Divine Cool Breeze The 00 415 July August, 2004

 In This Issue Sankranti Puja, Pune - 14.1.2004 Adishakti Puja, Cabella 6 June 2004 You Are The Love 6. Everything Turned Towards Her 8 Shri Mataji in Paris (September-2003) 11 A Message From Shri Mataji 12 Shri Ganesha Puja-2003 13 15 Wisdom 19 Vibrations 20 Creation Man And His Fulfilment 25 A Letter of Shri Mataji 26 The Relation Detachment-Integration 29 Guru Purnima, London-29th July 1980 Seeking And Rationality 41 42 Mother's Name 43 Where Are Our Priorities? 45 What The Prophets Said 45 Eulogy to Shri Mataji 46 The Fight For Collectivity 2.

 Co oL BREE ZE THE DIVINE Published by Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. H.O.: Plot No. 8, Chandragupt Housing Society Behind Hotel Grace, Paud Road Kothrud, Pune-411 029 Printed at Amarnath Press (P) Ltd. WHS 2/47, Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi -110015 Ph.:25268673 For Subscription Please Write To: Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 222, Desh Bandhu Apartments Kalkaji, New Dehi-110019 Tel. No. :011-26422054, 26216654 Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles,Miracle Photographs etc. to: Shri O.P. Chandna G-11-(463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110034 Tel. No. 011-55356811 Mor. :8:00 AM-9:00 AM Eve.:8:30 PM-10:30PM

 SANKRANTI PUJA 14.1.2004 PUNE (Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) (Translated) the Agya Chakra is that with it we get angry From South the Sun comes to North, with the people, start misbehaving with not because it revolves. Every year on the same date the Sun comes to this particular them, get enraged and all the faith is angle. Why do we recognize this shaken. Agya is very significant area which happening so much? What is so special we must know about. It is the place of Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ told us to forgive about it? Why do we feel so much of joy when the Sun comes at this angle? everyone. Forgiveness is very essential. But how to forgive? Many people say that we wish to forgive but we are unable to. To Because most of our things are performed because of the Sun. At night we are in the state of sleep, all our works begin when forgive one has to be forgiving (eT there is dawn. So the sun is the power that One has to think that everyone will have to face his deeds. What have we to do with affects all our deeds and when it comes in our orbit, we begin to recognize it. it? What one says will recoil back on him, Most of the festivals are based on the why have we to get involved? With such detachment if you forgive everyone then the situation of the Moon, but this is the only Agya Chakra will be alright. Obstruction in festival which goes according to the state the Agya Chakra stops the kundalini to of the Sun. So this is how 'Surya Narayana' ascend and to remove this obstruction we (The Sun God) has much importance in our country. People go to take dip in Ganga should know how to forgive. Every moment we keep on thinking as to who has tortured River and perform different types of us and how. Instead we should think that worships. However this day is very we have to forgive. The moment we forgive, significant. We have to decide as to what is to be done on this day? What work is to you will be surprised, the kundalini ascends be performed? We bow before the Sun, immediately. Our purpose is to raise our kundalini, why should we be angry? Getting offer offerings and express our gratitude to it. But what special work we could do, angry is human nature, not Divine, it is human nature. So we should control our particularly the Sahaj Yogis? The Sun has its place at the Agya anger and repeat thrice instead, 'forgiven, Chakra. You all know it, and think of the forgiven, forgiven' (THT, &HT, &THT) and the future with your Agya Chakra. So it is very obstruction of our Agya Chakra gets essential to set the Agya Chakra right removed. Eternal Blessings to all of you. because it affects the Sun. The impact of

 ADISHAKTI PUJA Cabella - 6 June, 2004 (Internet Version) Today we have to talk about this Power with problems, but none of these problems which is hidden in your heart by which you are there. I don't see any problem can do whatever you like to create a new anywhere. Those who think they have world, a new family, new standards, problems, I have asked them to write them everything that is not known so far. That is down and I will try to answer them and tell quite possible and it's being done, but what them what sort of a problem it is. But before is quite difficult is how to make people more adaptable, more in tune with each other. It still our Sahaja Yogis have not come to that seems to be a difficult thing. They are level to understand the Oneness, the alright among themselves, if they have their uniqueness in their hearts. All this comes own friends, their own style. But to make from within, not from without, so all efforts them absolutely one, one with each other, made outside is of no use. in one tune, in one life is very difficult. Now the problem is, we have beautiful what we are. It's all there. Just you have to people, beautiful souls, but they do not be that, to become that. This is rather become so one with each other as they difficult to understand for people who have should have. Now, how to solve this different noses, different faces, different problem?.... if you see the original idea everything, to become the same. But you why we started this new kind of are, you are. Because you don't know that understanding, new kind of penetration, you are, that's why you are looking different. because we wanted to find the Oneness. So, I have to tell you one thing: that you in every person. Now you should be very are all One.. One in the sense that your thankful that you are all One, One inside, everything, impulse, every feeling, every there's nothing second. It's only One and understanding is the same. that One when it speaks and when it wants to administer something, then you will be that there is different, but actually it is not. amazed that it is all done the same way, It is only One, one relationship, and this it's the same thing and it works out the relationship is with the Adi Shakti, that you same way. There is no change; there is are a part and parcel of Adi Shakti. could do anything, I would like to say that We have to be effortless and become it gives you the very wrong impression no difference between the two. Whatever one may try, one cannot get Despite that our minds are roving, separated from Adi Shakti. You are born roving into the same sort of problem which out of Her and you are guided by Her. has no significance in Sahaja Yoga. Now Everything seems to be one to Me while the main problem that we have is that we don't realize that we have no problem. We action, which is wrong. you people think there is a different line of Whatever I may say is to be proved, are without any problems. We think that there are problems and we should deal otherwise why should you accept.. Myself

 July August, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze are becoming Sahaja Yogis, but they are not. They are not Sahaja Yogis but they are trying to become. On the contrary, they should know that they are Sahaja Yogis and they don't have to become anything. Then there is no problem. We have to know that we are One, all the same. There's no need I am one with you and I will always remain the same with all of you; for me there is no difference. If that temperament changes a little bit you will see the oneness among all and the difference will be lost in no time. It's very surprising how you understand each other. Unless and until you have proper understanding of each other you to have any ignorance of any kind. And cannot achieve anything. That is essential, when this happens, the problems of the that is right, that is the truth. The truth started a long time back, much before difficulty. anybody could think of having the truth. It all went out with so many things which whole world will be solved without any Today's Puja is a special one because you are doing the Puja of something that never went into any transformations, which was not changed at all, remained the same, were not truthful and then the truth went away. born with the same and is still with the The Truth is not so easily accepted as the untruth is. Why? Because we are standing in untruth. Our all understanding is untruth and we have to change our understanding to truth, which is not difficult get lost in the atmosphere or the other same. In such a Puja what anyone has to say? Nothing. Just be one with yourself. we have to be one with ourselves and not to movements of the brain. Because this is because we are truth. We are the Truth. To become the Truth which we are, why the time when the brain starts moving and should it be difficult? Should not, but it happens. So that means there is over himself. Like a snake, unless and until something wrong somewhere with us it is in his own place, there is no danger, which we should find out. And the thing that but as soon as it starts moving, there's a is wrong is that we cannot face ourselves. danger. In the same way, we have to know We face others, not ourselves. We never ihat our mind is very, very difficult and see ourselves. We have no idea as to what should not go into the wrong directions. our own situation is. And for that, you needed a Mother to show you. That's how Mother's Puja because we should try to be the Mother came on this earth to tell you on the line of Primordial Mother. We have what's the problem with you within. This principle has to be practiced. And you will work out our Primordial Self and not to be amazed how much you have already change ourselves. We are just ourselves knowledge about yourself and about these. and that's what we have to achieve: that There's nothing so special, nothing so extraordinary, but only thing is you have to be acceptable to yourself. Lthink people when it starts moving it loses its control For that we have to do the Primordial to keep ourselves Primordial. We have to Oneness with ourselves. "May God bless you."

 YOU ARE THE LOVE (The Name of Love decorated the puja hall painted on banners hung from the ceiling and walls) You are the Love in the sap of the tree You are the Love in the first sound You are the Love from beyond infinity You are the Love in the caress of the sun You are the Love You are the Love in the majesty of the mountain in the first dance You are the Love in your pradakshina around the Father You are the Love in the foam of the water You are the Love in the music of the sea You are the Love that twinkles in the stars You are the Love in the ocean of Your eyes You are the Love that sings in the wind You are the Love that glitters in the crystal of snow You are the Love in the quiet splendour of meditation You are the Love that germinates in the flower You are the Love in ananya bhakti

 The Divine Cool Breeze July - August, 2004 You are the Love which opened the eyes of Parameshwara You are the Love that is secret You are the Love that is sacred You are the Love in the eternal sprit You are the Love that nourishes bliss of compassion's deepest well You are the Love that rests on innocence You are the Love in every movement Your eyelashes You are the Love that all creatures seek You are the Love in the cosmic tap of Your leela You are the Love that melts the ice age of this Kali Yuga You are the Love that shines in the light of the Golden Age You are the Love in the fervent prayer of all Your bhaktas You are the Love You are the Love of caring mother in every living cell that warms our closed hearts You are the Love which gives its shape to beauty You are the Love that makes the world go around You are the Love which gives its radiance to goodness You are the Love for which the whole world dances You are the Love which gives its balance to justice You are the Love that made us Safe You are the Love which gives its strength to righteousness You are the Love that is Nirmala

 The rays of sunlight, the waves of cool air surrounding Her, the way in which the flowers were facing, the scents, right up to Her house, everything turned towards Her Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in PARIS 31 August to 4 September 2003 Majid Golpour: How can we set about telling our non-yogi friends "Do you know who we had as a guest today?" As you. know, for the moment, we, the yogis, are the only ones to have access to the secrets that Mother occasionally reveals to us. How can one describe the beauty of these last few days? Every day, while Shri Mataji was making Her way through the streets of Paris, we heard many people around us wondering, "Is this the Indian royal family, some Maharajas?" People spontaneously came up humbly to ask who She was. For those of us who know who She is, it was as difficult to reply then, as it is now, We did not know what to say. The first of our observations is that we would need many filmmakers, poets and writers to come and help us describe to you the true beauty of the Adi Shakti's sweet trip to Her own creation.. I would just like to give you an outline of what the Mother, through this present incarnation and all Her history, let us experience. How can we, such small human beings, arrive at this stage of evolution where we are able to feel Her presence from so close by? I leamed in the Islamic traditions that an incarnation is the centre of gravity of the world and right up to Mother's arrival at the Paris Airport I had not understood what this meant. Imagine the moment of Her arrival, the rays of sunlight, the waves of cool air surrounding Her, the way in which the flowers were facing, the scents, right up to Her house. Everything turned towards Her. We saw the world in Her and, through Her, we understood the meaning of our day. Even the cells of our bodies did not want to sleep at bedtime.

 July - August, 2004 The Divine Coof Breeze powerful scent that emanated from these flowers. Progressively, as we approached Her house, in the company of Sir C.P. and Shri Mataji, we started to appreciate the surrounding area more and more. We realized that we were not the only ones who had been getting ready for Mother's arrival. Actually, all the towns had decorated their streets with magnificent flowers, especially red ones. Shreedhar Buyle: Mother joked about Her age and the fact that She no longer remembered all the routes She had taken over so many years No negative thoughts could enter us: They fell away before reaching our mind. All our physical or verbal gestures became melodious. Everything happened magically around Her and for Her. In each epoch there is a divine incarnation. Without this incarnation, the world cannot survive. It is at that moment that we experienced this wonderful life, in Her house, with Her. Her house has been transformed into a real paradise. Even the Sahaja Yogis who lived in the house no longer recognized their own bedrooms. We remember so well the support of the on every continent. I took a road that made a vibrations, from the Ganas, while we prepared Her house during the weeks beforehand. We still keep that coolness. Even when we surpassed ourselves physically and mentally, other road was a little quicker." 1 could not help it was pleasant and we all discovered hidden laughing at that sweet vision of the humble and, resources within. For the first time, the building at the same time, all-powerful greatness of the work was carried out, not without effort, but without the tidal wave of the right side, as if children again. Mother had constructed solid dikes to stop us leaving our course. It was remarkable. With each wish to embellish Her house, times, reminding myself how Her Feet had taken solutions came to us, just by being aware that charge of the grief and despair of all Her children it is She who resolves all details. Of course, there was "Nirmal Source," the vibratory been comforted by all the love coming from Her workshop, Her gift, which was enjoyed regularly. Feet. And the work on ourselves was so intense, deep and sometimes difficult to contain. We had never would be aware of the intensity and the depth of seen that. It was tike during a Sahaj seminar. Her work and that the reality of the Divine She was preparing us to be better instruments; Incarnation would enter our small human to be better able to receive Her. It is She that consciousness. We prayed that all the badness detour in order to avoid another shorter one that had many speed bumps. As we neared the ashram, Mother remarked gently, "I believe the Adi Shakti who was getting ready to see Her Majid: During those days, I was able to massage Mother's Feet for up to five hours at all over the world and how these children had During these massages, we prayed that we and negativity that were absorbed by this body brought us closer to Her. All the Sahaja Yogis involved in all aspects would come back to our small hands, so that of the preparation found themselves rapidly our Mother would not suffer more from this work. brought into the centre and they cleared out We prayed that we would be able to get rid of deeply. We were surfing on a wave of dynamic the conditioning that makes us believe that love, which acts and transforms. We had all incarnations are here to suffer in our place. We worked for Her, but, in fact, we had all worked prayed that humanity would adopt this good for ourselves as well, The flowers offered at the airport were in Incarnation in Her presence and that, for years perfect harmony with the colours of Her sari. Three times Mother breathed in deeply the spend relaxing moments and holidays, outside resolution to be able to adore the Divine to come, our Divine Mother would be able to

 The Divine Cool Breeze 10 July - August, 2004 Shreedhar: While massaging Her Feet, the words of devotion were like a mirror in which the times for pujas, where She would be the subject of our adoration. We prayed that, as Sahaja Yogis, thanks to our resolution and the quality of our attention, we would be able to succeed collectively in lightening the work of our Mother, so that She may be able to begin Her holidays on Earth starting now. We prayed that our Divine Mother accept the idea of holidays because She has never allowed Herself the idea of not working God became aware of His/Her Divinity. The visible dimension of Shri Mataji became extraordinary at that moment, shining and powerful. Her face lit up the whole room. Gyanendra Even: 1 was the guardian of the house. My role was directed towards a vibratory perception of people coming to the house. Working for Mother allowed me finally to live each day using my perception of vibrations fully. At one moment, Shri Mataji asked us to change the position of the furniture in Her, bedroom. It was a unique experience for me to be directly at my Mother's service under Her orders. Surrounded by scents and flowers and with the direct attention of my Mother I felt I was transported into another world. I did not even feel the weight of the furniture. Through the different placings, chosen one after the other by Shri Mataji, we realized all the depth behind each detail. I felt that it is this depth that we should experience in every moment of our everyday life. It is astonishing how many French yogis. yuva shaktis and children were able to feel through vibrations, Mother's arrival in France at the exact moment, when some did not even know She would be coming. Majid: Shri Mataji proposed a little visit to Paris that we thought would last a few minutes, but which turned into a visit of more than five hours, for the world. Moreover, during one of these prayers, Shri Mataji said to me, as if She was reading my mind, "We have never really thought of having a holiday." I was able to say that the primary income of France was from tourism and that the fact that She was putting Her attention on tourism would only help our country. During the massages, we had the opportunity to mention to Shri Mataji that, for us, it is evident that without Her the world has no future, that with Her all the quarrels between religions will end because She is proposing one sole religion for everyone, which incorporates the roots of all religions. Shri Mataji then told us that the problem with all these religions is that they have forgotten the feminine aspect of the Divine. We were then able to affirm that, thanks to Her, this aspect will be able to fully take its proper place. After that Shri Maraji asked us how we could get that idea through to people and affirmed, to us that if each Sahaja Yogi did his work, we would be able to transmit this message to humanity. We also recalled all the predictions made in the past, that Her incarnation would live for a hundred years on this Earth, in addition to the with Her attention on each detail. We were struck by Her capacity to discern, among products of highly reputed brands, finding the item of Her divine choice. This choice was so perfect that even Her car stopped in front of the desired shop. Afterwards, Mother paid particular attention to French embroidery. fact that She would travel less and less and From: receive fewer and fewer people because all the collectives of the world will come to Her, to Her (The Divine Cool Breeze) America Feet.

 SHRI MATAJI IN PARIS The shops chosen did not appear that that implies in terms of anxiety, special from the outside, but once insecurity and despair, we understood Mother was inside, all the objects took that it is absolutely false to believe that on their full value. (It seemed that the we cannot be of some help in this work. We do not know how Mother will use ganas themselves were taking care of the objects chosen by the Divine). us in this work, because She is the very Among the twenty shops in the street, source of this work as Shri Adi Shakti Shri Mataji chose precisely the only and will never let this need be known. It shop that could offer all the possible is there that the depths of our devotion, choice and all the most beautiful objects. as child of Our Mother, are revealed to us. Actually, She has made us and we With a most particular attention, Mother are born uniquely to express our love to bought small presents for Sir C.P. and Her family - a cup; a set of table mats from Provence, a model boat, a small Her and the love that humanity bears for Her. All the French Sahaja Yogis tell piece of china. The surprise with Shri Mataji is that She always tells you themselves that, if we can do it today, everything in advance, without Her why put it off until tomorrow? That is why all our collective, from Martinique to New Collectively, we wanted to really take OCaledonia, from Monaco to Lille, all the care of Mother, but, as usual, it is Mother Sahaja Yogis were transformed for a week into drivers, chauffeurs, painters. apparently being able to know. who took us at our word and, one by one - children, yuva shaktis, all the towns in France - She placed Her attention on us woodworkers, cooks. etc. We were transformed joyfully into servants at the service of our Mother. What an and gave us all Her benedictions. We really need to discover Our extraordinary discovery to see that even Mother. When we place our small people from the outside world became on Her, She aware that it was not a question of "a human attention automatically generates Her vibrations personality cult," but people who were of love. We understood that it is false to transforming themselves and finding the believe that Shri Mataji, as an richness of their own personality in this incarnation, is not sensitive to our task. attention and our intentions. While She In fact, our collectivity only served for carries out a task that touches the five days out of the 365 in the year, but we would like (selfishly) to reverse those depths of human consciousness, with all

 12 July-August, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze The French Sahaja Yogis, even those figures, whilst still remaining generous towards our brothers and sisters of who were not able to be physically other collectives. We believe, to suggest present, retain a wonderful memory of their adventure and, believe us, we really emerging future trends, that any collective that wants to surpass its experienced all these moments Sahaj conditionings and to breathe the collectively. cool vibrations of service to the Divine, Majid Golpour, Shreedhar Buyle, should venture forward in its own way Gyanendra Even, Benoit de Beffefroid (The Divine Cool Breeze, America) to express its love. MAHA AVATAR MESSAGE FROM HER HOLINESS MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI "Today, Sahaja Yoga has reached the state of Mahayoga, which is en- masse evolution manifested through it. It is this day's Yuga Dharma. It is the way the last judgment is taking place. Announce it to all the seekers of truth, to all the nations of the world, so that nobody misses the blessings of the divine to achieve their meaning, their absolute, their spirit." (Maha Avtar-1980)

 SHRI GANESHA PUJA (2003) same way, the elder Sahaja Yogis should The duty of the elders It is the duty of older Sahaja Yogis to look after their younger brothers and look after the children, "to have better sisters. "In this family of ours, which we call moral standards, to have better lives so that they follow your life and become as Sahaja Yogis, there are all kinds of genuinely good Sahaja Yogis. It's a very people, all types, all behaviour. Of big responsibility. Perhaps we don't course, they should not be regimented, recognize it, we don't understand, but there should not be uniformity, but, in that all these are little creatures, who are variety, there should be beauty, there after the image of great souls and they should be a beautiful trend of being one should be brought up in that way, with each other." respected in that manner and loved with Understanding Shri Ganesha The elders in Sahaja Yoga should great care. This is to be understood." The older people in Sahaja Yoga do make a solid contribution to the lives of not consider the children worth bothering those who are younger. The first thing is about. They do not try to understand to tell them about Shri Ganesha, His them. They think they are too intelligent, qualities and what He represents. Once too good and we need not waste our they understand that Shri Ganesha is generous and kind and forgiving, they energy with them.... "But today, when we are sitting here will be amazed because they are also to worship Shri Ganesha, we should small and they will also take to that kind know they are all incarnations of Shri of life. Ganesha and they should be given "I find some children very sensible proper attention, proper understanding." and good, some are naughty and some There are a certain number of children don't understand what we are doing here. "who are very well-beihaved... who are Whatever it is, they are, after all, children very spontaneous and there are some and what you have to do is to look after who have no idea what they are doing. them, respect them and give them the "So it is the duty of the elders to put full idea about Shri Ganesha. ideas into their heads" so that they have Everyone should have a staiue of Shri understanding Ganesha in their home. The children will "a about proper themselves and self-respect. "In the see it and ask, "Who is He? What is he

 July August, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze 14 Just because you can keep quiet and doing?" And you will be amazed how they will understand Him, how they will sit still does not mean you are a grown- understand His qualities and how they up. "You are grown-up only if you can will work it out. It is important for all of imbibe the qualities of Shri Ganesha. I you to have at least one Shri Ganesha have seen people who are very grown- in your house, so that you can tell your up still do not have simple qualities of children that "You all have to become like chastity, of honesty. They don't have and they can't have because they don't think Him'... "They won't understand chastity. it is important. So I leave it to you to find They are too small. They won't out Shri Ganesha within yourself." understand all those qualities. But one quality they will understand is to be They will understand love I enjoy the company of children honest." Gradually all the difficult ones will go because they are so innocent and so down. They don't understand My lecture, simple-hearted and I like them very, very they don't understand what I am saying, much. So you should not get afraid or but any oppositions within those children frightened of their mischievousness. On the contrary, you should know so innocent and so simple, their they deserve much more love, much will show very well. Because they are innocence will help them, to expose more understanding and much more them to reality. scope to grow. "I hope by the time they will be of your "I hope you all look after your children, guide them properly and take them to a age, they will be great Sahaja Yogis. level of understanding that they They will understand what we are doing understand what is their position, what here. "I had to face mountains of nonsense qualities they should have, why will they be respected. You will be amazed that with the older people, but these won't have that. They will be very simple, very their behaviour will change the behaviour of all the other children." sweet and they will understand love."

 WISDOM Only comes through understanding what wisdom means You might find somebody extremely wise, maybe your servant, may be your how to argue things or you fight with Wisdom doesn't mean that you know driver, maybe anyone and you are amazed people. No, it doesn't mean that. Wisdom means how you take to the good side of how such a person can be so wise because maybe form his last life he has everything to enjoy it. This is wisdom and that you avoid all destructive things and take to something constructive. got it within him or he has gone into it and he found it. Hamsa Puja 1992 It's not the state of one person. It's not the property of one person but it can belong to many of them. So the Sahaj Yogi is the one who has to have that wisdom. Why are you doing this? Wisdom plays such a part in life that whatever may happen outside, whatever may be the trend, whatever may be the fashion, whatever may be the people are What is the need to do it? They don't have all changing into, you do not change. You to ask any questions. They just don't do wrong. They just don't do wrong things They are always on the right path. That is the sign of the Sahaj Yogi, I believe, and which is the blessing of the Goddess. change within. Shri Ganesha Puja 1991 Pune Meditation is the only way. You give up If there is the power of the Goddess your left and you give up your right and you are just standing in the center, enjoying the wisdom, enjoying the joy of your being. working in you, you will have the wisdom to work it out. Navaratri Puja 2002 Shri Ganesha Puja 1991 Pune Wisdom is not apparent outside. You Wisdom is a thing that gives you, first can't say somebody is wise by looking at developed, then you become very peaceful that person. But in vibrations you will know because whatever people may say, that that person is extremely wise. He may they may do, whatever speak. He may not speak. If he speaks, he aggression they may do, whatever it is, you will speak about something so deep, so of all, complete peace. If your wisdom is whatever wise and so nice without hurting. are peaceful and you see the stupidity of Navaratri Puja 1998 the other person, of the other nations and you understand why they are doing it. Navaratri Puja 1998

 July - August, 2004 16 The Divine Cool Breeze Human beings...will not understand The wisdom is the thing which really is something straightforward. So it has to go not just an assumption that l am very wise round and round till they reach a point to understand that it was the play of the and all that, but it asserts, it works out and it shows what is good and what is bad. Mother that brought them to this shore of Navaratri Puja 2002 wisdom. Navaratri Puja 1998 Wisdom is the sign of a person who is really a realized soul of a very high level. If you don't have wisdom, whatever you may The first quality of Shri Ganesha is that He gives us wisdom and that wisdom gives us the sense how to behave, gives us the do, you might feel satisfied about it, but the wisdom part is very, very important. Navaratri Puja 2002 balance and gives us the sense how to behave towards ourselves, how to "Am I being a wise person?" That is the preserve yourself, how to respect yourself. Shri Ganesha Puja 1991 Australia first sign of the blessings of God. The one who has blessings of the Divine is a wise person, is very wise and his wisdom is shown by his silence. And his whole power, Shri Ganesha is the giver of wisdom, how to behave at what time, how to say at what time, how far to go with everything. It his divine power uses that person as a just should become innate, sahaj. You don't medium and works tremendously. That have to work it out, but should know. man himself is surprised how it has "Now I'm a Sahaja Yogini." Every happened. morning you should tell yourself, "I'm a Sahaja Yogini. So how far should I go? How A woman can have that. A man can have it. Anybody can have that wisdom, should I behave? What should be my that profoundness, that temperament, attitude?" All this can be very easily which is so beautiful and so empowering. understood if you develop this lotus of wisdom. Navaratri Puja 2002 How does a lotus come out? There is a seed which sprouts... There is already the Wisdom comes to you automatically. seed within you. All of you have got it and But through experience, then you know this is the right path. Through experience you now it has started opening because you are realized souls. Allow your wisdom to start understanding. Hamsa Puja 1992 take over...

 July August, 2004 17 The Divine Cool Breeze One may say, "Mother what is the source again of this wisdom?" The source is Shri Ganesha... Once Shri Ganesha is There's a very simple way of doing it- surrender to My wisdom and the wisdom itself that is in you is active. It will work. Diwali Puja 1991 insulted and He disappears behind the clouds of ignorance, then people start doing things which are unwise. Those who do not meditate will be lost Shri Ganesha Puja 1993 Germany to Sahaja Yoga because wisdom can only grow through your inner inspiration. You can have this inner inspiration only if the The greatest boon of the Devi is to give you wisdom. You can call it awareness. You power of Shri Ganesha manifests. He is can call it anything. It's kind of a wisdom Shri Ganesh Puja 1998 by which you become absolutely a divine personality. That wisdom you must reach the giver of your wisdom. It's very difficuit to say how to become through your bhakti. wise. It is just that it happens that you become wise. So, though He's a child, Navaratri Puja 2002 He's so matured. He's so wise. And He's The Divine needs you. Divine doesn't not only that, but He emits wisdom and this want you to die or to finish off, it needs you very much. it has to do its work and you wisdom is an innate quality of anyone who is a Sahaja Yogi because in him, also, Shri are the instrument of that Divine. If you have wisdom, you are the best Ganesha has been awakened. So he becomes a wise person, very instrument for the Divine to work it out. Navaratri Puja 2002 wise, and with wisdom what does he achieve? He achieves a balance, a proper Wisdom is... a very innate quality, very ascent and also he understands that this ascent is for his benevolence, for the innate. It's not superficial. You cannot just say that this person is benevolence of his country, benevolence of the whole world. He understands the importance of Sahaja Yoga. wise or not. It shows that, just like a power, it's a power of understanding and is supported by the power of the Goddess. So, She's the giver of wisdom. This is just absolutely, innately built in. Only thing the biggest quality of the Goddess that is we have to use the storehouse of this She's the giver of wisdom. And wisdom Without this wisdom, one cannot understand. And this wisdom is within us, wisdom that is within us. comes as a part of the evolutionary Shri Ganesha Puja 1991 Pune process.

 18 July-August, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze Why not develop a personality that, "I'm always in joy? Anything I see, I feel joyous. Anything I hear, I feel you." Then this lotus of your fragrance will improve and then Now She's brought about all the evolutions so far and, to go further, She is going to make you a very wise person. Navaratri Puja 2002 activity of your wisdom will be that you will take all that is very beautiful easily. You'lI Those people who have got wisdom are very lucky people, but wisdom comes from no source but your own understanding of get all that is very satisfying, very joyous. life. When a person start thinking, "Why am I doing such and such thing? What is within you which just leads you to people It's kind of an activity of this wisdom the effect of my doing? What is the result of my behaviour? It is good for me or bad who are extremely nice, to situations which are very beautiful where you discover nice for me then wisdom comes". things or to such beautiful creations that Shri Ganesha Puja 1993 Germany you would never expect to see. A person is wise who does not only know what is right and wrong, but also he It's very, very important to understand knows very well his own power riot to do that you tell Me, "Mother, this miracle happened, that miracle happened." It is something wrong. He just does not do it. Wisdom is a complete power within nothing. It is your own wisdom. Your own ourselves by which we try nothing. It just spirit is working it out. You don't have to do spontaneously works through us and we anything. do things which are proper and right. Diwali Puja 1991 Shri Ganesha Puja 1993 Germany We have to understand that our wisdom is not something that could be inculcated. Your innocence itself is a power and your innocence will definitely give you that It cannot be something that can be wisdom by which you can solve all the manoeuvred. It is something very innate problems without any difficulty. and it comes through our maturity. Shri Ganesha Puja, Kalwe 1991 Shri Ganesha Puja 1990 This is the point one has to reach, where Wisdom means that it gives you detachment, detachment from all that is you understand you have to have wisdom. selfishness, self-centredness, selI- If you are lacking in wissdom, then you are not a self-realized person. obsession, ego-all connected with self. Can Krishna Puja 2000 you imagine? Diwali Puja 1991

 July - August, 2004 19 The Divine Cool Breeze Your spirit cannot have a problem. It has If you really know yourself, you will have such powers of courage. You will not be a no fear. But above all, it has wisdom, tremendous wisdom. And that wisdom is daredevil, but with wisdom. Courage with the one sign of you being a very higher personality. As I told you, this is evolution.. And when wisdom, you will have. And that is what is your Self, which will give you lots of wisdom and lots of courage. you are transformed, you are evolved. Of a very different nature you become. And It's not a fighting spirit. It's not a violent nature. It's not a crude nature, but it's a very silent, beautiful, courageous attitude. Birthday Puja 2001 you are to stand out. Krishna Puja 2000 प्रतिबोधविदितं मतममृतत्वं हि विन्दते। आत्मना विन्दते वीर्य विद्या विदतऽमृतम् ।। -केनोपनिषद् (2/4) That alone is knowledge By means of which One perceives the Self That leads to Immortality. VIBRATIONS In our heart, there is a flicker of light, which is burning all the time, which is Atma, the reflection of Parmatma in our heart. When the Kundalini rises, She opens the BRAHM RANDHRA. The seat of SADASHIVA the Pitha is in the Sahasrar, but Sadashiva is reflected in the heart as Atma. Pitha is created because it receives the subtle energy which is all pervading. In the same way, Pithas are in the brain, and the Pitha of Sadashiva is higher up in the Sahasrar, which is opened out, so that the subtle, the sukshma, passes into our heart, througha very subtle channel. Just like a gas-light, it has a flicker, and when the gas opens out, the prakash (enlightenment) occurs. Vibrations are the passage of this subtle energy through us. These vibrations start flowing through us only after our Kundalini rises through the Brahmrandhra. Vibrations give us complete balance, correct our physical being, our mental being and our emotional being. They give us a sense of complete spiritual oneness with God. They integrate us completely. Shri Mataji (Maha Avtar-1980)

 CREATION, MAN AND HIS FULFILMENT In this lecture I would talk about the something. According to this formula, if creation. I would switch on from the time, human beings are created by chance, it when we were just amoeba. Every seems an impossibility; because the time scientist who is open minded can see for that is taken so far is so short that only, at himself that this universe is a beautiful the most, may be, some living cell could have been created. cosmos, is very well organised and has run very smoothly and can also deduce that the creation of this particular universe been created and so beautifully it is Why a complicated human being has organised within himself, that it is hard to has led to the creation of this Mother Earth. About five million years back, this believe that some jugglerwas not behind the show. There must have been some scientist Mother Earth which was in gaseous form who has achieved these results. It could condensed and was cooled down. How have only been possible by some special hand to do these things; I mean if there was was it cooled down to the extent it did? Scientists accept this fact just as it is; they cannot find out because they have no organisation, no thinking, no planning, no powerful personality, The Almighty behind it, it could not have been possible. limitations. Why this thing happened? How it was started? It is easy to say there is no As science has its limitations, of course, God but very difficult to explain many things without saying that there is God, e.g. the we cannot find out how was it expedited, how it took place? But we can see, that we time that was taken for this universe to create a human being, is so very short, have achieved something in the field of science, by one method, perhaps similar that nothing else can explain it. to one that was used to trigger our evolution If you use the law of chance, we can so fast. find out how many times the permutations When I was a young student in school and combinations have to work to create atthat time I could never have believed that even a living cell. For example, in a test tube if you have 50 red pills & 50 white pills, all arranged in such a manner that all the we could ever reach the moon; none could, have believed. If anyone would have said, that, the people would have laughed at red ones are at the bottom and that white ones are at the top. You have to go on such a conjecture. Even today if you tell shaking them, and the arrangement of the pills gets disorganised completely. Then my grandmother, she does not believe it. She thinks it is just a story you are telling. to organise it back fully into the original But we have reached the moon, no doubt. In this system, we have used very arrangement, how many times one has to shake? They have discovered a formula, wonderful system of putting 5 capsules on that is -n raised to power something, into one another & the first capsule, the

 July August, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze 21 lowest one explodes and triggers the form, it is in human beings. It is this force movement of the rest of four capsules. which exists in every one and evolves When the second one explodes, it gives everything, say from carbon to the amoeba an acceleration many more times than that stage and from amoeba to animal stage & with which it was already moving; the from animal to human stage. Even in speed increases in such a tremendous elements it exists because the elements also evolve. We do not know how they way that suddenly we find that the acceleration is a very high multiple of the first one; then the third one when it elements start changing their forms & evolve but it happens in Nature, that explodes gives another push to the capsule. Next, the fourth one explodes; we have no idea of this because we have mass and they become different elements; no way of measuring the quantity of this spacecraft. Through this kind of explosions change that is taking place. Then the animals also change, from fishes, many then the fifth one which contains the from one to the other, through that built-in mechanism, we have been able to achieve become reptiles, out of reptiles many a very high acceleration for the spacecraft. become mammals, from mammals, many become primates, monkeys and then human beings. All this happening takes knowing about our evolution from the place. How many are destroyed, how many In the same way our evolution has taken place. We got this idea without even UNCONSCIOUS. We have come to know remain, how many are transformed, how it has happened, but we cannot nobody has kept any account of it. correlate both these together. So, in the Today, we talk of population problem, perhaps many animals have taken birth as same way a human being was created out of amoeba or amoeba was created out of humans. You can see the effect of that, the all the elements. In the same manner we way people are behaving; you can be sure can say that we were made again of five that many animals have taken human form and they have yet to go through lot of physical being. Inside the physical being evolution & training as a human being to capsules. The first one is the physical, our was kept the emotional being. Inside the understand the value of human life. A human being starts evolving within himself. emotional being was kept the spiritual being & inside the spiritual being was kept the Now we have been human beings, as spirit or our attention. they say, for 14,000 years and we have been growing inside through our freedom. Human beings are the only people who get We can say, KUNDALINI is the one that triggers, that is the one that explodes. So Kundalini force is in everything, but freedom to evolve themselves to in the most affective, the best, the highest understand what is wrong & what is bad.

 July - August, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze 22 Human beings have been given This freedom is granted because without freedom you cannot go any further. For freedom to understand, to develop their example, when you start studying in a school, you are told to learn tables 2x knowledge of the Creator of this creation own efficiency, to receive the ultimate 10=20; you learn by heart and do not and the powers of the Creator. That is why, question why it is so, but just go on and the Kundalini is placed in the human beings on. But when you reach a certain standard alone though there is Kundalini force and of education, say graduation or post there is Kundalini in another form in graduation standard, then you are given everything that exists. Only in the human freedom to write on this subject-why is it beings, this force is kept in the triangular bone in dormant state, to trigger their last that when you multiply 2 by 10 it is 20? It is because you have reached a certain stage jump into the unknown. Now this Kundalini of development. At this stage you are given freedom to find out for yourself. That is how exists, this is there: But to begin with, if I say before starting you are developed and then by this all this creation, who was created first, it development only you can teach the other is most interesting & may not be very people who are coming up. This is the way congenial to the mind of a scientist. It is much beyond science I am taiking now, the evolution has been. So far you have not felt your evolution that much before anything was created on from amoeba to this stage. You do not this Earth. Holiness was created, that we know how you became a human being, you call the Pavitrata. Sri Ganesha is the deity take it for granted. Even if you see your of that Holiness, God has created this Holiness to protect this creation. This eyes, they are so complicated. It is such a complicated organ that if you start studying them you will be amazed how things are atmosphere of Holiness He created to protect all the people and all the creativities made. If you just prick a pin in my finger, which are there and which are being immediately there is a reflex action. It is created by Him, otherwise nothing would so nicely built, it is so nicely arranged; it is work out. Just think if one of the Oceans so quick, it is so efficient, that one is surprised and amazed at the wonders of Earth would have toppled down; just was deeper even by 10 feet the balance of this kind of organization, that is this human imagine what a speed this Mother Earth body. But you see what human beings are, they are inefficiency personified. I sent four telegrams to my daughter and today she says, she received one telegram after one has, it revolves with such a tremendous speed, goes round the Sun regularly in a proper way, not in a round way, but in a special style as you know. She creates day and night for you. Day to wark and night to month.

 23 July - August, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze to seek it with all humility in your own being. rest. How She Herself has created this No body can hypnotise people for seeking beautiful atmosphere for you and has maintained the balance and the truth, those who are hypnotised cannot understand. In all your awareness, in all your dignity you have to get the knowledge of truth. temperature that was given to Her, is only done by the power of Holiness that was created first. But it is not just giving you a lecture that Now, man in his foolishness is challenging that Holiness. He thinks he can you are going to understand. It is not challenge God, that is the sign of his brainwashing that has been done by all awareness. If he had risen to that height nonsensical people throughout. It is the happening, the actualization by which you reach that state of awareness, by which where he could feel God pulsating in every thing he would never have done that. But before he could reach that state of you develop the dynamics of collective perfection he has started talking about consciousness, by which you become God. Who is going to challenge his collectively conscious, is an awareness authority is stupid man, who does not want which develops within you is real to achieve his perfection and wants to talk actualization. As you are a human being, you know big. All pervading power is of Holiness which corrects, which guides, which co- ordinates, which loves and which that when this capsule of human being was triggered you got lots of things, e.g., your awareness is more than that of animals. organises everything for you to get this The University itself, animals do not have awakening within you. So one must any universities. Animals don't understand understand, how Kundalini awakening is gardens, they don't understand dirt and filth, the most important thing that has to they don't understand beauty. All this has happen. Kundalini awakening is the only come to you, deep within you manifested way you are going to know your spirit. This is the most important happening in the history of creation. It is like laying out the as soon as you become human beings. So, as soon as you become super human being through Kundalini awakening you become aware of yourself within and you become aware of others within. This the fruits must appear. It is the most is the collective consciousness. This is, important thing and has to happen. Every what Sahaja Yoga is. Sahaja Yoga is the garden, then you plant the trees, the trees have flowers and now the time has come, individual who is seeking the TRUTH will system of nature. The way this creation took place is also Sahaja. 'Sah' means with, know it. The trouble with truth is, that you have & 'ja' means born, Sahaja means born with.

 24 July August, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze Every thing is built in within you like in a power deals with our physical being and seed. out of which how much a scientist knows. You will be surprised that if knowledge is If you see a seed, it has a primule within an ocean, the scientist knows only a drop. And to know the Ocean, the drop is to be it to sprout. Seed has the complete power of the tree it is going to be. The whole thing dissolved in the Ocean. But a drop cannot is in the seed, in the same way in the human seed the whole picture of what he by its own effort become the Ocean, the going to be, is built in the whole Ocean has to dissolve the drop. And that is what Ocean has to do, if the creation is mechanism, is placed within. Now there are the undercurrents of your has to have its fulfillment and His beautiful creation is manifested in the human being. being, which I will be describing to you. The human being must find out his What are the forces built up inside human fulfillment. If he cannot find out his beings? Only thing I would like to say that you are like a computer, you are already fulfillment, he cannot reach perfection in made like a computer, only thing is that you anyone of his endeavours. God, Himself will have to be put to the mains. If you are put not rest till He does that. For, who would to the mains then the computer starts like to destroy one's own creation. In working by itself, but it is the way you thousands and thousand of years of time this has come to its fulfillment and if it is to understanda machine. You are a human be done by me, if I am the person who is supposed to trigger your Kundalini, why being, you know what is love. To a scientist I cannot talk of love, I am talking of Divine Holiness, the love of God which has should you have any objection? Thank God, I was not a scientist, otherwise I would created you, which wants you to know Him. Through science you cannot do that. Every have finished my life making an atom bomb. scientist must be loving somebody if not Thank God, I was not scientist otherwise I his children at least, his dog. He must be would have gone mad, listening to mad loving flowers, if not flowers he might be people. Thank God, I am not a politician, loving his horses, but he knows what is you know how they are. Thank God, I am none of these, I am love. And if he can understand that spark just your Mother, concerned, absolutely of love, from where it has come, love that concerned, about your ultimate well beings and not about superficial things. I am talking about is a synthesis of all these powers. May God bless you all. Science deals with only a very little (Nirmala Yoga-1980) portion, I will also tell you which part of this

 TRANSLALION OF A LETTER OF H. H. MATAJI SRI NIRMALADEVI WRITTEN IN MAY 1977, FROM ENGLAND TO HER DISCIPLES IN INDIA When someone speaks harshly to little children, then I feel a stab on my heart. Tell me, in Sahaja Yogi, should not there be exhibition of loving feelings? People who are the off-springs of the same Mother very My dearest Sahaja Yogis: My Blessings to you all. News has been conveyed to me that a new Centre is functioning in Muskwadi often "fail to realize that they are the Village (Rahuri), where thousands of children of their Mother in reality. This fact is well-known to you. Then, why should you people are getting Realization. The achievement has been made only because the workers over there have knit have the feeling that someone else is themselves in bond of wonderful Love. superior or inferior to you. Are you without They never try to complain to anyone about blemish and capable of being such anything but instead overlook and ignore judge? People talk of "universal in case someone commits what may be brotherhood of man" but is this feasible if described as an error. This broad- we don't love each-other as we should. At the moment, all I have to say is that you mindedness is capable of generating must use introspection and discrimination feelings of happiness in one's self and acts and rid yourself of such 'poison' as it is only then that you will make a real Sahaja Yogi. In case a Sahaja Yogi comes to your like a magnet where others are concerned. This broad-mindedness is the quality of a human body and gets multiplied with the place, invite him as if he is one of your own awakening of the Kundalini. This is the manifestation of divinity. But those people brothers. Look after him nicely. This will purify your household. I cannot understand how and why Sahaja Yogis form 'groups' as with every passing moment your who remain in "artificial" environments only, they cannot enjoy this Bliss. Your Kundalini has been awakened; and it has pierced the apex of the brain (Brahmrandhra) but still position improves or deteriorates? Such the heart also has to feel 'awakened'. In formations can lead to total annihilation of case one's heart is like a stone and he is the Self. You should try to own whatever is good in others and ignore what is not so unpleasant language in conversation with as this can be looked into by Me. In others and is very particular to stress that meditation, you will realize that this is the unable to shower Love on any one: he uses he himself is really someone special; then door to ETERNAL BLISS. he is not fit for becoming a Sahaja Yogi. One who remembers you always Of course, such is the nature of certain people. Many a time, I have observed that before myself, some of you try to push others or frown upon them with anger etc. MOTHER NIRMALA (Maha Avtar-1980)

 THE RELATION DETACHMENT-INTEGRATION -Arnew Kalber Matten, Switzerland s Sahaja Yogis we have noticed quite often how afraid people are when we talk could be a kind of escape if this detachment is possible, if it is related or connected to somebody higher than our common As about detachment. They associate understanding. Detachment becomes detachment to disdainful behavior towards people who are not so evolved, or to absolute when connected to our beloved coldness and dryness towards others. Mother. We should understand that we They believe that it is a way to avoid to cannot improve relationships among face reality in the daily life in order to keep ourselves in a detached way by our own, themselves away from the assaults of our but we can build a new dimension of love society. They declare that detached people and patience among us if we are are selfish people, arrogant people. But few connected to the Adishakti. Then other people profess that it is impossible detachment receives its entire, absolute to be detached; that to be detached means meaning. Then detachment becomes be without understanding. Non-Sahaja possible. Yogis could argue for hours against Detachment means be attached only by our spirit. Then the reflection of this spirit on others creates the connection to them. detachment without bringing new elements to the real answer: can we be detached? Being detached means love through our heart, and not through our brain. And when we love through our heart, the spirit, which is always detached, emits love, without any We, as Sahaja Yogis can give absolute answer to every absolute question. The absolute question is: is detachment possible? Yes, detachment is possible, more than possible, necessary. The great test is in discrimination or distinctions. It emits love everywhere, at any time and to everybody. The spirit is never tired to emit love and is not upset if the people cannot fully absorb this love or when they do not respond to the family. The people who can influence with their negativity the most are those who stay the nearest to us, who are too attached to us; the parents for instance. love according to our own expectations. They can use this attachment bondage by The sunbeams do not know if they'll reach creating tense relationships with their this tree or this flower, they just shine and children. It is quite common that the child the sun itself is enjoying the manifestation with the most beautiful personality is often the one who is the most submitted to these of its beams. Because love is absolute, it spreads and sprouts everywhere in the most detached way. To be detached means love without bondages, and gets most involved. Detachment does not mean to break all conditioning and discrimination. Detachment, however, is only possible the ties with their parents, on the contrary, it helps to establish proper ties. May be it

 27 July- August, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze feet. Mother you do my job, Mother, you are if we fully put our attention on our Divine the one who can save my father or my Mother. Detachment means attention on MATAJI, attention on our spirit. So if we mother, Mother you are the one who can want to increase our detachment, we have improve my intelligence, YOU ARE THE REAL DOER, BECAUSE YOU ARE THE CREATOR OF THIS UNIVERSE. I just to increase our attention in order to increase our heart. have to love you as a child with devotion By increasing our heart, we deepen, strengthen beautifully our ties to the and adoration. In this way, I integrate every single minute, every glance, every word into Sahaja Yoga. I am acting without thinking, I am loving without attachment. But I can integrate only when I am detached. With attachment I still keep on Goddess and the relationship between the Goddess and the child reflects itself with more light and intensity on the human beings. In this way detachment means also to be the perfect child of the Mother, a thinking I can do the job, I can cure them, I child full of devotion, attention, admiration, can console my father, my mother, I.. I...I respect, love, tremendous, pure, innocent love to the greatest of all the Mothers, We do not know that this "I" is our EGO because by being a child we glance and who is very satisfied, when it dresses itself in "I would like to help others" habits... And express our joy, and by expressing our joy, we only emit detached love. So detachment in Sahaja Yoga is not we go to the hospitals cleaning the shoes of the sick people, bringing the meals to only possible, it is necessary. If we want the sick people, enjoying the idea of being to grow in the quest and the discovery of the great healer of this "hospitals the SELF, we have to be detached. It is inhabitants". And we start believing that by possible to be detached in order to love, doing this job, we gain the realm of God. We do not realise that it is our attachment but it is necessary to be detached in order to Ego 'l'.. which is driving us to do these to rise. We must try to avoid to put our attention on gross things, thinking too. things. We will be the next inhabitants of much of money, worrying about the these hospitals. salvation of our parents only with our EGO, Full detachment is full love and this full love expresses itself through full giving too much energy to our job. It does integration. not mean that we have to avoid all the things Integration is laying everything at or relatives but, on the contrary, we with Mataji's feet. Integration is a need. It is the detachment put them altogether at Mataji's need of love and the need of joy. This Feet. At this level detachment leads to integration is absolute because this need integration. I try to deposit all my doings at Mataji's to love and enjoy is absolute.

 28 July - August, 2004 The Divine Gool Breeze When I try to integrate my life to Mataji, I feel myself melting into Her Divinity. The must be eternally thankful and joytul to vibrations increases very much and my realise that H.H. Mataji, 'the great goddess, eyes sparkle like diamonds. Detachment the Adi Shakti' has come to this Earth to is the key to integration and integration is enlighten our spirit and bestow upon us the key to surrender. Yes, we are the children of God and we Divine Attention, Absolute Detachment and When we integrate ourselves into full Integration the Essence of Her Divine Sahja Yoga, we surrender to Mataji. And Being, Her Love. by surrendering to Her, we let grow in us this extraordinary feeling that we are really the children of God. "My children, you must know I am beyond "The New revolution in your awareness has to take place otherwise all human insults and pain. Do you know that when Christ was crucified he was a witness to his achievements have no meaning. it would be like arranging all the electrical decorations pain? He can never be humiliated. But these for the marriage without the electrical current people are under the pressure of the satanic But when the Light be on, you will see the forces. We have to save them. Do you want them to go to hell?" Bridegroom and the Bride." H.H. Mataji, Sri Nirmala Devi H.H. 'Mataji, Sri Nirmala Devl शान्ताकारं भुजगशयनं पद्मनाभं सुरेशं विश्चाधारं गगन सदृशं मेघवर्ण शुभाङ्गम्। लक्ष्मीकान्तं कमलनयनं योगिभिघ्यनिगम्यं "Obeisance to Vishnu, the dispeller of the fear of rebirths, the one Lord of all the regions, वन्दे विष्णुं भवभय हरं सर्वलोकैकनाथम्।। possessed of a tranquil form, lying on a bed of snake, from whose navel has sprung the Shanlakaram Bhujagshayanam lotus, the Lord of all celestials, the support of Padmnabham Suresham the Universe, similar to the sky, possessed Vishvaadharam Gagan Sadrisham of the colour of a cloud and possessed of Meghavaranam Shubhangam! Lakshmikantam Kamala Nayanam handsome limbs, the Lord of Lakshmi (the Goddess of Wealth), having lotus-like eyes, Yogibhirdhyangamyam and realized by yogis in meditation." Vande Vishnum Bhawbhaya Haram Sarwalokaikantham !! (Maha Avtar-1980)

 ADVICE OF HER HOLINESS MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI (Guru Purnima, 29th July, 1980) London be a person who is an ascetic or a person Today you have arranged this worship of your Guru, that is your Mother perhaps. Why this Puja is arranged? who is living in a forest. He could be a king. All these outward manifestations of one's life do not matter whatever may be your One should know that it is very important position, I would say the so-called position for every disciple to worship his Guru. But the Guru has to be real Guru, not the one in this world makes no difference to your who is just exploiting the disciples and who being a Guru, as long as you have imbibed is not authorized by God. A Puja is the Statutes of the Lord. Again, I say you have to imbibe the arranged, because you have been initiated Statutes. Let us see what are the Statutes. into the Statutes of the Lord. You have been The first is, 'you do not do harm to anyone'. told what are the Dharmas of a human being. For that actually you do not need a The first principle is that 'we are not to harm anyone? Animals do harm without Guru. You can read a book and know what knowing that they are harming someone. are the Statutes of the Lord. But Guru has to see that you practice them. These If you go near a snake, he will bite. If a scorpion is there he will put his poison into Statutes are to be practiced, to be brought your being. Humans are not to harm. anyone. They can correct but not harm. But into your own life; which is a difficult thing and without a Guru, a correcting force, it is very difficult to follow these Statutes of the principle of not harming is taken point where reality disappears, e.g., when the Lord because, there is a very big gap between Human Awareness and Divine it was said do not harm anyone, people Awareness and that gap can only be filled started saying, 'alright we will not harm by a Guru, who himself is complete. mosquitoes and bugs and will not kill them.' Today is Purnima, which means a And there are some people who are complete moon. A Guru has to be a following religions in which they preserve complete personality to talk about these mostquitoes and bugs. This is absurdity. Statutes and to elevate his disciples to this Taking anything to absurdity, cannot be reality. level of understanding by which they imbibe First of all, we should not harm anyone those Statutes. He is there to fulfil this gap who is walking in the path of God, the one and for that it is essential that every Guru who is a realized soul. There may be some has to be a realized soul of a very high mistakes in him. He may need correction. quality and greatly evolved. He need not

 July August, 2004 The Diving Cool Breeze Nobody is perfect as yet. So do not harm. confident about it. But for that first of all Always try to help. Secondly, anybody who you must test yourself completely, is a real seeker, he may be wrong. He otherwise you might be playing into the hands of evil. It happens with many people might have gone to wrong Gurus, he might have done wrong things. But have feelings who start doing Sahaja Yoga in the beginning. So be cautious. Be sure that you for them because you have been going on are telling the Truth and nothing else and wrong path yourself, sometimes. You have been misled before, so have more that you have felt the Truth in full ways. Those who have not felt the vibrations. sympathies. That is why if you have done mistakes in a way it is good because you should not talk of Sahaja Yoga. They have have more sympathies for such people. no authority. They have to receive vibrations. They have to fully imbibe within Then you are not to harm human beings in anyway, you are not to cause them any them and then they can say, "Yes, we felt". This is very important task Sahaja Yogis bodily harm, any emotional upsetting just for harm's sake; for correction it is alright. have to do in these modern times, that is, to tell aloud that they have found the Truth. The second Statute is that you have to That part is very weak. In whatever way you stand on your own legs and know that you like you can announce the Truth. You can are here one with the Truth, the testimony of Truth, that you have seen the Truth. You write books, you can talk to your friends, know what Truth is and you cannot relations and everyone and tell them, "this compromise with falsehood. You just is the Truth now, that you have entered in cannot. For that you need not harm the kingdom of God, that you have been blessed by the Grace of God, that you are anyone. You have to just profess it. You realized souls, that you have felt the Divine have to stand up and say that you have power which is prevailing everywhere. That seen the Truth and this is the Truth, and you can give realization to others". This you you have to be one with it so that people see that light of Truth in you and they have to tell others and know that by your accepting the truth, you are not adding accept it. anything to the Truth but you are adoring It is not for telling others that you have yourself. One requires courage to enjoy the to be truthful and this is the Truth we have seen and this is what God's Laws are, how Truth. Sometimes people may mock at you, laugh at you and persecute also but they work out. Through vibratory that should not be any worry to you because awareness we have been able to see that your relationship is with the Statutes, with this is the Truth. But be completely

 31 July-August, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze the Grace of God. When that is your testimony and that you should announce connection, you should not worry about it. The third thing for Guru a Sahaja Yogi other people and what they have to say has to do, is to develop Detachment. about it. You have to stand up, adorn Gradually you do develop it because you yourself with that Truth and talk to people find that unless and until you develop that and people wilI know that you found it. With that authenticity with which you speak detachment, you are not receiving people will know that you have found it The vibrations in the full way. All kinds of detachments have to be developed, means difference between a realized soul and a your priorities change. Once your attention non-realized soul is basically this: He does not talk of woes and his separation with gets fixed up with your spirit, the catch or God. He says "I have Found it Now. This is the hold on things which are of no importance starts reducing by itself, e.g., it". Like Christ said, "I Am The Light, I Am you have a father, a mother and a sister. The Path." Or anybody else can say that This is a bigger problem in India. Here, you but you can make out that it is not Truth. With the confidence, with that complete are overdetached. But in India, people are very much involved in their own children, understanding, coming out of your heart people can make out, 'this is absolute "this is My son" & others are all orphans. Only, your sons and daughters are the real Truth' and then all kinds of falsehood must children. "My daughter, I must do this for be denounced. Does't matter if somebody my son, my father, my mother". Two types of Attachments are there, one through (E) feels bad because by telling that you are saving them and not harming them. But must be told in a correct way, not in Moha-involvement into that. That you want frivolous way, not in frivolous way. In a very to do this for them, that you want to give persuasive way, you must tell them that them property, have insurance for them and this is wrong. You must wait for the time every sort of thing. And another could be the other way, as when you can tell people, more in we have here. You hate your father, you hate your mother. You hate everyone. Both confidence. Tell them, "this is wrong, it is wrong, you don't know. We have done the things are just the same. So, Detachment same thing". This is how you are going to express your principle of Mastery or you must be developed. The Detachment is can say" Guru Tatwa". You have to be that you are your father, you are your truthful. First and foremost thing is that, mother, you are everything. Only your spirit you should know the Truth and stand the is everything to you, only your spirit you

 32 July- August, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze love is attachment. For example, in a tree, have to enjoy, then the detachment comes from them, then you really do good to them, say the sap rises, goes to all the necessary because, by detaching you see the parts, all the flowers, all the fruits, then complete vision about them and about goes back to Mother Earth. It is not what is to be done. For example, people attached to anyone. Supposing, the sap have attachment with some crazes. goes and gets attached into one fruit. What will happen? The fruit will die and the tree Human beings always become crazy about something. I mean it can be anything. One has to understand that there should will die. Detachment gives you the movement of your love, circulation of your be only one craze that is, to be settled, love. For things now. Things have no value absolutely settled in your spirit. All other crazes will disappear because it is the unless and until there are emotions behind it. For example the sari, I am wearing today, greatest joy giving thing. That's the most nourishing thing, that's the most beautiful was bought for Guru Day, Guru Purnima but they had no sari. The other day, they thing. wanted to have Sari for Puja. Then I said if So, all the other things fall off, you enjoy you insist I may have, but I wore it today only that which is the source of all enjoyment. You get yourself attached to just to say that this was bought with that your spirit, and detachment starts working. devotion, that love that on Guru Day, Mother would like to wear something of a Sometimes detachment is taken as a lighter shade; white-the pure colour of silk,- licence for becoming dry to others, which complete detachment. But in white all the is absurd. This is a human quality to make everything dirty what is beautiful. Actually, colours are mixed, then only it becomes a person who is detached is the most white-such a balance and unity it is. It beautiful person-is the extremely loving should be that you should become white person, is love. Look at the flowers, they and whiter than snow. Detachment is purity, are detached. They are dying tomorrow, is innocence. Innocence is such a light, light that really blinds vou to all that iş filthy. they are not going to live but every minute You would not even know that a person has they live they are emitting fragrance to you. come with bad intentions. A person comes The trees are not attached to anything; they to you, comes to steal. You will say, 'come will die tomorrow, doesn't matter. But if along, what do you want'. You will offer him anybody comes to them, they give tea and all that, then he says,. "I have come shadow, they give fruits. Attachment to rob you", "Alright rob me, if you want to", means death of love, complete death of

 July August, 2004 33 The Divine Cool Breeze not to harm anyone-Ahimsa, not to kill So he might not rob you at all. That is what anyone. That does not mean that you do is innocence, which one may develop, only not have to eat meat and fish and all that. through detachment. Detachment is of the That is all nonsense. Of course, you should attention. Do not allow your attention to get not hanker after food, no doubt about it. You involved in to something, even rituals of do not kill anyone means, you do not kill a anything. Say, now we have not washed human being. Thou shall not kill. So first Mataji's Feet, alright it does not matter. You thing is not to harm anyone. love Me, alright. If some mistakes may be Second is to know that you have found committed, what does it matter? If you see the truth and give the testimony of the truth. on the abstract plane, it's love. This is just Third is the detachment, the way I have a step forward. Like somebody ran very fast and fell down before reaching Me and told you about detachment. Not to get says, "Mother, Sorry, I fell down before attached to any one person because he is reaching you. I should have not done that. a relation or something; but develop a But, Mother see, how I prostrated before universal feeling and also not to hate anyone. That is a kind of worst attachment. you. Mother see, how I prostrated before you". It's a complete poetry-Detachment. So, one has to develop that detachment of all Sahaja Yogis 'I hate'. It is called as to be a Guru and that detachment does dandak, is the statute. You cannot hate This word should go away from the mouth anyone, even Rakshasas. Better not hate ) or anything like not mean Sanyas ( that, Sometimes one has to wear those them. Give them a chance. Now the tourth statute of the Lord is, to dresses to announce to the world because if you have to work in a short time then lead a moral life. These statutes were given you have to take to that intensive by all the Gurus. Take them from Socrates, behaviour like Christ, you can say or onwards, Moses, Ibrahim, Dattatreya, Adishankaracharya. All these people had Janaka, upto say Nanak, Mohammed Sahib and take up to the point when it was a very very short life. In that short life they had to achieve such a tremendous task about 100 years back at the most-was that they had to actually take a military Sainath. All of them have said that you have uniform just to avoid problems, not to to lead a Moral Life. None of them had said that you do not get married, that you should impress others. Now-a-days people do it have no relationship with your wife. All this just to impress others that they are detached and do just the things opposite is nonsense. Lead a moral life. When you are young and not married, keep your eyes to it. So, we understand that first work is

 34 July - August, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze respect, with dignity. Not staring at people," on the ground, Mother Earth gives you that which is just playing in the hands of these innocence. Most of the confusions and problems, specially in the Western life possessions. The whole society is have come because they have thrown pssessed. All the Satanic forces have morality to the sea and to accept morality been let loose, I think and the way the people are possessed, they cannot see as the very basis of society is very difficult through these things. They are supposed for them. It is complete reversion. But you to be Christians. Attention is to be looked have to do it, you have to turn the whole wheel back. So many things were done in after. That is the most important thing. Because attention is the one which is going the beginning of the society to establish these pure relationships. There are laws to be enlightened. So, we have to know what morality is. which act, just as chemical Laws are there, Physcial Laws are there in chemistry Let people laugh and say that these are Goodie-Goodies or this sort of thing. We and Physics. There are human laws which one should understand, the relationship are proud and not ashamed of being between each other. The sublimity of their righteous people. This is a very important relationship, the purity of their relationship part of righteousness. Those who do not follow this, will lose their vibrations very must be understood. Then only you can have a very very happy married life, which is the basis. "Thou shalt not commit fast. Then for a Guru, He should not accumulate things; he should not have adultery," Christ has said (Perhaps he much possessions. If he has possessions knew the modern people as they would be they should be just what he needs. A Guru using their brains for this). He said, "Thou shalt not have adulterous eyes". What a must give away his possessions. He should not have stamp-collection and all vision, in those days to think. Even, I could such kinds of collections. Whatever things not understand it when I was in India. Only after coming here I could see, what it could are useful and beautiful, which give mean. It is a possession on the eyes- happiness and joy to others, to their eyes, possession. It's a joyless, useless such things must be collected, He should behaviour. Attention is frittered away have such things which give symbolic to his life, very symbolic, which suggest that completely. There's no dignity. "eyes should be steady. If you look at somebody he is a Dharmic Person. He should not steadily, he should know that you have have things that are symbolic of Adharmikta, of irreligious life. Everything Sahaja Yoga in you. With love, with

 35 July-August, 2004 The Divine Col Breeze that he has or wears or shows should be because I am quite good at giving away. So, I told one of my niece in-laws that I want representative of his Dharmikta. I do not to give away this sari to her. On a holy day, know the situation here but in India, when we can give it to elders and so I will give it we were young we were not allowed to listen to all kinds of music. Not allowed, to her. She said, "You have only one left just not allowed to see all sort of filthy now, why do you want to give away even that. You have given away all you had". I things, filthy documentaries etc. Anything that is impure, giving bad vibrations should said, "Now, I feel like giving. I will give it not be possessed. Even whatever you away". And we were discussing this in the kitchen and I said, "why do you tell me, 1 have, you should think whom you can give am not going to take advice on this point". this. So, it means you should have possessions to express your generosity. And at that time, the bell rang and a Sahaja Yogi has to be generous like the gentleman came. He had brought 3 saris sea. A miserly Sahaja Yogi-l cannot think for me from Africa and one of them was of that-it is like mixing of darkness with exactly the same as one I had. Because I had given some silk saris to this lady when light. Miserliness is not allowed in Sahaja she was going to Africa, she thought she Yoga. Anybody, whose mind goes on how could send me some saris, and she sent me these saris. You are just standing in much money I can save, how much labour the center; from one door it comes and from can I save-there are many labour saving the other it goes. It is nice to see all that devices, and money-saving devices-and movement. It is very interesting. Apart from that the way you give it, the also cheating others or making money out of few things here and there and all such things are against Sahaja Yoga. They will emotional side of it is so beautiful, you pull you down. Enjoy your generosity. How cannot imagine it. I met a lady after say 30 many times must I have told you about years of her married life in London, generosity. I remember; once I wanted to suddenly and she said, "Oh what coincidence". I said, "why"? She said, "I am give a Sari that I had from abroad. You see, in India, the people like that kind of a Sari wearing the same pearl necklace you had given me on my wedding-day to day. And very much, although I do not understand should meet you". The whole thing, the why they like this nylon sort of sari. A lady whole drama changed with the meeting. It said, "I have not got a sari from abroad and I would like to have one imported Sari". I is how you give even a small thing. It is the had only one such Sari left with me greatest art of giving that one has to learn

 The Divine Cool Breeze July - August, 2004 36 in Sahaja Yoga. Give up the mundane type dresses, which are suitable to you, e.g. in of things, like if you go to somebody's this climate there is no use to wear dress birthday, you send a card, 'thank you, very like Rama used to wear. He will not wear much'. Make it a more deeper significant anything on the top, there was no need. You thing. Let us see how you develop your have to wear the dress of whatever country symbols of love. When you have these you belong, whatever suits the occasion. things of vibrations and you will give it to a Whatever you think is dignified and good. Sahaja Yogi, he will know what it is. Never It speaks for your more elegance and your lack in generosity specially among Sahaja personality. Whatever suits you, you Yogis. Gradually, you will be amazed how should wear, not like all the people wearing through small things you win over as if the moss Colour dress, the great suit, a vibrations flow brought those things and work out for those people. horrible looking and making clowns out of them. No clownish things are necessary, Then, for a Sahaja Yogi it is important no dandy stuff is necessary. Simple, to use things which are more natural in their beautiful dresses should be worn which character. Give up artificiality and be more give you dignity. Actually in the East, people natural. I do not mean that take out the believe that God has given you a beautiful roots and eat them or you eat the fish raw. body and it is to be adorned with the beauty I do not mean that. Always you must avoid of what human beings have created, just going too far with the things. But try to lead to respect it, just to worship your body, For example in India women wear their saris a life which is more natural. Natural, in the sense that people know that there is no and saris are expressive of their moods and vanity about you. Some people can be the expression of their worship of their bodies, other way round. You see, they will dress because you must respect your body. Dresses should be such that they should up like a tramp, just to attract more attention. I mean there can be both ways. be for utility as well as dignity. There is no Then I find some people colouring their hair need to have uniform clothes for Sahaja and all that. So you have to be a natural Yogis at all. I don't like it. There should be person; very natural in your behaviour. It variety as nature is. Everyone should look a different person. For Puja etc. all can can mean anything absurd also to some wear something similar, it doesn't matter people who do not use their wisdom. Wisdom is very important in Sahaja Yoga, where your attention need not be on the variety. But outside, you should be normal that you have to keep intact all the time. Natural means you must wear natural person. You are all householders, nobody

 37 July - August, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze has to announce something. For you some are touchable some are untouchable. This is in our Indian Community, horrible. people, I don't even advice to put the red mark when walking on the street. You Brahamanism of India has ruined India should be normal person, not to be pointed out. You need not be dressed absurdly or in funny way but in a normal way as others wear. To be normal is very important in completely and you learn from for example, who was Vyasa, the one who wrote Geeta, who was he? He was illegitimate son of a fisherwoman. That is why deliberately he was born like that. All the Brahmins who Sahaja Yoga. Then we have to know that Sahaja read Geeta, ask them who was Vyasa? Yogis have to get over all kinds of Brahmins are those who are realized souls and for realized souls there is nothing like discriminations and identifications according to races, colour and different such non-sensical things like where and in what caste or community you are born. Christian, you don't belong to a Church, With all education and everything in the religions in which you are born. As a West, we find this nonsense of Racialism, you are not born in a Church. Thank God, I just can't understand. If somebody is fair otherwise all the spirits there will capture you, immediately. But these identifications or dark, after all God had to make variety will linger on. To accept anything new, you in colour, in every way. Who told you that have to be reborn and you are reborn now. you are the most handsome people going round. May be for some markets here or in Now, you are Dharamatit means you need Hollywood, it may fit but in the kingdom of not follow any particular type of religion. You are open to all religions and the God, all these 'so called' handsome people, will be denied entry-marrying seven essence of all religions you have to take. You have not to denounce any religion or insult any religious incarnation at any time, it is a sin. It is a great sin in Sahaja Yoga husbands and all sort of things. They will all be put in Hell. The beauty is of the heart and not of the face, that shows and shines. May be, people are a little bit aware of it, and you know who they are. There should that is why they go and tan their faces. I do be no racial understanding of oneself. You could be Chinese or of any group. You not know. They are quite aware but there is too much "Showing-Off" they are doing. couid be anything. As long as we are human beings, we should know that we Some people like black hair, others like red laugh the same way, we smile the same hair, I mean there have to be all types of way, we hold the same way. This is all hair, why do you like a particular type of hair this I cannot understand. There is conditioning in our mind of this society that

 The Divine Cool Breeze 38 July August, 2004 nothing like or dislike. What God has the blood flows through arteries, they become smaller and smaller. You are the created is all beautiful, who are you to judge that? I like or dislike, 'l', who is this arteries which is going to flow this blood of T, you see, is Mr. Ego, which is being my love to all the people. If arteries are tampered by this society, which teaches broken the blood will not reach the people. you how to smoke cigar and how to have That is why you are so important. The your lager morning till evening. All this bigger you become, the bigger the arteries training and conditioning has to be thrown away just like filth and see that God has become. Then you encompass more people, by that you are more responsible. Guru must have the dignity. Guru means created all of you as his own children. It is such a beautiful thing. Why you want to the weight, is the gravity. Guruatwa means gravity. You must have the gravity by your make it ugly with these ugly ideas. All this ugliness of "I like or dislike" is nonsense. weight of your dignity, weight of your Only there should be one word "I Love", behaviour, weight of your faith; and your forget everything. There is no need to light. You become Guru not through frivolousness and vanity. Cheapness, remember what British did to Indians or Germans did to Jews, forget everything. vulgar language, cheap jokes, anger and Those people who did it are dead and temper-all must be avoided completely. Weild the weight of your sweetness, of your finished. We are different people, we are saints. This is for the statutes I have told tongue, of the dignity, which will attract people just like the flower which is loaded you, which you have to imbibe. with nectar, attract the bees from all over. But, today, I authorise you to be the In the same way you will be attracting people. Be proud of that, be very very proud Gurus, so that through your own character and through your own personality, the way you practice Sahaja Yoga in your own life of that and have sympathies for others and and manifest the light, others will follow care for others. Now, in short I have to tell you how you you. And that you will establish the statutes have to do it yourself. You have to work out of the lord in their hearts and emancipate them. Give them their salvation because your void clearly. First of all you have to you have got your salvation. You are the know that void catches when you had a channels, without the channels this all wrong type of a Guru. You must know about pervading power cannot work out. That's your Guru entirely. Try to find out the the system. If you see the Sun, its light character of your Guru. Rather difficult because your Guru is very elusive. She is spreads through its rays-from your heart

 July - August, 2004 39 The Divine Cool Breeze it is not a sin for me. I can kill anyone and Mahamaya; not easy to find out. She behaves in a very normal way and do whatever intrigue or anything. I really tell you, that's a fact. Do anything, I am above sin but I see to it that I do not do anything sometimes you are outwitted. But you see how in small things also, She behaves. How Her character is expressed, how Her like that in your presence, so that you do love is expressed. Try to remember Her not get one of these things, because that is my quality. You have a very supreme Guru, no doubt, but still you must know that forgiveness. Then you should know that have the Guru that many people must you have desired to have, who is the source of those powers of supremacy you don't all Gurus. It is the ardent desire of even have. I am above all these things. I do not know what temptations are, nothing, 1 Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesh to have a mean I do. Guru like that. They must be all jealous of Whatever I like, it is all my whim. But you. But this Guru is very elusive, so to improve your void, say that, "Mother you despite that I have made myself very of this normal because I must appear before you elusiveness, that fear or that awe, that in such a manner that you understand what are our Guru". Because respect which is necessary, for the Guru is the statutes. For me there are no Statutes. I make these statutes. Because is not established. Uniess and until you of you I do all these things and teach you develop that awe, complete awe within small things, because you are still children. you, your Guru principle will not be established. No liberty is to be taken. I am In the same way you must remember telling you myself but I am extremely that when you are talking to other people elusive; next moment I make you laugh and about Sahaja Yoga, remember that they forget about it because I am testing your will see you all the time and try to freedom to do it-Complete freedom. I play understand how far you are in it. As I understand you, you try to understand with you in such a manner that you will be forgetting every moment that I am your them. As I love you, you try to love them I definitely love you, no doubt but I am Guru, every moment. So first of all you must find about your Nirmala-l am beyond love, different state own Guru, establish Her in your heart.F altogether. Under these circumstances you are mean you have a wonderful 'Guru" otherwise, I must say, I wish I had one like much better off because no Guru goes to that extent. Apart from that I am the source that myself. And She is desireless and sinless, absolutely sinless. Whatever I do of all the Shaktis, of all powers, so you can

 The Divine Cool Breeze July August, 2004 40 have all the powers from me, whatever you like. I am desireless but whatever desires bend his head before anybody else, specially My disciples; except for mothers, you have will be fulfilled. Even about Me, sisters and you see in some relationship, you have to desire, look at that how much if it is, so you bow to that. But they do not am bound by you. Unless and until you bow to anybody else. desire My good health, I will have bad Secondly, you must know that your Guru health. It is to that extent. But to Me, what has been the Mother of very great people. it is bad health and good health. Under The thought of that itself should establish these beautiful conditions you should really your Guru Tatwa (Guru-principle). What prosper so well. There should be no tremendous sons I have had. What great problems for you to be Gurus. personalities, No words can describe and Now, the Void is to be established. First so many of them, one after another and of all you must know your Guru and she is you are in the same tradition; My disciples. on every Chakra. Imagine what Keep them as your ideals. Try to follow tremendous Guru you have. With that you them, read about them, understand them what they have said, how they have feel the confidence and because of such tremendous Guru everybody is getting realization so easily. If you go to a rich man achieved such heights. Recognise them, respect them. You will establish your Guru- for alms he is not going to give two pices Tatwa. only. Because she is so powerful you are Imbibe all the statutes within you, be getting your powers just like that. So you proud about them. Don't be misguided by have to feel very happy about it, extremely happy and beautiful that you have these what the people are talking. We are going to pull the whole multitudes towards powers. At least those who have been in ourselves. First of all let us establish our Sahaja Yoga will know it for certain. Those weight, the Gravity. As Mother Earih keeps who have come to my lecture for the first time will be a little puzzled. All of you know everybody pulling towards earth, we will be pulling all of them to ourselves. Today, all of you must within yourself, to for definite what it is. So, to understand your own Guru- your spirit promise that you will be a Guru, power, you first know who is your Guru- worthy of your Mother. May God bless you! Sakshat Adishakti, Oh God; it is too much. (Nirmala Yoga-1980) Then establish your void. A Guru does not

 SEEKING AND RATIONALITY In our searching, we are asking for without any effort required. We breathe, the actual experience. In all the our heart works, etc. without our doing scriptures it has been said that we will anything. Therefore everything has to come spontaneously like the sprouting second birth which is within us. All the of a seed. Only human beings believe in be born again. We are looking for a religions talk about it. We have to God, not animals. We haven't our stabilize ourselves to get the experience fulfilment. People are seeking. The awareness is responsible for the and it will work out. We search with our minds and rationality for the truth. This seeking. We have to keep our rationality mind is not connected to the whole. We clear. I ask you not to believe me, but not to deny me because you can't are not aware of the whole, we have so rationalize. Now is the time of many problems. unenlightened blossoming and many are going to be Thinking, rationalization and awareness are converted and have fulfilment. Our different, Rationality has all the time instrument, existing on many different been living with the ego. We can't levels has started to become separate the ego and rationality- neither enlightened. We pass from gross to the are perfected nor mature. If we are subtle of Mother Earth. Subtle of Mother Earth is fragrance. The cause of Mother mature enough to know why there are vibrations in the molecules-through Earth is the axis. Ultimately we go to the rationality we cannot discover this. We primordial cause, which is the spirit-the refiection of the God Almighty. cannot give answers to questions- e.g. Why are we human beings? We take too The real Gurus working in the forests much for granted. If we try to rationalize and the great people like Moses and everything we will go mad. Our rationality Abraham knew how difficult it was to s not mature enough, it is not raise Kundalini. When people are enlightened. The" I" within us knows the authorised it is an easy thing to do for rationality, but rationality doesn't know others. When it moves up the centre and the" I". We can't know each other's point pierces the fontanel bone, we achieve of view, Why human beings are made self-realisation. We aren't even aware of what has happened to us, what we have out of an amoeba-through rationalizing and logic? achieved. It's so spontaneous and so simple but it's a very dynamic process, The process has been worked out

 The Divine Cool Breeze July - August, 2004 42 an all dimensional working, which makes simple love. Mother can't keep all Her the Kundalini rise. love to Herself. Christ was crucified for I am a simple housewife who has this us to have it and to understand what we unique technique, I am your teacher and have; understand the mechanism can get us broken into the Unconscious. master it and we can give light to You mustn't be upset because of my thousands. To help them mentally, simplicity. physically, emotionally and spiritually. Jesus Christ was a carpenter's son. Not to waste this wonderful gift. Our His Mother was an uneducated woman. rationality will see the power flowing Krishna was a cow boy. When we find through us and we will enjoy the bliss something like this, it is a beginning. and joy of this wonderful happening. Having been able to get our own power May God Bless You! (-SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI) risen is enlightening ur rationality. It is Mother's Name Names are often given under the guidance of the Unconscious and, in this respect H.H. Mataji's names are quite interesting. NIRMALA is the Sanskrit word for IMMACULATE. In her childhood She was called Neera (Born from Water, Miriam, Marie). Her maiden name was SALVE which reminds us of the ritual "Hail Mary" in Latin. "Salve regina coeli. . The Spanish speaking guests of H.H. Mataji in Colombia were surprised at this coinci- dence. After marriage, H.H. Mataji's name became Shrivastava. "Shri" means "the God- dess" (the holy Spirit) and "Vastava" means "in reality" So, by a playful chance, NIRMALA DEVI SHRIVASTAVA reads. THE IMMACULATE GODDESS, THE HOLY SPIRIT IN REALITY. Gregoire in-The advent pp. 169

 WHERE ARE OUR PRIORITIES? beloved Mother. They are the foundations When we get our realization, we are not yet aware of the fundamental inner- of our steadiness and straightforwardness transformations of our being, we just in Sahaja Yoga. But when we do not witness these blessings we integrate them realize that something beautiful and new has transformed us. Then, we grow and in our Ego if they increase and go to the left side and confusion if they decrease or we see how the world changes according We can never witness such vanish. to our transformations, we get better jobs, better friends, more patience and calm. blessings if we do not see our priorities. The priorities of every Sahaja Yogi We see all these internal and external transformations as blessings of the should be to let these blessings be felt, received and nourished only by the heart, Goddess. The blessings grow and we get accustomed to their manifestations, not by the mind otherwise we feel that we especially to the external ones, like good have failed in Sahaja Yoga because we health, or success in emotional, could not bring our husband, mother or sister to Sahaja Yoga, because we had the But when these professional life. illusion that to have a happy family-life is manifestations decrease or even stop for a while, when we get sick or have some the purpose and the reward of every positive Sahaja Yogi. At this level, with such troubles of any kind we start wondering why an attitude, we can never grow. We have it happened to us, what we have done. to transcend this stage, go higher. Our Either we start blaming Sahaja Yoga or we develop a sense of guilt. With this sense priority should be to see the SELF as the of guilt insecurity grows in our heart and greatest blessing. This is where our takes out our joy. priorities should be, in the SELF. Our priorities are priorities of the manifestation Why does it happen so quickly and so often? Because we do not see where our of our spirit. Our priority of the priorities are. At first we must be the manifestation of our spirit. Our priority witness of our blessings in order to should be to let express our heart, to act assimilate them fully in our heart. In this through it, to be guided by the sparkle of the spirit, ignited by the pure grace of our witness-stage, we see that they are not beloved Mother. the goal of Sahaja Yoga or the achievement of our spiritual growth, but the by-products of our inner-evolution which help us to have Let us put our priorities in the spirit, then automatically we become the witness of the enjoyment of every blessing irradiated confidence and faith in the Self and in our

 July - August, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze by the SELF. The spirit is the absolute as the children of God Almighty? What are we afraid of? Who can attack us? Nobody, blessing and our priority should be to feel everything is a myth, a play, a drama when this absolute blessing in our heart and forget the whys, the hows. Everybody is we feel the protection of our Mother. I dare go further, our priority should be absolutely blessed, equally looked after by only to pronounce with all our strength, all Mother's love, the day his spirit has been connected to ADI SHAKTI, the day the drop our love, all our joy in an opened heart the has fallen in the ocean. So everybody's name of the DEVI. Just to pronounce Her priority must be to feel his blessed spirit name is the greatest blessing, the who is everlasting, absolute and of divine incomparable joy. In order to see our priorities we must source. The only priority is to be aware of this blessing, the greatest blessing, to be train our attention and strengthen our witnessing faculty. The attention helps us connected through the spirit to the Divine. to discover the beauty of the Self and its And by being connected to the Divine, the spirit needs nothing, because he has importance. When the priorities are being every-thing, integrates all blessings * se set by the enlightenment of our attention, we reach the state where there are no because he represents the absolute blessing. Our priority is to understand our doubts, no questions, no answers, where we see through the opening of the heart spirit and its love for the Divine Mother, to feel with tremendous joy and pride that we the glory of the DIVINE MOTHER. A. de Kalbermatten are the children of ADI SHAKTI. This is our key-priority to feel in the heart the joy of 344, Winterthurerstrasse 8057Zuerich belonging to the family of God. Do we (Nirmala Yoga-1981) realize what it means to have been chosen

 WHAT THE PROPHETS SAID I came to say a word and I shall say it now. But if death prevents its uttering, it will be said by tomorrow, for Tomorrow never leaves a secret in the book of Eternity. Therefore, at all times, do thou direct thy thought unto Me and fight: With thy mind and thought dedicated unto Me, thou wilt, without doubt, attain to Me exclusively. Jnaneshwari (VIII) (7) I came to live in the glory of love and the light It is the richest food served to the happy soul, of Beauty, which are the reflections of God. the Mother's love to the blessed poor spirits am here living, and the people are unable to exile me from the domain of life for they know I will live in death. If they pluck my eyes I will hearken to the murmurs of love and the song of Beauty. If they close my ears I will enjoy the touch of the breeze mixed with the who do not worry about life's cares; and the royal road to this Supreme Abode is devotion. Jnaneshwari (VIII) (21, 22) When the FACT becomes fact. None shall deny it is a fact, Abasing, exalting! When the Earth shall be shaken in a shock. incense of love & the fragrance of beauty. If they place me in vacuum, I will live together with my soul, the child of love and Beauty. -Khalil Gibran And the mountains shall be powered in Powder. And become like flying dust, And Ye shall be three kinds. (The speeches and table-talk of the Prophet Mohammed.) Eulogy to Shri Mataji She walks God-haired, God-fingered Touching Autumn into Summer With the silence of Her smile. She sings. Lark-solemn, high, exultant, Sweeping snowlight into Spring. She smiles Sun-blue, sun brilliant In the shelter of the storm. She speaks cool clear Soul calming In the music of the mind. Judith Bell, Sydney

 THE FIGHT FOR COLLECTIVITY At first, when we come to Sahaja Sahaja Yoga, still loaded with a lot of Yoga, we had to confront some negativity weaknesses and impurities. If a Sahaj coming from outside: Old friends who do Yogi is not very serious about clearing not react as we had hoped, family his instrument (yantra) with the Sahaj members who are neither sensitive nor techniques (tantra), he may fall a prey sensible, or more generally, we had to to the anti-evolutionary bhoots. Those face the pressure of an adharmic will try to infiltrate such a person to turn him into a medium of negativity. Let's say, society. Gradually we learn how to enjoy these situations, we know how to deal these bhoots are acting as Satan's CIA with them. All the while our collective or KGB. If they succeed, their body is growing: in India, in UK, in achievement is triple: 1. they have Australia, in continental Europe. Then, created one black sheep and lost that sometimes, we find out that the soul; 2. this person might create negativity is trying to open a second mischiefs; 3. suspicion is being aroused front, so to say, within our ranks, trying among Sahaja Yogis: confidence is the weakened, love grows cold, to manipulate Sahaja Yogis against each others, trying to tear apart our vibrations of togetherness and collective collectivity, which is Mother's beautiful well-being do not circulate any more; tapestry. We have to outwit this subtle one starts seeing only the faults of type of negativity. I wish, dear brothers others. In this way, bitter thorns are and sisters, to reflect with you on the prepared, seeds of dissent are sown appropriate Sahaja tactics to meet this within our camp. But we are not willing to give this pleasure to these wretched "negativity from within". A preliminary remark: there can be bhoots and we have been discussing the issue with our London friends. negativity frorn within Sahaja Yogis, not In its present shape, Sahaja Yoga is from within Sahaj Yoga; Sahaj Yoga is the Immaculate operation of God's not unlike the embryo of an organic, evolutionary plan: it cannot be spoiled. collective being. For this organism to But the boundless compassion of Mother grow it is necessary that blood, that is, love and-energy circulate, so that each (which is not always easy to understand) allows some of us to come in Sahaja part supports each others in their growth. Yoga, and even in the inner circle of if there is the intrusion of a foreign

 47 July - August, 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze its multiple forms (aggressiveness, envy, element in the body (the virus, the black sheep) the organism as a whole will jealousy) destroys the cell one ought to repel it. This function is, as a rule, save (the Sahaja Yogi) and spreads the performed by the Kalki aspect of Shri negativity to other parts of the body. Love, the contrary, comforts and Mataji and not by any Individual Sahaja on regenerates the cell and destroys the Yogi. And if there is sickness in one part of the body, the organism rushes extra negativity. So let us love each other as we can, despite the as supply of energy where there is a need much for it. This function is very often weaknesses that all of us still have. Let mediated by the care, love and detached us love because it is the only way to attention that Sahaja Yogis are able to grow: there is not going to be any "one yogi show" in Sahaja Yoga. No fast give to one of them in difficulty. runner to arrive before anybody else on In other words our job is not to throw people out of Sahaja Yoga but to take top of mount Kailash! Our achievement them in. If somebody turns very negative will be collective or...will not be! No show individual is important in 'this "Yoga Of certainly should we uncompromising firmness, shoe-beat The Whole". It is the universality of our mighty gathering that matters. Through etc...but basically leave it to Shri Mataji. She has corrected so many of us, She love we become the bearers of the light will correct many more. Let us never of Oneness; the channels of the flow of forget that all the great sons of Shri Universality. It is the only way, love is the Mataji are very much active, and lead the only way we can do some justice to the fight. Sakshat Shri Bhairawa, Shri Primordia! Mother, and indeed, Shri Kartikeya or Lord Jesus readily answer Mataji rejoices so much when She feels that We love each other. our prayers, Under no circumstances Love is a marvellous weapon; It does should we send vibrations of hate to a Sahaja Yogi in difficulty because then, not destroy the (imaginary) enemy but turns him into a friend. It allows us to see we fall in the trap of the negativity; such vibrations come back to us, confuse our beauty: "If you have to think of the other Sahaja Yogis and provide a thorns instead of the flower, will you enjoy the rose? And wisdom is to enjov" conveyance for negativity which happily These golden words of Shrl Mataji are to takes them back and forth, like an old witch sitting on her broom. Hate (under be ever remembered. Looking at the

 The Divine Cool Breeze July - August, 2004 48 thorns we would become thorns automatically a salesman's smile on the ourselves. face to prove how loving we are. The Hence let us not encourage the Goddess is love. But in Her hands, She spreading of rumours or criticisms, wears spears, club, mace and swords which can have unnecessary disruptive as well as sugarcanes. Some of us are effects. Are we really talking for the sugarcanes, some aren't. We should benefit of the community? Are we self understand. appointed judges? Are we forming little clans and clubs around Mr. such and minutely we, in our differences and When we feel our togetherness, how such? We should give full support to any variety, complement each other; when i we work like the fingers of one hand we thought. any project, any Sahaja Yogi who dedicatedly works for the are well on our way to overcome the ego collectivity; this criteria will help us. Love and to win the fight for collectivity, The does not discriminate. Mother's love victory will be the victory of the Self. Shri flows to everybody equally. The sun does Mataji, Parmeshwari is indeed taking us not favour a specific flower or tree. But by the hand, gently leading us to Divinity, the sunflower knows who is her lord. to that point where the identity of Atma 'Thus love discriminates: enlightened and Parmatma, the individual and the love chases righteousness, God's side, cosmic soul, is being experienced. Sahaja Yogis. It knows also how to JAI SHRI MATAJI ! Love. Gregoire express itself. We are not to put (1981)

 The children "are the ones who are incarnations. They are the ones who are going to lead humanity into some great advancement. The humanity has to be looked after. They are tomorrow's humanity. And we are today's. And what are we giving to them for them to follow?" It is very difficult to say what is the children's aim in life, "but, with Sahaja Yoga, they will all go in the proper way. They'll behave in a proper way and the whole thing will be a different mass of Sahaja Yogis coming up. 25.



----------------------

2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
The
00
415
July August, 2004
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 In This Issue
Sankranti Puja, Pune - 14.1.2004
Adishakti Puja, Cabella 6 June 2004
You Are The Love
6.
Everything Turned Towards Her
8
Shri Mataji in Paris (September-2003)
11
A Message From Shri Mataji
12
Shri Ganesha Puja-2003
13
15
Wisdom
19
Vibrations
20
Creation Man And His Fulfilment
25
A Letter of Shri Mataji
26
The Relation Detachment-Integration
29
Guru Purnima, London-29th July 1980
Seeking And Rationality
41
42
Mother's Name
43
Where Are Our Priorities?
45
What The Prophets Said
45
Eulogy to Shri Mataji
46
The Fight For Collectivity
2.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Co oL BREE ZE
THE
DIVINE
Published by
Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
H.O.: Plot No. 8, Chandragupt Housing Society
Behind Hotel Grace, Paud Road
Kothrud, Pune-411 029
Printed at
Amarnath Press (P) Ltd.
WHS 2/47, Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi -110015
Ph.:25268673
For Subscription Please Write To:
Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
222, Desh Bandhu Apartments
Kalkaji, New Dehi-110019
Tel. No. :011-26422054, 26216654
Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles,Miracle Photographs etc. to:
Shri O.P. Chandna
G-11-(463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110034
Tel. No. 011-55356811
Mor. :8:00 AM-9:00 AM
Eve.:8:30 PM-10:30PM
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 SANKRANTI PUJA
14.1.2004 PUNE
(Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
(Translated)
the Agya Chakra is that with it we get angry
From South the Sun comes to North,
with the people, start misbehaving with
not because it revolves. Every year on the
same date the Sun comes to this particular them, get enraged and all the faith is
angle. Why do we recognize this shaken. Agya is very significant area which
happening so much? What is so special we must know about. It is the place of
Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ told us to forgive
about it? Why do we feel so much of joy
when the Sun comes at this angle? everyone. Forgiveness is very essential.
But how to forgive? Many people say that
we wish to forgive but we are unable to. To
Because most of our things are performed
because of the Sun. At night we are in the
state of sleep, all our works begin when forgive one has to be forgiving (eT
there is dawn. So the sun is the power that
One has to think that everyone will have to
face his deeds. What have we to do with
affects all our deeds and when it comes in
our orbit, we begin to recognize it.
it? What one says will recoil back on him,
Most of the festivals are based on the why have we to get involved? With such
detachment if you forgive everyone then the
situation of the Moon, but this is the only
Agya Chakra will be alright. Obstruction in
festival which goes according to the state
the Agya Chakra stops the kundalini to
of the Sun. So this is how 'Surya Narayana'
ascend and to remove this obstruction we
(The Sun God) has much importance in
our country. People go to take dip in Ganga
should know how to forgive. Every moment
we keep on thinking as to who has tortured
River and perform different types of
us and how. Instead we should think that
worships. However this day is very
we have to forgive. The moment we forgive,
significant. We have to decide as to what
is to be done on this day? What work is to
you will be surprised, the kundalini ascends
be performed? We bow before the Sun, immediately. Our purpose is to raise our
kundalini, why should we be angry? Getting
offer offerings and express our gratitude
to it. But what special work we could do, angry is human nature, not Divine, it is
human nature. So we should control our
particularly the Sahaj Yogis?
The Sun has its place at the Agya anger and repeat thrice instead, 'forgiven,
Chakra. You all know it, and think of the forgiven, forgiven' (THT, &HT, &THT) and the
future with your Agya Chakra. So it is very obstruction of our Agya Chakra gets
essential to set the Agya Chakra right removed.
Eternal Blessings to all of you.
because it affects the Sun. The impact of
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 ADISHAKTI PUJA
Cabella - 6 June, 2004
(Internet Version)
Today we have to talk about this Power with problems, but none of these problems
which is hidden in your heart by which you are there. I don't see any problem
can do whatever you like to create a new anywhere. Those who think they have
world, a new family, new standards, problems, I have asked them to write them
everything that is not known so far. That is down and I will try to answer them and tell
quite possible and it's being done, but what them what sort of a problem it is. But before
is quite difficult is how to make people more
adaptable, more in tune with each other. It still our Sahaja Yogis have not come to that
seems to be a difficult thing. They are level to understand the Oneness, the
alright among themselves, if they have their uniqueness in their hearts. All this comes
own friends, their own style. But to make from within, not from without, so all efforts
them absolutely one, one with each other, made outside is of no use.
in one tune, in one life is very difficult.
Now the problem is, we have beautiful what we are. It's all there. Just you have to
people, beautiful souls, but they do not be that, to become that. This is rather
become so one with each other as they difficult to understand for people who have
should have. Now, how to solve this different noses, different faces, different
problem?.... if you see the original idea everything, to become the same. But you
why we started this new kind of are, you are. Because you don't know that
understanding, new kind of penetration, you are, that's why you are looking different.
because we wanted to find the Oneness. So, I have to tell you one thing: that you
in every person. Now you should be very are all One.. One in the sense that your
thankful that you are all One, One inside, everything, impulse, every feeling, every
there's nothing second. It's only One and understanding is the same.
that One when it speaks and when it wants
to administer something, then you will be that there is different, but actually it is not.
amazed that it is all done the same way, It is only One, one relationship, and this
it's the same thing and it works out the relationship is with the Adi Shakti, that you
same way. There is no change; there is are a part and parcel of Adi Shakti.
could do anything, I would like to say that
We have to be effortless and become
it gives you the very wrong impression
no difference between the two.
Whatever one may try, one cannot get
Despite that our minds are roving, separated from Adi Shakti. You are born
roving into the same sort of problem which out of Her and you are guided by Her.
has no significance in Sahaja Yoga. Now Everything seems to be one to Me while
the main problem that we have is that we
don't realize that we have no problem. We action, which is wrong.
you people think there is a different line of
Whatever I may say is to be proved,
are without any problems. We think that
there are problems and we should deal otherwise why should you accept.. Myself
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 July August, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
are becoming Sahaja Yogis, but they are
not. They are not Sahaja Yogis but they are
trying to become. On the contrary, they
should know that they are Sahaja Yogis and
they don't have to become anything. Then
there is no problem. We have to know that
we are One, all the same. There's no need
I am one with you and I will always remain
the same with all of you; for me there is no
difference. If that temperament changes a
little bit you will see the oneness among
all and the difference will be lost in no time.
It's very surprising how you understand
each other. Unless and until you have
proper understanding of each other you to have any ignorance of any kind. And
cannot achieve anything. That is essential, when this happens, the problems of the
that is right, that is the truth. The truth
started a long time back, much before difficulty.
anybody could think of having the truth. It
all went out with so many things which
whole world will be solved without any
Today's Puja is a special one because
you are doing the Puja of something that
never went into any transformations, which
was not changed at all, remained the same,
were not truthful and then the truth went
away.
born with the same and is still with the
The Truth is not so easily accepted as
the untruth is. Why? Because we are
standing in untruth. Our all understanding
is untruth and we have to change our
understanding to truth, which is not difficult get lost in the atmosphere or the other
same. In such a Puja what anyone has to
say? Nothing. Just be one with yourself. we
have to be one with ourselves and not to
movements of the brain. Because this is
because we are truth. We are the Truth.
To become the Truth which we are, why the time when the brain starts moving and
should it be difficult? Should not, but it
happens. So that means there is over himself. Like a snake, unless and until
something wrong somewhere with us it is in his own place, there is no danger,
which we should find out. And the thing that but as soon as it starts moving, there's a
is wrong is that we cannot face ourselves. danger. In the same way, we have to know
We face others, not ourselves. We never ihat our mind is very, very difficult and
see ourselves. We have no idea as to what should not go into the wrong directions.
our own situation is. And for that, you
needed a Mother to show you. That's how Mother's Puja because we should try to be
the Mother came on this earth to tell you on the line of Primordial Mother. We have
what's the problem with you within. This
principle has to be practiced. And you will work out our Primordial Self and not to
be amazed how much you have already change ourselves. We are just ourselves
knowledge about yourself and about these. and that's what we have to achieve: that
There's nothing so special, nothing so
extraordinary, but only thing is you have to
be acceptable to yourself. Lthink people
when it starts moving it loses its control
For that we have to do the Primordial
to keep ourselves Primordial. We have to
Oneness with ourselves.
"May God bless you."
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 YOU ARE THE LOVE
(The Name of Love decorated the puja hall painted on banners hung from the ceiling and walls)
You are the Love
in the sap of the tree
You are the Love
in the first sound
You are the Love
from beyond infinity
You are the Love in
the caress of the sun
You are the Love
You are the Love
in the majesty
of the mountain
in the first dance
You are the Love
in your pradakshina
around the Father
You are the Love in
the foam of the water
You are the Love in
the music of the sea
You are the Love that
twinkles in the stars
You are the Love
in the ocean
of Your eyes
You are the Love that
sings in the wind
You are the Love
that glitters in
the crystal of snow
You are the Love
in the quiet splendour
of meditation
You are the Love
that germinates
in the flower
You are the Love
in ananya bhakti
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July - August, 2004
You are the Love
which opened the
eyes of Parameshwara
You are the Love
that is secret
You are the Love
that is sacred
You are the Love
in the eternal sprit
You are the Love
that nourishes bliss
of compassion's
deepest well
You are the Love that
rests on innocence
You are the Love
in every movement
Your eyelashes
You are the Love that
all creatures seek
You are the Love
in the cosmic tap
of Your leela
You are the Love
that melts the ice age
of this Kali Yuga
You are the Love that
shines in the light of
the Golden Age
You are the Love
in the fervent prayer
of all Your bhaktas
You are the Love
You are the Love
of caring mother
in every living cell
that warms our
closed hearts
You are the Love
which gives its
shape to beauty
You are the Love
that makes the
world go around
You are the Love
which gives its
radiance to goodness
You are the Love
for which the whole
world dances
You are the Love
which gives its
balance to justice
You are the Love
that made us Safe
You are the Love
which gives its
strength to
righteousness
You are the Love
that is Nirmala
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 The rays of sunlight,
the waves of cool air surrounding Her,
the way in which the flowers were facing,
the scents, right up to Her house,
everything turned towards Her
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in
PARIS
31 August to 4 September 2003
Majid Golpour: How can we set about telling our non-yogi friends
"Do you know who we had as a guest today?" As you. know, for the
moment, we, the yogis, are the only ones to have access to the
secrets that Mother occasionally reveals to us.
How can one describe the beauty of these last few days? Every
day, while Shri Mataji was making Her way through the streets of
Paris, we heard many people around us wondering, "Is this the Indian
royal family, some Maharajas?" People spontaneously came up
humbly to ask who She was. For those of us who know who She is,
it was as difficult to reply then, as it is now, We did not know what
to say.
The first of our observations is that we would need many
filmmakers, poets and writers to come and help us describe to you
the true beauty of the Adi Shakti's sweet trip to Her own creation..
I would just like to give you an outline of what the Mother, through
this present incarnation and all Her history, let us experience. How
can we, such small human beings, arrive at this stage of evolution
where we are able to feel Her presence from so close by?
I leamed in the Islamic traditions that an incarnation is the centre
of gravity of the world and right up to Mother's arrival at the Paris
Airport I had not understood what this meant. Imagine the moment
of Her arrival, the rays of sunlight, the waves of cool air surrounding
Her, the way in which the flowers were facing, the scents, right up
to Her house. Everything turned towards Her. We saw the world in
Her and, through Her, we understood the meaning of our day. Even
the cells of our bodies did not want to sleep at bedtime.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 July - August, 2004
The Divine Coof Breeze
powerful scent that emanated from these flowers.
Progressively, as we approached Her house, in
the company of Sir C.P. and Shri Mataji, we
started to appreciate the surrounding area more
and more. We realized that we were not the only
ones who had been getting ready for Mother's
arrival. Actually, all the towns had decorated
their streets with magnificent flowers, especially
red ones.
Shreedhar Buyle: Mother joked about Her age
and the fact that She no longer remembered all
the routes She had taken over so many years
No negative thoughts could enter us: They
fell away before reaching our mind. All our
physical or verbal gestures became melodious.
Everything happened magically around Her and
for Her. In each epoch there is a divine
incarnation. Without this incarnation, the world
cannot survive. It is at that moment that we
experienced this wonderful life, in Her house,
with Her. Her house has been transformed into
a real paradise. Even the Sahaja Yogis who lived
in the house no longer recognized their own
bedrooms.
We remember so well the support of the on every continent. I took a road that made a
vibrations, from the Ganas, while we prepared
Her house during the weeks beforehand. We
still keep that coolness. Even when we
surpassed ourselves physically and mentally, other road was a little quicker." 1 could not help
it was pleasant and we all discovered hidden laughing at that sweet vision of the humble and,
resources within. For the first time, the building at the same time, all-powerful greatness of the
work was carried out, not without effort, but
without the tidal wave of the right side, as if children again.
Mother had constructed solid dikes to stop us
leaving our course. It was remarkable.
With each wish to embellish Her house, times, reminding myself how Her Feet had taken
solutions came to us, just by being aware that charge of the grief and despair of all Her children
it is She who resolves all details. Of course,
there was "Nirmal Source," the vibratory been comforted by all the love coming from Her
workshop, Her gift, which was enjoyed regularly. Feet.
And the work on ourselves was so intense, deep
and sometimes difficult to contain. We had never would be aware of the intensity and the depth of
seen that. It was tike during a Sahaj seminar. Her work and that the reality of the Divine
She was preparing us to be better instruments; Incarnation would enter our small human
to be better able to receive Her. It is She that consciousness. We prayed that all the badness
detour in order to avoid another shorter one that
had many speed bumps. As we neared the
ashram, Mother remarked gently, "I believe the
Adi Shakti who was getting ready to see Her
Majid: During those days, I was able to
massage Mother's Feet for up to five hours at
all over the world and how these children had
During these massages, we prayed that we
and negativity that were absorbed by this body
brought us closer to Her.
All the Sahaja Yogis involved in all aspects would come back to our small hands, so that
of the preparation found themselves rapidly our Mother would not suffer more from this work.
brought into the centre and they cleared out We prayed that we would be able to get rid of
deeply. We were surfing on a wave of dynamic the conditioning that makes us believe that
love, which acts and transforms. We had all incarnations are here to suffer in our place. We
worked for Her, but, in fact, we had all worked prayed that humanity would adopt this good
for ourselves as well,
The flowers offered at the airport were in Incarnation in Her presence and that, for years
perfect harmony with the colours of Her sari.
Three times Mother breathed in deeply the spend relaxing moments and holidays, outside
resolution to be able to adore the Divine
to come, our Divine Mother would be able to
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
10
July - August, 2004
Shreedhar: While massaging Her Feet, the
words of devotion were like a mirror in which
the times for pujas, where She would be the
subject of our adoration.
We prayed that, as Sahaja Yogis, thanks to
our resolution and the quality of our attention,
we would be able to succeed collectively in
lightening the work of our Mother, so that She
may be able to begin Her holidays on Earth
starting now. We prayed that our Divine Mother
accept the idea of holidays because She has
never allowed Herself the idea of not working
God became aware of His/Her Divinity. The
visible dimension of Shri Mataji became
extraordinary at that moment, shining and
powerful. Her face lit up the whole room.
Gyanendra Even: 1 was the guardian of the
house. My role was directed towards a vibratory
perception of people coming to the house.
Working for Mother allowed me finally to live
each day using my perception of vibrations fully.
At one moment, Shri Mataji asked us to
change the position of the furniture in Her,
bedroom. It was a unique experience for me to
be directly at my Mother's service under Her
orders. Surrounded by scents and flowers and
with the direct attention of my Mother I felt I
was transported into another world. I did not even
feel the weight of the furniture. Through the
different placings, chosen one after the other
by Shri Mataji, we realized all the depth behind
each detail. I felt that it is this depth that we
should experience in every moment of our
everyday life.
It is astonishing how many French yogis.
yuva shaktis and children were able to feel
through vibrations, Mother's arrival in France at
the exact moment, when some did not even
know She would be coming.
Majid: Shri Mataji proposed a little visit to Paris
that we thought would last a few minutes, but
which turned into a visit of more than five hours,
for the world.
Moreover, during one of these prayers, Shri
Mataji said to me, as if She was reading my
mind, "We have never really thought of having a
holiday." I was able to say that the primary
income of France was from tourism and that
the fact that She was putting Her attention on
tourism would only help our country.
During the massages, we had the
opportunity to mention to Shri Mataji that, for
us, it is evident that without Her the world has
no future, that with Her all the quarrels between
religions will end because She is proposing one
sole religion for everyone, which incorporates
the roots of all religions. Shri Mataji then told
us that the problem with all these religions is
that they have forgotten the feminine aspect of
the Divine. We were then able to affirm that,
thanks to Her, this aspect will be able to fully
take its proper place.
After that Shri Maraji asked us how we could
get that idea through to people and affirmed, to
us that if each Sahaja Yogi did his work, we
would be able to transmit this message to
humanity.
We also recalled all the predictions made in
the past, that Her incarnation would live for a
hundred years on this Earth, in addition to the
with Her attention on each detail. We were
struck by Her capacity to discern, among
products of highly reputed brands, finding the
item of Her divine choice. This choice was so
perfect that even Her car stopped in front of the
desired shop. Afterwards, Mother paid particular
attention to French embroidery.
fact that She would travel less and less and
From:
receive fewer and fewer people because all the
collectives of the world will come to Her, to Her
(The Divine Cool Breeze)
America
Feet.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 SHRI MATAJI IN PARIS
The shops chosen did not appear that that implies in terms of anxiety,
special from the outside, but once insecurity and despair, we understood
Mother was inside, all the objects took that it is absolutely false to believe that
on their full value. (It seemed that the we cannot be of some help in this work.
We do not know how Mother will use
ganas themselves were taking care of
the objects chosen by the Divine).
us in this work, because She is the very
Among the twenty shops in the street, source of this work as Shri Adi Shakti
Shri Mataji chose precisely the only and will never let this need be known. It
shop that could offer all the possible is there that the depths of our devotion,
choice and all the most beautiful objects.
as child of Our Mother, are revealed to
us. Actually, She has made us and we
With a most particular attention, Mother
are born uniquely to express our love to
bought small presents for Sir C.P. and
Her family - a cup; a set of table mats
from Provence, a model boat, a small
Her and the love that humanity bears for
Her.
All the French Sahaja Yogis tell
piece of china. The surprise with Shri
Mataji is that She always tells you themselves that, if we can do it today,
everything in advance, without Her why put it off until tomorrow? That is why
all our collective, from Martinique to New
Collectively, we wanted to really take OCaledonia, from Monaco to Lille, all the
care of Mother, but, as usual, it is Mother Sahaja Yogis were transformed for a
week into drivers, chauffeurs, painters.
apparently being able to know.
who took us at our word and, one by one
- children, yuva shaktis, all the towns in
France - She placed Her attention on us
woodworkers, cooks. etc. We were
transformed joyfully into servants at the
service of our Mother. What an
and gave us all Her benedictions.
We really need to discover Our extraordinary discovery to see that even
Mother. When we place our small people from the outside world became
on Her,
She aware that it was not a question of "a
human
attention
automatically generates Her vibrations personality cult," but people who were
of love. We understood that it is false to transforming themselves and finding the
believe that Shri Mataji, as an richness of their own personality in this
incarnation, is not sensitive to our
task.
attention and our intentions. While She
In fact, our collectivity only served for
carries out a task that touches the
five days out of the 365 in the year, but
we would like (selfishly) to reverse those
depths of human consciousness, with all
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 12
July-August, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
The French Sahaja Yogis, even those
figures, whilst still remaining generous
towards our brothers and sisters of who were not able to be physically
other collectives. We believe, to suggest present, retain a wonderful memory of
their adventure and, believe us, we really
emerging future trends, that any
collective that wants to surpass its experienced all these moments
Sahaj conditionings and to breathe the collectively.
cool vibrations of service to the Divine,
Majid Golpour, Shreedhar Buyle,
should venture forward in its own way Gyanendra Even, Benoit de Beffefroid
(The Divine Cool Breeze, America)
to express its love.
MAHA AVATAR
MESSAGE FROM
HER HOLINESS MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI
"Today, Sahaja Yoga has reached the state of Mahayoga, which is en-
masse evolution manifested through it. It is this day's Yuga Dharma. It is
the way the last judgment is taking place. Announce it to all the seekers of
truth, to all the nations of the world, so that nobody misses the blessings
of the divine to achieve their meaning, their absolute, their spirit."
(Maha Avtar-1980)
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 SHRI GANESHA PUJA
(2003)
same way, the elder Sahaja Yogis should
The duty of the elders
It is the duty of older Sahaja Yogis to
look after their younger brothers and
look after the children, "to have better sisters.
"In this family of ours, which we call
moral standards, to have better lives so
that they follow your life and become as Sahaja Yogis, there are all kinds of
genuinely good Sahaja Yogis. It's a very people, all types, all behaviour. Of
big responsibility. Perhaps we don't course, they should not be regimented,
recognize it, we don't understand, but
there should not be uniformity, but, in that
all these are little creatures, who are variety, there should be beauty, there
after the image of great souls and they should be a beautiful trend of being one
should be brought up in that way, with each other."
respected in that manner and loved with
Understanding Shri Ganesha
The elders in Sahaja Yoga should
great care. This is to be understood."
The older people in Sahaja Yoga do make a solid contribution to the lives of
not consider the children worth bothering
those who are younger. The first thing is
about. They do not try to understand to tell them about Shri Ganesha, His
them. They think they are too intelligent, qualities and what He represents. Once
too good and we need not waste our they understand that Shri Ganesha is
generous and kind and forgiving, they
energy with them....
"But today, when we are sitting here
will be amazed because they are also
to worship Shri Ganesha, we should small and they will also take to that kind
know they are all incarnations of Shri of life.
Ganesha and they should be given
"I find some children very sensible
proper attention, proper understanding." and good, some are naughty and some
There are a certain number of children don't understand what we are doing here.
"who are very well-beihaved... who are
Whatever it is, they are, after all, children
very spontaneous and there are some and what you have to do is to look after
who have no idea what they are doing.
them, respect them and give them the
"So it is the duty of the elders to put full idea about Shri Ganesha.
ideas into their heads" so that they have
Everyone should have a staiue of Shri
understanding
Ganesha in their home. The children will
"a
about
proper
themselves and self-respect. "In the
see it and ask, "Who is He? What is he
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 July August, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
14
Just because you can keep quiet and
doing?" And you will be amazed how they
will understand Him, how they will sit still does not mean you are a grown-
understand His qualities and how they up. "You are grown-up only if you can
will work it out. It is important for all of imbibe the qualities of Shri Ganesha. I
you to have at least one Shri Ganesha have seen people who are very grown-
in your house, so that you can tell your up still do not have simple qualities of
children that "You all have to become like chastity, of honesty. They don't have and
they can't have because they don't think
Him'...
"They won't understand chastity. it is important. So I leave it to you to find
They are too small. They won't out Shri Ganesha within yourself."
understand all those qualities. But one
quality they will understand is to be They will understand love
I enjoy the company of children
honest."
Gradually all the difficult ones will go because they are so innocent and so
down. They don't understand My lecture, simple-hearted and I like them very, very
they don't understand what I am saying, much. So you should not get afraid or
but any oppositions within those children frightened of their mischievousness.
On the contrary, you should know
so innocent and so simple, their they deserve much more love, much
will show very well. Because they are
innocence will help them, to expose more understanding and much more
them to reality.
scope to grow.
"I hope by the time they will be of your
"I hope you all look after your children,
guide them properly and take them to a age, they will be great Sahaja Yogis.
level of understanding that they They will understand what we are doing
understand what is their position, what here.
"I had to face mountains
of nonsense
qualities they should have, why will they
be respected. You will be amazed that with the older people, but these won't
have that. They will be very simple, very
their behaviour will change the behaviour
of all the other children."
sweet and they will understand love."
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 WISDOM
Only comes through understanding what wisdom means
You might find somebody extremely
wise, maybe your servant, may be your how to argue things or you fight with
Wisdom doesn't mean that you know
driver, maybe anyone and you are amazed people. No, it doesn't mean that. Wisdom
means how you take to the good side of
how such a person can be so wise
because maybe form his last life he has everything to enjoy it. This is wisdom and
that you avoid all destructive things and
take to something constructive.
got it within him or he has gone into it and
he found it.
Hamsa Puja 1992
It's not the state of one person. It's not
the property of one person but it can belong
to many of them.
So the Sahaj Yogi is the one who has to
have that wisdom. Why are you doing this?
Wisdom plays such a part in life that
whatever may happen outside, whatever
may be the trend, whatever may be the
fashion, whatever may be the people are
What is the need to do it? They don't have
all changing into, you do not change. You
to ask any questions. They just don't do
wrong. They just don't do wrong things
They are always on the right path. That is
the sign of the Sahaj Yogi, I believe, and
which is the blessing of the Goddess.
change within.
Shri Ganesha Puja 1991 Pune
Meditation is the only way. You give up
If there is the power of the Goddess
your left and you give up your right and you
are just standing in the center, enjoying the
wisdom, enjoying the joy of your being.
working in you, you will have the wisdom
to work it out.
Navaratri Puja 2002
Shri Ganesha Puja 1991 Pune
Wisdom is not apparent outside. You
Wisdom is a thing that gives you, first
can't say somebody is wise by looking at
developed, then you become very peaceful that person. But in vibrations you will know
because whatever people may say, that that person is extremely wise. He may
they may do, whatever speak. He may not speak. If he speaks, he
aggression they may do, whatever it is, you will speak about something so deep, so
of all, complete peace. If your wisdom is
whatever
wise and so nice without hurting.
are peaceful and you see the stupidity of
Navaratri Puja 1998
the other person, of the other nations and
you understand why they are doing it.
Navaratri Puja 1998
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 July - August, 2004
16
The Divine Cool Breeze
Human beings...will not understand
The wisdom is the thing which really is
something straightforward. So it has to go
not just an assumption that l am very wise
round and round till they reach a point to
understand that it was the play of the
and all that, but it asserts, it works out and
it shows what is good and what is bad.
Mother that brought them to this shore of
Navaratri Puja 2002
wisdom.
Navaratri Puja 1998
Wisdom is the sign of a person who is
really a realized soul of a very high level. If
you don't have wisdom, whatever you may
The first quality of Shri Ganesha is that
He gives us wisdom and that wisdom gives
us the sense how to behave, gives us the
do, you might feel satisfied about it, but
the wisdom part is very, very important.
Navaratri Puja 2002 balance and gives us the sense how to
behave towards ourselves, how to
"Am I being a wise person?" That is the
preserve yourself, how to respect yourself.
Shri Ganesha Puja 1991 Australia
first sign of the blessings of God. The one
who has blessings of the Divine is a wise
person, is very wise and his wisdom is
shown by his silence. And his whole power,
Shri Ganesha is the giver of wisdom,
how to behave at what time, how to say at
what time, how far to go with everything. It
his divine power uses that person as a
just should become innate, sahaj. You don't
medium and works tremendously. That
have to work it out, but should know.
man himself is surprised how it has
"Now I'm a Sahaja Yogini." Every
happened.
morning you should tell yourself, "I'm a
Sahaja Yogini. So how far should I go? How
A woman can have that. A man can
have it. Anybody can have that wisdom, should I behave? What should be my
that profoundness, that temperament, attitude?" All this can be very easily
which is so beautiful and so empowering. understood if you develop this lotus of
wisdom.
Navaratri Puja 2002
How does a lotus come out? There is a
seed which sprouts... There is already the
Wisdom comes to you automatically.
seed within you. All of you have got it and
But through experience, then you know this
is the right path. Through experience you
now it has started opening because you
are realized souls. Allow your wisdom to
start understanding.
Hamsa Puja 1992 take over...
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 July August, 2004
17
The Divine Cool Breeze
One may say, "Mother what is the
source again of this wisdom?" The source
is Shri Ganesha... Once Shri Ganesha is
There's a very simple way of doing it-
surrender to My wisdom and the wisdom
itself that is in you is active. It will work.
Diwali Puja 1991 insulted and He disappears behind the
clouds of ignorance, then people start
doing things which are unwise.
Those who do not meditate will be lost
Shri Ganesha Puja 1993 Germany
to Sahaja Yoga because wisdom can only
grow through your inner inspiration. You
can have this inner inspiration only if the
The greatest boon of the Devi is to give
you wisdom. You can call it awareness. You
power of Shri Ganesha manifests. He is
can call it anything. It's kind of a wisdom
Shri Ganesh Puja 1998 by which you become absolutely a divine
personality. That wisdom you must reach
the giver of your wisdom.
It's very difficuit to say how to become through your bhakti.
wise. It is just that it happens that you
become wise. So, though He's a child,
Navaratri Puja 2002
He's so matured. He's so wise. And He's
The Divine needs you. Divine doesn't
not only that, but He emits wisdom and this
want you to die or to finish off, it needs you
very much. it has to do its work and you
wisdom is an innate quality of anyone who
is a Sahaja Yogi because in him, also, Shri
are the instrument of that Divine.
If you have wisdom, you are the best
Ganesha has been awakened.
So he becomes a wise person, very
instrument for the Divine to work it out.
Navaratri Puja 2002
wise, and with wisdom what does he
achieve? He achieves a balance, a proper
Wisdom is... a very innate quality, very
ascent and also he understands that this
ascent is for his benevolence, for the innate. It's not superficial.
You cannot just say that this person is
benevolence of his country, benevolence
of the whole world. He understands the
importance of Sahaja Yoga.
wise or not. It shows that, just like a power,
it's a power of understanding and is
supported by the power of the Goddess.
So, She's the giver of wisdom. This is
just absolutely, innately built in. Only thing the biggest quality of the Goddess that
is we have to use the storehouse of this She's the giver of wisdom. And wisdom
Without this wisdom, one cannot
understand. And this wisdom is within us,
wisdom that is within us.
comes as a part of the evolutionary
Shri Ganesha Puja 1991 Pune process.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-19.txt 
 18
July-August, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
Why not develop a personality that, "I'm
always in joy? Anything I see, I feel joyous.
Anything I hear, I feel you." Then this lotus
of your fragrance will improve and then
Now She's brought about all the
evolutions so far and, to go further, She is
going to make you a very wise person.
Navaratri Puja 2002
activity of your wisdom will be that you will
take all that is very beautiful easily. You'lI
Those people who have got wisdom are
very lucky people, but wisdom comes from
no source but your own understanding of get all that is very satisfying, very joyous.
life. When a person start thinking, "Why
am I doing such and such thing? What is within you which just leads you to people
It's kind of an activity of this wisdom
the effect of my doing? What is the result
of my behaviour? It is good for me or bad
who are extremely nice, to situations which
are very beautiful where you discover nice
for me then wisdom comes".
things or to such beautiful creations that
Shri Ganesha Puja 1993 Germany you would never expect to see.
A person is wise who does not only
know what is right and wrong, but also he
It's very, very important to understand
knows very well his own power riot to do that you tell Me, "Mother, this miracle
happened, that miracle happened." It is
something wrong. He just does not do it.
Wisdom is a complete power within nothing. It is your own wisdom. Your own
ourselves by which we try nothing. It just spirit is working it out. You don't have to do
spontaneously works through us and we anything.
do things which are proper and right.
Diwali Puja 1991
Shri Ganesha Puja 1993 Germany
We have to understand that our wisdom
is not something that could be inculcated.
Your innocence itself is a power and
your innocence will definitely give you that It cannot be something that can be
wisdom by which you can solve all the manoeuvred. It is something very innate
problems without any difficulty.
and it comes through our maturity.
Shri Ganesha Puja, Kalwe 1991
Shri Ganesha Puja 1990
This is the point one has to reach, where
Wisdom means that it gives you
detachment, detachment from all that is you understand you have to have wisdom.
selfishness, self-centredness, selI- If you are lacking in wissdom, then you are
not a self-realized person.
obsession, ego-all connected with self. Can
Krishna Puja 2000
you imagine?
Diwali Puja 1991
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 July - August, 2004
19
The Divine Cool Breeze
Your spirit cannot have a problem. It has
If you really know yourself, you will have
such powers of courage. You will not be a
no fear. But above all, it has wisdom,
tremendous wisdom. And that wisdom is daredevil, but with wisdom. Courage with
the one sign of you being a very higher
personality.
As I told you, this is evolution.. And when
wisdom, you will have. And that is what is
your Self, which will give you lots of wisdom
and lots of courage.
you are transformed, you are evolved. Of
a very different nature you become. And
It's not a fighting spirit. It's not a violent
nature. It's not a crude nature, but it's a very
silent, beautiful, courageous attitude.
Birthday Puja 2001
you are to stand out.
Krishna Puja 2000
प्रतिबोधविदितं मतममृतत्वं हि विन्दते।
आत्मना विन्दते वीर्य विद्या विदतऽमृतम् ।।
-केनोपनिषद् (2/4)
That alone is knowledge
By means of which
One perceives the Self
That leads to Immortality.
VIBRATIONS
In our heart, there is a flicker of light, which is burning all the time, which is Atma, the
reflection of Parmatma in our heart. When the Kundalini rises, She opens the BRAHM
RANDHRA. The seat of SADASHIVA the Pitha is in the Sahasrar, but Sadashiva is
reflected in the heart as Atma. Pitha is created because it receives the subtle energy
which is all pervading.
In the same way, Pithas are in the brain, and the Pitha of Sadashiva is higher up in the
Sahasrar, which is opened out, so that the subtle, the sukshma, passes into our
heart, througha very subtle channel. Just like a gas-light, it has a flicker, and when the
gas opens out, the prakash (enlightenment) occurs. Vibrations are the passage of
this subtle energy through us. These vibrations start flowing through us only after our
Kundalini rises through the Brahmrandhra.
Vibrations give us complete balance, correct our physical being, our mental being and
our emotional being. They give us a sense of complete spiritual oneness with God.
They integrate us completely.
Shri Mataji
(Maha Avtar-1980)
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 CREATION, MAN AND HIS FULFILMENT
In this lecture I would talk about the something. According to this formula, if
creation. I would switch on from the time, human beings are created by chance, it
when we were just amoeba. Every seems an impossibility; because the time
scientist who is open minded can see for that is taken so far is so short that only, at
himself that this universe is a beautiful the most, may be, some living cell could
have been created.
cosmos, is very well organised and has
run very smoothly and can also deduce
that the creation of this particular universe been created and so beautifully it is
Why a complicated human being has
organised within himself, that it is hard to
has led to the creation of this Mother Earth.
About five million years back, this believe that some jugglerwas not behind the
show. There must have been some scientist
Mother Earth which was in gaseous form
who has achieved these results. It could
condensed and was cooled down. How
have only been possible by some special
hand to do these things; I mean if there was
was it cooled down to the extent it did?
Scientists accept this fact just as it is; they
cannot find out because they have no organisation, no thinking, no planning, no
powerful personality, The Almighty behind it,
it could not have been possible.
limitations. Why this thing happened? How
it was started? It is easy to say there is no
As science has its limitations, of course,
God but very difficult to explain many things
without saying that there is God, e.g. the
we cannot find out how was it expedited,
how it took place? But we can see, that we
time that was taken for this universe to
create a human being, is so very short, have achieved something in the field of
science, by one method, perhaps similar
that nothing else can explain it.
to one that was used to trigger our evolution
If you use the law of chance, we can
so fast.
find out how many times the permutations
When I was a young student in school
and combinations have to work to create
atthat time I could never have believed that
even a living cell. For example, in a test
tube if you have 50 red pills & 50 white pills,
all arranged in such a manner that all the
we could ever reach the moon; none could,
have believed. If anyone would have said,
that, the people would have laughed at
red ones are at the bottom and that white
ones are at the top. You have to go on such a conjecture. Even today if you tell
shaking them, and the arrangement of the
pills gets disorganised completely. Then
my grandmother, she does not believe it.
She thinks it is just a story you are telling.
to organise it back fully into the original But we have reached the moon, no doubt.
In this system, we have used very
arrangement, how many times one has to
shake? They have discovered a formula,
wonderful system of putting 5 capsules on
that is -n raised to power something, into one another & the first capsule, the
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-22.txt 
 July August, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
21
lowest one explodes and triggers the form, it is in human beings. It is this force
movement of the rest of four capsules. which exists in every one and evolves
When the second one explodes, it gives everything, say from carbon to the amoeba
an acceleration many more times than that
stage and from amoeba to animal stage &
with which it was already moving; the from animal to human stage. Even in
speed increases in such a tremendous elements it exists because the elements
also evolve. We do not know how they
way that suddenly we find that the
acceleration is a very high multiple of the
first one; then the third one when it elements start changing their forms &
evolve but it happens in Nature, that
explodes gives another push to the
capsule. Next, the fourth one explodes; we have no idea of this because we have
mass and they become different elements;
no way of measuring the quantity of this
spacecraft. Through this kind of explosions change that is taking place. Then the
animals also change, from fishes, many
then the fifth one which contains the
from one to the other, through that built-in
mechanism, we have been able to achieve become reptiles, out of reptiles many
a very high acceleration for the spacecraft. become mammals, from mammals, many
become primates, monkeys and then
human beings. All this happening takes
knowing about our evolution from the place. How many are destroyed, how many
In the same way our evolution has taken
place. We got this idea without even
UNCONSCIOUS. We have come to know remain, how many are transformed,
how it has happened, but we cannot nobody has kept any account of it.
correlate both these together. So, in the
Today, we talk of population problem,
perhaps many animals have taken birth as
same way a human being was created out
of amoeba or amoeba was created out of
humans. You can see the effect of that, the
all the elements. In the same manner we
way people are behaving; you can be sure
can say that we were made again of five that many animals have taken human form
and they have yet to go through lot of
physical being. Inside the physical being evolution & training as a human being to
capsules. The first one is the physical, our
was kept the emotional being. Inside the
understand the value of human life. A
human being starts evolving within himself.
emotional being was kept the spiritual being
& inside the spiritual being was kept the
Now we have been human beings, as
spirit or our attention.
they say, for 14,000 years and we have
been growing inside through our freedom.
Human beings are the only people who get
We can say, KUNDALINI is the one that
triggers, that is the one that explodes.
So Kundalini force is in everything, but
freedom to evolve themselves
to
in the most affective, the best, the highest
understand what is wrong & what is bad.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-23.txt 
 July - August, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
22
Human beings have been given
This freedom is granted because without
freedom you cannot go any further. For freedom to understand, to develop their
example, when you start studying in a
school, you are told to learn tables 2x knowledge of the Creator of this creation
own efficiency, to receive the ultimate
10=20; you learn by heart and do not and the powers of the Creator. That is why,
question why it is so, but just go on and the Kundalini is placed in the human beings
on. But when you reach a certain standard alone though there is Kundalini force and
of education, say graduation or post there is Kundalini in another form in
graduation standard, then you are given everything that exists. Only in the human
freedom to write on this subject-why is it beings, this force is kept in the triangular
bone in dormant state, to trigger their last
that when you multiply 2 by 10 it is 20? It is
because you have reached a certain stage
jump into the unknown. Now this Kundalini
of development. At this stage you are given
freedom to find out for yourself. That is how
exists, this is there:
But to begin with, if I say before starting
you are developed and then by this all this creation, who was created first, it
development only you can teach the other is most interesting & may not be very
people who are coming up. This is the way congenial to the mind of a scientist. It is
much beyond science I am taiking now,
the evolution has been.
So far you have not felt your evolution that much before anything was created on
from amoeba to this stage. You do not this Earth. Holiness was created, that we
know how you became a human being, you call the Pavitrata. Sri Ganesha is the deity
take it for granted. Even if you see your of that Holiness, God has created this
Holiness to protect this creation. This
eyes, they are so complicated. It is such a
complicated organ that if you start studying
them you will be amazed how things are
atmosphere of Holiness He created to
protect all the people and all the creativities
made. If you just prick a pin in my finger, which are there and which are being
immediately there is a reflex action. It is created by Him, otherwise nothing would
so nicely built, it is so nicely arranged; it is work out. Just think if one of the Oceans
so quick, it is so efficient, that one is
surprised and amazed at the wonders of Earth would have toppled down; just
was deeper even by 10 feet the balance of
this kind of organization, that is this human imagine what a speed this Mother Earth
body. But you see what human beings are,
they are inefficiency personified. I sent four
telegrams to my daughter and today she
says, she received one telegram after one
has, it revolves with such a tremendous
speed, goes round the Sun regularly in a
proper way, not in a round way, but in a
special style as you know. She creates day
and night for you. Day to wark and night to
month.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-24.txt 
 23
July - August, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
to seek it with all humility in your own being.
rest. How She Herself has created this
No body can hypnotise people for seeking
beautiful atmosphere for you and has
maintained the balance and the truth, those who are hypnotised cannot
understand. In all your awareness, in all
your dignity you have to get the knowledge
of truth.
temperature that was given to Her, is only
done by the power of Holiness that was
created first.
But it is not just giving you a lecture that
Now, man in his foolishness is
challenging that Holiness. He thinks he can you are going to understand. It is not
challenge God, that is the sign of his brainwashing that has been done by all
awareness. If he had risen to that height nonsensical people throughout. It is the
happening, the actualization by which you
reach that state of awareness, by which
where he could feel God pulsating in every
thing he would never have done that. But
before he could reach that state of you develop the dynamics of collective
perfection he has started talking about consciousness, by which you become
God. Who is going to challenge his collectively conscious, is an awareness
authority is stupid man, who does not want which develops within you is real
to achieve his perfection and wants to talk
actualization.
As you are a human being, you know
big.
All pervading power is of Holiness which
corrects, which guides, which co-
ordinates, which loves and which
that when this capsule of human being was
triggered you got lots of things, e.g., your
awareness is more than that of animals.
organises everything for you to get this The University itself, animals do not have
awakening within you. So one must any universities. Animals don't understand
understand, how Kundalini awakening is gardens, they don't understand dirt and filth,
the most important thing that has to they don't understand beauty. All this has
happen. Kundalini awakening is the only come to you, deep within you manifested
way you are going to know your spirit. This
is the most important happening in the
history of creation. It is like laying out the
as soon as you become human beings.
So, as soon as you become super
human being through Kundalini awakening
you become aware of yourself within and
you become aware of others within. This
the fruits must appear. It is the most is the collective consciousness. This is,
important thing and has to happen. Every what Sahaja Yoga is. Sahaja Yoga is the
garden, then you plant the trees, the trees
have flowers and now the time has come,
individual who is seeking the TRUTH will system of nature. The way this creation
took place is also Sahaja. 'Sah' means with,
know it.
The trouble with truth is, that you have
& 'ja' means born, Sahaja means born with.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-25.txt 
 24
July August, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
Every thing is built in within you like in a power deals with our physical being and
seed.
out of which how much a scientist knows.
You will be surprised that if knowledge is
If you see a seed, it has a primule within
an ocean, the scientist knows only a drop.
And to know the Ocean, the drop is to be
it to sprout. Seed has the complete power
of the tree it is going to be. The whole thing
dissolved in the Ocean. But a drop cannot
is in the seed, in the same way in the
human seed the whole picture of what he by its own effort become the Ocean, the
going to be, is built in the whole Ocean has to dissolve the drop. And that
is what Ocean has to do, if the creation
is
mechanism, is placed within.
Now there are the undercurrents of your has to have its fulfillment and His beautiful
creation is manifested in the human being.
being, which I will be describing to you.
The human being must find out his
What are the forces built up inside human
fulfillment. If he cannot find
out his
beings? Only thing I would like to say that
you are like a computer, you are already fulfillment, he cannot reach perfection in
made like a computer, only thing is that you anyone of his endeavours. God, Himself will
have to be put to the mains. If you are put not rest till He does that. For, who would
to the mains then the computer starts like to destroy one's own creation. In
working by itself, but it is the way you thousands and thousand of years of time
this has come to its fulfillment and if it is to
understanda machine. You are a human
be done by me, if I am the person who is
supposed to trigger your Kundalini, why
being, you know what is love. To a scientist
I cannot talk of love, I am talking of Divine
Holiness, the love of God which has
should you have any objection? Thank God,
I was not a scientist, otherwise I would
created you, which wants you to know Him.
Through science you cannot do that. Every have finished my life making an atom bomb.
scientist must be loving somebody if not Thank God, I was not scientist otherwise I
his children at least, his dog. He must be would have gone mad, listening to mad
loving flowers, if not flowers he might be people. Thank God, I am not a politician,
loving his horses, but he knows what is you know how they are.
Thank God, I am none of these, I am
love. And if he can understand that spark
just your Mother, concerned, absolutely
of love, from where it has come, love that
concerned, about your ultimate well beings
and not about superficial things.
I am talking about is a synthesis of all these
powers.
May God bless you all.
Science deals with only a very little
(Nirmala Yoga-1980)
portion, I will also tell you which part of this
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-26.txt 
 TRANSLALION OF A LETTER OF H. H. MATAJI SRI NIRMALADEVI
WRITTEN IN MAY 1977, FROM ENGLAND TO HER DISCIPLES IN INDIA
When someone speaks harshly to little
children, then I feel a stab on my heart. Tell
me, in Sahaja Yogi, should not there be
exhibition of loving feelings? People who
are the off-springs of the same Mother very
My dearest Sahaja Yogis:
My Blessings to you all.
News has been conveyed to me that a
new Centre is functioning in Muskwadi
often "fail to realize that they are the
Village (Rahuri), where thousands of
children of their Mother in reality. This fact
is well-known to you. Then, why should you
people are getting Realization. The
achievement has been made only because
the workers over there have knit have the feeling that someone else is
themselves in bond of wonderful Love. superior or inferior to you. Are you without
They never try to complain to anyone about blemish and capable of being such
anything but instead overlook and ignore judge? People talk of "universal
in case someone commits what may be brotherhood of man" but is this feasible if
described as an error. This broad- we don't love each-other as we should. At
the moment, all I have to say is that you
mindedness is capable of generating
must use introspection and discrimination
feelings of happiness in one's self and acts
and rid yourself of such 'poison' as it is only
then that you will make a real Sahaja Yogi.
In case a Sahaja Yogi comes to your
like a magnet where others are concerned.
This broad-mindedness is the quality of
a human body and gets multiplied with the
place, invite him as if he is one of your own
awakening of the Kundalini. This is the
manifestation of divinity. But those people brothers. Look after him nicely. This will
purify your household. I cannot understand
how and why Sahaja Yogis form 'groups'
as with every passing moment your
who remain in "artificial" environments only,
they cannot enjoy this Bliss. Your Kundalini
has been awakened; and it has pierced the
apex of the brain (Brahmrandhra) but still position improves or deteriorates? Such
the heart also has to feel 'awakened'. In formations can lead to total annihilation of
case one's heart is like a stone and he is the Self. You should try to own whatever is
good in others and ignore what is not so
unpleasant language in conversation with as this can be looked into by Me. In
others and is very particular to stress that meditation, you will realize that this is the
unable to shower Love on any one: he uses
he himself is really someone special; then door to ETERNAL BLISS.
he is not fit for becoming a Sahaja Yogi.
One who remembers you always
Of course, such is the nature of certain
people. Many a time, I have observed that
before myself, some of you try to push
others or frown upon them with anger etc.
MOTHER
NIRMALA
(Maha Avtar-1980)
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-27.txt 
 THE RELATION DETACHMENT-INTEGRATION
-Arnew Kalber Matten, Switzerland
s Sahaja Yogis we have noticed quite
often how afraid people are when we talk
could be a kind of escape if this detachment
is possible, if it is related or connected to
somebody higher than our common
As
about detachment. They associate
understanding. Detachment becomes
detachment to disdainful behavior towards
people who are not so evolved, or to absolute when connected to our beloved
coldness and dryness towards others. Mother. We should understand that we
They believe that it is a way to avoid to cannot improve relationships among
face reality in the daily life in order to keep ourselves in a detached way by our own,
themselves away from the assaults of our but we can build a new dimension of love
society. They declare that detached people and patience among us if we are
are selfish people, arrogant people. But few connected to the Adishakti. Then
other people profess that it is impossible detachment receives its entire, absolute
to be detached; that to be detached means meaning. Then detachment becomes
be without understanding. Non-Sahaja possible.
Yogis could argue for hours against
Detachment means be attached only by
our spirit. Then the reflection of this spirit
on others creates the connection to them.
detachment without bringing new elements
to the real answer: can we be detached?
Being detached means love through our
heart, and not through our brain. And when
we love through our heart, the spirit, which
is always detached, emits love, without any
We, as Sahaja Yogis can give absolute
answer to every absolute question. The
absolute question is: is detachment
possible?
Yes, detachment is possible, more than
possible, necessary. The great test is in
discrimination or distinctions. It emits love
everywhere, at any time and to everybody.
The spirit is never tired to emit love and is
not upset if the people cannot fully absorb
this love or when they do not respond to
the family. The people who can influence
with their negativity the most are those who
stay the nearest to us, who are too
attached to us; the parents for instance. love according to our own expectations.
They can use this attachment bondage by The sunbeams do not know if they'll reach
creating tense relationships with their this tree or this flower, they just shine and
children. It is quite common that the child the sun itself is enjoying the manifestation
with the most beautiful personality is often
the one who is the most submitted to these
of its beams.
Because love is absolute, it spreads and
sprouts everywhere in the most detached
way. To be detached means love without
bondages, and gets most involved.
Detachment does not mean to break all
conditioning and discrimination.
Detachment, however, is only possible
the ties with their parents, on the contrary,
it helps to establish proper ties. May be it
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-28.txt 
 27
July- August, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
feet. Mother you do my job, Mother, you are
if we fully put our attention on our Divine
the one who can save my father or my
Mother. Detachment means attention on
MATAJI, attention on our spirit. So if we mother, Mother you are the one who can
want to increase our detachment, we have improve my intelligence, YOU ARE THE
REAL DOER, BECAUSE YOU ARE THE
CREATOR OF THIS UNIVERSE. I just
to increase our attention in order to
increase our heart.
have to love you as a child with devotion
By increasing our heart, we deepen,
strengthen beautifully our ties to the
and adoration. In this way, I integrate every
single minute, every glance, every word into
Sahaja Yoga. I am acting without thinking,
I am loving without attachment.
But I can integrate only when I am
detached. With attachment I still keep on
Goddess and the relationship between the
Goddess and the child reflects itself with
more light and intensity on the human
beings. In this way detachment means
also to be the perfect child of the Mother, a
thinking I can do the job, I can cure them, I
child full of devotion, attention, admiration,
can console my father, my mother, I.. I...I
respect, love, tremendous, pure, innocent
love to the greatest of all the Mothers, We do not know that this "I" is our EGO
because by being a child we glance and who is very satisfied, when it dresses itself
in "I would like to help others" habits... And
express our joy, and by expressing our joy,
we only emit detached love.
So detachment in Sahaja Yoga is not
we go to the hospitals cleaning the shoes
of the sick people, bringing the meals to
only possible, it is necessary. If we want the sick people, enjoying the idea of being
to grow in the quest and the discovery of the great healer of this "hospitals
the SELF, we have to be detached. It is inhabitants". And we start believing that by
possible to be detached in order to love, doing this job, we gain the realm of God.
We do not realise that it is our attachment
but it is necessary to be detached in order
to Ego 'l'.. which is driving us to do these
to rise. We must try to avoid to put our
attention on gross things, thinking too. things. We will be the next inhabitants of
much of money, worrying about the these hospitals.
salvation of our parents only with our EGO,
Full detachment is full love and this full
love expresses itself through full
giving too much energy to our job. It does
integration.
not mean that we have to avoid all the things
Integration is laying everything at
or relatives but, on the contrary, we with
Mataji's feet. Integration is a need. It is the
detachment put them altogether at Mataji's
need of love and the need of joy. This
Feet. At this level detachment leads to
integration is absolute because this need
integration.
I try to deposit all my doings at Mataji's
to love and enjoy is absolute.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-29.txt 
 28
July - August, 2004
The Divine Gool Breeze
When I try to integrate my life to Mataji,
I feel myself melting into Her Divinity. The must be eternally thankful and joytul to
vibrations increases very much and my realise that H.H. Mataji, 'the great goddess,
eyes sparkle like diamonds. Detachment the Adi Shakti' has come to this Earth to
is the key to integration and integration is enlighten our spirit and bestow upon us
the key to surrender.
Yes, we are the children of God and we
Divine Attention, Absolute Detachment and
When we integrate ourselves into full Integration the Essence of Her Divine
Sahja Yoga, we surrender to Mataji. And Being, Her Love.
by surrendering to Her, we let grow in us
this extraordinary feeling that we are really
the children of God.
"My children, you must know I am beyond
"The New revolution in your awareness has
to take place otherwise all human insults and pain. Do you know that when
Christ was crucified he was a witness to his
achievements have no meaning. it would be
like arranging all the electrical decorations
pain? He can never be humiliated. But these
for the marriage without the electrical current
people are under the pressure of the satanic
But when the Light be on, you will see the
forces. We have to save them. Do you want
them to go to hell?"
Bridegroom and the Bride."
H.H. Mataji, Sri Nirmala Devi
H.H. 'Mataji, Sri Nirmala Devl
शान्ताकारं भुजगशयनं पद्मनाभं सुरेशं
विश्चाधारं गगन सदृशं मेघवर्ण शुभाङ्गम्।
लक्ष्मीकान्तं कमलनयनं योगिभिघ्यनिगम्यं
"Obeisance to Vishnu, the dispeller of the fear
of rebirths, the one Lord of all the regions,
वन्दे विष्णुं भवभय हरं सर्वलोकैकनाथम्।।
possessed of a tranquil form, lying on a bed
of snake, from whose navel has sprung the
Shanlakaram Bhujagshayanam
lotus, the Lord of all celestials, the support of
Padmnabham Suresham
the Universe, similar to the sky, possessed
Vishvaadharam Gagan Sadrisham
of the colour of a cloud and possessed of
Meghavaranam Shubhangam!
Lakshmikantam Kamala Nayanam
handsome limbs, the Lord of Lakshmi (the
Goddess of Wealth), having lotus-like eyes,
Yogibhirdhyangamyam
and realized by yogis in meditation."
Vande Vishnum Bhawbhaya Haram
Sarwalokaikantham !!
(Maha Avtar-1980)
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-30.txt 
 ADVICE OF HER HOLINESS
MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI
(Guru Purnima, 29th July, 1980)
London
be a person who is an ascetic or a person
Today you have arranged this worship
of your Guru, that is your Mother perhaps.
Why this Puja is arranged?
who is living in a forest. He could be a king.
All these outward manifestations of one's
life do not matter whatever may be your
One should know that it is very important
position, I would say the so-called position
for every disciple to worship his Guru. But
the Guru has to be real Guru, not the one
in this world makes no difference to your
who is just exploiting the disciples and who being a Guru, as long as you have imbibed
is not authorized by God. A Puja is the Statutes of the Lord.
Again, I say you have to imbibe the
arranged, because you have been initiated
Statutes. Let us see what are the Statutes.
into the Statutes of the Lord. You have been
The first is, 'you do not do harm to anyone'.
told what are the Dharmas of a human
being. For that actually you do not need a The first principle is that 'we are not to
harm anyone? Animals do harm without
Guru. You can read a book and know what
knowing that they are harming someone.
are the Statutes of the Lord. But Guru has
to see that you practice them. These If you go near a snake, he will bite. If a
scorpion is there he will put his poison into
Statutes are to be practiced, to be brought
your being. Humans are not to harm.
anyone. They can correct but not harm. But
into your own life; which is a difficult thing
and without a Guru, a correcting force, it
is very difficult to follow these Statutes of
the principle of not harming is taken
point where reality disappears, e.g., when
the Lord because, there is a very big gap
between Human Awareness and Divine it was said do not harm anyone, people
Awareness and that gap can only be filled started saying, 'alright we will not harm
by a Guru, who himself is complete.
mosquitoes and bugs and will not kill them.'
Today is Purnima, which means a And there are some people who are
complete moon. A Guru has to be a following religions in which they preserve
complete personality to talk about these mostquitoes and bugs. This is absurdity.
Statutes and to elevate his disciples to this Taking anything to absurdity, cannot be
reality.
level of understanding by which they imbibe
First of all, we should not harm anyone
those Statutes. He is there to fulfil this gap
who is walking in the path of God, the one
and for that it is essential that every Guru
who is a realized soul. There may be some
has to be a realized soul of a very high
mistakes in him. He may need correction.
quality and greatly evolved. He need not
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-31.txt 
 July August, 2004
The Diving Cool Breeze
Nobody is perfect as yet. So do not harm. confident about it. But for that first of all
Always try to help. Secondly, anybody who you must test yourself completely,
is a real seeker, he may be wrong. He otherwise you might be playing into the
hands of evil. It happens with many people
might have gone to wrong Gurus, he might
have done wrong things. But have feelings who start doing Sahaja Yoga in the
beginning. So be cautious. Be sure that you
for them because you have been going on
are telling the Truth and nothing else and
wrong path yourself, sometimes. You have
been misled before, so have more that you have felt the Truth in full ways.
Those who have not felt the vibrations.
sympathies. That is why if you have done
mistakes in a way it is good because you should not talk of Sahaja Yoga. They have
have more sympathies for such people. no authority. They have to receive
vibrations. They have to fully imbibe within
Then you are not to harm human beings in
anyway, you are not to cause them any them and then they can say, "Yes, we felt".
This is very important task Sahaja Yogis
bodily harm, any emotional upsetting just
for harm's sake; for correction it is alright.
have to do in these modern times, that is,
to tell aloud that they have found the Truth.
The second Statute is that you have to
That part is very weak. In whatever way you
stand on your own legs and know that you
like you can announce the Truth. You can
are here one with the Truth, the testimony
of Truth, that you have seen the Truth. You write books, you can talk to your friends,
know what Truth is and you cannot relations and everyone and tell them, "this
compromise with falsehood. You just is the Truth now, that you have entered in
cannot. For that you need not harm the kingdom of God, that you have been
blessed by the Grace of God, that you are
anyone. You have to just profess it. You
realized souls, that you have felt the Divine
have to stand up and say that you have
power which is prevailing everywhere. That
seen the Truth and this is the Truth, and
you can give realization to others". This you
you have to be one with it so that people
see that light of Truth in you and they have to tell others and know that by your
accepting the truth, you are not adding
accept it.
anything to the Truth but you are adoring
It is not for telling others that you have
yourself. One requires courage to enjoy the
to be truthful and this is the Truth we have
seen and this is what God's Laws are, how Truth. Sometimes people may mock at
you, laugh at you and persecute also but
they work out. Through vibratory
that should not be any worry to you because
awareness we have been able to see that
your relationship is with the Statutes, with
this is the Truth. But be completely
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-32.txt 
 31
July-August, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
the Grace of God. When that is your testimony and that you should announce
connection, you should not worry about it.
The third thing for Guru a Sahaja Yogi
other people and what they have to say
has to do, is to develop Detachment.
about it. You have to stand up, adorn
Gradually you do develop it because you
yourself with that Truth and talk to people
find that unless and until you develop that
and people wilI know that you found it. With
that authenticity with which you speak detachment, you are not receiving
people will know that you have found it The vibrations in the full way. All kinds of
detachments have to be developed, means
difference between a realized soul and a
your priorities change. Once your attention
non-realized soul is basically this: He does
not talk of woes and his separation with gets fixed up with your spirit, the catch or
God. He says "I have Found it Now. This is the hold on things which are of no
importance starts reducing by itself, e.g.,
it". Like Christ said, "I Am The Light, I Am
you have a father, a mother and a sister.
The Path." Or anybody else can say that
This is a bigger problem in India. Here, you
but you can make out that it is not Truth.
With the confidence, with that complete are overdetached. But in India, people are
very much involved in their own children,
understanding, coming out of your heart
people can make out, 'this is absolute "this is My son" & others are all orphans.
Only, your sons and daughters are the real
Truth' and then all kinds of falsehood must
children. "My daughter, I must do this for
be denounced. Does't matter if somebody
my son, my father, my mother". Two types
of Attachments are there, one through (E)
feels bad because by telling that you are
saving them and not harming them. But
must be told in a correct way, not in Moha-involvement into that. That you want
frivolous way, not in frivolous way. In a very
to do this for them, that you want to give
persuasive way, you must tell them that them property, have insurance for them and
this is wrong. You must wait for the time every sort of thing.
And another could be the other way, as
when you can tell people, more in
we have here. You hate your father, you
hate your mother. You hate everyone. Both
confidence. Tell them, "this is wrong, it is
wrong, you don't know. We have done the
things are just the same. So, Detachment
same thing". This is how you are going to
express your principle of Mastery or you must be developed. The Detachment is
can say" Guru Tatwa". You have to be that you are your father, you are your
truthful. First and foremost thing is that, mother, you are everything. Only your spirit
you should know the Truth and stand the is everything to you, only your spirit you
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-33.txt 
 32
July- August, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
love is attachment. For example, in a tree,
have to enjoy, then the detachment comes
from them, then you really do good to them, say the sap rises, goes to all the necessary
because, by detaching you see the parts, all the flowers, all the fruits, then
complete vision about them and about goes back to Mother Earth. It is not
what is to be done. For example, people attached to anyone. Supposing, the sap
have attachment with some crazes.
goes and gets attached into one fruit. What
will happen? The fruit will die and the tree
Human beings always become crazy
about something. I mean it can be anything.
One has to understand that there should
will die. Detachment gives you the
movement of your love, circulation of your
be only one craze that is, to be settled, love.
For things now. Things have no value
absolutely settled in your spirit. All other
crazes will disappear because it is the unless and until there are emotions behind
it. For example the sari, I am wearing today,
greatest joy giving thing. That's the most
nourishing thing, that's the most beautiful was bought for Guru Day, Guru Purnima
but they had no sari. The other day, they
thing.
wanted to have Sari for Puja. Then I said if
So, all the other things fall off, you enjoy
you insist I may have, but I wore it today
only that which is the source of all
enjoyment. You get yourself attached to just to say that this was bought with that
your spirit, and detachment starts working. devotion, that love that on Guru Day,
Mother would like to wear something of a
Sometimes detachment is taken as a
lighter shade; white-the pure colour of silk,-
licence for becoming dry to others, which
complete detachment. But in white all the
is absurd. This is a human quality to make
everything dirty what is beautiful. Actually, colours are mixed, then only it becomes
a person who is detached is the most white-such a balance and unity it is. It
beautiful person-is the extremely loving should be that you should become white
person, is love. Look at the flowers, they and whiter than snow. Detachment is purity,
are detached. They are dying tomorrow, is innocence. Innocence is such a light,
light that really blinds vou to all that iş filthy.
they are not going to live but every minute
You would not even know that a person has
they live they are emitting fragrance to you.
come with bad intentions. A person comes
The trees are not attached to anything; they
to you, comes to steal. You will say, 'come
will die tomorrow, doesn't matter. But if
along, what do you want'. You will offer him
anybody comes to them, they give
tea and all that, then he says,. "I have come
shadow, they give fruits. Attachment
to rob you", "Alright rob me, if you want to",
means death of love, complete death of
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-34.txt 
 July August, 2004
33
The Divine Cool Breeze
not to harm anyone-Ahimsa, not to kill
So he might not rob you at all. That is what
anyone. That does not mean that you do
is innocence, which one may develop, only
not have to eat meat and fish and all that.
through detachment. Detachment is of the
That is all nonsense. Of course, you should
attention. Do not allow your attention to get
not hanker after food, no doubt about it. You
involved in to something, even rituals of
do not kill anyone means, you do not kill a
anything. Say, now we have not washed
human being. Thou shall not kill. So first
Mataji's Feet, alright it does not matter. You
thing is not to harm anyone.
love Me, alright. If some mistakes may be
Second is to know that you have found
committed, what does it matter? If you see
the truth and give the testimony of the truth.
on the abstract plane, it's love. This is just
Third is the detachment, the way I have
a step forward. Like somebody ran very
fast and fell down before reaching Me and told you about detachment. Not to get
says, "Mother, Sorry, I fell down before attached to any one person because he is
reaching you. I should have not done that. a relation or something; but develop a
But, Mother see, how I prostrated before universal feeling and also not to hate
anyone. That is a kind of worst attachment.
you. Mother see, how I prostrated before
you". It's a complete poetry-Detachment.
So, one has to develop that detachment of all Sahaja Yogis 'I hate'. It is called as
to be a Guru and that detachment does dandak, is the statute. You cannot hate
This word should go away from the mouth
anyone, even Rakshasas. Better not hate
) or anything like
not mean Sanyas (
that, Sometimes one has to wear those them. Give them a chance.
Now the tourth statute of the Lord is, to
dresses to announce to the world because
if you have to work in a short time then
lead a moral life. These statutes were given
you have to take to that intensive by all the Gurus. Take them from Socrates,
behaviour like Christ, you can say or onwards, Moses, Ibrahim, Dattatreya,
Adishankaracharya. All these people had Janaka, upto say Nanak, Mohammed
Sahib and take up to the point when it was
a very very short life. In that short life they
had to achieve such a tremendous task about 100 years back at the most-was
that they had to actually take a military Sainath. All of them have said that you have
uniform just to avoid problems, not to to lead a Moral Life. None of them had said
that you do not get married, that you should
impress others. Now-a-days people do it
have no relationship with your wife. All this
just to impress others that they are
detached and do just the things opposite is nonsense. Lead a moral life. When you
are young and not married, keep your eyes
to it. So, we understand that first work is
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-35.txt 
 34
July - August, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
respect, with dignity. Not staring at people,"
on the ground, Mother Earth gives you that
which is just playing in the hands of these
innocence. Most of the confusions and
problems, specially in the Western life possessions. The whole society is
have come because they have thrown pssessed. All the Satanic forces have
morality to the sea and to accept morality been let loose, I think and the way the
people are possessed, they cannot see
as the very basis of society is very difficult
through these things. They are supposed
for them. It is complete reversion. But you
to be Christians. Attention is to be looked
have to do it, you have to turn the whole
wheel back. So many things were done in after. That is the most important thing.
Because attention is the one which is going
the beginning of the society to establish
these pure relationships. There are laws to be enlightened.
So, we have to know what morality is.
which act, just as chemical Laws are
there, Physcial Laws are there in chemistry Let people laugh and say that these are
Goodie-Goodies or this sort of thing. We
and Physics. There are human laws which
one should understand, the relationship are proud and not ashamed of being
between each other. The sublimity of their righteous people. This is a very important
relationship, the purity of their relationship part of righteousness. Those who do not
follow this, will lose their vibrations very
must be understood. Then only you can
have a very very happy married life, which
is the basis. "Thou shalt not commit
fast.
Then for a Guru, He should not
accumulate things; he should not have
adultery," Christ has said (Perhaps he
much possessions. If he has possessions
knew the modern people as they would be
they should be just what he needs. A Guru
using their brains for this). He said, "Thou
shalt not have adulterous eyes". What a must give away his possessions. He
should not have stamp-collection and all
vision, in those days to think. Even, I could
such kinds of collections. Whatever things
not understand it when I was in India. Only
after coming here I could see, what it could
are useful and beautiful, which give
mean. It is a possession on the eyes- happiness and joy to others, to their eyes,
possession. It's a joyless, useless such things must be collected, He should
behaviour. Attention is frittered away have such things which give symbolic to
his life, very symbolic, which suggest that
completely. There's no dignity. "eyes
should be steady. If you look at somebody he is a Dharmic Person. He should not
steadily, he should know that you have have things that are symbolic of
Adharmikta, of irreligious life. Everything
Sahaja Yoga in you. With love, with
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-36.txt 
 35
July-August, 2004
The Divine Col Breeze
that he has or wears or shows should be because I am quite good at giving away.
So, I told one of my niece in-laws that I want
representative of his Dharmikta. I do not
to give away this sari to her. On a holy day,
know the situation here but in India, when
we can give it to elders and so I will give it
we were young we were not allowed to
listen to all kinds of music. Not allowed, to her. She said, "You have only one left
just not allowed to see all sort of filthy now, why do you want to give away even
that. You have given away all you had". I
things, filthy documentaries etc. Anything
that is impure, giving bad vibrations should said, "Now, I feel like giving. I will give it
not be possessed. Even whatever you away". And we were discussing this in the
kitchen and I said, "why do you tell me, 1
have, you should think whom you can give
am not going to take advice on this point".
this. So, it means you should have
possessions to express your generosity. And at that time, the bell rang and a
Sahaja Yogi has to be generous like the gentleman came. He had brought 3 saris
sea. A miserly Sahaja Yogi-l cannot think for me from Africa and one of them was
of that-it is like mixing of darkness with exactly the same as one I had. Because I
had given some silk saris to this lady when
light. Miserliness is not allowed in Sahaja
she was going to Africa, she thought she
Yoga.
Anybody, whose mind goes on how could send me some saris, and she sent
me these saris. You are just standing in
much money I can save, how much labour
the center; from one door it comes and from
can I save-there are many labour saving
the other it goes. It is nice to see all that
devices, and money-saving devices-and
movement. It is very interesting.
Apart from that the way you give it, the
also cheating others or making money out
of few things here and there and all such
things are against Sahaja Yoga. They will emotional side of it is so beautiful, you
pull you down. Enjoy your generosity. How cannot imagine it. I met a lady after say 30
many times must I have told you about years of her married life in London,
generosity. I remember; once I wanted to suddenly and she said, "Oh what
coincidence". I said, "why"? She said, "I am
give a Sari that I had from abroad. You see,
in India, the people like that kind of a Sari wearing the same pearl necklace you had
given me on my wedding-day to day. And
very much, although I do not understand
should meet you". The whole thing, the
why they like this nylon sort of sari. A lady
whole drama changed with the meeting. It
said, "I have not got a sari from abroad and
I would like to have one imported Sari". I
is how you give even a small thing. It is the
had only one such Sari left with me greatest art of giving that one has to learn
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-37.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July - August, 2004
36
in Sahaja Yoga. Give up the mundane type
dresses, which are suitable to you, e.g. in
of things, like if you go to somebody's this climate there is no use to wear dress
birthday, you send a card, 'thank you, very
like Rama used to wear. He will not wear
much'. Make it a more deeper significant
anything on the top, there was no need. You
thing. Let us see how you develop your have to wear the dress of whatever country
symbols of love. When you have these
you belong, whatever suits the occasion.
things of vibrations and you will give it to a
Whatever you think is dignified and good.
Sahaja Yogi, he will know what it is. Never
It speaks for your more elegance and your
lack in generosity specially among Sahaja
personality. Whatever suits you, you
Yogis. Gradually, you will be amazed how
should wear, not like all the people wearing
through small things you win over as if the
moss Colour dress, the great suit, a
vibrations flow brought those things and
work out for those people.
horrible looking and making clowns out of
them. No clownish things are necessary,
Then, for a Sahaja Yogi it is important no dandy stuff is necessary. Simple,
to use things which are more natural in their
beautiful dresses should be worn which
character. Give up artificiality and be more
give you dignity. Actually in the East, people
natural. I do not mean that take out the believe that God has given you a beautiful
roots and eat them or you eat the fish raw.
body and it is to be adorned with the beauty
I do not mean that. Always you must avoid
of what human beings have created, just
going too far with the things. But try to lead
to respect it, just to worship your body, For
example in India women wear their saris
a life which is more natural. Natural, in the
sense that people know that there is no
and saris are expressive of their moods and
vanity about you. Some people can be the
expression of their worship of their bodies,
other way round. You see, they will dress
because you must respect your body.
Dresses should be such that they should
up like a tramp, just to attract more
attention. I mean there can be both ways.
be for utility as well as dignity. There is no
Then I find some people colouring their hair need to have uniform clothes for Sahaja
and all that. So you have to be a natural
Yogis at all. I don't like it. There should be
person; very natural in your behaviour. It
variety as nature is. Everyone should look
a different person. For Puja etc. all can
can mean anything absurd also to some
wear something similar, it doesn't matter
people who do not use their wisdom.
Wisdom is very important in Sahaja Yoga,
where your attention need not be on the
variety. But outside, you should be normal
that you have to keep intact all the time.
Natural means you must wear natural person. You are all householders, nobody
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-38.txt 
 37
July - August, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
has to announce something. For you some are touchable some are untouchable.
This is in our Indian Community, horrible.
people, I don't even advice to put the red
mark when walking on the street. You Brahamanism of India has ruined India
should be normal person, not to be pointed
out. You need not be dressed absurdly or
in funny way but in a normal way as others
wear. To be normal is very important in
completely and you learn from for example,
who was Vyasa, the one who wrote Geeta,
who was he? He was illegitimate son of a
fisherwoman. That is why deliberately he
was born like that. All the Brahmins who
Sahaja Yoga.
Then we have to know that Sahaja read Geeta, ask them who was Vyasa?
Yogis have to get over all kinds of Brahmins are those who are realized souls
and for realized souls there is nothing like
discriminations and identifications
according to races, colour and different such non-sensical things like where and
in what caste or community you are born.
Christian, you don't belong to a Church, With all education and everything in the
religions in which you are born. As a
West, we find this nonsense of Racialism,
you are not born in a Church. Thank God,
I just can't understand. If somebody is fair
otherwise all the spirits there will capture
you, immediately. But these identifications or dark, after all God had to make variety
will linger on. To accept anything new, you in colour, in every way. Who told you that
have to be reborn and you are reborn now. you are the most handsome people going
round. May be for some markets here or in
Now, you are Dharamatit means you need
Hollywood, it may fit but in the kingdom of
not follow any particular type of religion.
You are open to all religions and the
God, all these 'so called' handsome people,
will be denied entry-marrying seven
essence of all religions you have to take.
You have not to denounce any religion or
insult any religious incarnation at any time,
it is a sin. It is a great sin in Sahaja Yoga
husbands and all sort of things. They will
all be put in Hell. The beauty is of the heart
and not of the face, that shows and shines.
May be, people are a little bit aware of it,
and you know who they are. There should
that is why they go and tan their faces. I do
be no racial understanding of oneself. You
could be Chinese or of any group. You not know. They are quite aware but there
is too much "Showing-Off" they are doing.
couid be anything. As long as we are
human beings, we should know that we Some people like black hair, others like red
laugh the same way, we smile the same hair, I mean there have to be all types of
way, we hold the same way. This is all hair, why do you like a particular type of
hair this I cannot understand. There is
conditioning in our mind of this society that
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-39.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
38
July August, 2004
nothing like or dislike. What God has the blood flows through arteries, they
become smaller and smaller. You are the
created is all beautiful, who are you to
judge that? I like or dislike, 'l', who is this
arteries which is going to flow this blood of
T, you see, is Mr. Ego, which is being my love to all the people. If arteries are
tampered by this society, which teaches
broken the blood will not reach the people.
you how to smoke cigar and how to have That is why you are so important. The
your lager morning till evening. All this bigger you become, the bigger the arteries
training and conditioning has to be thrown
away just like filth and see that God has
become. Then you encompass more
people, by that you are more responsible.
Guru must have the dignity. Guru means
created all of you as his own children. It is
such a beautiful thing. Why you want to the weight, is the gravity. Guruatwa means
gravity. You must have the gravity by your
make it ugly with these ugly ideas. All this
ugliness of "I like or dislike" is nonsense. weight of your dignity, weight of your
Only there should be one word "I Love", behaviour, weight of your faith; and your
forget everything. There is no need to light. You become Guru not through
frivolousness and vanity. Cheapness,
remember what British did to Indians or
Germans did to Jews, forget everything. vulgar language, cheap jokes, anger and
Those people who did it are dead and temper-all must be avoided completely.
Weild the weight of your sweetness, of your
finished. We are different people, we are
saints. This is for the statutes I have told tongue, of the dignity, which will attract
people just like the flower which is loaded
you, which you have to imbibe.
with nectar, attract the bees from all over.
But, today, I authorise you to be the
In the same way you will be attracting
people. Be proud of that, be very very proud
Gurus, so that through your own character
and through your own personality, the way
you practice Sahaja Yoga in your own life
of that and have sympathies for others and
and manifest the light, others will follow care for others.
Now, in short I have to tell you how you
you. And that you will establish the statutes
have to do it yourself. You have to work out
of the lord in their hearts and emancipate
them. Give them their salvation because your void clearly. First of all you have to
you have got your salvation. You are the know that void catches when you had a
channels, without the channels this all wrong type of a Guru. You must know about
pervading power cannot work out. That's your Guru entirely. Try to find out the
the system. If you see the Sun, its light character of your Guru. Rather difficult
because your Guru is very elusive. She is
spreads through its rays-from your heart
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-40.txt 
 July - August, 2004
39
The Divine Cool Breeze
it is not a sin for me. I can kill anyone and
Mahamaya; not easy to find out. She
behaves in a very normal way and do whatever intrigue or anything. I really tell
you, that's a fact. Do anything, I am above
sin but I see to it that I do not do anything
sometimes you are outwitted. But you see
how in small things also, She behaves.
How Her character is expressed, how Her
like that in your presence, so that you do
love is expressed. Try to remember Her not get one of these things, because that
is my quality. You have a very supreme
Guru, no doubt, but still you must know that
forgiveness. Then you should know that
have the Guru that many people must
you
have desired to have, who is the source of
those powers of supremacy you don't
all Gurus. It is the ardent desire of even
have. I am above all these things. I do not
know what temptations are, nothing, 1
Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesh to have a
mean I do.
Guru like that. They must be all jealous of
Whatever I like, it is all my whim. But
you. But this Guru is very elusive, so to
improve your void, say that, "Mother you despite that I have made myself very
of this normal because I must appear before you
elusiveness, that fear or that awe, that in such a manner that you understand what
are our Guru". Because
respect which is necessary, for the Guru is the statutes. For me there are no
Statutes. I make these statutes. Because
is not established. Uniess and until you
of you I do all these things and teach you
develop that awe, complete awe within
small things, because you are still children.
you, your Guru principle will not be
established. No liberty is to be taken. I am
In the same way you must remember
telling you myself but I am extremely that when you are talking to other people
elusive; next moment I make you laugh and about Sahaja Yoga, remember that they
forget about it because I am testing your will see you all the time and try to
freedom to do it-Complete freedom. I play understand how far you are in it. As I
understand you, you try to understand
with you in such a manner that you will be
forgetting every moment that I am your them. As I love you, you try to love them
I
definitely love you, no doubt but I am
Guru, every moment.
So first of all you must find about your Nirmala-l am beyond love, different state
own Guru, establish Her in your heart.F altogether.
Under these circumstances you are
mean you have a wonderful 'Guru"
otherwise, I must say, I wish I had one like
much better off because no Guru goes to
that extent. Apart from that I am the source
that myself. And She is desireless and
sinless, absolutely sinless. Whatever I do
of all the Shaktis, of all powers, so you can
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-41.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July August, 2004
40
have all the powers from me, whatever you
like. I am desireless but whatever desires
bend his head before anybody else,
specially My disciples; except for mothers,
you have will be fulfilled. Even about Me, sisters and you see in some relationship,
you have to desire, look at that how much
if it is, so you bow to that. But they do not
am bound by you. Unless and until you
bow to anybody else.
desire My good health, I will have bad
Secondly, you must know that your Guru
health. It is to that extent. But to Me, what
has been the Mother of very great people.
it is bad health and good health. Under The thought of that itself should establish
these beautiful conditions you should really your Guru Tatwa (Guru-principle). What
prosper so well. There should be no tremendous sons
I have had. What great
problems for you to be Gurus.
personalities, No words can describe and
Now, the Void is to be established. First
so many of them, one after another and
of all you must know your Guru and she is
you are in the same tradition; My disciples.
on every Chakra. Imagine what
Keep them as your ideals. Try to follow
tremendous Guru you have. With that you
them, read about them, understand them
what they have said, how they have
feel the confidence and because of such
tremendous Guru everybody is getting
realization so easily. If you go to a rich man
achieved such heights. Recognise them,
respect them. You will establish your Guru-
for alms he is not going to give two pices
Tatwa.
only. Because she is so powerful you are
Imbibe all the statutes within you, be
getting your powers just like that. So you
proud about them. Don't be misguided by
have to feel very happy about it, extremely
happy and beautiful that you have these
what the people are talking. We are going
to pull the whole multitudes towards
powers. At least those who have been in
ourselves. First of all let us establish our
Sahaja Yoga will know it for certain. Those
weight, the Gravity. As Mother Earih keeps
who have come to my lecture for the first
time will be a little puzzled. All of you know
everybody pulling towards earth, we will be
pulling all of them to ourselves.
Today, all of you must within yourself, to
for definite what it is.
So, to understand your own Guru-
your spirit promise that you will be a Guru,
power, you first know who is your Guru- worthy of your Mother.
May God bless you!
Sakshat Adishakti, Oh God; it is too much.
(Nirmala Yoga-1980)
Then establish your void. A Guru does not
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-42.txt 
 SEEKING AND RATIONALITY
In our searching, we are asking for without any effort required. We breathe,
the actual experience. In all the our heart works, etc. without our doing
scriptures it has been said that we will anything. Therefore everything has to
come spontaneously like the sprouting
second birth which is within us. All the of a seed. Only human beings believe in
be born again. We are looking for a
religions talk about it. We have to God, not animals. We haven't our
stabilize ourselves to get the experience fulfilment. People are seeking. The
awareness is responsible for the
and it will work out. We search with our
minds and rationality for the truth. This
seeking. We have to keep our rationality
mind is not connected to the whole. We
clear. I ask you not to believe me, but not
to deny me because you can't
are not aware of the whole, we have so
rationalize. Now is the time of
many problems.
unenlightened blossoming and many are going to be
Thinking,
rationalization and awareness are converted and have fulfilment. Our
different, Rationality has all the time instrument, existing on many different
been living with the ego. We can't levels has started to
become
separate the ego and rationality- neither enlightened. We pass from gross to the
are perfected nor mature. If we are subtle of Mother Earth. Subtle of Mother
Earth is fragrance. The cause of Mother
mature enough to know why there are
vibrations in the molecules-through
Earth is the axis. Ultimately we go to the
rationality we cannot discover this. We primordial cause, which is the spirit-the
refiection of the God Almighty.
cannot give answers to questions- e.g.
Why are we human beings? We take too
The real Gurus working in the forests
much for granted. If we try to rationalize and the great people like Moses and
everything we will go mad. Our rationality Abraham knew how difficult it was to
s not mature enough, it is not raise Kundalini. When people are
enlightened. The" I" within us knows the authorised it is an easy thing to do for
rationality, but rationality doesn't know others. When it moves up the centre and
the" I". We can't know each other's point pierces the fontanel bone, we achieve
of view, Why human beings are made
self-realisation. We aren't even aware of
what has happened to us, what we have
out of an amoeba-through rationalizing
and logic?
achieved. It's so spontaneous and so
simple but it's a very dynamic process,
The process has been worked out
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-43.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July - August, 2004
42
an all dimensional working, which makes simple love. Mother can't keep all Her
the Kundalini rise.
love to Herself. Christ was crucified for
I am a simple housewife who has this
us to have it and to understand what we
unique technique, I am your teacher and
have; understand the mechanism
can get us broken into the Unconscious. master it and we can give light to
You mustn't be upset because of my thousands. To help them mentally,
simplicity.
physically, emotionally and spiritually.
Jesus Christ was a carpenter's son.
Not to waste this wonderful gift. Our
His Mother was an uneducated woman. rationality will see the power flowing
Krishna was a cow boy. When we find through us and we will enjoy the bliss
something like this, it is a beginning. and joy of this wonderful happening.
Having been able to get our own power
May God Bless You!
(-SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI)
risen is enlightening ur rationality. It is
Mother's Name
Names are often given under the guidance of the Unconscious and, in this respect H.H.
Mataji's names are quite interesting.
NIRMALA is the Sanskrit word for IMMACULATE. In her childhood She was called Neera
(Born from Water, Miriam, Marie). Her maiden name was SALVE which reminds us of the
ritual "Hail Mary" in Latin. "Salve regina coeli.
.
The Spanish speaking guests of H.H. Mataji in Colombia were surprised at this coinci-
dence. After marriage, H.H. Mataji's name became Shrivastava. "Shri" means "the God-
dess" (the holy Spirit) and "Vastava" means "in reality"
So, by a playful chance, NIRMALA DEVI SHRIVASTAVA reads.
THE IMMACULATE GODDESS, THE HOLY SPIRIT IN REALITY.
Gregoire in-The advent pp. 169
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-44.txt 
 WHERE ARE OUR PRIORITIES?
beloved Mother. They are the foundations
When we get our realization, we are not
yet aware of the fundamental inner- of our steadiness and straightforwardness
transformations of our being, we just in Sahaja Yoga. But when we do not
witness these blessings we integrate them
realize that something beautiful and new
has transformed us. Then, we grow and in our Ego if they increase and go to the
left side and confusion if they decrease or
we see how the world changes according
We can never witness such
vanish.
to our transformations, we get better jobs,
better friends, more patience and calm. blessings if we do not see our priorities.
The priorities of every Sahaja Yogi
We see all these internal and external
transformations as blessings of the should be to let these blessings be felt,
received and nourished only by the heart,
Goddess. The blessings grow and we get
accustomed to their manifestations, not by the mind otherwise we feel that we
especially to the external ones, like good have failed in Sahaja Yoga because we
health, or success in emotional, could not bring our husband, mother or
sister to Sahaja Yoga, because we had the
But when these
professional life.
illusion that to have a happy family-life is
manifestations decrease or even stop for
a while, when we get sick or have some the purpose and the reward of every
positive Sahaja Yogi. At this level, with such
troubles of any kind we start wondering why
an attitude, we can never grow. We have
it happened to us, what we have done.
to transcend this stage, go higher. Our
Either we start blaming Sahaja Yoga or we
develop a sense of guilt. With this sense priority should be to see the SELF as the
of guilt insecurity grows in our heart and greatest blessing. This is where our
takes out our joy.
priorities should be, in the SELF. Our
priorities are priorities of the manifestation
Why does it happen so quickly and so
often? Because we do not see where our of our spirit. Our priority of the
priorities are. At first we must be the manifestation of our spirit. Our priority
witness of our blessings in order to should be to let express our heart, to act
assimilate them fully in our heart. In this through it, to be guided by the sparkle of
the spirit, ignited by the pure grace of our
witness-stage, we see that they are not
beloved Mother.
the goal of Sahaja Yoga or the achievement
of our spiritual growth, but the by-products
of our inner-evolution which help us to have
Let us put our priorities in the spirit, then
automatically we become the witness of
the enjoyment of every blessing irradiated
confidence and faith in the Self and in our
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-45.txt 
 July - August, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
by the SELF. The spirit is the absolute as the children of God Almighty? What are
we afraid of? Who can attack us? Nobody,
blessing and our priority should be to feel
everything is a myth, a play, a drama when
this absolute blessing in our heart and
forget the whys, the hows. Everybody is
we feel the protection of our Mother.
I dare go further, our priority should be
absolutely blessed, equally looked after by
only to pronounce with all our strength, all
Mother's love, the day his spirit has been
connected to ADI SHAKTI, the day the drop
our love, all our joy in an opened heart the
has fallen in the ocean. So everybody's
name of the DEVI. Just to pronounce Her
priority must be to feel his blessed spirit name is the greatest blessing, the
who is everlasting, absolute and of divine incomparable joy.
In order to see our priorities we must
source. The only priority is to be aware of
this blessing, the greatest blessing, to be train our attention and strengthen our
witnessing faculty. The attention helps us
connected through the spirit to the Divine.
to discover the beauty of the Self and its
And by being connected to the Divine, the
spirit needs nothing, because he has importance. When the priorities are being
every-thing, integrates all blessings
* se
set by the enlightenment of our attention,
we reach the state where there are no
because he represents the absolute
blessing. Our priority is to understand our
doubts, no questions, no answers, where
we see through the opening of the heart
spirit and its love for the Divine Mother, to
feel with tremendous joy and pride that we
the glory of the DIVINE MOTHER.
A. de Kalbermatten
are the children of ADI SHAKTI. This is our
key-priority to feel in the heart the joy of 344, Winterthurerstrasse
8057Zuerich
belonging to the family of God. Do we
(Nirmala Yoga-1981)
realize what it means to have been chosen
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-46.txt 
 WHAT THE PROPHETS SAID
I came to say a word and I shall say it now.
But if death prevents its uttering, it will be said
by tomorrow, for Tomorrow never leaves a
secret in the book of Eternity.
Therefore, at all times, do thou direct thy
thought unto Me and fight: With thy mind and
thought dedicated unto Me, thou wilt, without
doubt, attain to Me exclusively.
Jnaneshwari (VIII) (7)
I came to live in the glory of love and the light
It is the richest food served to the happy soul, of Beauty, which are the reflections of God.
the Mother's love to the blessed poor spirits am here living, and the people are unable to
exile me from the domain of life for they know
I will live in death. If they pluck my eyes I will
hearken to the murmurs of love and the song
of Beauty. If they close my ears I will enjoy
the touch of the breeze mixed with the
who do not worry about life's cares; and the
royal road to this Supreme Abode is devotion.
Jnaneshwari (VIII) (21, 22)
When the FACT becomes fact.
None shall deny it is a fact,
Abasing, exalting!
When the Earth shall be shaken in a shock.
incense of love & the fragrance of beauty. If
they place me in vacuum, I will live together
with my soul, the child of love and Beauty.
-Khalil Gibran
And the mountains shall be powered in
Powder.
And become like flying dust,
And Ye shall be three kinds.
(The speeches and table-talk of the Prophet
Mohammed.)
Eulogy to Shri Mataji
She walks
God-haired, God-fingered
Touching Autumn into Summer
With the silence of Her smile.
She sings.
Lark-solemn, high, exultant,
Sweeping snowlight into Spring.
She smiles
Sun-blue, sun brilliant
In the shelter of the storm.
She speaks cool clear
Soul calming
In the music of the mind.
Judith Bell, Sydney
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-47.txt 
 THE FIGHT FOR COLLECTIVITY
At first, when we come to Sahaja Sahaja Yoga, still loaded with a lot of
Yoga, we had to confront some negativity weaknesses and impurities. If a Sahaj
coming from outside: Old friends who do Yogi is not very serious about clearing
not react as we had hoped, family his instrument (yantra) with the Sahaj
members who are neither sensitive nor techniques (tantra), he may fall a prey
sensible, or more generally, we had to to the anti-evolutionary bhoots. Those
face the pressure of an adharmic will try to infiltrate such a person to turn
him into a medium of negativity. Let's say,
society. Gradually we learn how to enjoy
these situations, we know how to deal these bhoots are acting as Satan's CIA
with them. All the while our collective or KGB. If they succeed, their
body is growing: in India, in UK, in achievement is triple: 1. they have
Australia, in continental Europe. Then, created one black sheep and lost that
sometimes, we find out that the soul; 2. this person might create
negativity is trying to open a second mischiefs; 3. suspicion is being aroused
front, so to say, within our ranks, trying among Sahaja Yogis: confidence is
the
weakened, love grows cold,
to manipulate Sahaja Yogis against each
others, trying to tear apart our vibrations of togetherness and collective
collectivity, which is Mother's beautiful well-being do not circulate any more;
tapestry. We have to outwit this subtle one starts seeing only the faults of
type of negativity. I wish, dear brothers others. In this way, bitter thorns are
and sisters, to reflect with you on the prepared, seeds of dissent are sown
appropriate Sahaja tactics to meet this within our camp. But we are not willing
to give this pleasure to these wretched
"negativity from within".
A preliminary remark: there can be bhoots and we have been discussing the
issue with our London friends.
negativity frorn within Sahaja Yogis, not
In its present shape, Sahaja Yoga is
from within Sahaj Yoga; Sahaj Yoga is
the Immaculate operation of God's not unlike the embryo of an organic,
evolutionary plan: it cannot be spoiled. collective being. For this organism to
But the boundless compassion of Mother grow it is necessary that blood, that is,
love and-energy circulate, so that each
(which is not always easy to understand)
allows some of us to come in Sahaja part supports each others in their growth.
Yoga, and even in the inner circle of if there is the intrusion of a foreign
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-48.txt 
 47
July - August, 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
its multiple forms (aggressiveness, envy,
element in the body (the virus, the black
sheep) the organism as a whole will jealousy) destroys the cell one ought to
repel it. This function is, as a rule, save (the Sahaja Yogi) and spreads the
performed by the Kalki aspect of Shri negativity to other parts of the body. Love,
the contrary, comforts and
Mataji and not by any Individual Sahaja
on
regenerates the cell and destroys the
Yogi. And if there is sickness in one part
of the body, the organism rushes extra negativity. So let us love each other as
we can, despite the
as
supply of energy where there is a need much
for it. This function is very often weaknesses that all of us still have. Let
mediated by the care, love and detached us love because it is the only way to
attention that Sahaja Yogis are able to grow: there is not going to be any "one
yogi show" in Sahaja Yoga. No fast
give to one of them in difficulty.
runner to arrive before anybody else on
In other words our job is not to throw
people out of Sahaja Yoga but to take top of mount Kailash! Our achievement
them in. If somebody turns very negative will be collective or...will not be! No
show individual is important in 'this "Yoga Of
certainly
should
we
uncompromising firmness, shoe-beat The Whole". It is the universality of our
mighty gathering that matters. Through
etc...but basically leave it to Shri Mataji.
She has corrected so many of us, She love we become the bearers of the light
will correct many more. Let us never of Oneness; the channels of the flow of
forget that all the great sons of Shri Universality. It is the only way, love is the
Mataji are very much active, and lead the only way we can do some justice to the
fight. Sakshat Shri Bhairawa, Shri Primordia! Mother, and indeed, Shri
Kartikeya or Lord Jesus readily answer Mataji rejoices so much when She feels
that We love each other.
our prayers, Under no circumstances
Love is a marvellous weapon; It does
should we send vibrations of hate to a
Sahaja Yogi in difficulty because then, not destroy the (imaginary) enemy but
turns him into a friend. It allows us to see
we fall in the trap of the negativity; such
vibrations come back to us, confuse our beauty: "If you have to think of the
other Sahaja Yogis and provide a thorns instead of the flower, will you
enjoy the rose? And wisdom is to enjov"
conveyance for negativity which happily
These golden words of Shrl Mataji are to
takes them back and forth, like an old
witch sitting on her broom. Hate (under be ever remembered. Looking at the
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-49.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July - August, 2004
48
thorns we would become thorns automatically a salesman's smile on the
ourselves.
face to prove how loving we are. The
Hence let us not encourage the
Goddess is love. But in Her hands, She
spreading of rumours or criticisms,
wears spears, club, mace and swords
which can have unnecessary disruptive as well as sugarcanes. Some of us are
effects. Are we really talking for the sugarcanes, some aren't. We should
benefit of the community? Are we self understand.
appointed judges? Are we forming little
clans and clubs around Mr. such and minutely we, in our differences and
When we feel our togetherness, how
such? We should give full support to any
variety, complement each other; when
i we work like the fingers of one hand we
thought. any project, any Sahaja Yogi
who dedicatedly works for the
are well on our way to overcome the ego
collectivity; this criteria will help us. Love and to win the fight for collectivity, The
does not discriminate. Mother's love victory will be the victory of the Self. Shri
flows to everybody equally. The sun does Mataji, Parmeshwari is indeed taking us
not favour a specific flower or tree. But by the hand, gently leading us to Divinity,
the sunflower knows who is her lord. to that point where the identity of Atma
'Thus love discriminates: enlightened and Parmatma, the individual and the
love chases righteousness, God's side,
cosmic soul, is being experienced.
Sahaja Yogis. It knows also how to
JAI SHRI MATAJI ! Love. Gregoire
express itself. We are not to put
(1981)
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-51.txt 
 The children "are the ones who are incarnations.
They are the ones who are going to lead humanity into
some great advancement. The humanity has to be
looked after. They are tomorrow's humanity. And we are
today's. And what are we giving to them for them to
follow?"
It is very difficult to say what is the children's aim in
life, "but, with Sahaja Yoga, they will all
go in the proper
way. They'll behave in a proper way and the whole thing
will be a different mass of Sahaja Yogis coming up.
25.
