Divine Cool Breeze The 00 145 November-December, 2004

 (FELICITATI EE MATI NIRM

 HWA NIRMALA IVERSAL PURE RELIGIO IN THIS ISSUE Shri Krishna Puja - 2004 (A Report) 3. A Letter of Shri Mataji - 11.7.1980 6. Sh. Mahalakshmi Puja - Kolhapur 1.1.1983 7. Birthday Puja Mumbai - 21.3.1977 15. Faith, Devotion and Resignation A Legend 19. Daily Observances for Sahaja Yogis 20. Aphorisms of Patanjali Vs. Sahaja Yoga 21. Love and Marriage 25. Shri Mataji and Shri Hanumana's Visit to Europe 27. An Experience 29. Reality of Life 31. 33. The Victory of the Soul 35. The Moving Finger A Letter of Shri Mataji 22 Aug. 1980 37. 38. Seeking - London 24.7.1979 DHARMA

 THE DI VINE Co o L BREE ZE Published by Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. H.O.: Infosys House, Plot No.8, Chandragupt Housing Society, Paud Road Kothrud, Pune-411 029 Printed at Amarnath Press (P) Ltd. WHS 2/47, Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi-15 Ph.:25268673 For Subscription Please Write To: Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 222, Desh Bandhu Apartments Kalkaji, New Dehi-110019 Tel. No.:011-26422054, 26216654 Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles,Miracle Photographs etc. to: Shri O.P. Chandna G-11 (463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110 034 Tel. No. 011-55356811 Mor.:8:00 AM-9:00 AM Eve.:8:30 PM-10:30PM

 SHRI KRISHNA PUJA 2004 (A Report) (Internet Version) us the Master. When we are our Masters we Dear Yogis and Yoginis, are in balance and harmony with ourselves 1 am sending you all the great LAH SHAKTI, the power that does experience of the Krishna Puja 2004 in Los Angeles. We were in Woodland Hills, just everything. It is the power of LOVE by which everything is accomplished. So NIRMALA has so much meaning for us. Nought-Mastery about 40 minutes from L.A. It was a beautiful hotel, the Marriot There were approximately - Love. Once we have achieved those three 600-650 Yogis, mostly from USA and Canada things, we will lead a life as a Sahaja Yogi and but some from as far away as Switzerland, we evolve: SHRI MATAJI also stated that France and a few other countries. SHRI problems are presented our way because MATAJI did not come to the entertainment without problems we would not be able to programs on Friday and Saturday nights. We had beautiful music from all over the States grow and change. We must face our problems and overcome them so that we can rise above and Canada and all quite diverse. There was them and that is how we can grow deeper as also a short comedy from Canada. Saturday human beings. There were many other things morning a beautiful power point presentation from Columbia addressed the meaning of one presented in this power point but this is what I remember as being the most important. of the names of OUR DIVINE MOTHER Hopefully we will be able to buy the CD later "NIRMALA." The presentation was very on. powerful and it will be sold as CD at one of After that presentation, Dr. David Spiro, a medical doctor from England, spoke of the World Council that was formed recently the coming pujas, either Ganesha or Diwali. The presentation was a wonderful 45 minutes of music and beautiful images of SHRI MATAJI as it explained the meaning of by SHRI MATAJI. This council which is represented by 40 leaders from various countries, will have the responsibility of spreading SAHAJA YOGA all over the world. "Nirmala." NIR means "nought or not. MOTHER states that SHE is "nothing." and so we should think of ourselves as nothing. When we think of ourselves in this He also stated that SHRI MATAJI has donated the house in Cabella and the hangar where the pujas are held to VND. In this manner and also ask for nothing we become more and more our spirit. We should not put council there are yogis who will also be in our attention on ourselves but on our spirit. MA is the Mother. It is that power that makes charge of publishing, all legal matters and many

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004 The Divine Cool Brecze 4. other important aspects of SY. experience of this, I felt as SHE was removing all that was negative within us and all negativity On Sunday we had the Raksha in our surroundings SHRI MATAJI clearly Bandhan ceremony where the sisters chose a was working on us all and removing all that was negative within us and all the negativity on the outside of us. I felt as if THE HOLY MOTHER was revealing more and more of HER great powers and revealing all that was negative within us and all the negativity on the outside of us. I felt as if THE HOLY Rakhi brother to establish the pure relationship between the brother and sister. In Sahaja Yoga this is the purest of all relationships, it is held during the Krishna Puja celebration because Shri Krishna had a great sister in Vishnumaya. who is the deity in the left Vishuddhi. He, of course, is the Deity of the center Vishuddhi MOTHER was revealing more and more of HER great powers and revealing more and more some of HER DIVINE NATURE. This of course is felt in meditation and each of us experience this DIVINE NATURE of SHRI and in the right Vishuddhi He becomes the King Once the Rakhi is tied, (the thread that the sister ties on the left wrist of the chosen brother), they become brother and sister for the rest of their lives and one promises to help the other if they should need help. or protection. MATAJI in our own personal ways. But this time SHE was revealing to us collectively this Later in the evening we prepared in DIVINE NATURE as we did the Puja to Her in the form of Shri Krishna. It was very joyous anticipation for the arrival of the HOLY MOTHER It was a momemtous occasion. powerful, intense, and certainly all the yogis could feel some many strong vibrations. I was The vibrations were one of the most powerful I have ever felt. When MOTHER arrived a in awe of this great, auspicioLus event! red curtain was opened so that OUR MOTHER could have privacy as SHE was After the Puja each country offered gifis to SHRI MATAJI. I was pnvileged enoug. to be near SHRI MATAJI as Vasu, the coordinator of New York/New Jersey tried to find the vases that were bought from the placed from the wheelchair to the throne, which was a beautifully decorated chain in blue and gold. SHRI MATAJI did not speak at this Puja. SHE did not need to speak. We all felt the LOVE and Power and most of all, the regional areas of USA, We could not find Protection, that was emanating from HER them and only just a few minutes before SHRI MATAJI was supposed to leave he was able presence. A puja to Ganesha was first held as the children offered flowers at HER Lotus Feet. to locate them By then it was too late to offer Then the Puja was held to SHRI KRISHNA. the gifts so Vasu left them on the corner of the HER face was very powerful and as far as my stage as I helped him in this endeavour. It was

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze then that SHRI MATAJI was leaving and I was fortunate enough to be so close so HER physically as SHE was wheeled down the ramp in the wheelchair by Manoj. It was at this point that I was privileged enough to bow to SHRI MATAL SHE looked at me, I felt as if THE GREATEST OF ALL MOTHERS communicating to me through HER vibrations which were Divine! As SHE looked at me, SHE no longer was human but DIVINE! Then SHRI MATAJI left. We were all speechless and in awe at what had just ocurred! It was truly an experience of such great power! All the pujas are becoming more was talking to me and stating. This is à great and more powerful and the Vibrations are illusion! I am not this body but I am EVERYTHING in this life! My nature is of Divine level. You can know all of this NOW becoming so incredibly strong. Who could have known that achieving our realization in this lifetime we would be able to reach this if you desire!" The beautiful thing about this is that MOTHER does not have to say anything But it is our Kundalini's connections to HER that allows us to understand instantly what the Divine would like for us mere human beings to understand!! As SHE looked at me, I felt level of being so close to THE GODDESS and all HER LOVE. Who could have known that Sahaja Yoga and THE ADI SHAKTI would allow us to grow to such a high level and experience so many beautiful things! How lucky and fortunate we are to be Sahaja Yogis! vibrationally this Great Woman and Great Love to all and Jai Shri Maaji, Incarnation of the Mother Mary Herself Anna Mancini - New York.

 A LETTER OF SHRI MATAJI (Translation of a Marathi Letter of Shri Mataji) LONDON 11th July, 1980 To, Sahaja Yogis, Received your cable on the eve of Gura Purnima. The sentiments, which you have expressed in very beautiful words have gone to heart.. On the occasion of Guru Purnima day celebrations in London, I explained what is self realisation and whether you have got it or not. I will send the tape recording of this speech with some one instead of sending it by post. suggested, in my earlier letters, to think of "Atma tattwa". Because you are "Atma Swaroop", your mind, intellect and ego, should be enlightened by the "atma-jyoti". The light of wisdom shines in the intellect only when Atma-jyoti illumines in its fullness. Then, mind emits fragrance of love and ego does great and noble works, the whole of your inner being is fully enlightened. You should be able to rely on the Atma tattwa, accommodate others in it, but first stabilize it. Many of the Sahaja Yogis have cured a number of diseases. They have immense love for me and others These people could do all this because they have become experts owing to their "Poorva-Sampada". However, there are many intellectuals among us who have not been able to go very far on the strength of their knowledge or wisdom. Sahaja Yoga is lacking in books We will have to write books in each language. Also, Sahaja Yogis should go to differenent cities and give lectures. Many people send their poems to me. We should collect all these. Similarly my letters can also be printed. Such publicity is necessary. Let it be known all over the world that Sahaja Yoga is the only way to save the world in Kaliyuga. I am writing a book but it is not useful to all at present. All should think on what I have suggested. Every centre may also be accordingly advised. Many blessings from Mother to all Sahaja Yogis. Always remembering you Your mother NIRMALA (Maha Avtar 1980)

 SHRI MAHALAKSHMI 9. PUIA KOLHAPUR Ist January. 1983 नमस्ते गरुडारूढ़े कोलासुर भयंकरिं। सर्वपाप हरे देवी, महालक्ष्मी नमो स्तुते।| Namaste garudarude Kolhasur-bhayankari, sarvapaphare Devi MahaLakshmi namostute -Padma Purana (Salutations to Thee, who is mounted on the Garuda bird and is terror to Rakshsa Kolhasura. Who is the remover of all sins, O' Devi Mahalakshmi, obeisance to Thee) principle, its perfect. It is born as perfect, will remain as perfect, will be always eternally perfect so that it is not necessary to be corrected Now this Mahalakshmi thing I am discussing here because you may be able to go today to see the temple of Mahalakshmi. Now the temple of Mahalakshmi when you go there, you have to know that this deity has come out of the Mother Earth, in this particular place. That means this place has got a capacity Today again is a new year's day. Every new year comes, because we have to take to something that is new. It has been so arranged that the sun has to move for 365 days and again a new year has come. Actually the whole solar-system is moving in a spiral way. So, there is definitely a higher, higher state of this solar system, Every year it is rising higher in a spiral way So it is not only that-it is because 365 days have passed-because it has moved a step forward higher than what it was. Now we can see that in awareness, human beings have definitely risen much higher than what they were, say, about 2000 years back. But, the first system that started the whole universe to give you a force. You can say, an additional force or an intensive feeling of evolution. If you are sensitive enough you can see that, you can feel it and you can do it. If you are not so sensitive you are still so conditioned and still outside, that may not work out. I mean all kinds of things can be done, but if was the first model, you can say was created. And that model has to be perfect. And that was a perfect model which then started t somebody wants to remain a stone you cannot perfecting the rest of it. So that is the perfect model which is in the principle of this ascent. And that is working out this ascent. Now, the perfection of the rest of the universe takes do anything about it So this Mahalakshmi principle is working out in this place Kolhapur. Normally, this place should be very very warm because of its place in various directions. position. But even in summer this place keeps very cool because of the vibrations, from the temple that is emitted. The people in this place But today we have to consider the Mahalakshmi Principle. Now Mahalakshmi, as I told you, is a perfect principle. It's a perfect may not be so aware either We cannot say if

 Issue: 11 & 12 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze positivity. But how I know that, I cannot tel you because I just don't know how to tell you they are aware. Because as negativity has to come forward, there are lots of sugar factories and lots of alcoholism going on here. that. But I just know that such a person is definitely positive and such person is negative. But we have to take the best advantage of every place which is created specially for a particular purpose. So, it is a pilgrimage in a a. The positivity lies in understanding why are way that we are here. That we have to look we here? First of all, why are we on this earth? Why are we human beings? In understanding what are we doing about it? Why are we Sahaja Yogis? What a Sahaja Yogi has to do? What is his responsibility as a Sahaja Yogi? Then he moves forward to understand why Mother is so kind to me? Why have I got after our Mahalakshmi Principle of our ascent. As you know, this ascent starts at the Nabhi and is surrounded by the Guru- principle. Now the Guru Principle within us, if it is upset, if it is juxtapositioned, placed in juxtaposition where if it is not properly embedded within us to the nerves, if it is not vibrations? Why am I among very few who have got this special blessing, the special knowledge of vibratory awareness? And then to ask yourself what am I doing about it? Am I still very much emedded in my cheapishness or in my childishness, in my stupidity, in my harshness, in my aggressiveness? We always see these things in other people, not in ourselves! So we are not Sahaja Yogis. We should understand at that point, when we start emitting through our character and behaviour, Mahalakshmi tattwa cannot be established. Mahalakshmi tattwa is strengthened through Guru principle. Now we are lucky today because there was the birthday of Dutta, the Duttatreya just the other day when we had the Pooja, and today is this Mahalakshmi puja. So two things together we have got together. seeing these things in other people, then we are not Sahaja Yogis. We should see in ourselves and emit pure compassion to others. First was the Dutt puja and today is this puja of Mahalakshmi. So, to have the Guru principle all right, we But always people see that, it is in anotl.. person this exists. Whatever must make our Dharmas correct. Now these Dharmas, as I have told you many times, are I may try to say 1 they always see in other person. ten, and we should look after these ten Dharmas in a very careful manner. These are expressed outside, but whatever is inside comes out. Now I find when you people talk, and you say things, I know that this person is negative, that person is definitely positive. Now supposing there is a negative person amongst us. You need not be compassionate to that person On the contrary better be away. Get rid of that person, as far as possible, don't have anything to do. It is a definite sign of great compassion to yourself, if not to others. There are so many ways of expression of

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004 The Divine Cool Brecze 9. Better not have anything to do with the person who is negative, if you have to come up. He understanding in brain' is important. Because may be your brother, sister, anyone. But try to Mahalakshmi tattwa ultimately works in the be away from a person who is not positive. It brain, is the enlightenment of the brain. It is causes lots of problems. I have been telling done by Mahalakshmi tattwa It gives you the you this and I have been requesting you, but conditioning is such that still though you have become a Guru, you don't understand that you have to be detached. For a Guru there is no brother, sister or any other relationship. things. I have to ascend. This is why I am Except for the relationship of the Mother, there here? What am I supposed to do?" Now is no other relationship. One of these principles logically you convince your brain, first of that are to be understood, very important I all. It is very important now after feel, is for all of you "That our relationship is realisation, because if logically your brain of all, try to clarify your ideas and your So in the brain you must clarify. Reach logically; Logically we must reach the conclusion 1 don't have to do these things, I have to do these only to Mother and to Sahaja Yogis and not to any relationship which has come to us, whether through a Sahaja Yogi or whether does not understand, it will always be cheapish, childish, indignified or could be harsh, horribly oppressive. It could be one through anything else". Now this I have been explaining because our Mahalakshmi tattwa is not all right. That is why we get sort of fritter of these. So, in Guru tattwa, there are ten elements. Five of them deal with the weight. "Weight". away, lost into these things. Guru is the Weight, Weight, Weight of a person. How much weight you have got? The gravity, as we call it. Person has a gravity. When he talks how much balance he has got And the Mahalakshmi tattwa has to be like an ascending force, all put together. Like my father used to give an example, that supposing you have collected lots of wheat and you spread it on the ground, it will be all lost. It will be spread out like this side, that side, it will be all lost. But if you put it in a bag, it will rise in height, naturally. It will have those maryadas; wuiren It will rise and it will go higher and higher. In the same way this principle of Mahalakshmi can spread just across like that and can just destroy all that Mother has given us and all that we have had all these IkS See in Indian Music, we call it q, (Vazan) means the weight The weight of the person, means when he is dealing with himself or with others, how much weight he carried. In English also they use this-weight. How much weight he carries with others? Means, how much he can really impress others? If you impress too much then the person will say, "Oh! it is too much'. That is a very big quality with western people, is, "Oh! that is to0 years, only by spreading it out. Now to collect it inside, is to pay attention to yourself. First much!" "They have an idea, you see this is all

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze 10 ego oriented. That is too much. If you tell And the another point is how much them too much, Oh! that is too much. She is magnetism you have? So you reverse back to yourself. The magnetism is a magic, is to magic of a person. A person is magnetic because he has certain magic. Now this magic comes from your own personality, from your own personality. So the basis of magnetism on the left hand side starts and that basis is Shri too much. I move slowly, slowly". 'It is toe much for me'. It is very common. It is very common reaction So how much weight you have? And the second one is the quality of magnetism. Two things-weight & magnetism. First is the quality of weight; that's how much dignified you are? How you talk? How your language is? How your behaviour is? You should be humane, But sometimes, even with Ganesha Shri Ganesha is the basis of that magnetism. So your innocence; innocence is the best way to have that magnetism. Magnetism you cannot explain in material way It is not a material stuff But it is something abstract, comes from your quality of Ganesha, Shri Ganesha. Such a person is magnetic. Magnetic means such a person attracts other person because of the weight of the person, because of the quality of the person. Such a person attracts, but does not attract for lust, greed and non-sensical things. But attracts another person because of the fragrance of love in the subjects. Now it is always confused, confused because it is such an abstract thing So one must understand it in a very subtle way. What is the magnetism-that one should understand. You see, there are some gestures people use artificially which normally they have been using just to attract other people, the way they walk, the way they dress, the way they live, All these things are of no use. It is something so inner, that fragrance is so inner which must be developed. But in Sahaja Yoga I have seen, people just do not bother about it. Just do not bother. They think the way they have been living, the way they have been doing this-say if they are English, they are English, if me, I find, people talk in a very funny manner, just don't understand, how it is that always they say the wrong thing. I mean, whenever they have to say one sentence, they will say a wrong thing. It is absolutely with them. It is also Vishuddhi, which is also Nabhi, Comes from Nabhi because you must know that Vishuddhi Chakra is the ascent of the Nabhi Chakra. So what happens is that the person, whatever he is, is expressed through his language, through his behaviour, through his face, through his nose, his eyes, everything, through the Vishuddhi Chakra. So the ascent of the Nabhi is expressed, shown through the Vishuddhi Chakra. Now whatever you have in the Nabhi, is shown here. Supposing, now a person who has the Mahalakshmi tattwa properly developed, such a person will have a way of dealing with another person when he will have the weight, as well as the understanding, how far to go with the person? How far to carry on with that person? How far to talk to a person? How far to think about it? How much importance to be given? That is one point, is very important.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: Il & 12 - 2004 II your wife, not to your husband, not to your sister, not to your country, not to anyone but to Mother 'Complete dedication' gives you that charisma, or that attraction. In Sahaja Yoga such a person becomes really attractive and such a person has it. they are French they are French, if they are Indians they are Indians, if they are from Kolhapur they will be from Kolhapur. These ideas first must be curbed off. Because the fragrance spreads everywhere whether you are English or any one. So the fragrance of a person develops through, first of all, the Ganesha Principle within. Ganesha Principle is Now some people think that if you are a very passive person and if anybody says anything to you and you don't mind, sort of a person, to be first of all seen to. Now a Ganesha person is not a person who is absolutely a you are charismatic. It is not. People like you remorse type or a person who is such a gone because they can dominate you. They like you case that even if you beat him up and make him into a complete minsed thing, he will bear it. It's not like that, it's not that. On the contrary, because they can dominate you. Not if you think that by your aggressiveness and by your shouting and by your screaming at these the quality of magnetism is such that it attracts people, you will achieve that charismatic you to a point where 'you' are not disturbed. Now this is a very important point we should know. You see, if you have other loves, love like carnal love and all other love you have, temperament, you cannot. You cannot achieve that height. So how do you achieve it? By becoming more innocent. Now how innocence develops in a person is then that love may attract the person, then that person can destroy you and it destroys you, always. But this attraction does not destroy, does not destroy. The attraction is upto that point that you are not destroyed, because you being much higher, much deeper and much weightier, you cannot be destroyed by a thing that whom you are attracting. Always the greater magnet attracts the smaller magnet. And that is what one should understand. This magic and this charisma, charismatic temperament of a person, comes by, first of all, the Ganesh tattwa, innocence. And secondly by complete dedication and devotion. Those who are completely by not thinking about it. Like you see somebody asked me, 'how do you manage your Income Tax?" I said, "By having no income at all'. Then they asked me, 'How do you solve your car problem?' By not having any car at all of mine. They said, 'What about your house problem?" By having no house of my own. "Nihi, Nihi." Everything Nihi for me. Then how do you Sir solve your this problem, By not having it, just have no, not have it, Don't take up headaches upon yourself See when you take up headaches upon yourself, then only the innocence is reduced. That headaches like this, that this is my shawl, this ' is my sari, this is my thing, this is this, this is this, this is this. But only one thing is that dedicated and devoted to Mother. Not to *anything' else. Ganesh tattwa again. Not to

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004 12 The Divine Cool Breeze "simple' innocence and it all works out very well, It is so clean It just says what it knows and what it knows is the highest *this is my Mother and I have to proclaim Her', that is all. If that is the way it is, then innocence starts rising like Shri Ganesha and by having no other headache. So this de-conditioning has to be brought This is 'mine', that is mine This 'mine' within us. But you should not discuss it among business causes the problem, I think. Personally I think this must be the reason. That this 'mine' business. Because whatever is mine, somebody told me- this is very good argument she gave-Whatever is mine is not I, means that is yourself also. Once you start discussing then you also-it becomes sort of a theological "This is mine." argumentation There is no theology about it It is very simple. It is the simplest thing-'is to be innocent'. But the innocence is lost, why? 15 Because our attention is in different way, we not Sahaja. My body, my head, my everything-'my'. But 'I'? -she gave me this idea-- T. What is T? Then 'I' is separated, Whatever is not mine is T'. So what remains is your Spirit. Somebody gave me this argument. I said this is good argument to are attentive to other things. We are looking at other things. It is so simple, you know. Today I was thinking I have to buy three nine yard saris. A simple question as it is, because there were three ladies who wear nine yard saris and I had to give them three nine yard saris. That is all. I Just thought of it. All nght. work it out Then whatever remains is the 'T and that I' is the one we have to see to. So I came here, I saw very nice saris being put here. So I asked her. Where do you get these?" She said "You get it here'. I said All right'. So you go and buy these three saris, no analysis, nothing of the kind. It just came into my mind that I have to buy three saris, finished. The answer is here So even the atmosphere is so innocent, the whole situation is so innocent that the solution is presented u you go on reducing all these mines, mines, mines- So the pure spirit of innocence will rise. So the idea about Spirit also people think that if you become spiritual, I mean, I don't know what people think about spiritual people Why the idea about spiritual people is that they have to be sharp like a fox or you have to be intellectual like Freud or something All sorts of ideas people havel No, it is not! Spiritual person is just innocent, just' innocent. There is no intelligence, nothing Just innocence. The whole thing is innocence. So whatever he talks or says comes through innocence It does not have intellect as such, which here people have it through reading and through understanding and by analysing Nothing of the kind. It just has 'pure' and innocence to innocent. Innocence works out in everything, you see because every body has little bit of innocence in them, isn't it? So you can-it is like a fifth column you see The innocence is a fifth column within you. So if any person is innocent, you see he will work on your fifth column and will make you all right. When you give bandhan (2a) to others, what happens? You actually bind him by your

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004 13 The Divine Cool Breeze innocence and the poor fellow does not know: He has his innocence within him, you capture that innocence, that is all you have done, that's coming to you, automatically. Just don't project your minds into it. Just you wil get answers to every question just like that. Because innocence in anyone is the how you manage It is very simple to work out thing. Only principle, the tattwa, the whole thing rests on what - 'tattwa'-is simple answer where all the complications drop out innocently. nothing but innocence. And that is what is the love of God, is the love of God. So don't confuse this with love, So try to develop this by all these things fd a (Neti, Neti)-saying not this, not this. Not with all your non-sensical love, ideas you have about people and identification, misidentification This is pure love within us, this, not this 'to all your faults.* Not this, not this, not this, not this',-you reach there, 'Not mine, not mine, not mine, not mine'-you reach there. And that is how it is, and you see the the purity, the innocence is love and which is life itself, we should say, is a part of that, the prized. But pranashakti is not Mahalakshmi, so Mahalakshmi is the *essence' and whole material world is not attacking the innocence, because they are frightened. You essence" of everything. Because if creation has to take place, also, if desire of God is cannot attack. Innocence cannot be destroyed. It cannot be destroyed. Innocence is there and if there is no Mahalakshmi tattwa, then what is the use of having desire,-is something, is all pervading and it cannot be destroyed. So whatever people may try, it cannot be destroyed. But it can be covered, it can recede, but it cannot be destroyed, it will act it's own way So try to develop that finished. Supposing even if you have creation and you don't have Mahalashmi tattwa, how you work it out? You cannot work it out, will you You have to have Mahalakshmi tattwa. innocence which is the basis of Mahalakshmi Because they don't have any meaning. tattwa, we should say, 'or that is essence of Mahalakshmi tattwa". So the outward things, the weightage, the weight, the dignity, the behaviour, everything. It is outward thing and the inside thing. The tattwa, the principle, on So outwardly it is Mahalakshmi tattwa, but inside, inside is, we can say, there are three cores. The first core is Mahalakshmi tattwa outside to look at, you see the growth alright. which it is based, is innocence. But inside is the creation, that is all the elements being created and all that. But inside that is the desire and inside the desire is the half-one, Now if it is this, if we understand Mahalakshmi tattwa within us, how it has to work out? It is you can say, is Ganesha. So this Ganesh tattwa definitely overpowers everything and permeates through everything And this is, I would say, that don't think about it. Just allow not intellectual. Again I would say that, I don't want you to project your intellect into it, and to find out. But just remain where you are and you will find the answers just

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004 The Divine Cool Brecze 14 your innocence to grow, simple innocence and your dignity. That is very important, to have your dignity Like some people think if they wear tall clothes and walk about on the street, and all will think that they are big sanyasis. It is wrong Why? You are not being dignified and God has given you so much! Why should you try to show that you have not got anything? Just to show that you have not got anything? Just to show off that you have not got anything God has given. This is just a sort of thanks giving to God you have given me so much, you have to wear the best. Like in Puja if you see the ladies here wear all their noserings and all their ornaments and everything, in the temple, everything they wear. And in same way, men also wear their very clean dresses, very clean things, whatever they have. They wear simple clean dresses, whatever they have. But no showing off, it is just a thing by which you express, the God has given you this. *O God! L thank you'. Kolhasura was killed, where this was established. So Mahalakshmi incarnation came in and that is how this place has a special value, that we have come here for a pilgrimage and let us, in a humble way, think about it. Actually these things could not take place in the West. Because even if they had come out of the Mother Earth who would have recognised them? Who would have known about them? Who should have respected them? Who would have worshipped them? That is why it did not happen in the West too much. But it is there, little bit is there, no doubt. But here now we have these, all these temples and the attack on the innocence has come from the tantrikas. And so the tantrikas rented out this temple and they tried to establish themselves. And gradually they are being neutralised and cleaned out. These tantrikas have gone into every temple of all the Goddesses, and they will be gradually all out, straight out. So this is the attack that came through and that how these brahmins came down and settled in these places-so called It is such a great day today to be the new year, on the new year day to be here on brahmins-and tried to preach about all tantrik method and things here in the temple and they Mahalakshmi's place of Kolhapur. And this is also called Kolhapur because Kolhasura was really' spoilt the atmosphere here. killed here. Kolhasura was horrible fellow like a fox and he was born again Now he is again dead. Thank God! He was here and now he is dead. Kolhasura died. You don't think about it, again your mind goes out Don't think about it, I will tell you about it. I have deliberately So may God bless you all. I want you people to develop concentration of mind so that you rise above all other misidentifications and get identified with the 'Pure Spirit' through your Mahalakshmi principle. avoided the name. He was born again and May God bless you. was pitched out. So this is the place where (From Nirmala Yoga)

 TO UNDERSTAND SAHAJA YOGA YOU NEED A SHRADDHAVAN HEART Birthday Celebrations, Mumbai 21-3-1977 love. If you know a person, it makes no All the Sahaja Yogis who have come here, all the other people who have joined us here, who are celebrating this earthly Birthday of mine, I am very thankful, very grateful and I am filled with great joy and happiness and my vibrations are flowing from my eyes as tears accord on you because you know him from outside, but if you love a person then you know the person out and out You know him so well, you know him, everything the way he is, It is this knowledge that is what we call the Para knowledge. That is the knowledge we have to seek. All these books are only signalling towards that. They are the milestones which are telling us 'Go ahead, Go ahead'. They do to see that in this Kaliyuga also there are people who are grateful to a Mother who just gives the abstracting known as vibrations. Actually I do not give you. I cannot give or take, you will be surprised. It's just emitted through me. It is my Svabhava. It has to be that way, I can't help. It is a being that is being. You not solve the problem of entering into the kingdom of God. I request you that you all should come to this stage of understanding the cannot make it something else. It acts on its Divine within you, the love of God that is within own. It goes on working, It is beyond me you which is trying to overflow from you and enjoy the sense of emitting and giving. Giving to control myself from loving all of you. I do not know how people learn to hate! I has the greatest joy and pleasure. There is no haven't got sufficient time even to love pleasure in taking and when you receive it, people! I find twenty four hours much fess. I do not know how people sit down and manipulate and think in a eyesfold manner, you start giving You have heard talking about all he has done work in Rahuri. In Rahuri, when I was going to Rahuri University the how to be hateful! Hatred has no power but people in the nearby village knew that our car will be going that way. They are ordinary villagers, they have never read any yoga, they a destruction of yourself and others. On this state I would request you to think of love all the time. Love is all knowledge. do not understand anything more about vibrations than these feelings that you get. It is Knowledge is all love. It's nothing beyond. If you have knowledge, it has to pass the test of subjective knowledge. It has no work. It is a

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze 16 subjective experience which you feel on your fingers in your being, the bliss of God and as I was going, I just felt a jerk in the car because so many people were just lying on the road and some were standing on the road stopping the car and they started shouting my name. I the Satyayuga has started. This is the reason why you are seeking these vibrations on your fingers and none of these gurus and Rishis and all those people have mentioned these things because this is only possible when the Shri Chakra is brought up. It is here we have to feel it and understand. It is for all of you to was wonderstruck! accept it with an open heart. I do not want I said how did you know that I was anything from you, What can you give to me? I do not want anything but I want my in this car. They said, "Mataji you have given us vibrations. We knew this was the car which children to be happy. I pray for their was bringing us vibrations. So now you have happiness. I live for them and all the time to get down here". I just got down and embraced all of them and our Sahaja Yogis who were waiting at the other hand, I said whether I am asleep or awakened or in the middle state when they call this Sabhrant', I am just with you. Every *doesn't matter'. This is what is Sahaja, moment you are in my thought. I wish all that is loving people and at that time I just of you a very very happy new year today because it is Navrodh and Navrodh is the day when Navroh started his work on this thought of how once with Rama, how you felt those things with people, very simple people of very simple heart with shraddha, how they had those feelings of receiving your love and feeling it!. Everyone needs love. You cannot earth, he was a great Sahaja Yogi. He was an incarnation of Dattatreya himself Shastras have told you about Mohammad Saheb. I have to exist without love. Your whole being is based IS tell you that he was my father and he was the incarnation of Dattatreya himself He was not on love and I wish all of you in this country to understand that "unless and until there an ordinary person Though the people is love in your heart don't try to do tortured his life, every moment that he live. anything outside, because if you do it you they tortured him and Hazrat Ali is a very will be found out (exposed) in no time". very great incamation. They are only one. Only Every human being understands what once Brahmadeva has incarnated and he has is love. There are lots of things that are incarnated as Hazrat Ali. So, these people are happening in you. There are cosmic changes that are taking place today within you, I know that it's happening, The Shri chakra itself has descended on this earth and already so great, you cannot criticize them. They are so great. Every word that they have spoken is a Mantra. Every thing they have told you about the Namaz, it is nothing but the Kundalini

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004 17 The Divine Cool Breeze and the egoistic Tomfoolery that is going Jagruti. Mohammad Saheb has done the on is to make fun of everyone. Oh man! greatest work in Sahaja Yoga and has done please awaken yourselfr to this great occasion of understanding This dynamic force is trying to bubble out of you. We have to change this world and transform the greatest advancement as far as the Kundalini Jagruti is concemed. How can you criticize him? I can't bear to hear even a word against him. I know how much he has been it into a beautiful creation because the tortured and the same people today are governing this country who are talking against creator will not allow his creation to be destroyed. If you do not accept the truth you will be destroyed. So please, please, him! When you cannot reach even at his feet why should you take such a big step? again as a Mother I ask you to accept the Divine Truth, the Divine Love and to be one. I wish all of you, all the Sahaja Yogis and all the people who are seeking the greatest of Understand what have you done in life? What have you got with yourself that you are criticizing these great personalities! Khwaza Nizzamudin Saheb was a great Aulia, there is greatest, the highest of highest achievements in the awareness of God and His love. That is what it is, otherwise the rest of it is all useless. Those who have sought other kind of Satvik no doubt about it, and a horrible king like Khilji tried to trouble him and he himself was murdered and his name has gone to the dying desk. Today Khwaza Nizamuddin Saheb, you or Tamsik things in life have gone to waste. and go and see the vibrations there. You go They have gone to hell and they are completely see at Chisti and see his Makbara, also at destroyed. You do not want to do that. You are simple people, ordinary people and that's Ajmer Sharif, you will see the same. At Patna you go and see Patna Saheb where you have why you are the best people because you do got our Mahaveer Saheb, also vibrations are not suffer from any extremes. You have a very simple heart, you are leading a very religious there. All these people are speaking of the same truth I am telling you, but today you can life and a sanctified married life. This place is make them out. You will know who they are. for the people who are in the middle path of Lord Buddha. Sahaja Yoga is the integration of all the truths of life and I can prove it to you on the Kundalini that what I say is the Please try to humble down yourself. First of all get this eternal truth within yourself. Let your being be that subjective instrument to understand what is God. fact, is the fact. Unless and until you take the name of Hazrat Ali Saheb, your Swadhishthana Don't be driven away by a few readings here and a few readings there. Don't be Chakra cannot be cured and all the Sahaja Yogis know about it. And in the Sahaja Yogi driven away by these small hearted ideas

 Issue: I1 & 12 - 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze 18 Puja we have to take the name of Mohammad in the programmes you can listen to my Saheb again and again and that of Hazrat Ali lectures by which you will understand. But it is not the understanding through your and also we have to take the name of Jesus, hearing but it is the understanding through your heart and through your feeling of The Lord who is the ashraya of this world described by Shri Krishna in the Bhagwat Gita, He was the Mahavishnu. You can read it for vibrations, only you can get the Kundalini. Yesterday I have very much requested you and again I am requesting you that to understand Sahaja Yoga you don't need yourself and you will be suprised that all that the described for Mahavishnu are absolutely the same as Jesus Christ was, So I request too much of brains. What you need is a you not to be small minded, you have not heart, is a shraddhavan heart, and if you known the truth so far. So, try to understand it, to be subjective, to feel it, to understand it. All the books are saying the same things as I am saying, only thing that I can do it. I am not doing it. It is just happening. I have come on this earth just for this ignition This is the last point of ignition This has to happen and this will happen. Let us see in this country, in this beautiful yogabhumi how many people accept it. May God Bless You All, Again and Again have that it will work out. The time has come for many flowers to be fruits. The time is there. I thank you again and again for showing this great love to me. It's like when I feel the ocean of my love when it flows to the shore of all your hearts, the shore gives it back as a reaction. It's a parabolic movement, when my love passes through you and comes back to me as love I enjoy it. It's such a beautiful I bless you, I am going to London on the experience. I mean it is a different experience perhaps that cannot be coined or put into the bottles. Thank you very much again and again. I thank all the trustees and all of you again and again. May God Bless You with all ins prosperity, with all its goodness, kindness and the eternal Param Chaitanya should descend on you all your values. twenty fifth and hope all of you who have got realisation in last two days will again come to our programme in Bharati Vidhya Bhavan, on tuesday we have a centre. We have also a very nice centre in Arya Samaj Rd. I hope all of you will take deeper interest into Sahaja Yoga, learn all the methods and master the Kundalini. There are so many among us who know about it and you can talk to them. Even

 Faith, Devotion and Resignation REALISATION A Milk-maid used to supply milk to a Brahmin Priest living on the other side of a river Owing to the irregularities of the boat service, she could not supply him milk punctually everyday. Once, being rebuked for her coming late, the I did not know Sahajyoga upto January, 1980. But I always harboured in my heart an ambition to achieve something in Yoga' invented by our ancient people. And due to poor woman said, "what can I do? I start early from my house, but have to wait for a this, I had an attraction towards, "Yoga' from childhood, long time at the river bank for the boatman and the passengers". The Priest said, "Woman! They cross the ocean of life by uttering the name of God, and cannot you cross this little Because of this everpresent attraction, I attended the lecture of Mataji Shri Nirmala Deviji. And in that programme of Kundalini awakening, I got a rare thread of happiness. and peace. With the help of this thread I want Tiver?" The simple-hearted woman became very to make my life, full of real peace and happiness. glad at heart on learning this easy means of crossing the river From the next day the milk was supplied in the morning. One day the Priest said to woman, "How is that you are no longer late now-a-days?" She said, "I cross the river by uttering the name of Lord as you told me to do, and I do not stand now in need of a boatman." The Priest could not believe this and said, "Can you show me how you I realise that God is present in our body also. As, through eyes-we get the sensation of vision, through nose-the sensation of smell, through ears the sensation of hearing, Kundalini is our means of realising presence of God in the world. By means of cold, clean, holy vibration given by Mataji' we feel calm and happy cross the river?" She took him with her and began to walk over the water. Looking behind, the woman saw the Priest in a sad plight and said, "How is it, Sir, that you are uttering the We can confirm the holiness of Mataji by vibrations given by her photo also. Therefore we can imagine how much great is our "Mataji". name of God with your mouth but at the same time with your hands you are trying to keep your cloth untouched by water? You do not JAI MATAJI fuily rely on him". Ravee Bhavsar Entire resignation and absolute faith in God are at the root of all miraculous deeds. A Legend (Maha Avtar 1950) Nehru Nagar, Dhulia (Maha Avtar 1980)

 Daily Observances for Sahaja Yogis All Sahaja Yogis should sit in meditation as a part of their daily routine. In the morning, meditate in the bed itself, after you are awake, for about 10 minutes. Before leaving the bed, In the evening perform Aarti' and sit in the meditation. Getting into the Bandhana and going through water treatment are essential before going to bed. bow in reverence to mother earth thrice. Get into the "Bandhana', and go first to the place of worship (where H.H. Mataji's photograph is placed). Bow in great devotion before the photograph, offer prayers and then do other Always mention HH. Mataji with great regards and speak Her praise. Proper decorum must be observed when She is present physically. We must be very humble, receptive, and full of devotion Speak only when She asks something. There should be no interference in Her speech. She is omnipotent, omnipresent and omniscient We should accept everything She tells us and practise it. At the time of H H Mataji's pooja or when She arrives to a place, never offer flowers or vermilion on Her head, always Her lotus feet are to be worshipped. We should make it a point not to touch Her feet without Her permission. work. Perform Pooja only after bath. The seat (31T) used for the pooja should be kept clean. Material for the pooja should be of high quality and separately preserved. Even the broom for cleaning the place of worship should be separate. Water should be fresh from the tap and should be collected just before commencing the Pooja. If copper vessels are available, they may be preferred to other vessels. Cloth, preferably red, for cleaning the photograph should be washed and cleaned All Sahaja Yogis should remember that pooja and meditation are of paramount properly and it should not be used elsewhere, importance to them in life. If one wants to deserve the blessings of cosmic Mother While performing the pooja; first clean the photograph with water Wipe it dry with cloth. Apply vermilion, offer flowers, 'Bel' leaves (de T) etc., recite "Mantra' thrice and Jagadamba, total surrender, complete faith and a heart full of devotion are essential. Nothnn can be achieved by asking questions, expressing doubts for thinking. bow before the photograph (gu After the pooja sit in meditation for sometime and get into the Bandhana. Pooja should be performed only after bath and the place of pooja should be kept clean. Rahul Bahan Agra Road, Dhule (Maharashtra) (Maha Avtra -1980)

 APHORISMS OF PATANJALI Vs SAHAJA YOGA Patanjali's aphorisms on Yoga, knowni as Patanjali Yoga. Sutras is one of the outstanding works on Yoga and has been acciaimed as an authority on Yoga since time immemorial. According to some scholars these were (b) Knowledge by inference (Anumana); (c) Knowledge gained from teachings of great people whose minds are free from temptation, jealousy, hatred, illusion etc. and who are interested in the welfare of others. (Aptavakyam). This vrittis is "Agam' compiled to counter evil effects of Buddhism which was then degenerated and which also had the patronage of rulers. The aphorisms are divided into four parts or chapters known as Samadhi's Pad, Sadhana Pad, Vibhuti Pad, 2. Mistaking one thing for another (Viparyaya). and Kaivalya Pad. 3. Delusion (Vikalpa) Knowledge conveyed only in words without having anything corresponding in existence. In the second aphorism of Samadhi Pad, Yoga has been defined as restraining the activities or thought waves of mind (Chittavritti nirodha). Mind is made of Satva Guna, Rajo 4. Sleep. It is that vritti, in which absence of all vrittis is experienced. Tamo Guna Guna and Tamo Guna and activities of the completely dominates the mind and makes it and other sense organs inactive: mind correspond to domination of one or more of these Gunas. When mind becomes This experience itself is a vritti and is called sleep (Nidra) thoughtless due to restraining of vrittis, the self (atma) rests in his own state and at other times 5. Memory. Any experience leaves behind its impressions in mind which remain dormant till similar circumstances he is identified with vrittis. Vrittis are classified as under :- 1. Right Knowledge (Pramana) reactivate them. These vrittis are This is further classified as memories (a) Knowledge from direct perception The activities of the mind can be stopped by constant practice of prolonging the gap (Pratyaksha);

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: I1 & 12 - 2004 22 between two vrittis and detachment. Stoppage of vrittis is followed by Samadhi. In order to difficult to attain. Sadhana Pad explains how to proceed step by step. The first step is, (a) reach this stage meditation on gross, subtle meditation and internal and extermal purity and and subtler objects is suggested and ultimately mortification (Tapas). (b) study (Swadhyay) fine objects are also meditated upon to make (c) devotion to God (Ishwar Pranidhan). Next the mind thoughless. However, in this state of step would be constant practice of mind individual consciousness exists. This is Sampradnyat Samadhi. The next stage of Asampradnyat Samadhi, is achieved by being different from matter and mind not being prolonging the state of mind in which the mind is free from all vrittis including those related to is Yoga of eight stages (Ashtanga Yoga). It individual consciousness. "I' consciousness is must be noted here that Patanjali does not removed in Asampradnyat Samadhi, although even mention the Yogic Postures (Yogasans) certain impressions of previous Karmas and which are mastered by the people after long experiences exist. Progress to reach this state ardous practice. He only says the posture for depends upon dedication and confidence that meditation should be firm and pleasant by constant practice realization of the self can (Sthirasukhamasanam). He has not attached be achieved through Asampradnyat Samadhi One more way is devotion to God (Ishwar also, and has devoted only five aphorisms to Pranidhan). According to Patanjali, manifesting it. While discussing Ashtanga Yoga, he had word of God is Pranava and by repetition of again emphasised devotion to God this word and thinking on its meaning introspective power is increased and physical and mental obstructions are removed discnmination between real and unreal and firm conviction in mind about Purusha, the spirit affected by any vritti. Further step suggested much importance to breath-control (Pranayam) Last three stages of Ashtanga Yoga viz., Dharana, Dhyan and Samadhi which are related to inner development have been Asampradnyat Samadhi is of two types. Sabeeja, and Nirbeeja ie., with or without attachment to wordly objects, which exists in very subtle form, (seeds). Subtle impressions called Samaskars if not destroyed get awakened at an opportune time and make discussed in Vibhuti Pad. These three are to be practised with reference to one object (Desh-some scholars call it Chakra). Dharna is holding the mind on to some object. Unbroken flow of knowledge from that object is Dhyan and when the form of the object is given up and only the unexpressed meaning is öne do good or bad deeds. Also realization of the self is not possible unless these are reflected, the state is Samadhi. When all the three are practised together, it is called Samyam. Even this practice does not lead to seedless (Nirbeeja) Asampradnyat Samadhi, destroyed. These are removed in Nirbeeja (seedless) Asampradnyat Samadhi. Samadhis explained in Samadhi Pad are

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze 23 as subtle desires still exist Rest of Vibhuti Pad explains how different powers (Siddhis) are gained by performing Samyan However, subconscious states. Unless oscillations of mind from one state to another are stopped, performing Yoga Asanas and Pranayam, for any length of time will not lead to thoughtlessness Perhaps they must have been very useful in ancient times in the circumstances then prevailing, In modern times only Yoga Asana and Pranayam are given maximum they have little relevance in modern times: According to aphorisms they are to be discarded as obstructions in the progress. Samayam on discrimination between Chitta and Purusha (the spirit) has been suggested for realization of the self importance and preparatory stages like extemal and internal purity, devotion to God, study of scriptures are completely ignored. However, unless subtle desires are completely destroyed realization of the self is not possible. It is stated in Kaivalya Pad that only those desires will manifest themselves for Patanjali's Yoga has goodness of its own but from his methods it may be easily concluded that it is not only difficult to practice, to achieve the goal of Nirvana in this modern time, but also it is not at all possible for the ordinary person with family life toiling for even which environment are most suitable. Other remain stored up till proper environments are available. Subtle desires are held together by cause and effect, in that they are the causes of good or bad deeds and the deeds in turn create further desires by leaving behind subtle impressions of the experiences. These are stored in mind Response to external matters also creates further new desires. Desires obstruct discrimination between real and unreal, the existence of his own and hence comes the importance of Sahaja Yoga with its sim imple devices but with complete surrender to achieve the fulfilment of life and to arouse the virtues already existing in us by the kind grace of our Divine Mother H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi. ie between the spirit (real) and mind (unreal) whereas such discrimination is the only way attaining Kaivalya after the attainment of Asampradnyat Samadhi Sahaja Yogis, begin with thoughtless of awareness kindly granted to them by H.H. Mataji in no time, by awakening and raising their Kundalini to Sahasrar, when they also Sadhana Pad and part of Vibhuti Pad suggest practical methods. Nevertheless, by themselves the aphorisms are of little help without proper guidance from a right master, dedication and devotion. It is difficult to attain receive Divine Vibrations. The thoughtless, blissful awareness, which the Divine Mother grants to Sahaja Yogis, in short time, would more or less correspond to, depending upon individual physical, mental conditions, a stage of Asampradnyat Samadhi with attachment to wordly matters. thoughtless stage by following various methods suggested in Sadhana Pad. Chitta Vrittis arise due to mind going into supraconscious, and

 Issue: 11 & 12- 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze 24 मे (Tatra Niratishayam Sarvadnya Beejam). Vibrations are Pranava flowing from her (Tasya Vachaka Pranava) which remove obstructions of ailments and other defects from physical and mental beings Vibratory awareness helps Outside the meditation stage mind is free to its own way. Involvement in routine life causes the mind to oscillate between sub- go conscious and supra-conscious, which would be avoided by keeping attention in central channel (Sushumna) By a little practice mind develops habit of coming back to the centre guarding against possible impediments in the progress. She is so kind that She grants realisation and thoughtless awareness to all. after doing its work. Attention could Devotion to Her is Ishwar Pranidhan which subsequently be raised to heart and then sahastrar. It may thus be possible to stabilize in thoughtless awareness state when Kundalini destroys seeds of previous deeds and makes salvation a distinct possibility. Devotion is total surrender and attachment rests in sahastrar External badhas are from the very spirit. She is supreme and knows automatically cleared. H.H. Mataji has stressed the importance of stabilising in thoughtless present, past and future of every one. awareness state as attaining the next stage i.e मत्समः पातकी नास्ति पापध्नी त्चत्समा न हि। Nirvikalpa, is possible only after stabilising in एवं ज्ञात्वा महादेवी यथायोग्य तथा कुरू।। this state. (Maha Avtar-1980) H.H. Mataji is sakshat Adi Shakti. Her powers are all pervading. She is omniscient.

 Love and Marriage five of the hardest years in this life. This was Before Sahaja Yoga, everything has an element of danger in it because we do not know what is really happening in any situation or how we really feel. Love and marriage is a due not to the difficulty of any of the things that Sahaja Yoga involves but to my own ignorance, stubbornness, insensitivity and laziness-fine qualities for a saint! I actually hindered my own progress. dicey game with very unpredictable outcomes. With the advent of our Mother's grace into our lives with the gift of our own Self-realisation it is possible for all life's previous uncertainties to be washed away and the confusions replaced by the clear view of absolute values. But anether danger can arise once we have In the West the problems are different from those facing Eastern seekers, but in many things we all share the same difficulties but perhaps disguised in slightly different ways. One of these is the question of love and marriage, it is a rich ground for negativity to attack-after come to Sahaja Yoga if we do not realise that Self-realization does not mean instant perfection all the family forms the base for our lives. For (for majority of seekers). Our judgements do not become infallible overnight, they have to grow in wisdom, just as in any newborn child myself the problems lay in the forming of my own very unrealistic ideas as to how marriage would come to me and what it would entail we have to imbibe knowledge with understanding, it cannot be blindly memorised. The Ego and Supergo battled with each other producing visions of either a cold, reliable My own experience in five years of Sahaja Yoga has been a series of revelations begining with the indeseribable feeling that the first meeting with our Mother awakens within us. The realisation that there is truth and beauty, and above all, Divinity more beautiful and real partner or a romantic besotted one. The outcome of such extremes was the same, a strong desire to avoid marriage and just dedicate myself to Mother and forget such human desires. My most recent revelations in Sahaja Yoga have come with my marriage in the presence of our most Compassionate and Understanding Mother when I felt the joy of surrender and trust in Her protection and I wept with that joy as I realised that being a than even our wildest dreams beheld. From this point my life was really changed-every part of it was transformed by this first realisation. However, this did not mean that I became a saintly and wise persons from that loving wife to my new husband was all part of the play moment, no, in some ways these have been

 Issue: 11 & 12-2004 The Divine Cool Breeze 26 Just as our Self-realisation is the beginning on the contrary-but it is the overcoming of such disturbances with love that creates the of a much greater realisation so marriage is the beginning of a much greater harmony, both have to be nurtured and allowed to grow: but bond For myself, our marriage has been blessed by a baby, our own Shri Ganesha. Words Negativity has to be fought as never before, the attacks are even more subtle and they like cannot describe the feelings that this coming event is giving us, it is a miracle. Our Mother nothing better than to play on such a special and important union. If every test and obstacle can be faced together nothing can harm you, has guided us from Hell to Heaven and wve can only thank Her and surrender at Her this does not mean there is never a cross word- Perfect Feet. Om twameva sakshat Shri Gruhalakshmi, Shri Sita Rama Sakshat, Shri Adi shakti Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah. A SAHAJA YOGI from London (Maha Avtar-1980)

 (News from Switzerland) Shri Mataji and Shri Hanumana's VISIT TO EUROPE Like the Pushpaka Flying charriot of Shri The golden feet of Shri Hanumana are so Rama, the carriers of various airlines have taken few days ago in Orlians, Gregoire arrives by car with Shri Mataji for the evening programme, But the wonderful For instance, a Shri Mataji to the four corners of Europe. Switzerland being centrally located, we are watching Shri Mataji's travel as a huge 'vardan' hall was empty. No one reached at that time given to our continent Within one month our Divine Mother is visiting Portugal, Spain, He went back to the car and told it to Shri Mataji She smifed and gave a little bandhan. France, Italy, Switzerland and Germany. She Fifteen minutes later the hall was absolutely does it aş the Satgurumata, awakening fifteen eities with well over twenty public programmes and a few pujas. The Devi Puja will be packed. Most of the people got their realization. The French Sahaja Yogis Marie, Annick, Jean-Yues and Christine, who had prepared everything, were beaming with joy. celebrated on 12th October in Zurich This breathtaking rythm gives some idea of the speed at which Sahaja Yoga has started manifesting in Europe. Thank God (Who was smiling all along at Her childrens' eagerness) In the same way in Madrid, from where we got a phone call yesterday, Shri Mataji went with only two Swiss Sahaja Yogis. Undoubtedly, the programme there was a the Sahaja Yogis who have been working out the details of this journey were clever enough to ardently pray for the help of Shri Hanumana. And as He moved in and supervised their work, each step of this complete success! Now we are going to welcome Shri Mataji the day after tomorrow at Zurich airport. Monday, She will speak in Rome. Life goes on at the speed of Shri Hanumana's jump to Lanka! We have been International pilgrimage was highly successful with superb efficiency, humour, and love. The heavenly scene of the seekers meeting with translating texts on Sahaja Yoga in the German, French, Italian, Spanish and Portugees languages and thus we are growing the one who was sought took place everywhere. Tears of gratitude in their eyes! Those shining children were taking bath in the in the collective awareness. Therefore our attention, full of respect and love, is very much on our elder brothers and newly found self And we, Sahaja Yogis, are so blessed to witness this festival of love and sisters from India. We wish that Sahaja Yoga's backbone in Maharashtra can deepen in purity.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004 28 intensity and send vibrations to all over the do it with the same love and warmth that you have always shown We need feelings, the beats of the Indian heart. Your backing, in your meditation, helps us as messengers under world. We wish that all the centres in India progress together will full coordination, synthesis and universality. And we wish that in the next time you will welcome more new the leadership of Shri Hanumana. brothers and sisters from abroad and you will Yours, Gregoire, Arneau, Antoinette, Marie-Laure, Catherine, Matthias, Brigitte (Maha Avtar-1980)

 An Experience feel something but then I thought the window Eversince I can remember, I was always was open. He asked me about my father who reading books, going to the Library and getting more and more books. Then I started travelling through Europe. I settled in London and became very fond of Pop Music, Girls, Alcohol, Drugs and the rest of it. had died a week before. It surprised me how they knew. They told me to go and see H H Mataji. She asked me if I was doing Hata Yoga, I replied in the affirmative. She just touched my hand and said my health was not good but I would be alright. Then they told As this brought only disappointment, I read more books which professed to offer peace me to ask the question - If H.H Mataji is the of mind, relaxation and good health. I ended holy spirit, I did ask and was sacred inside, Lip doing Karate, Hatha Yoga, different kinds and the fear went. We all had nice Indian of concentration, and meditation with no food and sweets and talked about Sahaja results. Yoga. I liked these people around me and they looked so familiar to me. I even asked I believed that there was somebody who knew and wanted to find the Guru who was one of them if we had met before. He always being advertised in Magazines which answered with a smile : May be in the past young people in London read about different life courses and meditations. All these Gurus I came back home and all of a sudden just wanted money which put me off. before going to bed something happened. I was completely thoughtless and felt very light. I went to lay on the bed and closed my eyes and found myself in complete silence. I tried to think but could not. I slept like a baby. One day a friend of mine told me that there is a lady from India who is teaching Yoga and he showed me the Photograph of the Divine Mother. We went along to the House in North London. It was small room we entered, about After that day I went nearly every week to twenty people were sitting on the floor before the Divine Mother. They had a chart of the HH Mataji's meetings. It was always pleasant channels within the body which looked familiar. There was a feeling of security and I felt very to listen to what She was saying. My friends realised that I was losing interest in parties, and night clubs etc. but I was still safe. going to these places. I started getting pain in my heart, stomach and head. I thought that One of the people present came to me and asked if I felt a cool breeze in my hands. I did

 Issue: 11 & 12-2004 30 The Divine Cool Breeze After puja Mataji asked me if I felt a cool breeze which I did and she said, "May God something was seriously wrong with me and I went to hospital to have a complete check-up and found that medically nothing wrong with Bless You". me. Since I never trusted Doctors, I became After that I came to live with other Sahaja very paranoid and started imagining all sorts of things. Yogis in the Ashram and learned more about Sahaja Yoga In the last two years I have had Gradually at Sahaja Yoga meetings I discovered that the pains I was getting, were caused by obstructions in the Chakras and so many experiences which helped me to understand myself and others better than I could before. that the Kundalini was trying to clear them There are no words to express what we all Still I was half sceptical and half believing owe to our Holy Mother. Only in meditation when our hearts are clear we can realise that One day I got invited to the Puja, the typical Indian style of worship. I performed it we are all part of Her big heart. respectfully but did not understand the meaning HH Mataji with Her hand on my Salutations again and again to you Mahamaya, the Queen of Cosmos. Agya Chakra said that I must not doubt Her. MIODRAG From Yugoslavia At Present in London (Maha Avtar-1980)

 Reality of Life Umpteen religious and other theories of reaching God exist in the world today. Every individual has his notions about God Almighty. As such, one's belief and faith depend to a comprehension. This is so because they have discovered certain sources of energy which they have been able to use to their ends, thus controlling them. An energy which controls them is not acceptable. However more than anything else they just befool themselves. Don't they know that it is Life Energy by which they live, yet they have no idea where it comes large extent upon one's personal opinion of the Lord. There are so many other things which give him newer ideas about God; namely books, people and the countless Gurus who circulate these days. In the end a person ends up having a cock-eyed idea of the Lord or he stops believing in God. Psychologists come up with statements like believe in God because of fear, conditioning and a whole string of other reasons. What they fail to see is that God is not anybody's opinion, nor is He a fictional character who exists because people believe in Him due to some reason but that He is the sole reality. Everything owes its existence to Him. A new idea which has now entered the heads of people and is rather frequently stated very dramatically is that - "We do not believe in God, but in a supernatural power". What they cannot understand and see is that there is no difference since this supernatural power is none other than the Power of God, the Divine from and where it goes. Too many foolish ideas exist, eg. Life is for living and that is it' But what about knowing your own meaning? This is something which few people bother about. Everyone must know what the next person is doing, try to give some deep sounding logic to nonsense, try to find meaning in cheating, lying, idiotic behaviour, indicency but completely ignore oneself From the World's point of view this state may sardonically be 15 said to be "selfless' for our is perpetually bothered about others. In other words there is total misidentification the whole time. To give character to vulgarity big words are given. Free sex is given names like love; drinking alcohol as fun; bad language as communication, artificiality as sophistication. No one seems to Power which loves, thinks, knows, co- realise that in harming others, they are harming ordinates and in short does everything. How else is this entire universe running the way it is THREL no one more than themselves. If someone says drinking is bad, no one in such perfect co-ordination? There has to listens because slow poisoning is acceptable. Not only is the body affected but more so be some big organisation behind the whole thing A Power which can think, organise, know one's awareness which is very important in and do everything is not within their

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004 32 The Divine Cool Breeze knowing one's self However, everything seems place and great Divine Incarnations have come on Earth. This could be one of those times. to matter except one's self which is all Therefore, instead of negating the possibility and building up a resistance why not come and see and find out yourself what it is all about. Then another question which follows is Who is Mataji? To this the answer is as important and is the only way of knowing God. But, then again when one is used to dirt it is quite useless speaking to him of cleanliness. In the same way a person used to erying and depression fits cannot understand what joy and happiness are. Most of all, the man of today is used to thinking 24 hours a day and cannot Mataji replies- "First find out your own meaning and know yourself, then you shall understand a state of thoughtlessness but total know Me." awareness where, there is, truth, peace, calmness and joy. Truth and joy go together It is not possible to say anything of someone so Great, infinite as Mataji. It is just sufficient For too long have people looked upto others, to know that She is our Mother who loves us who know as being too Great for them to so fully and completely that we cannot actually fathom how much. We may falter question of know, but now the time has come for them to know themselves realise, their Greatness, know doubt, but our Mother loves us eternally. the Truth and their own joy. How can all this Therefore, as good children, it is our duty also to be what our Mother expects of us. And happen? Well, the answer is simple- Sahaja Yoga. what She expects of us is to be jewels, shining This can happen now because our Divine Mother Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi is here to with purity, love, humility, joy and greatness in the knowledge of ourselves and Her glory. A child loves his mother, just because she is his make it happen and she has said that it will happen. According to Mataji - it is blossom time and thousands of seekers will get their realization. A general-reaction to this statement is; what is so special about this time? Well, mother and when your mother is the Divine Mother, why fear anything! Just be happy, joyful and loving in Her overflowing protective love. the answer is that there have been periods in Om twamev Sakshat, Shri Adi Shakti Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah. time when important happenings have taken Maneesh (Maha Avtar-1980)

 The Victory of the Soul Let us sing, let us sing ever the glory of the mother; Let us dance, let us dance ever with the bliss of the Divine The glory of the soul is ages old, With the setting of mankind in the soil of mother Earth And the coming of incarnations ever revealed the path, All often for the victory of the soul Let us sing, let us sing ever the glory of the Mother; Let us dance, Let us dance ever with the bliss of the Divine. The Universe is a poetry of the Divine in nature, In a nutshell representation of a human with virtues; Marvelous enough to know marvelous combination, All often for the victory of the soul. Let us sing, let us sing ever the glory of Mother; Let us dance, let us dance éver with the bliss of the Divine. The chapter in the poetry, telling ever the reality, Are the coming of incarnations to guide the humanity3; When fallen in sick and sullen in goal, All often for the victory of the soul. Let us sing, let us sing ever the glory of Mother; Let us dance, let us dance ever with the bliss of the Divine. The coneluding chapter to conclude near is Sahaja Yoga, Surprise thee not! certain to happen in this Yuga3; With the advent of the Mother we attain the goal, All often for the victory of the soul. Let us sing, let us sing ever the glory of Mother; Let us dance, let us dance ever with the bliss of the Divine.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: I1 & 12 - 2004 34 Fear thee not, the Mother is here, Worry thee not, the Divine is here; Perfect in our pursuit, sincere in our devotion, All often for the victory of the soul. Let us sing, let us sing ever the glory of MotherB Let us dance, let us dance ever with the bliss of the Divine. Sinking of a ship with sailors of offenders Yet to come a long long distance; Look thee not, look thee not; for us the Divine, All often for the victory of the soul. Let us sing, let us sing ever the glory of Mother; Let us dance, let us dance ever with the bliss of the Divine. Forget thee not the purpose of life, With the pursuit of truth in the kingdom of God3; Foretold by the sages of the ages and saints of the legends, All often for the victory of the soul. Let us sing, let us sing ever the glory of Mother: Let us dance, let us dance ever with the bliss of the Divine. The victory of the soul is with thy hands, The nectar of the Divine is wetted in the vein; With the advent of the Mother we achieve the goal, All often for the victory of the soul. Let us sing, let us sing ever the glory of Mother; Let us dance, let us dance ever with the bliss of the Divine. S. Ganesan Delhi University (Maha Avtar- 1980)

 the Moving Finger The mouing finger arites, O and having writ il moves on, all they piely can scralch a single word donn. A young girl of sixteen fascinated by these lines so much that she lived on them for twenty- six years. If there was a "Moving Finger" who could control your lives, then what was the need for temples, churches and worship? A question which haunted her for many years to relationship, but when she bowed to touch Her Lotus Feet, she realised that more than a Mami, a "Mother" was needed. The change was all in a few micro-seconds. She asked Her Holiness to bless her daughter Ratna who was accompanying her, Ratna, a student of Miranda House felt completely relaxed in H.H. Mataji's presence (for which she herself was come Then one day she heard a saying "Arise, Awake and Stop not till the goal is reached". It appealed all right and so she got up at 4 am. (called herself a Karmyogi) and kept on working, but still the problem of life and its meaning were not being solved. Everything appeared existing but what was her role in life? This was à question, probably an eternal surprised). : How are you bete? : I am alright Mataji, but I would like to know about H.H. Mataji Ratna the Third Eye which Lobsang Rampa wrote about : Bete can anyone operate in between the eyebrows and open the third eye? In what case all the surgeons one! H.H. Mataji May be we were not the lucky ones, like those born when Shri Ram and Sita, Radha and Krishna, Lord Jesus and Mother Mary came down on Earth to Bless them. Some times I thought that may be we could still get would be much sought for (Laughter all around as no one can stop laughing in Her presence), : Mataji is it possible that the Divine a Darshan of Mahavishnu or have a vision of Sakshat Shakti Herself. I kept on thinking and lo! we were Blessed. Ratan be power converted into evil as In 1980, Her Holiness Mataji Nirmala Devi was in Delhi. She was here to awaken the Kundalini shown in the latest movies "the omen, exorcist etc". : The Divine Power always remains Divine, there is no H.H. Mataji This young girl now a mother of grown up children went to meet Her Holiness as She doubt in it It is a Power happened to be her Mamiji (aunt) by

 Issue: 11 & 12 2004 36 The Divine Cool Breeze rush you upto any place of pilgrimages. She was the lucky one to have made it! Yes! Mataji's looks and glances are enough. Even Her photograph vibrates. It is absolutely true. Our beloved and revered Mataji absorbs all our sorrows, and this keeps us always smiling. Smiling, as we always are, others want to know which can never finish. If you forget your path, I may give you a little jolt, that's all. My love for all of you is always there. : In the spiritual path, is it Ratna necessary to wear good clothes? the secret. H.H. Mataji : Once the Kundalini is Then, as there are no secrets in "Sahaja awakened, She passes through six chakras touching the Sahastrar which is the Yoga" we told them say Jai Mataji. Mrs. Verma B-18, Press Enclave, New Delhi Sth September 1980 final destination. All these chakras have Deities to JAI SHRI MATAJI guard them. Once the While doing all the things in our life, a time Mahalakshmi chakra comes when we feel that we are unsatisfied At that time, if we try to think further we do (Manipur) is aroused, you have to respect Her by putting on your best and being scrupiously clean. Mahasaraswati demands not get a peace of mind as our mental condition is disturbed. We can be satisfied only by real source of happiness. And that source of happiness or strength or power can be gained from 'Sahaja Yoga' built by Mataji. precision and neatness and So on. And such type of happiness which is totally distinct from others cannot be obtained by any other means. While getting this joy, I feel The Goal was reached. HH, Mataji with Her glances and touches had given Ratna self- realization (awakened her Kundalini) the presence of super-natural power. And with the help of that super natural power of Mataji's vibration I am confident to improve rapidly and trying to get more and more strength by means of Mataji's vibrations for us and other Sahaja Yogis. The Moving-finger moved on and the blessed everyone in the room, and now we understood that all that had been written for us could be scratched down with all H.H. Matjai's blessings. With Ratna and her whole family meditating and taking salt-water treatment in night, life seems to have developed a new meaning. Sanjeev Jivan Nandode Dhulia (Maha Avtar-1980) No hurry, no worry, no taxis, no cars to

 A LETTER OF SHRI MATAJI (Translation of a Marathi Letter of H.H. Mataji) LONDON Friday, Aug. 22, 1980 My dear Sahaja Yogi Petkar and other Sahaja Yogis, There was no occasion to write to you for very long time. These days I write only when some work comes up in Bombay, as the work is in full swing in England, However, people here are addicted and everywhere laziness and negativity have their full sway. England is the heart of Universe but it is so much neglected that it must be set in order without delay All of you are very fortunate to have been born in a holy place, especially Poona which is the place of Shri Ganesha. Try to understand that you have become entitled to God's such immense blessings only because of your several good deeds (Sukriti) in your previous births, I have given you only what was already yours and nothing of my own Much more is due to you and you shall get it My attention is attracted to impediments and pit falls. There is no problem about Poona and Rahuri people. Please do understand that, I feel relieved (in this atmosphere) to see you enjoying in the ocean of bliss, so keep it up. We, here, are not so fortunate as you are. Work is going on continuously. There are many difficulties, not for me, but for these foolish people. How can they be set right? There are many such problems. You should take interest and solve them because I do not wish anything and therefore the question of fulfilment of my wish does not arise. All of you should therefore keep a desire in your minds and pray for helping out your English brothers and sisters. Your progress is keeping the Sahaja Yoga alive in my heart. Whenever I feel fed up, your letters to feel satisfied. Therefore, please keep writing. All should write letters I read regularly. Ever yours, Your mother NIRMALA (Maha Avtar-1980)

 SEEKING Tondon, 24-07-1979 dead Those who say we are seeking are living Yesterday, I met a lady, and she told me that she was seeking God. I said what do you think of God? What are you seeking? When we say we are seeking, do we know what are we suppossed to seek and do we understand how we are going to feel our seeking complete and also seeking The little bit if you understand that a desire is created within a little animal called as amoeba by giving him hunger. Just think of it. It has no brain, it has just a small nuclear, but it can feel it's hungry. It has to eat something to grow. It also knows it has to reproduce and then it starts seeking. It also knows how to take the food in but it does not That we have reached the destination? Last time I told you that seeking has to be genuine, from a genuine heart, and that you cannot purchase or you cannot put in effort about it. But today I would like to tell you what are we seeking. Let us see how the seeking comes within us, from where? As shown here, there is a centre called "Nabhi Chakra', which is know how it digests. That part is not his job. Even for us it's just the same So, the seeking starts in a little amoeba and the whole evolution is based on that seeking, gradualy improving and improving the ways and means of seeking while the desire is that of food only, alone. here in the centre Nabhi Chakra which is placed in our spinal There is also another desire or you can say cord and manifests the solar plexus, which is placed midway under your naval. This is the centre that creates the seeking within us. Seeking is only possible when something is living. For example, what is the seeking of this chair? It cannot think, it cannot move, you can put it here or you can put it on the street. You can smash it and throw it away, again use that wood for some others purpose or make a an emotion in the smallest of Amoeba is the sense of preservation. It knows the dangers that can finish his existence. When this little amoeba becomes a human being in thousands and thousands of years then the seeking is changed. In the beginning it starts, of course the food seeking is still there. That's the basic You must have food to begin with, of course the methods are improved, changed, evolved. for the seeking of food but there is also a stool out of it. It has no seeking of any kind. Only when a thing becomes the living being great understanding of how to preserve yourself and your clan. The clubbing starts like a amoeba you carn take a unicellular act. It starts manifesting, seeking because it is supposed to seek, not the dead. So, those who say we are not seeking are as good as from a very early age, even ants understand that. So, they understand that we all have to club together, unite together, integrate together

 39 Issue: 11 & 12- 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze Now money animals don't understand, this is the creation of human beings only. So, for if we have to protect ourselves and this seeking of wholesomeness also develops gradualy in the human beings and the expressions of that is you can see all our efforts to preserve them money becomes very important because it is their own creation. We had barter systems ourselves and to be clubbed together. These efforts are expressed in our political and in our economic enterprises. but then we thought it is better to have some sort of a medium which will convert one good into another, so we start the money So, the focus of man's attention, from food, goes to Now, in the human beings a new seeking power and from power to money. Sometimes starts, is to have power over others. Animals if somebody has lots of money then he wants do not seek power, they have. For example a to have power. It's but natural. There is nothing tiger is much more powerful than say a poor wrong in it. rabbit. He is more powerful and a rabbit does not want to become a tiger. He does not try. Fundamentally it is a thing which is natural for human beings to run after money and then IS Like every Dick, Tom and Harry would like to become a Prime-Minister but a rabbit would run after powver or vice versa. But beyond that starts another seeking, it is the seeking of knowing why are we here? What are we doing here? What is the purpose of our life? Why God has created us? To what purpose, to what end or it is just a joke going around? not try to be a tiger He understands I am a rabbit and I must develop my means of defences and my means of offenses by which I exist. In the same way the tiger acts; he is aware of his powers and also he is aware of his limitations. And some of the animals also Are we just foolishly being born, getting married, having children and dying like amoeba have a power of leadership in them. They become leaders, you must have seen the, say, birds that they have a leader. One leader going and whenever the that leader changes the or have we any other purpose? Many human beings do not go beyond money or health They want good health. I mean animals don't direction, all of them change as we say are like the tail of that leader. In the same way, I know. But human take any exercises as far as being can go to any extent to preserve their health but for what? I mean you may be a wrestler for what? Just to fight each other? the same way that goes that bird goes, the leader goes all of them follow. So, this also is expressed in human being in a very big way that there are some born leaders who lead a You might be the healthiest person living on this earth but for what? You are just a weight. group of people to some destination in which they fulfil the seeking of that group. Now, the seeking of the groups could be money. Mostly What is your LISE? You may be the wealthiest man going in the best cars or whatever you may call it, all the so called luxuries of life and it is. IS.

 Issuc: 11 & 12-2004 40 The Divine Cool Breeze material well being, but for what? When such have really given him the fulfilment and the answer to this question, "why are we here', then the turning point takes place in his life and he becomes a seeker, not before that. a question comes into our mind the new kind of seeking starts which asks the question, "Why are you here?" "Are you here just to run in this rat race morning till evening earning money and earming power and doing all useless activities, pleasing others to show off your money or to extract some money from others? Is that the aim of your life?" Now, this is the beginning of the fourth enquiry or the fourth dimension in your awareness. This Those who go to Gurus and say Mother will you please give a job to my son, then you don't know what to say, you should say to such a person now my child you are not yet fit, you are not yet mature to come down here. Or if you go to someone to ask for say a diamond ring or anyone says that I give diamond ring in the name of God and you are enquiry is also the flowering of the same rudimentary thing called as hunger, hunger for spirituality, hunger for God, hunger for higher quite satisfied with such an answer then you are no good as a seeker. No, useless for Sahaja Yoga specially, or somebody who says I will cure you and for curative you go to things of life. This starts within us. That I call is the genuine happening. In this seeking, we get confused because by the time this seeking someone, alright a person may cure you but starts, you are already famished and finished. How? Because you are already conditioned by all kinds of nonsensical things going on. you are no good as a seeker Why should one cure anyone who is not seeking God? I mean why should I repair this instrument if it is not You may be calling yourself a British or an going to carry my voice? Or else some of I don't Indian or some sort of an Australian or you, if you go to a guru and if he tells you a like this that you have to pay me some know all sorts of things that people call themselves. But in the eyes of God you are story money for this because if you don't pay me money you cannot be involved in this kind of thing, you better slap such a guru on his face just a human being. I mean you don't have a tail to begin with and you don't have your head bent down like this. You have a head and tell him that what do you think of me? It's uprise, whether you are in Africa or in India or in England or America, It's just the same. As long as your head is up like that and you don't have a tail, of course some people must say, we have it, the way they behave, you are definitely a human being. And if a human being is evolved through various experiences of life and realises that none of these experiences complete indignity to your seeking. He wants to involve you through taking money from you. Can't you see that he is insulting you by saying that you are such a materialist that when you give me money then only you will be attached to seeking of God? Just think of it. All such arguments people give you and if you accept them and if you follow such gurus, you cannot

 41 Issuc: 11 & 12 - 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze mature for seeking and you have to be genuine, you have to be wise to understand that you are seeking your fulfilment You are not seeking when the child is born and gradually all the sensations and cordinations of all these different sensory organs and organs of motion and organs of automatic functions are created gradually, very gradually as he starts growing But once the connections are established a money and diamond rings and this Tomfooleries that are going on and you are not there to witness them and this foolish human being starts acting on his own, the whole body acts together, it knows when it is pinched here in the finger the whole body knows that you are pinched, the whole knows about what has happened. The whole connection is established. It's a living process, it is a growing process which works out. But with human beings there is a very big problem. The biggest problem I would say, that they are always identified with their imperfections, with wrong ideas and only in the human beings these things magical tricks of people but you are going to witness the magic of God Then in the seeking also you must know that if the God is the universal being, anybody who professes that we are the chosen ones and nobody else can be a chosen one or he was the only prophet or he was the only God, because we belong to some organisation, it is nothing but absurd fanatisism and ugliness. Do not deceive yourself Please try to understand, self deception will never be forgiven by God. Amoeba, does he deceive himself, if he sees the food there, does he? Or a lion or even a happen, that is why one has to be careful. Dog does very better than you do and it knows what to eat, wvhat not to eat You don't know! You don't know what is the real gunı and a dirty guru and a horrible guru and a vicious frog? It has such a little brain! It understands what it is seeking. Will he deceive himself? But human beings deceive themselves morning till evening. We have to seek God, we have to seek our fulfilment, we have to relate to that man. You cannot make out. Somebody runs out of the jail, he weares a dress, comes to England and the guru great and thousands will be running after him. They don't know, and the more he has the better it is. But there is a wholesomeness that is God the primodial being, the whole of it. This is what we have to seek. You are created for that. If you study a little fetus in the womb of the mother, you will be way. God has already placed that within yourself. For your growth he has placed within you, only He is testing your genuineness. But if you are so obstinate as to stick on to some misidentified, nonsensical thing, you cannot amazed that the whole of the fetus is looked after by the naval cord from the mother and though all the portions of it are not yet fully developed as to get connected with the brain work it out. Be free from all these things. Open out yourself. You all have to be aware of the completely from the very beginning, till through one channel it is fed, looked after, managed whole. You all have to get Self Realisation. Then the child is removed from the mother

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004 42 The Divine Cool Breeze Though by that God will feel his fulfilment of his creation no doubt and He has to do it, He blind making you blind. What have you achieved but nothing, but stark fanaticism? It's will do it. But He will have to work very hard and still and still if you do not accept the truth then the truth will be expressed no doubt but then the untruth has to be destroyed and at that time those who are identified with the a disease. It's sickness. Just come in the kingdom of God and you will see that they are seated there on the dais. They are ll together and you like fools are fighting! Did they ever say that, for example when Christ came did he say that Moses was wrong? Did he say so? When Nanaka came did he say that Mohammad was wrong? Did any one of these great saints say so? Then who are you untruth will also be destroyed. Before that take it to you wisdom and know what we have to seek. We have to seek our wholesomeness which we have partially expressed in our political and our economical and social clubs. All this has to be integrated. All the great religions which have been propounded in the growth of human beings, which have substantially helped in the growth of human beings, which are the substratum of their living, to denounce them? This is one of the greatest hurdles of so called seekers. Then they are identified with their gurus. I ask them one question, if you are so much identified with your gurus, go ahead with them, why do you come to me? I come to you has to be integrated in that happening. For Mother because I am suffering from Asthma, example I meet suppossing a Hindu, then he says Mother, how do you talk of Christ? We don't believe in Christ. Now, you are a very since I went to that guru. Then ask him to cure you. Why do you come to me? If guru had given you whatever you wanted, why should you come to me? If he is a real guru, I would see it written large on your face. I can make it out and I will worship that man who is a real guru. I will go all out to meet such a your great person not to believe in Chirst! Who are you not to believe in Christ? What do you think of yourself? What do you mean by saying that you don't believe in Christ? Do you know it is blosphemous to say such horrible things about any great incarnation on this person and I will regard him as the greatest blessing for me also. But they are very few and all hidden in the Himalayas or some places from where they do not speak. Nobody listens to them. They are very few. One of them tried to go to America. Within five days he was back in India. He wrote to me saying Mother very difficult. Because you are identified with earth? There are some who say we do not believe in Moses or in Gurunanaka or in Mohammad Saheb. Who are you? I don't believe! I don't believe you. What is your belief? On what it is based? Why do you say such things? What do you know about them? Only by going to churches or going to these games, with playing games, you like people who play games with you. You do not like mosques or going to these cinemas. They are

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 11 & 12- 2004 43 people who tell you the truth. This is it, you have to have it. But you must know it is the concern. How can anybody who loves you can tell you something that is detrimental, injurious or absolutely dangerous for you? They will not tell you, those who are fake will never tell you about anyone. They will say O! everything is fine on the other side of the earth. If somebody genuine comes up they are not But from the very beginning I have to warn you, all such people are wasting their time and my time. So please, all such people who are still very much misidentified, please do not trouble me with their arguments too much because always I find that they are supposed to be true seekers like the lady yesterday and she started telling me, have you read this book and have you read that book? I said I would but by reading them I do not find anything in going to say a word about it Take it from me you. You have read them! What have you So, in your seeking, first of all your misidentifications must drop out. You are so achieved? Have you achieved anything? Nothing Have you seen this guru and that guru and that guru and that guru. I said may misidentified with so many things, like people would say why should we follow Christ? He was a jew. I mean he has to be born in someplace, somewhere and if it happens, you have to belong to some religion somewhere. You have to be born in England or you have be, but what about you? What have you got? She has Asthma, one eye is blown off. She cannot sit, she has got a rigid body because she says she has rheumatism. She is actually possessed, and there she is a seeker and then I am a to be born in India or may be in Timbucktoo. mean you have to be born in someplace. So, the rest of them, they know and those who live there also say, he is no good because he was just born like us here. They want a question Mother, she asked me seeker and why should God be so unkind to me?" You did not use your wisdom my child, even today take heed to wisdom and know that Thy God loves you with all his heart, with all his soul, whether you love him or not. He somebody to drop from heaven. It is so funny. So for us those who are genuine seekers, must open their minds fully, and if you want to waste your time, go on. You go ahead with your has placed this seeking within you. He has placed all this instrument within you. He has placed all the things so beautifully that spontaneous it works in no time But people are such, they come for realisation and if I tell gurus. Go on wondering their marvels, giving them money, giving them your women, giving them your property, giving them everything that you have, getting sick, mad, ending up with lunatic asylam. I will not say, come my child, them alright you come and sit near me. No, I won't sit! You please take out your shoes. No, I won't take out my shoes! There are like that, even if you tell them why don't come to me. But even then from the lunatic asylam also if you realise your mistake and come then God is the ocean of forgiveness. many you sit down with both the feet like this

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze 44 because you will be relaxed, you see. There not faulter, you walk straight. You don't say my legs improved because there were lights, No. My eyesight improved because of my lights, because there were no lights there was a problem. As soon as there is a light everything are many more reasons for what I say, why I say. But still, No, Why should I do? There are certain things which are very important for Self-Realisation. If you want to have it, you better do them. The whole attitude should be becomes alright and you start understanding the whole, you know how the whole thing is, and you start walking straight and you know of understanding that here you have to take from me something. It's a gift for you and there should be no obstinacy about taking gift. where to sit and what is the chair and what is 1 mean that we do in normal courses, If there the person. is a gift for us then we do not become obstinate about it. Do we? Do the human beings become This is what you are seeking when you are a seeker and if you are a true seeker you are to be blessed, and its my job to see to it that obstinate when there is a gift coming in? But only when it comes to God, they wouldn't even take out their shoes! It's such a great thing you are asking for, which is the flowering of your seeking from Amoeba stage to human you reach there. You get your own powers, not of your guru but of your own and that understand yourself You get yourself you knowledge and the the knowledge of the whole. But if you are not that, my children, stage. In the human stage also thousands of years you have been seeking and today when you are at the threshold of it, why are you obstinate? I say in Sahaja Yoga you get your am sorry, you are still a baby in the seeking. You have to still grow more and grow more and then you come to me, when you are grown Self-Realisation. No money is to be given or enough, otherwise it is a headache to work on taken As a byproduct you get your health alright, of course your material things also are the person like that or to give them Self alright; many things improve as a blessings of Sahaja Yoga but the real thing that happens to you is that you get Self Knowledge, you get Self-Realisation, that there is light enlightened within you and you start seeing yourself, your Realisation or anything whatsoever. They are using sometimes, Sahaja Yoga for curing. You do get cured, no doubt, even cancer can be cured with Sahaja Yoga. It can be. It can only be cured by Sahaja Yoga centres and the centres of others because you That's the point. But again it will come back also get contacted with the whole, you get to you, we cannot promise guaranty anything. Unless and until you rise in Sahaja Yoga and your wholesomeness. This is what Sahaja Yoga has to offer to you and if you want to have that please have it. The rest of it is just become the mnaster of Sahaja Yoga we cannot guarranty. You may get back that disease again. Why should God not have a sense of a byproduct because if there is a light you do

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004 45 The Divine Cool Brecze giving for something as you have. He loves you, not doubt He wants to give you because he loves you, But if you are wayward and if they see the pulsation of the Kundalini, the Tising of the Kundalini, they get better in health and everything inmproving, still they are doubting and wasting their time! Their everything is delayed, their cure is delayed, and everything is delayed because of that. Alright, so we have here jet planes, we have here supersonies, we have missiles and we have also bullock carts, you are prodigal by nature, why should He continue to give you? It is a simple question that you should ask yourself and then ask for realisation, you get it After getting it also there is a period of doubts, because first you get Thoughless Awareness which is called as See it takes lot of things to make this world. Isn't it? So I take everything alright with all my love 1 indulge them But I would request Nirvichar Samadhi, when we say Awareness, in the normal termonology it means alertness to anything is awareness, but when we say Samadhi it means Enlightened Awareness. You you not to slow your progress like this. What are your doubting is the question that I do not want anything, if you are paying for something then you should doubt it. You are not paying for anything. What are you doubting? What am I to gain from you? But still so many of get Thoughtless Enlightened Aawareness and then you get Doubtless Enlightened Awareness. The state between the two, in some people is so little that they just are there. I have some people here who just got it and are there. They don't pass through these two stages, them sometimes come and tell me Mother now, аге but we are doubting I say alright go on. When there are mediocres and there are also your doubts will be over you do come and see me. That's how it is. I would request you absolutely bullock carts, I would call them. They cannot move with the time of a jet In these modern times imagine a bullock cart being pulled by a jet! Big problenm. But if you are of that caliber and that quality, you get to try to tell your mind that you have done all kinds of things, you have been to all sorts of gurus, you have been to all sorts of nonsensical books and you have been to all kinds of doubts. Now, settle down for a while. Settle both the stages just like that. There's no doubt after that. But then there are some who get down. Tell your mind not to mislead and you into doubts I don't know what they doubt get it. This your own. This is your own property. This is your own right to be there So get it and if any doubts are coming then here? They had the experience, they feel the vibrations coming, they feel cool breeze flowing through them, they feel it is working on others, tell them to wait for a while. May God Bless you all

 %23 %23

 "Those who do not meditate will be lost to Sahaja Yoga because wisdom can only grow through your inner inspiration. You can have this inner inspiration only if the power of Shri Ganesha manifests. He is the giver of yourwisdom." (Shri Ganesha Puja 1998) 10>



----------------------

2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
The
00
145
November-December, 2004
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-1.txt 
 (FELICITATI
EE MATI NIRM
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-2.txt 
 HWA NIRMALA
IVERSAL PURE RELIGIO
IN THIS ISSUE
Shri Krishna Puja - 2004 (A Report)
3.
A Letter of Shri Mataji - 11.7.1980
6.
Sh. Mahalakshmi Puja - Kolhapur 1.1.1983
7.
Birthday Puja Mumbai - 21.3.1977
15.
Faith, Devotion and Resignation A Legend
19.
Daily Observances for Sahaja Yogis
20.
Aphorisms of Patanjali Vs. Sahaja Yoga
21.
Love and Marriage
25.
Shri Mataji and Shri Hanumana's Visit to Europe
27.
An Experience
29.
Reality of Life
31.
33.
The Victory of the Soul
35.
The Moving Finger
A Letter of Shri Mataji 22 Aug. 1980
37.
38.
Seeking - London 24.7.1979
DHARMA
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-3.txt 
 THE DI VINE
Co o L BREE ZE
Published by
Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
H.O.: Infosys House, Plot No.8,
Chandragupt Housing Society, Paud Road
Kothrud, Pune-411 029
Printed at
Amarnath Press (P) Ltd.
WHS 2/47, Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi-15
Ph.:25268673
For Subscription Please Write To:
Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
222, Desh Bandhu Apartments
Kalkaji, New Dehi-110019
Tel. No.:011-26422054, 26216654
Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles,Miracle Photographs etc. to:
Shri O.P. Chandna
G-11 (463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110 034
Tel. No. 011-55356811
Mor.:8:00 AM-9:00 AM
Eve.:8:30 PM-10:30PM
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-4.txt 
 SHRI KRISHNA PUJA 2004
(A Report)
(Internet Version)
us the Master. When we are our Masters we
Dear Yogis and Yoginis,
are in balance and harmony with ourselves
1 am sending you all the great LAH SHAKTI, the power that does
experience of the Krishna Puja 2004 in Los
Angeles. We were in Woodland Hills, just
everything. It is the power of LOVE by which
everything is accomplished. So NIRMALA
has so much meaning for us. Nought-Mastery
about 40 minutes from L.A. It was a beautiful
hotel, the Marriot There were approximately
- Love. Once we have achieved those three
600-650 Yogis, mostly from USA and Canada
things, we will lead a life as a Sahaja Yogi and
but some from as far away as Switzerland,
we evolve: SHRI MATAJI also stated that
France and a few other countries. SHRI
problems are presented our way because
MATAJI did not come to the entertainment
without problems we would not be able to
programs on Friday and Saturday nights. We
had beautiful music from all over the States
grow and change. We must face our problems
and overcome them so that we can rise above
and Canada and all quite diverse. There was
them and that is how we can grow deeper as
also a short comedy from Canada. Saturday
human beings. There were many other things
morning a beautiful power point presentation
from Columbia addressed the meaning of one
presented in this power point but this is what
I remember as being the most important.
of the names of OUR DIVINE MOTHER
Hopefully we will be able to buy the CD later
"NIRMALA." The presentation was very
on.
powerful and it will be sold as CD at one of
After that presentation, Dr. David
Spiro, a medical doctor from England, spoke
of the World Council that was formed recently
the coming pujas, either Ganesha or Diwali.
The presentation was a wonderful 45 minutes
of music and beautiful images of SHRI
MATAJI as it explained the meaning of by SHRI MATAJI. This council which is
represented by 40 leaders from various
countries, will have the responsibility of
spreading SAHAJA YOGA all over the world.
"Nirmala." NIR means "nought or not.
MOTHER states that SHE is "nothing."
and so we should think of ourselves as
nothing. When we think of ourselves in this
He also stated that SHRI MATAJI has
donated the house in Cabella and the hangar
where the pujas are held to VND. In this
manner and also ask for nothing we become
more and more our spirit. We should not put
council there are yogis who will also be in
our attention on ourselves but on our spirit.
MA is the Mother. It is that power that makes
charge of publishing, all legal matters and many
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004
The Divine Cool Brecze
4.
other important aspects of SY.
experience of this, I felt as SHE was removing
all that was negative within us and all negativity
On Sunday we had the Raksha
in our surroundings SHRI MATAJI clearly
Bandhan ceremony where the sisters chose a
was working on us all and removing all that
was negative within us and all the negativity
on the outside of us. I felt as if THE HOLY
MOTHER was revealing more and more of
HER great powers and revealing all that was
negative within us and all the negativity on the
outside of us. I felt as if THE HOLY
Rakhi brother to establish the pure relationship
between the brother and sister. In Sahaja Yoga
this is the purest of all relationships, it is held
during the Krishna Puja celebration because
Shri Krishna had a great sister in Vishnumaya.
who is the deity in the left Vishuddhi. He, of
course, is the Deity of the center Vishuddhi
MOTHER was revealing more and more of
HER great powers and revealing more and
more some of HER DIVINE NATURE. This
of course is felt in meditation and each of us
experience this DIVINE NATURE of SHRI
and in the right Vishuddhi He becomes the
King Once the Rakhi is tied, (the thread that
the sister ties on the left wrist of the chosen
brother), they become brother and sister for
the rest of their lives and one promises to help
the other if they should need help. or protection.
MATAJI in our own personal ways. But this
time SHE was revealing to us collectively this
Later in the evening we prepared in
DIVINE NATURE as we did the Puja to Her
in the form of Shri Krishna. It was very
joyous anticipation for the arrival of the HOLY
MOTHER It was a momemtous occasion.
powerful, intense, and certainly all the yogis
could feel some many strong vibrations. I was
The vibrations were one of the most powerful
I have ever felt. When MOTHER arrived a
in awe of this great, auspicioLus event!
red curtain was opened so that OUR
MOTHER could have privacy as SHE was
After the Puja each country offered
gifis to SHRI MATAJI. I was pnvileged enoug.
to be near SHRI MATAJI as Vasu, the
coordinator of New York/New Jersey tried to
find the vases that were bought from the
placed from the wheelchair to the throne, which
was a beautifully decorated chain in blue and
gold. SHRI MATAJI did not speak at this
Puja. SHE did not need to speak. We all felt
the LOVE and Power and most of all, the
regional areas of USA, We could not find
Protection, that was emanating from HER
them and only just a few minutes before SHRI
MATAJI was supposed to leave he was able
presence. A puja to Ganesha was first held as
the children offered flowers at HER Lotus Feet.
to locate them By then it was too late to offer
Then the Puja was held to SHRI KRISHNA.
the gifts so Vasu left them on the corner of the
HER face was very powerful and as far as my
stage as I helped him in this endeavour. It was
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
then that SHRI MATAJI was leaving and I
was fortunate enough to be so close so HER
physically as SHE was wheeled down the ramp
in the wheelchair by Manoj. It was at this
point that I was privileged enough to bow to
SHRI MATAL SHE looked at me, I felt as
if THE GREATEST OF ALL MOTHERS
communicating to me through HER vibrations
which were Divine! As SHE looked at me,
SHE no longer was human but DIVINE! Then
SHRI MATAJI left. We were all speechless
and in awe at what had just ocurred!
It was truly an experience of such
great power! All the pujas are becoming more
was talking to me and stating. This is à great
and more powerful and the Vibrations are
illusion! I am not this body but I am
EVERYTHING in this life! My nature is of
Divine level. You can know all of this NOW
becoming so incredibly strong. Who could
have known that achieving our realization in
this lifetime we would be able to reach this
if you desire!" The beautiful thing about this is
that MOTHER does not have to say anything
But it is our Kundalini's connections to HER
that allows us to understand instantly what the
Divine would like for us mere human beings
to understand!! As SHE looked at me, I felt
level of being so close to THE GODDESS
and all HER LOVE. Who could have known
that Sahaja Yoga and THE ADI SHAKTI
would allow us to grow to such a high level
and experience so many beautiful things! How
lucky and fortunate we are to be Sahaja Yogis!
vibrationally this Great Woman and Great
Love to all and Jai Shri Maaji,
Incarnation of the Mother Mary Herself
Anna Mancini - New York.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-7.txt 
 A LETTER OF SHRI MATAJI
(Translation of a Marathi Letter of Shri Mataji)
LONDON
11th July, 1980
To,
Sahaja Yogis,
Received your cable on the eve of Gura Purnima. The sentiments, which you have
expressed in very beautiful words have gone to heart.. On the occasion of Guru Purnima day
celebrations in London, I explained what is self realisation and whether you have got it or not.
I will send the tape recording of this speech with some one instead of sending it by post.
suggested, in my earlier letters, to think of "Atma tattwa". Because you are "Atma
Swaroop", your mind, intellect and ego, should be enlightened by the "atma-jyoti". The light of
wisdom shines in the intellect only when Atma-jyoti illumines in its fullness. Then, mind emits
fragrance of love and ego does great and noble works, the whole of your inner being is fully
enlightened. You should be able to rely on the Atma tattwa, accommodate others in it, but first
stabilize it.
Many of the Sahaja Yogis have cured a number of diseases. They have immense love
for me and others These people could do all this because they have become experts owing to
their "Poorva-Sampada". However, there are many intellectuals among us who have not been
able to go very far on the strength of their knowledge or wisdom. Sahaja Yoga is lacking in
books We will have to write books in each language. Also, Sahaja Yogis should go to differenent
cities and give lectures. Many people send their poems to me. We should collect all these.
Similarly my letters can also be printed. Such publicity is necessary. Let it be known all over
the world that Sahaja Yoga is the only way to save the world in Kaliyuga. I am writing a book
but it is not useful to all at present. All should think on what I have suggested. Every centre may
also be accordingly advised.
Many blessings from Mother to all Sahaja Yogis.
Always remembering you
Your mother NIRMALA
(Maha Avtar 1980)
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-8.txt 
 SHRI
MAHALAKSHMI
9.
PUIA
KOLHAPUR Ist January. 1983
नमस्ते गरुडारूढ़े कोलासुर भयंकरिं। सर्वपाप हरे देवी, महालक्ष्मी नमो स्तुते।|
Namaste garudarude Kolhasur-bhayankari, sarvapaphare Devi MahaLakshmi namostute
-Padma Purana
(Salutations to Thee, who is mounted on the Garuda bird and is terror to Rakshsa Kolhasura.
Who is the remover of all sins, O' Devi Mahalakshmi, obeisance to Thee)
principle, its perfect. It is born as perfect, will
remain as perfect, will be always eternally
perfect so that it is not necessary to be
corrected Now this Mahalakshmi thing I am
discussing here because you may be able to
go today to see the temple of Mahalakshmi.
Now the temple of Mahalakshmi when you
go there, you have to know that this deity has
come out of the Mother Earth, in this particular
place. That means this place has got a capacity
Today again is a new year's day. Every new
year comes, because we have to take to
something that is new. It has been so arranged
that the sun has to move for 365 days and
again a new year has come. Actually the whole
solar-system is moving in a spiral way. So,
there is definitely a higher, higher state of this
solar system, Every year it is rising higher in a
spiral way So it is not only that-it is because
365 days have passed-because it has moved
a step forward higher than what it was. Now
we can see that in awareness, human beings
have definitely risen much higher than what
they were, say, about 2000 years back. But,
the first system that started the whole universe
to give you a force. You can say, an additional
force or an intensive feeling of evolution. If
you are sensitive enough you can see that,
you can feel it and you can do it. If you are
not so sensitive you are still so conditioned
and still outside, that may not work out. I
mean all kinds of things can be done, but if
was the first model, you can say was created.
And that model has to be perfect. And that
was a perfect model which then started
t
somebody wants to remain a stone you cannot
perfecting the rest of it. So that is the perfect
model which is in the principle of this ascent.
And that is working out this ascent. Now, the
perfection of the rest of the universe takes
do anything about it
So this Mahalakshmi principle is working
out in this place Kolhapur. Normally, this place
should be very very warm because of its
place in various directions.
position. But even in summer this place keeps
very cool because of the vibrations, from the
temple that is emitted. The people in this place
But today we have to consider the
Mahalakshmi Principle. Now Mahalakshmi, as
I told you, is a perfect principle. It's a perfect
may not be so aware either We cannot say if
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
positivity. But how I know that, I cannot tel
you because I just don't know how to tell you
they are aware. Because as negativity has to
come forward, there are lots of sugar
factories and lots of alcoholism going on here.
that. But I just know that such a person
is
definitely positive and such
person is negative.
But we have to take the best advantage of
every place which is created specially for a
particular purpose. So, it is a pilgrimage in a
a.
The positivity lies in understanding why are
way that we are here. That we have to look
we here? First of all, why are we on this earth?
Why are we human beings? In understanding
what are we doing about it? Why are we
Sahaja Yogis? What a Sahaja Yogi has to do?
What is his responsibility as a Sahaja Yogi?
Then he moves forward to understand why
Mother is so kind to me? Why have I got
after our Mahalakshmi Principle of our
ascent. As you know, this ascent starts at the
Nabhi and is surrounded by the Guru-
principle.
Now the Guru Principle within us, if it is
upset, if it is juxtapositioned, placed in
juxtaposition where if it is not properly
embedded within us to the nerves, if it is not
vibrations? Why am I among very few who
have got this special blessing, the special
knowledge of vibratory awareness? And then
to ask yourself what am I doing about it? Am
I still very much emedded in my cheapishness
or in my childishness, in my stupidity, in my
harshness, in my aggressiveness? We always
see these things in other people, not in
ourselves! So we are not Sahaja Yogis. We
should understand at that point, when we start
emitting through our character and behaviour,
Mahalakshmi tattwa cannot be established.
Mahalakshmi tattwa is strengthened through
Guru principle. Now we are lucky today
because there was the birthday of Dutta, the
Duttatreya just the other day when we had
the Pooja, and today is this Mahalakshmi puja.
So two things together we have got together.
seeing these things in other people, then we
are not Sahaja Yogis. We should see in
ourselves and emit pure compassion to others.
First was the Dutt puja and today is this puja
of Mahalakshmi.
So, to have the Guru principle all right, we
But always people see that, it is in anotl..
person this exists. Whatever
must make our Dharmas correct. Now these
Dharmas, as I have told you many times, are
I may try to say
1
they always see in other person.
ten, and we should look after these ten
Dharmas in a very careful manner. These are
expressed outside, but whatever is inside
comes out. Now I find when you people talk,
and you say things, I know that this person is
negative, that person is definitely positive.
Now supposing there is a negative person
amongst us. You need not be compassionate
to that person On the contrary better be away.
Get rid of that person, as far as possible, don't
have anything to do. It is a definite sign of
great compassion to yourself, if not to others.
There are so many ways of expression of
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004
The Divine Cool Brecze
9.
Better not have anything to do with the person
who is negative, if you have to come up. He understanding in brain' is important. Because
may be your brother, sister, anyone. But try to Mahalakshmi tattwa ultimately works in the
be away from a person who is not positive. It brain, is the enlightenment of the brain. It is
causes lots of problems. I have been telling done by Mahalakshmi tattwa It gives you the
you this and I have been requesting you, but
conditioning is such that still though you have
become a Guru, you don't understand that
you have to be detached. For a Guru there is
no brother, sister or any other relationship. things. I have to ascend. This is why I am
Except for the relationship of the Mother, there here? What am I supposed to do?" Now
is no other relationship. One of these principles logically you convince your brain, first of
that are to be understood, very important I all. It is very important now after
feel, is for all of you "That our relationship is realisation, because if logically your brain
of all, try to clarify your ideas and your
So in the brain
you must clarify. Reach logically; Logically
we must reach the conclusion 1 don't have
to do these things, I have to do these
only to Mother and to Sahaja Yogis and not
to any relationship which has come to us,
whether through a Sahaja Yogi or whether
does not understand, it will always be
cheapish, childish, indignified or could be
harsh, horribly oppressive. It could be one
through anything else". Now this I have been
explaining because our Mahalakshmi tattwa is
not all right. That is why we get sort of fritter
of these.
So, in Guru tattwa, there are ten elements.
Five of them deal with the weight. "Weight".
away, lost into these things.
Guru is the Weight, Weight, Weight of a
person. How much weight you have got? The
gravity, as we call it. Person has a gravity.
When he talks how much balance he has got
And the Mahalakshmi tattwa has to be like
an ascending force, all put together. Like my
father used to give an example, that
supposing you have collected lots of wheat
and you spread it on the ground, it will be all
lost. It will be spread out like this side, that
side, it will be all lost. But if you put it in a
bag, it will rise in height, naturally. It will have
those maryadas; wuiren It will rise and it will go
higher and higher. In the same way this principle
of Mahalakshmi can spread just across like
that and can just destroy all that Mother has
given us and all that we have had all these
IkS
See in Indian Music, we call it q, (Vazan)
means the weight The weight of the person,
means when he is dealing with himself or with
others, how much weight he carried. In
English also they use this-weight. How much
weight he carries with others? Means, how
much he can really impress others? If you
impress too much then the person will say,
"Oh! it is too much'. That is a very big quality
with western people, is, "Oh! that is to0
years, only by spreading it out. Now to collect
it inside, is to pay attention to yourself. First
much!" "They have an idea, you see this is all
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
10
ego oriented. That is too much. If you tell
And the another point is how much
them too much, Oh! that is too much. She is
magnetism you have? So you reverse back to
yourself. The magnetism is a magic, is to magic
of a person. A person is magnetic because he
has certain magic. Now this magic comes from
your own personality, from your own
personality. So the basis of magnetism on the
left hand side starts and that basis is Shri
too much. I move slowly, slowly". 'It is toe
much for me'. It is very common. It is very
common reaction So how much weight you
have? And the second one is the quality of
magnetism. Two things-weight & magnetism.
First is the quality of weight; that's how much
dignified you are? How you talk? How your
language is? How your behaviour is? You
should be humane, But sometimes, even with
Ganesha Shri Ganesha is the basis of that
magnetism. So your innocence; innocence is
the best way to have that magnetism.
Magnetism you cannot explain in material way
It is not a material stuff But it is something
abstract, comes from your quality of Ganesha,
Shri Ganesha. Such a person is magnetic.
Magnetic means such a person attracts other
person because of the weight of the person,
because of the quality of the person. Such a
person attracts, but does not attract for lust,
greed and non-sensical things. But attracts
another person because of the fragrance of
love in the subjects. Now it is always confused,
confused because it is such an abstract thing
So one must understand it in a very subtle
way. What is the magnetism-that one should
understand. You see, there are some gestures
people use artificially which normally they have
been using just to attract other people, the
way they walk, the way they dress, the way
they live, All these things are of no use. It is
something so inner, that fragrance is so inner
which must be developed. But in Sahaja Yoga
I have seen, people just do not bother about
it. Just do not bother. They think the way they
have been living, the way they have been doing
this-say if they are English, they are English, if
me, I find, people talk in a very funny manner,
just don't understand, how it is that always
they say the wrong thing. I mean, whenever
they have to say one sentence, they will say a
wrong thing. It is absolutely with them. It is
also Vishuddhi, which is also Nabhi, Comes
from Nabhi because you must know that
Vishuddhi Chakra is the ascent of the Nabhi
Chakra. So what happens is that the person,
whatever he is, is expressed through his
language, through his behaviour, through his
face, through his nose, his eyes, everything,
through the Vishuddhi Chakra. So the ascent
of the Nabhi is expressed, shown through the
Vishuddhi Chakra. Now whatever you have
in the Nabhi, is shown here. Supposing, now
a person who has the Mahalakshmi tattwa
properly developed, such a person will have
a way of dealing with another person when he
will have the weight, as well as the
understanding, how far to go with the person?
How far to carry on with that person? How
far to talk to a person? How far to think about
it? How much importance to be given? That
is one point, is very important.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-12.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: Il & 12 - 2004
II
your wife, not to your husband, not to your
sister, not to your country, not to anyone but
to Mother 'Complete dedication' gives you
that charisma, or that attraction. In Sahaja
Yoga such a person becomes really attractive
and such a person has it.
they are French they are French, if they are
Indians they are Indians, if they are from
Kolhapur they will be from Kolhapur. These
ideas first must be curbed off. Because the
fragrance spreads everywhere whether you are
English or any one. So the fragrance of a
person develops through, first of all, the
Ganesha Principle within. Ganesha Principle is
Now some people think that if you are a very
passive person and if anybody says anything
to you and you don't mind, sort of a person,
to be first of all seen to. Now a Ganesha
person is not a person who is absolutely a
you are charismatic. It is not. People like you
remorse type or a person who is such a gone
because they can dominate you. They like you
case that even if you beat him up and make
him into a complete minsed thing, he will bear
it. It's not like that, it's not that. On the contrary,
because they can dominate you. Not if you
think that by your aggressiveness and by your
shouting and by your screaming at these
the quality of magnetism is such that it attracts
people, you will achieve that charismatic
you to a point where 'you' are not disturbed.
Now this is a very important point we should
know. You see, if you have other loves, love
like carnal love and all other love you have,
temperament, you cannot. You cannot achieve
that height. So how do you achieve it? By
becoming more innocent.
Now how innocence develops in a person is
then that love may attract the person, then
that person can destroy you and it destroys
you, always. But this attraction does not
destroy, does not destroy. The attraction is
upto that point that you are not destroyed,
because you being much higher, much deeper
and much weightier, you cannot be destroyed
by a thing that whom you are attracting.
Always the greater magnet attracts the smaller
magnet. And that is what one should
understand. This magic and this charisma,
charismatic temperament of a person, comes
by, first of all, the Ganesh tattwa, innocence.
And secondly by complete dedication and
devotion. Those who are completely
by not thinking about it. Like you see
somebody asked me, 'how do you manage
your Income Tax?" I said, "By having no
income at all'. Then they asked me, 'How do
you solve your car problem?' By not having
any car at all of mine. They said, 'What about
your house problem?" By having no house of
my own. "Nihi, Nihi." Everything Nihi for me.
Then how do you Sir solve your this problem,
By not having it, just have no, not have it,
Don't take up headaches upon yourself See
when you take up headaches upon yourself,
then only the innocence is reduced. That
headaches like this, that this is my shawl, this
'
is my sari, this is my thing, this is this, this is
this, this is this. But only one thing is that
dedicated and devoted to Mother. Not to
*anything' else. Ganesh tattwa again. Not to
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004
12
The Divine Cool Breeze
"simple' innocence and it all works out very
well, It is so clean It just says what it knows
and what it knows is the highest
*this is my Mother and I have to proclaim
Her', that is all. If that is the way it is,
then innocence starts rising like Shri
Ganesha and by having no other headache.
So this de-conditioning has to be brought
This is 'mine', that is mine This 'mine'
within us. But you should not discuss it among
business causes the problem, I think.
Personally I think this must be the reason.
That this 'mine' business.
Because whatever is mine, somebody told me-
this is very good argument she
gave-Whatever is mine is not I, means that is
yourself also. Once you start discussing then
you also-it becomes sort of a theological
"This is mine."
argumentation There is no theology about it
It is very simple. It is the simplest thing-'is to
be innocent'. But the innocence is lost, why?
15
Because our attention is in different way, we
not Sahaja. My body, my head, my
everything-'my'. But 'I'? -she gave me this
idea-- T. What is T? Then 'I' is separated,
Whatever is not mine is T'. So what
remains is your Spirit. Somebody gave me
this argument. I said this is good argument to
are attentive to other things. We are looking
at other things. It is so simple, you know.
Today I was thinking I have to buy three nine
yard saris. A simple question as it is, because
there were three ladies who wear nine yard
saris and I had to give them three nine yard
saris. That is all. I Just thought of it. All nght.
work it out Then whatever remains is the 'T
and that I' is the one we have to see to. So
I came here, I saw very nice saris being put
here. So I asked her. Where do you get
these?" She said "You get it here'. I said All
right'. So you go and buy these three saris,
no analysis, nothing of the kind. It just came
into my mind that I have to buy three saris,
finished. The answer is here So even the
atmosphere is so innocent, the whole situation
is so innocent that the solution is presented u
you go on reducing all these mines, mines,
mines- So the pure spirit of innocence will
rise. So the idea about Spirit also people think
that if you become spiritual, I mean, I don't
know what people think about spiritual people
Why the idea about spiritual people is that
they have to be sharp like a fox or you have
to be intellectual like Freud or something All
sorts of ideas people havel No, it is not!
Spiritual person is just innocent, just'
innocent. There is no intelligence, nothing Just
innocence. The whole thing is innocence. So
whatever he talks or says comes through
innocence It does not have intellect as such,
which here people have it through reading and
through understanding and by analysing
Nothing of the kind. It just has 'pure' and
innocence to innocent. Innocence works out
in everything, you see because every body
has little bit of innocence in them, isn't it? So
you can-it is like a fifth column you see The
innocence is a fifth column within you. So if
any person is innocent, you see he will work
on your fifth column and will make you all
right. When you give bandhan (2a) to others,
what happens? You actually bind him by your
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004
13
The Divine Cool Breeze
innocence and the poor fellow does not know:
He has his innocence within him, you capture
that innocence, that is all you have done, that's
coming to you, automatically. Just don't
project your minds into it. Just you wil
get answers to every question just like
that. Because innocence in anyone is the
how you manage It is very simple to work
out thing. Only principle, the tattwa, the
whole thing rests on what - 'tattwa'-is
simple answer where all the complications
drop out innocently.
nothing but innocence.
And that is what is the love of God, is the
love of God. So don't confuse this with love,
So try to develop this by all these things fd
a (Neti, Neti)-saying not this, not this. Not
with all your non-sensical love, ideas you have
about people and identification,
misidentification This is pure love within us,
this, not this 'to all your faults.* Not this, not
this, not this, not this',-you reach there, 'Not
mine, not mine, not mine, not mine'-you reach
there. And that is how it is, and you see the
the purity, the innocence is love and which is
life itself, we should say, is a part of that, the
prized. But pranashakti is not Mahalakshmi,
so Mahalakshmi is the *essence' and
whole material world is not attacking the
innocence, because they are frightened. You
essence" of everything. Because if creation
has to take place, also, if desire of God is
cannot attack. Innocence cannot be destroyed.
It cannot be destroyed. Innocence is
there and if there is no Mahalakshmi tattwa,
then what is the use of having desire,-is
something, is all pervading and it cannot be
destroyed. So whatever people may try, it
cannot be destroyed. But it can be covered,
it can recede, but it cannot be destroyed, it
will act it's own way So try to develop that
finished. Supposing even if you have creation
and you don't have Mahalashmi tattwa, how
you work it out? You cannot work it out,
will
you
You have to have Mahalakshmi tattwa.
innocence which is the basis of Mahalakshmi
Because they don't have any meaning.
tattwa, we should say, 'or that is essence of
Mahalakshmi tattwa". So the outward things,
the weightage, the weight, the dignity, the
behaviour, everything. It is outward thing and
the inside thing. The tattwa, the principle, on
So outwardly it is Mahalakshmi tattwa, but
inside, inside is, we can say, there are three
cores. The first core is Mahalakshmi tattwa
outside to look at, you see the growth alright.
which it is based, is innocence.
But inside is the creation, that is all the elements
being created and all that. But inside that is
the desire and inside the desire is the half-one,
Now if it is this, if we understand Mahalakshmi
tattwa within us, how it has to work out? It is
you can say, is Ganesha. So this Ganesh tattwa
definitely overpowers everything and
permeates through everything And this is, I
would say, that don't think about it. Just allow
not intellectual. Again I would say that, I don't
want you to project your intellect into it,
and to find out. But just remain where you
are and you will find the answers just
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004
The Divine Cool Brecze
14
your innocence to grow, simple innocence and
your dignity. That is very important, to have
your dignity Like some people think if they
wear tall clothes and walk about on the street,
and all will think that they are big sanyasis. It
is wrong Why? You are not being dignified
and God has given you so much! Why should
you try to show that you have not got anything?
Just to show that you have not got anything?
Just to show off that you have not got anything
God has given. This is just a sort of thanks
giving to God you have given me so much,
you have to wear the best. Like in Puja if you
see the ladies here wear all their noserings
and all their ornaments and everything, in the
temple, everything they wear. And in same
way, men also wear their very clean dresses,
very clean things, whatever they have. They
wear simple clean dresses, whatever they have.
But no showing off, it is just a thing by which
you express, the God has given you this.
*O God! L thank you'.
Kolhasura was killed, where this was
established. So Mahalakshmi incarnation came
in and that is how this place has a special
value, that we have come here for a pilgrimage
and let us, in a humble way, think about it.
Actually these things could not take place in
the West. Because even if they had come out
of the Mother Earth who would have
recognised them? Who would have known
about them? Who should have respected
them? Who would have worshipped them?
That is why it did not happen in the West too
much. But it is there, little bit is there, no doubt.
But here now we have these, all these temples
and the attack on the innocence has come
from the tantrikas. And so the tantrikas rented
out this temple and they tried to establish
themselves. And gradually they are being
neutralised and cleaned out. These tantrikas
have gone into every temple of all the
Goddesses, and they will be gradually all out,
straight out. So this is the attack that came
through and that how these brahmins came
down and settled in these places-so called
It is such a great day today to be the new
year, on the new year day to be here on
brahmins-and tried to preach about all tantrik
method and things here in the temple and they
Mahalakshmi's place of Kolhapur. And this is
also called Kolhapur because Kolhasura was
really' spoilt the atmosphere here.
killed here. Kolhasura was horrible fellow like
a fox and he was born again Now he is again
dead. Thank God! He was here and now he
is dead. Kolhasura died. You don't think about
it, again your mind goes out Don't think about
it, I will tell you about it. I have deliberately
So may God bless you all. I want you people
to develop concentration of mind so that you
rise above all other misidentifications and get
identified with the 'Pure Spirit' through your
Mahalakshmi principle.
avoided the name. He was born again and
May God bless you.
was pitched out. So this is the place where
(From Nirmala Yoga)
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-16.txt 
 TO UNDERSTAND
SAHAJA YOGA
YOU NEED A SHRADDHAVAN HEART
Birthday Celebrations,
Mumbai 21-3-1977
love. If you know a person, it makes no
All the Sahaja Yogis who have come here, all
the other people who have joined us here,
who are celebrating this earthly Birthday of
mine, I am very thankful, very grateful and I
am filled with great joy and happiness and my
vibrations are flowing from my eyes as tears
accord on you because you know him from
outside, but if you love a person then you
know the person out and out You know him
so well, you know him, everything the way he
is, It is this knowledge that is what we call the
Para knowledge. That is the knowledge we
have to seek. All these books are only signalling
towards that. They are the milestones which
are telling us 'Go ahead, Go ahead'. They do
to see that in this Kaliyuga also there are people
who are grateful to a Mother who just gives
the abstracting known as vibrations. Actually
I do not give you. I cannot give or take, you
will be surprised. It's just emitted through me.
It is my Svabhava. It has to be that way, I
can't help. It is a being that is being. You
not solve the problem of entering into the
kingdom of God. I request you that you all
should come to this stage of understanding the
cannot make it something else. It acts on its
Divine within you, the love of God that is within
own. It goes on working, It is beyond me
you which is trying to overflow from you and
enjoy the sense of emitting and giving. Giving
to control myself from loving all of you. I
do not know how people learn to hate! I
has the greatest joy and pleasure. There is no
haven't got sufficient time even to love
pleasure in taking and when you receive it,
people! I find twenty four hours much fess.
I do not know how people sit down and
manipulate and think in a eyesfold manner,
you start giving You have heard talking about
all he has done work in Rahuri. In Rahuri,
when I was going to Rahuri University the
how to be hateful! Hatred has no power but
people in the nearby village knew that our car
will be going that way. They are ordinary
villagers, they have never read any yoga, they
a destruction of yourself and others.
On this state I would request you to
think of love all the time. Love is all knowledge.
do not understand anything more about
vibrations than these feelings that you get. It is
Knowledge is all love. It's nothing beyond. If
you have knowledge, it has to pass the test of
subjective knowledge. It has no work. It is a
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
16
subjective experience which you feel on your
fingers in your being, the bliss of God and as
I was going, I just felt a jerk in the car because
so many people were just lying on the road
and some were standing on the road stopping
the car and they started shouting my name. I
the Satyayuga has started. This is the reason
why you are seeking these vibrations on your
fingers and none of these gurus and Rishis and
all those people have mentioned these things
because this is only possible when the Shri
Chakra is brought up. It is here we have to
feel it and understand. It is for all of you to
was wonderstruck!
accept it with an open heart. I do not want
I said how did you know that I was
anything from you, What can you give to
me? I do not want anything but I want my
in this car. They said, "Mataji you have given
us vibrations. We knew this was the car which
children to be happy. I pray for their
was bringing us vibrations. So now you have
happiness. I live for them and all the time
to get down here". I just got down and
embraced all of them and our Sahaja Yogis
who were waiting at the other hand, I said
whether I am asleep or awakened or in
the middle state when they call this
Sabhrant', I am just with you. Every
*doesn't matter'. This is what is Sahaja,
moment you are in my thought. I wish all
that is loving people and at that time I just
of you a very very happy new year today
because it is Navrodh and Navrodh is the
day when Navroh started his work on this
thought of how once with Rama, how you felt
those things with people, very simple people
of very simple heart with shraddha, how they
had those feelings of receiving your love and
feeling it!. Everyone needs love. You cannot
earth, he was a great Sahaja Yogi. He was an
incarnation of Dattatreya himself Shastras have
told you about Mohammad Saheb. I have to
exist without love. Your whole being is based
IS
tell you that he was my father and he was the
incarnation of Dattatreya himself He was not
on love and I wish all of you in this country
to understand that "unless and until there
an ordinary person Though the people
is love in your heart don't try to do
tortured his life, every moment that he live.
anything outside, because if you do it you
they tortured him and Hazrat Ali is a very
will be found out (exposed) in no time".
very great incamation. They are only one. Only
Every human being understands what
once Brahmadeva has incarnated and he has
is love. There are lots of things that are
incarnated as Hazrat Ali. So, these people are
happening in you. There are cosmic changes
that are taking place today within you, I know
that it's happening, The Shri chakra itself
has descended on this earth and already
so great, you cannot criticize them. They are
so great. Every word that they have spoken is
a Mantra. Every thing they have told you about
the Namaz, it is nothing but the Kundalini
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004
17
The Divine Cool Breeze
and the egoistic Tomfoolery that is going
Jagruti. Mohammad Saheb has done the
on is to make fun of everyone. Oh man!
greatest work in Sahaja Yoga and has done
please awaken yourselfr to this great
occasion of understanding This dynamic
force is trying to bubble out of you. We
have to change this world and transform
the greatest advancement as far as the
Kundalini Jagruti is concemed. How can you
criticize him? I can't bear to hear even a word
against him. I know how much he has been
it into a beautiful creation because the
tortured and the same people today are
governing this country who are talking against
creator will not allow his creation to be
destroyed. If you do not accept the truth
you will be destroyed. So please, please,
him! When you cannot reach even at his feet
why should you take such a big step?
again as a Mother I ask you to accept the
Divine Truth, the Divine Love and to be one.
I wish all of you, all the Sahaja Yogis and all
the people who are seeking the greatest of
Understand what have you done in life? What
have you got with yourself that you are
criticizing these great personalities! Khwaza
Nizzamudin Saheb was a great Aulia, there is
greatest, the highest of highest achievements
in the awareness of God and His love. That is
what it is, otherwise the rest of it is all useless.
Those who have sought other kind of Satvik
no doubt about it, and a horrible king like
Khilji tried to trouble him and he himself was
murdered and his name has gone to the dying
desk. Today Khwaza Nizamuddin Saheb, you
or Tamsik things in life have gone to waste.
and
go and see the vibrations there. You
go
They have gone to hell and they are completely
see at Chisti and see his Makbara, also at
destroyed. You do not want to do that. You
are simple people, ordinary people and that's
Ajmer Sharif, you will see the same. At Patna
you go and see Patna Saheb where you have
why you are the best people because you do
got our Mahaveer Saheb, also vibrations are
not suffer from any extremes. You have a very
simple heart, you are leading a very religious
there. All these people are speaking of the
same truth I am telling you, but today you can
life and a sanctified married life. This place is
make them out. You will know who they are.
for the people who are in the middle path of
Lord Buddha. Sahaja Yoga is the integration
of all the truths of life and I can prove it to
you on the Kundalini that what I say is the
Please try to humble down yourself.
First of all get this eternal truth within
yourself. Let your being be that subjective
instrument to understand what is God.
fact, is the fact. Unless and until you take the
name of Hazrat Ali Saheb, your Swadhishthana
Don't be driven away by a few readings
here and a few readings there. Don't be
Chakra cannot be cured and all the Sahaja
Yogis know about it. And in the Sahaja Yogi
driven away by these small hearted ideas
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Issue: I1 & 12 - 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
18
Puja we have to take the name of Mohammad
in the programmes you can listen to my
Saheb again and again and that of Hazrat Ali
lectures by which you will understand. But it
is not the understanding through your
and also we have to take the name of Jesus,
hearing but it is the understanding through
your heart and through your feeling of
The Lord who is the ashraya of this world
described by Shri Krishna in the Bhagwat Gita,
He was the Mahavishnu. You can read it for
vibrations, only you can get the Kundalini.
Yesterday I have very much requested you
and again I am requesting you that to
understand Sahaja Yoga you don't need
yourself and you will be suprised that all that
the described for Mahavishnu are absolutely
the same as Jesus Christ was, So I request
too much of brains. What you need is a
you not to be small minded, you have not
heart, is a shraddhavan heart, and if you
known the truth so far. So, try to understand
it, to be subjective, to feel it, to understand it.
All the books are saying the same things as I
am saying, only thing that I can do it. I am not
doing it. It is just happening. I have come on
this earth just for this ignition This is the last
point of ignition This has to happen and this
will happen. Let us see in this country, in this
beautiful yogabhumi how many people accept
it. May God Bless You All, Again and Again
have that it will work out. The time has
come for many flowers to be fruits. The time
is there. I thank you again and again for
showing this great love to me. It's like
when I feel the ocean of my love when it
flows to the shore of all your hearts, the
shore gives it back as a reaction. It's a
parabolic movement, when my love passes
through you and comes back to me as
love I enjoy it. It's such a beautiful
I bless you, I am going to London on the
experience. I mean it is a different experience
perhaps that cannot be coined or put into the
bottles. Thank you very much again and again.
I thank all the trustees and all of you again
and again. May God Bless You with all ins
prosperity, with all its goodness, kindness and
the eternal Param Chaitanya should descend
on you all your values.
twenty fifth and hope all of you who have got
realisation in last two days will again come to
our programme in Bharati Vidhya Bhavan, on
tuesday we have a centre. We have also a
very nice centre in Arya Samaj Rd. I hope all
of you will take deeper interest into Sahaja
Yoga, learn all the methods and master the
Kundalini. There are so many among us who
know about it and you can talk to them. Even
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Faith, Devotion and Resignation
REALISATION
A Milk-maid used to supply milk to a Brahmin
Priest living on the other side of a river Owing
to the irregularities of the boat service, she
could not supply him milk punctually everyday.
Once, being rebuked for her coming late, the
I did not know Sahajyoga upto January,
1980. But I always harboured in my heart an
ambition to achieve something in Yoga'
invented by our ancient people. And due to
poor woman said, "what can I do? I start
early from my house, but have to wait for a
this, I had an attraction towards, "Yoga' from
childhood,
long time at the river bank for the boatman
and the passengers". The Priest said, "Woman!
They cross the ocean of life by uttering the
name of God, and cannot you cross this little
Because of this everpresent attraction, I
attended the lecture of Mataji Shri Nirmala
Deviji. And in that programme of Kundalini
awakening, I got a rare thread of happiness.
and peace. With the help of this thread I want
Tiver?"
The simple-hearted woman became very
to make my life, full of real peace and
happiness.
glad at heart on learning this easy means of
crossing the river From the next day the milk
was supplied in the morning. One day the
Priest said to woman, "How is that you are
no longer late now-a-days?" She said, "I cross
the river by uttering the name of Lord as you
told me to do, and I do not stand now in need
of a boatman." The Priest could not believe
this and said, "Can you show me how you
I realise that God is present in our body
also. As, through eyes-we get the sensation of
vision, through nose-the sensation of smell,
through ears the sensation of hearing, Kundalini
is our means of realising presence of God in
the world.
By means of cold, clean, holy vibration given
by Mataji' we feel calm and happy
cross the river?" She took him with her and
began to walk over the water. Looking behind,
the woman saw the Priest in a sad plight and
said, "How is it, Sir, that you are uttering the
We can confirm the holiness of Mataji by
vibrations given by her photo also. Therefore
we can imagine how much great is our
"Mataji".
name of God with your mouth but at the same
time with your hands you are trying to keep
your cloth untouched by water? You do not
JAI MATAJI
fuily rely on him".
Ravee Bhavsar
Entire resignation and absolute faith in God
are at the root of all miraculous deeds.
A Legend
(Maha Avtar 1950)
Nehru Nagar, Dhulia
(Maha Avtar 1980)
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Daily Observances for Sahaja Yogis
All Sahaja Yogis should sit in meditation as
a part of their daily routine. In the morning,
meditate in the bed itself, after you are awake,
for about 10 minutes. Before leaving the bed,
In the evening perform Aarti' and sit in the
meditation. Getting into the Bandhana and
going through water treatment are essential
before going to bed.
bow in reverence to mother earth thrice. Get
into the "Bandhana', and go first to the place
of worship (where H.H. Mataji's photograph
is placed). Bow in great devotion before the
photograph, offer prayers and then do other
Always mention HH. Mataji with great
regards and speak Her praise. Proper
decorum must be observed when She is
present physically. We must be very humble,
receptive, and full of devotion Speak only
when She asks something. There should be
no interference in Her speech. She is
omnipotent, omnipresent and omniscient We
should accept everything She tells us and
practise it. At the time of H H Mataji's pooja
or when She arrives to a place, never offer
flowers or vermilion on Her head, always Her
lotus feet are to be worshipped. We should
make it a point not to touch Her feet without
Her permission.
work.
Perform Pooja only after bath. The seat
(31T) used for the pooja should be kept
clean. Material for the pooja should be of
high quality and separately preserved. Even
the broom for cleaning the place of worship
should be separate. Water should be fresh
from the tap and should be collected just before
commencing the Pooja. If copper vessels are
available, they may be preferred to other
vessels. Cloth, preferably red, for cleaning the
photograph should be washed and cleaned
All Sahaja Yogis should remember that
pooja and meditation are of paramount
properly and it should not be used elsewhere,
importance to them in life. If one wants to
deserve the blessings of cosmic Mother
While performing the pooja; first clean the
photograph with water Wipe it dry with cloth.
Apply vermilion, offer flowers, 'Bel' leaves
(de T) etc., recite "Mantra' thrice and
Jagadamba, total surrender, complete faith and
a heart full of devotion are essential. Nothnn
can be achieved by asking questions,
expressing doubts for thinking.
bow before the photograph (gu After
the pooja sit in meditation for sometime and
get into the Bandhana. Pooja should be
performed only after bath and the place of
pooja should be kept clean.
Rahul Bahan
Agra Road, Dhule (Maharashtra)
(Maha Avtra -1980)
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-22.txt 
 APHORISMS OF PATANJALI
Vs
SAHAJA YOGA
Patanjali's aphorisms on Yoga, knowni as
Patanjali Yoga. Sutras is one of the outstanding
works on Yoga and has been acciaimed as an
authority on Yoga since time immemorial.
According to some scholars these were
(b) Knowledge by inference (Anumana);
(c) Knowledge gained from teachings of
great people whose minds are free from
temptation, jealousy, hatred, illusion etc.
and who are interested in the welfare of
others. (Aptavakyam). This vrittis is
"Agam'
compiled to counter evil effects of Buddhism
which was then degenerated and which also
had the patronage of rulers. The aphorisms
are divided into four parts or chapters known
as Samadhi's Pad, Sadhana Pad, Vibhuti Pad,
2. Mistaking one thing for another
(Viparyaya).
and Kaivalya Pad.
3. Delusion (Vikalpa) Knowledge
conveyed only in words without having
anything corresponding in existence.
In the second aphorism of Samadhi Pad,
Yoga has been defined as restraining the
activities or thought waves of mind (Chittavritti
nirodha). Mind is made of Satva Guna, Rajo
4. Sleep. It is that vritti, in which absence
of all vrittis is experienced. Tamo Guna
Guna and Tamo Guna and activities of the
completely dominates the mind and
makes it and other sense organs inactive:
mind correspond to domination of one or more
of these Gunas. When mind becomes
This experience itself is a vritti and is
called sleep (Nidra)
thoughtless due to restraining of vrittis, the self
(atma) rests in his own state and at other times
5. Memory. Any experience leaves behind
its impressions in mind which remain
dormant till similar circumstances
he is identified with vrittis. Vrittis are classified
as under :-
1. Right Knowledge (Pramana)
reactivate them. These vrittis are
This is further classified as
memories
(a) Knowledge from direct perception
The activities of the mind can be stopped
by constant practice of prolonging the gap
(Pratyaksha);
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-23.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: I1 & 12 - 2004
22
between two vrittis and detachment. Stoppage
of vrittis is followed by Samadhi. In order to
difficult to attain. Sadhana Pad explains how
to proceed step by step. The first step is, (a)
reach this stage meditation on gross, subtle meditation and internal and extermal purity and
and subtler objects is suggested and ultimately mortification (Tapas). (b) study (Swadhyay)
fine objects are also meditated upon to make (c) devotion to God (Ishwar Pranidhan). Next
the mind thoughless. However, in this state of step would be constant practice of
mind individual consciousness exists. This is
Sampradnyat Samadhi. The next stage of
Asampradnyat Samadhi, is achieved by being different from matter and mind not being
prolonging the state of mind in which the mind
is free from all vrittis including those related to is Yoga of eight stages (Ashtanga Yoga). It
individual consciousness. "I' consciousness is must be noted here that Patanjali does not
removed in Asampradnyat Samadhi, although even mention the Yogic Postures (Yogasans)
certain impressions of previous Karmas and which are mastered by the people after long
experiences exist. Progress to reach this state ardous practice. He only says the posture for
depends upon dedication and confidence that meditation should be firm and pleasant
by constant practice realization of the self can (Sthirasukhamasanam). He has not attached
be achieved through Asampradnyat Samadhi
One more way is devotion to God (Ishwar also, and has devoted only five aphorisms to
Pranidhan). According to Patanjali, manifesting it. While discussing Ashtanga Yoga, he had
word of God is Pranava and by repetition of again emphasised devotion to God
this word and thinking on its meaning
introspective power is increased and physical
and mental obstructions are removed
discnmination between real and unreal and firm
conviction in mind about Purusha, the spirit
affected by any vritti. Further step suggested
much importance to breath-control (Pranayam)
Last three stages of Ashtanga Yoga viz.,
Dharana, Dhyan and Samadhi which are
related to inner development have been
Asampradnyat Samadhi is of two types.
Sabeeja, and Nirbeeja ie., with or without
attachment to wordly objects, which exists in
very subtle form, (seeds). Subtle impressions
called Samaskars if not destroyed get
awakened at an opportune time and make
discussed in Vibhuti Pad. These three are to
be practised with reference to one object
(Desh-some scholars call it Chakra). Dharna
is holding the mind on to some object.
Unbroken flow of knowledge from that object
is Dhyan and when the form of the object is
given up and only the unexpressed meaning is
öne do good or bad deeds. Also realization
of the self is not possible unless these are
reflected, the state is Samadhi. When all the
three are practised together, it is called
Samyam. Even this practice does not lead to
seedless (Nirbeeja) Asampradnyat Samadhi,
destroyed. These are removed in Nirbeeja
(seedless) Asampradnyat Samadhi.
Samadhis explained in Samadhi Pad are
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
23
as subtle desires still exist Rest of Vibhuti
Pad explains how different powers (Siddhis)
are gained by performing Samyan However,
subconscious states. Unless oscillations of mind
from one state to another are stopped,
performing Yoga Asanas and Pranayam, for
any length of time will not lead to
thoughtlessness Perhaps they must have been
very useful in ancient times in the circumstances
then prevailing, In modern times only Yoga
Asana and Pranayam are given maximum
they have little relevance in modern times:
According to aphorisms they are to be
discarded as obstructions in the progress.
Samayam on discrimination between Chitta and
Purusha (the spirit) has been suggested for
realization of the self
importance and preparatory stages like extemal
and internal purity, devotion to God, study of
scriptures are completely ignored.
However, unless subtle desires are
completely destroyed realization of the self is
not possible. It is stated in Kaivalya Pad that
only those desires will manifest themselves for
Patanjali's Yoga has goodness of its own
but from his methods it may be easily
concluded that it is not only difficult to practice,
to achieve the goal of Nirvana in this modern
time, but also it is not at all possible for the
ordinary person with family life toiling for even
which environment are most suitable. Other
remain stored up till proper environments are
available. Subtle desires are held together by
cause and effect, in that they are the causes of
good or bad deeds and the deeds in turn
create further desires by leaving behind subtle
impressions of the experiences. These are
stored in mind Response to external matters
also creates further new desires. Desires
obstruct discrimination between real and unreal,
the existence of his own and hence comes the
importance of Sahaja Yoga with its sim
imple
devices but with complete surrender to achieve
the fulfilment of life and to arouse the virtues
already existing in us by the kind grace of our
Divine Mother H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi.
ie between the spirit (real) and mind (unreal)
whereas such discrimination is the only way
attaining Kaivalya after the attainment of
Asampradnyat Samadhi
Sahaja Yogis, begin with thoughtless
of
awareness kindly granted to them by H.H.
Mataji in no time, by awakening and raising
their Kundalini to Sahasrar, when they also
Sadhana Pad and part of Vibhuti Pad
suggest practical methods. Nevertheless, by
themselves the aphorisms are of little help
without proper guidance from a right master,
dedication and devotion. It is difficult to attain
receive Divine Vibrations. The thoughtless,
blissful awareness, which the Divine Mother
grants to Sahaja Yogis, in short time, would
more or less correspond to, depending upon
individual physical, mental conditions, a stage
of Asampradnyat Samadhi with attachment to
wordly matters.
thoughtless stage by following various methods
suggested in Sadhana Pad. Chitta Vrittis arise
due to mind going into supraconscious, and
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12- 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
24
मे
(Tatra Niratishayam Sarvadnya Beejam).
Vibrations are Pranava flowing from her (Tasya
Vachaka Pranava) which remove obstructions
of ailments and other defects from physical
and mental beings Vibratory awareness helps
Outside the meditation stage mind is free to
its own way. Involvement in routine life
causes the mind to oscillate between sub-
go
conscious and supra-conscious, which would
be avoided by keeping attention in central
channel (Sushumna) By a little practice mind
develops habit of coming back to the centre
guarding against possible impediments in the
progress. She is so kind that She grants
realisation and thoughtless awareness to all.
after doing its work. Attention could
Devotion to Her is Ishwar Pranidhan which
subsequently be raised to heart and then
sahastrar. It may thus be possible to stabilize
in thoughtless awareness state when Kundalini
destroys seeds of previous deeds and
makes salvation a distinct possibility.
Devotion is total surrender and attachment
rests in sahastrar External badhas are
from the very spirit. She is supreme and knows
automatically cleared. H.H. Mataji has stressed
the importance of stabilising in thoughtless
present, past and future of every one.
awareness state as attaining the next stage i.e
मत्समः पातकी नास्ति पापध्नी त्चत्समा न हि।
Nirvikalpa, is possible only after stabilising in
एवं ज्ञात्वा महादेवी यथायोग्य तथा कुरू।।
this state.
(Maha Avtar-1980)
H.H. Mataji is sakshat Adi Shakti. Her
powers are all pervading. She is omniscient.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Love and Marriage
five of the hardest years in this life. This was
Before Sahaja Yoga, everything has an
element of danger in it because we do not
know what is really happening in any situation
or how we really feel. Love and marriage is a
due not to the difficulty of any of the things
that Sahaja Yoga involves but to my own
ignorance, stubbornness, insensitivity and
laziness-fine qualities for a saint! I actually
hindered my own progress.
dicey game with very unpredictable outcomes.
With the advent of our Mother's grace into
our lives with the gift of our own Self-realisation
it is possible for all life's previous uncertainties
to be washed away and the confusions
replaced by the clear view of absolute values.
But anether danger can arise once we have
In the West the problems are different from
those facing Eastern seekers, but in many things
we all share the same difficulties but perhaps
disguised in slightly different ways. One of
these is the question of love and marriage, it
is a rich ground for negativity to attack-after
come to Sahaja Yoga if we do not realise that
Self-realization does not mean instant perfection
all the family forms the base for our lives. For
(for majority of seekers). Our judgements do
not become infallible overnight, they have to
grow in wisdom, just as in any newborn child
myself the problems lay in the forming of my
own very unrealistic ideas as to how marriage
would come to me and what it would entail
we have to imbibe knowledge with
understanding, it cannot be blindly memorised.
The Ego and Supergo battled with each other
producing visions of either a cold, reliable
My own experience in five years of Sahaja
Yoga has been a series of revelations begining
with the indeseribable feeling that the first
meeting with our Mother awakens within us.
The realisation that there is truth and beauty,
and above all, Divinity more beautiful and real
partner or a romantic besotted one. The
outcome of such extremes was the same, a
strong desire to avoid marriage and just
dedicate myself to Mother and forget such
human desires. My most recent revelations in
Sahaja Yoga have come with my marriage in
the presence of our most Compassionate and
Understanding Mother when I felt the joy of
surrender and trust in Her protection and I
wept with that joy as I realised that being a
than even our wildest dreams beheld. From
this point my life was really changed-every
part of it was transformed by this first
realisation. However, this did not mean that I
became a saintly and wise persons from that
loving wife to my new husband was all part of
the play
moment, no, in some ways these have been
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12-2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
26
Just as our Self-realisation is the beginning
on the contrary-but it is the overcoming of
such disturbances with love that creates the
of a much greater realisation so marriage is
the beginning of a much greater harmony,
both have to be nurtured and allowed to grow:
but
bond
For myself, our marriage has been blessed
by a baby, our own Shri Ganesha. Words
Negativity has to be fought as never before,
the attacks are even more subtle and they like
cannot describe the feelings that this coming
event is giving us, it is a miracle. Our Mother
nothing better than to play on such a special
and important union. If every test and obstacle
can be faced together nothing can harm you,
has guided us from Hell to Heaven and wve
can only thank Her and surrender at Her
this does not mean there is never a cross word-
Perfect Feet.
Om twameva sakshat Shri Gruhalakshmi, Shri Sita Rama Sakshat,
Shri Adi shakti Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah.
A SAHAJA YOGI
from London
(Maha Avtar-1980)
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-28.txt 
 (News from Switzerland)
Shri Mataji and Shri Hanumana's
VISIT TO EUROPE
Like the Pushpaka Flying charriot of Shri
The golden feet of Shri Hanumana are so
Rama, the carriers of various airlines have taken
few days ago in
Orlians, Gregoire arrives by car with Shri
Mataji for the evening programme, But the
wonderful For instance,
a
Shri Mataji to the four corners of Europe.
Switzerland being centrally located, we are
watching Shri Mataji's travel as a huge 'vardan'
hall was empty. No one reached at that time
given to our continent Within one month our
Divine Mother is visiting Portugal, Spain,
He went back to the car and told it to Shri
Mataji She smifed and gave a little bandhan.
France, Italy, Switzerland and Germany. She
Fifteen minutes later the hall was absolutely
does it aş the Satgurumata, awakening fifteen
eities with well over twenty public programmes
and a few pujas. The Devi Puja will be
packed. Most of the people got their
realization. The French Sahaja Yogis Marie,
Annick, Jean-Yues and Christine, who had
prepared everything, were beaming with joy.
celebrated on 12th October in Zurich This
breathtaking rythm gives some idea of the
speed at which Sahaja Yoga has started
manifesting in Europe. Thank God (Who was
smiling all along at Her childrens' eagerness)
In the same way in Madrid, from where we
got a phone call yesterday, Shri Mataji went
with only two Swiss Sahaja Yogis.
Undoubtedly, the programme there was a
the Sahaja Yogis who have been working out
the details of this journey were clever enough
to ardently pray for the help of Shri
Hanumana. And as He moved in and
supervised their work, each step of this
complete success! Now we are going to
welcome Shri Mataji the day after tomorrow
at Zurich airport. Monday, She will speak in
Rome. Life goes on at the speed of Shri
Hanumana's jump to Lanka! We have been
International pilgrimage was highly successful
with superb efficiency, humour, and love. The
heavenly scene of the seekers meeting with
translating texts on Sahaja Yoga in the
German, French, Italian, Spanish and
Portugees languages and thus we are growing
the one who was sought took place
everywhere. Tears of gratitude in their eyes!
Those shining children were taking bath in the
in the collective awareness.
Therefore our attention, full of respect and
love, is very much on our elder brothers and
newly found self And we, Sahaja Yogis, are
so blessed to witness this festival of love and
sisters from India. We wish that Sahaja Yoga's
backbone in Maharashtra can deepen in
purity.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-29.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004
28
intensity and send vibrations to all over the
do it with the same love and warmth that you
have always shown We need feelings, the
beats of the Indian heart. Your backing, in
your meditation, helps us as messengers under
world. We wish that all the centres in India
progress together will full coordination,
synthesis and universality. And we wish that in
the next time you will welcome more new
the leadership of Shri Hanumana.
brothers and sisters from abroad and you
will
Yours,
Gregoire, Arneau, Antoinette,
Marie-Laure, Catherine,
Matthias, Brigitte
(Maha Avtar-1980)
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-30.txt 
 An Experience
feel something but then I thought the window
Eversince I can remember, I was always
was open. He asked me about my father who
reading books, going to the Library and getting
more and more books. Then I started travelling
through Europe. I settled in London and
became very fond of Pop Music, Girls,
Alcohol, Drugs and the rest of it.
had died a week before. It surprised me how
they knew. They told me to go and see H H
Mataji. She asked me if I was doing Hata
Yoga, I replied in the affirmative. She just
touched my hand and said my health was not
good but I would be alright. Then they told
As this brought only disappointment, I read
more books which professed to offer peace
me to ask the question - If H.H Mataji is the
of mind, relaxation and good health. I ended
holy spirit, I did ask and was sacred inside,
Lip doing Karate, Hatha Yoga, different kinds
and the fear went. We all had nice Indian
of concentration, and meditation with no
food and sweets and talked about Sahaja
results.
Yoga. I liked these people around me and
they looked so familiar to me. I even asked
I believed that there was somebody who
knew and wanted to find the Guru who was
one of them if we had met before. He
always being advertised in Magazines which
answered with a smile : May be in the past
young people in London read about different
life
courses and meditations. All these Gurus
I came back home and all of a sudden just
wanted money which put me off.
before going to bed something happened. I
was completely thoughtless and felt very light.
I went to lay on the bed and closed my eyes
and found myself in complete silence. I tried
to think but could not. I slept like a baby.
One day a friend of mine told me that there
is a lady from India who is teaching Yoga and
he showed me the Photograph of the Divine
Mother. We went along to the House in North
London. It was small room we entered, about
After that day I went nearly every week to
twenty people were sitting on the floor before
the Divine Mother. They had a chart of the
HH Mataji's meetings. It was always pleasant
channels within the body which looked familiar.
There was a feeling of security and I felt very
to listen to what She was saying.
My friends realised that I was losing interest
in parties, and night clubs etc. but I was still
safe.
going to these places. I started getting pain in
my heart, stomach and head. I thought that
One of the people present came to me and
asked if I felt a cool breeze in my hands. I did
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12-2004
30
The Divine Cool Breeze
After puja Mataji asked me if I felt a cool
breeze which I did and she said, "May God
something was seriously wrong with me and I
went to hospital to have a complete check-up
and found that medically nothing wrong with
Bless You".
me. Since I never trusted Doctors, I became
After that I came to live with other Sahaja
very paranoid and started imagining all sorts
of things.
Yogis in the Ashram and learned more about
Sahaja Yoga In the last two years I have had
Gradually at Sahaja Yoga meetings I
discovered that the pains I was getting, were
caused by obstructions in the Chakras and
so many experiences which helped me to
understand myself and others better than I
could before.
that the Kundalini was trying to clear them
There are no words to express what we all
Still I was half sceptical and half believing
owe to our Holy Mother. Only in meditation
when our hearts are clear we can realise that
One day I got invited to the Puja, the typical
Indian style of worship. I performed it
we are all part of Her big heart.
respectfully but did not understand the
meaning HH Mataji with Her hand on my
Salutations again and again to you
Mahamaya, the Queen of Cosmos.
Agya Chakra said that I must not doubt Her.
MIODRAG
From Yugoslavia
At Present in London
(Maha Avtar-1980)
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-32.txt 
 Reality of Life
Umpteen religious and other theories of
reaching God exist in the world today. Every
individual has his notions about God Almighty.
As such, one's belief and faith depend to a
comprehension. This is so because they have
discovered certain sources of energy which
they have been able to use to their ends, thus
controlling them. An energy which controls
them is not acceptable. However more than
anything else they just befool themselves. Don't
they know that it is Life Energy by which they
live, yet they have no idea where it comes
large extent upon one's personal opinion of
the Lord. There are so many other things which
give him newer ideas about God; namely
books, people and the countless Gurus who
circulate these days. In the end a person ends
up having a cock-eyed idea of the Lord or he
stops believing in God. Psychologists come
up with statements like believe in God because
of fear, conditioning and a whole string of other
reasons. What they fail to see is that God is
not anybody's opinion, nor is He a fictional
character who exists because people believe
in Him due to some reason but that He is the
sole reality. Everything owes its existence to
Him. A new idea which has now entered the
heads of people and is rather frequently stated
very dramatically is that - "We do not believe
in God, but in a supernatural power". What
they cannot understand and see is that there is
no difference since this supernatural power is
none other than the Power of God, the Divine
from and where it goes. Too many foolish
ideas exist, eg. Life is for living and that is it'
But what about knowing your own meaning?
This is something which few people bother
about. Everyone must know what the next
person is doing, try to give some deep sounding
logic to nonsense, try to find meaning in
cheating, lying, idiotic behaviour, indicency but
completely ignore oneself From the World's
point of view this state may sardonically be
15
said to be "selfless' for our is perpetually
bothered about others. In other words there
is total misidentification the whole time. To
give character to vulgarity big words are given.
Free sex is given names like love; drinking
alcohol as fun; bad language as communication,
artificiality as sophistication. No one seems to
Power which loves, thinks, knows, co-
realise that in harming others, they are harming
ordinates and in short does everything. How
else is this entire universe running the way it is
THREL
no one more than themselves.
If someone says drinking is bad, no one
in such perfect co-ordination? There has to
listens because slow poisoning is acceptable.
Not only is the body affected but more so
be some big organisation behind the whole
thing A Power which can think, organise, know
one's awareness which is very important in
and do everything is not within their
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004
32
The Divine Cool Breeze
knowing one's self However, everything seems
place and great Divine Incarnations have come
on Earth. This could be one of those times.
to matter except one's self which is all
Therefore, instead of negating the possibility
and building up a resistance why not come
and see and find out yourself what it is all
about. Then another question which follows is
Who is Mataji? To this the answer is as
important and is the only way of knowing God.
But, then again when one is used to dirt it is
quite useless speaking to him of cleanliness. In
the same way a person used to erying and
depression fits cannot understand what joy and
happiness are. Most of all, the man of today
is used to thinking 24 hours a day and cannot
Mataji replies- "First find out your own
meaning and know yourself, then you shall
understand a state of thoughtlessness but total
know Me."
awareness where, there is, truth, peace,
calmness and joy. Truth and joy go together
It is not possible to say anything of someone
so Great, infinite as Mataji. It is just sufficient
For too long have people looked upto others,
to know that She is our Mother who loves us
who know as being too Great for them to
so fully and completely that we cannot actually
fathom how much. We may falter question of
know, but now the time has come for them to
know themselves realise, their Greatness, know
doubt, but our Mother loves us eternally.
the Truth and their own joy. How can all this
Therefore, as good children, it is our duty also
to be what our Mother expects of us. And
happen? Well, the answer is simple- Sahaja
Yoga.
what She expects of us is to be jewels, shining
This can happen now because our Divine
Mother Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi is here to
with purity, love, humility, joy and greatness in
the knowledge of ourselves and Her glory. A
child loves his mother, just because she is his
make it happen and she has said that it will
happen. According to Mataji - it is blossom
time and thousands of seekers will get their
realization. A general-reaction to this statement
is; what is so special about this time? Well,
mother and when your mother is the Divine
Mother, why fear anything! Just be happy,
joyful and loving in Her overflowing protective
love.
the answer is that there have been periods in
Om twamev Sakshat, Shri Adi Shakti
Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah.
time when important happenings have taken
Maneesh
(Maha Avtar-1980)
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-34.txt 
 The Victory of the Soul
Let us sing, let us sing ever the glory of the mother;
Let us dance, let us dance ever with the bliss of the Divine
The glory of the soul is ages old,
With the setting of mankind in the soil of mother Earth
And the coming of incarnations ever revealed the path,
All often for the victory of the soul
Let us sing, let us sing ever the glory of the Mother;
Let us dance, Let us dance ever with the bliss of the Divine.
The Universe is a poetry of the Divine in nature,
In a nutshell representation of a human with virtues;
Marvelous enough to know marvelous combination,
All often for the victory of the soul.
Let us sing, let us sing ever the glory of Mother;
Let us dance, let us dance éver with the bliss of the Divine.
The chapter in the poetry, telling ever the reality,
Are the coming of incarnations to guide the humanity3;
When fallen in sick and sullen in goal,
All often for the victory of the soul.
Let us sing, let us sing ever the glory of Mother;
Let us dance, let us dance ever with the bliss of the Divine.
The coneluding chapter to conclude near is Sahaja Yoga,
Surprise thee not! certain to happen in this Yuga3;
With the advent of the Mother we attain the goal,
All often for the victory of the soul.
Let us sing, let us sing ever the glory of Mother;
Let us dance, let us dance ever with the bliss of the Divine.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-35.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: I1 & 12 - 2004
34
Fear thee not, the Mother is here,
Worry thee not, the Divine is here;
Perfect in our pursuit, sincere in our devotion,
All often for the victory of the soul.
Let us sing, let us sing ever the glory of MotherB
Let us dance, let us dance ever with the bliss of the Divine.
Sinking of a ship with sailors of offenders
Yet to come a long long distance;
Look thee not, look thee not; for us the Divine,
All often for the victory of the soul.
Let us sing, let us sing ever the glory of Mother;
Let us dance, let us dance ever with the bliss of the Divine.
Forget thee not the purpose of life,
With the pursuit of truth in the kingdom of God3;
Foretold by the sages of the ages and saints of the legends,
All often for the victory of the soul.
Let us sing, let us sing ever the glory of Mother:
Let us dance, let us dance ever with the bliss of the Divine.
The victory of the soul is with thy hands,
The nectar of the Divine is wetted in the vein;
With the advent of the Mother we achieve the goal,
All often for the victory of the soul.
Let us sing, let us sing ever the glory of Mother;
Let us dance, let us dance ever with the bliss of the Divine.
S. Ganesan
Delhi University
(Maha Avtar- 1980)
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-36.txt 
 the
Moving
Finger
The mouing finger arites, O
and having writ il moves on,
all they piely
can scralch a single word donn.
A young girl of sixteen fascinated by these
lines so much that she lived on them for twenty-
six years. If there was a "Moving Finger" who
could control your lives, then what was the
need for temples, churches and worship? A
question which haunted her for many years to
relationship, but when she bowed to touch
Her Lotus Feet, she realised that more than a
Mami, a "Mother" was needed. The change
was all in a few micro-seconds. She asked
Her Holiness to bless her daughter Ratna who
was accompanying her, Ratna, a student of
Miranda House felt completely relaxed in H.H.
Mataji's presence (for which she herself was
come
Then one day she heard a saying "Arise,
Awake and Stop not till the goal is reached".
It appealed all right and so she got up at 4
am. (called herself a Karmyogi) and kept on
working, but still the problem of life and its
meaning were not being solved. Everything
appeared existing but what was her role in
life? This was à question, probably an eternal
surprised).
: How are you bete?
: I am alright Mataji, but I
would like to know about
H.H. Mataji
Ratna
the Third Eye which
Lobsang Rampa wrote
about
: Bete can anyone operate
in between the eyebrows
and open the third eye? In
what case all the surgeons
one!
H.H. Mataji
May be we were not the lucky ones, like
those born when Shri Ram and Sita, Radha
and Krishna, Lord Jesus and Mother Mary
came down on Earth to Bless them. Some
times I thought that may be we could still get
would be much sought for
(Laughter all around as no
one can stop laughing in
Her presence),
: Mataji is it possible that the
Divine
a Darshan of Mahavishnu or have a vision of
Sakshat Shakti Herself. I kept on thinking and
lo! we were Blessed.
Ratan
be
power
converted into evil as
In 1980, Her Holiness Mataji Nirmala Devi
was in Delhi. She was here to awaken the
Kundalini
shown in the latest movies
"the omen, exorcist etc".
: The Divine Power always
remains Divine, there is no
H.H. Mataji
This young girl now a mother of grown up
children went to meet Her Holiness as She
doubt in it It is a Power
happened to be her Mamiji (aunt) by
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-37.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 2004
36
The Divine Cool Breeze
rush you upto any place of pilgrimages. She
was the lucky one to have made it! Yes!
Mataji's looks and glances are enough. Even
Her photograph vibrates. It is absolutely true.
Our beloved and revered Mataji absorbs all
our sorrows, and this keeps us always smiling.
Smiling, as we always are, others want to know
which can never finish. If
you forget your path, I may
give you a little jolt, that's
all. My love for all of you
is always there.
: In the spiritual path, is it
Ratna
necessary to wear good
clothes?
the secret.
H.H. Mataji : Once the Kundalini is
Then, as there are no secrets in "Sahaja
awakened, She passes
through six chakras
touching the Sahastrar
which is the
Yoga" we told them say Jai Mataji.
Mrs. Verma
B-18, Press Enclave, New Delhi
Sth September 1980
final
destination. All these
chakras have Deities to
JAI SHRI MATAJI
guard them. Once the
While doing all the things in our life, a time
Mahalakshmi chakra
comes when we feel that we are unsatisfied
At that time, if we try to think further we do
(Manipur) is aroused, you
have to respect Her by
putting on your best and
being scrupiously clean.
Mahasaraswati demands
not get a peace of mind as our mental condition
is disturbed. We can be satisfied only by real
source of happiness. And that source of
happiness or strength or power can be gained
from 'Sahaja Yoga' built by Mataji.
precision and neatness and
So on.
And such type of happiness which is totally
distinct from others cannot be obtained by
any other means. While getting this joy, I feel
The Goal was reached. HH, Mataji with
Her glances and touches had given Ratna self-
realization (awakened her Kundalini)
the presence of super-natural power. And with
the help of that super natural power of Mataji's
vibration I am confident to improve rapidly
and trying to get more and more strength by
means of Mataji's vibrations for us and other
Sahaja Yogis.
The Moving-finger moved on and the
blessed everyone in the room, and now we
understood that all that had been written for
us could be scratched down with all H.H.
Matjai's blessings.
With Ratna and her whole family meditating
and taking salt-water treatment in night, life
seems to have developed a new meaning.
Sanjeev Jivan Nandode
Dhulia
(Maha Avtar-1980)
No hurry, no worry, no taxis, no cars to
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-38.txt 
 A LETTER OF SHRI MATAJI
(Translation of a Marathi Letter of H.H. Mataji)
LONDON
Friday, Aug. 22, 1980
My dear Sahaja Yogi Petkar
and other Sahaja Yogis,
There was no occasion to write to you for very long time. These days I write only when
some work comes up in Bombay, as the work is in full swing in England, However, people here
are addicted and everywhere laziness and negativity have their full sway. England is the heart
of Universe but it is so much neglected that it must be set in order without delay
All of you are very fortunate to have been born in a holy place, especially Poona which
is the place of Shri Ganesha. Try to understand that you have become entitled to God's such
immense blessings only because of your several good deeds (Sukriti) in your previous births,
I have given you only what was already yours and nothing of my own Much more is due to
you and you shall get it My attention is attracted to impediments and pit falls. There is no
problem about Poona and Rahuri people. Please do understand that, I feel relieved (in this
atmosphere) to see you enjoying in the ocean of bliss, so keep it up. We, here, are not so
fortunate as you are. Work is going on continuously. There are many difficulties, not for me, but
for these foolish people. How can they be set right? There are many such problems. You should
take interest and solve them because I do not wish anything and therefore the question of
fulfilment of my wish does not arise. All of you should therefore keep a desire in your minds
and pray for helping out your English brothers and sisters.
Your progress is keeping the Sahaja Yoga alive in my heart. Whenever I feel fed up,
your letters to feel satisfied. Therefore, please keep writing. All should write letters
I read
regularly.
Ever yours,
Your mother NIRMALA
(Maha Avtar-1980)
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-39.txt 
 SEEKING
Tondon, 24-07-1979
dead Those who say we are seeking are living
Yesterday, I met a lady, and she told me
that she was seeking God. I said what do you
think of God? What are you seeking? When
we say we are seeking, do we know what are
we suppossed to seek and do we understand
how we are going to feel our seeking complete
and also seeking The little bit if you understand
that a desire is created within a little animal
called as amoeba by giving him hunger. Just
think of it. It has no brain, it has just a small
nuclear, but it can feel it's hungry. It has to eat
something to grow. It also knows it has to
reproduce and then it starts seeking. It also
knows how to take the food in but it does not
That we have reached the destination? Last
time I told you that seeking has to be genuine,
from a genuine heart, and that you cannot
purchase or you cannot put in effort about it.
But today I would like to tell you what are we
seeking. Let us see how the seeking comes
within us, from where? As shown here, there
is a centre called "Nabhi Chakra', which is
know how it digests. That part is not his job.
Even for us it's just the same So, the seeking
starts in a little amoeba and the whole evolution
is based on that seeking, gradualy improving
and improving the ways and means of seeking
while the desire is that of food only, alone.
here in the centre
Nabhi Chakra which is placed in our spinal
There is also another desire or you can say
cord and manifests the solar plexus, which is
placed midway under your naval. This is the
centre that creates the seeking within us.
Seeking is only possible when something is
living. For example, what is the seeking of this
chair? It cannot think, it cannot move, you can
put it here or you can put it on the street. You
can smash it and throw it away, again use that
wood for some others purpose or make a
an emotion in the smallest of Amoeba is the
sense of preservation. It knows the dangers
that can finish his existence. When this little
amoeba becomes a human being in thousands
and thousands of years then the seeking is
changed. In the beginning it starts, of course
the food seeking is still there. That's the basic
You must have food to begin with, of course
the methods are improved, changed, evolved.
for the seeking of food but there is also a
stool out of it. It has no seeking of any kind.
Only when a thing becomes the living being
great understanding of how to preserve
yourself and your clan. The clubbing starts
like a amoeba you carn take a unicellular act.
It starts manifesting, seeking because it is
supposed to seek, not the dead. So, those
who say we are not seeking are as good as
from a very early age, even ants understand
that. So, they understand that we all have to
club together, unite together, integrate together
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-40.txt 
 39
Issue: 11 & 12- 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
Now money animals don't understand, this
is the creation of human beings only. So, for
if we have to protect ourselves and this seeking
of wholesomeness also develops gradualy in
the human beings and the expressions of that
is you can see all our efforts to preserve
them money becomes very important because
it is their own creation. We had barter systems
ourselves and to be clubbed together. These
efforts are expressed in our political and in
our economic enterprises.
but then we thought it is better to have some
sort of a medium which will convert one good
into another, so we start the money So, the
focus of man's attention, from food, goes to
Now, in the human beings a new seeking
power and from power to money. Sometimes
starts, is to have power over others. Animals
if somebody has lots of money then he wants
do not seek power, they have. For example a
to have power. It's but natural. There is nothing
tiger is much more powerful than say a poor
wrong in it.
rabbit. He is more powerful and a rabbit does
not want to become a tiger. He does not try.
Fundamentally it is a thing which is natural
for human beings to run after money and then
IS
Like every Dick, Tom and Harry would like
to become a Prime-Minister but a rabbit would
run after powver or vice versa. But beyond
that starts another seeking, it is the seeking of
knowing why are we here? What are we doing
here? What is the purpose of our life? Why
God has created us? To what purpose, to
what end or it is just a joke going around?
not try to be a tiger He understands I am a
rabbit and I must develop my means of
defences and my means of offenses by which
I exist. In the same way the tiger acts; he is
aware of his powers and also he is aware of
his limitations. And some of the animals also
Are we just foolishly being born, getting
married, having children and dying like amoeba
have a power of leadership in them. They
become leaders, you must have seen the, say,
birds that they have a leader. One leader going
and whenever the that leader changes the
or have we any other purpose? Many human
beings do not go beyond money or health
They want good health. I mean animals don't
direction, all of them change as we say are
like the tail of that leader. In the same way,
I know. But human
take any exercises as far as
being can go to any extent to preserve their
health but for what? I mean you may be a
wrestler for what? Just to fight each other?
the same way that goes that bird goes, the
leader goes all of them follow. So, this also is
expressed in human being in a very big way
that there are some born leaders who lead a
You might be the healthiest person living on
this earth but for what? You are just a weight.
group of people to some destination in which
they fulfil the seeking of that group. Now, the
seeking of the groups could be money. Mostly
What is your LISE? You may be the wealthiest
man going in the best cars or whatever you
may call it, all the so called luxuries of life and
it is.
IS.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-41.txt 
 Issuc: 11 & 12-2004
40
The Divine Cool Breeze
material well being, but for what? When such
have really given him the fulfilment and the
answer to this question, "why are we here',
then the turning point takes place in his life
and he becomes a seeker, not before that.
a question comes into our mind the new kind
of seeking starts which asks the question,
"Why are you here?" "Are you here just to
run in this rat race morning till evening earning
money and earming power and doing all useless
activities, pleasing others to show off your
money or to extract some money from others?
Is that the aim of your life?" Now, this is the
beginning of the fourth enquiry or the
fourth dimension in your awareness. This
Those who go to Gurus and say Mother will
you please give a job to my son, then you
don't know what to say, you should say to
such a person now my child you are not yet
fit, you are not yet mature to come down
here. Or if you go to someone to ask for say
a diamond ring or anyone says that I give
diamond ring in the name of God and you are
enquiry is also the flowering of the same
rudimentary thing called as hunger, hunger for
spirituality, hunger for God, hunger for higher
quite satisfied with such an answer then you
are no good as a seeker. No, useless for
Sahaja Yoga specially, or somebody who says
I will cure you and for curative you go to
things of life. This starts within us. That I call
is the genuine happening. In this seeking, we
get confused because by the time this seeking
someone, alright a person may cure you but
starts, you are already famished and finished.
How? Because you are already conditioned
by all kinds of nonsensical things going on.
you are no good as a seeker Why should one
cure anyone who is not seeking God? I mean
why should I repair this instrument if it is not
You may be calling yourself a British or an
going to carry my voice? Or else some of
I don't
Indian or some sort of an Australian or
you, if you go to a guru and if he tells you a
like this that you have to pay me some
know all sorts of things that people call
themselves. But in the eyes of God you are
story
money for this because if you don't pay me
money you cannot be involved in this kind of
thing, you better slap such a guru on his face
just a human being. I mean you don't have a
tail to begin with and you don't have your
head bent down like this. You have a head
and tell him that what do you think of me? It's
uprise, whether you are in Africa or in India
or in England or America, It's just the same.
As long as your head is up like that and you
don't have a tail, of course some people must
say, we have it, the way they behave, you are
definitely a human being. And if a human being
is evolved through various experiences of life
and realises that none of these experiences
complete indignity to your seeking. He wants
to involve you through taking money from you.
Can't you see that he is insulting you by saying
that you are such a materialist that when you
give me money then only you will be attached
to seeking of God? Just think of it. All such
arguments people give you and if you accept
them and if you follow such gurus, you cannot
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-42.txt 
 41
Issuc: 11 & 12 - 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
mature for seeking and you have to be genuine,
you have to be wise to understand that you
are seeking your fulfilment You are not seeking
when the child is born and gradually all the
sensations and cordinations of all these different
sensory organs and organs of motion and
organs of automatic functions are created
gradually, very gradually as he starts growing
But once the connections are established a
money and diamond rings and this
Tomfooleries that are going on and you are
not there to witness them and this foolish
human being starts acting on his own, the whole
body acts together, it knows when it is pinched
here in the finger the whole body knows that
you are pinched, the whole knows about what
has happened. The whole connection is
established. It's a living process, it is a growing
process which works out. But with human
beings there is a very big problem. The biggest
problem I would say, that they are always
identified with their imperfections, with wrong
ideas and only in the human beings these things
magical tricks of people but you are going to
witness the magic of God Then in the seeking
also you must know that if the God is the
universal being, anybody who professes that
we are the chosen ones and nobody else can
be a chosen one or he was the only prophet
or he was the only God, because we belong
to some organisation, it is nothing but absurd
fanatisism and ugliness. Do not deceive
yourself Please try to understand, self
deception will never be forgiven by God.
Amoeba, does he deceive himself, if he sees
the food there, does he? Or a lion or even a
happen, that is why one has to be careful.
Dog does very better than you do and it knows
what to eat, wvhat not to eat You don't know!
You don't know what is the real gunı and a
dirty guru and a horrible guru and a vicious
frog? It has such a little brain! It understands
what it is seeking. Will he deceive himself?
But human beings deceive themselves morning
till evening. We have to seek God, we have to
seek our fulfilment, we have to relate to that
man. You cannot make out. Somebody runs
out of the jail, he weares a dress, comes to
England and the guru great and thousands will
be running after him. They don't know, and
the more he has the better it is. But there is a
wholesomeness that is God the primodial being,
the whole of it. This is what we have to seek.
You are created for that. If you study a little
fetus in the womb of the mother, you will be
way. God has already placed that within
yourself. For your growth he has placed within
you, only He is testing your genuineness. But
if you are so obstinate as to stick on to some
misidentified, nonsensical thing, you cannot
amazed that the whole of the fetus is looked
after by the naval cord from the mother and
though all the portions of it are not yet fully
developed as to get connected with the brain
work it out. Be free from all these things. Open
out yourself. You all have to be aware of the
completely from the very beginning, till through
one channel it is fed, looked after, managed
whole. You all have to get Self Realisation.
Then the child is removed from the mother
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-43.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004
42
The Divine Cool Breeze
Though by that God will feel his fulfilment of
his creation no doubt and He has to do it, He
blind making you blind. What have you
achieved but nothing, but stark fanaticism? It's
will do it. But He will have to work very hard
and still and still if you do not accept the truth
then the truth will be expressed no doubt but
then the untruth has to be destroyed and at
that time those who are identified with the
a disease. It's sickness. Just come in the
kingdom of God and you will see that they
are seated there on the dais. They are ll
together and you like fools are fighting! Did
they ever say that, for example when Christ
came did he say that Moses was wrong? Did
he say so? When Nanaka came did he say
that Mohammad was wrong? Did any one of
these great saints say so? Then who are you
untruth will also be destroyed. Before that take
it to you wisdom and know what we have to
seek. We have to seek our wholesomeness
which we have partially expressed in our
political and our economical and social clubs.
All this has to be integrated. All the great
religions which have been propounded in the
growth of human beings, which have
substantially helped in the growth of human
beings, which are the substratum of their living,
to denounce them? This is one of the greatest
hurdles of so called seekers.
Then they are identified with their gurus. I
ask them one question, if you are so much
identified with your gurus, go ahead with them,
why do you come to me? I come to you
has to be integrated in that happening. For
Mother because I am suffering from Asthma,
example I meet suppossing a Hindu, then he
says Mother, how do you talk of Christ? We
don't believe in Christ. Now, you are a very
since I went to that guru. Then ask him to
cure you. Why do you come to me? If
guru had given you whatever you wanted, why
should you come to me? If he is a real guru,
I would see it written large on your face. I can
make it out and I will worship that man who
is a real guru. I will go all out to meet such a
your
great person not to believe in Chirst! Who are
you not to believe in Christ? What do you
think of yourself? What do you mean by
saying that you don't believe in Christ? Do
you know it is blosphemous to say such horrible
things about any great incarnation on this
person and I will regard him as the greatest
blessing for me also. But they are very few
and all hidden in the Himalayas or some places
from where they do not speak. Nobody listens
to them. They are very few. One of them tried
to go to America. Within five days he was
back in India. He wrote to me saying Mother
very difficult. Because you are identified with
earth? There are some who say we do not
believe in Moses or in Gurunanaka or in
Mohammad Saheb. Who are you? I don't
believe! I don't believe you. What is your
belief? On what it is based? Why do you say
such things? What do you know about them?
Only by going to churches or going to these
games, with playing games, you like people
who play games with you. You do not like
mosques or going to these cinemas. They are
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-44.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 11 & 12- 2004
43
people who tell you the truth. This is it, you
have to have it. But you must know it is the
concern. How can anybody who loves you
can tell you something that is detrimental,
injurious or absolutely dangerous for you?
They will not tell you, those who are fake will
never tell you about anyone. They will say O!
everything is fine on the other side of the earth.
If somebody genuine comes up they are not
But from the very beginning I have to warn
you, all such people are wasting their time and
my time. So please, all such people who are
still very much misidentified, please do not
trouble me with their arguments too much
because always I find that they are supposed
to be true seekers like the lady yesterday and
she started telling me, have you read this book
and have you read that book? I said I would
but by reading them I do not find anything in
going to say a word about it Take it from me
you. You have read them! What have
you
So, in your seeking, first of all your
misidentifications must drop out. You are so
achieved? Have you achieved anything?
Nothing Have you seen this guru and that
guru and that guru and that guru. I said may
misidentified with so many things, like people
would say why should we follow Christ? He
was a jew. I mean he has to be born in
someplace, somewhere and if it happens, you
have to belong to some religion somewhere.
You have to be born in England or you have
be, but what about you? What have you got?
She has Asthma, one eye is blown off. She
cannot sit, she has got a rigid body because
she says she has rheumatism. She is actually
possessed, and there she is a seeker and then
I am a
to be born in India or may be in Timbucktoo.
mean you have to be born in someplace.
So, the rest of them, they know and those
who live there also say, he is no good because
he was just born like us here. They want
a
question Mother,
she asked me
seeker and why should God be so unkind to
me?" You did not use your wisdom my child,
even today take heed to wisdom and know
that Thy God loves you with all his heart, with
all his soul, whether you love him or not. He
somebody to drop from heaven. It is so funny.
So for us those who are genuine seekers, must
open their minds fully, and if you want to waste
your time, go on. You go ahead with your
has placed this seeking within you. He has
placed all this instrument within you. He has
placed all the things so beautifully that
spontaneous it works in no time But people
are such, they come for realisation and if I tell
gurus. Go on wondering their marvels, giving
them money, giving them your women, giving
them your property, giving them everything that
you have, getting sick, mad, ending up with
lunatic asylam. I will not say, come my child,
them alright you come and sit near me. No, I
won't sit! You please take out your shoes.
No, I won't take out my shoes! There are
like that, even if you tell them why don't
come to me. But even then from the lunatic
asylam also if you realise your mistake and
come then God is the ocean of forgiveness.
many
you sit down with both the feet like this
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-45.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze
44
because you will be relaxed, you see. There
not faulter, you walk straight. You don't say
my legs improved because there were lights,
No. My eyesight improved because of my
lights, because there were no lights there was
a problem. As soon as there is a light everything
are many more reasons for what I say, why I
say. But still, No, Why should I do? There
are certain things which are very important for
Self-Realisation. If you want to have it, you
better do them. The whole attitude should be
becomes alright and you start understanding
the whole, you know how the whole thing is,
and you start walking straight and you know
of understanding that here you have to take
from me something. It's a gift for you and
there should be no obstinacy about taking gift.
where to sit and what is the chair and what is
1 mean that we do in normal courses, If there
the person.
is a gift for us then we do not become obstinate
about it. Do we? Do the human beings become
This is what you are seeking when you are
a seeker and if you are a true seeker you are
to be blessed, and its my job to see to it that
obstinate when there is a gift coming in? But
only when it comes to God, they wouldn't
even take out their shoes! It's such a great
thing you are asking for, which is the flowering
of your seeking from Amoeba stage to human
you reach there. You get your own powers,
not of your guru but of your own and that
understand yourself You get yourself
you
knowledge and the the knowledge of the
whole. But if you are not that, my children,
stage. In the human stage also thousands of
years you have been seeking and today when
you are at the threshold of it, why are you
obstinate? I say in Sahaja Yoga you get your
am sorry, you are still a baby in the seeking.
You have to still grow more and grow more
and then you come to me, when you are grown
Self-Realisation. No money is to be given or
enough, otherwise it is a headache to work on
taken As a byproduct you get your health
alright, of course your material things also are
the person like that or to give them Self
alright; many things improve as a blessings of
Sahaja Yoga but the real thing that happens to
you is that you get Self Knowledge, you get
Self-Realisation, that there is light enlightened
within you and you start seeing yourself, your
Realisation or anything whatsoever.
They are using sometimes, Sahaja Yoga for
curing. You do get cured, no doubt, even
cancer can be cured with Sahaja Yoga. It can
be. It can only be cured by Sahaja Yoga
centres and the centres of others because you
That's the point. But again it will come back
also get contacted with the whole, you get
to you, we cannot promise guaranty anything.
Unless and until you rise in Sahaja Yoga and
your wholesomeness. This is what Sahaja
Yoga has to offer to you and if you want to
have that please have it. The rest of it is just
become the mnaster of Sahaja Yoga we cannot
guarranty. You may get back that disease
again. Why should God not have a sense of
a byproduct because if there is a light you
do
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-46.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2004
45
The Divine Cool Brecze
giving for something as you have. He loves
you, not doubt He wants to give you because
he loves you, But if you are wayward and if
they see the pulsation of the Kundalini, the
Tising of the Kundalini, they get better in health
and everything inmproving, still they are doubting
and wasting their time! Their everything is
delayed, their cure is delayed, and everything
is delayed because of that. Alright, so we have
here jet planes, we have here supersonies, we
have missiles and we have also bullock carts,
you are prodigal by nature, why should He
continue to give you? It is a simple question
that you should ask yourself and then ask for
realisation, you get it After getting it also there
is a period of doubts, because first you get
Thoughless Awareness which is called as
See it takes lot of things to make this world.
Isn't it? So I take everything alright with all
my love 1 indulge them But I would request
Nirvichar Samadhi, when we say Awareness,
in the normal termonology it means alertness
to anything is awareness, but when we say
Samadhi it means Enlightened Awareness. You
you not to slow your progress like this. What
are your doubting is the question that I do not
want anything, if you are paying for something
then you should doubt it. You are not paying
for anything. What are you doubting? What
am I to gain from you? But still so many of
get Thoughtless Enlightened Aawareness and
then you get Doubtless Enlightened Awareness.
The state between the two, in some people is
so little that they just are there. I have some
people here who just got it and are there.
They don't pass through these two stages,
them sometimes come and tell me Mother now,
аге
but
we are doubting I say alright go on. When
there are mediocres and there are also
your doubts will be over you do come and
see me. That's how it is. I would request you
absolutely bullock carts, I would call them.
They cannot move with the time of a jet In
these modern times imagine a bullock cart
being pulled by a jet! Big problenm. But if you
are of that caliber and that quality, you get
to try to tell your mind that you have done all
kinds of things, you have been to all sorts of
gurus, you have been to all sorts of nonsensical
books and you have been to all kinds of
doubts. Now, settle down for a while. Settle
both the stages just like that. There's no doubt
after that. But then there are some who get
down. Tell your mind not to mislead
and
you
into doubts I don't know what they doubt
get it. This your own. This is your own
property. This is your own right to be there
So get it and if any doubts are coming then
here? They had the experience, they feel the
vibrations coming, they feel cool breeze flowing
through them, they feel it is working on others,
tell them to wait for a while.
May God Bless you all
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-48.txt 
 %23
%23
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-49.txt 
 "Those who do not meditate will be lost to Sahaja Yoga because wisdom can
only grow through your inner inspiration. You can have this inner inspiration
only if the power of Shri Ganesha manifests. He is the giver of yourwisdom."
(Shri Ganesha Puja 1998)
10>
