Divine Cool Breeze The 00 30K0 101 September-October, 2004

 NIRMALA NIVERSAL PURE RELIGIC In This Issue 3. Guru Puja Cabella - 04.07.2004 6. Shri Krishna Puja Mumbai - 28.08.1973 12. Gudi Padwa Puja, Delhi - 30.02.1976 17. A Poem 18. Prophecies and Fulfillments 23. 'AUM' Explained 25. 'Pledge' 26. Towards Libration TV Interview 14.03.2003 30. Sahasrara Puja Cabella (A Report) 04.05.2003 33. Give me strength- 34. Shri Adishakti Puja (A Report) - 2003 36. The Joy of Paris Collectivity 40. Guru Puja Cabella - 24.07.1994 44. Experience Still The Best Teacher 46. Sahaja Yoga in Morocco DHARMA IN VAHSIA

 THE D IVINE Co OL BREE ZE COOL BRE E Z E Published by Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. H.O. Plot No. 8, Chandragupt Housing Society Behind Hotel Grace, Paud Road Kothrud, Pune-411 029 Printed at Amarnath Press (P) Ltd. WHS 2/47, Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi - 15 Ph.:25268673 For Subscription Please Write To: Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 222, Desh BandhuApartments Kalkaji, New Dehi-110019 Tel. No. : 011-26422054, 26216654 Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles,Miracle Photographs etc. to: Shri O.P. Chandna G-11 (463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110034 Tel. No. 011-55356811 Mor.: 8:00 AM-9:00 AM Eve. : 8:30 PM-10:30PM

 GURU PUJA Cabella Ligure 4th July 2004 Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi (Internet Version) It is a great pleasure for me, greatest joy to thin. And only within you can feel that. So we have to understand it's not the show, it's not, nothing else but just the feeling within that you know that you have love of the Divine. This you can have because it is just there. No one see so many Sahaja yogis for the Guru Puja. It's very gratifying to think that there are so many, so many of you who are disciples, It was never expected that I'II have so many, can give you, no one can sell it, no one can so many people following me. share it, it's just there. And that love has to be felt and shared. It has nothing to do with oth- It is being expected that you all will follow my message of love. I do not have to say ers. Whether others love you or not makes no anything for love. Love is absolute gift of just difference. It's within yourself, this feeling, this feeling others. There is no talking about it, depth is there which you enjoy. It is their discussing about it, nothing. Just you feel that capacity. Everyone has this, lots of it. love. To feel the love I will say one has to Sometimes you feel you've lost it, sometimes you feel you've gained it, but it is there as have a heart, but how can you have a heart? It is not your own doing, it's all there. So it is much as... something already gifted to you, you have it, In the same way the source of your love is that you can feel that love. It's so much eternal. You cannot measure it, it's difficult. joy-giving, peace-giving. But it's beyond all your human expressions and it shows your understanding, your Love has its own qualities and one of the quality is that love understands, Its understanding of love which has no words, understanding is not in words, not in thought, which cannot explain, but by itself you wil but understands within. It can feel within, which know that I have this quality to love within myself and I can enjoy this love within myself. is very important. This is the most important part one has to realise, that love, you can only feel it. You cannot talk about it, you cannot show about it, but it is within and you can feel This is a very unique gift which only very human beings have. Among animals also you few find people who have love, but that love is not it. deep, that love has no meaning. It has some And that is why today is your celebration of purpose, maybe, but it is not human. So it lacks the beauty of human love. It lacks the understanding of human love. the Guru, is the celebration where you can feel that love for your Guru. That feeling is

 Issue: 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze from what love I am telling you. That has some It is not easy to describe or explain love in human words. This you can only feel within yourself. That is what once you start feeling, you can feel who is your Guru, whom do you connections, some meanings, but this love which is Divine, cannot be described in words, that's the only reason why you should love you are being taught and persuaded and made to live in a particular manner. All that is think your Guru. Now there's no reason for that. Because love is love. That is how the Guru becomes very important in life. We have people who love their Guru and are very much possible if you get immersed in it It's very gratifying, it is very lovable to see how people love each other and then this love spreads. Love begets love. If somebody has love it just spreads. He need not tell anyone, he need not confess it, but it will spread. And in chaste understanding of their love. In this great opportunity of love that we are, we are here to enjoy each other fully from our heart. That there is this ocean within us. We have just to be submerged in that this is what one has to learn: how to see that love in other person. ocean. If we are lost in that ocean then we will have no problems, no questions. Somehow we are here already in love Everything will be our own and we can because of Sahaj happening. We all love and manage everything without any argument, we enjoy love It shows on our faces, that we without any questioning. That is what is are love, in our characters and so easily being Sahaj. available. The Sahaj way if you have this love...where's that love within which approached people in It is a very big blessing that you are human beings and that this because of understanding that unique manner. That's the thing that we for which we do not have to go to any col- cannot possess. You cannot claim. It is there lege, to any school for education, it is some- and it works. It works automátically. This is thing so much within that it works and ex- what we have to know that we are that love. presses itself, expresses like light. Such people we can make out because they are fully en- That love is within us, we have to have knowledge, we have to have a complete lightened. They have light and through that light knowledge that we are badshah. That will solve our problem. Because you can explain they see the whole world. This is very inno- cent and simple for them. everything, all your behaviour, all your failures, everything you can explain when you We have love for our children, naturally We have love for our parents naturally. We have know that you are endowed with that love, This is what is the Guru, is the love within you love for some people but that love is different

 Issue: 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze you have to feel the taste, feel the feeling, what it does, and all that is together, that's not which wants to share the love with others, which wants to give love to others. This is separate. what it is...and joy. I don't think the subject was too subtle for I can go on talking on love, but to feel it within yourself is the biggest thing. Like water, if you are thirsty we can give you water but you people. You all have reached a certajn amount of understanding of that love. I hope it grows and you will grow into it, all of you, and enjoy it. we cannot drink. You have to drink water and May god bless you

 The Most Dynamic Power Of Love SHRI KRISHNA PUJA Mumbai 28.08.1973 Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi love are weak. But the most dynamic power in this world is that of love, is the most aggresive power is that of love. Even when we suffer in love it is out of our strength that we suffer and not out of our weakness. For example there was a teacher in China who by the Divine For example if I know only my head that is not sufficient, ifI know only my neck that is not sufficient, ifI know only my leg that is not sufficient. But the more I know about myself the more dynamic I will be, the more expansive 1 will be. And all the great that existed or all Lused to teach the cocks how to fight, and the the people who were called as great, are great king of that place took his cocks to that teacher and told him that you please teach them how because they live in many human beings. I feel that warmth in the atmosphere and you are to figlit. After one month when the king went feeling because you know they are not foreigners, they are your brothers and sisters. There are so many stories in Puranas like this that I will not name it but once two brothers met in a jungle, but they thought that they were enemies and they wanted to fight with each other and when they came to blows, to take those cocks with him, he was surprised that the cocks were just standing undisturbed. He told the teacher, "what have you done to my cocks? They are not at all aggressive, they are not doing anything! How are they going to fight it out?" There is going to be a race, there is going to be an exhibition of their they couldn't hit each other. They took out strength and what are we going to do about it? He said you just take them. He took those their arrows. The arrows won't work. They were quite surprised at this and when they asked each other "who is your mother? They found out the mother was the same, and then they realised that they were not foreigners, neither enemies but they were made of the same fiber! What sweetness, what beauty that knowledge had given them! And what security two cocks with him and put them in the arena where there were other cocks who had come to fight. These two cocks were very nicely standing. All the other cocks started coxing and törturing. They were just standing and looking at them. All the other cocks were surprised at their behaviour and thought they of understanding that everywhere in the whole were very powerful and they all fled away. The love that I am talking about, the Divine Love makes you not only strong but dynamic. It is the greatest luminous power that we can think of! Only when love is surrounded by world we have brothers and sisters who are on their inner being, on their divine and how we are bound together with that lovel! I talk of love pepole think that I am trying to make you weaklings, because people think those who

 Issue: 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze you are not to keep mum about it. All the wrong ideas about love, all the falsehood about love has to be given up. One must know that it is the dynamic power and it won't allow you to sit comfortably with your self enjoying with peace and the bliss when the rest of the world is not enjoying that and is placed into the hands of the evil geniuses who have come in this world to destroy and to bring the satanic realnm on this earth. Now the days are gone when gross and is lost in the gross, it looks as if it is weak and under chase. The time it is released, the dynamic power of love can transcend all the evil powers of the world. When people get their Realisation, automatically the ego drops out, to a great extent, I should say, because you say that the vibrations are passing. You don't say that you are giving. Because of the dropping of the ego, sometimes it happens that you feel that whatever you wanted to have you have got it the people had to suffer. Christ suffered for us. Of course Christ never suffered because and better not talk about it. When there you is any opposition from any where you shun it and sit away from it. You don't want to save he never suiffered. He never wept. He was like those cocks, a very powerful personality, but today is the day to brighten up your understanding about your own strength that is there. Those who are gross should worry about their insecurity and their problems and their organisations but not for the people who are realised. I have told you many a times and today you also remarked that you should know that position from negative opposition whether it is by speech or even by evil methods. You run away from that thinking that Oh God! how are they going to face it? On the contrary a person who is negative, who has got hatred, becomes talkative, that he talks, talks and talks big. He thinks he is above everybody else, hé that can befool all the world. He takes the you are never alone when you are realised. responsibility on himself. They start a big There have þeen many people who have been Ashram or some big place where he sits down with all his ignorance and starts spreading his knowledge, so called, to people. By his methods people get interest and they all go and fall at his feet. While the realised sits at home quitely wondering what are these fools doing? But it is not now for the realised to sit down and to wonder and laugh at them. Foolishness of the people who are not yet realised before even you were born, who exist, who are anxious to help you at every moment. In our Shastras we call them Chiranjeevas, you know that. They are people who are Niranjanas. As we said about Bhairva and Hanumana, all these people exist and they are waiting just for a call from you. Once we went to the market and there was a problem about something and I had somebody with me, a disciple, who was also with me, I just realised not even to take pity on them but to come out. Come out with the sword of love to win the whole world; which is very very wanted to see what is his reaction. He tried to argue out with the person telling about essential. If the creation has to be saved then

 Issue: 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze or not. In that, you love that person, you don't something. So he told me, 'Mataji lets go now. Then we came out of the shop. I said, hate. Only talking sweetly is not the idea of op love. No, a mother sometimes even scolds the child, does not mean that she does not going to what you are about it ? He said 1 have love. If it is necessary, you have to tell the already told Hanumana to look after that man, person that it is negative. Of course, if there is a realised person, he won't mind the correction because he wants the correction, he knows that there is a defect The instrument and the work was done. It is gross but it happens. When they say you can leave it to anyone of them and they will have to gillie teo it because it is you who are on the stage and * has to be corrected but a person who doesn't not they. They are the background people. there are the playbacks. But you must open understand you have to force your love on that person. You can force that love, you know that, sitting down here. Many people have tried putting love around certain people who are trying to be mischievious and they have been able to achieve great results. Those people have turned back and come back. Only by your mouth otherwise if they start thinking what will people say? They are going to help you in every way but how far are you standing on your security? How far are you standing on your property, on your understanding of yourself putting your hand and putting your attention on that person and moving the hand like this, the love encircles and the person comes up. It is a great war going on, you are not aware of it. Some of you are, some of you are definitely aware of it because they have had There is no doubt that there is negativity and experience of fighting it out. It is a big war on, now specially when ten Rakshasas have taken their avtaras and for you to be so feeble! You positivity, nothing in between. There is no compromise between the two, either it is light and darkness or it is positive and negative, are still small children, no doubt, because you definitely there are two things that are fighting got your Realisation only a few days back but if you want you can grow very fast, vou can grow into big-big giants. All of you can grow, only thing you have to decide that you have to grow within. There are so many things that you only have discovered by which a person grows. I can give you food but you have to grow yourself. Whenever you see the negativity you have to stand up and say that this is negativity and nothing else whether you like it Only thing, your will, that's the trouble with the whole joke, that your will is respected, your will is throughout respected. If you have the will to be adjoin that love, you can. The other day I met a psychiatrist. He was catching his super ego very much. I said, what's wrong with you? He said my child- hood. In my childhood, I couldn't get much life, love. I said now I am here, come in my

 Issue: 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze take the love. He said I want to flow my love you can do to someone. You have seen what Mother, I want to open out myself completely without any fear. I said you just start it. Don't worry what people are going to misunder- stand, what people are going to say. Its noth- ing important what people are going to say. For love, the satisfaction is only love that you love another person, you just flow your love as said and you will see it will work out. Just decide that I am going to love, and once you decide that, the whole Heavens, the whole negativity does to people! You have now known what is negativity, you have seen how people suffer with it! And here, they are also anxious to be loved you will be surprised to know that if you really love them, they them- selves come to Me and say give us that, give me salvation Mother! They come to me only for that sometimes with you that I should give them salvation and if I promise that, they take the birth again but there are Rakshasas, there are Rakashasas. As I told you the other day the Kalyuga has laid a beautiful stage and a very wonderful drama has to be played, in power of the Heaven will fall at your feet. You believe me in this. If you see otherwise, I am an ordinary housewife. Some poeple always say, "Mataji how can we be like you? Why not? I am just like you. I have the same prob- lems as you have, but only thing I know that I am nothing but embodiment of that love that is Divine and I can't exist without it. Every moment of my life, let the love flow, let the love flow; every wave of my mind conveys that love and that makes you completely pow- erful. If you read, I was reading Devi Mahatamaya, in that they talk about a which Ravana has to love Sita as a Mother, the Kansa has to fall at the feet of Radha. Perhaps you do not know that Krishna wanted to kill Kansa at that time. He was his uncle, you see the feeling came in him of his mother, that after all he is my brother. So he asked Radha and Radha killed him, the Radha who loved the whole world at that time. She is the embodiment of love and she killed Kansa be- cause it was the will. When you are playing in the hands of the God and if He wants to kill Rakshasa who faced Primordial Mother, the Divine Mother and he laughed at her, "You somebody, it has to be slain. But first of all you have to be in the hands of God com- woman, what can you do to me, you are a pletely. It is his love only which kills this body and when the songs of their strength and vic- tory are sung, you have seen it, how all my Chakaras start working and vibrate! Because of strength! All those victorious days are still lingering on and it is going to work through you. But what about your poor instrument which is moving little slowly? woman!' What can you do to me? And She smiled at him and said 'Alright, come along, let us fight. And with one stroke She cut his throat! Very clearly that shows that positivity can cut the throat of negativity. There is no Hinsa in that, you must remember the differ- ence between the two. If negativity is cut and positivity brought out, that is the greatest ahimsa

 Issue: 9 & 10 10 The Divine Cool Breeze carry the channel, that force of love. It should not be like you have to be egoistic you cannot The time, when love has to rule, the Satyayuga if it has to come it is going to be through your efforts now. Before Sahaj Yoga no efforts but now all your efforts are Divine. be even if you try to. You cannot harm anyone even if you want to do, so many of you have What ever you do, what ever sympathetic you expressed that Mataji has given it to every Tom, Dick and Harry. I cannot give it to any activate, you are getting it through Para Sympathetic. You don't do anything at all. But you can see yourself what stakes are involved. You are the chosen ones, otherwise why you Dick, Tom & Harry. It has to be a man who have been searching, it has to be a woman who has been searching in her previous lives. You should know what you have got it, you get? You are the only people who have got realisation and so much have you come foward. have got it in your own right. So a person look like a Dick, Tom, Harry but he is Some of you got it only few days back and may not, he is a great saint. They are all saints sitting here. It's a centre of nucleus of sainthiness where the complete Divine is have gone very far, why? You are the chosen ones and you are to take it upon yourself. To be the channels of the Divine Love, that flowing. Only thing is, let it flow out from This power is that of God and it is not your dynamic power which is going to transform the whole conception of hatred on which all you. responsibility to worry as together it will do good or bad. Even if you think that it may do some bad things according to this modern sciences of this world, ultimately it is going to be alright. Why that Jarasandh was to be killed? Why that Kansa was to be killed? Why Ravana was to be killed? Of course killing these nations and all these differences are created. It looks sometimes how, how can it be? But now the days are gone of Gokul. I was thinking of it and all the time when Krishna used to play his flute and he tried Sahaja Yoga on the Gopis and Gopas. Oh! He tried, and tried and tried in different lives. Nothing worked doesn't help much, that I have realised. All those who were killed are back again in their saddles. But still you don't fight those horrible people, you just fight yourself out. You just watch yourself. Where are you? What are you doing? Are you on the Divine or on the gross? Just think about it every moment, every moment you are in mediation. Just think of this moment and the dynamism of that moment. and now it is going to click like a spark. The chain reaction will start, but we have to have strong machines to carry out, otherwise, the fuse will be off. Only the strength that is in you is to be felt by your attention. That's the only thing you have to do, is to feel you patience and give up all that is falsehood. All that is falsehood, you see within yourself and you will know what is falsehood and just drop it. The complete power that is filling every moment Accept only the truth and the truth will give just to go inside you. It will flow through your you that power to be the real instrument, to

 11 The Divine Cool Breeze issue: 9 & 10 Sahasrara inside your being and completely kill Kalia, that Krishna is to be born within you, went and sat on the Kalia's Sahasrara and was pressing it with his feet and all the people were seeing the great drama of Krishna's dancing on the Kalia's Sahasrara! revolve round your whole being and transform the inside into a complete Chaitanya Shakti, a complete Divine Power. Allow it to come in, accept it, accept it without any fear, let it get in every moment, every moment keep awake. Krishna is to be bon within your being3; when you are Krishna, you are not going to It is very precarious style that we are upto. I have only two hands, you can see that very see him. Let us now go to the state which is clearly and though Mr.. says that I can do everything, I can do everything but not to make you do something. Your Will will be respected throughout. Every other thing can be looked beyond verge, beyond thoughts, into the realm of Thoughtless Awareness where the Divine is pouring its blessings. These people have decided today to have a puja and you know what happens to after accept for one that you should be perfect machine, a perfect channel, a perfect flute. For My role to play that tune of your love, it is for you to clear out all your seven holes. It is for you to clear out your hollowness and to be complete within yourself and He knows His job. He is the Artist but you are the instruments and the harmonious music from a Me when you do My Puja! So with all those problems that will be facing later, I would like all of you to be attentive about the puja and to take full advantage of that. With this Puja you get the Mother's protection to begin with, and my Chakra's, when they start moving, they give you special powers of love and bless all your Chakras and fill them up completely. So, I would like you, though some few people are coming to do this all of you should feel that you are all doing it, and you can feel it that way with oneness and the blessings of my being will flow to you automatically. so many souls can fill the ears of these evil people and can penetrate into their heart and put love into them and may be that they themselves will give up their evil ways and fall at the feet of love. Krishna is to be born within you today. A five year old boy who went to May God Bless You

 GUDI PADWA, Delhi 1976 Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nrimala Devi (Being in Thoughtless Awareness) charge. We cannot meditate, we only can be in meditation. When we say that we are going to meditate it has no meaning. We have to be in You will start moving with the force of achetna, the unconscious is going to work it out. It is meditation. Either you are inside the house or going to take you there where it wants you to go. You keep to Thoughtless Awareness all outside the house. You cannot be inside the house and then say that now I am outside the house or when you are outside the house you cannot say I am inside the house. In the same way you are moving in three dimensions of your life, emotional, physical and mental being. the time. Try to keep to Thoughtless Awareness as much as you can. When you are in thought less awareness you must know that you are in the kingdom of God and his people, his arrangements, his consciousness is going to You are not inside yourself. But when you are inside, that you are in Thoughtless Awareness, then not only you are there but you are every where. Because that is the place, that is the look after you. Even when you are giving vibrations to other people, I have noticed that you are not in Thoughtless Awareness. If you eive vibrations in Thoughtless Awareness you point where you are really in the universe. will not catch because all these entities that From there you are in contact with the enter into you, all these material problems that Principal, with the Shakti, with the Power that permeats into every particle that is matter, into every thought that is emotion, into every planning and thinking of the whole world. You come into you, come when you are in those three dimensions. Through Sahaja Yoga you have opened your gate of your own being. You have entered into your own kingdom but you do not keep there, you come out of it and again you go back and settle down. That's a fact. You should not feel so dissapointed about it, so frustrated. You know people have worked for thousands of years and they could not separate themselves from themselves. Only you people, Sahaja Yogis who are made after the pattern of Shri Ganesh himself are so powerful that they can give awakening and realisation to other people. Even if you are caught up, you have permeate into all the elements that are created on this beautiful earth, you permeate into earth, you permeate into Aakasha, into Teja, into sound. But your movement is very slow. When you say I am meditating that means you are moving in permeation with the universal being, but you are not moving yourself. You are just unloading yourself to be free from the weight of things that do not allow you to move. When you are is meditation you must allow yourself be in thoughtless awareness. There the unconscious itself, the achetna itself will take

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 9 & 10 13 seen you have powers. Even if you feel that the vibrations are not coming, you know you absolutely individual. So whether it is your son brother, have powers. You can give realisation to others. In your presence people get realisation. But you have to be that power completely. Supposing there is something wrong with your car but as long as it is moving it's alright. You have to repair it, you have to repair all the sister, wife, friend. You must remember that you are not responsible for their ascendance. You cannot help them for their ascendence. Only Mother's grace and their own desire, their own effort to give up all the things three dimensional will help them. So whenever a times on our moodes which we have caused thought comes like that you must know that ourselves by our foolishness, by our lust, by you have not attained the Thoughtless our greed, by so many false identification we carry with ourselves. We must have a complete Awareness in its full extent and that is how you have problems which are three dimensional. Sometimes a Sahaja yogi will find attention towards our weaknessesses and not towards our achievements. If we know what an emotion will come into his mind. It will be are our weaknesses it's better that we can an emotion of dejection or frustration and he really swim across better. Supposing on a ship will be disgusted with himself or with others. there is a hole and the water is coming in Both things are just the same. I have seen some Sahaja Yogis getting very disgusted with others. There should be no disgust that is lasting. Of- course for a short time you might feel disgust. Its alright, It is a part of feelings or you might feel disgusted with yourself, may be a part of feelings, but if you go on hankering on to it or if you go on clinging to it, that means you are conditioning yourself. That means you are not in Thoughless Awareness, that means that you are in your past. You are through that hole. The attention of all the the crew of all the staff and the captain itself wvill be on that hole from where the water is coming in and nowhere else. In the same way we must be on the watchout. There are so many pit falls for a Sahaja Yogi, I have seen it. Of course even the past is over, even the past can be overcome. In the present also there are many shadows of the past working For example when you are sitting in group you are involved with each other. Those who are making your past a solid mass on your head. In the present everything is sleeping, everything is sleeping that is not eternal. In he present in the eternal state, the rest all drops out. It's like a moving river which doesn't stop anywhere, but the moving river is eternal, the rest of the involved with each other, by any relationship, whatsoever, must know that this kind of involvement is not going to help them to attain their individual ascent. Everybody is acending individually though you are collectively contacted with each other and in things are all changing. If you are on the Etermal communication. But the ascender is individual,

 The Divine Cool Breeze 14 Issue: 9 & 10 Meditaion is the most Sahaja method. The Principle, all that is not eternal changes and drops out, dissolves and becomes non- we have prayers and we have also Puja Prayers are also to be said in your heart with the feeling of complete surrendering and asking for the eternal. It will be granted. Just ask for that and the rest will take place because they existent. We have to understand our own dignity, our own essence. The first and foremost thing is that all the Sahaja Yogis are the chosen ones go step by step. All the Sahaja Yogis have a problem and they have problems because of their past, because of their future aspirations. Now, when you have problems, in Sahaja Yoga They are the people whom God has chosen, in this eity of Delhi there are thousands and thousands of people. All over the world there are so many people that you are suffering from over population. But in Sahaja Yoga there are very very few people and when you are chosen the first, you must also realise that you have learnt how to overcome them. There are so many methods other than meditation. You know then very well, that you must know what is the chakra, where the kundalini is. Now, if the kundalini has been stopped by a certain chakra which is not working, you shouldn't get frustrated about it, Supposing your instrument or your car has stopped on the way, what is the use of getting frustrated with you are the foundations, you are the stones that are to be laid down and have to be strong, have to be forebearing and that's why it is necessary that all of you who are now few, who are the first lamps that are going to it? You have to learn the mechanism You have enlighten other lamps in the world, you have to enjoy the strength of Eternity, the strength of Divine Love, the strength of this Universal to be a good technician and then you can manage it very well. So, all the techniques of Sahaja Yoga must be learned and mastered. Being that you are, This is what meditaion is. This you can only do by giving it to others and learning from correcting them and correcting yourself There is nothing to be frustrated. That's the work, if you get frustrated and unhappy with yourself then there is going to be a problem. You have to laugh at yourself and laugh at your mechanism that is out of gear. When you start identifying yourself even So when Sahaja Yogis ask me, what should we, we do? You be in Thoughtless Awareness, that's all. Don't do anything at that time, not that you are moving towards the good or that the unconscious is taking charge of you. Not only that, but also you are emitting for the first time, the Divine into the Nature, into your surroundings, into other people who are universally connected to you Only thing is that we are used to one thing that is we must do something about it, and that's why we start doing that. with the instrument then you are not there You are not the chakra, you are not the different channels, you are the awareness, you are the power, you are the kundalini. So, you

 15 Issue: 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze but it is 'You'. Kabir Dasji has written a beautiful poem about it, that when the goat is living and she says Mein', 'Mein' that is don't have to worry about all these things being not in their proper condition. If they are not, you can solve it. Just now the lights went off If the lights went off because of the electricity failure, it's a serious thing. But if the lights have gone out because there is a fuse burst, you can replace it, you can remove that. So, there is no need to worry if your chakras are T,T but when she dies and her intestines are drawn out into wires and some cotton-comber fixes them on their instrument they have, Ek Tari as they call it, and he goes on pulling it with his fingers then it says Tu Hi, Tu Hi, Tu Hi,' that is 'you are', 'you are', 'you are'. spoilt. That is how we have to die and we have to Worrying itself or frustrating yourself, itself is a wrong attitude towards Sahaja. 'Sahaja' in other terminology also means simple. Sahaja be resurrected. You have been already, but Sahaja Yoga as I have told you is a kheer or what you call the sweet dish cooked in a raw how means, to be Sahaja means, I can say Tulsidasa has said, "Jaise Rakhhu, Taise Rahu." pot (कच्चे घड़े की खीर है). So, the soil of the raw pot also is mixed up, but your attention can be with the kheer, with the milk and can You keep me as you like. That kind of an attitude keeps your attention inside, because drop out all that is the mud of the raw pot. That discrimination is spontaneous. It is there, outside is to be let alone, to the top, let alone. We are not bothered about the outside one. feel you have got it. Self actualisation, you can yourself. You know you are not that, you have started talking about your chakras in that As you keep me, I will be in that manner, and you will be surprised everything clicks out very well. Even sometimes you might feel,' I should manner. But the only thing, the only problem or the only defect that is with the Sahaja Yogi is that still though he is there, his attention is in God with outside. That's the only defect. If reach a certain place.'I must have this bhajan done, I must get these things done, and it's not done sometimes. Sometimes by mistake something as you want is not done. You must accept it as the Will of God. That is what it is desired. It's alright. That is the Desire of God and now you are one with this Desire. You are here to communicate the Desire of God to the attention is removed, how to remove, that's the point. That is the first thing. Once you say how to remove means you have created the three dimensional involvement. You are not to remove. It is there. If your attention is outside then I would have said 'No, your attention has to go inside, it has not gone'. But it is there you are sitting there. I am sitting here but my attention is outside. I would just feel the whole world and at this stage if you start having your own desires and ideas about yourself then when will you become the Desire of God? This I'ness has to go away. That is what meditation is; where you are no more 'I' myself where I am. That's all. Some have felt

 Issue: 9 & 10 16 The Divine Cool Breeze balance, with your Puja then only it helps better. That means when you are doing Puja also receive it. Be in Thoughtless Awareness when you are doing Puja. Completely concentrate in receiving, but while Puja people are talking I have seen that they are moving about. I don't know how to explain it! That's the time something is oozing out-the nectar, and you just receive it at that time with full devotion. It is oozing out. If you feel the vibrations of my chakras at the time, you will it, some have acheived it. You know among yourselves there are some who have gone very high. The other method we employ is of Puja. I found that works very well with human beings, Puja, because it satisfies lots of demands of the past habit, that you feel that you are doing something about it. Then you start giving whatever you think the God has given you the blessings and the Rishis and Munis have found out, they are very clever people, they have found out how to please the deity, how to please the Mother So, they have told you as realise that even the minute small little weals in my body out pour, different space a different speed, a different dimension and I really don't know how to explain it but, you see, it creates they have told you even in this lifetime of mine, how to please her. They say she is Stutipriya that means She likes praises. They thought that. But when you praise someone from the heart that means you are accepting him and that is the time the chakras start creating a force by which you are thrown, you are the melody. You have to receive it and it is the melody, individually. Suitable for every individual and when you when you receive it brings in you, that state is infinity. So, at the time of Puja you must know that all your attention, should be in reception. triggered into that realm of God, So, these Puja methods and prayer methods and the mantra methods have been devised and found Today is a very great day It's a new year. Within two years from today, Satyayuga is going to start. It's a great day for many things that nine days are celebrated out by great thinkers of Sahaja Yoga, the great masters of Sahaja Yoga and it is the effort or vou can say the effortless effort of the Sahaja Yogis that makes my body vibrate, extract the essence from my body or I should say, makes me infinite, relelive itself through this fine effort and it works, it clicks, I have seen after this for the ascent of Mother. It is with date or I should say the calander was started it by my forefathers and they perceived it that this is the day when the Mother started it works very well, But you know that after Puja I get little tired because if you cannot receive that foree, I want to sleep and get rid of that additional vibrations into sushupti by entering into the infinite state. If you could receive whatever I am emitting, in creating, and this is the day She created the Ganesha to begin with in the utpatti stage She started a work this day And that's why we put this date as the first date, because the time started from this date long time back, and that's why this date is very important and if

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 9 & 10 17 get this, otherwise they will be left out of you cross this state then you are beyond time. You have to step out of this date and go evolutionary process. beyond. You have to step on your Dharma There's no time for you to doubt and think: on to a religion and go beyond Dharma (-dharmatita). You have to be those three Don't waste your time in all these useless activities. If you have still doubt, it's better to Gunas and to go beyond Gunas Gunatita You give up. It's high time that you get into it, through it. are all those three but the steps on which you are standing have to be alright or those which are crossed or have to be alright too. So, So, today I wish you Happy New Year for you are beyond you have to repair those steps which you have erossed somehow. when journey in the spiritual life of this world. You have to think of all the Sahaja Yogis who are far away from us and our thoughts should carry our love for them and they should be blessed It can be done through meditation, Puja, prayers. But the most important the greatest advancement is done by giving, The universal through your universal being. You all must dedicate your life to Sahaja yoga and give more and more. Among us there are some people who have given a lot and by that they have acheived a lot. You have to give, talk about it, spread it and bring more people to as you all are blessed here. I hope this impor- tant day that I am here, you will fully dedicate. yourself for your emancipation on those four lines that I have told you, and whatever programme comes, take it Sahaja. You should not insist on times and timings. Whatever comes Sahaja accept it. May God Bless You. ANUPAMA'S POEM Shri Mataji has three very beautiful grand daughters who to the Sahaja Yogis, are little god- desses. (Perhaps, after all, the Sahaja Yogis have just there the right insight.) The youngest one, Anupama, had written the following poem: "I am a little cabbage Divided into two I give my leaves to others And my heart to you." London, July &83

 PROPHECIES AND FULFILLMENTS Prophecies - Ancient texts from the major religions and spiritual traditions of the world which show references to the Kundalini, Self by The following extract from the Nadigrantha Mr. Realization, their association with the cool Shanataram breeze felt emanating from the top of the head and from the palms, and predict Shri Mataji's Athvale gives an amazing prediction of Shri Mataji's birth and the advent of Sahaj Yoga in these modern times. Fulfillments - how Sahaja Yoga was born coming and Her starting of Sahaja Yoga, and gradually spread around the world like a silent, revolution-and how these prophecies were fulfilled. as well as the effects Sahaja Yoga will have on humankind. Prophecies In this book he gave informations about sev- eral different Nadigranthas which are the great ancient books on astrology like Bhrigu Samhita, Satya Nadi, Kak Nadi etc. In this particular The texts below show references to the Kundalini, Self Realization, their association with the cool breeze felt emanating from the top of the head and from the palms, and predictions referring to the coming of Shri Mataji and Sahaja Yoga in these modern times. extract the author refers to the writings from Kak Nadi written by Kakayyar Bhujander who was a great astrologer and seeker who lived nearly 2000 years ago. From the Hindu Scriptures "While Jupiter is in Pisces a great Yogi will Shri Gyaneshwara, who lived in the 12th incarnate on the Earth. By 1970 it will have become quite evident to many people that a century in India, is the first saint who asked permission from his guru to speak openly to new era has started. Kaliyuga will end and the masses about the Kundalini, this Krutayuga will start. The axis of the Earth will knowledge being kept secret and transmitted depress and the Earth's orbit will come closer and closer to the Sun. Human life will undergo only from guru to disciple till those times He describes the manifestation of Kundalini a complete revolution. A great Yogi will incarnate at this time.. ] awakening very clearly: "The Life-wind emerges out of the Kundalini and creates a cooling sensation in the body internally as also externally." (Gyaneshwara 6.14) Until this time a yogi or devotee could achieve the bliss of Moksha and find the ultimate

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 9 & 10 19 meaning of his life only by following the path of devotion, knowledge and Patanjali Yoga. He would have to go through severe penance in order to awaken the sleeping powers of various chakras of his body and finally enlighten the Kundalini Power. science the existence of God and the Soul could be proved. The veil of ignorance and Maya would be drawn aside and Brahmananda, Moksha which could previously only be attained by yogis as a result of very hard work and severe penance would become easily available to all human beings." By the new method of yoga devised by the great Yogi, human beings will be able to attain the joy of Moksha within one lifetime. It would • From the Christian scriptures Kundalini is the reflection of the Holy Spirit within every human being. The mustard seed no longer be necessary to sacrifice one's body or die in order to achieve Moksha. The Brahmananda which so far only great saints had been to experience and then only by entering into the Samadhi state at the point of is none other than the dormant Kundalini en- ergy which when sprouted grows into the Tree of-the subtle system with the seven chakras and the three channels of energy. death, due to new type of yoga could be The "Aquarian Gospel" mentions the following words of Christ: "These things I achieved by ordinary human beings without entering Samadhi state while dying. speak while you in the flesh but when the Holy Breath shall come in power lo! She will In the beginning it would be possible for one person in crores to attain this Yoga and Moksha. However, after some time the whole teach you more and more and bring to your remembrance all the words that I have said to human race with the help of this Yoga will be you. There are multitude of things yet to be able to defeat itself. People won't have to worry about food, shelter or clothing. While living ordinary lives people will achieve said: things that this age cannot receive because it cannot comprehend. But lo! I say before the great day of the Lord shall come Yoga-Union with God. There will be no the Holy Breath will make all mysteries known. The mysteries of the soul, of life, of death, of immortality; the oneness of man with every necessity for hospitals as there will be no diseases. In the beginning the great Yogi will be able to heal diseases with a mere touch. Old age will go, destruction of the body will not exist and other man and with every other man and with his God." (Levi H. Dowling. "The Aquarian Gospel of Jesus the Christ" 162.5-8, L.N. Fowler & Ltd., Co. Ltd., Romford, Essex, people will possess heavenly bodies. p.238). Due to new scientific discoveries, science ar religions would become one. With the help of In the "Gospel" according to John, Christ says:

 20 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 9 & 10 "I say the truth to you. It is profitable for "we shall seal up their mouths and their hands you will speak to us, and their legs will bear wit- ness to what they used to earn" (ibid. 36.65 I go away: for if I do not go away, the Comforter will not come to you, but if I go I p.713). is precisely what happens in Sahaja Yoga, when our entire inner system can be felt will send her to you" (16:7), "But the Comforter, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in My Name, shall teach you all on our fingertips. Everything that we do which goes against our Spirit manifests on our things, and will bring to your remembrance all the things which I have said you" (14.26). chakras, and can be felt on our palms after "When He is come, the Spirit of truth, He shall guide you into all the truth; for shall not we get our Self Realization. The Koran (ibid. for instance: 2.8 42.52etc.) also makes many references to the Ruh (or Ruah), the Breath of speak from Himself, but whatsoever He shall God, which is same as the All Pervading Power bear He shall speak; and He will announce to in Hinduism and the Holy Spirit in Christianitv, you what is coming" (16:13). ("The Holy Bible". Gute Botschaft Verlag, Dillent Ger- Its reflection in the human being is the Kundalini. many, 1889. The New Testament. GMorrish, London 1871). An interesting reference can be found in the "Shorter Encyclopaedia of Islam" which described the Mahdi - the Twelfth Imam who Long time ago, a famous Cistercian monk by the name of Gioachino da Fiore (c.1130/ was predicted to come in the times of Kiyama: 45-1) claimed that the New testament "To believe Him as the Second or the announced a third age of knowledge and integration, the time of the Holy Spirit to come after the age of the Father (Yahweh - The Old Testament) and of Son (Jesus Christ The New Testament). ("Joachim de Fiore" in Promised Messiah is an article of faith, because first of all His coming early in the 14th century of the Hidjra was predicted by Muhammad" (H.AR. Gibb JH.Kramers, "Shorter Encyclopaedia of Islam", E.J Brill, Leiden 1953, p.24). Or, Hidjra (Hegir the starting point of the Islamic period was towards the end of the year 622, which sends us the end of the year 1922 maybe the beginning of the year 1923. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi was bon on 21st of March, "Exegese medievale". Pal 1967, vol.3, pp. 437-527). From the Islamic scriptures The Koran mentions the cool breeze in connection to the Resurrection: "It is Alah Who sent the winds... As such (will be) the 1923 Resurrection." ("The Noble Quran" 35.9, Hilal Publishing House, Istanbul, 1994, p.700). From the Jewish scriptures At the time of Kiyama (Resurrection Time) The Zohar too mentions the sacred "breath"

 The Divine Cool Breeze 21 Volume-XVI Issue: 9 & 10 seventh center that is the integration aänd in connection with the subtle body (the sephoron free): "A breath which comes from pinnacle of our spiritual evolution. By doing so She cleared the path for the Kundalini to rise effortlessly in each and every human this world shakes the branches of the Tree of Life which spreads the fragrance of the future world in this world and brings the holy souls alive These souls come up waking each other... being who desires to receive their Self Realization, the connection with their true Self and with the Divine. She describes this and the Tree of Life rejoices." ("The Zohar III, 173 1 ir Livre de la Splendeur", pages de livre de Zohar choisies par Edmond Fleg, trad historic event, "It is the greatest event of all the spiritual happenings of the universe Without this happening, there could not have been the possibility of giving en-mass realisation to par J de Pauly, ed. J.CLattes, Paris 1980, our transl.). This is in reference to the capac- ity of Sahaja Yogis (prectitioners of Sahaja Yoga) to give Self Realization to other people, like an enlightened candle enlightening another, people. [. As soon as the Sahasrara was opened, the and the joy of the tree of life is the joy felt on whole atomosphere was filled with tremen- dous chaitanya, and there was tremendous light in the sky, and the whole thing came on this our subtle system during meditation when the Kundalini has been awakened Fulfillments earth, as if a torrential rain or a waterfall with such tremendous force as if I was unaware and got stupefied. The happening was so tremendous, and so unexpected that I was stunned and got totally silent at the grandeur. I saw the primordial kundalini rising like a big furnace, and the furnace was very silent but a burning appearence it had, as if you heat up a metal, and it has many colours. In the early morning hours of the 5th of May in year 1970, disgusted with the falsehood spread by self-proclaimed New Age "gurus and desiring all the Seekers of Truth attain their Self Realization on the small beach of Nargol (about 150 km from Mumbai), Shri Mataji opened the primordial Sahasrara - the In the same way, the Kundalini showed up as a furnace like a tunnel, as you see these plants you have for coal burning, that create electricity and it stretched like a telescope and came out one after another, shoot! just like that.

 22 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 9 & 10 I started seeing all that and got lost in the joy. It was like an artist seeing his own creation, and I felt the joy of great fulfilment. Slowly Sahaja Yoga spread throughout Europe, and to North America. Shri Mataji was very eager to save her American children from the clutches of the false gurus who had descended upon that country and were looting people in the name of spirituality. In 1972 she sold her golden jewellery to set sail After coming out of this beautiful experience. I looked around and saw human beings so blind and 1 became absolutely silent, and desired that I should get the cups to fill the on America She visited hall after hall but her nectar". message fell on deaf ears as the seekers of Sahaja Yoga was born. Shri Mataji started giving Realization to small groups of seekers in India touching their centers along the spine. those times. were too naive to realize that Truth can be obtained without paying fabulous sums of money On the way back aboard the ship She addressed them in one of her poems. Then the first group of twelve seekers got their Kundalini awakened: en-masse Self Realization had started. Sahaja Yoga spread very quickly in the small villages of India, where innocent people were ready to receive In 1989, after the Iron Curtain fell, Sahaja Yoga spread like wildfire in Russia and the Eastern Block countries, where dozens of this Divine gift with an open heart. thousands of seekers filled stadiums to listen to her lectures and received their Self Realization. Nowadays Sahaja Yoga is Shortly afterwards, Shri Mataji's husband was appointed as the Secretary General of the UN Maritime Organization and London became their home. The first group of seven Western established on all five continents and is coming with full force to the attention of the scientific, political, ecological and spiritual communities as a solution to solve today's seekers received their Self-Realization and became Sahaja Yogis (practitioners of Salhaja Yoga). crises from within

 'AUM' EXPLAINED IN SCRIPTURES Sahaja Yogis know that the goal of all the World religions is the union between the jiva life, and the life was the light of men... The true light that enlightens every man was coming into the world. He was in the world and the atma, the union between the atma and the paramatma; that is, the identification of the seeker with his Self and the merging of his Self into God. He witnesses the play of and the world was made through him, yet the world knew him not." (John I) "Of that goal which all the Vedas declare, the dynamic Love of God like a flute. which is implicit in all penances, and in pursuit of which men lead lives of continence and When the Kundalini, settled in the Sahasrara, service, of that will I briefly speak. It is Aum." unites with the Atma located in the Anahat (Katha Upnishad) chakra, the human consciousness has realised the supreme religion. It is the state of integra- tion between the -Atman and the Shakti (God "The syllable Aum which is the imperishable Brahman is the universe. and the Holy Spirit). This state also expresses Whatsoever has existed, whatsoever exists, the Unity between the unmanifested God whatsoever shall exist hereafter is AUM. And (Parabrahma, Paramatma, Brahma) and whatsoever transcends past, present and God within man (the Atma, the Self) because future, that also is AUM. All this that we see it reflects the state of Unity which preceded the Original Distinction (the original apparent without is Brahman. This Self, that is within is Brahman. This Self, which is one with AUM." distinction takes place between the God Al- (Mandukya Upnishad) mighty and the Holy Spirit, Sadashiva and the Adi Shakti). And to the angel of the Church in Laodicea write, "The words of the Amen, the faithfl and true witness, the beginning of God's (John. The Apocalypse 3.14) This Unity is expressed in the Word, Brahma Tattwa, the Aum and Amen which has creation." incarnated as Lord Jesus, the Christ, the Son We can relate Christhood-the-Word-Aum to of God, Mahavishnu. Let us remember now Sahaja Kundalini Yoga in exposing the symbolism contained in the sacred syllable. what has been said in the older ages: "In the beginning was the Word, and the "A" Represents the Tamoguna of the Virata, the Primordial Being (desiring mood). Word was with God, and the word was God. He was in the beginning with God; all things At the cosmic level it is the Ishwara were made through him, and without him was whose shakti is Mahakali. At the not anything made that was made. In him was microcosmic level it is Ida nadi and the

 24 Volume-XVI Issue: 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze left side Sympathetic Nervous System. At the microscopic level it is the nucleus Energy. Its manifestation as Chaitanya (wave of life force) can be felt through the of the atom. parasympathetic nervous system after self-realisation. This Energy is at work "U' Represents the Rajoguna of the Primordial Being (activating mood). At the cosmic level it is the Hyranyagharbha everywhere and all the time but before realisation man cannot feel it. whose shakti is Mahasaraswati. At Upanishad tells us "by meditating upon AUM, the microcosmic level it is Pingala Nadi and the right sympathetic nervous the wiseman attains Brahman": "AUM is Brahman. AUM is all. Now the question arises system. At the microscopic level it is the that how to meditate upon AUM? The electrons of the atom. answer to this question is given by Shri Mataji "M" Represents the Sattwa guna of the Primordial Being (revelation mood) through Sahaja Yoga. How does a human being become AUM? which evolves AUM to the level of the Primordial Being Himself, the Virata, By putting A, U and M together. whose shakti is Mahalakshmi. At the Who does in fact put A, U and M together? microcosmic level it is the Sushumna and The subdued Kundalini does it. the parasympathetic nervous system. At the microscopic level it is the valency of How does the Kundalini manifest Herself? the atom. Through Sahaja Yoga. The Adi Kundalini (Holy Spirit in the form of As Adi Shakti the Almighty Sacred Mother the Primoridal Kundalini) is said to be created the AUM. As Shri Gauri She created "rignunatmika" that is, containing the three gunas. What She does is to unite the A, the U and the M. Hence, at the Divine Energy level Lord Ganesha. As Shri Parvati She created Lord Kartikeya. As Shri Radha She created the Adi Kundalini generates the AUM which Mahavishnu, who was born to Mother Mary means, in personified terms, that the Adi Shakti as Lord Jesus. As H.H. Mataji Nirmala Devi is the mother of the Son of God. She created a new race of Sahaja Yogis. She says that Sahaja Yogis have been created in AUM is a sound and this symbol actually the pattern of the Great Son of God. represents the primordial movement of the

 PLEDGE (By Yuva Shakti) We pledge to protect our innocence from the dom within the Vishwa Nirmala Dharma. unending attracts of the society by We pledge to face our fears and ask for courage to face ourselves and spread Sahaja worshipping Shri Ganesha, asking for his protection and inviting our lord to reside in our Mooladhara during our daily meditation. Yoga. We pledge to spend as much time as possible with Yuva Shakti brothers and sisters, to share We pledge to rid ourselves from the stains and blots that cloud the light of our spirit from our divine knowledge with them, and to shinning in our attention. protect them when necessary. We pledge, as Shri Mataji asked Yuva We pledge to surrender to overcome our ego, Shatki, in Shasrara Pooja 2000 in her castle in Cabella, to develop a penetrating attention, so that it may be vector for the divine power within us to work out all the problems facing and to have faith to overcome our superego. We pledge to pray, with dedicated, humble sincerity to our DIVINE MOTHER that our world. She grants us her recognition, and that she blesses us so that we overcome all the weak- We pledge to seize any opportunity to talk about Sahaja Yoga and give Realisation with humility. nesses that might hold us back from fulfill- ing our pledge for this new year, which we hope is the beginning of the emergence of a new Yuva Shakti Force energized by its desire to thank our Mother for having made We pledge to become our own masters so that our words resonate with the confidence of realised gurus, and inspire the seekers to get their Realisation and take up a life of free- Her children. Jai Shri Mataji ****

 TOWARDS LIBERATION (Indian TV Interview, 14 March, 2003) A half-hour Himdi Language television doumentary about Sahaja Yoga titled "Towards Liberation" was broadcast in March on India's Public television network, Doordarshan, It featured this interview with Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi They know nothing about God, The word The draw to spiritualism spiritual was unknown to them..yet they have "With the interest in technology, the interest in spiritualism could go down. But I am seeing that more and more people of technologically been very deep from within and have ascended to great heights of spritualism. They have become more deserving.. When they get their advanced countries are being drawn towards. Realization they go very deep in it because the intensity of seeking is there." spiritualism because there is neither joy nor peace in technology It does not give a solution to human problems. In India there is only talk about Therefore, those who have come into spiritualism. Everyone advises others to seek. "All the gurus have said the same thing. We Sahaja Yoga have come from India as well as might have harassed and tortured these gurus in their lifetime, but when they are gone from this world, people follow them and read what they said. They know everything, but no one is prepared to work for it." those technologically advanced nations. They "have gone beyond technology and they have derived the conclusion that there is nothing special in technology. Their bent and seeking is extremely deep. It's very sahaj. Seeking Around the World All of the gurus of India have said to search "I go abroad because there people are within. They said "nothing could be achieved seekers. In their seeking, they are absorbed number of them are seeking and a lot without knowing the power within." The problem is that Indians "talk about it, sing its large songs, but do nothing practical. The people of has been written about it." They have developed countries know nothing about translated and read most of the Indian scriptures. "It is amazing that they read the Sanskrit language. They know so much. But spiritualism, so they are keen seekers. Their seeking is so intense, that in a country like then, certain kugurus (false gurus).from India reached there and they began to teach them" They could not attain the required goal of Russia, where I thought spiritualism could not take up, there is a larger number of spiritual people. They are really wonderful because so many attrocities were committed on them, but they kept on going ahead with their seeking. Self-Realization, but a lot of money was taken from them.

 Issue: 9 & 10 27 The Divine Cool Breeze *After that, when I reached there, people are organized" were amazed that "She gives Self-Realization In "countries such as Benin and Ivory Coast, where all the people were converted In and accepts no money at all.' So they came close to Me." How long will these false gurus go on in spiritualism? They "deceived the seekers with honeyed discourses and befooled them. Those who came in contact with Me to Islam, I asked them, "Why did you become Muslims? They replied, "We saw the French. There is absolutely no morality in them so, we became Muslims. Now they have all once, remained with Me forever. We have been doing this work for the last thirty years become Sahaja Yogis. That is how the number of Sahaja Yogis is increasing and these people have gone very deep. In their seeking they have attained great depths. everywhere. Those who are tired of fundamentalists, they also wish to come to For these Western seekers, "the emotions Sahaja Yoga" of love for each other were totally absent in Many kinds of people have come Sahaja Yoga They "sought their ideal in Me and they their families and society. They received that love from Me and, nourished by that love, are drawn towards Me" and got their Self they got totally transformed. They are so much Realization. changed that even the Germans have become The real religion so lovable and sweet that they talk their hearts out unhesitatingly. They are ashamed over the excesses that have been perpetrated by their "The significance of Sahaja Yoga is that we are not conditioned by any religion, country. country in the past." creed or race." There is "absolutely no conditioning. We regard human beings as human beings and respect all the religions. But our respect is for the religion and the essence of these religions. It is not for the distorted form of religion. Therefore, people of all I do not know in how many countries there is Sahaja Yoga. "Sahaja Yogis will say that Sahaja Yoga is being practised in eighty-six nations I Myself have not been to so many countries. What happens is that when one person gets Self-Realization and practises it, he becomes an expert in a year's time Wherever such people go, they talk about Sahaja Yoga to others. This is how it worked out and Sahaja Yoga spread to this level. 1 do religions jumped into Sahaja Yoga and have the feeling that they have got the real religion. "I have not done anything special. I searched only for the method to give en mass Self Realization. I thought it would have a better effect." If you attain anything such as o not know how to go to all these countries, but those people come wherever our programs

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue: 9 & 10 28 the extent of saying "there shall be no need of inventing electricity, without putting it for the benefit of the society, it is useless. Similarly, I thought that the attainment of Sahaja Yoga that I had should be for the benefit of the society. hospitals. Many prophecies have been made." The method of curing "So this is the method. This time was to come It should be en mass and given to all the seek- and it has come. It is the speciality of Kali ers. We should say that it is Yuga that in it human beings get confused and in the state of confusion, people start seeking. collective. "No doubt, I had to put in a little hard Groping in darkness, the seeker gets more work for it. I studied different attitudes of confused and searches intensely. Now is that human beings. I concentrated on the chakras period. In this era, it will take place". and saw where the problem was. When I "Many people get cured of their diseases with the practice of Sahaja Yoga because there are plexuses in our body through which we are connected physically, mentally intellectually and spiritually. When our kundalini awakens and nourishes these plexuses, the could know these problems of the human beings, then I tried to find out the ways to overcome these problems. "In May 1970, I came across a person who was confusing the seekers of truth, so I decided to do it." With that, I was able to get diseases concerned with those chakras get this system and attainment. "Now en mass cured." Realization has become very easy. It is Diseases believed to be incurable, such mentioned in the scriptures that in Kali Yuga this will take place and will reach its heights. as cancer and AIDS, can be cured, but for AIDS it is difficult. It is already known to us. Whatever was "Alzheimer is another disease. Those who written is now happening try to have control over others in their lives "So the first thing is to prepare the and always have an upper hand society for seeking. There is a scripture of Bhrigu Muni called Nadi Grantha. In this, he has clearly mentioned the year in which Sahaja sometimes get this disease. Before death, one side of their brain becomes dead and the other one keeps working" This disease "is very Yoga will start With the beginning of Sahaja Yoga, all those who have been confused, those aggressive, very cruel and very violent.. This is a disease which we have not touched," who have taken to a wrong path and fallen in With Sahaja Yoga, "drug addiction goes the trap of Kali Yuga will be saved. Their Kundalini will be awakened." He has gone to away. I never tell anybody what to do and %24

 29 Issue: 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze what not to do. Automatically, everything gets all right After awakening, the kundalini does it herself Man starts understanding immedi- into the ocean." As Kabira said, "when the drop falls into the ocean, it becomes one with it. The same oneness takes place with Sahaja Yoga." This has to happen. We have to get ately after SelfRealization, the climax of our evolution. "How does the Realization take place? It is with the light of the spirit and enlightening of your heart. When the light of the spirit "Whatever progress we have made so far, whatever work the gurus, the incarnations, spiritual guides have done, that has to bear enlightens your heart, in that light we begin to see what will bring misery to us and what will fruit now. So this is the time. As we sow the bring empancipation. Just as you could see clearly in the light, but keep groping when it is seed, first of all it sprouts, becomes a tree, then bears flowers and then fruits. Similarly, dark, so man gets transformed in that light of call this age 'blossomtime". There is abundant the spirit." flowering and it is not difficult to make fruits "You will be amazed that in Sahaja Yoga no one takes drugs, no one drinks alcohol and none commit misdeeds." Ninety-nine "Everyone has to search for the truth within. There is no other way. Without searching for the truth that lies within, one goes on treading the path of untruth, which generates all these negativities. When you are established in truth, no rules and regulations percent of people do no wrong "Many marriages are performed in Sahaja Yoga and all of them go beautifully in a beautiful manner. They have very lovable children." are required. Then all your deeds become divine Therefore, everyone should seek the The dawning of a new kingdom truth and this is the time when you could get This is the dawning of a new kingdom. "That it is the kingdom of God in which neither there This is My desire that everybody, is any bitterness nor difficulty In a way, man especially men, should seek the truth." becomes very collective, like the drop falling "May God bless you"

 SAHASRARA PUJA Cabella - 4th May 2003 WHEREVER. She (A Report) It is a mystery warm weekend. May flowers bursting with coloured essence, dark and light greenery wrapping one's mind inside and out. Floating down from and Cabellites looking at each other with wonderful, sparkling eyes, macelleria is closed, delicious little oranges, yogis, yogis, a hotel owner excitedly talking about Shri Mataji and Yogis, a little boy's tears for a bed to sleep in mother's comfort and cookies. the castello, cars stopping with kind greetings and rides, but the walk is too beautiful. There's infinite space Group shoebeat near the blue tent, collective energy rising. time has stopped Cabella buzzing with tender yogis of eighty countries, fiends all, loving yogis absorbed in the pendal, springing to life Smiles stretching for miles, handfuls of children here and there swooping, laughing, playing. In the pendal, Gregoire announces that Shri Mataji will not be coming to the evening performance. Everyone has to realize it is time we absorb more of Her vibrations. It is no A weekend of connectivity, hosted by European brothers and sisters- calm, natural easiness. Sleepless and energized vibrations everywhere, a full pendal of joyous children of Shri Mataji. A havan in front of the men's blue tent, Friday evening. Tall and wide flames licking the warm air, strong yellow-red-orange energy, full tent, full yogis, babies laughing. longer a time to ask our Mother for anything. We have to give everyone love and receive Her vibrations, feeling a strong and subtle empowering, pure joy, no sadness, detached awareness. After the play, dancing begins with a wild, joyous electricity in the air and never ends One by one, the singers and musicians change and some step off the stage, but the yogis call them back, circle dancing, jumping and Indian dancing, hugging and leaping and group dancing and singing ring through the night as the last musician has finally stopped drumming a familiar beat - yogis are still dancing and . Long silky meditation, following late dinner, Morning meditation in the pendal. It is a strong, sunny, hot day, good for walking to l town, every car stopping to give a seat, meeting new faces and voices. Some yogis jump from the cars to be on foot and join the meander, vibrating toes. Cafes full of yogis

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 9 & 10 31 awareness. "Rather than asking Me for something, you can ask deep in yourselves for anything. You have the kundalini. You bo-peeping their own beats and will not stop until they finally desire to nourish the Nabhi chakra, dinner is served. are responsible. You can do it all. You are my instruments." It's 4.30 am Sahasrara Puja Morning meditazione, more yogis arriving, mangiare, strong and whipping up a cool awareness of Mother, yogis playing After the video ends, a silent period, then a soft spoken announcement that Shri Mataji wishes us to go on with the puja without Her, She will not be coming. Phillip says, "Our volleyball, children playing football, assorted games playing under the sunny wind-whipped afternoon, a group footsoak in the narrow, shallow, creamy, white bubbly effervescence of the narrow river, everyone on the side close Mother is with us in formless form. We need to absorb Her vibrations. We need to absorb Her vibrations. We need to give Her the message that we can take the responsibility and give to Her rather than ask from Her. We are Sahaja Yogis. to the pendal, an unbroken serpentine line of every yogi runs up the river for miles of colour and meditation to the castello. A handful There is a sombre, sad part to this news, scatter on the hintersides as well, slight hands moving in the yellow-white glare of warming river, yogis full body soaking, laughing, giggling of underwater vibrations, coming out of Mother's mountin castello through our subtle eyes well up with silent, slippery tears that don't fall, hearts opening and filling with more new love for Shri Mataji and an announcement is made that we have to wake our joy and give love and bliss and energy to this puja, no earthly sadness-a lively vibrant puja for Shri Mataji, for all yogis-we can do it and elate in the joy of our puja with Shri Mataji formless. up systems, snaking downstream, purifying Her children. A spiralling, single organism of love and light shooting out of Sahasrara crowns in the northern hills of Cabella the world. Time ceases to move. Shasrara Puja, dressing up for an elegant evening, no anticipation, calm settles over the yogis and an announcement to enter deep mneditation immediately upon entering the pendal, full at 6 pm, silence and scattered child sounds, "cou cou c'est nous. The clapping and singing resounds with a newfound happiness, eyes lighten and glisten with joy and smiles opening up the energized pendal. The puja is on and it is alive and bounding and the yogis have awvakened, a new something has arrived and it is enlightening love and awareness. At 8 pm the Shasrara Puja videotape Wherever, She is. Her children are begins, appears to be last year's puja. In deep meditation words blend into doubtless joy, with Her love, with Her presence growing up, Her children are alive with Her

 The Divine Cool Breeze 32 Issue: 9 & 10 everywhere on this planet. We feel as if all Sahaja Yogis are in Cabella with us There is no rain on this puja, it started to rain inside the puja on this night and it cleanses the beauty of all yogis, Her children are responsible for the road they have turned onto, a continuing path. We will do all and be joyous through all and Dancing and singing late into the night, as old yogi asks for it to end and it does sweetly Rollicking yogis head down for dinner, arm in arm, clumps bouncing-it is earthly morning in a cloudless, starry night, the yogi dinner bell is ringing A long table under a tent seats yogis from the world, twenty or so, eating the remains of zuppa and rizo can sugo, hot chai is served sporadically like some golden nectar from the hills, all ensconced in a brilliant love and laughter until buses start leaving at 5 am. give Her the openness to come and go and do as She will with full confidence in Her enlightening yogis. We love you, Shri Mataji. We love you, Shri Mataji. We are happy and joyous and aware of our understanding. We are Bollo Shri Adi Shakti Mataji, Shri Nimala absorbing you deep in our hearts, Devi Ki Jai! Jonathan Schorr (The American Newsletter)

 Give me strength GIVE me strength, Mother to meet one challenge or the other GIVE me a mature mind to tackle problems of one or the other kind GIVE me a patient heart so that you can reside in any of its parts, GIVE me a pair of beautiful eyes Whenever I open them I should see You to my surprise Give me a pair of noble hands so i can work according to your commands. GIVE me a confident and cheerful nature so I can survive in any weather. GIVE me the sense to smell a flower and to smell the fragrance of love which you shower, Give me the sense to feel to feel the way you heal. above all, give me the sense of satisfaction so the "GIVE" above I don't have to mention. Chanchal Lal

 SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA-2003 (A Report) MATECHE GONDHARI The moments spent with Shri Mataji are price- less. We are the singers of Shri Mataji. Many Sahaja Yogis understood this after the Shri Adi Shakti Puja, We were blessed to enjoy Shri Mataji's brief presence at Saturday evening's program and at the puja. We are the praisers of the Mother. The dharma has lost its meaning. There was an epitome of ego. Almost by surprise, Shri Mataji ar- The children became harassed, so the Mother rived on Saturday evening at the artistic program and enjoyed the presentations offered by the Sahaja Yogis from the host countries. came on the Earth. The love of the Mother manifested. The en- emies were destroyed. The end of the sins is approaching. The Shakti The puja was set to start at 7 am has come on the Earth and at that hour it was announced that Shri Mataji was ready to leave the castle. The vibrations became very strong. Shri Mataji came actually at ten and stayed for almost an hour She challenged the devils with Her yoga and they were destroyed. We have got lost in devotion for Her. We saw the Heaven on the Earth. The puja started without the speech We recognized God and we started adoring the Adi Shakti. and immediately the children were allowed to offer kumkum on Shri Mataji's Feet. Afterwards, without preparations or decorations for Shri Mataji, the puja items were offered and we sang We worshipped Her and the whole village the normal knew this. The whole village came back to us to get the blessings from the Mother. the aarti. After this, Shri Mataji Herself asked for the bhajan Mateche Gondhari. ' On this song, indeed, the whole puja pendal started to dance. Shri Mataji was radiant and we She made a sign and all felt the love of God. In Sahaja Yoga life is not a wasted life, as it is with false gurus. were lost in joy and everyone wanted this song never to end. Suddenly, Shri Mataji Here we have a direct relation with God and love to spread only His message. took the microphone and spoke about the song 's meaning. "We are the singers of Shri Mataji." Then Shri Mataji left. We remained satisfied in silence. (Arno, Ute, Margot, Martin and Sita) I am not going to tell you more. Those who came have got their Realization. You only have to have devotion and you will certainly get the moksha.

 The Divine Coal Breeze 35 Issue: 9 & 10 SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA CABELLA LIGURE 15 JUNE 2003 am very happy all of you are kere singing the songs of Gondhari. Perhaps you do not know the meaning. That is We are the singers of Shri Mataji. And these are the songs sung by people who are villagers and they are singing this song that We are singing the song of our Mother, with all our leve for Her. And all that singing has come to you." It is very, very happy for Me because these are only ordinary vil- lagers and how you have accepted such a nice mood and songs from them. "May God bless you.

 t#*** Shri Mataji in Paris July 22nd to 24th, 2003 outside the bounds of time day following Her arrival, delivering to us a From the 22nd to 24th July 2003 and, more precisely, for thirty-six hours, the French collective lived divinely blessed moments series of precise descriptions of the events that we have been living through in France for during our Divine Mother's visit to our twenty years to this day. country We were living outside the bounds of time. It is hard to express in detail the More than six hours were spent visiting Paris, including some shopping and the crossing of the city of Paris, but it all seemed to us very richness of the teachings with which our Guru blessed us. short How to describe such a divine arrival - the extraordinary column of Paramchaitanya, the flowers and the yogis and the intense looks Shri Mataji was beyond fatigue. We felt like we were in a puja and there was a downpour of vibrations and a freshness akin between her devotees and the ultimate aim of their devotion, Shri Adi Shakti! to a fresh morning rain shower. All the souls, and the little reservoir of That same evening, Shri Mataji love that we were, began to flow towards Her, the inexhaustible source of love. expressed her wish to see some of the Paris yogis and so we were twenty or so blessed souls who spet an eternal ten minutes in Her And yes, our Mother arrived at the presence, when She then announced that we Roissy Airport in Paris with all Her powers of the Adi Shakti, Her Resplendent Majestry, full of tenderness, of force and of gravity which pulled in everybody's attention. How could should go for a drive. This was at 11 pm. And so a cortege of four cars followed Shri Adi Shakti around the outskirts the country, supposedly the representative of of Paris, during which time She announced to the attention of the world, remain indifferent us that, "I am here because of your strong desire," which left us wondering exactly to to the very source of that attention? which desire She was referring. That night The airport was enchanted and that enchantment invaded Paris during the next again our Mother allowed us to sail on that extraordinary ocean of love over which She is thirty-six hours. Mother visited Paris on the

 The Divine Cool Breeze 37 Issue: 9 & 10 the only one to reign. hearing. I stay in this hotel two to three weeks out of every month. One colleague had received his Realization a few weeks And so with the same question in mind, we soon found ourselves again at the airport, back and was meditating. He is very waving Her off to India. sensitive to the vibrations. I said to him, It is true that we, the French Sahajis, "You know the lady you have been meditating on for the past few weeks? Well, She's arriving at the airport tonight. "While we were standing at the airport arrivals, he said to me, "I think that plane landed a few minutes early. "He was right. Shri Mataji had arrived. We saw Her from the windaw and She waved lovingly at all the yogis, making sure that She waved to the yogis at each window as She passecd. It felt like old times again with all the yogis live in a spiritually backward and difficult country. With no great powers, we wished only to be able to receive our Mother, carry Her bags, offer Her food, wash her Lotus Feet, see Her resting comfortably and to help take away all those problems which come from us. And it is also true that in these simple acts, we were not the best. Which desire was Mother speaking about? With this brief account, dear brothers gathering around Shri Mataji in a sea of and sisters, we wanted simply to share with you this pure desire to which Shri Adi Shakti, divine love. The next day. I was to give a training course and I heard that Shri Mataji Shri Adi Guru, Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi is so Was going to go shopping, so I asked another Sahaja Yogi, who works for the sensitive. And we also wanted to share with you our company, to phone when Shri Mataji was ieaving. I was in the middle of my training collective introspection, as it is an occasion for each one of us to pierce into the seerets of pure desire course and I received the call. I told the trainees that I had to go out for fifteen minutes and that they should contimue with Majid Golpour the exercises. I raced to the Hilton, which was only five minutes away, and, as I walked in, Shri Mataji was in the reception hall and, apart from Majid and Alganesh, I had just finished a training course at my company's office in Paris and was wondering what to do with the evening, when I received a call from a Sahaja Yogi I was the only yogi. Shri Mataji gave me a big smile and offered namaste and I felt so brother saying that Shri Mataji was arriving and would be staying at the Hilton Hotel. I couldn't believe what I was blessed to have received Her darshan, After She left, I raced back to my trainees,

 Issue: 9. & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze 38 feeling bathed in vibrations. It was quite a proper comfort to give attention to comfort and that here, obviously, we do not under- bizarre adjustment from the darshan of the Goddess to going straight back into stand what comfort is. explaining the technicalities of our software She later spoke about how important it is product. (Steve Jones) to have proper comfort and hygiene in our life, to have the proper attention on our being and to be very neat and clean, every day to With very little advance notice of Her arrival, the French Sahaja Yogis in the area take a bath, every day to have proper hy- of Paris journeyed to the airport to greet Shri gienic care. Our attention should go to each Mataji We all phoned each other and we and every part of our body, as well as to our started a crazy-pleasant rush. It was such a brain; otherwise we cannot feel comfortable. Proper introspection is needed to find the com- fort of our body and our spirit. happy rush. No one was late when Shri Mataji and Sir arrived at 9 pm. The Adi Shakti has decided to use this Two lines of yogis were formed and Shri Mataji passed between them. We welcomed country of France to bring proper comfort Her with so many flowers, which She accepted and to show what is the comfort of the spirit. This trip clearly showed us who Shri Mataji from every person. Although it was late in the evening, She saw each and every one of us with full attention. Many children were there, is This trip clearly showed us that She is the Adi Shakti. This trip clearly showed us newborn babies and also newcomers. This our fears, our limited perceptions and walk through the airport was just like a tunnel interpretations about Her. She came to show us all this, in the most delicate and soft of joy, love and vibrations. Shri Mataji did not speak to the assembled crowd, however She did say thank you to manner. The meaning of this trip was to tell us to take up again good Sahaj principles that many of us unfortunately fail to actualize This means it is important to meditate deeply and truly, everyone. At Her hotel near the airport, Shri Mataji found it very uncomfortable and noticed that everything in the suite was placed too low. She said that She will show people what is every day. It is essential for us to have full faith in Shri Mataji. The deities express themselves through comfort by bringing it to France. She said She will find land, buy it and build a place where people can eat and stay, enjoying comfort in Her. After such a trip, it is impossible to imagine the real sense of the word. the Divine differently All the dimensions of She pointed out how important it is to have the Divine are meeting inside Her. What would

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 9 & 10 the world be wvithout Shri Mataji? When I finished my training course, A lot of things happened only to show us I went back to the hotel and, by this time all the yogis were gone how important it is to have fixed attention and rnot to have our organization disturbed by useless actions and everything had been taken away. I was alone, meditating in front of Mother s bed. hust looking at the bed took me into thoightless Mother was there watching everything carefully as the Witness, She showed us how a calm and inner quiet attitude is always the awareness. I only had about half an hour to go before I had to take my flight home and I was meditating best. Each and every moment spent with Shri Mataji is a lesson of Yoga. Shri Mataji is able on the reality that a divine to take all forms. If we want Her to be sick incarnation had slept in this room. and weak, She will play that character also. So, it is better not to project anything or I looked at the sheets that were still on the bed, the sheets that to interpret. She is like an untouchable Shri Mataji had slept on two nights previousły and I couldn'Y bear the idea of the cleaner giant. Shri Mataji is very well. She is working on a deep and subtle plan. Now it is our turn to coming and juSi dumping them into a bin. So I phoned overtake our fears and projections through our meditation A lot of yogis came also to say goodbye. the manager with an umusual request to buy the sheets. It wasn Y a problem, So I folded up the sheets and flew home and placed them on our altar. Sahaja Yogis from Australia, England and Russia were also present during these three days and brought back these Divine messages to their countries. When She left, the rain started to fall very On the plane, I kept thinking of the vibrated sheets in the over- strongly head compartment and felt that I was carrying back to Vienna (Majid Golpour and Janaki Gerard) a small part of Shri Mataji's ocean of love along with the memory of an incredible week in Paris. (Steve Jones)

 Once GURU PUJA A SAHAJA YOGI 24 July 2004 Cabella Ligure "Most of these gurus and incarnations were very helpless with human beings. Perhaps they didn't have such beautiful disciples as I have. Perhaps at this time, all the good people who are seeking divinity are born, they are here as Sahaja Yogis... Once you are a Sahaja Yogi, you are a Sahaja Yogi. Then you must show your dignity and not thrive on your weaknesses.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue. 9 & 10 41 But modern times are so special I think. It is have so many powers. But their self- confidence and assumption is not with you. very easy to give Realization. In Sahaja, you witness yourself as a Ego is finished. separate identity. All your past in finished, "Even if you do some mistakes, doesn't matter. Because of no self-confidence, you 2one. You are not bothered and you remain in a state which is fearless. This state has to be achieved through Sahaja Yoga. become austere in Sahaja Yoga." If you are self-confident, then why should you be "Sahaja Yoga is not to conquer others or to control others, but to conquer austere? "It all goes together. First you must mature. With that, you must have self-confidence. And without fear, you should spread Sahaja Yoga. yourself"...Have you completely trans- formed yourself, changed yourself and now, in your presence, do people feel "Some have fear about themselves and some have fear about others. Also it comes secure?... from your conditionings, from your upbring- "Now to become the guru, yOu should have ing" “I want to tell you what you can achieve, a great sense of forgiveness," like Buddha. "To call yourself a guru, you must have also maturity. to tell you how far you can go." With so many of you on this Earth, it is more than sufficient If you put a litle light in a lamp, it is just Living light to itself, nothing else. "You have to to transform at least ten globes, ten worlds... give light to others. You have powers. You can do it. You can really change people." "As much as you want to grow, this power can give you that much power. But Whatever position you have, you should try to act with humility, through compassion. the problem that lies with us is that we don't know ourselves and we don't want "The maturity is this-that you should know to know ourselves." You should have "the state of guru". If you you have these powers. You should know how to preserve these powers... want, it can work out. The all-pervading divine power of love is asolutely working it out. More than you, the Divine wants this world "You may be anything. You may be a clerk. You may be a dishwasher. That makes no difference. But once you are a Sahaa Yogi, you are a Sahaja Yogi, Then you must show your dignity and not thrive on your to change, wants to transform the whole universe. "Now, you are the instruments and if you weaknesses. You are much better than all these try to cheat yourself, who can stop it?" Just to realized souls, who have achieved their enjoy music or to enjoy the company or belonging to some club or to.. seek the Realization in thousands of years, because you

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 9 & 10. security of your children and family . will never satisfy. It will only satisfy you when you will become the lights to give it to others, to correct your own faults. I'm very proud of you. I'm very happy that never such disciples existed for any gunu. work for others... When I see that you people don't see what "You have these powers by which you can you have achieved and you don't want to work it out, then I think of the parable of Christ that introspect yourself, you can witness yourself and you can surrender because, mentally nOw, some seeds fell on the rock You don't know why you got you are convinced about Sahaja Yoga Realization, why you are here, what is your Emotionally, you are convinced that Sahaja Yoga has given you such sense of love and speciality, what you have to get You don't know that And that is what you have to compassion. Physically, you are convinced that Sahaja Yoga has given you good health and confidence about your health." know. "After all, you're all seekers of truth for ages and now you have come. You have Now spiritually, you should be convinced that you are really spiritual people, found the truth." So try to identify yourself with truth, that's all-and with reality. If you selected by the Divine, that your last lives have identify yourself with truth and with reality, your been of great seeking. That's why you are Sahasrara is absolutely open - no problem. born now and you are getting all this blessing "So assume. Assumption of your per- "Truth is in your Sahasrara". And when the truth comes in, you are surprised that truth is love and love is truth, pure love. sonality is important." You must meditate and go into thoughtless Awareness and all the time keep your atention alert. That is very mportant. All these things come to you when you are alert and aware of this all-pervading It's very, very joy-giving and all the niranandas you want to have, you can have, if you understand this simple equation that absolute truth is absolute love power all the time, every moment "I have no expectations. I must tell So "Thoughtless Awareness" is the first beautiful state you have to achieve. That will you I am over-satisfied. As far as I am concerned, I think I have done My job. But give you peace and a witness state to enjoy now this has to be taken over You have to be the drama of life, to enjoy the different varieties of people, while you will be growing within yourself responsible You have to work it out. There is, if you may call it, a defect. Sahaja Yoga is not a military thing. It's just plain, simple Mother's love. And, of course, "For a Sahaja Yogi, it is important not to see the faults of others," but to see and every mother wants her child to be great, to

 The Divine Cool Brecze Issue: 9 & 10 have all her powers She wants that, no doubt. How she does it, how she works it out is her country and, no. question of the whole world. So what is needed now is to raise own problem. But how you take it and how you use it is your own problem. I always bow to you people who have got Realization because I think so many saints your awakening, to raise your spirituality to go into a realm of complete support and surrender to the movement of this spontaneous movement of Sahaja Yoga were never there on this Earth. But the saint- May God bless you all. liness has to be complete: Without that, you "In short, you must worship yourself cannot heip even your family, leave alone your

 EXPERIENCE STILL ТЕАСНER BEST THE To lead does not mean solving problems. It means giving problems to solve, SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI The quote above is one of many cited by Gregoire de Kalbermatten in his new book, The Third Advent, published this year. As we turn our attention to the Guru Principle, the simple wisdom of these works stands out like a beacon. One might add: deceptively simple, for at their heart lies one of the deepest underlying principles defining the relationship between a mother and her children, guru and disciple or, indeed, God and Man, that of compassion. The cub hesitates, then bounds forward, perhaps unaware that he is alone in the chase. But the quarry is too quick, disappearing into the thick of the herd. The cub turns to his mother, but she's not in sight. Perhaps he goes hungry, but he is left in no doubt as to what he must do in order to survive. The best leaders are the ones who can awaken the finest qualities and activate the highest powers in those who look to them for guidance. We see in our Holy Mother, Leader of all Leaders and Guru of all Gurus, the most shining and perfect example of this. Rarely in any of Her talks does She seek to solve our problems outright, but instead She clarifies the problems for us that we have to solve and so makes us aware of just how well equiped we are, saying in effect, Now you see the problems. Before you couldl not. Now at least you know what yon have to do. However, Shri Matai has solved one problem for us that we could not have done ourselves: the Raising Of The Kundalini. In so doing, She has taken our eyes, which were closed and in darkness and opened them to the light, so that She is able to say: This is what you all are Here are the roots of the tree Often declaring that She is not a Guru, but a Mother, Shri Mataji refers to the traditional harsh disciplines enforced by gurus who might, for example, hang disciples upside down in a well. Yet we see, through Her motherhood, that She exemplifies the very best type of guru, a loving and benevolent teacher. A good teacher will not need to mete out discipline if the pupil can be provided with experience that has discipline automatically built into it. For example, the best way to teach a language is to immerse the pupil in an environment where only that language is spoken. The need to communicate increases to the point where the learner simply must acquire the means and does. In nature, the lion cub follows the mother each day, observing as she selects the unwary prey momentarily detached from the herd. If she is successful he is allowed to share in the kill. Then one day, she stands back. These are the powers that you have Here is where the problem lies Here is how to attack them at their roots Here is how to grow into and maintain your

 45. The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 9 & 10 teaching. It is about getting things done. No good leader, tries to solve every crises alone or do everything himself Of a poor leader, it is often said, "He doesn't know how to del- awareness every moment and Here, in your heart, you will find Me. Giving problems to solve can work on more than one level. It can mean egate." But Shri Mataji, while working cease- lessly Herself, is undoubtedly the Delegator of all Delegators, entrusting the task of en mass Self Realization, with all its logistical challenges, to the "masse" itself.. Sahaja Yogis of the identifying existing problems, then providing the means to solve them and saying, "Go to it" It can also mean creating problems artificially to use as growth exercises or to build confidence. world. Yet Shri Mataji never desires us to suffer needlessly, nor as gurus must we ever allow ourselves, nor others, to suffer for the sake of it or out of guilt. The key element is benevolence, expressed through compassion. Compassion, as embodied by the Divine, must involve setting out problems when necessary Shri Mataji has said that this is not Her conscious doing, but that it is the compassion itself which act through the Paramchaitanya. It blesses us by providing obstacles for us to overcome. Otherwise how would we grow? How would we ever know what powers we Sahaja Yogis are indeed a rare and special case. The fact is that we need not break our heads to solve problems because the kundalini gives us clear access to an infinite number of solutions built within us. The real challenge is in recognizing and heeding them, but doing so always brings reward. It happens on occasion that Shaja Yogis, including leaders, go to Shri Mataji with a question and might receive only an enigmatic response or may even fail to get an opportunity to ask the question at all. Yet somehow within a very short time they find the answer revealing itself, either from inside have? At the same time, She is a Mother whose love is limitless and, in Her generosity, She has intervened countless times, more than or through some event which occurs spontaneously most of us may ever know, to end our suffering or shield us from needless pain, so much of which She takes on Herself. In our own guru capacity, we often find new people who are naturally full of questions. Even if we know the answers, we might serve them best with the following suggestions, "Why not meditate a little more, then see if you still need to ask the question She has also on many occasions dispensed clear-cut and ready-made solutions to specific problems. But in Her compassion, She will limit that generosity where necessary, in order to ensure that what must be learned next week." Such experiences, and the answers that come with them, are never is learned: forgotten- this writer can vouch for that, first hand! Of course, leadership is not only about

 Moroco In honour of Her YOGA Holiness Shri Mataji s birthday, a group of European Sahaja Yogis travelled to Morocco to SAHAJA IN give Self Realization to the seekers of truth in the Islamic world. Ken Williams American D.C.B.. On the night of March 21st we had a puja seekers just felt deep thoughtless awareness celebration together with Ali Atig, who is one and some of them, in the next step, felt the of the first Sahaja Yogi of Morocco. In this depth of the nirananda state - the joy of the puja we expressed our deep desire that by Sahasrara. the grace of Shri Mataji, the Islamic world should have a breakthrough in recognizing Sahaja Yoga and the importance of Self Bachir from the Sahara, for example, mentioned, "What you tell me about Sahaja Yoga, I believe it is one hundred percent pure Realization Islam. In Morocco we met very deep Mohammed from Marrakech seekers, some of whom had met Shri Mataji mentioned, after we had worked on him for in Tunisia, some in Cabella and some even in only a few minutes, "I feel completely in the present time- unbelievable". Also, I have now a very good communicațion with this Lady, referring to the picture of "Shri Mataji". India, but had not followed it up after their initial contact. Shri Mataji mentioned once that, "as long as the seekers have fear, it is not easy to help them in their spiritual growth. Shri Mataji told us that Kind Sidi Mohammed Ben Abdullah, who lived at the On the other hand, we realized that same time as Queen Maria Theresa ruled in most of the seekers in Morocco also have a Austria, reigning Morocco from 1757 to 1790, very open heart and are quite sensitive in feeling the cool vibrations. It seems that the Ganesha tattwa is respected. was a born-reaized soul. He established diplomatic relations with Austria. As well, very good cultural and economic ties existed between India and Morocco. Sidi Mohammed is also understood to have had a strong relationship with the United States, Morocco being the first country to recognize the new American nation. Simply put, Morocco was It was always very easy to give Self Realization to the Moroccans. Many naturally have a very strong attention. The way they spontaneously felt their kundalinis remind us of experiences in India. In many cases, the

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 9 & 10 47 brought into intermational recognition, especially due to the political and commercial relation- ship between the Arabic world and the west- ern hemisphere. translated the introduction of the programs into the Arabic language for the audience. The way the Moroccans appreciated and really enjoyed our music and the experience of their kundalini was very touching. All of them were singing with us and the programs continued until after Our music programs and Sahaj bhajans, which took place during three midnight. evenings in March, were an ideal atmosphere We feel that the feminine force of for the collective awakening. As a result, the Sahaja Yoginis will be very important also in these Muslim countries. In fact, Sahaja Yoga process of Self Realization took place very spontaneously. We felt thạt the space we has now taken a new turn in Morocco for the entered transcended beyond the room and first time since 1995. The attention and desire of Ali is taking care of all the other cities and through the walls. Far ahead, the divine vibrations spread their force. places and there is a strong force beside him in his wife, Kautar, a very innocent Sahaury healing power of spiritual music. Every year or lady of the Sahara. In the Sahara, the you can find the festival Music Spiritual takes position of women is very special. They rule place in the city of Fes and all musicians from all their society, even in politics. Men have the all cultures and all religions around the world secondary role. This is unique and does not Moroccan citizens are aware of the join this event to surrender and worship God exist in other Islamic societies. as the essence of this music. The depth and surrender and worship, which is expressed especially by the music of Sahaja Yogis, Her Holiness Shri Mataji mentioned very clearly to one of the seekers of Morocco, who came to India in 1998 for the reaches the absolute height in touching the heart of the Divine and, in retum, our souls, creating such a heavenly atmosphere. Birthday Puja, that the Muslim people have to recognize that today we have just one religion and this religion we call as Vishwa Nirmala Dharma and this religion is universal. Ali, who is from Marrakech, (Franz Mekyna)

 48 The Divine Cool Breeze He writes: For me, the beginning in Sahaja Yaga was easy t was my fate to meet my sister Selma and After his Self Realization brather Laurens in Marrakech They were my first and becoming a Sahaja yaga teachers Flove them I trust them: 9 never them so much anid respect thought they wounld bring me Yogi, Ali Atig feels that, in anything which wauld hurt me and my family. They tanght me step by step. From the first line the true sense, he is one of the richest people in Mo- I maditated, I fele something Россо. Мапу times he rocco. new felt more than relaxed. I can say this, it mentions how happy he is was just like ane drinks alcahal and feels gaod. to have real brothers and But after I had meditated tvice a day, as Selma advised eanlinued discovering that it sisters in the Sahaj family. and Laurens ather interesting things to seems that kere wete many laok for mare than just resting and feeling gaod was our Mother, Her Holiness Shi Mataji When I felt in need of meditation, after putting the holy picture, incense and candles, and after sitlling in a clean place camfortably, can yau imagine that9 really forgat campletely the time and the real world? was samething unbelievable How can I desoribe this to new people? You, the yoginis and the yogis, yow must know this Now I have the respansibility to do samething far Sahaja Yoga and to speak about the bady and haw This is one of his I most important achieve- ments. Ali 's desire is to spread Sahaja Yoga in all corners of Morocco and then to think about the other nations in north Af- rica. The small plant of Sahaja Yoga in Morocco, which had to face has to clean all the chakras. many obstacles, was grow- тany This is the respansibility af each one of us, just Shri Matajë said in ane of Her speeches, Sa uhere are you?" ing in a desert, but now it as gets water by the rivers of love and recognition. Yaur brather, a yagi fram Marrakech Ali Atig

 ৩ पी ा र शी रमन ३०

 "Sahaja Yoga is not to conquer others or to control others, but to conquer yourself...Have you completely transformed yourself, changed yourself and now, in your presence, do people feel secure?...



----------------------

2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
The
00
30K0
101
September-October, 2004
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-2.txt 
 NIRMALA
NIVERSAL PURE RELIGIC
In This Issue
3. Guru Puja Cabella - 04.07.2004
6. Shri Krishna Puja Mumbai - 28.08.1973
12. Gudi Padwa Puja, Delhi - 30.02.1976
17. A Poem
18. Prophecies and Fulfillments
23. 'AUM' Explained
25. 'Pledge'
26. Towards Libration TV Interview 14.03.2003
30. Sahasrara Puja Cabella (A Report) 04.05.2003
33. Give me strength-
34. Shri Adishakti Puja (A Report) - 2003
36. The Joy of Paris Collectivity
40. Guru Puja Cabella - 24.07.1994
44. Experience Still The Best Teacher
46. Sahaja Yoga in Morocco
DHARMA
IN VAHSIA
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-3.txt 
 THE D IVINE Co OL BREE ZE
COOL
BRE E Z E
Published by
Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
H.O. Plot No. 8, Chandragupt Housing Society
Behind Hotel Grace, Paud Road
Kothrud, Pune-411 029
Printed at
Amarnath Press (P) Ltd.
WHS 2/47, Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi - 15
Ph.:25268673
For Subscription Please Write To:
Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
222, Desh BandhuApartments
Kalkaji, New Dehi-110019
Tel. No. : 011-26422054, 26216654
Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles,Miracle Photographs etc. to:
Shri O.P. Chandna
G-11 (463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110034
Tel. No. 011-55356811
Mor.: 8:00 AM-9:00 AM
Eve. : 8:30 PM-10:30PM
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-4.txt 
 GURU PUJA
Cabella Ligure 4th July 2004
Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
(Internet Version)
It is a great pleasure for me, greatest joy to
thin. And only within you can feel that. So we
have to understand it's not the show, it's not,
nothing else but just the feeling within that you
know that you have love of the Divine. This
you can have because it is just there. No one
see so many Sahaja yogis for the Guru
Puja. It's very gratifying to think that there are
so many, so many of you who are disciples,
It was never expected that I'II have so many,
can give you, no one can sell it, no one can
so many people following me.
share it, it's just there. And that love has to be
felt and shared. It has nothing to do with oth-
It is being expected that you all will follow my
message of love. I do not have to say
ers. Whether others love you or not makes no
anything for love. Love is absolute gift of just
difference. It's within yourself, this feeling, this
feeling others. There is no talking about it,
depth is there which you enjoy. It is their
discussing about it, nothing. Just you feel that
capacity. Everyone has this, lots of it.
love. To feel the love I will say one has to
Sometimes you feel you've lost it, sometimes
you feel you've gained it, but it is there as
have a heart, but how can you have a heart?
It is not your own doing, it's all there. So it is
much as...
something already gifted to you, you have it,
In the same way the source of your love is
that you can feel that love. It's so much
eternal. You cannot measure it, it's difficult.
joy-giving, peace-giving.
But it's beyond all your human expressions
and it shows your understanding, your
Love has its own qualities and one of the
quality is that love understands, Its
understanding of love which has no words,
understanding is not in words, not in thought,
which cannot explain, but by itself you wil
but understands within. It can feel within, which
know that I have this quality to love within
myself and I can enjoy this love within myself.
is very important. This is the most important
part one has to realise, that love, you can only
feel it. You cannot talk about it, you cannot
show about it, but it is within and you can feel
This is a very unique gift which only very
human beings have. Among animals also you
few
find people who have love, but that love is not
it.
deep, that love has no meaning. It has some
And that is why today is your celebration of
purpose, maybe, but it is not human. So it
lacks the beauty of human love. It lacks the
understanding of human love.
the Guru, is the celebration where you can
feel that love for your Guru. That feeling is
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Issue: 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
from what love I am telling you.
That has some
It is not easy to describe or explain love in
human words. This you can only feel within
yourself. That is what once you start feeling,
you can feel who is your Guru, whom do you
connections, some meanings, but this love
which is Divine, cannot be described in words,
that's the only reason why you should love
you are being taught and persuaded and
made to live in a particular manner. All that is
think
your Guru. Now there's no reason for that.
Because love is love. That is how the Guru
becomes very important in life. We have
people who love their Guru and are very much
possible if you get immersed in it
It's very gratifying, it is very lovable to see
how people love each other and then this love
spreads. Love begets love. If somebody has
love it just spreads. He need not tell anyone,
he need not confess it, but it will spread. And
in chaste understanding of their love.
In this great opportunity of love that we are,
we are here to enjoy each other fully from
our heart. That there is this ocean within
us. We have just to be submerged in that
this is what one has to learn: how to see that
love in other person.
ocean. If we are lost in that ocean then
we will have no problems, no questions.
Somehow we are here already in love
Everything will be our own and we can
because of Sahaj happening. We all love and
manage everything without any argument,
we enjoy love It shows on our faces, that we
without any questioning. That is what is
are love, in our characters and so easily
being Sahaj.
available.
The Sahaj way if you have this love...where's
that love within which approached people in
It is a very big blessing that you are human
beings and that this because of understanding
that unique manner. That's the thing that we
for which we do not have to go to any col-
cannot possess. You cannot claim. It is there
lege, to any school for education, it is some-
and it works. It works automátically. This is
thing so much within that it works and ex-
what we have to know that we are that love.
presses itself, expresses like light. Such people
we can make out because they are fully en-
That love is within us, we have to have
knowledge, we have to have a complete
lightened. They have light and through that light
knowledge that we are badshah. That will
solve our problem. Because you can explain
they see the whole world. This is very inno-
cent and simple for them.
everything, all your behaviour, all your
failures, everything you can explain when you
We have love for our children, naturally We
have love for our parents naturally. We have
know that you are endowed with that love, This
is what is the Guru, is the love within you
love for some people but that love is different
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Issue: 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
you have to feel the taste, feel the feeling,
what it does, and all that is together, that's not
which wants to share the love with others,
which wants to give love to others. This is
separate.
what it is...and joy.
I don't think the subject was too subtle for
I can go on talking on love, but to feel it
within yourself is the biggest thing. Like water,
if you are thirsty we can give you water but
you people. You all have reached a certajn
amount of understanding of that love. I hope
it grows and you will grow into it, all of you,
and enjoy it.
we cannot drink. You have to drink water and
May god bless you
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-7.txt 
 The Most Dynamic Power Of Love
SHRI KRISHNA PUJA
Mumbai 28.08.1973
Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
love are weak. But the most dynamic power
in this world is that of love, is the most
aggresive power is that of love. Even when
we suffer in love it is out of our strength that
we suffer and not out of our weakness. For
example there was a teacher in China who
by the Divine
For example if I know only my head that is
not sufficient, ifI know only my neck that is
not sufficient, ifI know only my leg that is not
sufficient. But the more I know about myself
the more dynamic I will be, the more expansive
1 will be. And all the great that existed or all
Lused to teach the cocks how to fight, and the
the people who were called as great, are great
king of that place took his cocks to that teacher
and told him that you please teach them how
because they live in many human beings. I feel
that warmth in the atmosphere and you are
to figlit. After one month when the king went
feeling because you know they are not
foreigners, they are your brothers and sisters.
There are so many stories in Puranas like this
that I will not name it but once two brothers
met in a jungle, but they thought that they
were enemies and they wanted to fight with
each other and when they came to blows,
to take those cocks with him, he was surprised
that the cocks were just standing undisturbed.
He told the teacher, "what have you done to
my cocks? They are not at all aggressive,
they are not doing anything! How are they
going to fight it out?" There is going to be a
race, there is going to be an exhibition of their
they couldn't hit each other. They took out
strength and what are we going to do about
it? He said you just take them. He took those
their arrows. The arrows won't work. They
were quite surprised at this and when they
asked each other "who is your mother? They
found out the mother was the same, and then
they realised that they were not foreigners,
neither enemies but they were made of the
same fiber! What sweetness, what beauty that
knowledge had given them! And what security
two cocks with him and put them in the arena
where there were other cocks who had come
to fight. These two cocks were very nicely
standing. All the other cocks started coxing
and törturing. They were just standing and
looking at them. All the other cocks were
surprised at their behaviour and thought they
of understanding that everywhere in the whole
were very powerful and they all fled away.
The love that I am talking about, the Divine
Love makes you not only strong but dynamic.
It is the greatest luminous power that we can
think of! Only when love is surrounded by
world we have brothers and sisters who are
on their inner being, on their divine and how
we are bound together with that lovel! I talk of
love pepole think that I am trying to make you
weaklings, because people think those who
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Issue: 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
you are not to keep mum about it. All the
wrong ideas about love, all the falsehood about
love has to be given up. One must know that
it is the dynamic power and it won't allow you
to sit comfortably with your self enjoying with
peace and the bliss when the rest of the world
is not enjoying that and is placed into the hands
of the evil geniuses who have come in this
world to destroy and to bring the satanic realnm
on this earth. Now the days are gone when
gross and is lost in the gross, it looks as if it
is weak and under chase. The time it is
released, the dynamic power of love can
transcend all the evil powers of the world.
When people get their Realisation,
automatically the ego drops out, to a great
extent, I should say, because you say that the
vibrations are passing. You don't say that you
are giving. Because of the dropping of the
ego, sometimes it happens that you feel that
whatever you wanted to have you have got it
the people had to suffer. Christ suffered for
us. Of course Christ never suffered because
and
better not talk about it. When there
you
is any opposition from any where you shun it
and sit away from it. You don't want to save
he never suiffered. He never wept. He was
like those cocks, a very powerful personality,
but today is the day to brighten up your
understanding about your own strength that is
there. Those who are gross should worry about
their insecurity and their problems and their
organisations but not for the people who are
realised. I have told you many a times and
today you also remarked that you should know
that position from negative opposition whether
it is by speech or even by evil methods. You
run away from that thinking that Oh God! how
are they going to face it? On the contrary a
person who is negative, who has got hatred,
becomes talkative, that he talks, talks and talks
big. He thinks he is above everybody else, hé
that
can befool all the world. He takes the
you are never alone when you are realised.
responsibility on himself. They start a big
There have þeen many people who have been
Ashram or some big place where he sits down
with all his ignorance and starts spreading his
knowledge, so called, to people. By his
methods people get interest and they all go
and fall at his feet. While the realised sits at
home quitely wondering what are these fools
doing? But it is not now for the realised to sit
down and to wonder and laugh at them.
Foolishness of the people who are not yet
realised before even you were born, who exist,
who are anxious to help you at every
moment. In our Shastras we call them
Chiranjeevas, you know that. They are people
who are Niranjanas. As we said about Bhairva
and Hanumana, all these people exist and they
are waiting just for a call from you. Once we
went to the market and there was a problem
about something and I had somebody with
me, a disciple, who was also with me, I just
realised not even to take pity on them but to
come out. Come out with the sword of love
to win the whole world; which is very very
wanted to see what is his reaction. He tried to
argue out with the person telling about
essential. If the creation has to be saved then
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Issue: 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
or not. In that, you love that person, you don't
something. So he told me, 'Mataji lets go
now. Then we came out of the shop. I said,
hate. Only talking sweetly is not the idea of
op
love. No, a mother sometimes even scolds
the child, does not mean that she does not
going to
what
you
are
about it ? He said
1
have
love. If it is necessary, you have to tell the
already told Hanumana to look after that man,
person that it is negative. Of course, if there
is a realised person, he won't mind the
correction because he wants the correction,
he knows that there is a defect The instrument
and the work was done. It is gross but it
happens. When they say you can leave it to
anyone of them and they will have to gillie teo
it because it is you who are on the stage and
*
has to be corrected but a person who doesn't
not they. They are the background people.
there are the playbacks. But you must open
understand you have to force your love on
that person. You can force that love, you know
that, sitting down here. Many people have tried
putting love around certain people who are
trying to be mischievious and they have been
able to achieve great results. Those people
have turned back and come back. Only by
your mouth otherwise if they start thinking what
will people say? They are going to help you in
every way but how far are you standing on
your security? How far are you standing on
your property, on your understanding of
yourself
putting your hand and putting your attention
on that person and moving the hand like this,
the love encircles and the person comes up.
It is a great war going on, you are not aware
of it. Some of you are, some of you are
definitely aware of it because they have had
There is no doubt that there is negativity and
experience of fighting it out. It is a big war on,
now specially when ten Rakshasas have taken
their avtaras and for you to be so feeble! You
positivity, nothing in between. There is no
compromise between the two, either it is light
and darkness or it is positive and negative,
are still small children, no doubt, because you
definitely there are two things that are fighting
got your Realisation only a few days back but
if you want you can grow very fast, vou can
grow into big-big giants. All of you can grow,
only thing you have to decide that you have to
grow within. There are so many things that
you only have discovered by which a person
grows. I can give you food but you have to
grow yourself. Whenever you see the negativity
you have to stand up and say that this is
negativity and nothing else whether you like it
Only thing, your will, that's the trouble with
the whole joke, that your will is respected,
your will is throughout respected. If you have
the will to be adjoin that love, you can.
The other day I met a psychiatrist. He
was catching his super ego very much. I said,
what's wrong with you? He said my child-
hood. In my childhood, I couldn't get much
life,
love. I said now I am here, come in my
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Issue: 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
take the love. He said I want to flow my love
you can do to someone. You have seen what
Mother, I want to open out myself completely
without any fear. I said you just start it. Don't
worry what people are going to misunder-
stand, what people are going to say. Its noth-
ing important what people are going to say.
For love, the satisfaction is only love that you
love another person, you just flow your love
as said and you will see it will work out. Just
decide that I am going to love, and once you
decide that, the whole Heavens, the whole
negativity does to people! You have now
known what is negativity, you have seen how
people suffer with it! And here, they are also
anxious to be loved you will be surprised to
know that if you really love them, they them-
selves come to Me and say give us that, give
me salvation Mother! They come to me only
for that sometimes with you that I should give
them salvation and if I promise that, they take
the birth again but there are Rakshasas, there
are Rakashasas. As I told you the other day
the Kalyuga has laid a beautiful stage and a
very wonderful drama has to be played, in
power of the Heaven will fall at your feet. You
believe me in this. If you see otherwise, I am
an ordinary housewife. Some poeple always
say, "Mataji how can we be like you? Why
not? I am just like you. I have the same prob-
lems as you have, but only thing I know that
I am nothing but embodiment of that love that
is Divine and I can't exist without it. Every
moment of my life, let the love flow, let the
love flow; every wave of my mind conveys
that love and that makes you completely pow-
erful. If you read, I was reading Devi
Mahatamaya, in that they talk about a
which Ravana has to love Sita as a Mother,
the Kansa has to fall at the feet of Radha.
Perhaps you do not know that Krishna wanted
to kill Kansa at that time. He was his uncle,
you see the feeling came in him of his mother,
that after all he is my brother. So he asked
Radha and Radha killed him, the Radha who
loved the whole world at that time. She is the
embodiment of love and she killed Kansa be-
cause it was the will. When you are playing in
the hands of the God and if He wants to kill
Rakshasa who faced Primordial Mother, the
Divine Mother and he laughed at her, "You
somebody, it has to be slain. But first of all
you have to be in the hands of God com-
woman, what can you do to me, you are a
pletely. It is his love only which kills this body
and when the songs of their strength and vic-
tory are sung, you have seen it, how all my
Chakaras start working and vibrate! Because
of strength! All those victorious days are still
lingering on and it is going to work through
you. But what about your poor instrument
which is moving little slowly?
woman!' What can you do to me? And She
smiled at him and said 'Alright, come along,
let us fight. And with one stroke She cut his
throat! Very clearly that shows that positivity
can cut the throat of negativity. There is no
Hinsa in that, you must remember the differ-
ence between the two. If negativity is cut and
positivity brought out, that is the greatest ahimsa
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Issue: 9 & 10
10
The Divine Cool Breeze
carry the channel, that force of love. It should
not be like you have to be egoistic you cannot
The time, when love has to rule, the
Satyayuga if it has to come it is going to be
through your efforts now. Before Sahaj Yoga
no efforts but now all your efforts are Divine.
be even if you try to. You cannot harm anyone
even if you want to do, so many of you have
What ever you do, what ever sympathetic you
expressed that Mataji has given it to every
Tom, Dick and Harry. I cannot give it to any
activate, you are getting it through Para
Sympathetic. You don't do anything at all. But
you can see yourself what stakes are involved.
You are the chosen ones, otherwise why you
Dick, Tom & Harry. It has to be a man who
have been searching, it has to be a woman
who has been searching in her previous lives.
You should know what you have got it, you
get? You are the only people who have got
realisation and so much have you come foward.
have got it in your own right. So a person
look like a Dick, Tom, Harry but he is
Some of you got it only few days back and
may
not, he is a great saint. They are all saints
sitting here. It's a centre of nucleus of
sainthiness where the complete Divine is
have gone very far, why? You are the chosen
ones and you are to take it upon yourself. To
be the channels of the Divine Love, that
flowing. Only thing is, let it flow out from
This power is that of God and it is not your
dynamic power which is going to transform
the whole conception of hatred on which all
you.
responsibility to worry as together it will do
good or bad. Even if you think that it may do
some bad things according to this modern
sciences of this world, ultimately it is going to
be alright. Why that Jarasandh was to be
killed? Why that Kansa was to be killed? Why
Ravana was to be killed? Of course killing
these nations and all these differences are
created. It looks sometimes how, how can it
be? But now the days are gone of Gokul. I
was thinking of it and all the time when Krishna
used to play his flute and he tried Sahaja Yoga
on the Gopis and Gopas. Oh! He tried, and
tried and tried in different lives. Nothing worked
doesn't help much, that I have realised. All
those who were killed are back again in their
saddles. But still you don't fight those horrible
people, you just fight yourself out. You just
watch yourself. Where are you? What are you
doing? Are you on the Divine or on the gross?
Just think about it every moment, every
moment you are in mediation. Just think of
this moment and the dynamism of that moment.
and now it is going to click like a spark. The
chain reaction will start, but we have to have
strong machines to carry out, otherwise, the
fuse will be off. Only the strength that is in you
is to be felt by your attention. That's the only
thing you have to do, is to feel you patience
and give up all that is falsehood. All that is
falsehood, you see within yourself and you
will know what is falsehood and just drop it.
The complete power that is filling every moment
Accept only the truth and the truth will give
just to go inside you. It will flow through your
you that power to be the real instrument, to
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-12.txt 
 11
The Divine Cool Breeze
issue: 9 & 10
Sahasrara inside your being and completely
kill Kalia, that Krishna is to be born within
you, went and sat on the Kalia's Sahasrara
and was pressing it with his feet and all the
people were seeing the great drama of
Krishna's dancing on the Kalia's Sahasrara!
revolve round your whole being and transform
the inside into a complete Chaitanya Shakti, a
complete Divine Power. Allow it to come in,
accept it, accept it without any fear, let it get
in every moment, every moment keep awake.
Krishna is to be bon within your being3;
when you are Krishna, you are not going to
It is very precarious style that we are upto. I
have only two hands, you can see that very
see him. Let us now go to the state which is
clearly and though Mr.. says that I can do
everything, I can do everything but not to make
you do something. Your Will will be respected
throughout. Every other thing can be looked
beyond verge, beyond thoughts, into the realm
of Thoughtless Awareness where the Divine is
pouring its blessings.
These people have decided today to
have a puja and you know what happens to
after accept for one that you should be
perfect machine, a perfect channel, a perfect
flute. For My role to play that tune of your
love, it is for you to clear out all your seven
holes. It is for you to clear out your hollowness
and to be complete within yourself and He
knows His job. He is the Artist but you are
the instruments and the harmonious music from
a
Me when you do My Puja! So with all those
problems that will be facing later, I would like
all of you to be attentive about the puja and
to take full advantage of that. With this Puja
you get the Mother's protection to begin with,
and my Chakra's, when they start moving,
they give you special powers of love and bless
all your Chakras and fill them up completely.
So, I would like you, though some few people
are coming to do this all of you should feel
that you are all doing it, and you can feel it
that way with oneness and the blessings of my
being will flow to you automatically.
so many souls can fill the ears of these evil
people and can penetrate into their heart and
put love into them and may be that they
themselves will give up their evil ways and fall
at the feet of love. Krishna is to be born within
you today. A five year old boy who went to
May God Bless You
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-13.txt 
 GUDI PADWA, Delhi 1976
Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nrimala Devi
(Being in Thoughtless Awareness)
charge.
We cannot meditate, we only can be in
meditation. When we say that we are going to
meditate it has no meaning. We have to be in
You will start moving with the force of achetna,
the unconscious is going to work it out. It is
meditation. Either you are inside the house or
going to take you there where it wants you to
go. You keep to Thoughtless Awareness all
outside the house. You cannot be inside the
house and then say that now I am outside the
house or when you are outside the house you
cannot say I am inside the house. In the same
way you are moving in three dimensions of
your life, emotional, physical and mental being.
the time. Try to keep to Thoughtless Awareness
as much as you can. When you are in thought
less awareness you must know that you are in
the kingdom of God and his people, his
arrangements, his consciousness is going to
You are not inside yourself. But when you are
inside, that you are in Thoughtless Awareness,
then not only you are there but you are every
where. Because that is the place, that is the
look after you. Even when you are giving
vibrations to other people, I have noticed that
you are not in Thoughtless Awareness. If you
eive vibrations in Thoughtless Awareness you
point where you are really in the universe.
will not catch because all these entities that
From there you are in contact with the
enter into you, all these material problems that
Principal, with the Shakti, with the Power that
permeats into every particle that is matter, into
every thought that is emotion, into every
planning and thinking of the whole world. You
come into you, come when you are in those
three dimensions.
Through Sahaja Yoga you have opened your
gate of your own being. You have entered
into your own kingdom but you do not keep
there, you come out of it and again you go
back and settle down. That's a fact. You should
not feel so dissapointed about it, so frustrated.
You know people have worked for thousands
of years and they could not separate
themselves from themselves. Only you people,
Sahaja Yogis who are made after the pattern
of Shri Ganesh himself are so powerful that
they can give awakening and realisation to other
people. Even if you are caught up, you have
permeate into all the elements that are created
on this beautiful earth, you permeate into earth,
you permeate into Aakasha, into Teja, into
sound. But your movement is very slow. When
you say I am meditating that means you are
moving in permeation with the universal being,
but you are not moving yourself. You are just
unloading yourself to be free from the weight
of things that do not allow you to move. When
you are is meditation you must allow yourself
be in thoughtless awareness. There the
unconscious itself, the achetna itself will take
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-14.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 9 & 10
13
seen you have powers. Even if you feel that
the vibrations are not coming, you know you
absolutely individual.
So whether it is your son brother,
have powers. You can give realisation to
others. In your presence people get realisation.
But you have to be that power completely.
Supposing there is something wrong with your
car but as long as it is moving it's alright. You
have to repair it, you have to repair all the
sister, wife, friend. You must remember that
you are not responsible for their ascendance.
You cannot help them for their ascendence.
Only Mother's grace and their own desire,
their own effort to give up all the things three
dimensional will help them. So whenever a
times on our moodes which we have caused
thought comes like that you must know that
ourselves by our foolishness, by our lust, by
you have not attained the Thoughtless
our greed, by so many false identification we
carry with ourselves. We must have a complete
Awareness in its full extent and that is how
you have problems which are three
dimensional. Sometimes a Sahaja yogi will find
attention towards our weaknessesses and not
towards our achievements. If we know what
an emotion will come into his mind. It will be
are our weaknesses it's better that we can
an emotion of dejection or frustration and he
really swim across better. Supposing on a ship
will be disgusted with himself or with others.
there is a hole and the water is coming in
Both things are just the same. I have seen
some Sahaja Yogis getting very disgusted with
others. There should be no disgust that is
lasting. Of- course for a short time you might
feel disgust. Its alright, It is a part of feelings
or you might feel disgusted with yourself, may
be a part of feelings, but if you go on hankering
on to it or if you go on clinging to it, that
means you are conditioning yourself. That
means you are not in Thoughless Awareness,
that means that you are in your past. You are
through that hole. The attention of all the the
crew of all the staff and the captain itself wvill
be on that hole from where the water is coming
in and nowhere else. In the same way we
must be on the watchout. There are so many
pit falls for a Sahaja Yogi, I have seen it. Of
course even the past is over, even the past
can be overcome. In the present also there
are many shadows of the past working For
example when you are sitting in group you are
involved with each other. Those who are
making your past a solid mass on your head.
In the present everything is sleeping, everything
is sleeping that is not eternal. In he present in
the eternal state, the rest all drops out. It's like
a moving river which doesn't stop anywhere,
but the moving river is eternal, the rest of the
involved with each other, by any relationship,
whatsoever, must know that this kind of
involvement is not going to help them to attain
their individual ascent. Everybody is acending
individually though you are collectively
contacted with each other and in
things are all changing. If you are on the Etermal
communication. But the ascender is individual,
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-15.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
14
Issue: 9 & 10
Meditaion is the most Sahaja method. The
Principle, all that is not eternal changes and
drops out, dissolves and becomes non-
we have prayers and we have also Puja
Prayers are also to be said in your heart with
the feeling of complete surrendering and asking
for the eternal. It will be granted. Just ask for
that and the rest will take place because they
existent.
We have to understand our own dignity, our
own essence. The first and foremost thing is
that all the Sahaja Yogis are the chosen ones
go step by step. All the Sahaja Yogis have a
problem and they have problems because of
their past, because of their future aspirations.
Now, when you have problems, in Sahaja Yoga
They are the people whom God has chosen,
in this eity of Delhi there are thousands and
thousands of people. All over the world there
are so many people that you are suffering from
over population. But in Sahaja Yoga there are
very very few people and when you are
chosen the first, you must also realise that
you have learnt how to overcome them. There
are so many methods other than meditation.
You know then very well, that you must know
what is the chakra, where the kundalini is.
Now, if the kundalini has been stopped by a
certain chakra which is not working, you
shouldn't get frustrated about it, Supposing your
instrument or your car has stopped on the
way, what is the use of getting frustrated with
you
are the foundations, you are the stones that
are to be laid down and have to be strong,
have to be forebearing and that's why it is
necessary that all of you who are now few,
who are the first lamps that are going to
it? You have to learn the mechanism You have
enlighten other lamps in the world, you have
to enjoy the strength of Eternity, the strength
of Divine Love, the strength of this Universal
to be a good technician and then you can
manage it very well. So, all the techniques of
Sahaja Yoga must be learned and mastered.
Being that you are, This is what meditaion is.
This you can only do by giving it to others and
learning from correcting them and correcting
yourself There is nothing to be frustrated.
That's the work, if you get frustrated and
unhappy with yourself then there is going to
be a problem. You have to laugh at yourself
and laugh at your mechanism that is out of
gear. When you start identifying yourself even
So when Sahaja Yogis ask me, what should
we, we do? You be in Thoughtless Awareness,
that's all. Don't do anything at that time, not
that you are moving towards the good or that
the unconscious is taking charge of you. Not
only that, but also you are emitting for the first
time, the Divine into the Nature, into your
surroundings, into other people who are
universally connected to you Only thing is that
we are used to one thing that is we must do
something about it, and that's why we start
doing that.
with the instrument then you are not there
You are not the chakra, you are not the
different channels, you are the awareness, you
are the power, you are the kundalini. So, you
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-16.txt 
 15
Issue: 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
but it is 'You'. Kabir Dasji has written a
beautiful poem about it, that when the goat is
living and she says Mein', 'Mein' that is
don't have to worry about all these things being
not in their proper condition. If they are not,
you can solve it. Just now the lights went off
If the lights went off because of the electricity
failure, it's a serious thing. But if the lights
have gone out because there is a fuse burst,
you can replace it, you can remove that. So,
there is no need to worry if your chakras are
T,T but when she dies and her intestines are
drawn out into wires and some cotton-comber
fixes them on their instrument they have, Ek
Tari as they call it, and he goes on pulling it
with his fingers then it says Tu Hi, Tu Hi, Tu
Hi,' that is 'you are', 'you are', 'you are'.
spoilt.
That is how we have to die and we have to
Worrying itself or frustrating yourself, itself is
a wrong attitude towards Sahaja. 'Sahaja' in
other terminology also means simple. Sahaja
be resurrected. You have been already, but
Sahaja Yoga as I have told you is a kheer or
what you call the sweet dish cooked in a raw
how
means, to be Sahaja means, I can say
Tulsidasa has said, "Jaise Rakhhu, Taise Rahu."
pot (कच्चे घड़े की खीर है). So, the soil of the
raw pot also is mixed up, but your attention
can be with the kheer, with the milk and can
You keep me as you like. That kind of an
attitude keeps your attention inside, because
drop out all that is the mud of the raw pot.
That discrimination is spontaneous. It is there,
outside is to be let alone, to the top, let alone.
We are not bothered about the outside one.
feel
you have got it. Self actualisation, you can
yourself. You know you are not that, you have
started talking about your chakras in that
As you keep me, I will be in that manner, and
you will be surprised everything clicks out very
well. Even sometimes you might feel,' I should
manner. But the only thing, the only problem
or the only defect that is with the Sahaja Yogi
is that still though he is there, his attention is
in God with outside. That's the only defect. If
reach a certain place.'I must have this bhajan
done, I must get these things done, and it's
not done sometimes. Sometimes by mistake
something as you want is not done. You must
accept it as the Will of God. That is what it is
desired. It's alright. That is the Desire of God
and now you are one with this Desire. You
are here to communicate the Desire of God to
the attention is removed, how to remove, that's
the point. That is the first thing. Once you say
how to remove means you have created the
three dimensional involvement. You are not to
remove. It is there. If your attention is outside
then I would have said 'No, your attention
has to go inside, it has not gone'. But it is
there you are sitting there. I am sitting here
but my attention is outside. I would just feel
the whole world and at this stage if you start
having your own desires and ideas about
yourself then when will you become the Desire
of God? This I'ness has to go away. That is
what meditation is; where you are no more 'I'
myself where I am. That's all. Some have felt
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Issue: 9 & 10
16
The Divine Cool Breeze
balance, with your Puja then only it helps
better. That means when you are doing Puja
also receive it. Be in Thoughtless Awareness
when you are doing Puja. Completely
concentrate in receiving, but while Puja people
are talking I have seen that they are moving
about. I don't know how to explain it! That's
the time something is oozing out-the nectar,
and you just receive it at that time with full
devotion. It is oozing out. If you feel the
vibrations of my chakras at the time, you will
it, some have acheived it. You know among
yourselves there are some who have gone very
high. The other method we employ is of Puja.
I found that works very well with human beings,
Puja, because it satisfies lots of demands of
the past habit, that you feel that you are doing
something about it. Then you start giving
whatever you think the God has given you the
blessings and the Rishis and Munis have found
out, they are very clever people, they have
found out how to please the deity, how to
please the Mother So, they have told you as
realise that even the minute small little weals in
my body out pour, different space a different
speed, a different dimension and I really don't
know how to explain it but, you see, it creates
they have told you even in this lifetime of mine,
how to please her. They say she is Stutipriya
that means She likes praises. They thought
that. But when you praise someone from the
heart that means you are accepting him and
that is the time the chakras start creating a
force by which you are thrown, you are
the melody. You have to receive it and it is the
melody, individually. Suitable for every
individual and when you when you receive it
brings in you, that state is infinity. So, at the
time of Puja you must know that all your
attention, should be in reception.
triggered into that realm of God, So, these
Puja methods and prayer methods and the
mantra methods have been devised and found
Today is a very great day It's a new
year. Within two years from today, Satyayuga
is going to start. It's a great day for many
things that nine days are celebrated
out by great thinkers of Sahaja Yoga, the great
masters of Sahaja Yoga and it is the effort or
vou can say the effortless effort of the Sahaja
Yogis that makes my body vibrate, extract the
essence from my body or I should say,
makes me infinite, relelive itself through this
fine effort and it works, it clicks, I have seen
after this for the ascent of Mother. It is with
date or I should say the calander was started
it
by my forefathers and they perceived it that
this is the day when the Mother started
it works very well, But you know that after
Puja I get little tired because if you cannot
receive that foree, I want to sleep and get rid
of that additional vibrations into sushupti by
entering into the infinite state. If you could
receive whatever I am emitting, in
creating, and this is the day She created the
Ganesha to begin with in the utpatti stage She
started a work this day And that's why we
put this date as the first date, because the time
started from this date long time back, and
that's why this date is very important and if
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-18.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 9 & 10
17
get this, otherwise they will be left out of
you cross this state then you are beyond time.
You have to step out of this date and go
evolutionary process.
beyond. You have to step on your Dharma
There's no time for you to doubt and think:
on to a religion and go beyond Dharma
(-dharmatita). You have to be those three
Don't waste your time in all these useless
activities. If you have still doubt, it's better to
Gunas and to go beyond Gunas Gunatita You
give up. It's high time that you get into it,
through it.
are all those three but the steps on which you
are standing have to be alright or those which
are crossed or have to be alright too. So,
So, today I wish you Happy New Year for
you are beyond you have to repair those
steps which you have erossed somehow.
when
journey in the spiritual life of this world. You
have to think of all the Sahaja Yogis who are
far away from us and our thoughts should carry
our love for them and they should be blessed
It can be done through meditation, Puja,
prayers. But the most important the greatest
advancement is done by giving, The universal
through your universal being. You all must
dedicate your life to Sahaja yoga and give
more and more. Among us there are some
people who have given a lot and by that they
have acheived a lot. You have to give, talk
about it, spread it and bring more people to
as you all are blessed here. I hope this impor-
tant day that I am here, you will fully dedicate.
yourself for your emancipation on those four
lines that I have told you, and whatever
programme comes, take it Sahaja. You should
not insist on times and timings. Whatever comes
Sahaja accept it.
May God Bless You.
ANUPAMA'S POEM
Shri Mataji has three very beautiful grand daughters who to the Sahaja Yogis, are little god-
desses. (Perhaps, after all, the Sahaja Yogis have just there the right insight.) The youngest one,
Anupama, had written the following poem:
"I am a little cabbage
Divided into two
I give my leaves to others
And my heart to you."
London, July &83
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-19.txt 
 PROPHECIES AND FULFILLMENTS
Prophecies - Ancient texts from the major
religions and spiritual traditions of the world
which show references to the Kundalini, Self
by
The following
extract from
the Nadigrantha
Mr.
Realization, their association with the cool
Shanataram
breeze felt emanating from the top of the head
and from the palms, and predict Shri Mataji's
Athvale gives
an amazing
prediction of
Shri Mataji's
birth and the advent of Sahaj Yoga in these
modern times.
Fulfillments - how Sahaja Yoga was born
coming and
Her starting of
Sahaja Yoga,
and gradually spread around the world like a
silent, revolution-and how these prophecies
were fulfilled.
as well as the
effects Sahaja Yoga will have on humankind.
Prophecies
In this book he gave informations about sev-
eral different Nadigranthas which are the great
ancient books on astrology like Bhrigu Samhita,
Satya Nadi, Kak Nadi etc. In this particular
The texts below show references to the
Kundalini, Self Realization, their association
with the cool breeze felt emanating from the
top of the head and from the palms, and
predictions referring to the coming of Shri
Mataji and Sahaja Yoga in these modern times.
extract the author refers to the writings from
Kak Nadi written by Kakayyar Bhujander who
was a great astrologer and seeker who lived
nearly 2000 years ago.
From the Hindu Scriptures
"While Jupiter is in Pisces a great Yogi will
Shri Gyaneshwara, who lived in the 12th
incarnate on the Earth. By 1970 it will have
become quite evident to many people that a
century in India, is the first saint who asked
permission from his guru to speak openly to
new era has started. Kaliyuga will end and
the masses about the Kundalini, this
Krutayuga will start. The axis of the Earth will
knowledge being kept secret and transmitted
depress and the Earth's orbit will come closer
and closer to the Sun. Human life will undergo
only from guru to disciple till those times He
describes the manifestation of Kundalini
a complete revolution. A great Yogi will
incarnate at this time.. ]
awakening very clearly: "The Life-wind
emerges out of the Kundalini and creates a
cooling sensation in the body internally as also
externally." (Gyaneshwara 6.14)
Until this time a yogi or devotee could achieve
the bliss of Moksha and find the ultimate
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-20.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 9 & 10
19
meaning of his life only by following the path
of devotion, knowledge and Patanjali Yoga.
He would have to go through severe penance
in order to awaken the sleeping powers of
various chakras of his body and finally
enlighten the Kundalini Power.
science the existence of God and the Soul
could be proved. The veil of ignorance and
Maya would be drawn aside and
Brahmananda, Moksha which could previously
only be attained by yogis as a result of very
hard work and severe penance would become
easily available to all human beings."
By the new method of yoga devised by the
great Yogi, human beings will be able to attain
the joy of Moksha within one lifetime. It would
• From the Christian scriptures
Kundalini is the reflection of the Holy Spirit
within every human being. The mustard seed
no longer be necessary to sacrifice one's body
or die in order to achieve Moksha. The
Brahmananda which so far only great saints
had been to experience and then only by
entering into the Samadhi state at the point of
is none other than the dormant Kundalini en-
ergy which when sprouted grows into the Tree
of-the subtle system with the seven chakras
and the three channels of energy.
death, due to new type of yoga could be
The "Aquarian Gospel" mentions the
following words of Christ: "These things I
achieved by ordinary human beings without
entering Samadhi state while dying.
speak while you in the flesh but when the
Holy Breath shall come in power lo! She will
In the beginning it would be possible for one
person in crores to attain this Yoga and
Moksha. However, after some time the whole
teach you more and more and bring to your
remembrance all the words that I have said to
human race with the help of this Yoga will be
you. There are multitude of things yet to be
able to defeat itself. People won't have to
worry about food, shelter or clothing. While
living ordinary lives people will achieve
said: things that this age cannot receive
because it cannot comprehend. But lo! I say
before the great day of the Lord shall come
Yoga-Union with God. There will be no
the Holy Breath will make all mysteries known.
The mysteries of the soul, of life, of death, of
immortality; the oneness of man with every
necessity for hospitals as there will be no
diseases.
In the beginning the great Yogi will be able to
heal diseases with a mere touch. Old age will
go, destruction of the body will not exist and
other man and with every other man and with
his God." (Levi H. Dowling. "The Aquarian
Gospel of Jesus the Christ" 162.5-8, L.N.
Fowler & Ltd., Co. Ltd., Romford, Essex,
people will possess heavenly bodies.
p.238).
Due to new scientific discoveries, science ar
religions would become one. With the help of
In the "Gospel" according to John, Christ says:
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-21.txt 
 20
The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 9 & 10
"I say the truth to you. It is profitable for
"we shall seal up their mouths and their hands
you
will speak to us, and their legs will bear wit-
ness to what they used to earn" (ibid. 36.65
I go away: for if I do not go away, the
Comforter will not come to you, but if I go I
p.713). is precisely what happens in Sahaja
Yoga, when our entire inner system can be felt
will send her to you" (16:7), "But the
Comforter, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father
will send in My Name, shall teach you all
on our fingertips. Everything that we do which
goes against our Spirit manifests on our
things, and will bring to your remembrance all
the things which I have said you" (14.26). chakras, and can be felt on our palms after
"When He is come, the Spirit of truth, He
shall guide you into all the truth; for shall not
we get our Self Realization. The Koran (ibid.
for instance: 2.8 42.52etc.) also makes many
references to the Ruh (or Ruah), the Breath of
speak from Himself, but whatsoever He shall
God, which is same as the All Pervading Power
bear He shall speak; and He will announce to
in Hinduism and the Holy Spirit in Christianitv,
you what is coming" (16:13). ("The Holy
Bible". Gute Botschaft Verlag, Dillent Ger-
Its reflection in the human being is the
Kundalini.
many, 1889. The New Testament. GMorrish,
London 1871).
An interesting reference can be found in the
"Shorter Encyclopaedia of Islam" which
described the Mahdi - the Twelfth Imam who
Long time ago, a famous Cistercian monk by
the name of Gioachino da Fiore (c.1130/
was predicted to come in the times of Kiyama:
45-1) claimed that the New testament
"To believe Him as the Second or the
announced a third age of knowledge and
integration, the time of the Holy Spirit to come
after the age of the Father (Yahweh - The Old
Testament) and of Son (Jesus Christ The
New Testament). ("Joachim de Fiore" in
Promised Messiah is an article of faith,
because first of all His coming early in the
14th century of the Hidjra was predicted by
Muhammad" (H.AR. Gibb JH.Kramers,
"Shorter Encyclopaedia of Islam", E.J Brill,
Leiden 1953, p.24). Or, Hidjra (Hegir the
starting point of the Islamic period was
towards the end of the year 622, which sends
us the end of the year 1922 maybe the
beginning of the year 1923. Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi was bon on 21st of March,
"Exegese medievale". Pal 1967, vol.3, pp.
437-527).
From the Islamic scriptures
The Koran mentions the cool breeze in
connection to the Resurrection: "It is Alah Who
sent the winds... As such (will be) the
1923
Resurrection." ("The Noble Quran" 35.9, Hilal
Publishing House, Istanbul, 1994, p.700).
From the Jewish scriptures
At the time of Kiyama (Resurrection Time)
The Zohar too mentions the sacred "breath"
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-22.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
21
Volume-XVI Issue: 9 & 10
seventh center that is the integration aänd
in connection with the subtle body (the
sephoron free): "A breath which comes from
pinnacle of our spiritual evolution. By doing
so She cleared the path for the Kundalini to
rise effortlessly in each and every human
this world shakes the branches of the Tree of
Life which spreads the fragrance of the future
world in this world and brings the holy souls
alive These souls come up waking each other...
being who desires to receive their Self
Realization, the connection with their true Self
and with the Divine. She describes this
and the Tree of Life rejoices." ("The Zohar
III, 173 1 ir Livre de la Splendeur", pages de
livre de Zohar choisies par Edmond Fleg, trad
historic event,
"It is the greatest event of all the spiritual
happenings of the universe Without this
happening, there could not have been the
possibility of giving en-mass realisation to
par J de Pauly, ed. J.CLattes, Paris 1980,
our transl.). This is in reference to the capac-
ity of Sahaja Yogis (prectitioners of Sahaja
Yoga) to give Self Realization to other people,
like an enlightened candle enlightening another,
people. [.
As soon as the Sahasrara was opened, the
and the joy of the tree of life is the joy felt on
whole atomosphere was filled with tremen-
dous chaitanya, and there was tremendous light
in the sky, and the whole thing came on this
our subtle system during meditation when the
Kundalini has been awakened
Fulfillments
earth, as if a torrential rain or a waterfall with
such tremendous force as if I was unaware
and got stupefied.
The happening was so tremendous, and so
unexpected that I was stunned and got totally
silent at the grandeur.
I saw the primordial kundalini rising like a big
furnace, and the furnace was very silent but a
burning appearence it had, as if you heat up
a metal, and it has many colours.
In the early morning hours of the 5th of May
in year 1970, disgusted with the falsehood
spread by self-proclaimed New Age "gurus
and desiring all the Seekers of Truth attain
their Self Realization on the small beach of
Nargol (about 150 km from Mumbai), Shri
Mataji opened the primordial Sahasrara - the
In the same way, the Kundalini showed up as
a furnace like a tunnel, as you see these plants
you have for coal burning, that create
electricity and it stretched like a telescope
and came out one after another, shoot! just
like that.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-23.txt 
 22
The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 9 & 10
I started seeing all that and got lost in the joy.
It was like an artist seeing his own creation,
and I felt the joy of great fulfilment.
Slowly Sahaja Yoga spread throughout
Europe, and to North America. Shri Mataji
was very eager to save her American children
from the clutches of the false gurus who had
descended upon that country and were
looting people in the name of spirituality. In
1972 she sold her golden jewellery to set sail
After coming out of this beautiful experience.
I looked around and saw human beings so
blind and 1 became absolutely silent, and
desired that I should get the cups to fill the
on America She visited hall after hall but her
nectar".
message fell on deaf ears as the seekers of
Sahaja Yoga was born. Shri Mataji started
giving Realization to small groups of seekers
in India touching their centers along the spine.
those times. were too naive to realize that Truth
can be obtained without paying fabulous sums
of money On the way back aboard the ship
She addressed them in one of her poems.
Then the first group of twelve seekers got
their Kundalini awakened: en-masse Self
Realization had started. Sahaja Yoga spread
very quickly in the small villages of India,
where innocent people were ready to receive
In 1989, after the Iron Curtain fell, Sahaja
Yoga spread like wildfire in Russia and the
Eastern Block countries, where dozens of
this Divine gift with an open heart.
thousands of seekers filled stadiums to listen
to her lectures and received their Self
Realization. Nowadays Sahaja Yoga is
Shortly afterwards, Shri Mataji's husband was
appointed as the Secretary General of the UN
Maritime Organization and London became
their home. The first group of seven Western
established on all five continents and is
coming with full force to the attention of the
scientific, political, ecological and spiritual
communities as a solution to solve today's
seekers received their Self-Realization and
became Sahaja Yogis (practitioners of Salhaja
Yoga).
crises from within
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-24.txt 
 'AUM'
EXPLAINED IN SCRIPTURES
Sahaja Yogis know that the goal of all the
World religions is the union between the jiva
life, and the life was the light of men... The
true light that enlightens every man was
coming into the world. He was in the world
and the atma, the union between the atma
and the paramatma; that is, the identification
of the seeker with his Self and the merging of
his Self into God. He witnesses the play of
and the world was made through him, yet the
world knew him not." (John I)
"Of that goal which all the Vedas declare,
the dynamic Love of God like a flute.
which is implicit in all penances, and in pursuit
of which men lead lives of continence and
When the Kundalini, settled in the Sahasrara,
service, of that will I briefly speak. It is Aum."
unites with the Atma located in the Anahat
(Katha Upnishad)
chakra, the human consciousness has realised
the supreme religion. It is the state of integra-
tion between the -Atman and the Shakti (God
"The syllable Aum which is the
imperishable Brahman is the universe.
and the Holy Spirit). This state also expresses
Whatsoever has existed, whatsoever exists,
the Unity between the unmanifested God
whatsoever shall exist hereafter is AUM. And
(Parabrahma, Paramatma, Brahma) and
whatsoever transcends past, present and
God within man (the Atma, the Self) because
future, that also is AUM. All this that we see
it reflects the state of Unity which preceded
the Original Distinction (the original apparent
without is Brahman. This Self, that is within is
Brahman. This Self, which is one with AUM."
distinction takes place between the God Al-
(Mandukya Upnishad)
mighty and the Holy Spirit, Sadashiva and the
Adi Shakti).
And to the angel of the Church in Laodicea
write, "The words of the Amen, the faithfl
and true witness, the beginning of God's
(John. The Apocalypse 3.14)
This Unity is expressed in the Word, Brahma
Tattwa, the Aum and Amen which has
creation."
incarnated as Lord Jesus, the Christ, the Son
We can relate Christhood-the-Word-Aum to
of God, Mahavishnu. Let us remember now
Sahaja Kundalini Yoga in exposing the
symbolism contained in the sacred syllable.
what has been said in the older ages:
"In the beginning was the Word, and the
"A" Represents the Tamoguna of the Virata,
the Primordial Being (desiring mood).
Word was with God, and the word was God.
He was in the beginning with God; all things
At the cosmic level it is the Ishwara
were made through him, and without him was
whose shakti is Mahakali. At the
not anything made that was made. In him was
microcosmic level it is Ida nadi and the
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-25.txt 
 24
Volume-XVI Issue: 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
left side Sympathetic Nervous System.
At the microscopic level it is the nucleus
Energy. Its manifestation as Chaitanya (wave
of life force) can be felt through the
of the atom.
parasympathetic nervous system after
self-realisation. This Energy is at work
"U' Represents the Rajoguna of the
Primordial Being (activating mood). At
the cosmic level it is the Hyranyagharbha
everywhere and all the time but before
realisation man cannot feel it.
whose shakti is Mahasaraswati. At
Upanishad tells us "by meditating upon AUM,
the microcosmic level it is Pingala Nadi
and the right sympathetic nervous
the wiseman attains Brahman": "AUM is
Brahman. AUM is all. Now the question arises
system. At the microscopic level it is the
that how to meditate upon AUM? The
electrons of the atom.
answer to this question is given by Shri Mataji
"M" Represents the Sattwa guna of the
Primordial Being (revelation mood)
through Sahaja Yoga.
How does a human being become AUM?
which evolves AUM to the level of the
Primordial Being Himself, the Virata,
By putting A, U and M together.
whose shakti is Mahalakshmi. At the
Who does in fact put A, U and M together?
microcosmic level it is the Sushumna and
The subdued Kundalini does it.
the parasympathetic nervous system. At
the microscopic level it is the valency of
How does the Kundalini manifest Herself?
the atom.
Through Sahaja Yoga.
The Adi Kundalini (Holy Spirit in the form of
As Adi Shakti the Almighty Sacred Mother
the Primoridal Kundalini) is said to be
created the AUM. As Shri Gauri She created
"rignunatmika" that is, containing the three
gunas. What She does is to unite the A, the U
and the M. Hence, at the Divine Energy level
Lord Ganesha. As Shri Parvati She created
Lord Kartikeya. As Shri Radha She created
the Adi Kundalini generates the AUM which
Mahavishnu, who was born to Mother Mary
means, in personified terms, that the Adi Shakti
as Lord Jesus. As H.H. Mataji Nirmala Devi
is the mother of the Son of God.
She created a new race of Sahaja Yogis. She
says that Sahaja Yogis have been created in
AUM is a sound and this symbol actually
the pattern of the Great Son of God.
represents the primordial movement of the
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-26.txt 
 PLEDGE
(By Yuva Shakti)
We pledge to protect our innocence from the
dom within the Vishwa Nirmala Dharma.
unending attracts of the society by
We pledge to face our fears and ask for
courage to face ourselves and spread Sahaja
worshipping Shri Ganesha, asking for his
protection and inviting our lord to reside in
our Mooladhara during our daily meditation.
Yoga.
We pledge to spend as much time as possible
with Yuva Shakti brothers and sisters, to share
We pledge to rid ourselves from the stains
and blots that cloud the light of our spirit from
our divine knowledge with them, and to
shinning in our attention.
protect them when necessary.
We pledge, as Shri Mataji asked Yuva
We pledge to surrender to overcome our ego,
Shatki, in Shasrara Pooja 2000 in her castle
in Cabella, to develop a penetrating attention,
so that it may be vector for the divine power
within us to work out all the problems facing
and to have faith to overcome our superego.
We pledge to pray, with dedicated, humble
sincerity to our DIVINE MOTHER that
our world.
She grants us her recognition, and that she
blesses us so that we overcome all the weak-
We pledge to seize any opportunity to talk
about Sahaja Yoga and give Realisation with
humility.
nesses that might hold us back from fulfill-
ing our pledge for this new year, which we
hope is the beginning of the emergence of
a new Yuva Shakti Force energized by its
desire to thank our Mother for having made
We pledge to become our own masters so
that our words resonate with the confidence
of realised gurus, and inspire the seekers to
get their Realisation and take up a life of free-
Her children.
Jai Shri Mataji
****
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-27.txt 
 TOWARDS LIBERATION
(Indian TV Interview, 14 March, 2003)
A half-hour Himdi Language television doumentary about Sahaja Yoga titled "Towards
Liberation" was broadcast in March on India's Public television network, Doordarshan,
It featured this interview with Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
They know nothing about God, The word
The draw to spiritualism
spiritual was unknown to them..yet they have
"With the interest in technology, the interest in
spiritualism could go down. But I am seeing
that more and more people of technologically
been very deep from within and have ascended
to great heights of spritualism. They have
become more deserving.. When they get their
advanced countries are being drawn towards.
Realization they go very deep in it because
the intensity of seeking is there."
spiritualism because there is neither joy nor
peace in technology It does not give a
solution to human problems.
In India there is only talk about
Therefore, those who have come into spiritualism. Everyone advises others to seek.
"All the gurus have said the same thing. We
Sahaja Yoga have come from India as well as
might have harassed and tortured these gurus
in their lifetime, but when they are gone from
this world, people follow them and read what
they said. They know everything, but no one
is prepared to work for it."
those technologically advanced nations. They
"have gone beyond technology and they have
derived the conclusion that there is nothing
special in technology. Their bent and seeking
is extremely deep. It's very sahaj.
Seeking Around the World
All of the gurus of India have said to search
"I go abroad because there people are
within. They said "nothing could be achieved
seekers. In their seeking, they are absorbed
number of them are seeking and a lot
without knowing the power within." The
problem is that Indians "talk about it, sing its
large
songs, but do nothing practical. The people of has been written about it." They have
developed countries know nothing about
translated and read most of the Indian
scriptures. "It is amazing that they read the
Sanskrit language. They know so much. But
spiritualism, so they are keen seekers. Their
seeking is so intense, that in a country like
then, certain kugurus (false gurus).from India
reached there and they began to teach them"
They could not attain the required goal of
Russia, where I thought spiritualism could not
take up, there is a larger number of spiritual
people. They are really wonderful because so
many attrocities were committed on them, but
they kept on going ahead with their seeking.
Self-Realization, but a lot of money was taken
from them.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Issue: 9 & 10
27
The Divine Cool Breeze
*After that, when I reached there, people
are organized"
were amazed that "She gives Self-Realization
In "countries such as Benin and Ivory
Coast, where all the people were converted
In
and accepts no money at all.' So they came
close to Me." How long will these false gurus
go on in spiritualism? They "deceived the
seekers with honeyed discourses and befooled
them. Those who came in contact with Me
to Islam, I asked them, "Why did you
become Muslims? They replied, "We saw the
French. There is absolutely no morality in them
so, we became Muslims. Now they have all
once, remained with Me forever. We have
been doing this work for the last thirty years
become Sahaja Yogis. That is how the
number of Sahaja Yogis is increasing
and these people have gone very deep. In
their seeking they have attained great depths.
everywhere. Those who are tired of
fundamentalists, they also wish to come to
For these Western seekers, "the emotions
Sahaja Yoga"
of love for each other were totally absent in
Many kinds of people have come Sahaja
Yoga They "sought their ideal in Me and they
their families and society. They received that
love from Me and, nourished by that love,
are drawn towards Me" and got their Self
they got totally transformed. They are so much
Realization.
changed that even the Germans have become
The real religion
so lovable and sweet that they talk their hearts
out unhesitatingly. They are ashamed over the
excesses that have been perpetrated by their
"The significance of Sahaja Yoga is that we
are not conditioned by any religion, country.
country in the past."
creed or race." There is "absolutely no
conditioning. We regard human beings as
human beings and respect all the religions. But
our respect is for the religion and the essence
of these religions. It is not for the distorted
form of religion. Therefore, people of all
I do not know in how many countries
there is Sahaja Yoga. "Sahaja Yogis will say
that Sahaja Yoga is being practised in
eighty-six nations I Myself have not been to
so many countries. What happens is that when
one person gets Self-Realization and practises
it, he becomes an expert in a year's time
Wherever such people go, they talk about
Sahaja Yoga to others. This is how it worked
out and Sahaja Yoga spread to this level. 1 do
religions jumped into Sahaja Yoga and have
the feeling that they have got the real
religion.
"I have not done anything special. I
searched only for the method to give en mass
Self Realization. I thought it would have a
better effect." If you attain anything such as
o
not know how to go to all these countries, but
those people come wherever our programs
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-29.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume-XVI Issue: 9 & 10
28
the extent of saying "there shall be no need of
inventing electricity, without putting it for the
benefit of the society, it is useless. Similarly, I
thought that the attainment of Sahaja Yoga that
I had should be for the benefit of the society.
hospitals. Many prophecies have been made."
The method of curing
"So this is the method. This time was to come
It should be en mass and given to all the seek-
and it has come. It is the speciality of Kali
ers. We should say that it is
Yuga that in it human beings get confused and
in the state of confusion, people start seeking.
collective.
"No doubt, I had to put in a little hard
Groping in darkness, the seeker gets more
work for it. I studied different attitudes of
confused and searches intensely. Now is that
human beings. I concentrated on the chakras
period. In this era, it will take place".
and saw where the problem was. When I
"Many people get cured of their diseases
with the practice of Sahaja Yoga because there
are plexuses in our body through which we
are connected physically, mentally
intellectually and spiritually. When our kundalini
awakens and nourishes these plexuses, the
could know these problems of the human
beings, then I tried to find out the ways to
overcome these problems.
"In May 1970, I came across a person
who was confusing the seekers of truth, so I
decided to do it." With that, I was able to get
diseases concerned with those chakras get
this system and attainment. "Now en mass
cured."
Realization has become very easy. It is
Diseases believed to be incurable, such
mentioned in the scriptures that in Kali Yuga
this will take place and will reach its heights.
as cancer and AIDS, can be cured, but for
AIDS it is difficult.
It is already known to us. Whatever was
"Alzheimer is another disease. Those who
written is now happening
try to have control over others in their lives
"So the first thing is to prepare the
and always have an upper hand
society for seeking. There is a scripture of
Bhrigu Muni called Nadi Grantha. In this, he
has clearly mentioned the year in which Sahaja
sometimes get this disease. Before death, one
side of their brain becomes dead and the other
one keeps working" This disease "is very
Yoga will start With the beginning of Sahaja
Yoga, all those who have been confused, those
aggressive, very cruel and very violent.. This
is a disease which we have not touched,"
who have taken to a wrong path and fallen in
With Sahaja Yoga, "drug addiction goes
the trap of Kali Yuga will be saved. Their
Kundalini will be awakened." He has gone to
away. I never tell anybody what to do and
%24
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-30.txt 
 29
Issue: 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
what not to do. Automatically, everything gets
all right After awakening, the kundalini does
it herself Man starts understanding immedi-
into the ocean." As Kabira said, "when the
drop falls into the ocean, it becomes one with
it. The same oneness takes place with Sahaja
Yoga." This has to happen. We have to get
ately after SelfRealization,
the climax of our evolution.
"How does the Realization take place? It
is with the light of the spirit and enlightening of
your heart. When the light of the spirit
"Whatever progress we have made so far,
whatever work the gurus, the incarnations,
spiritual guides have done, that has to bear
enlightens your heart, in that light we begin to
see what will bring misery to us and what will
fruit now. So this is the time. As we sow the
bring empancipation. Just as you could see
clearly in the light, but keep groping when it is
seed, first of all it sprouts, becomes a tree,
then bears flowers and then fruits. Similarly,
dark, so man gets transformed in that light of
call this age 'blossomtime". There is abundant
the spirit."
flowering and it is not difficult to make fruits
"You will be amazed that in Sahaja Yoga
no one takes drugs, no one drinks alcohol
and none commit misdeeds." Ninety-nine
"Everyone has to search for the truth
within. There is no other way. Without
searching for the truth that lies within, one goes
on treading the path of untruth, which
generates all these negativities. When you are
established in truth, no rules and regulations
percent of people do no wrong "Many
marriages are performed in Sahaja Yoga and
all of them go beautifully in a beautiful manner.
They have very lovable children."
are required. Then all your deeds become
divine Therefore, everyone should seek the
The dawning of a new kingdom
truth and this is the time when you could get
This is the dawning of a new kingdom. "That
it
is the kingdom of God in which neither there
This is My desire that everybody,
is any bitterness nor difficulty In a way, man
especially men, should seek the truth."
becomes very collective, like the drop falling
"May God bless you"
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-31.txt 
 SAHASRARA PUJA
Cabella - 4th May 2003
WHEREVER.
She
(A Report)
It is a mystery warm weekend. May
flowers bursting with coloured essence,
dark and light greenery wrapping one's
mind inside and out. Floating down from
and Cabellites looking at each other with
wonderful, sparkling eyes, macelleria is
closed, delicious little oranges, yogis, yogis, a
hotel owner excitedly talking about Shri Mataji
and Yogis, a little boy's tears for a bed to
sleep in mother's comfort and cookies.
the castello, cars stopping with kind
greetings and rides, but the walk is too
beautiful.
There's infinite space
Group shoebeat near the blue tent, collective
energy rising.
time has stopped
Cabella buzzing with tender yogis of eighty
countries, fiends all, loving yogis absorbed in
the pendal, springing to life Smiles stretching
for miles, handfuls of children here and there
swooping, laughing, playing.
In the pendal, Gregoire announces that
Shri Mataji will not be coming to the evening
performance. Everyone has to realize it is time
we absorb more of Her vibrations. It is no
A weekend of connectivity, hosted by
European brothers and sisters- calm, natural
easiness. Sleepless and energized vibrations
everywhere, a full pendal of joyous children
of Shri Mataji. A havan in front of the men's
blue tent, Friday evening. Tall and wide flames
licking the warm air, strong yellow-red-orange
energy, full tent, full yogis, babies laughing.
longer a time to ask our Mother for anything.
We have to give everyone love and receive
Her vibrations, feeling a strong and subtle
empowering, pure joy, no sadness, detached
awareness.
After the play, dancing begins with a wild,
joyous electricity in the air and never ends
One by one, the singers and musicians change
and some step off the stage, but the yogis call
them back, circle dancing, jumping and Indian
dancing, hugging and leaping and group
dancing and singing ring through the night as
the last musician has finally stopped drumming
a familiar beat - yogis are still dancing and
.
Long silky meditation, following late dinner,
Morning meditation in the pendal. It is a
strong, sunny, hot day, good for walking to
l
town, every car stopping to give a seat,
meeting new faces and voices. Some yogis
jump from the cars to be on foot and join the
meander, vibrating toes. Cafes full of yogis
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-32.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 9 & 10
31
awareness. "Rather than asking Me for
something, you can ask deep in yourselves
for anything. You have the kundalini. You
bo-peeping their own beats and will not stop
until they finally desire to nourish the Nabhi
chakra, dinner is served.
are responsible. You can do it all. You are
my instruments."
It's 4.30 am
Sahasrara Puja
Morning meditazione, more yogis
arriving, mangiare, strong and whipping up a
cool awareness of Mother, yogis playing
After the video ends, a silent period, then
a soft spoken announcement that Shri Mataji
wishes us to go on with the puja without Her,
She will not be coming. Phillip says, "Our
volleyball, children playing football, assorted
games playing under the sunny wind-whipped
afternoon, a group footsoak in the narrow,
shallow, creamy, white bubbly effervescence
of the narrow river, everyone on the side close
Mother is with us in formless form. We need
to absorb Her vibrations. We need to absorb
Her vibrations. We need to give Her the
message that we can take the responsibility
and give to Her rather than ask from Her. We
are Sahaja Yogis.
to the pendal, an unbroken serpentine line of
every yogi runs up the river for miles of colour
and meditation to the castello. A handful
There is a sombre, sad part to this news,
scatter on the hintersides as well, slight hands
moving in the yellow-white glare of warming
river, yogis full body soaking, laughing,
giggling of underwater vibrations, coming out
of Mother's mountin castello through our subtle
eyes well up with silent, slippery tears that
don't fall, hearts opening and filling with more
new love for Shri Mataji and an
announcement is made that we have to wake
our joy and give love and bliss and energy
to this puja, no earthly sadness-a lively vibrant
puja for Shri Mataji, for all yogis-we can do
it and elate in the joy of our puja with Shri
Mataji formless.
up
systems, snaking downstream, purifying Her
children.
A spiralling, single organism of love and
light shooting out of Sahasrara crowns in the
northern hills of Cabella the world. Time
ceases to move. Shasrara Puja, dressing up
for an elegant evening, no anticipation, calm
settles over the yogis and an announcement to
enter deep mneditation immediately upon
entering the pendal, full at 6 pm, silence and
scattered child sounds, "cou cou c'est nous.
The clapping and singing resounds with a
newfound happiness, eyes lighten and glisten
with joy and smiles opening up the energized
pendal. The puja is on and it is alive and
bounding and the yogis have awvakened, a new
something has arrived and it is enlightening
love and awareness.
At 8 pm the Shasrara Puja videotape
Wherever, She is. Her children are
begins, appears to be last year's puja. In deep
meditation words blend into doubtless joy, with Her love, with Her presence
growing up, Her children are alive with Her
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-33.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
32
Issue: 9 & 10
everywhere on this planet. We feel as if all
Sahaja Yogis are in Cabella with us There is
no rain on this puja, it started to rain inside the
puja on this night and it cleanses the beauty of
all yogis, Her children are responsible for the
road they have turned onto, a continuing path.
We will do all and be joyous through all and
Dancing and singing late into the night, as
old yogi asks for it to end and it does sweetly
Rollicking yogis head down for dinner, arm in
arm, clumps bouncing-it is earthly morning in
a cloudless, starry night, the yogi dinner bell is
ringing
A long table under a tent seats yogis from the
world, twenty or so, eating the remains of
zuppa and rizo can sugo, hot chai is served
sporadically like some golden nectar from the
hills, all ensconced in a brilliant love and
laughter until buses start leaving at 5 am.
give Her the openness to come and go and
do as She will with full confidence in Her
enlightening yogis.
We love you, Shri Mataji. We love you,
Shri Mataji. We are happy and joyous and
aware of our understanding. We are
Bollo Shri Adi Shakti Mataji, Shri Nimala
absorbing you deep in our hearts,
Devi Ki Jai!
Jonathan Schorr
(The American Newsletter)
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Give
me strength
GIVE me strength, Mother
to meet one challenge
or the other
GIVE me a mature mind
to tackle problems of one
or the other kind
GIVE me a patient heart
so that you can reside
in any of its parts,
GIVE me a pair of beautiful eyes
Whenever I open them
I should see You
to my surprise
Give me a pair of noble hands
so i can work
according to your commands.
GIVE me a confident
and cheerful nature
so I can survive in any weather.
GIVE me the sense to smell a flower
and to smell the fragrance of love
which you shower,
Give me the sense to feel
to feel the way you heal.
above all,
give me the sense of satisfaction
so the "GIVE" above
I don't have to mention.
Chanchal Lal
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-35.txt 
 SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA-2003
(A Report)
MATECHE GONDHARI
The moments spent with Shri Mataji are price-
less.
We are the singers of Shri Mataji.
Many Sahaja Yogis understood this after
the Shri Adi Shakti Puja, We were blessed
to enjoy Shri Mataji's brief presence at
Saturday evening's program and at the puja.
We are the praisers of the Mother.
The dharma has lost its meaning. There was
an epitome of ego.
Almost by surprise, Shri Mataji ar-
The children became harassed, so the Mother
rived on Saturday evening at the
artistic program and enjoyed the
presentations offered by the Sahaja Yogis
from the host countries.
came on the Earth.
The love of the Mother manifested. The en-
emies were destroyed.
The end of the sins is approaching. The Shakti
The puja was set to start at 7 am
has come on the Earth
and at that hour it was announced that
Shri Mataji was ready to leave the castle.
The vibrations became very strong. Shri
Mataji came actually at ten and stayed for
almost an hour
She challenged the devils with Her yoga and
they were destroyed.
We have got lost in devotion for Her. We saw
the Heaven on the Earth.
The puja started without the speech
We recognized God and we started
adoring the Adi Shakti.
and immediately the children were allowed
to offer kumkum on Shri Mataji's Feet.
Afterwards, without
preparations or decorations for Shri Mataji,
the puja items were offered and we sang
We worshipped Her and the whole village
the
normal
knew this.
The whole village came back to us to get the
blessings from the Mother.
the aarti.
After this, Shri Mataji Herself asked
for the bhajan Mateche Gondhari. ' On this
song, indeed, the whole puja pendal started
to dance. Shri Mataji was radiant and we
She made a sign and all felt the love of God.
In Sahaja Yoga life is not a wasted life, as it
is with false gurus.
were lost in joy and everyone wanted this
song never to end. Suddenly, Shri Mataji
Here we have a direct relation with God and
love to spread only His message.
took the microphone and spoke about the
song 's meaning. "We are the singers of Shri
Mataji." Then Shri Mataji left. We remained
satisfied in silence.
(Arno, Ute, Margot, Martin and Sita)
I am not going to tell you more. Those who
came have got their Realization.
You only have to have devotion and you will
certainly get the moksha.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-36.txt 
 The Divine Coal Breeze
35
Issue: 9 & 10
SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA
CABELLA LIGURE
15 JUNE 2003
am very happy all of you are
kere singing the songs of Gondhari.
Perhaps you do not know the
meaning. That is We are the
singers of Shri Mataji. And these
are the songs sung by people who
are villagers and they are singing this
song that We are singing the song
of our Mother, with all our leve for
Her. And all that singing has come
to you."
It is very, very happy for Me
because these are only ordinary vil-
lagers and how you have accepted
such a nice mood and songs from
them.
"May God bless you.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-37.txt 
 t#***
Shri Mataji in Paris
July 22nd to 24th, 2003
outside the bounds of time
day following Her arrival, delivering to us a
From the 22nd to 24th July 2003 and, more
precisely, for thirty-six hours, the French
collective lived divinely blessed moments
series of precise descriptions of the events
that we have been living through in France for
during our Divine Mother's visit to our
twenty years to this day.
country
We were living outside the bounds of time.
It is hard to express in detail the
More than six hours were spent visiting Paris,
including some shopping and the crossing of
the city of Paris, but it all seemed to us very
richness of the teachings with which our Guru
blessed us.
short
How to describe such a divine arrival
- the extraordinary column of Paramchaitanya,
the flowers and the yogis and the intense looks
Shri Mataji was beyond fatigue. We
felt like we were in a puja and there was a
downpour of vibrations and a freshness akin
between her devotees and the ultimate aim of
their devotion, Shri Adi Shakti!
to a fresh morning rain shower.
All the souls, and the little reservoir of
That same evening, Shri Mataji
love that we were, began to flow towards
Her, the inexhaustible source of love.
expressed her wish to see some of the Paris
yogis and so we were twenty or so blessed
souls who spet an eternal ten minutes in Her
And yes, our Mother arrived at the
presence, when She then announced that we
Roissy Airport in Paris with all Her powers of
the Adi Shakti, Her Resplendent Majestry, full
of tenderness, of force and of gravity which
pulled in everybody's attention. How could
should go for a drive. This was at 11 pm.
And so a cortege of four cars
followed Shri Adi Shakti around the outskirts
the country, supposedly the representative of
of Paris, during which time She announced to
the attention of the world, remain indifferent
us that, "I am here because of your strong
desire," which left us wondering exactly to
to the very source of that attention?
which desire She was referring. That night
The airport was enchanted and that
enchantment invaded Paris during the next
again our Mother allowed us to sail on that
extraordinary ocean of love over which She is
thirty-six hours. Mother visited Paris on the
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-38.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
37
Issue: 9 & 10
the only one to reign.
hearing. I stay in this hotel two to three
weeks out of every month. One colleague
had received his Realization a few weeks
And so with the same question in mind,
we soon found ourselves again at the airport,
back and was meditating. He is very
waving Her off to India.
sensitive to the vibrations. I said to him,
It is true that we, the French Sahajis,
"You know the lady you have been
meditating on for the past few weeks? Well,
She's arriving at the airport tonight. "While
we were standing at the airport arrivals,
he said to me, "I think that plane landed a
few minutes early. "He was right. Shri
Mataji had arrived. We saw Her
from the windaw and She waved lovingly
at all the yogis, making sure that She waved
to the yogis at each window as She passecd.
It felt like old times again with all the yogis
live in a spiritually backward and difficult
country. With no great powers, we wished
only to be able to receive our Mother, carry
Her bags, offer Her food, wash her Lotus
Feet, see Her resting comfortably and to help
take away all those problems which come from
us. And it is also true that in these simple acts,
we were not the best.
Which desire was Mother speaking
about? With this brief account, dear brothers
gathering around Shri Mataji in a sea of
and sisters, we wanted simply to share with
you this pure desire to which Shri Adi Shakti,
divine love. The next day. I was to give a
training course and I heard that Shri Mataji
Shri Adi Guru, Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi is so
Was going to go shopping, so I asked
another Sahaja Yogi, who works for the
sensitive.
And we also wanted to share with you our
company, to phone when Shri Mataji was
ieaving. I was in the middle of my training
collective introspection, as it is an occasion
for each one of us to pierce into the seerets
of pure desire
course and I received the call. I told the
trainees that I had to go out for fifteen
minutes and that they should contimue with
Majid Golpour
the exercises. I raced to the Hilton, which
was only five minutes away, and, as I
walked in, Shri Mataji was in the reception
hall and, apart from Majid and Alganesh,
I had just finished a training course at
my
company's office in Paris and was
wondering what to do with the evening,
when I received a call from a Sahaja Yogi
I was the only yogi. Shri Mataji gave me a
big smile and offered namaste and I felt so
brother saying that Shri Mataji was
arriving and would be staying at the Hilton
Hotel. I couldn't believe what I was
blessed to have received Her darshan,
After She left, I raced back to my trainees,
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-39.txt 
 Issue: 9. & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
38
feeling bathed in vibrations. It was quite a
proper comfort to give attention to comfort
and that here, obviously, we do not under-
bizarre adjustment from the darshan of the
Goddess to going straight back into
stand what comfort is.
explaining the technicalities of our software
She later spoke about how important it is
product.
(Steve Jones)
to have proper comfort and hygiene in our
life, to have the proper attention on our being
and to be very neat and clean, every day to
With very little advance notice of Her
arrival, the French Sahaja Yogis in the area
take a bath, every day to have proper hy-
of Paris journeyed to the airport to greet Shri
gienic care. Our attention should go to each
Mataji We all phoned each other and we
and every part of our body, as well as to our
started a crazy-pleasant rush. It was such a
brain; otherwise we cannot feel comfortable.
Proper introspection is needed to find the com-
fort of our body and our spirit.
happy rush. No one was late when Shri Mataji
and Sir arrived at 9 pm.
The Adi Shakti has decided to use this
Two lines of yogis were formed and Shri
Mataji passed between them. We welcomed
country of France to bring proper comfort
Her with so many flowers, which She accepted
and to show what is the comfort of the spirit.
This trip clearly showed us who Shri Mataji
from every person. Although it was late in the
evening, She saw each and every one of us
with full attention. Many children were there,
is This trip clearly showed us that She is the
Adi Shakti. This trip clearly showed us
newborn babies and also newcomers. This
our fears, our limited perceptions and
walk through the airport was just like a tunnel
interpretations about Her. She came to show
us all this, in the most delicate and soft
of joy, love and vibrations.
Shri Mataji did not speak to the assembled
crowd, however She did say thank you to
manner.
The meaning of this trip was to tell us to
take up again good Sahaj principles that many
of us unfortunately fail to actualize This means
it is important to meditate deeply and truly,
everyone.
At Her hotel near the airport, Shri Mataji
found it very uncomfortable and noticed that
everything in the suite was placed too low.
She said that She will show people what is
every day.
It is essential for us to have full faith in Shri
Mataji. The deities express themselves through
comfort by bringing it to France. She said She
will find land, buy it and build a place where
people can eat and stay, enjoying comfort in
Her.
After such a trip, it is impossible to imagine
the real sense of the word.
the Divine differently All the dimensions of
She pointed out how important it is to have
the Divine are meeting inside Her. What would
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-40.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 9 & 10
the world be wvithout Shri Mataji?
When I finished my training course,
A lot of things happened only to show us
I went back to the hotel and,
by this time all the yogis were gone
how important it is to have fixed attention and
rnot to have our organization disturbed by
useless actions
and everything had been taken
away. I was alone, meditating in
front of Mother s bed. hust looking
at the bed took me into thoightless
Mother was there watching everything
carefully as the Witness, She showed us how
a calm and inner quiet attitude is always the
awareness. I only had about half an
hour to go before I had to take my
flight home and I was meditating
best.
Each and every moment spent with Shri
Mataji is a lesson of Yoga. Shri Mataji is able
on the reality that a divine
to take all forms. If we want Her to be sick
incarnation had slept in this room.
and weak, She will play that character also.
So, it is better not to project anything or
I looked at the sheets that were
still on the bed, the sheets that
to interpret. She is like an untouchable
Shri Mataji had slept on two
nights previousły and I couldn'Y
bear the idea of the cleaner
giant.
Shri Mataji is very well. She is working on
a deep and subtle plan. Now it is our turn to
coming and juSi dumping
them into a bin. So I phoned
overtake our fears and projections through our
meditation
A lot of yogis came also to say goodbye.
the manager with an umusual
request to buy the sheets.
It wasn Y a problem, So I folded
up the sheets and flew home
and placed them on our altar.
Sahaja Yogis from Australia, England and
Russia were also present during these three
days and brought back these Divine messages
to their countries.
When She left, the rain started to fall very
On the plane, I kept thinking of
the vibrated sheets in the over-
strongly
head compartment and felt that
I was carrying back to Vienna
(Majid Golpour and Janaki Gerard)
a small
part of Shri Mataji's
ocean of love along with the
memory of an incredible week
in Paris.
(Steve Jones)
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-41.txt 
 Once
GURU PUJA
A SAHAJA YOGI
24 July 2004
Cabella Ligure
"Most of these gurus and incarnations were very helpless
with human beings. Perhaps they didn't have such
beautiful disciples as I have. Perhaps at this time, all
the good people who are seeking divinity are
born, they are here as Sahaja Yogis...
Once you are a Sahaja Yogi,
you are a Sahaja Yogi.
Then you must show your dignity
and not thrive on your weaknesses.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-42.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue. 9 & 10
41
But modern times are so special I think. It is
have so many powers. But their self-
confidence and assumption is not with you.
very easy to give Realization.
In Sahaja, you witness yourself as a
Ego is finished.
separate identity. All your past in finished,
"Even if you do some mistakes, doesn't
matter. Because of no self-confidence, you
2one. You are not bothered and you remain in
a state which is fearless. This state has to be
achieved through Sahaja Yoga.
become austere in Sahaja Yoga." If you are
self-confident, then why should you be
"Sahaja Yoga is not to conquer others
or to control others, but to conquer
austere?
"It all goes together. First you must mature.
With that, you must have self-confidence. And
without fear, you should spread Sahaja Yoga.
yourself"...Have you completely trans-
formed yourself, changed yourself and
now, in your presence, do people feel
"Some have fear about themselves and
some have fear about others. Also it comes
secure?...
from your conditionings, from your upbring-
"Now to become the guru, yOu should have
ing"
“I want to tell you what you can achieve,
a great sense of forgiveness," like Buddha.
"To call yourself a guru, you must have
also maturity.
to tell you how far you can go." With so many
of you on this Earth, it is more than sufficient
If you put a litle light in a lamp, it is just
Living light to itself, nothing else. "You have to
to transform at least ten globes, ten worlds...
give light to others. You have powers. You
can do it. You can really change people."
"As much as you want to grow, this
power can give you that much power. But
Whatever position you have, you should
try to act with humility, through compassion.
the problem that lies with us is that we
don't know ourselves and we don't want
"The maturity is this-that you should know
to know ourselves."
You should have "the state of guru". If you
you have these powers. You should know how
to preserve these powers...
want, it can work out. The all-pervading
divine power of love is asolutely working it
out. More than you, the Divine wants this world
"You may be anything. You may be a clerk.
You may be a dishwasher. That makes no
difference. But once you are a Sahaa Yogi,
you are a Sahaja Yogi, Then you must show
your dignity and not thrive on your
to change, wants to transform the whole
universe.
"Now, you are the instruments and if you
weaknesses. You are much better than all these
try to cheat yourself, who can stop it?" Just to
realized souls, who have achieved their
enjoy music or to enjoy the company or
belonging to some club or to.. seek the
Realization in thousands of years, because you
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-43.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 9 & 10.
security of your children and family . will
never satisfy. It will only satisfy you when you
will become the lights to give it to others, to
correct your own faults.
I'm very proud of you. I'm very happy
that never such disciples existed for any gunu.
work for others...
When I see that you people don't see what
"You have these powers by which you can
you have achieved and you don't want to work
it out, then I think of the parable of Christ that
introspect yourself, you can witness yourself
and you can surrender because, mentally nOw,
some seeds fell on the rock
You don't know why you got
you are convinced about Sahaja Yoga
Realization, why you are here, what is your
Emotionally, you are convinced that Sahaja
Yoga has given you such sense of love and
speciality, what you have to get You don't
know that And that is what you have to
compassion.
Physically, you are convinced that Sahaja
Yoga has given you good health and
confidence about your health."
know.
"After all, you're all seekers of truth
for ages and now you have come. You have
Now spiritually, you should be
convinced that you are really spiritual people,
found the truth." So try to identify yourself
with truth, that's all-and with reality. If you
selected by the Divine, that your last lives have
identify yourself with truth and with reality, your
been of great seeking. That's why you are
Sahasrara is absolutely open - no problem.
born now and you are getting all this blessing
"So assume. Assumption of your per-
"Truth is in your Sahasrara". And when
the truth comes in, you are surprised that truth
is love and love is truth, pure love.
sonality is important." You must meditate and
go into thoughtless Awareness and all the time
keep your atention alert. That is very
mportant. All these things come to you when
you are alert and aware of this all-pervading
It's very, very joy-giving and all the
niranandas you want to have, you can have, if
you understand this simple equation that
absolute truth is absolute love
power all the time, every moment
"I have no expectations. I must tell
So "Thoughtless Awareness" is the first
beautiful state you have to achieve. That will
you I am over-satisfied. As far as I am
concerned, I think I have done My job. But
give you peace and a witness state to enjoy
now this has to be taken over You have to be
the drama of life, to enjoy the different
varieties of people, while you will be growing
within yourself
responsible You have to work it out.
There is, if you may call it, a defect.
Sahaja Yoga is not a military thing. It's just
plain, simple Mother's love. And, of course,
"For a Sahaja Yogi, it is important not
to see the faults of others," but to see and
every mother wants her child to be great, to
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-44.txt 
 The Divine Cool Brecze
Issue: 9 & 10
have all her powers She wants that, no doubt.
How she does it, how she works it out is her
country and, no. question of the whole world.
So what is needed now is to raise
own problem. But how you take it and how
you use it is your own problem.
I always bow to you people who have
got Realization because I think so many saints
your awakening, to raise your spirituality to
go into a realm of complete support and
surrender to the movement of this spontaneous
movement of Sahaja Yoga
were never there on this Earth. But the saint-
May God bless you all.
liness has to be complete: Without that, you
"In short, you must worship yourself
cannot heip even your family, leave alone your
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-45.txt 
 EXPERIENCE
STILL
ТЕАСНER
BEST
THE
To lead does not mean solving problems. It means giving problems to solve,
SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
The quote above is one of many cited by
Gregoire de Kalbermatten in his new book,
The Third Advent, published this year. As
we turn our attention to the Guru Principle,
the simple wisdom of these works stands out
like a beacon. One might add: deceptively
simple, for at their heart lies one of the
deepest underlying principles defining the
relationship between a mother and her
children, guru and disciple or, indeed, God
and Man, that of compassion.
The cub hesitates, then bounds forward,
perhaps unaware that he is alone in the chase.
But the quarry is too quick, disappearing into
the thick of the herd. The cub turns to his
mother, but she's not in sight. Perhaps he goes
hungry, but he is left in no doubt as to what
he must do in order to survive.
The best leaders are the ones who
can awaken the finest qualities and activate
the highest powers in those who look to them
for guidance. We see in our Holy Mother,
Leader of all Leaders and Guru of all Gurus,
the most shining and perfect example of this.
Rarely in any of Her talks does She seek to
solve our problems outright, but instead She
clarifies the problems for us that we have to
solve and so makes us aware of just how well
equiped we are, saying in effect, Now you
see the problems. Before you couldl not. Now
at least you know what yon have to do.
However, Shri Matai has solved one
problem for us that we could not have done
ourselves: the Raising Of The Kundalini. In so
doing, She has taken our eyes, which were
closed and in darkness and opened them to
the light, so that She is able to say:
This is what you all are
Here are the roots of the tree
Often declaring that She is not a Guru,
but a Mother, Shri Mataji refers to the
traditional harsh disciplines enforced by gurus
who might, for example, hang disciples upside
down in a well. Yet we see, through Her
motherhood, that She exemplifies the very best
type of guru, a loving and benevolent teacher.
A good teacher will not need to mete
out discipline if the pupil can be provided with
experience that has discipline automatically built
into it. For example, the best way to teach a
language is to immerse the pupil in an
environment where only that language is
spoken. The need to communicate increases
to the point where the learner simply must
acquire the means and does.
In nature, the lion cub follows the
mother each day, observing as she selects the
unwary prey momentarily detached from the
herd. If she is successful he is allowed to share
in the kill. Then one day, she stands back.
These are the powers that you have
Here is where the problem lies
Here is how to attack them at their roots
Here is how to grow into and maintain your
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-46.txt 
 45.
The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 9 & 10
teaching. It is about getting things done. No
good leader, tries to solve every crises alone
or do everything himself Of a poor leader, it
is often said, "He doesn't know how to del-
awareness every moment and
Here, in your heart, you will find Me.
Giving problems to solve can work on
more than one level. It can mean
egate." But Shri Mataji, while working cease-
lessly Herself, is undoubtedly the Delegator of
all Delegators, entrusting the task of en mass
Self Realization, with all its logistical challenges,
to the "masse" itself.. Sahaja Yogis of the
identifying existing problems, then providing the
means to solve them and saying, "Go to it" It
can also mean creating problems
artificially to use as growth exercises or to
build confidence.
world.
Yet Shri Mataji never desires us to
suffer needlessly, nor as gurus must we ever
allow ourselves, nor others, to suffer for the
sake of it or out of guilt. The key element is
benevolence, expressed through compassion.
Compassion, as embodied by the Divine, must
involve setting out problems when necessary
Shri Mataji has said that this is not Her
conscious doing, but that it is the compassion
itself which act through the Paramchaitanya. It
blesses us by providing obstacles for us to
overcome. Otherwise how would we grow?
How would we ever know what powers we
Sahaja Yogis are indeed a rare and
special case. The fact is that we need not
break our heads to solve problems because
the kundalini gives us clear access to an
infinite number of solutions built within us. The
real challenge is in recognizing and heeding
them, but doing so always brings reward. It
happens on occasion that Shaja Yogis,
including leaders, go to Shri Mataji with a
question and might receive only an enigmatic
response or may even fail to get an
opportunity to ask the question at all. Yet
somehow within a very short time they find
the answer revealing itself, either from inside
have?
At the same time, She is a Mother
whose love is limitless and, in Her generosity,
She has intervened countless times, more than
or through some event which occurs
spontaneously
most of us may ever know, to end our
suffering or shield us from needless pain, so
much of which She takes on Herself.
In our own guru capacity, we often
find new people who are naturally full of
questions. Even if we know the answers, we
might serve them best with the following
suggestions, "Why not meditate a little more,
then see if you still need to ask the question
She has also on many occasions
dispensed clear-cut and ready-made solutions
to specific problems. But in Her compassion,
She will limit that generosity where necessary,
in order to ensure that what must be learned
next week." Such experiences, and the
answers that come with them, are never
is learned:
forgotten- this writer can vouch for that, first
hand!
Of course, leadership is not only about
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-47.txt 
 Moroco
In honour of Her
YOGA Holiness Shri Mataji s
birthday, a group of
European Sahaja Yogis
travelled to Morocco to
SAHAJA
IN
give Self Realization to
the seekers of truth in
the Islamic world.
Ken Williams
American D.C.B..
On the night of March 21st we had a puja
seekers just felt deep thoughtless awareness
celebration together with Ali Atig, who is one
and some of them, in the next step, felt the
of the first Sahaja Yogi of Morocco. In this
depth of the nirananda state - the joy of the
puja we expressed our deep desire that by
Sahasrara.
the grace of Shri Mataji, the Islamic world
should have a breakthrough in recognizing
Sahaja Yoga and the importance of Self
Bachir from the Sahara, for example,
mentioned, "What you tell me about Sahaja
Yoga, I believe it is one hundred percent pure
Realization
Islam.
In Morocco we met very deep
Mohammed from Marrakech
seekers, some of whom had met Shri Mataji
mentioned, after we had worked on him for
in Tunisia, some in Cabella and some even in
only a few minutes, "I feel completely in the
present time- unbelievable". Also, I have now
a very good communicațion with this Lady,
referring to the picture of "Shri Mataji".
India, but had not followed it up after their
initial contact.
Shri Mataji mentioned once that, "as
long as the seekers have fear, it is not easy to
help them in their spiritual growth.
Shri Mataji told us that Kind Sidi
Mohammed Ben Abdullah, who lived at the
On the other hand, we realized that
same time as Queen Maria Theresa ruled in
most of the seekers in Morocco also have a
Austria, reigning Morocco from 1757 to 1790,
very open heart and are quite sensitive in
feeling the cool vibrations. It seems that the
Ganesha tattwa is respected.
was a born-reaized soul. He established
diplomatic relations with Austria. As well, very
good cultural and economic ties existed
between India and Morocco. Sidi Mohammed
is also understood to have had a strong
relationship with the United States, Morocco
being the first country to recognize the new
American nation. Simply put, Morocco was
It was always very easy to give Self
Realization to the Moroccans. Many naturally
have a very strong attention. The way they
spontaneously felt their kundalinis remind us
of experiences in India. In many cases, the
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-48.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 9 & 10
47
brought into intermational recognition, especially
due to the political and commercial relation-
ship between the Arabic world and the west-
ern hemisphere.
translated the introduction of the programs into
the Arabic language for the audience. The way
the Moroccans appreciated and really enjoyed
our music and the experience of their kundalini
was very touching. All of them were singing
with us and the programs continued until after
Our music programs and Sahaj
bhajans, which took place during three
midnight.
evenings in March, were an ideal atmosphere
We feel that the feminine force of
for the collective awakening. As a result, the
Sahaja Yoginis will be very important also in
these Muslim countries. In fact, Sahaja Yoga
process of Self Realization took place very
spontaneously. We felt thạt the space we
has now taken a new turn in Morocco for the
entered transcended beyond the room and
first time since 1995. The attention and desire
of Ali is taking care of all the other cities and
through the walls. Far ahead, the divine
vibrations spread their force.
places and there is a strong force beside him
in his wife, Kautar, a very innocent Sahaury
healing power of spiritual music. Every year or lady of the Sahara. In the Sahara, the
you can find the festival Music Spiritual takes position of women is very special. They rule
place in the city of Fes and all musicians from all their society, even in politics. Men have the
all cultures and all religions around the world secondary role. This is unique and does not
Moroccan citizens are aware of the
join this event to surrender and worship God
exist in other Islamic societies.
as the essence of this music. The depth and
surrender and worship, which is expressed
especially by the music of Sahaja Yogis,
Her Holiness Shri Mataji mentioned
very clearly to one of the seekers of
Morocco, who came to India in 1998 for the
reaches the absolute height in touching the heart
of the Divine and, in retum, our souls, creating
such a heavenly atmosphere.
Birthday Puja, that the Muslim people have to
recognize that today we have just one religion
and this religion we call as Vishwa Nirmala
Dharma and this religion is universal.
Ali, who is from Marrakech,
(Franz Mekyna)
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-49.txt 
 48
The Divine Cool Breeze
He writes:
For me, the beginning in Sahaja Yaga was easy
t
was my fate to meet my sister Selma and
After his Self Realization
brather Laurens in Marrakech They were my first
and becoming a Sahaja
yaga teachers Flove them
I trust them: 9 never
them so much
anid
respect
thought they wounld bring me
Yogi, Ali Atig feels that, in
anything which wauld hurt me and my family. They
tanght me step by step.
From the first line
the true sense, he is one of
the richest people in Mo-
I maditated, I fele something
Россо. Мапу times he
rocco.
new felt more than relaxed.
I can say this, it
mentions how happy he is
was just like ane drinks alcahal and feels gaod.
to have real brothers and
But after I had meditated tvice a day, as Selma
advised eanlinued discovering that it
sisters in the Sahaj family.
and Laurens
ather interesting things to
seems that kere wete many
laok for mare than just resting and feeling gaod
was our Mother, Her Holiness Shi Mataji
When I felt in need of meditation, after putting
the holy picture, incense and candles, and after sitlling
in a clean place camfortably, can yau imagine that9
really forgat campletely the time and the real world?
was samething unbelievable
How can I desoribe this to new people? You,
the yoginis and the yogis, yow must know this
Now I have the respansibility to do samething far
Sahaja Yoga and to speak about the bady and haw
This is one of his
I
most important achieve-
ments. Ali 's desire is to
spread Sahaja Yoga in all
corners of Morocco and
then to think about the
other nations in north Af-
rica. The small plant of
Sahaja Yoga in Morocco,
which
had to face
has
to clean all the chakras.
many obstacles, was grow-
тany
This is the respansibility af each one of us, just
Shri Matajë said in ane of Her speeches, Sa
uhere are you?"
ing in a desert, but now it
as
gets water by the rivers of
love and recognition.
Yaur brather, a yagi fram Marrakech
Ali Atig
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-50.txt 
 ৩
पी
ा
र
शी
रमन
३०
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-51.txt 
 "Sahaja Yoga is not to conquer others or
to control others, but to conquer
yourself...Have you completely
transformed yourself, changed yourself
and now, in your presence, do people
feel secure?...
