T Divine Cool Breeze The 00 Volume: XVI Issue: 1 & 2 January February, 2004

 Diwali Puja - Los Angeles : 9th Nov. 2003 3 3 Shri Krishna Puja - Pune : 9th August, 2003 10 THE Shri Ganseh Puja - Cabella Ligure: 13.9.2003 13 Shri Mataji's Pravachan 20.1.1975 22 Shri Mataji's Advice (Brighton, U.K. 15 Nov. 1979) 29 Ego and Super Ego Shri Mataji's Advice (Guru Purnima-London) 29th July, 1980 30 43 Instruction of Mother to all Sahaj Yogis: Letter 46 Devotion 47 Letters

 Diwali Puja - 2003 Рија "The lights of your heart together our destiny is also guided and looked after. you are already blessed people, there is make a greater light for the world to move in a proper direction. It's a day of great joy, no doubt about it. And we should not worry and those who join in this, are spreading about small things and small matters. It will all work out very well, you will see. if you also great joy. But the problems are there, just leave it to your destiny, which is very as they say, but for us there is no problem because there is no darkness. We don't high, very great in this your own destiny see any darkness anywhere, we see lights, you will go very far. This is the promise of Diwali to you all, that you will reach the highest and the noblest way of life. Every and lights, and lights. Then what is the thing missing? Missing is our sincerity. We have to be very sincere with ourselves, because word I say will be there to prove it is not just a borrowed love or borrowed joy, but it is from within the source, it's what I say is there Whatever flowing and flowing and flowing. So that is petty problems you have, they'll all be washed off. All these are to be awakened, and that love should the messages from the Divine, flow, and our small petty things like jealousies and competitions and all those you don't have to worry about things which spoil us must be washed petty things, about money, about away. And it can be washed if your heart jobs. That's not your job. Your destiny will work it out. You have a promise that you'll be looked after. I hope you believe in that is full of love. Today is a day of spreading that light of love, so that everybody feels enlightened and happy and forgets these promise and are joyous in the petty problems. I am happy that you have highest way. I bless you all from my been able to get some hall, it's all luck that we got it, people were so much worried heart, all of you, for a very happy and about getting a hall. But it had just prosperous Diwali. Thank you very much. happened, so you should know also that

 Shri Krishna Puja Talk August 9h, 2003, Pune, India (TRANSLATED) Now we have to realize that Sahaja that we should become like small children. Yoga has spread a lot and in all corners of We should see the comforting shade of the the world people respect Sahaja Yoga, but sweet nature of a child. Do we taik like a until and unless Sahaja Yoga is completely child? What is the quality within us that we become like a child? manifested within us, the people who respect Sahaja Yoga will not continue to Now child means purity, innocence. do so. That is why it is essential that we With this innocence we have to look look within ourselves. The nature of Shri towards ourselves and cover ourselves Krishna is that we look within and see what with it. This innocence is very loveable. If are the things that put us in trouble. We you look at children and the love you feel should find that out. We should look towards them is because they are towards ourselves, within ourselves and innocent. They don't know cleverness: that is not such a difficult thing. don't feel their importance, nothing at all. When we want to see our face, we What do they know? They know that all look in the mirror. Similarly, when we need these people are related to us. They are our brothers, sisters and everything. But to see our spirit, we should find out how to see it within us. Many Sahaja Yogis have how do they know this? That is the question. In the same way that these asked Me, "Mother, how do we see what is within us and how we are doing?." For that children know, we have forgotten that we it is necessary that we ourselves should are like an innocent child and that we have become very humble. If we lack humility, innocence within us. we will be clouded by our own thoughts. There are many Sahaja Yogis who So in the life of Shri Krishna, first it come and think that they will show their was shown that he was just like a small cleverness and prove themselves to child. Absolutely like an infant. Not knowing Mother. What is the need to prove anything anything. He did not think anything of to Me? I already know everything. So what himself. He had his mother and he wanted you should do is look towards yourself and with the support of his mother. We recognize your innocence. Where is it and to grow should also iook inside of ourselves and how is it doing? And we should think how realize that we are like a small child as joyful it is well. Shri Krishna has said this repeatedly. Now the thing about Shri Krishna is this only. He was absolutely simple as a Also, Jesus Christ has said the same thing

 Jan, & Feb. 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue:182 happening in Sahaja Yogis, because inside child and when He grew up He explained The Gita, which is very deep. How did it the kundalini awakens and shows all the paths. happen that the human beings grew in it? Now the remaining thing is the dirt In the same way we can grow in Sahaja Yoga. We have found it but still have not that is within, how to fix that. First and foremost the way we look at the defects of progressed in it. And to progress we need others should be changed because the to leave the bad things behind. First of all same defects exist within us also. So we need to have a childlike temperament. instead of looking at the defects of others, Now if we say to somebody that you should we should see what are the defects within become childlike, it is a very difficult thing us. If we can learn to see this, then a lot of to do. We cannot just leave whatever we are and become childlike. But living with things would become all right automatically. The thing with saints and sages is that they children, having respect for them, listening see their own defects and they think about to how they talk, can make a big difference how they became like that. They think, "Why and we change all the things within us. So first of all we have to know that do I say such harsh things? Why do I lie like this?" So this is a flow of watching within us, as we grew up, a lot of bad things oneself. Most of the time we do not flow have gone in. How should we remove those bad things? What are the kinds of with that. We think we are separate from that. But it is not like that. If we understand bad things that have gotten into us? If we that there is this flow within us that takes think about it and put attention on it, then us to such paths where we cannot even we can correct it. We have to put attention on things like, when we talk to somebody recognize ourselves, then a human being aggressively, or we want to scold someone can turn inwards. Now just to say that you go within or we keep thinking about how to correct somebody else. When our attention goes yourself, meditate, take out these things on other people then we get removed from from within, is very easy. But that will not our own self, because we have to do. That is why we have to meditate and ourselves be all right. That is why it is no constantly work towards it. And we have ways that we know. Like to meditate on Shri use thinking about other people. So, first of all we should look at ourselves only, we Krishna. By meditating on Shri Krishna we should see ourselves. But all of that is get cleansed from within. But when we happening, I have told about it and it is meditate on Shri Krishna we think about

 Jan. & Feb. 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue : 1 & 2 This attention is never on the self the defects of others. If we want to look at the defects of Shri Krishna we can see that but on the defects of others. This causes us to be unsettled and we fail to understand also, but we cannot see our own defects. This is too much that we cannot see our that these are our own defects. Why are own defects but are able to see the defects we looking at the defects of others? By of Shri Krishna. I have seen a lot of people doing this, is it going to fix our defects? They can never be fixed like this. Slowly, who have written books about what were as this point is understood, man will stop the defects in Shri Krishna. What wrong IS things did He do. How He should have focusing on the defects of others. Looking lived? And they don't know about at his own defects will amaze him and themselves. But even when they think realizing how many devils he has harboured within himself. Within our mind about themselves, and look at themselves, it is never in a way that this defect exists we keep thinking such dirty things. When this cleansing starts, man, in within and it should go away. They can keep a way, assumes a special form. He gets on discussing about the defects of others. special powers and with those powers he The only thing we have to see is what are can do many things. This happens not to the defects that we have within ourselves. I do not believe that there is a boost his ego, but so that he gets cleansed. greater yogi than Shri Krishna, because When we start getting cleansed like this, He showed us the way to look at the we have achieved our goal. Therefore, by mistakes within ourselves, the defects looking at our own defects, we start cleansing ourselves and leave the defects within ourselves. This is a very big thing. He said it, but people who actually do it behind. Now how to do this? Because, less in number. Mostly we look at are very seeing the defect is not a hard thing, but to the defects of others, because everyone let go of it, is the hard part. That is why the remembers them, everyone knows them. way to see the defect has to be subtle and But very few people are able to understand minute, and our attention should be their own defects. That is why those people will never be all right. We have to be towards it. A lot can be cleansed like this. familiar with our own defects and laugh at The message of today's festival is ourselves and think that "look at me, what that we should look within ourselves and kind of defects I am having within myself'. see. This is what Shri Krishna has said. We should think about this. But people find this hard to do. It doesn't

 Jan. & Feb. 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume:XVI Issue: 18.2 your eyes will become very steady. On your happen. What is the reason that we are not able to see ourselves? What is this veil own you will start understanding yourself. in between? The veil is of bad things like Actually, the defect lies within us only. ego etc. They stand up and we are unable Looking at the defects of others, how can we fix our own defects? A very simnple to see the defects that we should see. To straightforward question is, "If something see these defects is very essential. I am very happy that you kept falls on our sari and we do not remove it, today's puja. Shri Krishna's Puja takes and if we abuse or blame someone else, it place and a lot of people will get cleansed won't just go away, will it?" This much from within because this is a special intelligence we all have. But we donot use that intelligence. And for this blessing of Shri Krishna. He will do it you should all use this intelligence. Himself, but you have to show a little interest, an inclination that you want to be If anyone has not understood this completely cleansed from within. You you can ask questions, in Marathi also. At donot know how profound this question is. least you should ask some questions. To fix this we have to work very hard. **** Earlier, people would do many Now see. physical exercises; listen to the orders of the attention is going inside and we are their guru. They would do a lot of things pushing it farther but it should happen but they would never achieve the depth. spontaneously. The attention should have the habit of going inwards by itself. I know But you are Sahaja Yogis. It should not be difficult for you. So now I will only say that that you have many questions to ask. We have a lot of confusion within us, there is you should learn to look into yourselves. It will be a lot of fun, Till now, it is alright, but no doubt about it. But the questions are I do not know what you have started doing. very subtle. There is no end to it. Always, You keep a watch on yourself. You will see there is a question of rising above all this. Now, people say, "Mother, how can we rise how this whole thing works and you will be enjoying it and start laughing at yourself above all this?" Meditation. What to say and exclaim - 'what to say?' When this about meditation? You have to meditate on happens, you will start manifesting your ownselves. You have to see your innocence within you. This is the Bal Leela ownselves, that, where is your brain going? And where are you going? Slowly you will (Childlike playfulness) of Shri Krishna. Once you get bathed in this innocence get cleansed.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI issue: 1&2 Jan, & Feb. 2004 Today is a day of great importance. on the right track. When you look at The incarnation of Shri Krishna has done: yourself in the mirror, you see yourself. a great deal of cleansing for us and He has What is the use of seeing others? The helped us a lot. His coming on the earth trouble with us is, we always like to see made a lot of difference. The awakening others in the mirror. Then how will you of Kundalini has also gone smoothly on identify your own faults if you start to see account of His blessings. Please try to look others in the mirror? Sahaja Yogi: How do we protect at yourselves. You should not be annoyed with yourselves and you should not be ourselves from the clutches of the false annoyed with others either. It will be very gurus? Shri Mataji: Why did you have to go joyous. This is the Krishna Puja. If you have any other questions, to a false guru? (Shri Mataji laughs) You alright, you can ask Me... What to say.... tell me first, why did you go to a false guru? Comment from Sahaja Yogi: Everyone is What attracted you to go to the false guru? in nirvichar. How did you go there? You must ask Shri Mataji: Any yourself this first. Then you -will realise that other questions?..a What's the question?... you ignored the evils of that false guru. That Sahaja Yogi: Everyone is sitting in is "what you didn't protect yourself from. Now, in the past I have already given nirvichar. lectures on false gurus where I have clearly Shri Mataji: Come closer. Sahaja Yogi: How do you attain nirchvichar talked about their evil doings and how they take one for a ride. It is their business to (thoughtlessness) in meditation? Shri Mataji: In meditation? There is entrap you all. There are different types of no vichar (thought) during meditation. Why business which they adopt. Out of that, should thoughts come in meditation? You gurus also have a business to entrap you are not to seek anything during meditation. and you are trapped. From this, one must It is only to be felt within. It is you who have realise which trap we have fallen into. We to discriminate whether you have realised have filled our brains with the badhas this or not during meditation. In meditation, (negativities) of the false gurus. Now if you first you will come to know your own can tell me any of those badhas, then I can mistakes, where you were wrong, and tell you IN Sahaja Yogis: inaudible, two or three where you were right. When you start voices speaking together. realising your own mistakes, then you are

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volumme-XVI Issue 1 & 2 Jan. & Feb. 2004 Shri Mataji: Now if you know one or had been to many such gurus just to see two of these badhas, you let me know. The false gurus' badhas. Now what do these them and what they do, and how they tempt and attract people. And with what they badhas actually do? First they focus their entrap people. attention on your pocket, (laughter) Isn't it? So the first thing I saw was that As they start doing this, then you must these people find your own weaknesses, understand that their intentions are that what weakness you have. If this different. But it is all on the gross level. On doesn't work then they put badhas into you. the subtler level, infact, there are many The badhas are of various types. Cut of who wouldn't want to entrap you, but they these badhas you must first learn to detect would try to project their own importance. what type of badhas he has put into you And for this reason they become gurus. It that you are unable to get rid of. The is like this, that one projects his greatest badha that they put into you is importance. So you must watch all this and Fear. It keeps on frightening you, that 'if you be critical about it. Then it will forsake you. leave me, such and such thing will happen But most of the people absorb their to you. ' This type of fear creeps within you. It doesn't have much strength in it. But badhas, their ego, their anger, their physical health and many more aspects it keeps on frightening you. When this fear that you absorb from the guru. Like these comes, you must say to it, 'yes, I know it '. With this fear the human beings keep on gurus, -when they fall sick, their shadow starts reflecting within you. going round and round the guru. For that For this reason, you must analyse Shri Krishna is there, Who drives out this yourself and look at yourself, that, -what fear from everyone. Is it over, or do you have I received from this guru? This is very have any other questions? important. Then when there is a cleansing Sahaja Yogi: Everyone is in of yourself, you will see that it benefits you nirvichar (thoughtlessness) to a great extent. Why did you go to a guru Sahaja Yogis: inaudible, two or three when you were seeking for your own voices speaking together. spiritual ascent? You went to a guru to Shri Mataji: Saying that everyone is know him but you were in turn entrapped. in vichar (thoughts) now we have to go This guru is such a guru, and you yourself should know how to protect yourself from beyond vichar (thoughts). Sahaja Yogi reaffirms: No Mother him. You should stay away from them, I it's nirvichar (thoughtlessness)

 Jan & Feb. 2004 The Divine Cool Bireeze Volurne-XVI Issue: 1 &2 laughing, that is perfect. One who laughs Shri Mataji: Nirvichar. How did that at others, his attention is in another happen? You have organized such a nice direction. Again, one who can witness and puja that I also keep wondering. How is the laugh at himself, and his own environment environment? Is it OK? .. Yes, it is peaceful and aspect, he is perfect. and calm.. peaceful. .now better. Eternal Blessings. A person who can witness himself

 SHRI GANESHA PUJA Cabella Ligure, 13.9.03 Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi (Shri Mataji invites the children and we need not waste our energy with to come and sit on the stage) them. This is the trouble of the elderly Now we are facing little children. people. They are the ones who are incarnations. But today when we are sitting here They are the ones who are going to lead to worship Shri Ganesha, we should know humanity into some great advancement. they are all incarnations of Shri Ganesha The humanity has to be looked after. They and they should be given proper attention, are tomorrow's humanity. And we are proper understanding about themselves. I find certain amount of children who are today's. And what are we giving to them for them to follow? What is their aim in life? very well behaved, which are very Very, very difficult to say. But with the spontaneous, and there are some who Sahaja Yoga they will all go in the proper have no idea as to what they are doing. So way, they will behave in a proper way and it is the duty of the elders to put ideas into the whole thing will be a different mass of their heads, to proper understanding about Sahaja Yogis coming up. themselves and the self-respect. Same But it is the duty of bigger Sahaja thing I would say for the elder Sahaja Yogis Yogis to look after them; to have better who have to look after their younger brothers and sisters. In this family of ours moral standards, to have better lives so that they follow your life and become which we call as Sahaja Yogis, there are genuinely good Sahaja Yogis. It's a very all kinds of people, all types, all behaviors. big responsibility. Perhaps we don't Of course they should not be regimented, recognize it, we don't understand. But all there should not be uniformity, but in that these are little creatures which are after variety there should be this beauty, there the image of great souls and they should should be beautiful trend of being one with be brought up in that way, respected in that each other. manner and loved with great care. This is For that, what should we do, is the to be understood. The problem with our problem. What should the elders do to elderly people is this that we do not achieve that? What is our solid consider them to be considered, to be 'contribution' to their lives? The first will be to tell them who is Shri Ganesha, and that bothered about, to be understood about. We think we are too intelligent, too good what are the qualities of Ganesha, what

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volumie-XVI Issue : 1 & 2 11 Jan. & Feb. 2004 does he represent. What does he lecture, they don't understand what I am represent, what qualities he has - and once saying. But one thing is there, if there are they start understanding, that though being some of possessions within, they will a little boy, he is so generous, he is so kind, show - show very well - because they are so innocent and so simple, their innocence he is so forgiving - they will be amazed will help them to expose them to reality because they are also small and they will I hope you all look after your also take to that kind of life. I find some children very sensible, children, guide them properiy and take them to a level of understanding that they very good here. Some are naughty and some don't understand what we are doing understand what is their position, what here. Whatever it is, they are after all qualities they should have, why will they be children. And what we have to do is to look respected. You will be amazed, that their after them, respect them, and give them behavior will change the behavior of all the other children. the full idea about Shri Ganesha, I think everyone of you must have What I have to say is that nobody a statue of Shri Ganesha in your house, should think that you are very grown-up so the children will see it and ask "Who is because you can keep quiet, sit quietly and this? What is He doing?" And you will be all that. You are grown-up only if you can imbibe the qualities of Shri Ganesha. I have amazed how they will understand Him, seen people who are very grown-up still do not have simple qualities of chastity, of how they will understand His qualities and how they will work it out. It is important for all of you to have at least one Shri Ganesha honesty - they don't have, and they can't in your house, so that you can tell your have it because they don't think it is children that, 'You all have to become like important. So, I leave it to you to find out Shri Ganesha within yourself. Him'. Tenjoy their company because they Now what are the qualities of Shri Ganesha. They won't understand chastity, are so innocent and so simple hearted and I like them very, very much. So, you should they are too small, they won't understand all those qualities. But one quality they will not get afraid or frightened of their mischievousness. On the contrary, you understand is to be honest, is to be honest. Gradually you will find all difficult should know they deserve much more love, much more understanding and much more ones will go down, it will work out that way. Because you see they don't understand My scope to grow. I hope by the time they will

 Jan. & Feb. 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue 12 1&2 be of your age, they will be great Sahaja at peace, (no-one moves and the children also remain motioniess sitting on Yogis. They will understand what we are doing here. I had to face mountains of the stage) Who can take them out? nonsense with the older people, but these (laughter) won't have that. They will be very simple, You can give Me flowers. If you have got flowers, will take them. (The children very sweet and they will understand love. So I will say we can allow these start giving Her flowers) Every so often we children to go out and play and somebody hear Her saying- Thank you... Thank you can look after them so that you will be very much. Thank you

 Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Bombay 20-01-1975 (Translated) In Kaliyuga, there is no other way you think, you could use some old methods, except 'forgiveness'. The more power of then you are mistaken. I told you many-a- times that there is no perfect saint in this forgiveness you have, the more powerful you will be. Forgive all, Only the great world. There is a devil sitting in every saint. people could forgive. How could the They have settled on your attention. Could powerless forgive? This morning I told you to know the Dharma, you have to know the dharma that is within you. Are you you get me? Perfect saints are rare. Shri Krishna said, "Pritranaya Sadhunam, Vinashaya-ch-dushcritam". There is a devil established in Dharma? The one who is sitting next to each sadhu. Very carefully it has to be brushed aside. How difficult it is? established in Dharma is very powerful," So know the Dharma. Yes; how beautifully Whether you stand in saintliness or we stand in Dharma? You stand in devilishness depends upon you. If you are in saintliness and some negativity tries to Dharma. Those who stand in Adharma are the sinners (Adharmis). They have no affect you, you could remove it. But today comparison with us. Adharma is their how many such pure people are there in support. But we stand on Dharma, our this world? Tell me. Only the degree varies. heading Those towards who style is quite different. Dharmik people have are different style than those of the anti- saintliness, they should not look behind and dharma-Religious and non-religious have no relations with the devils. These (dharmic and adharmic) cannot go devilish people are thieves and cheats. together. Despite all the difficulties and How could they be any match to us! We cannot be like them, they cannot compete problems you are standing on Dharma. To know the inner-power which is based on with us. Our paths are different. To rise in dharma is the sign of Sahaja Yoga. It is very dharma is the biggest achievement. clear. Sahaja Yoga has nothing to do with 'Dharma' is nothing but love. Love is all. Let us see how much outrage and other things. One has to awaken in one's dharma and get enlightened. People ask wickedness could be committed before our Love'. Let us see who tortures us and to me, "Shri Mataji, should we do like that? Should we move our plexuses like that? what extent? Let them do. Should we move our fingers like that?" Most Everything bows down before the power of love. This is the only way in of these movements are primordial and these will have effect only when they move Kaliyuga. I cannot think of any other way. If

 Jan. & Feb. 2004 14 The Divine Cool Breeza Volume-XVI Issue 1&2 worldly measurements. No one has correctly. If the flow within is not pure then the movement done with the hands would harassed you. I have seen many difficulties yet I am quite comfortable. I have seen also be similar. Purity is possible only by forgiveness and when one gets purified people suffering to such an extent that it from within then the light of the dharma cannot be described. There are such would also be pure. So those who are devilish people making others' lives difficult religious will have to come to limelight, but today the condition of society is far speak and tell about it. He has to think better and your condition is also much himself whether there is dharma or better. But do not deceive yourself. Do not adharma in whatever he does. It would not deceive yourself, it is very clear. Whatever have been appropriate, had I delivered this you are doing to Sahaj Yoga actually you are doing it to yourself. Know it thoroughly. lecture before you got your Realisation. www. In administrative purposes sometimes the That would have conditioned you. All the psychologist, ruled out the significance of question arises as what to do about dharma and told that the principles of something? Solution is very easy. Before dharma condition the minds of the taking any decision go into thoughtless followers. After Realisation there will be awareness and whatever solution comes no conditioning. Now you will accept things up automatically go by that. It could never willingly. There will be no conditioning at be wrong. But the decision should be all. It has brought your attention on ego & spontaneous and it should come in a state superego. Dharma is asserting itself, you of thoughtless awareness. Mental are not struggling with it. You have chosen decisions will be biased ones because this path and whatever worldy things you while thinking both ego and superego are have learnt, they cannot be compared with at work. All your worldly experiences will the etherial ones. One cannot attach the be behind your decisions but decisions taken in thoughtless awareness will be etherial values with the worldly things. I am talking of the etherial but you are seeing it in worldly way. The three dimensions of etherial and miraculous. Miraculous because its meaning in Hindi is 'very high the worldliness have finished and those but in Marathi the meaning of this word is who wish to go to the fourth dimension they strange. So it will be miraculous in both senses-Hindi and Marathi. While talking of have to achieve its depths in a serious way. I am talking about this fourth dimension. the etherial, all your worldly views, pre- You cannot evaluate the etherial with conceived ideas of human beings cannot

 Jan. & Feb. 2004 The Divine Coal Breeze Volume-XVI Issue : 1& 2 15 be bigotry. He has His own standing, His mammoths and physically developed beings have vanished and become missing own being. If you wish the God to be like you or you say 'O!, Almighty give me some links. Only elephants remain. Similary money so that I invest it for you', that level those who are extremely mentally also come. He will manifest Himself, developed, like fox have also fallen in you keep opening your channel and know missing links. Same is the fate of the the dharma within. It is very essential to people. However, dog was saved. Human beings will also rise from the ordinary ones know the dharma. What a beautiful thing is there within us; flowing in the perishable and the so called ordinary people will not body is the imperishable power. It is the do anything in three dimensions. stream of the Ganges, Yamuna and Otherwise in the process of evolution they Saraswati - the confluence of the three. So you cannot know it with worldliness. Go in thoughtlessness for a moment and take will become missing-links the way chimpanzees have become missing links. That is why ordinary people are selected for the purpose of evolution. AlIl these big- any decision, your decisions will be such R) that even highly placed people could not big renunciates and austeres (USI- take - very dynamic, absolutely dynamic. will reach no where. You will see yourself When worries, fear, anger, servility, that these very highly placed people and renunciates will become missing links. To slavishness, inferiorty, all these complexes get washed away then the Divine will how many I have given Realisation, to how express within you with His grace. He is many kings and Emperors, sacred groups, so humble, so sweet, so sweet that it secretaries etc! All are glued to their thrones. Does someone realise that the penetrates within without letting us feel, the light-has been lit in us? They write letters the moonlight penetrates in our being. When you are selected for this way to me, 'l am enjoying myself!' Does anyone. work your importance increases much think of doing something. that we have received enlightenment and we have to more. You think yourselves to be ordinary people. 'How have we been selected?' give it to others. When you have a special seat then you have to be a special person God will select out of the ordinary human as well. Extraordinary will evolve from the beings. All these extraordinary and highly fa) people will become ordinary ones. It will blossom in them. placed ( Gradually you will understand that all these missing links. Always it has happened in are foolish, why to talk to them. There are every stage of evolution, if you see. All the

 The Divine Coot Breeze Volume-XVI Issue: 1&2 Jan & Feb, 2004 16 big-big doctors. What to do? They are big connected, you know it well that you are connected to each other. When you share fools. What have we to do? They have spent their lives without achieving negativities (Badhas) of each other, why do anything. Let it go to dogs, what have we to do! Our position is very high. There not you share the dharma? You take up the badhas, why not the dharma? What is could be no education programme for it. I cannot sit and educate you about it and the reason? The reason is that still we are evolving. We are small and growing. We teach you ABCD of it. You have to learn it are small children. We shall get our fingers with day- to-day experience. burnt, we shall stumble and one day when This morning I told you a very we grow, we shall make thousands of people move with us, catching hold of their significant thing that in Sahaj Yoga you are collective (fz) beings not individuals fingers. Still you are small, does not matter (afte). You are collective, you must know if you are cheated, remain in your this fact. Now the Gagangarh Maharaj is innocense. Those who are cheating and thinking themselves to be very wise, they much-much higher than you. Accepted. THE WE He has wocked hard for twentyone should know that they will be made cancerous and thrown out. It is another path thousand years. He himself told about it. He took birth twentyone thousand times where if someone goes, he never returns. and remained in the Holy Feet of the There is a pathway to hell, many people Almighty. Almighty remained in jungle. go by it. They know nothing. They think of going before Shri Mataji, touch and wash Only then he could get vibrations. And how have you all got it in the twinkling of an Her feet and regard themselves to be big eye? Because it is a new word, a new saints. This is one of the approach, happening. You all have become atoms in everything goes side by side. When the the body of the Virata. A symbolic human flower blossoms, the unwanted particles being has been made, it has become. of the bud fall down and fragrance emanates from it. Whatever has to flourish, Forget about them. You are in collective flourishes everything else falls down. Both form and those of you who wish to be away the things happen simultaneously. Life is from the collectivity should know that they will become cancerous and get finished. such. Those who have to tall shall waste their lives. They have to die and get None of you is good or bad. If one finger is hurt another one soothes it, one hand finished. But it has a storing time. The soothes the another one. You are all arrangment for storing is there. Such

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI issue: 18 2 Jan & Feb. 2004 17 at all. If someone tells that your chakra is people go away and some of them go in catching, you should be thankful to him and such a way that they never come back. tell that you have decoded what I could not From animal you have evolved to human do. Because if someone tells that snake being but what is the use if after becoming human being you become an insect. In is biting you then you feel grateful to him. Similarly you should be grateful to one who dharma will be your competetion. Are we tells you about your chakra and request him established in dharma or not ? Think of it to cleanse it. Never take ill of it, although about yourself and about others also. Think that how much established they are in you are very great in this world because dharma. How much established we are you have got vibrations. How many people of this world have got vibrations? Pope is so popular, yet he has not got vibrations. and how much established other adharmic people are in dharma. If they are adharmic then what is the reason. Which of their You are greater than many great people. chakra is catching? They stand on Yet you are children. In Sahaj Yoga you adharma because of catch on some of the. are children. The pope doesn't have vibrations. All these big-big people before chakra. There could be no other reason. bows, these this world whom Watch it in a very unprejudiced manner. If Shankracharyas, none of them have the there is a catch then what? We shall clear it, if you all desire, If the person is in an knowledge of vibrations. But you people incurable condition then forget him. He has give awakening & Self Realisation! You cancer. Forget him and bury him. But with move the Kundalinis of all on your whom you have sympathy and you think fingertips. How great it is. No one except TETER Ganesha could do it earlier. Small snake, that he could be cured, you could set him the Ganesha has in His hands, is symbolic right. You have many methods of it. There conveying that He moves the Kundalini of are the primordial movements. Cleanse all the seekers. them with it. Share amongst yourself and Now you have achieved atleast one expand the plexuses. Share amongst yourself, do not feel bad about it. You thing that you can awaken the Kundalini of should never feel bad about it. The one others. But this is not worldly thing. This is who feels that, is similar to the person who etherial, which has no limits. It can turn troubles others. To feel bad and trouble everything topsy-turvy. The more soft and loving He is, He has got limitless others are the same, These are two parts powers of one action. So one should not feel bad of destruction on His command. He will go

 Jan. & Feb. 2004 18 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue : 1 & 2 Now you have to know the rate of dharma. His way. You do only this much your own Why the dharmic people need to know the way (Where is the heart chakra correct it first of all). Our heart is clear or not Does rates of flour and pulses? They have to it contain anger for anyone? Do we have know about dharma but you people know fear for anyone? Ask your heart. It is a big the politics? It shows that you do not have thing because heart controls the brain. vibrations in you. Only flowing of vibrations With heart we do everything and with your is not enough. It is not a big achievement. heart you are connected to me. So first of Still you are children. I am not even willing all you should clear your heart. We think to celebrate your first brithday. It is just our own way, that is why this heart chakra forced acquaintance with you. Look to is there. How much love we have given? yourself. Is there any change in you ? Is How much love we have given to others? I there any difference in me? Have I got got a letter from Mr. Desai, he has written some place or not? Is there any transformation? As I have just taken you that Sahajyogis helped my wife a lot. I was very happy. I was over-joyed. Help each out through the subtle Sushumna other, love each other, and we shall be (Parasympathatic). Its a very subtle line, bound with love. We shall become one we could say of the size of a hair. the body of Virata. You are placed on the thickness of Sushumna is only this much Sahasrara of this body. I have made you and there are four layers one upon another, sit on Sahasrara of Virata. What these mad yet people are getting cured by these people are doing ? Thousand people are vibrations. They are getting alright. One to be put on the Saharara of the Virata lady came; her face was totally changed. Purisha. It appears to be a big thing. How She told that her asthama was fully cured. It is not a big thing. This disease is cured, many have got vibrations in hand? Felt it? You understand the Kundalini. Have you that disease is cured, it is not a big deal. have any doubt in it? I have done the What is there in it? Cancer is cured, what farming. We will see the results. You are is extra-ordinary in it? It was to happen. If worried about small small things ! At such the light is put on in the house then one a time what your brains are caught in. If could see things. Otherwise what is the you have to go to Delhi then you will think purpose of light? At least everything could what is the rate of flour there. But you have be seen. There is nothing special in it. But to go to such a place where there is no with this enlightenment what knowledge such problem. That is the place of Dharma. could you acquire, what new dimension

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue: 1& 2 Jan. & Feb. 2004 appreciate and say what a man! First class could you see, what new achievement could you make? This is the speciality. person, very generous nature, It is getting done already but it could gain more speed. (yes, how is it going? Now you are groing It all depends on you. How you think about younger and younger. I am worried about it. Listen to others and appreciate their you. She is getting younger and younger. Isn't it?) Whatever we speak is it going through our head? Is it going through our feelings very peacefully. Get identified with others the way one hand is identified with heart ? If it goes through the head then we the other. The hand is identified with brain, it is identified with heart. Every part is so shall argue, make a dogma of it. Let it go through the heart. There will be integrated. You also have to be integrated enlightenment. If you want to enjoy the love the same way. Only then those thousand hands could be got ready whom I could use then go by the heart. Heart chakra is called as human help (मनुष्य रूपेण संस्थिता) those the 'Sacred Heart'. Sacred Heart chakra which the christians call, is the heart thousand hands which are the hands of Virata. These hands will emerge from chakra which is the abode of the Goddess Durga. It is a huge centre. It is beyond you amongst the human beings; ordinary to understand Durga. All these Rakshasas human beings. Big saints and sages are not required for that so that they be placed are Her children. Everything in the world belongs to Her. Whomsoever She had on the chakras. These people will come out of the ordinary seekers. First of all destroyed, it is because of Her love for you. It is difficult to break your own hands. It is cleanse yourself at home. I am telling you to bath each other with vibrations, Mrs. Lal difficult to inject yourself. To kill one's own children for the sake of others is very you give vibrations to her and she gives to difficult. But this killing is the work of a big you. First feel each others Chakras and power. It is the act of forgiveness, a big then cleanse each other. Come out nicely forgiveness. But you people have no need to become Durga in this Kaliyuga. Be very calm & quite. Your peace will help spread bathed and ready. Keep on cleansing each other and everything will be cured (Aa). Lot of turmoil is going on in this world. You are not even aware of it. Criminality is likely Sahaj Yoga. People will say that they have to take over. You are not aware that it has seen Sahaj Yogis who had no anger at all, become the kingdom of devils and they talk they were the embodiments of humility. They were unique. You are my helping in such a way that they form groups. They hands. It is you whom people will get attached to each other in such a way

 20 Jan, & Feb. 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue:182 if they were glued and Sahajyogi fall ill I will give indications to you. Once you as know about the chakra of that person you prey to them because there is freedom; should clear it out. Collectively you should and see these Rakshasas, how collectively they are enjoying themselves! They cleanse each other. Q. Shri Mataji there appears to be no strangulate one, kill another and trouble others. When the collectivity of Saints is difference between each other. Ans. It is still there. We go five steps ahead formed, then think what will happen ? Saints have never formed groups. It has and come back six steps behind. When shall we attain our goal. Shall we be able happened first time. If the saintliness of the saints goes away then what is the use of to attain it or not, that is the question ? such a group. All the qualities of a saint When you go into the depth of your should manifest from him (Marathi..) (I awareness you will all move together the way the waves of the ocean go. All of you am saying Mr. Lal, you were to hold a should evolve together. Instead of trying to meeting. First do it and then do the Puja. shall not be able to speak once I start improve others one has to improve oneself. vibrating. I shall not be able to participate In Sahajayoga no one is big or small. There in the proceedings of the meeting). Now is no question of seniority. You feel this you tell if you have any problem. Let us way because you have come from the material world. Someone is officer and finish with the worldly things, then do the some junior. One is King and another a Puja peacefully. You have to throw away beggar. Someone is saint and another an all this dung then we shall discuss. Tell me what is the problem? If austere. It has absolutely no significance. The churning (ier7) is going on. I am doing someone has a serious problem, you can this churning only. Let us see who steals help him out. Be detached. Detachment is the butter. Only the wise one could do it. essential because you are not what you appear. You are pure (Nirmala) from within Sometimes you will feel cool and and without. Another person could also sometimes hot. Butter will come on the surface because of its lightness. There is be like you. Without any prejudice, be no high and low. If someone thinks higher conscious towards others. If someone is or lower then Mahamaya is there to take caught, set him right. Do not feel bad about care. I will pull the Kundalini in such a way it. Talk in Sahaja-codes. Like you are sitting in My feet and I know something about you, that those who regard themselves very high will be astonished. This churning is then do not feel bad about it. If someone is

 WJan. & Feb. 2004 21 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue 1&2 going on. Knowingly I will pull your Kundalini down; until we raise it and keep world. One cannot believe it. They will be ready within ten-twelve years but by then it in the state of ascent, it will not work out. you should not break my platforms while All the older people should know that in wrestling among yourself. If my platforms worldly sense they are the leaders, they are broken then what my children shall do are the seniors. They have to tell to the who have come here for this Divine game? smaller one that it is the worldliness. To some extent it is all right offcourse, Anyone who rises spiritually, any one who because it is organisational work. Every looks up shall ascend. though he still be thing will be alright automatically when the on the first step. Someone who regards movement is collective and you are all oneself on a higher pedestal is wrong. integrated. If someone is speaking too much you should cool down. (You get the cool vibrations, isn't it? You should get the Such a person should look within and see how he ascended and descended. Try to cool vibrations not the hot one.) Cool down. ascend. Churning is going on and in it no Coolness, sincerity, let it come within you. one has a fixed place. Dharma is cool on absolute zero. It stands The method of Sahaja Yoga is unique. Never before such churning was on absolute zero. People used to go to Himalayas. You however do not need to go done. Only Gagan Gadh Maharaj remained to Himalayas. You open your air- in jungle for years together and did all kind conditioners; be aware of yourselves. See of penance. You have nothing to do with it. I cannot tell you more than this. Without your faults, see your Chakras and help getting into the churning he uplifted himself others cleanse their plexuses. Do it all alone. He is something different. His secretely. There is no need to tell. When guidance is like that of Shri Ganesha. You you could do it secretly then what is the harm ? If Awakening and Realisation are are all caught in my churning and I am the given on the road then what is there to link for you. I am telling you about all these think? The more secretely you do, The things. It may be Shankracharya or anyone more pure & loveable will it be. I feel nice else, no one knew about vibrations, spiritual technicalities and primordial to see you doing the work of awakening movements. No one knew about it. No secretely where it has been written, but now these May God Bless You. wonderful people have incarnated in this

 SHRI MATAJI'S ADVICE Brighton (U.K.) 15th Nov. 1979 you do not know what you are seeking. But The name itself is so beautiful- Brighton. It has to brighten the whole one thing is definite, you are not satisfied with things as they are. There is something country. I have been here twice before also beyond which you have to seek. There is and I always felt that if a chance is given to me in this place, we can really start some thing beyond, no doubt, which has been told to you by all the prophets, by all Sahaja Yoga in a big way and one day it the scriptures, by all the incarnations who can become a place of pilgrimage. There came on this earth. It has been promised are mixed vibrations in Brighton. You have also that you will be judged one day. But the sea. Also, the mother Earth here has special significance but when something the first judgment will be your own. You Divine starts emitting itself, the evil comes yourself will decide whether you are thing. seeking the Divine or some frivolous in a disguise, accumulates and starts If you are seeking the Reality & the Truth, fighting with the Divine and that's how, I felt mixed vibrations at Brighton. But on the then only you are going to be chosen, then only you are going to be the citizen of God's whole it is a very good place, where Sahaja Kingdom. Yoga can prosper. They must have told you about Now, let us see who is this God & Sahaja Yoga. 'Saha' is with, Ja' is born what am I talking about. In the beginning, it was just a Silence, complete Silence. - the union you with you. This is the Yoga And out of the Silence, when It awakened, are seeking with the Divine, that is born the Silence was awakened. The Silence is with you. It is within you. Everybody has said, "Seek Him within yourself". Even called "Para Brahma". I am sorry, I have to Christ has said the same. That means you use Sanskrit language; it does not mean is something Hindu. These ideas you have to seek. It is your freedom, which cannot be challenged. You have to ask for must get rid of. In India people have it. For example, if God could, at this stage meditated much more. They did not have to fight the Nature, like we had to fight today, of human awareness, transform you to higher awareness, without your coming while coming to this hall. The atmosphere into that play, He would have done it long is so nice & warm there. People could time back. But He cannot. You have to sit and meditate under a tree. They did not have to fight the Nature so much. They seek the Divine in your own freedom. You are seeking, definitely. Perhaps had a long time to meditate. In their

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue : 1& 2 Jan. & Feb. 2004 23 meditation they have found a lot of things it's own creation. So, three powers started for which they have used Sanskrit acting and thus these three powers were created. Now, as we know that people have language. So, this Para Brahma or you can not talked much about the Holy Ghost In say, the Absolute Silence was awakened, got awakened because it got awakened the Bible. Many scriptures that have talked about the Father have not been able to talk itself; like we sleep and we get awakened. about the Holy Ghost. Specially, when And then the Silence became what you call Sadashiva. When it was awakened or Christ's mother herself was an incarnation of Holy Ghost; he did not want to endanger when this Sadashiva started breaking in the sense that it wanted, it desired to Her life. He did not even say that She was create. As we say, that the morning sun is the incarnation of Holy Ghost, because if breaking through the dawn; in the same they had crucified Her, He would have come out with His own destructive powers. way when this desire started manifesting, the desire became HIS power and got But, the drama was to be played and She separated. Now, whatever I say is just a remained a silent person. Now, this Holy story for you; you need not believe it but I Ghost is important for us, because Father is just a witness. He is witnessing the play, will reach a point which you can believe into and then step by step you can believe the game that the Holy Ghost is playing. into this theory. This is just a hypothesis Heis going to enjoy Her creation. He is the for you. So, use when this desire became only witness of that game and She is trying to please Him by creating this because it a power, this power was called Shakti or Mahashakti or Adishakti, means Primordial was His desire to create. So, She created with these forces, that we have got, which Power. This Primordial Power assumed a the Desire are called; the first one personality and entity; it had to, if it had to act. If you have only a desire in your (Mahakali), the second one-the Action heart, it is no good. We have to transform (Mahasaraswati), and the third-the it into some form, otherwise the desire Sustenance or you call it-the Evolution will rise and fall. So, this desire got into a (Mahalakshmi). These powers acted to create us-human beings. Here, we have form, we can say, into an entity, which we call in the Bible, the Holy Ghost & in the reached this stage, when we can talk about this. Even at the time of Christ, one Sanskrit language-Adishakti. This desire could not talk of the Holy Ghost. What could then created out of itself two more powers- one to act and the other to improve upon we do with these fishermen Just tell me,

 Jan & Feb. 2004 24 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue:1&2 how could you tell them about these you are seeking. Now, there are three powers within things? That was just a preparatory thing us. On the left hand side is your love, is but you know, what a mess they have done! Quite a mess is there, and people can't your power of desiring, by which we understand those who call themselves desire, by which we express our emotions; and when this desire is no more left in us religious. How could they be fanatic? Fanaticism and religion are at dagger's in the sense that when this power ends. They can't be one thing. You can disappears within us, then we also see now in iran. Anywhere you can see, disappear. In the centre is the spirit, which is where people are fanatics how irreligious the - reflection of the Father God or Witness they are, because religion is Love. God is God, who is within us in our heart. On the Love and none of these "religious people" have expressed that love in a way it should right hand side is our power of action. These three powers have created like a be expressed, nor have they taken up the curtain between our attention and between work of seeking God. But other things they Him. This curtain exists In the Void. It is are doing like philanthropic work, collecting funds, having a jumbo sale etc. That is not sustained by our liver and that's how the the job of a person seeking God. Under three curtains keep. us away from that these circumstances, when we are face spirit. We cannot see that spirit, nor can to face with people who have organised we feel it. We cannot manifest it. We know that there is someone who knows. In religion or disorganised religion and fake Gita, it is called (as) "Kshetragya" who people, we really get absolutely frustrated. is the knower of the field. So, we know that, We get flabbergasted and we do not know there is a knower and the knower knows what we are to do because we are born seekers. We might have made mistakes all about you, is tape recording of all that in seeking but we are definitely seekers. If you have been doing, your seeking, your you were not seekers you would have been mistakes, your turbulence, all kinds of happy attending a dinner or a ball things you have done. And that tape somewhere. But, no. There is something recorder is placed down below there in the beyond, something that is promised, triangular bone and is called the Kundalini. something that you feel, the existence of This is the residual energy of our desire, which you are aware of but you have so means when the whole universe was far not reached the source. That is why created, this energy of desire, the Adi-

 25 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue 1&2 Jan. & Feb. 2004 Shakti, after creating the whole, She authority-some one who has power to raise remains whole, as She is complete. It is Her, who loves the same way as she loves you, then only she rises. Not by any tricks, very easy to understand; you can say- supposing there is light here and film here. The whole film is reflected but the film is by standing on your head or doing some exercise or beating people or doing all sorts intact. In the same way after projecting of things, they have devised now. It is a itself, what ever remains is this residual spontaneous things Sahaja. Spontaneously energy, is this Kundalini. It means that you it rises. I mean, supposing now somebody are the complete projection of that comes to me & says, "Can you guarantee Kundalini. That power, that is desire power that my Kundalini will be awakened?" | which manifests in two powers-the right would say, "No, Sir. I am sorry, may be, side power- which is called the power of may not be". If you don't argue, too much, action and the central power which you then it will. Why? What happens with arguments? have evolved up to a point and the rest is I must tell what happens with a void, as the power which is responsible for your evolution from amoeba to this argument. I don't mean you should not argue. You must; because , I know you stage. We should ask a question, "Why have a problem. You are too identified with did we become human beings-from arguments. Doesn't matter. But when you amoeba to this stage?" Supposing I have argue, you use this power which is on the some bolts, nuts, etc. & I gather them right hand side. By thinking, what happens, together. Then, anybody can ask me, "Why You create that yellow stuff there and that are you doing this?" I will say, "I am making yellow stuff in common words is' Mr. Ego'. And when you think, this ego rises like that a microphone." But even, this microphone has a thread, here. It has to be put to the and goes on pressing the other one- mains. Unless and until it is put to the Superego, which comes from your conditionings. So this Ego, when it sits on mains, it is not going to work. This is what this one like that how are we to raise the we have got-these three powers and the Kundalini, because then there is no place, residual power which is the desire power, no space, left. It has to be balanced like which is just sitting down there, which is going to desire your rebirth. She is your that. So by arguments, I cannot raise the Kundalini. That's why I say, "Let me see own mother and when she desires it, she about it. Do not argue just now". But, then comes into action only when she sees an

 26 Jan. & Feb. 2004 The Divine Coal Breeze Volume-XVI Issue :1&2 people don't like it. You see, they feel from the Indian scriptures, where it is e saleelam- described as (weian challenged. So, I say. "Go ahead". But what saleelam, that is, this cool breeze comes happens when you argue, the thoughts go on pressing you and that is why you cannot on you like a wave. In the Bible also you have read it as the Cool Breeze. So, the do it by arguments or by reading a book. whole power is the power of desire which You cannot pay for it. It is absolutely impossible to pay for it. God doesn't have has manifested into three powers of Adishakti as the Cool Breeze and it is all a shop. No, He doesn't know shopping nor pervading and when this Kundalini rises it can you organise Him. We cannot organise passes through those centres and touches God, He has to organise us. So any sort them. These centres are the subtle centres of an organised thing can not work it out. It is absolutely like sprouting of a below our plexuses which we know in our medical science as the plexuses we have seed. You just put it in the soil and put some got within ourselves. And then you water. As I say, I put some water of Love, I give you some water of Love, then it become Self-Realized. I cannot give a lecture on that or sprouts by itself. You have a seed, you have a sprout-inside (Primule) and brain wash you, you become collectively conscious. It's actualization, that we should everything is ready: It has to happen. By getting angry it does not work out. By seek. It has to happen within you, so that anything that you can do, you cannot you become that, It is not by branding work it out. You have to be effortless. You anybody that you are a Sahaja Yogi. It cannot be done like that. A Sahaja cannot put any effort for sprouting a seed. You can't even transform a single flower Yogi has to get the real baptism. His fontannel bone has to become soft and his into a fruit. Actually we do not do much. Kundalini has to pierce it, then only he is a What we do is that whatever is dead, we change it into another dead object, then Sahaja Yogi. You cannot have membership, you we change into another. That's all. We have done nothing living. This is a living cannot have anything like that. It is so process and all living processes are spontaneous and if it has not happened achieved through spontaneity. within you, then you are not a Sahaja Yogi. spontaneously it rises. It Till it has happened, you are still seeking. But it takes a split of a second in people So. fouches your Sahasrara and you start like children. It can take quite a lot of time getting a cool breeze in your hands. Apart

 27 Jan. & Feb. 2004 The Divine Coo Breeze Volume-XVI Issue : 1 & 2 pace of an ant. The reason is reality. You in some people, who have harmed themselves. Actually in this country (U.K.) see all other organisations spread I have seen that there are very beautiful because, you pay the money and become people born - genuine, honest and humble. some great minister of state there, Then you wear a something like that. Very great seekers of old times are blessed locket and become the great disciple of a to be born here and also in America. But they became impatient and in their great fake guru or something like that. It impatience, they have tried to destroy is very easy to do that, isn't themselves. And that is how you have become a Sahaja Yogi, you have to face it ? But to yourself, you have to see yourself and then spoiled those psychosomatic centres. In these centres, there will be problem for a the beauty when it dawns upon you; you can see that it is the Truth, that you have short time, but you have to have it. You to receive and have to give. are born for it. This is the evolution which You should-not feel obliged has to take place. You have to know your because that is My Job. You can say that self. You must get it. I am paid for that. Giving you Realization But the way is not demanding, but is My own Job. I have to do it. Your job is asking for it. "Blessed are those who are to take it because that is what you are here meek" has already been said. That for. It is no question of any obligation. It's meekness and not your arrogance is Love, just Love. I have to love you and you needed. If you sit on my head and say, have to receive that love from me. It just "Give us Realization". Then, I should say, flows, it just emits. that I am not the one who is giving, but I am just telling you how to receive it's you who is receiving it. Like the river Ganga which flows; if you throw stones at it, but our human love, you see, is so aggressive that we cannot understand her, you cannot get water out of her. You have to take a pitcher, a hollow pitcher anyone who says, "I love you". We run and dip it inside her. It will fill up by itself. away "You love me, then I would better run away", because love means So it is your own asking which receives love means fulfillment and you have to find out that possession. Human but this fulfillment. Without that you cannot be domination, is aggressive love is just Love, that soothes you, which happy. raises you to a new awareness, by which We have Sahaja Yogis in London you feel on your fingers the complete of course, and we are progressing with the

 Jan, & Feb. 2004 28 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue 1&2 just watch it. If with that attitude you come, enlightenment and your hands can tell you what centres are catching in you and in just to open your eyes to it, Open your eyes- it's called Unmesh ( means others. There are so many blessings of open your eyes to that beauty that is yourself. For this you should be ready and Sahaja Yoga, which I am going to tell you there should be no doubts about it in the seminar and perhaps all these because they are not worth it. But still, if Sahaja Yogis can tell you also. you have any doubt, I will like to attend to I don't know what are your problems. I would like to talk to you if them definitely. More-over, sometimes we get very good questions. I have seen that there are any problems or questions but not too long. Because Sahaja Yogis get some people ask really good questions and give me the idea of as to what is the quite worried about it. The reason is that firstly they have all asked me questions problem. So that will also be welcome. But do not sit down with the attitude of doubting quite a lot and they will be quite ashamed to remember that. Secondly, they feel Toms, that is also one thing. Sahaja Yoga is a very big subject and it is rather difficult excited, that why are you not getting your to explain whole of it. It is by which you get Realization instead, why are you asking your physical, mental, emotional and questions ? You should better have it, is in spiritual integration because all the centres your hands and thirdly, they find sometime come into play and bring enlightenment you are asking questions of no value to into all the four aspects of your life; into yourselves or to anyone. So, one thing you should remember the totality so that you feel your collective in wholesomeness that there is nothing selling here. You have not to pay for it. It's something that is just consciousness. It is quite a complicated flowing. It is something, no one knows of sentence. I have said in short, but if you really in this world. Just flowing, have any problem about it, you can ask somethings beautiful. If you have me without fear. I am your Mother. May God bless you. somewhere seen a beautiful scene, you

 Ego & Superego necessary to protect the brain carefully and Man is still in a transitional stage. Little more he has to jump and he becomes make it independent of God's will and that, for which he has been created, make it used by itself so that it develops Human brain and heart are the most another dimension of wisdom. For this purpose the system of ego and super ego evolved things. Human heart also has to has been created which is the byproduct be correlated with the brain. From our stomachs fat rises into or reaction, of human activities. Every activity has a reaction. If you say no to something, the reaction is Ego. If you our brains passing through all the centres, evolving to be cells of the brain. The fat, to become brain, has to evolve, that is, to accept something the reaction is Super achieve certain amount of changes of Ego. Ego & Superego, completely cover human awareness. Human brain has a dimension, which animals do not have, a fontanel bone and separate you from all mental or emotional dimension, with which pervading power giving you freedom, to act we understand love. We understand how as you like, to use your brain as you like to to receive and reciprocate. We understand learn; because if the evolution has to go also any further you have to try, So, whatever beauty and poetry; and we God has done is for your good. understand how to create these. Brain is He has not given you Ego & Super triangular and prismatic in nature. When ego to get spoiled and finished. You must the rays of God's divine power flow in, they have ego and do not have to fight with it. get refracted into different angles and by Your ego should become one with that of the principle of parallelogram of forces, God. Once you are awakened, once your a part of the power escapes to left side light has come, then yeu can do it. and a part to right side. Therefore man can thínk of past and future but animals cannot. In the transitional period it is "SHRI MATAJI"

 Advice of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Guru Purnima London - 29th July 1980 Today you have arranged this this gap and for that it is essential that every Guru has to be a realized soul of a worship of your Guru, that is your Mother perhaps. very high quality and greatly evolved. He need not be a person who is an ascetic or Why is this Puja arranged ? One should know that it is very a person who is living in a forest. He could be a common householder. He could be a important for every disciple to worship his Guru. But the Guru has to be real Guru, king. All these outward manifestations of not a one who is just exploiting the one's life do not matter whatever may be disciples and who is not authorised by God. your position. I would say the so-called A Puja is arranged because you have position in this world makes no difference been initiated into the Statutes of the Lord. to your being a Guru, as long as you have imbibed the Statutes of the LORD. You have been told what are the Dharmas of a human being. For that actually you do Again,I say you have to imbibe the not need a Guru. You can read a book and Statutes. Let us see what are the Statutes. know what are the Statutes of the Lord. The first is, 'you do not do harm to anyone', But Guru has to see that you practice them. The first principle is that we are not to harm These Statutes are to be practiced, to be anyone. Animals do harm without knowing that they are harming someone. If you go brought into your own life; which is a difficult thing and without a Guru, a near a snake, he will bite. If a scorpion is correcting force, it is very difficult to follow there he will put his poison into your being. these Statutes of the Lord because, there Humans are not to harm anyone. They can correct but not harm. But the principle of is a very big gap between Human Awareness and Divine Awareness and that not harming is taken to a point where reality gap can only be filled by a Guru, who disappears. for example, when it was said himself is complete. "do not harm anyone,' people started Today is Purnima, which means a saying, 'alright we will not harm mosquitoes complete moon. A Guru has to be a and bugs and will not kill them.' And there complete personality to talk about these are some people who are following religions Statutes and to elevate his disciples to in which they preserve mosquitoes and this level of understanding by which they imbibe those Statutes. He is there to fulfil bugs. This is absurdity. Taking anything to absurdity, cannot be reality.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue 1& 2 31 Jan. & Feb. 2004 First of all, we should not harm It is not for telling others that you anyone who is walking in the path of God, have to be truthful and this is the Truth we the one who is a realized soul. There may have seen and this is what God's Laws are, be some with his mistakes in him. He how they work out. Through vibratory may need correction. Nobody is perfect as awareness we have been able to see that yet. So do not harm. Always try to help. this is the Truth. But be completely confident about it. But for that first of all Secondly, anybody who is a real seeker, he may be wrong. He might have gone to you must test yourself completely, wrong Gurus, he might have done wrong otherwise you might be playing into the But have feelings for them hands of evil. It happens with many people things. because you have been going on wrong who start doing Sahaja Yoga in the path yourself, sometimes. You have been beginning. So be cautious. Be sure that you misled before, so have more sympathies. are telling the Truth and nothing else and That is why if you have done mistakes in a that you have felt the Truth in full ways. way it is good because you have more Those who have not felt the vibrations, should not talk of Sahaja Yoga. They sympathies for such people. Then you are not to harm human beings in anyway, you have no authority. They have to receive are not to cause them any bodily harm, vibrations. They have to fully imbibe within any emotional upsetting just for harm's them and then they can say, "Yes, we felt". sake; for correction it is alright. This is very important task Sahaja Yogis have to do in these modern times - that is, The second Statute is that you to tell aloud that they have found the Truth. have to stand on your own legs and know That part is very weak. In whatever way you that you are here one with the Truth, the You can testimony of Truth, that yoOu have seen the like you can announce the Truth, Truth. You know what Truth is and you write books, 'you can talk to your friends, relations and everyone and tell them, "this cannot compromise with falsehood. You just cannot. For that you need not harm is the Truth now, that you have entered in the kingdom of God. That you have been anyone. You have to just profess it. You have to stand up and say that you have blessed by the Grace of God. That you are realized souls, that you have felt the seen the Truth and this is the Truth, and Divine power which is prevailing everywhere. That you can give Realization you have to be one with it so that people see that light of truth in you and they accept to others. This you have to tell others and it.

 Jan. & Feb. 2004 32 The Divine Coal Breeze Volume-XVI Issue: 1 82 know that by your accepting the truth, you You must wait for the time when you can are not adding anything to the truth but you tell people, more in confidence. Tell them, "this is wrong, it is wrong, you do not know. We have done the same thing". This is are adorning yourself. One requires courage to enjoy the truth. Sometimes people may mock at you, laugh at you and how you are going to express your principle of Mastery or you can say "Guru Tatwa". persecute also but that should not be any worry to you because your relationship is You have to be truthful. First and foremost thing is, that, You should know the truth and with the Statutes, with the Grace of God. When that is your connection, you should stand the testimony and that you should not worry about other people and what they announce it. The third thing for Guru a Sahaja have to say about it. You have to stand up, adorn yourself with that truth and talk to Yogi has to do is to develop Detachment. people and people will know that you have Gradually you do develop it because you find that unless and until you develop that found it. With that authenticity with which detachment, you are not receiving you speak, people will know that you have found it. The difference between a vibrations in the full way. All kinds of realized soul and a non-realized soul is detachments have to be developed, means basically this: He does not talk of woes your priorities change. Once your attention and his separation with God. He says "I gets fixed up with your spirit, the catch or have found it now. This is it". Like Christ the hold on things which are of no said, "I am the Light, I am the path". importance starts reducing by itself, e.g. Or anybody else can say that but you you have a father, a mother and a sister. This is a bigger problem in India. Here, can make out that it is not Truth. With the confidence, with that you are over deteched. But in India, people complete understanding, coming out of your heart are very much involved in their own people can make out, 'this is absolute children "this is My son" & others are all orphans. Only, your sons and daughters Truth' and then all kinds of falsehood must be denounced. Doesn't matter if are the real children. "My daughter, I must somebody feels bad, because by telling do this for my son, my father, my mother". that you are saving them and not harming Two types of attachments are there, one through (e) 'Moha-involvement into that. them. But must be told in a correct way, not in frivolous way. In a very persuasive That you want to do this for them, that for way, you must tell them that this is wrong. them want to give them property, have

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue :1&2 Jan. & Feb. 2004 33 insurance for them and every sort of thing. most beautiful person-isthe extremely loving person, is love. Look at the flowers, And another could be the other way, they are detached. They are dying as we have here. You hate your father, you hate your mother. You hate everyone.-Both tomorrow, they are not going to live but things are just the same. So, Detachment every minute they live, they are emitting must be developed. The Detachment is fragrance to you. The trees are not that you are your father, you are your attached to anything; they will die tomorrow, doesn't matter. But if anybody comes to mother, you are everything. Only your spirit is everything to you, only your spirit you them, they give shadow, they give fruits. attachment means death of love, complete have to enjoy, then the detachment comes from them, then you really do good to them, death of love is attachment. For example, because, by detaching you see the complete vision about them and about necessary parts, all the flowers, all the in a tree, say the sap rises, goes to all .the what is to be done. For example, people fruits, then goes back to Mother Earth. It is not attached to anyone, Supposing, have attachment with some crazes. Human beings always become crazy the sap goes and gets attached into one about something. I mean it can be fruit. What will happen? The fruit will die anything. One ħas to under- stand that and the tree will die. Detachment gives you the movement of your love circulation of there should be only one craze, that is, to your love. be settled, absolutely settled in your "spirit. For things now. Things have no All other crazes will disappear because is the greatest joy giving thing. That's the value uniess and until there are emotions most nourishing thing, that's the most behind it. For example the sari, I am wearing today, was bought for Guru Day, beautiful thing. Guru Purnima. But they had no Sari. The So, all the other things fall off, you enjoy only that which is the Source of all other day, they wanted to have Sari for Puja. Then I said if you insist I may have, enjoyment. You get yourself attached to but I wore it today just to say that this was your spirit, and detachment. Starts bought with that devotion, that love that on working. Sometimes detachment is taken as a licence for becoming dry to others, Guru Day, Mother would like to wear which is absurd. This is a human quality something of a lighter shade; white-the colour of silk, to make everything dirty which is beautiful. complete pure detachment. But in white all the colours Actually, a person who is detached is the

 Jan. & Feb. 2004 134 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue 1 & 2 are mixed, then only it becomes white-such one has to wear those dresses to announce to the world because if you have a balance and unity it is. It should be that you should become white and whiter than to work in a short time then you have to take to that intensive behavior like Christ, snow. Detachment is purity, is innocence. you can say or Adishankaracharya. All these innocence is such a light, light that really people had a very very short life. In that blinds you to all that is filthy. You would not even know that a person has come with short Ilife they had to achieve such a bad intentions. A person comes to you, tremendous task that they had to actually comes to steal. You will say, 'come along, take a military uniform just to avoid what do you want'. You will offer him tea problems, Not to impress others. Now-a- and all that, then, he says,. "I have come days people do it just to impress others that to rob you". "Alright rob me, if you want they are detached and do just the things to", So he might not rob you at all. That is opposite to it. So, we understand that first work is not to harm anyone-Ahimsa. Not to what is innocence, which one may develop, only through Detachment. kill anyone. That does not mean that you Detachment is of. Do not allow your do not have to eat meat and fish and all attention to get involved into something, that. That is all nonsense. Of course you should not hanker after food, no doubt about even rituals of anything. Say, now we have not washed Mataji's Feet, alright, it does it. You do not kill anyone means, you do not matter. You love Me. Alright. If some not kill a human being. Thou shall not kill. mistakes may be committed what does it So first thing is not to harm anyone. Second is to know that you have matter? If you see in the abstract plane, It's love. This is just a step forward, like found the TRUTH and give the testimony somebody ran very fast and fell down of the TRUTH. Third is the Detachment, the way, I before reaching Me and says, "Mother, Sorry, I fell down before reaching you, I have told you about Detachment. Not to should not have done that. But, Mother get attached to any one person because see, how I prostrated before you". It's a heis a relation or something; but develop a universal feeling and also not to hate complete poetry-Detachment. anyone. That is a kind of worst attachment. So, one has to develop that So, detachment to be a Guru. And that This word should go away from the mouth detachment does not mean Sanyas of all Sahaja Yogis 'I hate'. It is called as or anything like that. Sometimes Dandak, in the statute. You cannot hate

 The Divine Coot Breeze Volume-XVI Issue: 1& 2 35 Jan. & Feb. 2004 relationship, the purity of their relationship anyone, even Rakshasas. Better not hate them. Give them a chance. must be understood . Then only you can Now the fourth statute of the Lord have a very very happy married life which is, to lead a moral life. These Statutes were is the basis. "Thou shall not commit given by all the Gurus. Take them from adultery," Christ has said (Perhaps he Soorates onwards. Moses, Ibrahim, knew the modern people as they would be using their brains for this)., He said, "Thou Dattatreya, Janaka, upto say Nanak, Mohammed Sahib and take up to the point shall not have adulterous eyes". What a when it was about hundred years back at vision, in those days to think. Even, I could not understand it when I was in India. Only the most-was Sainath. All of them have after said that you have to lead a Moral life. None coming here I could see, what it of them had said that you do not get could mean. It is a possession on the married, that you should not talk to your eyes-Possession. It is a joyless, useless wife or you should have no relationship behavior. Attention is frittered away with your wife. All this is nonsense. Lead a completely. There is no dignity. 'Eyes moral life. When you are young and not should be steady. If you look at somebody married, keep your eyes on the ground, steadily, he should know that you have Mother Earth gives you that innocence. Sahaja Yoga in you. With love, with respect, Most of the confusions and problems, with dignity. Not staring at people, which is just playing in the hands of these specially in the Western life have come because they have thrown morality to the possessions. The whole society is sea and to accept morality as the very possessed. All the Satanic forces have basis of society is very difficult for them. been let loose, I think and the way the It is complete reversion. But you have to people are possessed, they cannot see do it, you have to turn the whole wheel through these things. They are supposed to be Christians. Attention is to be looked back. So many things were done in the beginning of the society to establish these after. That is the most important thing. Because attention is the one which is going pure relationships. There are laws which act, just as chemical laws are there, to be enlightened. So, we have to know what morality physical laws are there in chemistry and is. Let people laugh and say that these are physics. There are human laws which one should understand, the relationship goodie-goodies or this sort of thing. We between each other. The sublimity of their are proud and not ashamed of being

 The Divine Coal Breeze Volume-XVI Issue 1& 2 Jan. & Feb. 2004 36 righteous people. This is a very important part-of righteousness. Those who do not of that-it is like mixing of darkness with light. Miserliness is not allowed in Sahaja follow this, will lose their vibrations very Yoga. Anybody, whose mind goes on how fast. Then for a Guru, He should not much money I can save, how much labour accumulate things; he should not have can I save-there are many labour saving much possessions, If he has possessions devices, and money-saving devices-and also cheating others or making money out they should be just what he needs. A Guru must give away his possessions. He of few things here and there and all such should not have stamp-collection and all things are against Sahaja Yoga. They will such kinds of collections. Whatever things pull you down. Enjoy your generosity. How are useful and beautiful, which give many times must I have told you about happiness and joy to others, to their eyes, Generosity. I remember; once I wanted to such things must be collected. He should give a sari that I had from abroad. You see, in India, the people like that kind of a sari have such things which give symbolic very much, although I do not understand importance to his life, very symbolic, which why they like this nylon sort of sari. A lady suggest that he is a Dharmic person. He should not have things that are symbolic said, "I have not got a sari from abroad and I would like to have one imported sari". of Adharmikta, of irreligious life. Everything that he has or wears or shows should be I had only one such sari left with me representative of his Dharmikta. I do not because I am quite good at giving away. Sol told one of my niece-in-laws that I want know the situation here but in India, when to give away this sari to her. On a holy day, we were young we were not allowed to listen to all kinds of music. Not allowed, we can give it to elders and so I will give it just not allowed to see all sort of filthy to her. She said, "You have only one left things, filthy documentaries etc. Anything now, why do you want to give away even that is impure, giving bad vibrations that. You have given away all you had". I should not be possessed. Even whatever said, "Now, I feel like giving. I will give it away". And we were discussing this in the you have, you should think whom you can kitchen andI said, "why do you tell me, I give this. So, it means you should have am not going to take advice on this point". possessions to express your generosity. Sahaja Yogi has to be generous like the And at that time, the bell rang and a sea. A miserly Sahaja Yogi-I cannot think gentleman came. He had brought three

 Jan. & Feb. 2004 37 The Divine Col Breeze Volume-XVI Issue: 18 2 things you win over as if the vibrations flow saris for me from Africa and one of them through those things and work out for those as one I had. was exactly the same Because I had given some silk saris to people. Then, for a Sahaja Yogi it is this lady when she was going to Africa, she thought she could send me some important to use things which are more saris, and she sent me these saris. You natural in their character. Give up are just standing in the centre; from one artificiality and be more natural. I do not door it comes and from the other it goes. mean that take out the roots and eat them It is nice to see all that or you eat the fish raw. I do not mean that. movement. It is Always you must avoid going too far with very interesting. Apart from that the way you give it, the things. But try to lead a life which is the emotional side of it is so beautiful, you more natural. Natural, in the sense that cannot imagine it. I met a lady after say people know that there is no vanity about thirty years of her married life in London, you. Some people can be the other way suddenly and she said, "Oh what a round. You see, they will dress up like a coincidence". I said, "why"?. She said, "| tramp, just to attract more attention. I mean am wearing the same pearl necklace you there can be both ways. Then I find some had given me on my wedding day today, people colouring their hair and all that. So and I should meet you". The whole thing, you have to be a natural person; very the whole drama changed with the natural in your behavior. It can mean anything absurd also to some people who meeting. It is how you give even a small thing It is the greatest art of giving that do not use their wisdom. Wisdom is very important in Sahaja Yoga, that you have to one has to learn in Sahaja Yoga. Give up keep intact all the time. Natural means you the mundane type of things, like if you go to somebody's birthday, you send a card, must wear natural dresses, which are 'thank you, very much'. Make it a more suitable to you,for example in this climate deeper significant thing. Let us see how there is no use to wear dress like Rama used to wear. He will not wear anything on you develop your symbols of love. When you have these things of vibrations and you the top, there was no need, You have to wear the dress of whatever country you will give it to a Sahaja Yogi, he will know what it is. Blever lack in generosity belong; whatever suits the occasion. Whatever you think is dignified and good. specially among Sahaja Yogis. Gradually, It speaks for your more elegance and your you will be amazed how through small

 38 Jan. & Feb. 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI issue : 182 normal is very important in Şahaja Yoga. personality. Whatever suits you, you Then we have to know that Sahaja should wear, not like all the people wearing moss colour dress, the great suit, a Yogis have to get over all kinds of horrible looking and making clowns out of discriminations and identifications them. No clownish things are necessary, according to races, colour and different no dandy stuff is necessary. Simple, religions in which you are born. As a beautiful dresses should be worn which Christian, you don't belong to a Church, give you dignity. Actually in the East, people you are not born in a Church. Thank God, believe that God has given you a beautiful otherwise all the spirits there will capture body and it is to be adorned with the beauty you, immediately. But these identifications of what human beings have created, just will linger on. To accept anything new, you have to be reborn and you are reborn now. to respect It, just to worship your body. For example, in India women wear their Now, you are Dharamatita means you need saris and saris are expressive of their not follow any particular type of religion. moods and expression of their worship of You are open to all religions and the their bodies, because you must respect essences of all religions you have to take. You have not to denounce any religion or your body. Dresses should be such that they should be for utility as well as dignity. insult any religious incarnation at any time, it is a sin. It is a great sin in Sahaja Yoga There is no need to have uniform clothes for Sahaja Yogis at all. I don't like it. There and you know who they are. There should be no racial understanding of one self. You should be variety as nature is. Everyone should look a different person. For Puja could be Chinese or of any group. You etc. all can wear something similar, it could be anything. As long as we are doesn't matter where your attention need human beings, we should know that we not be on the variety. But outside, you laugh the same way, we smile the same should be normal person. You are all way, we hold the same way. This is all householders, nobody has to renounce conditioning in our mind of this society that something. For you people, I don't even are touchables some are some untouchable. This is in our Indian advise to put the red mark when walking on the street. You should be normal Community, horrible. Brahmanism of India has ruined India completely and you learn person, not to be pointed out. You need not from for example, who was Vyasa, the one be dressed absurdly or in funny way but in a normal way as others wear. To be who wrote Geeta; who was he? He was

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue: 1&2 39 Jan. & Feb. 2004 illegitimate son of a fisherwoman. That is tempered by this Society, which teaches why deliberately he was born like that. All you how to smoke cigar and how to have the Brahmins who read Geeta, ask them your lager morning till evening. All this who was Vyasa? Brahims are those who training and conditioning has to be thrown are realised souls and for realised souls, away just like filth and see that God has there is nothing like such non-sensical created all of you as his own children. It is things like where and in what caste or such a beautiful thing. Why you want to community you are born. With all education make it with these ugly ideas. All this ugliness of "I like or dislike" is nonsense. and everything in the West, we find this nonsense of Racialism, I just can't Only there should be one word "I Love". understand. If somebody is fair or dark, Forget every thing. There is no need to after all God had to make variety, in colour, remember what British did to Indians or in every way. Who told you that you are Germans did to Jews. Forget everything. the most handsome people going round. Those people who did it are dead and May be for some markets here or in finished. We are different people, we are saints. This is from the Statutes I have told Hollywood, it may fit but in the kingdom of God, all these 'so called' handsome people, you, which you have to imbibe. will be denied entry-marrying seven But, today, I authorise you to be the husbands and all sort of things. They will Gurus, so that through your own character all be put in Hell. The beauty is of the and through own personality, the way you heart and not of the face, that shows and practice Sahaja Yoga in your own life and shines. May be, people are a little bit aware manifest the light, others will follow you. And of it,; that is why they go and tan the faces. that you will establish the statutes of the I do not know. They are quite aware but lord in their hearts and emancipate them. there is too much "Showing-Off" they are Give them their salvation, because you doing, Some people like black hair others have got, your salvation. You are the like red hair, I mean there have to be all channels, without the channels this all pervading power cannot work out. That's types of hair, why do you like a particular type of hair; this I cannot understand. There the system. If you see the Sun, its light is nothing like or dislike. What God has spreads through it's rays, from your heart created is all beautiful, who are you to the blood flows through arteries, they judge that I like or dislike, 'l who is this 'l', become smaller and smaller. You are the you see, is Mr. Ego, which is being arteries which is going to flow this blood of

 The Divine Cool Breeze Voluma-XVI Issue :1& 2 40 Jan, & Feb. 2004 behaves in a very normal way and my love to all the people. If arteries are broken the blood will not reach the people. sometimes you are outwitted. But you see That is why you are so important. The how in small things also, She behaves. bigger you become, the bigger the arteries How Her character is expressed, how Her become. Then you encompass more Love is expressed. Try to remember Her forgiveness. Then you should know that people, by that you are more responsible. Guru must have the dignity. Guru means you have the Guru that many people must you! the weight, is the Gravity, Gurutwa have desired to have, who is the source of all Gurus. It is the ardent desire of even means gravity. You must have the gravity Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesha to have a by your weight, means the weight of your character, weight of your dignity, weight of Guru like that. They must be all jealous of your behavior, weight of your faith; and your you. But this Guru is very elusive, so to You become Guru not improve your void, say that" Mother you are through light. frivolousness and vanity. Cheapness, our Guru". Because of this elusiveness, that fear or that awe, that respect which is vulgar language, cheap jokes, anger and necessary, for the Guru is not established. temper-all must be avoided completely. Weild the weight of your sweetness of your Unless and until you develop that awe, tongue, of the dignity, which will attract complete awe within you, your Guru people just like the flower which is loaded principle will not be established. No liberty is to be taken. I am telling you Myself butI with nectar, attract the bees from all over. In the same way you will be attracting am extremely elusive; next moment I make people. Be proud of that, be very very you laugh and forget about it, because I proud of that and have sympathies for am testing your freedom to do it- Complete freedom. I play with you in such others and care for others. a manner that you will be forgetting every Now, in shortI have to tell you how that I am your Guru, every you have to do it yourself. You have to work moment out your void clearly. First of all you have to know that void catches when you had a So first of all you must find about your own Guru, establish Her in your heart. wrong type of a Guru. You must know about your Guru entirely. Try to find out the character of your Guru. Rather difficult otherwise, I must say, wish I had one like I mean you have a wonderful 'Guru' because your Guru is very elusive. She is that myself. And She is desireless and Mahamaya; not easy to find out. She sinless, absolutely sinless. Whatever I do

 Jan. & Feb. 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze Volumie-XVI Issue 1 & 2 it is not a sin for me. I can kill anyone and the source of all the Shaktis - of all powers, do whatever intrigue or anything. I really so you can have all the powers from me, tell you, that's a fact. Do anything, I am whatever you like. I am desireless but above sin but I see to it that I do not do whatever desires you have will be fulfilled. Even about Me, you have to desire, look at anything like that in your presence, so that you do not get one of these things, because that how much I am bound by you. Unless and until you desire My good health, I will that is my quality. You have a very supreme have bad health. It is to that extent. But to Guru, no doubt, but still you must know that those powers of supremacy you don't Me, what it is bad health and good health. have. I am above all these things. I do not Under these beautiful conditions you should really prosper so well. There should know what temptations are, nothing, I be no problems for you to be Gurus. mean I do. Now, the void is to be established. "Whatever I like, it is all my Whim. But despite that I have made myseif very First of all you must know your Guru and normal because I must appear before you She is on every chakra. Imagine what in such a manner that you understand tremendous Guru you have. With that you feel the confidence and because of such what is the Statutes. For me there are no Statutes. I make these Statutes. Because tremendous Guru everybody is getting of you I do all these things and teach you Realization so easily. If you go to a rich man for alms, he is not going to give two small things, because you are still children. In the same way you must pies only. Because She is so powerful remember that when you are talking to you are getting your powers just like that. other people about Sahaja Yoga, So you have to feel very happy about it remember that they will see you all the time extremely happy and beautiful that you have At least, those who have these powers. and try to understand how far you are in it. been in Sahaja Yoga will know it for certain. As I understand you, you to try Those who have come to my lecture for understand them. As I love you, you try to love them I definitely love you, no doubt the first time will be little puzzled. All of you know for definite what it is. but I am Nirmala-1 am beyond love. So, to understand for your own Different state altogether. Under these cięcumstances you Guru-power, you first know who is your Guru-Sakshat Adishakti. Oh God? it is too are much better off because no Guru ever goes to that extent. Apart from that I am much. Then establish your void. A Guru

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue 182 Jan & Feb. 2004 42 such heights. does not bend his head before anybody they have achieved else, specially My disciples; except for Recognise them, Respect them. You will mothers, sisters and you see in some establish your Guru-tatwa. Imbibe all the Statutes within you, relationship, if it is, so you bow to that. But they do not bow to anybody else. be proud about them. Don't be misguided Secondly, you must know that your by what the people are talking. We are Guru has been the Mother of very great going to pull the whole multitudes towards people. The thought of that itself should ourselves. First of all let us establish our establish your Guru tatwa (Guru-principle). weight, the Gravity. As Mother Earth keeps What tremendous sons I have had! What everybody pulling towards earth, we will be great personalities! No words can pulling all of them to ourselves. describe and so many of them, one after Today, all of you must, within another and you are in the same tradition! yourself to your SPIRIT, promise that you My disciples! Keep them as your ideals. Try to follow them. Read about them, will be a Guru worthy of your Mother. understand them what they have said, how May God bless you!

 Instruction of Shri Mataji to all Sahaja Yogis. (Sahaja Yoga keeps away physical and other disorders) |1 is necessary to be always alert gives others great pleasure to fall on Her feet, as regards the chakras. They should be She may find it troublesome due to 'Badhas' always kept clear of the external 'badhas' and in their beings. ' It is customary in India, for catches. Regular salt water bath shall help the young to serve the elders by pressing ensure this. More often than not, ingress of their feet who in turn bless them. This badhas' which cause physical and other courtesy is often extended to the Mother ailments, is through eyes and food. Special but, being different from others, She does not need it. If she asks someone to do so, it care in this regard is always advisable. Deities are awake when the chakras are is for clearing the chakras of that person and open and help Sahaja Yogis. Taking not for Her personal pleasure. All should 'Bandhana' before going to bed also protects therefore make it a point not to touch Her being without Her permission. from 'badhas'. Using symbolic gestures of hands to clear own chakras, raising the Kundalini, A devotee always likes to please his deity. Our Mother is so kind that She is pleased to see Her children happy and getting into Bandhana, raising left or right side to correct imbalance should be desisted from progressing well in Sahaja Yoga. She visits when we are among non-Sahaja-Yogi different places and countries to meet them and solve their problems. They should be audiences. All this could be done equally equally responsive and show more progress effectively with the attention. It serves no every time She meets them, instead of telling useful purpose to throng the gate of the hall Her the problems. Undoubtedly, by practising to receive the Mother at the place of Her Her teachings Sahaja Yogis will be the discourse. Preferably all should be, seated before Her arrival and respectfully stand up happiest people in the world. It is natural to feel love for the Mother. as she enters the hall and receive Her with Silence is the best expression of it, as She folded hands. It is imperative to seek Her understands the subtlest things from the permission before garlanding. Generally She heart of hearts. Rushing forward to touch Her allows it soon after the arrival when She also enquires about the welfare of the people. feet without permission, attempting to attract. Problems if any should be explained briefly Her attention, speaking unasked, meeting Her at Her residence are undesirable at this time. If She does not tell the solution to any problem, immediately it should not be insisted upon. Her silence indicates that She manners of expressing this love. Our Divine Mother is the quintessence of purity. While it

 Jan. & Feb. 2004 44 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue 1& 2 has noted the problem and a solution is books and adopting Her teachings sincerely, it is leaving all the problems to Her instead of soon to follow. solving, them through ego. An easy way to and modesty Her easy surrender is to emulate Her way of life and approachability and respectul treatment to Her qualities. all tend to be misunderstood. It is necessary In the moments of temptation to observe all decorum and protocol in Her provocation, or tension or depression, one presence and be humble, respectful, attentitive and responsive to Her. All deities can always ask aneself, "Would the Mother behave as I am doing?" Remembering Her always attend to Her and do not tolerate even the slightest disrespect to Her. They may and thinking what she would do in the circumstances, should be a guiding force and show some restraint in Her presence out of a great help in keeping away negative forces. modesty and love for Her but beyond a For the twice-borns life is a constant certain limit they may act, in which case punishments is in ascapable capable. All struggle with the negativity, assisted by their personal discussion should end as soon own ego and super ego, which may confront them. Negativity maybe inherent; existing as she enters the hall and should never be done in Her presence. Disturbance in Her within us in the subtlest form accumulated as a result of past Karmas, not only of this speech must be avoided. She does not need life but also previous ones. Alternatively we may come across external negativity In daily any explanation suggestions or comments. Devotion is not possible without surrender. Ego and Super ego are the life. Inner negativity may identify itself with obstacles to surrender. A western Sahara outer negativity, at an opnortune moment and Yogi truely says "I look at my ego and smile, What trick will you not try to keep me from if not checked may neutralise all the good myself? Surrendering ego and superego at influence of the Mother. It is therefore the Lotus Feet of the Mother is an essential essential thal after realisation, no one should go to any of the negative gurus, or ricks read step towards self-realisation. Surrendering their literature. It is better to abstain from the is accepting-that the Mother is supreme and the creatrix of the universe, that she discussions on negativity and mixing with Vibrations should be negative people. knows what is best for us; that every spoken word of Hers is pranava manifest. checked before entering a temple. Surrendering is forgetting past experiences, The Divine Mother should have a Gurus and knowledge gained from reading place in our hearts. Always remembering Her

 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue: 1 & 2 Jan. & Feb. 2004. 45 or maintaining thoughtlessness will cultivate Notwithstanding all that has been said, an attitude of detachment towards mundane seeds of Sahaja Yoga sown by the Mother will germinate and grow into big trees only in affairs. Daily shoe beating (or chappal beating) of one's own name can remove the proper environments. The Mother protects them by Her All Pervading Powers, but the subtle negativity. Bandhana to internal negative people and shoe beating of their individuals have to provide requisite environments, They have to make judicious names will keep them away and may even use of the freedom of choice given to them improve them. Ignoring other's mistakes and follies instead of criticising them or and persevere along the path shown by the complaining against them promotes Mother. Almighty God is waiting to receive magnanimity. Efforts to inculcate these them. Those who cannot reach Him will have qualities may be very helpful. only themselves to blame. Dearest Brothers and Sisters of India Our stay in India is now drawing to an end and it has been such a rich and deep experience for us all, we have so much to thank you all for. We thank you for the warmth of your hospitality, your love and your patience. We will be returning horme with such respect and love for Mother India and her people. For most of us it was our first meeting with our Mother and what a perfect back drop India has been for this great occasion! We thank Mataji, our Mother with all our hearts for the Joy and learning of the past two months and we thank you too for your great generosity, and for all that you have done to make us so welcomed and so at home. With our deepest love and gratitude. Jai Mataji An Australian Sahaja Yogini New Delhi, February-1981

 DEVOTION ALL Sahaja Yogis become twice- to the respective chakra. Devotion to the borns when they get Realisation from the Mother amounts to devotion to all Gods. Devotion has many aspects, some who can lead them to salvation because are gross and some subtle. It may not be she is one with Primordial Father Shiva- correct to consider one to be better than 'Shaktaikya - roopini'. Sahaja yogis have a another, as all are necessary in the interest glimpse of the ultimate slage of the of spiritual progress. Meditation in the evolutionary process, When they go into eariy hours of morning is of immense the thoughtless blissful awareness at Her importance. Before leaving the bed, one should bow with great regards to goal and depending upon physical and the Mother Earth. It may be useful to mental conditions, may have a long way meditate in the bed itself for someone to go. Having got this never-before- before leaving the bed, but after cleaning experienced, Realisation from the Mother, oneself one should meditate before the the conviction should be firm in mind that Mother's photograph. 'Bandhan' to self and devotion to the Mother and meditating as to the seat should be done before starting per Her instructions, is the only way to the meditation. Bow before the Mother in Divine Mother. It is only the Divine Mother lotus feet. Each one therefore knows the great reverence and beseech Her The Mother's powers are all forgiveness for wrong doings and pervading and distance cannot inhibit the blessings for becoming Her worthy child spiritual communication between Sahaja The Pooja should be performed after bath Yogis and the Mother; collective using good quality material and a clean consciousness is Her precious gift to cloth. It is advisable to sit in meditation after them. Her presence can always be felt Pooja also, for some time, In the evening through vibratory awareness. She knows perform 'Aarti' and meditate. Attending the the activities of each of Her sons and programmes of collective meditation in a daughters through Her all pervading centre once a week is necessary for well- salvation. powers, takes care of their well being, being and progress. prevents and corrects the disorders in their systems and keeps raising External and internal purity are of their utmost importance. However going to an Kundalinis. Her response to their call is extreme in respect of superficial always assured. She is keeping Her cleanliness is not desirable as it may promise of "Yogakshemam Vahamyaham'. detract the attention from via media. It is incorrect to assume that God Nevertheless, salt water treatment before and the Mother are different. All Gods fully going to bed, that is, meditating with feet manifest themselves within Her and they dipped in lukewarm water with salt (in front do not like to be distinguished from Her. of the Mother's photograph) should be Any such notion is bound to cause damage taken regularly. It is the specific.

 Jan. & Feb. 2004 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue : 18 2 example of surrender and love. And we have Letters felt the reflection of your devotion on your own Zurich, 10th February behaviour, how wise you are, how confident you are, how you begin to master the intensity My dear sisters and brothers, of the present! Here in the West we see the future, we foresee, we plan and our Back to Europe, back to the cold, the speedometer goes mad. We do not have snow and the wind. But it is impossible for time to realise the beauty of the present and us to forget your evershining sun, your it is only through the present that we can enjoy unforgettable sunsets, the light and the our Mother's creation. brightness of your country. Colourful We have seen you for the first time, countrysides, unspoiled villages, the and very soon we felt that you have resided freshness to your atmosphere and the daily in our hearts for ages and ages and in the life of all the people we have met have invited first acquaintance we have recognised you us to peace and deeper meditation. And the as our brothers and sisters, out of joy and Sahaja Yogis we have seen have led us to eager to share it with all of us. We had just to discover the inner joy of the inhabitants of receive and let us be pushed by this dynamics your blessed country. of affection. Our greatest experience is that We know that we have got, in the we have seen for the first time intermediates West a bad habit to thank for everything. So between our Beloved Mother and us, we do not let speak our mind but our hearts. Through your awareness you understand We would try, through this letter to express much more and you discover much more on behalf of all the Western Sahaja Yogis easily the Divine Beauty of The Adi Shakti, that you have earned so much our gratitude because you feel much more and you for the way you have welcomed us in your absorb through your acting spirit and not great country, for the way you have given through a tired mind. At the same time your us so much love, joy and brotherhood. ego is deflated and your humility greater. You, all of you, have been so sweet Thanks to your behaviour we see Mother with us that really we could see how our beloved Mother acted through your smiles, higher and higher, more Divine and more powerful, because we see how you behave attitudes and generosity. Our heart is filled with Her with full attention, respect, devotion with thankfulness and admiration. Your and adoration. You speak to Her when She devotion to our Mother has been a perfect speaks to you and you would never begin to

 Jan. & Feb. 2004 The Divine Coal Breeze Volume-XVI issue 1& 2 48 speak at once, or interrupt Her. You respect and deeper. the protocol. May we follow your We all pray the Creator of this universe and we make altogether this straightfowardness and your enthusiasm in order to glorify the one who is worthy of being absolute promise that we shall see only the seen and understood only by our spirit. beauty which is sparkling in us, we shall love each other with more intensity remembering It was a great time where the West and the East dissolved in our Mother's love, how much our Mother loves us, we shall when we discovered our own beauty share among us the feeling of belonging to enlightened by God and learned how to the children of God. Let us put ourselves under Mother's respect each other and how to show affection to each other. This feeling of protection, let us meet again and again under togetherness and communicative love, the intensity of Mother's persence and let us bestowed by our beloved Mother is our goal glorify Her all together all the time because it and achievment. It is through this circulation is only through Her Grace that we were able, of love and joy among us that the collective my dear brothers and sisters, to discover being manifests more and more, that your own beauty and the sparkling of your Mother's divinity penetrates into us deeper joyful spirit. Much Much love and Jai Shri Mataji Ameau, Maria-Amelia, Marie-Laure, Ibe Gregoire, Catherine, Christine Brothers and Sisters of India With open amms and open hearts you welcomed us from the West. With Mother's love and grace wo have been invited and your giving of love has showed us much more about the beauty of life. The past weeks have been filled with many experiences. From the mass realization in Kadus to the making of a film twenty four storeys up in Bombay. You have given us so much from your beautiful hearts and taught us the love, missing from our society. Thank you for it all and thank you dear Mother for making it possible. Jai Shri Mataji Phillip.



----------------------

2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-0.txt 
 T Divine Cool Breeze
The
00
Volume: XVI Issue: 1 & 2
January February, 2004
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Diwali Puja - Los Angeles : 9th Nov. 2003
3
3
Shri Krishna Puja - Pune : 9th August, 2003
10
THE
Shri Ganseh Puja - Cabella Ligure: 13.9.2003
13
Shri Mataji's Pravachan 20.1.1975
22
Shri Mataji's Advice (Brighton, U.K. 15 Nov. 1979)
29
Ego and Super Ego
Shri Mataji's Advice (Guru Purnima-London) 29th July, 1980
30
43
Instruction of Mother to all Sahaj Yogis: Letter
46
Devotion
47
Letters
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Diwali Puja - 2003
Рија
"The lights of your heart together our destiny is also guided and looked after.
you are already blessed people, there is
make a greater light for the world to move
in a proper direction. It's a day of great joy, no doubt about it. And we should not worry
and those who join in this, are spreading
about small things and small matters. It will
all work out very well, you will see. if you
also great joy. But the problems are there,
just leave it to your destiny, which is very
as they say, but for us there is no problem
because there is no darkness. We don't high, very great in this your own destiny
see any darkness anywhere, we see lights, you will go very far. This is the
promise of Diwali to you all, that
you will reach the highest and
the noblest way of life. Every
and lights, and lights. Then what is the thing
missing? Missing is our sincerity. We have
to be very sincere with ourselves, because
word I say will be there to prove
it is not just a borrowed love or borrowed
joy, but it is from within the source, it's what I say is there Whatever
flowing and flowing and flowing. So that is petty problems you have, they'll
all be washed off. All these are
to be awakened, and that love should
the messages from the Divine,
flow, and our small petty things like
jealousies and competitions and all those you don't have to worry about
things which spoil us must be washed petty things, about money, about
away. And it can be washed if your heart jobs. That's not your job. Your
destiny will work it out. You have
a promise that you'll be looked
after. I hope you believe in that
is full of love. Today is a day of spreading
that light of love, so that everybody feels
enlightened and happy and forgets these
promise and are joyous in the
petty problems. I am happy that you have
highest way. I bless you all from my
been able to get some hall, it's all luck that
we got it, people were so much worried heart, all of you, for a very happy and
about getting a hall. But it had just prosperous Diwali.
Thank you very much.
happened, so you should know also that
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Shri Krishna Puja Talk
August 9h, 2003, Pune, India
(TRANSLATED)
Now we have to realize that Sahaja that we should become like small children.
Yoga has spread a lot and in all corners of We should see the comforting shade of the
the world people respect Sahaja Yoga, but
sweet nature of a child. Do we taik like a
until and unless Sahaja Yoga is completely
child? What is the quality within us that we
become like a child?
manifested within us, the people who
respect Sahaja Yoga will not continue to
Now child means purity, innocence.
do so. That is why it is essential that we With this innocence we have to look
look within ourselves. The nature of Shri towards ourselves and cover ourselves
Krishna is that we look within and see what
with it. This innocence is very loveable. If
are the things that put us in trouble. We you look at children and the love you feel
should find that out. We should look towards them is because they are
towards ourselves, within ourselves and innocent. They don't know cleverness:
that is not such a difficult thing.
don't feel their importance, nothing at all.
When we want to see our face, we What do they know? They know that all
look in the mirror. Similarly, when we need these people are related to us. They are
our brothers, sisters and everything. But
to see our spirit, we should find out how to
see it within us. Many Sahaja Yogis have how do they know this? That is the
question. In the same way that these
asked Me, "Mother, how do we see what is
within us and how we are doing?." For that
children know, we have forgotten that we
it is necessary that we ourselves should
are like an innocent child and that we have
become very humble. If we lack humility,
innocence within us.
we will be clouded by our own thoughts.
There are many Sahaja Yogis who
So in the life of Shri Krishna, first it
come and think that they will show their
was shown that he was just like a small cleverness and prove themselves to
child. Absolutely like an infant. Not knowing
Mother. What is the need to prove anything
anything. He did not think anything of to Me? I already know everything. So what
himself. He had his mother and he wanted
you should do is look towards yourself and
with the support of his mother. We
recognize your innocence. Where is it and
to
grow
should also iook inside of ourselves and
how is it doing? And we should think how
realize that we are like a small child as joyful it is
well. Shri Krishna has said this repeatedly.
Now the thing about Shri Krishna is
this only. He was absolutely simple as a
Also, Jesus Christ has said the same thing
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Jan, & Feb. 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue:182
happening in Sahaja Yogis, because inside
child and when He grew up He explained
The Gita, which is very deep. How did it the kundalini awakens and shows all the
paths.
happen that the human beings grew in it?
Now the remaining thing is the dirt
In the same way we can grow in Sahaja
Yoga. We have found it but still have not that is within, how to fix that. First and
foremost the way we look at the defects of
progressed in it. And to progress we need
others should be changed because the
to leave the bad things behind. First of all
same defects exist within us also. So
we need to have a childlike temperament.
instead of looking at the defects of others,
Now if we say to somebody that you should
we should see what are the defects within
become childlike, it is a very difficult thing
us. If we can learn to see this, then a lot of
to do. We cannot just leave whatever we
are and become childlike. But living with things would become all right automatically.
The thing with saints and sages is that they
children, having respect for them, listening
see their own defects and they think about
to how they talk, can make a big difference
how they became like that. They think, "Why
and we change all the things within us.
So first of all we have to know that
do I say such harsh things? Why do I lie
like this?" So this is a flow of watching
within us, as we grew up, a lot of bad things
oneself. Most of the time we do not flow
have gone in. How should we remove
those bad things? What are the kinds of with that. We think we are separate from
that. But it is not like that. If we understand
bad things that have gotten into us? If we
that there is this flow within us that takes
think about it and put attention on it, then
us to such paths where we cannot even
we can correct it. We have to put attention
on things like, when we talk to somebody
recognize ourselves, then a human being
aggressively, or we want to scold someone
can turn inwards.
Now just to say that you go within
or we keep thinking about how to correct
somebody else. When our attention goes yourself, meditate, take out these things
on other people then we get removed from
from within, is very easy. But that will not
our own self, because we have to do. That is why we have to meditate and
ourselves be all right. That is why it is no constantly work towards it. And we have
ways that we know. Like to meditate on Shri
use thinking about other people. So, first
of all we should look at ourselves only, we
Krishna. By meditating on Shri Krishna we
should see ourselves. But all of that is get cleansed from within. But when we
happening, I have told about it and it is meditate on Shri Krishna we think about
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Jan. & Feb. 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue : 1 & 2
This attention is never on the self
the defects of others. If we want to look at
the defects of Shri Krishna we can see that but on the defects of others. This causes
us to be unsettled and we fail to understand
also, but we cannot see our own defects.
This is too much that we cannot see our that these are our own defects. Why are
own defects but are able to see the defects we looking at the defects of others? By
of Shri Krishna. I have seen a lot of people
doing this, is it going to fix our defects?
They can never be fixed like this. Slowly,
who have written books about what were
as this point is understood, man will stop
the defects in Shri Krishna. What wrong
IS
things did He do. How He should have focusing on the defects of others. Looking
lived? And they don't know about at his own defects will amaze him and
themselves. But even when they think realizing how many devils he has
harboured within himself. Within our mind
about themselves, and look at themselves,
it is never in a way that this defect exists
we keep thinking such dirty things.
When this cleansing starts, man, in
within and it should go away. They can keep
a way, assumes a special form. He gets
on discussing about the defects of others.
special powers and with those powers he
The only thing we have to see is what are
can do many things. This happens not to
the defects that we have within ourselves.
I do not believe that there is a
boost his ego, but so that he gets cleansed.
greater yogi than Shri Krishna, because When we start getting cleansed like this,
He showed us the way to look at the we have achieved our goal. Therefore, by
mistakes within ourselves, the defects looking at our own defects, we start
cleansing ourselves and leave the defects
within ourselves. This is a very big thing.
He said it, but people who actually do it behind.
Now how to do this? Because,
less in number. Mostly we look at
are very
seeing the defect is not a hard thing, but to
the defects of others, because everyone
let go of it, is the hard part. That is why the
remembers them, everyone knows them.
way to see the defect has to be subtle and
But very few people are able to understand
minute, and our attention should be
their own defects. That is why those people
will never be all right. We have to be towards it. A lot can be cleansed like this.
familiar with our own defects and laugh at
The message of today's festival is
ourselves and think that "look at me, what
that we should look within ourselves and
kind of defects I am having within myself'.
see. This is what Shri Krishna has said.
We should think about this.
But people find this hard to do. It doesn't
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Jan. & Feb. 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume:XVI Issue: 18.2
your eyes will become very steady. On your
happen. What is the reason that we are
not able to see ourselves? What is this veil
own you will start understanding yourself.
in between? The veil is of bad things like Actually, the defect lies within us only.
ego etc. They stand up and we are unable
Looking at the defects of others, how can
we fix our own defects? A very simnple
to see the defects that we should see. To
straightforward question is, "If something
see these defects is very essential.
I am very happy that you kept
falls on our sari and we do not remove it,
today's puja. Shri Krishna's Puja takes
and if we abuse or blame someone else, it
place and a lot of people will get cleansed won't just go away, will it?" This much
from within because this is a special
intelligence we all have. But we donot use
that intelligence. And for this
blessing of Shri Krishna. He will do it
you should all
use this intelligence.
Himself, but you have to show a little
interest, an inclination that you want to be
If anyone has not understood this
completely cleansed from within. You you can ask questions, in Marathi also. At
donot know how profound this question is. least you should ask some questions.
To fix this we have to work very hard.
****
Earlier, people would do many
Now see.
physical exercises; listen to the orders of the attention is going inside and we are
their guru. They would do a lot of things pushing it farther but it should happen
but they would never achieve the depth. spontaneously. The attention should have
the habit of going inwards by itself. I know
But you are Sahaja Yogis. It should not be
difficult for you. So now I will only say that
that you have many questions to ask. We
have a lot of confusion within us, there is
you should learn to look into yourselves. It
will be a lot of fun, Till now, it is alright, but
no doubt about it. But the questions are
I do not know what you have started doing.
very subtle. There is no end to it. Always,
You keep a watch on yourself. You will see
there is a question of rising above all this.
Now, people say, "Mother, how can we rise
how this whole thing works and you will be
enjoying it and start laughing at yourself above all this?" Meditation. What to say
and exclaim - 'what to say?' When this about meditation? You have to meditate on
happens, you will start manifesting your ownselves. You have to see your
innocence within you. This is the Bal Leela
ownselves, that, where is your brain going?
And where are you going? Slowly you will
(Childlike playfulness) of Shri Krishna.
Once you get bathed in this innocence get cleansed.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-8.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI issue: 1&2
Jan, & Feb. 2004
Today is a day of great importance. on the right track. When you look at
The incarnation of Shri Krishna has done: yourself in the mirror, you see yourself.
a great deal of cleansing for us and He has
What is the use of seeing others? The
helped us a lot. His coming on the earth trouble with us is, we always like to see
made a lot of difference. The awakening others in the mirror. Then how will you
of Kundalini has also gone smoothly on identify your own faults if you start to see
account of His blessings. Please try to look
others in the mirror?
Sahaja Yogi: How do we protect
at yourselves. You should not be annoyed
with yourselves and you should not be ourselves from the clutches of the false
annoyed with others either. It will be very
gurus?
Shri Mataji: Why did you have to go
joyous. This is the Krishna Puja.
If you have any other questions, to a false guru? (Shri Mataji laughs) You
alright, you can ask Me... What to say....
tell me first, why did you go to a false guru?
Comment from Sahaja Yogi: Everyone is
What attracted you to go to the false guru?
in nirvichar.
How did you go there? You must ask
Shri
Mataji:
Any
yourself this first. Then you -will realise that
other
questions?..a What's the question?...
you ignored the evils of that false guru. That
Sahaja Yogi: Everyone is sitting in is "what you didn't protect yourself from.
Now, in the past I have already given
nirvichar.
lectures on false gurus where I have clearly
Shri Mataji: Come closer.
Sahaja Yogi: How do you attain nirchvichar
talked about their evil doings and how they
take one for a ride. It is their business to
(thoughtlessness) in meditation?
Shri Mataji: In meditation? There is
entrap you all. There are different types of
no vichar (thought) during meditation. Why business which they adopt. Out of that,
should thoughts come in meditation? You
gurus also have a business to entrap you
are not to seek anything during meditation.
and you are trapped. From this, one must
It is only to be felt within. It is you who have
realise which trap we have fallen into. We
to discriminate whether you have realised
have filled our brains with the badhas
this or not during meditation. In meditation, (negativities) of the false gurus. Now if you
first you will come to know your own
can tell me any of those badhas, then I can
mistakes, where you were wrong, and tell you
IN
Sahaja Yogis: inaudible, two or three
where you were right. When you start
voices speaking together.
realising your own mistakes, then you are
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-9.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volumme-XVI Issue 1 & 2
Jan. & Feb. 2004
Shri Mataji: Now if you know one or
had been to many such gurus just to see
two of these badhas, you let me know. The
false gurus' badhas. Now what do these
them and what they do, and how they tempt
and attract people. And with what they
badhas actually do? First they focus their
entrap people.
attention on your pocket, (laughter) Isn't it?
So the first thing I saw was that
As they start doing this, then you must
these people find your own weaknesses,
understand that their intentions are
that what weakness you have. If this
different. But it is all on the gross level. On doesn't work then they put badhas into you.
the subtler level, infact, there are many
The badhas are of various types. Cut of
who wouldn't want to entrap you, but they
these badhas you must first learn to detect
would try to project their own importance.
what type of badhas he has put into you
And for this reason they become gurus. It that you are unable to get rid of. The
is like this, that one projects his greatest badha that they put into you is
importance. So you must watch all this and
Fear. It keeps on frightening you, that 'if you
be critical about it. Then it will forsake you.
leave me, such and such thing will happen
But most of the people absorb their to you. ' This type of fear creeps within
you. It doesn't have much strength in it. But
badhas, their ego, their anger, their
physical health and many more aspects
it keeps on frightening you. When this fear
that you absorb from the guru. Like these
comes, you must say to it, 'yes, I know it '.
With this fear the human beings keep on
gurus, -when they fall sick, their shadow
starts reflecting within you.
going round and round the guru. For that
For this reason, you must analyse
Shri Krishna is there, Who drives out this
yourself and look at yourself, that, -what
fear from everyone. Is it over, or do you
have I received from this guru? This is very
have any other questions?
important. Then when there is a cleansing
Sahaja Yogi: Everyone is in
of yourself, you will see that it benefits you
nirvichar (thoughtlessness)
to a great extent. Why did you go to a guru
Sahaja Yogis: inaudible, two or three
when you were seeking for your own voices speaking together.
spiritual ascent? You went to a guru to
Shri Mataji: Saying that everyone is
know him but you were in turn entrapped.
in vichar (thoughts) now we have to go
This guru is such a guru, and you yourself
should know how to protect yourself from
beyond vichar (thoughts).
Sahaja Yogi reaffirms: No Mother
him. You should stay away from them, I
it's nirvichar (thoughtlessness)
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Jan & Feb. 2004
The Divine Cool Bireeze Volurne-XVI Issue: 1 &2
laughing, that is perfect. One who laughs
Shri Mataji: Nirvichar. How did that
at others, his attention is in another
happen? You have organized such a nice
direction. Again, one who can witness and
puja that I also keep wondering. How is the
laugh at himself, and his own environment
environment? Is it OK? .. Yes, it is peaceful
and aspect, he is perfect.
and calm.. peaceful. .now better.
Eternal Blessings.
A person who can witness himself
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-11.txt 
 SHRI GANESHA PUJA
Cabella Ligure, 13.9.03
Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
(Shri Mataji invites the children and we need not waste our energy with
to come and sit on the stage)
them. This is the trouble of the elderly
Now we are facing little children. people.
They are the ones who are incarnations.
But today when we are sitting here
They are the ones who are going to lead
to worship Shri Ganesha, we should know
humanity into some great advancement.
they are all incarnations of Shri Ganesha
The humanity has to be looked after. They
and they should be given proper attention,
are tomorrow's humanity. And we are proper understanding about themselves. I
find certain amount of children who are
today's. And what are we giving to them
for them to follow? What is their aim in life?
very well behaved, which are very
Very, very difficult to say. But with the spontaneous, and there are some who
Sahaja Yoga they will all go in the proper
have no idea as to what they are doing. So
way, they will behave in a proper way and
it is the duty of the elders to put ideas into
the whole thing will be a different mass of
their heads, to proper understanding about
Sahaja Yogis coming up.
themselves and the self-respect. Same
But it is the duty of bigger Sahaja
thing I would say for the elder Sahaja Yogis
Yogis to look after them; to have better who have to look after their younger
brothers and sisters. In this family of ours
moral standards, to have better lives so
that they follow your life and become which we call as Sahaja Yogis, there are
genuinely good Sahaja Yogis. It's a very
all kinds of people, all types, all behaviors.
big responsibility. Perhaps we don't
Of course they should not be regimented,
recognize it, we don't understand. But all
there should not be uniformity, but in that
these are little creatures which are after variety there should be this beauty, there
the image of great souls and they should
should be beautiful trend of being one with
be brought up in that way, respected in that
each other.
manner and loved with great care. This is
For that, what should we do, is the
to be understood. The problem with our problem. What should the elders do to
elderly people is this that we do not achieve that? What is our solid
consider them to be considered, to be
'contribution' to their lives? The first will be
to tell them who is Shri Ganesha, and that
bothered about, to be understood about.
We think we are too intelligent, too good what are the qualities of Ganesha, what
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-12.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volumie-XVI Issue : 1 & 2
11
Jan. & Feb. 2004
does he represent. What does he lecture, they don't understand what I am
represent, what qualities he has - and once
saying. But one thing is there, if there are
they start understanding, that though being some of possessions within, they will
a little boy, he is so generous, he is so kind, show - show very well - because they are
so innocent and so simple, their innocence
he is so forgiving - they will be amazed
will help them to expose them to reality
because they are also small and they will
I hope you all look after your
also take to that kind of life.
I find some children very sensible,
children, guide them properiy and take them
to a level of understanding that they
very good here. Some are naughty and
some don't understand what we are doing understand what is their position, what
here. Whatever it is, they are after all qualities they should have, why will they be
children. And what we have to do is to look
respected. You will be amazed, that their
after them, respect them, and give them
behavior will change the behavior of all the
other children.
the full idea about Shri Ganesha,
I think everyone of you must have
What I have to say is that nobody
a statue of Shri Ganesha in your house,
should think that you are very grown-up
so the children will see it and ask "Who is
because you can keep quiet, sit quietly and
this? What is He doing?" And you will be
all that. You are grown-up only if you can
imbibe the qualities of Shri Ganesha. I have
amazed how they will understand Him,
seen people who are very grown-up still do
not have simple qualities of chastity, of
how they will understand His qualities and
how they will work it out. It is important for
all of you to have at least one Shri Ganesha
honesty - they don't have, and they can't
in your house, so that you can tell your have it because they don't think it is
children that, 'You all have to become like
important. So, I leave it to you to find out
Shri Ganesha within yourself.
Him'.
Tenjoy their company because they
Now what are the qualities of Shri
Ganesha. They won't understand chastity, are so innocent and so simple hearted and
I like them very, very much. So, you should
they are too small, they won't understand
all those qualities. But one quality they will
not get afraid or frightened of their
mischievousness. On the contrary, you
understand is to be honest, is to be honest.
Gradually you will find all difficult should know they deserve much more love,
much more understanding and much more
ones will go down, it will work out that way.
Because you see they don't understand My
scope to grow. I hope by the time they will
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Jan. & Feb. 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue
12
1&2
be of your age, they will be great Sahaja
at peace, (no-one moves and the children
also remain motioniess sitting on
Yogis. They will understand what we are
doing here. I had to face mountains of the stage) Who can take them out?
nonsense with the older people, but these
(laughter)
won't have that. They will be very simple,
You can give Me flowers. If you have
got flowers, will take them. (The children
very sweet and they will understand love.
So I will say we can allow these
start giving Her flowers) Every so often we
children to go out and play and somebody
hear Her saying- Thank you... Thank you
can look after them so that you will be very much. Thank you
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Bombay 20-01-1975
(Translated)
In Kaliyuga, there is no other way
you think, you could use some old methods,
except 'forgiveness'. The more power of
then you are mistaken. I told you many-a-
times that there is no perfect saint in this
forgiveness you have, the more powerful
you will be. Forgive all, Only the great world. There is a devil sitting in every saint.
people could forgive. How could the They have settled on your attention. Could
powerless forgive? This morning I told you
to know the Dharma, you have to know the
dharma that is within you. Are you
you get me? Perfect saints are rare. Shri
Krishna said, "Pritranaya Sadhunam,
Vinashaya-ch-dushcritam". There is a devil
established in Dharma? The one who is sitting next to each sadhu. Very carefully it
has to be brushed aside. How difficult it is?
established in Dharma is very powerful,"
So know the Dharma. Yes; how beautifully
Whether you stand in saintliness or
we stand in Dharma? You stand in
devilishness depends upon you. If you are
in saintliness and some negativity tries to
Dharma. Those who stand in Adharma are
the sinners (Adharmis). They have no affect you, you could remove it. But today
comparison with us. Adharma is their how many such pure people are there in
support. But we stand on Dharma, our this world? Tell me. Only the degree varies.
heading
Those
towards
who
style is quite different. Dharmik people have
are
different style than those of the anti- saintliness, they should not look behind and
dharma-Religious and non-religious have no relations with the devils. These
(dharmic and adharmic) cannot go devilish people are thieves and cheats.
together. Despite all the difficulties and How could they be any match to us! We
cannot be like them, they cannot compete
problems you are standing on Dharma. To
know the inner-power which is based on
with us. Our paths are different. To rise in
dharma is the sign of Sahaja Yoga. It is very
dharma is the biggest achievement.
clear. Sahaja Yoga has nothing to do with
'Dharma' is nothing but love. Love is all.
Let us see how much outrage and other things. One has to awaken in one's
dharma and get enlightened. People ask
wickedness could be committed before our
Love'. Let us see who tortures us and to me, "Shri Mataji, should we do like that?
Should we move our plexuses like that?
what extent? Let them do.
Should we move our fingers like that?" Most
Everything bows down before the
power of love. This is the only way in of these movements are primordial and
these will have effect only when they move
Kaliyuga. I cannot think of any other way. If
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Jan. & Feb. 2004
14
The Divine Cool Breeza Volume-XVI Issue
1&2
worldly measurements. No one has
correctly. If the flow within is not pure then
the movement done with the hands would
harassed you. I have seen many difficulties
yet I am quite comfortable. I have seen
also be similar. Purity is possible only by
forgiveness and when one gets purified people suffering to such an extent that it
from within then the light of the dharma cannot be described. There are such
would also be pure. So those who are
devilish people making others' lives difficult
religious will have to come to limelight, but today the condition of society is far
speak and tell about it. He has to think better and your condition is also much
himself whether there is dharma or better.
But do not deceive yourself. Do not
adharma in whatever he does. It would not
deceive yourself, it is very clear. Whatever
have been appropriate, had I delivered this
you are doing to Sahaj Yoga actually you
are doing it to yourself. Know it thoroughly.
lecture before you got your Realisation.
www.
In administrative purposes sometimes the
That would have conditioned you. All the
psychologist, ruled out the significance of question arises as what to do about
dharma and told that the principles of something? Solution is very easy. Before
dharma condition the minds of the taking any decision go into thoughtless
followers. After Realisation there will be awareness and whatever solution comes
no conditioning. Now you will accept things up automatically go by that. It could never
willingly. There will be no conditioning at be wrong. But the decision should be
all. It has brought your attention on ego &
spontaneous and it should come in a state
superego. Dharma is asserting itself, you of thoughtless awareness. Mental
are not struggling with it. You have chosen
decisions will be biased ones because
this path and whatever worldy things you
while thinking both ego and superego are
have learnt, they cannot be compared with
at work. All your worldly experiences will
the etherial ones. One cannot attach the be behind your decisions but decisions
taken in thoughtless awareness will be
etherial values with the worldly things. I am
talking of the etherial but you are seeing it
in worldly way. The three dimensions of
etherial and miraculous. Miraculous
because its meaning in Hindi is 'very high
the worldliness have finished and those
but in Marathi the meaning of this word is
who wish to go to the fourth dimension they strange. So it will be miraculous in both
senses-Hindi and Marathi. While talking of
have to achieve its depths in a serious way.
I am talking about this fourth dimension. the etherial, all your worldly views, pre-
You cannot evaluate the etherial with conceived ideas of human beings cannot
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Jan. & Feb. 2004
The Divine Coal Breeze Volume-XVI Issue : 1& 2
15
be bigotry. He has His own standing, His mammoths and physically developed
beings have vanished and become missing
own being. If you wish the God to be like
you or you say 'O!, Almighty give me some links. Only elephants remain. Similary
money so that I invest it for you', that level those who are extremely mentally
also come. He will manifest Himself, developed, like fox have also fallen in
you keep opening your channel and know missing links. Same is the fate of the
the dharma within. It is very essential to
people. However, dog was saved. Human
beings will also rise from the ordinary ones
know the dharma. What a beautiful thing
is there within us; flowing in the perishable
and the so called ordinary people will not
body is the imperishable power. It is the do anything in three dimensions.
stream of the Ganges, Yamuna and Otherwise in the process of evolution they
Saraswati - the confluence of the three.
So you cannot know it with worldliness. Go
in thoughtlessness for a moment and take
will become missing-links the way
chimpanzees have become missing links.
That is why ordinary people are selected
for the purpose of evolution. AlIl these big-
any decision, your decisions will be such
R)
that even highly placed people could not big renunciates and austeres (USI-
take - very dynamic, absolutely dynamic.
will reach no where. You will see yourself
When worries, fear, anger, servility, that these very highly placed people and
renunciates will become missing links. To
slavishness, inferiorty, all these complexes
get washed away then the Divine will how many I have given Realisation, to how
express within you with His grace. He is many kings and Emperors, sacred groups,
so humble, so sweet, so sweet that it secretaries etc! All are glued to their
thrones. Does someone realise that the
penetrates within without letting us feel, the
light-has been lit in us? They write letters
the moonlight penetrates in our being.
When you are selected for this
way
to me, 'l am enjoying myself!' Does anyone.
work your importance increases much think of doing something. that we have
received enlightenment and we have to
more. You think yourselves to be ordinary
people. 'How have we been selected?' give it to others. When you have a special
seat then you have to be a special person
God will select out of the ordinary human
as well. Extraordinary will evolve from the
beings. All these extraordinary and highly
fa) people will become ordinary ones. It will blossom in them.
placed (
Gradually you will understand that all these
missing links. Always it has happened in
are foolish, why to talk to them. There are
every stage of evolution, if you see. All the
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-17.txt 
 The Divine Coot Breeze Volume-XVI Issue: 1&2
Jan & Feb, 2004
16
big-big doctors. What to do? They are big connected, you know it well that you are
connected to each other. When you share
fools. What have we to do? They have
spent their lives without achieving
negativities (Badhas) of each other, why do
anything. Let it go to dogs, what have we
to do! Our position is very high. There
not you share the dharma? You take up
the badhas, why not the dharma? What is
could be no education programme for it. I
cannot sit and educate you about it and
the reason? The reason is that still we are
evolving. We are small and growing. We
teach you ABCD of it. You have to learn it
are small children. We shall get our fingers
with day- to-day experience.
burnt, we shall stumble and one day when
This morning I told you a very
we grow, we shall make thousands of
people move with us, catching hold of their
significant thing that in Sahaj Yoga you are
collective (fz) beings not individuals
fingers. Still you are small, does not matter
(afte). You are collective, you must know if you are cheated, remain in your
this fact. Now the Gagangarh Maharaj is innocense. Those who are cheating and
thinking themselves to be very wise, they
much-much higher than you. Accepted.
THE WE
He has wocked hard for twentyone should know that they will be made
cancerous and thrown out. It is another path
thousand years. He himself told about it.
He took birth twentyone thousand times where if someone goes, he never returns.
and remained in the Holy Feet of the There is a pathway to hell, many people
Almighty. Almighty remained in jungle.
go by it. They know nothing. They think of
going before Shri Mataji, touch and wash
Only then he could get vibrations. And how
have you all got it in the twinkling of an Her feet and regard themselves to be big
eye? Because it is a new word, a new saints. This is one of the approach,
happening. You all have become atoms in everything goes side by side. When the
the body of the Virata. A symbolic human
flower blossoms, the unwanted particles
being has been made, it has become. of the bud fall down and fragrance
emanates from it. Whatever has to flourish,
Forget about them. You are in collective
flourishes everything else falls down. Both
form and those of you who wish to be away
the things happen simultaneously. Life is
from the collectivity should know that they
will become cancerous and get finished.
such. Those who have to tall shall waste
their lives. They have to die and get
None of you is good or bad. If one finger is
hurt another one soothes it, one hand finished. But it has a storing time. The
soothes the another one. You are all arrangment for storing is there. Such
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-18.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI issue: 18 2
Jan & Feb. 2004
17
at all. If someone tells that your chakra is
people go away and some of them go in
catching, you should be thankful to him and
such a way that they never come back.
tell that you have decoded what I could not
From animal you have evolved to human
do. Because if someone tells that snake
being but what is the use if after becoming
human being you become an insect. In is biting you then you feel grateful to him.
Similarly you should be grateful to one who
dharma will be your competetion. Are we
tells you about your chakra and request him
established in dharma or not ? Think of it
to cleanse it. Never take ill of it, although
about yourself and about others also. Think
that how much established they are in you are very great in this world because
dharma. How much established we are
you have got vibrations. How many people
of this world have got vibrations? Pope is
so popular, yet he has not got vibrations.
and how much established other adharmic
people are in dharma. If they are adharmic
then what is the reason. Which of their You are greater than many great people.
chakra is catching? They stand on Yet you are children. In Sahaj Yoga you
adharma because of catch on some of the.
are children. The pope doesn't have
vibrations. All these big-big people before
chakra. There could be no other reason.
bows, these
this
world
whom
Watch it in a very unprejudiced manner. If
Shankracharyas, none of them have the
there is a catch then what? We shall clear
it, if you all desire, If the person is in an knowledge of vibrations. But you people
incurable condition then forget him. He has give awakening & Self Realisation! You
cancer. Forget him and bury him. But with move the Kundalinis of all on your
whom you have sympathy and you think fingertips. How great it is. No one except
TETER
Ganesha could do it earlier. Small snake,
that he could be cured, you could set him
the Ganesha has in His hands, is symbolic
right. You have many methods of it. There
conveying that He moves the Kundalini of
are the primordial movements. Cleanse
all the seekers.
them with it. Share amongst yourself and
Now you have achieved atleast one
expand the plexuses. Share amongst
yourself, do not feel bad about it. You thing that you can awaken the Kundalini of
should never feel bad about it. The one others. But this is not worldly thing. This is
who feels that, is similar to the person who etherial, which has no limits. It can turn
troubles others. To feel bad and trouble everything topsy-turvy. The more soft and
loving He is, He has got limitless
others are the same, These are two parts
powers
of one action. So one should not feel bad
of destruction on His command. He will go
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Jan. & Feb. 2004
18
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue : 1 & 2
Now you have to know the rate of dharma.
His way. You do only this much your own
Why the dharmic people need to know the
way (Where is the heart chakra correct it
first of all). Our heart is clear or not Does
rates of flour and pulses? They have to
it contain anger for anyone? Do we have
know about dharma but you people know
fear for anyone? Ask your heart. It is a big
the politics? It shows that you do not have
thing because heart controls the brain.
vibrations in you. Only flowing of vibrations
With heart we do everything and with your is not enough. It is not a big achievement.
heart you are connected to me. So first of Still you are children. I am not even willing
all you should clear your heart. We think to celebrate your first brithday. It is just
our own way, that is why this heart chakra forced acquaintance with you. Look to
is there. How much love we have given? yourself. Is there any change in you ? Is
How much love we have given to others? I there any difference in me?
Have I got
got a letter from Mr. Desai, he has written
some place or not? Is there any
transformation? As I have just taken you
that Sahajyogis helped my wife a lot. I was
very happy. I was over-joyed. Help each out through the subtle Sushumna
other, love each other, and we shall be (Parasympathatic). Its a very subtle line,
bound with love. We shall become one
we could say of the size of a hair. the
body of Virata. You are placed on the thickness of Sushumna is only this much
Sahasrara of this body. I have made you
and there are four layers one upon another,
sit on Sahasrara of Virata. What these mad
yet people are getting cured by these
people are doing ? Thousand people are vibrations. They are getting alright. One
to be put on the Saharara of the Virata lady came; her face was totally changed.
Purisha. It appears to be a big thing. How
She told that her asthama was fully cured.
It is not a big thing. This disease is cured,
many have got vibrations in hand? Felt it?
You understand the Kundalini. Have you that disease is cured, it is not a big deal.
have any doubt in it? I have done the What is there in it? Cancer is cured, what
farming. We will see the results. You are
is extra-ordinary in it? It was to happen. If
worried about small small things ! At such the light is put on in the house then one
a time what your brains are caught in. If could see things. Otherwise what is the
you have to go to Delhi then you will think
purpose of light? At least everything could
what is the rate of flour there. But you have
be seen. There is nothing special in it. But
to go to such a place where there is no
with this enlightenment what knowledge
such problem. That is the place of Dharma.
could you acquire, what new dimension
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-20.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue: 1& 2
Jan. & Feb. 2004
appreciate and say what a man! First class
could you see, what new achievement
could you make? This is the speciality. person, very generous nature, It is getting
done already but it could gain more speed.
(yes, how is it going? Now you are groing
It all depends on you. How you think about
younger and younger. I am worried about
it. Listen to others and appreciate their
you. She is getting younger and younger.
Isn't it?) Whatever we speak is it going
through our head? Is it going through our
feelings very peacefully. Get identified with
others the way one hand is identified with
heart ? If it goes through the head then we
the other. The hand is identified with brain,
it is identified with heart. Every part is so
shall argue, make a dogma of it. Let it go
through the heart. There will be integrated. You also have to be integrated
enlightenment. If you want to enjoy the love
the same way. Only then those thousand
hands could be got ready whom I could use
then go by the heart. Heart chakra is called
as human help (मनुष्य रूपेण संस्थिता) those
the 'Sacred Heart'. Sacred Heart chakra
which the christians call, is the heart thousand hands which are the hands of
Virata. These hands will emerge from
chakra which is the abode of the Goddess
Durga. It is a huge centre. It is beyond you
amongst the human beings; ordinary
to understand Durga. All these Rakshasas human beings. Big saints and sages are
not required for that so that they be placed
are Her children. Everything in the world
belongs to Her. Whomsoever She had on the chakras. These people will come
out of the ordinary seekers. First of all
destroyed, it is because of Her love for you.
It is difficult to break your own hands. It is
cleanse yourself at home. I am telling you
to bath each other with vibrations, Mrs. Lal
difficult to inject yourself. To kill one's own
children for the sake of others is very you give vibrations to her and she gives to
difficult. But this killing is the work of a big
you. First feel each others Chakras and
power. It is the act of forgiveness, a big
then cleanse each other. Come out nicely
forgiveness. But you people have no need
to become Durga in this Kaliyuga. Be very
calm & quite. Your peace will help spread
bathed and ready. Keep on cleansing each
other and everything will be cured (Aa).
Lot of turmoil is going on in this world. You
are not even aware of it. Criminality is likely
Sahaj Yoga. People will say that they have
to take over. You are not aware that it has
seen Sahaj Yogis who had no anger at all,
become the kingdom of devils and they talk
they were the embodiments of humility.
They were unique. You are my helping
in such a way that they form groups. They
hands. It is you whom people will get attached to each other in such a way
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-21.txt 
 20
Jan, & Feb. 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue:182
if they were glued and Sahajyogi fall ill I will give indications to you. Once you
as
know about the chakra of that person you
prey to them because there is freedom;
should clear it out. Collectively you should
and see these Rakshasas, how collectively
they are enjoying themselves! They cleanse each other.
Q. Shri Mataji there appears to be no
strangulate one, kill another and trouble
others. When the collectivity of Saints is difference between each other.
Ans. It is still there. We go five steps ahead
formed, then think what will happen ?
Saints have never formed groups. It has and come back six steps behind. When
shall we attain our goal. Shall we be able
happened first time. If the saintliness of the
saints goes away then what is the use of to attain it or not, that is the question ?
such a group. All the qualities of a saint When you go into the depth of your
should manifest from him (Marathi..) (I awareness you will all move together the
way the waves of the ocean go. All of you
am saying Mr. Lal, you were to hold a
should evolve together. Instead of trying to
meeting. First do it and then do the Puja.
shall not be able to speak once I start improve others one has to improve oneself.
vibrating. I shall not be able to participate
In Sahajayoga no one is big or small. There
in the proceedings of the meeting). Now is no question of seniority. You feel this
you tell if you have any problem. Let us way because you have come from the
material world. Someone is officer and
finish with the worldly things, then do the
some junior. One is King and another a
Puja peacefully. You have to throw away
beggar. Someone is saint and another an
all this dung then we shall discuss.
Tell me what is the problem? If
austere. It has absolutely no significance.
The churning (ier7) is going on. I am doing
someone has a serious problem, you can
this churning only. Let us see who steals
help him out. Be detached. Detachment is
the butter. Only the wise one could do it.
essential because you are not what you
appear. You are pure (Nirmala) from within Sometimes you will feel cool and
and without. Another person could also sometimes hot. Butter will come on the
surface because of its lightness. There is
be like you. Without any prejudice, be
no high and low. If someone thinks higher
conscious towards others. If someone is
or lower then Mahamaya is there to take
caught, set him right. Do not feel bad about
care. I will pull the Kundalini in such a way
it. Talk in Sahaja-codes. Like you are sitting
in My feet and I know something about you,
that those who regard themselves very
high will be astonished. This churning is
then do not feel bad about it. If someone is
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-22.txt 
 WJan. & Feb. 2004
21
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue 1&2
going on. Knowingly I will pull your
Kundalini down; until we raise it and keep
world. One cannot believe it. They will be
ready within ten-twelve years but by then
it in the state of ascent, it will not work out.
you should not break my platforms while
All the older people should know that in wrestling among yourself. If my platforms
worldly sense they are the leaders, they are broken then what my children shall do
are the seniors. They have to tell to the who have come here for this Divine game?
smaller one that it is the worldliness. To some extent it is all right offcourse,
Anyone who rises spiritually, any one who because it is organisational work. Every
looks up shall ascend. though he still be thing will be alright automatically when the
on the first step. Someone who regards movement is collective and you are all
oneself on a higher pedestal is wrong. integrated. If someone is speaking too
much you should cool down. (You get the
cool vibrations, isn't it? You should get the
Such a person should look within and see
how he ascended and descended. Try to
cool vibrations not the hot one.) Cool down.
ascend. Churning is going on and in it no
Coolness, sincerity, let it come within you.
one has a fixed place.
Dharma is cool on absolute zero. It stands
The method of Sahaja Yoga is
unique. Never before such churning was on absolute zero. People used to go to
Himalayas. You however do not need to go
done. Only Gagan Gadh Maharaj remained
to Himalayas. You open your air-
in jungle for years together and did all kind
conditioners; be aware of yourselves. See
of penance. You have nothing to do with
it. I cannot tell you more than this. Without
your faults, see your Chakras and help
getting into the churning he uplifted himself others cleanse their plexuses. Do it
all alone. He is something different. His secretely. There is no need to tell. When
guidance is like that of Shri Ganesha. You you could do it secretly then what is the
harm ? If Awakening and Realisation are
are all caught in my churning and I am the
given on the road then what is there to
link for you. I am telling you about all these
think? The more secretely you do, The
things. It may be Shankracharya or anyone
more pure & loveable will it be. I feel nice
else, no one knew about vibrations,
spiritual technicalities and primordial to see you doing the work of awakening
movements. No one knew about it. No secretely
where it has been written, but now these
May God Bless You.
wonderful people have incarnated in this
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-23.txt 
 SHRI MATAJI'S ADVICE
Brighton (U.K.) 15th Nov. 1979
you do not know what you are seeking. But
The name itself is so beautiful-
Brighton. It has to brighten the whole one thing is definite, you are not satisfied
with things as they are. There is something
country. I have been here twice before also
beyond which you have to seek. There is
and I always felt that if a chance is given
to me in this place, we can really start some thing beyond, no doubt, which has
been told to you by all the prophets, by all
Sahaja Yoga in a big way and one day it
the scriptures, by all the incarnations who
can become a place of pilgrimage. There
came on this earth. It has been promised
are mixed vibrations in Brighton. You have
also that you will be judged one day. But
the sea. Also, the mother Earth here has
special significance but when something the first judgment will be your own. You
Divine starts emitting itself, the evil comes yourself will decide whether you are
thing.
seeking the Divine or some frivolous
in a disguise, accumulates and starts
If you are seeking the Reality & the Truth,
fighting with the Divine and that's how, I
felt mixed vibrations at Brighton. But on the
then only you are going to be chosen, then
only you are going to be the citizen of God's
whole it is a very good place, where Sahaja
Kingdom.
Yoga can prosper.
They must have told you about
Now, let us see who is this God &
Sahaja Yoga. 'Saha' is with, Ja' is born what am I talking about. In the beginning, it
was just a Silence, complete Silence.
- the union you
with you. This is the Yoga
And out of the Silence, when It awakened,
are seeking with the Divine, that is born
the Silence was awakened. The Silence is
with you. It is within you. Everybody has
said, "Seek Him within yourself". Even called "Para Brahma". I am sorry, I have to
Christ has said the same. That means you
use Sanskrit language; it does not mean
is something Hindu. These ideas you
have to seek. It is your freedom, which
cannot be challenged. You have to ask for must get rid of. In India people have
it. For example, if God could, at this stage meditated much more. They did not have
to fight the Nature, like we had to fight today,
of human awareness, transform you to
higher awareness, without your coming while coming to this hall. The atmosphere
into that play, He would have done it long is so nice & warm there. People could
time back. But He cannot. You have to sit and meditate under a tree. They did
not have to fight the Nature so much. They
seek the Divine in your own freedom.
You are seeking, definitely. Perhaps had a long time to meditate. In their
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-24.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue : 1& 2
Jan. & Feb. 2004
23
meditation they have found a lot of things
it's own creation. So, three powers started
for which they have used Sanskrit acting and thus these three powers were
created. Now, as we know that people have
language. So, this Para Brahma or you can
not talked much about the Holy Ghost In
say, the Absolute Silence was awakened,
got awakened because it got awakened the Bible. Many scriptures that have talked
about the Father have not been able to talk
itself; like we sleep and we get awakened.
about the Holy Ghost. Specially, when
And then the Silence became what you call
Sadashiva. When it was awakened or Christ's mother herself was an incarnation
of Holy Ghost; he did not want to endanger
when this Sadashiva started breaking in
the sense that it wanted, it desired to
Her life. He did not even say that She was
create. As we say, that the morning sun is the incarnation of Holy Ghost, because if
breaking through the dawn; in the same they had crucified Her, He would have
come out with His own destructive powers.
way when this desire started manifesting,
the desire became HIS power and got But, the drama was to be played and She
separated. Now, whatever I say is just a remained a silent person. Now, this Holy
story for you; you need not believe it but I
Ghost is important for us, because Father
is just a witness. He is witnessing the play,
will reach a point which you can believe
into and then step by step you can believe the game that the Holy Ghost is playing.
into this theory. This is just a hypothesis
Heis going to enjoy Her creation. He is the
for you. So, use when this desire became
only witness of that game and She is trying
to please Him by creating this because it
a power, this power was called Shakti or
Mahashakti or Adishakti, means Primordial
was His desire to create. So, She created
with these forces, that we have got, which
Power. This Primordial Power assumed a
the Desire
are called; the first one
personality and entity; it had to, if it had to
act. If you have only a desire in your (Mahakali), the second one-the Action
heart, it is no good. We have to transform (Mahasaraswati), and the third-the
it into some form, otherwise the desire Sustenance or you call it-the Evolution
will rise and fall. So, this desire got into a (Mahalakshmi). These powers acted to
create us-human beings. Here, we have
form, we can say, into an entity, which we
call in the Bible, the Holy Ghost & in the reached this stage, when we can talk
about this. Even at the time of Christ, one
Sanskrit language-Adishakti. This desire
could not talk of the Holy Ghost. What could
then created out of itself two more powers-
one to act and the other to improve upon
we do with these fishermen Just tell me,
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Jan & Feb. 2004
24
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue:1&2
how could you tell them about these you are seeking.
Now, there are three powers within
things? That was just a preparatory thing
us. On the left hand side is your love, is
but you know, what a mess they have done!
Quite a mess is there, and people can't your power of desiring, by which
we
understand those who call themselves desire, by which we express our emotions;
and when this desire is no more left in us
religious. How could they be fanatic?
Fanaticism and religion are at dagger's in the sense that when this power
ends. They can't be one thing. You can disappears within us, then we also
see now in iran. Anywhere you can see, disappear.
In the centre is the spirit, which is
where people are fanatics how irreligious
the - reflection of the Father God or Witness
they are, because religion is Love. God is
God, who is within us in our heart. On the
Love and none of these "religious people"
have expressed that love in a way it should right hand side is our power of action.
These three powers have created like a
be expressed, nor have they taken up the
curtain between our attention and between
work of seeking God. But other things they
Him. This curtain exists In the Void. It is
are doing like philanthropic work, collecting
funds, having a jumbo sale etc. That is not
sustained by our liver and that's how the
the job of a person seeking God. Under three curtains keep. us away from that
these circumstances, when we are face spirit. We cannot see that spirit, nor can
to face with people who have organised we feel it. We cannot manifest it. We
know that there is someone who knows. In
religion or disorganised religion and fake
Gita, it is called (as) "Kshetragya" who
people, we really get absolutely frustrated.
is the knower of the field. So, we know that,
We get flabbergasted and we do not know
there is a knower and the knower knows
what we are to do because we are born
seekers. We might have made mistakes all about you, is tape recording of all that
in seeking but we are definitely seekers. If
you have been doing, your seeking, your
you were not seekers you would have been
mistakes, your turbulence, all kinds of
happy attending a dinner or a ball things you have done. And that tape
somewhere. But, no. There is something
recorder is placed down below there in the
beyond, something that is promised,
triangular bone and is called the Kundalini.
something that you feel, the existence of This is the residual energy of our desire,
which you are aware of but you have so means when the whole universe was
far not reached the source. That is why created, this energy of desire, the Adi-
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-26.txt 
 25
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue 1&2
Jan. & Feb. 2004
Shakti, after creating the whole, She authority-some one who has power to raise
remains whole, as She is complete. It is Her, who loves the same way as she loves
you, then only she rises. Not by any tricks,
very easy to understand; you can say-
supposing there is light here and film here.
The whole film is reflected but the film is
by standing on your head or doing some
exercise or beating people or doing all sorts
intact. In the same way after projecting of things, they have devised now. It is a
itself, what ever remains is this residual spontaneous things Sahaja. Spontaneously
energy, is this Kundalini. It means that you
it rises. I mean, supposing now somebody
are the complete projection of that comes to me & says, "Can you guarantee
Kundalini. That power, that is desire power that my Kundalini will be awakened?" |
which manifests in two powers-the right would say, "No, Sir. I am sorry, may be,
side power- which is called the power of
may not be". If you don't argue, too much,
action and the central power which you then it will. Why? What happens with
arguments?
have evolved up to a point and the rest is
I must tell what happens with
a void, as the power which is responsible
for your evolution from amoeba to this argument. I don't mean you should not
argue. You must; because , I know you
stage.
We should ask a question, "Why
have a problem. You are too identified with
did we become human beings-from arguments. Doesn't matter. But when you
amoeba to this stage?" Supposing I have
argue, you use this power which is on the
some bolts, nuts, etc. & I gather them right hand side. By thinking, what happens,
together. Then, anybody can ask me, "Why
You create that yellow stuff there and that
are you doing this?" I will say, "I am making
yellow stuff in common words is' Mr. Ego'.
And when you think, this ego rises like that
a microphone." But even, this microphone
has a thread, here. It has to be put to the
and goes on pressing the other one-
mains. Unless and until it is put to the Superego, which comes from your
conditionings. So this Ego, when it sits on
mains, it is not going to work. This is what
this one like that how are we to raise the
we have got-these three powers and the
Kundalini, because then there is no place,
residual power which is the desire power,
no space, left. It has to be balanced like
which is just sitting down there, which is
going to desire your rebirth. She is your that. So by arguments, I cannot raise the
Kundalini. That's why I say, "Let me see
own mother and when she desires it, she
about it. Do not argue just now". But, then
comes into action only when she sees an
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-27.txt 
 26
Jan. & Feb. 2004
The Divine Coal Breeze Volume-XVI Issue :1&2
people don't like it. You see, they feel from the Indian scriptures, where it is
e saleelam-
described as (weian
challenged. So, I say. "Go ahead". But what
saleelam, that is, this cool breeze comes
happens when you argue, the thoughts go
on pressing you and that is why you cannot
on you like a wave. In the Bible also you
have read it as the Cool Breeze. So, the
do it by arguments or by reading a book.
whole power is the power of desire which
You cannot pay for it. It is absolutely
impossible to pay for it. God doesn't have has manifested into three powers of
Adishakti as the Cool Breeze and it is all
a shop. No, He doesn't know shopping nor
pervading and when this Kundalini rises it
can you organise Him. We cannot organise
passes through those centres and touches
God, He has to organise us. So any sort
them. These centres are the subtle centres
of an organised thing can not work it out.
It is absolutely like sprouting of a
below our plexuses which we know in our
medical science as the plexuses we have
seed. You just put it in the soil and put some
got within ourselves.
And then you
water. As I say, I put some water of Love,
I give you some water of Love, then it become Self-Realized.
I cannot give a lecture on that or
sprouts by itself. You have a seed, you
have a sprout-inside (Primule) and brain wash you, you become collectively
conscious. It's actualization, that we should
everything is ready: It has to happen. By
getting angry it does not work out. By seek. It has to happen within you, so that
anything that you can do, you cannot you become that, It is not by branding
work it out. You have to be effortless. You anybody that you are a Sahaja Yogi. It
cannot be done like that. A Sahaja
cannot put any effort for sprouting a seed.
You can't even transform a single flower Yogi has to get the real baptism. His
fontannel bone has to become soft and his
into a fruit. Actually we do not do much.
Kundalini has to pierce it, then only he is a
What we do is that whatever is dead, we
change it into another dead object, then Sahaja Yogi.
You cannot have membership, you
we change into another. That's all. We
have done nothing living. This is a living cannot have anything like that. It is so
process and all living processes are spontaneous and if it has not happened
achieved through spontaneity.
within you, then you are not a Sahaja Yogi.
spontaneously it rises. It Till it has happened, you are still seeking.
But it takes a split of a second in people
So.
fouches your Sahasrara and you start
like children. It can take quite a lot of time
getting a cool breeze in your hands. Apart
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-28.txt 
 27
Jan. & Feb. 2004
The Divine Coo Breeze Volume-XVI Issue : 1 & 2
pace of an ant. The reason is reality. You
in some people, who have harmed
themselves. Actually in this country (U.K.) see all other organisations spread
I have seen that there are very beautiful
because, you pay the money and become
people born - genuine, honest and humble.
some great minister of state there,
Then you wear a
something like that.
Very great seekers of old times are blessed
locket and become the great disciple of a
to be born here and also in America. But
they became impatient and in their great fake guru or something like that. It
impatience, they have tried to destroy is very easy to do that, isn't
themselves. And that is how you have become a Sahaja Yogi, you have to face
it ? But to
yourself, you have to see yourself and then
spoiled those psychosomatic centres. In
these centres, there will be problem for a
the beauty when it dawns upon you; you
can see that it is the Truth, that you have
short time, but you have to have it. You
to receive and have to give.
are born for it. This is the evolution which
You should-not feel obliged
has to take place. You have to know your
because that is My Job. You can say that
self. You must get it.
I am paid for that. Giving you Realization
But the way is not demanding, but
is My own Job. I have to do it. Your job is
asking for it. "Blessed are those who are
to take it because that is what you are here
meek" has already been said. That
for. It is no question of any obligation. It's
meekness and not your arrogance is
Love, just Love. I have to love you and you
needed. If you sit on my head and say,
have to receive that love from me. It just
"Give us Realization". Then, I should say,
flows, it just emits.
that I am not the one who is giving, but
I am just telling you how to receive
it's you who is receiving it. Like the river
Ganga which flows; if you throw stones at it, but our human love, you see, is so
aggressive that we cannot understand
her, you cannot get water out of her. You
have to take a pitcher, a hollow pitcher anyone who says, "I love you". We run
and dip it inside her. It will fill up by itself. away "You love me, then I would better
run away", because love means
So it is your own asking which receives
love
means
fulfillment and you have to find out that possession. Human
but this
fulfillment. Without that you cannot be domination, is aggressive
love is just Love, that soothes you, which
happy.
raises you to a new awareness, by which
We have Sahaja Yogis in London
you feel on your fingers the complete
of course, and we are progressing with the
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-29.txt 
 Jan, & Feb. 2004
28
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue 1&2
just watch it. If with that attitude you come,
enlightenment and your hands can tell you
what centres are catching in you and in just to open your eyes to it, Open your
eyes- it's called Unmesh ( means
others.
There are so many blessings of open your eyes to that beauty that is
yourself. For this you should be ready and
Sahaja Yoga, which I am going to tell you
there should be no doubts about it
in the seminar and perhaps all these
because they are not worth it. But still, if
Sahaja Yogis can tell you also.
you have any doubt, I will like to attend to
I don't know what are your
problems. I would like to talk to you if them definitely. More-over, sometimes we
get very good questions. I have seen that
there are any problems or questions but
not too long. Because Sahaja Yogis get some people ask really good questions
and give me the idea of as to what is the
quite worried about it. The reason is that
firstly they have all asked me questions problem. So that will also be welcome. But
do not sit down with the attitude of doubting
quite a lot and they will be quite ashamed
to remember that. Secondly, they feel Toms, that is also one thing. Sahaja Yoga
is a very big subject and it is rather difficult
excited, that why are you not getting your
to explain whole of it. It is by which you get
Realization instead, why are you asking
your physical, mental, emotional and
questions ? You should better have it, is in
spiritual integration because all the centres
your hands and thirdly, they find sometime
come into play and bring enlightenment
you are asking questions of no value to
into all the four aspects of your life; into
yourselves or to anyone.
So, one thing you should remember the totality so that you feel your
collective
in
wholesomeness
that there is nothing selling here. You have
not to pay for it. It's something that is just consciousness. It is quite a complicated
flowing. It is something, no one knows of sentence. I have said in short, but if you
really in this world. Just flowing, have any problem about it, you can ask
somethings beautiful. If you have me without fear. I am your Mother.
May God bless you.
somewhere seen a beautiful scene, you
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Ego & Superego
necessary to protect the brain carefully and
Man is still in a transitional stage.
Little more he has to jump and he becomes
make it independent of God's will and
that, for which he has been created,
make it used by itself so that it develops
Human brain and heart are the most another dimension of wisdom. For this
purpose the system of ego and super ego
evolved things. Human heart also has to
has been created which is the byproduct
be correlated with the brain.
From our stomachs fat rises into or reaction, of human activities. Every
activity has a reaction. If you say no to
something, the reaction is Ego. If you
our brains passing through all the centres,
evolving to be cells of the brain. The fat, to
become brain, has to evolve, that is, to accept something the reaction is Super
achieve certain amount of changes of Ego.
Ego & Superego, completely cover
human awareness. Human brain has a
dimension, which animals do not have, a
fontanel bone and separate you from all
mental or emotional dimension, with which
pervading power giving you freedom, to act
we understand love. We understand how
as you like, to use your brain as you like to
to receive and reciprocate. We understand learn; because if the evolution has to go
also any further you have to try, So, whatever
beauty and poetry; and
we
God has done is for your good.
understand how to create these. Brain is
He has not given you Ego & Super
triangular and prismatic in nature. When
ego to get spoiled and finished. You must
the rays of God's divine power flow in, they
have ego and do not have to fight with it.
get refracted into different angles and by
Your ego should become one with that of
the principle of parallelogram of forces,
God. Once you are awakened, once your
a part of the power escapes to left side
light has come, then yeu can do it.
and a part to right side. Therefore man can
thínk of past and future but animals cannot.
In the transitional period it is
"SHRI MATAJI"
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Advice of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Guru Purnima
London - 29th July 1980
Today you have arranged this this gap and for that it is essential that
every Guru has to be a realized soul of a
worship of your Guru, that is your Mother
perhaps.
very high quality and greatly evolved. He
need not be a person who is an ascetic or
Why is this Puja arranged ?
One should know that it is very
a person who is living in a forest. He could
be a common householder. He could be a
important for every disciple to worship his
Guru. But the Guru has to be real Guru, king. All these outward manifestations of
not a one who is just exploiting the one's life do not matter whatever may be
disciples and who is not authorised by God.
your position. I would say the so-called
A Puja is arranged because you have position in this world makes no difference
been initiated into the Statutes of the Lord.
to your being
a Guru, as long as you have
imbibed the Statutes of the LORD.
You have been told what are the Dharmas
of a human being. For that actually you do
Again,I say you have to imbibe the
not need a Guru. You can read a book and
Statutes. Let us see what are the Statutes.
know what are the Statutes of the Lord.
The first is, 'you do not do harm to anyone',
But Guru has to see that you practice them.
The first principle is that we are not to harm
These Statutes are to be practiced, to be
anyone. Animals do harm without knowing
that they are harming someone. If you go
brought into your own life; which is a
difficult thing and without a Guru, a
near a snake, he will bite. If a scorpion is
correcting force, it is very difficult to follow there he will put his poison into your being.
these Statutes of the Lord because, there
Humans are not to harm anyone. They can
correct but not harm. But the principle of
is a very big gap between Human
Awareness and Divine Awareness and that
not harming is taken to a point where reality
gap can only be filled by a Guru, who disappears. for example, when it was said
himself is complete.
"do not harm anyone,' people started
Today is Purnima, which means a
saying, 'alright we will not harm mosquitoes
complete moon. A Guru has to be a and bugs and will not kill them.' And there
complete personality to talk about these are some people who are following religions
Statutes and to elevate his disciples to in which they preserve mosquitoes and
this level of understanding by which they
imbibe those Statutes. He is there to fulfil
bugs. This is absurdity. Taking anything to
absurdity, cannot be reality.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-32.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue 1& 2
31
Jan. & Feb. 2004
First of all, we should not harm
It is not for telling others that you
anyone who is walking in the path of God,
have to be truthful and this is the Truth we
the one who is a realized soul. There may
have seen and this is what God's Laws are,
be some with his mistakes in him. He
how they work out. Through vibratory
may need correction. Nobody is perfect as
awareness we have been able to see that
yet. So do not harm. Always try to help.
this is the Truth. But be completely
confident about it. But for that first of all
Secondly, anybody who is a real seeker,
he may be wrong. He might have gone to
you must test yourself completely,
wrong Gurus, he might have done wrong
otherwise you might be playing into the
But have feelings for them
hands of evil. It happens with many people
things.
because you have been going on wrong who start doing Sahaja Yoga in the
path yourself, sometimes. You have been
beginning. So be cautious. Be sure that you
misled before, so have more sympathies.
are telling the Truth and nothing else and
That is why if you have done mistakes in a
that you have felt the Truth in full ways.
way it is good because you have more Those who have not felt the vibrations,
should not talk of Sahaja Yoga. They
sympathies for such people. Then you are
not to harm human beings in anyway, you
have no authority. They have to receive
are not to cause them any bodily harm, vibrations. They have to fully imbibe within
any emotional upsetting just for harm's
them and then they can say, "Yes, we felt".
sake; for correction it is alright.
This is very important task Sahaja Yogis
have to do in these modern times - that is,
The second Statute is that you
to tell aloud that they have found the Truth.
have to stand on your own legs and know
That part is very weak. In whatever way you
that you are here one with the Truth, the
You can
testimony of Truth, that yoOu have seen the
like you can announce the Truth,
Truth. You know what Truth is and you
write books, 'you can talk to your friends,
relations and everyone and tell them, "this
cannot compromise with falsehood. You
just cannot. For that you need not harm is the Truth now, that you have entered
in the kingdom of God. That you have been
anyone. You have to just profess it. You
have to stand up and say that you have
blessed by the Grace of God. That you
are realized souls, that you have felt the
seen the Truth and this is the Truth, and
Divine power which is prevailing
everywhere. That you can give Realization
you have to be one with it so that people
see that light of truth in you and they accept
to others. This you have to tell others and
it.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Jan. & Feb. 2004
32
The Divine Coal Breeze Volume-XVI Issue: 1 82
know that by your accepting the truth, you
You must wait for the time when you can
are not adding anything to the truth but you
tell people, more in confidence. Tell them,
"this is wrong, it is wrong, you do not know.
We have done the same thing". This is
are adorning yourself. One requires
courage to enjoy the truth. Sometimes
people may mock at you, laugh at you and
how you are going to express your principle
of Mastery or you can say "Guru Tatwa".
persecute also but that should not be any
worry to you because your relationship is You have to be truthful. First and foremost
thing is, that, You should know the truth and
with the Statutes, with the Grace of God.
When that is your connection, you should stand the testimony and that you should
not worry about other people and what they
announce it.
The third thing for Guru a Sahaja
have to say about it. You have to stand up,
adorn yourself with that truth and talk to Yogi has to do is to develop Detachment.
people and people will know that you have
Gradually you do develop it because you
find that unless and until you develop that
found it. With that authenticity with which
detachment, you are not receiving
you speak, people will know that you have
found it. The difference
between a vibrations in the full way. All kinds of
realized soul and a non-realized soul is detachments have to be developed, means
basically this: He does not talk of woes your priorities change. Once your attention
and his separation with God. He says "I
gets fixed up with your spirit, the catch or
have found it now. This is it". Like Christ the hold on things which are of no
said, "I am the Light, I am the path". importance starts reducing by itself, e.g.
Or anybody else can say that but you you have a father, a mother and a sister.
This is a bigger problem in India. Here,
can make out that it is not Truth. With the
confidence,
with
that
you are over deteched. But in India, people
complete
understanding, coming out of your heart are very much involved in their own
people can make out, 'this is absolute
children "this is My son" & others are all
orphans. Only, your sons and daughters
Truth' and then all kinds of falsehood must
be denounced.
Doesn't matter if
are the real children. "My daughter, I must
somebody feels bad, because by telling do this for my son, my father, my mother".
that you are saving them and not harming Two types of attachments are there, one
through (e) 'Moha-involvement into that.
them. But must be told in a correct way,
not in frivolous way. In a very persuasive
That you want to do this for them, that for
way, you must tell them that this is wrong.
them want to give them property, have
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-34.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue :1&2
Jan. & Feb. 2004
33
insurance for them and every sort of thing. most beautiful person-isthe extremely
loving person, is love. Look at the flowers,
And another could be the other way,
they are detached. They are dying
as we have here. You hate your father, you
hate your mother. You hate everyone.-Both
tomorrow, they are not going to live but
things are just the same. So, Detachment every minute they live, they are emitting
must be developed. The Detachment is fragrance to you. The trees are not
that you are your father, you are your attached to anything; they will die tomorrow,
doesn't matter. But if anybody comes to
mother, you are everything. Only your spirit
is everything to you, only your spirit you them, they give shadow, they give fruits.
attachment means death of love, complete
have to enjoy, then the detachment comes
from them, then you really do good to them, death of love is attachment. For example,
because, by detaching you see the
complete vision about them and about necessary parts, all the flowers, all the
in a tree, say the sap rises, goes to all .the
what is to be done. For example, people fruits, then goes back to Mother Earth. It
is not attached to anyone, Supposing,
have attachment with some crazes.
Human beings always become crazy the sap goes and gets attached into one
about something. I mean it can be fruit. What will happen? The fruit will die
anything. One ħas to under- stand that and the tree will die. Detachment gives you
the movement of your love circulation of
there should be only one craze, that is, to
your love.
be settled, absolutely settled in your "spirit.
For things now. Things have no
All other crazes will disappear because
is the greatest joy giving thing. That's the value uniess and until there are emotions
most nourishing thing, that's the most behind it. For example the sari, I am
wearing today, was bought for Guru Day,
beautiful thing.
Guru Purnima. But they had no Sari. The
So, all the other things fall off, you
enjoy only that which is the Source of all other day, they wanted to have Sari for
Puja. Then I said if you insist I may have,
enjoyment. You get yourself attached to
but I wore it today just to say that this was
your spirit, and detachment. Starts
bought with that devotion, that love that on
working. Sometimes detachment is taken
as a licence for becoming dry to others, Guru Day, Mother would like to wear
which is absurd. This is a human quality something of a lighter shade; white-the
colour of silk,
to make everything dirty which is beautiful.
complete
pure
detachment. But in white all the colours
Actually, a person who is detached is the
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-35.txt 
 Jan. & Feb. 2004
134
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue 1 & 2
are mixed, then only it becomes white-such one has to wear those dresses to
announce to the world because if you have
a balance and unity it is. It should be that
you should become white and whiter than to work in a short time then you have to
take to that intensive behavior like Christ,
snow. Detachment is purity, is innocence.
you can say or Adishankaracharya. All these
innocence is such a light, light that really
people had a very very short life. In that
blinds you to all that is filthy. You would not
even know that a person has come with short Ilife they had to achieve such a
bad intentions. A person comes to you, tremendous task that they had to actually
comes to steal. You will say, 'come along, take a military uniform just to avoid
what do you want'. You will offer him tea problems, Not to impress others. Now-a-
and all that, then, he says,. "I have come days people do it just to impress others that
to rob you". "Alright rob me, if you want they are detached and do just the things
to", So he might not rob you at all. That is opposite to it. So, we understand that first
work is not to harm anyone-Ahimsa. Not to
what is innocence, which one may
develop, only through Detachment. kill anyone. That does not mean that you
Detachment is of. Do not allow your do not have to eat meat and fish and all
attention to get involved into something, that. That is all nonsense. Of course
you
should not hanker after food, no doubt about
even rituals of anything. Say, now we have
not washed Mataji's Feet, alright, it does it. You do not kill anyone means, you do
not matter. You love Me. Alright. If some not kill a human being. Thou shall not kill.
mistakes may be committed what does it So first thing is not to harm anyone.
Second is to know that you have
matter? If you see in the abstract plane,
It's love. This is just a step forward, like found the TRUTH and give the testimony
somebody ran very fast and fell down of the TRUTH.
Third is the Detachment, the way, I
before reaching Me and says, "Mother,
Sorry, I fell down before reaching you, I have told you about Detachment. Not to
should not have done that. But, Mother get attached to any one person because
see, how I prostrated before you". It's a heis a relation or something; but develop
a universal feeling and also not to hate
complete poetry-Detachment.
anyone. That is a kind of worst attachment.
So, one has to develop that
So,
detachment to be a Guru. And that This word should go away from the mouth
detachment does not mean Sanyas of all Sahaja Yogis 'I hate'. It is called as
or anything like that. Sometimes Dandak, in the statute. You cannot hate
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-36.txt 
 The Divine Coot Breeze Volume-XVI Issue: 1& 2
35
Jan. & Feb. 2004
relationship, the purity of their relationship
anyone, even Rakshasas. Better not hate
them. Give them a chance.
must be understood . Then only you can
Now the fourth statute of the Lord
have a very very happy married life which
is, to lead a moral life. These Statutes were
is the basis. "Thou shall not commit
given by all the Gurus. Take them from adultery," Christ has said (Perhaps he
Soorates onwards. Moses, Ibrahim,
knew the modern people as they would be
using their brains for this)., He said, "Thou
Dattatreya, Janaka, upto say Nanak,
Mohammed Sahib and take up to the point
shall not have adulterous eyes". What a
when it was about hundred years back at
vision, in those days to think. Even, I could
not understand it when I was in India. Only
the most-was Sainath. All of them have
after
said that you have to lead a Moral life. None
coming
here I could see, what it
of them had said that you do not get could mean. It is a possession on the
married, that you should not talk to your eyes-Possession. It is a joyless, useless
wife or you should have no relationship behavior. Attention is frittered away
with your wife. All this is nonsense. Lead a
completely. There is no dignity. 'Eyes
moral life. When you are young and not
should be steady. If you look at somebody
married, keep your eyes on the ground, steadily, he should know that you have
Mother Earth gives you that innocence. Sahaja Yoga in you. With love, with respect,
Most of the confusions and problems, with dignity. Not staring at people, which
is just playing in the hands of these
specially in the Western life have come
because they have thrown morality to the possessions. The whole society is
sea and to accept morality as the very possessed. All the Satanic forces have
basis of society is very difficult for them. been let loose, I think and the way the
It is complete reversion. But you have to people are possessed, they cannot see
do it, you have to turn the whole wheel through these things. They are supposed
to be Christians. Attention is to be looked
back. So many things were done in the
beginning of the society to establish these
after. That is the most important thing.
Because attention is the one which is going
pure relationships. There are laws which
act, just as chemical laws are there, to be enlightened.
So, we have to know what morality
physical laws are there in chemistry and
is. Let people laugh and say that these are
physics. There are human laws which one
should understand, the relationship goodie-goodies or this sort of thing. We
between each other. The sublimity of their are proud and not ashamed of being
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-37.txt 
 The Divine Coal Breeze Volume-XVI Issue
1& 2
Jan. & Feb. 2004
36
righteous people. This is a very important
part-of righteousness. Those who do not
of that-it is like mixing of darkness with
light. Miserliness is not allowed in Sahaja
follow this, will lose their vibrations very Yoga.
Anybody, whose mind goes on how
fast.
Then for a Guru, He should not
much money I can save, how much labour
accumulate things; he should not have can I save-there are many labour saving
much possessions, If he has possessions
devices, and money-saving devices-and
also cheating others or making money out
they should be just what he needs. A Guru
must give away his possessions. He of few things here and there and all such
should not have stamp-collection and all
things are against Sahaja Yoga. They will
such kinds of collections. Whatever things pull you down. Enjoy your generosity. How
are useful and beautiful, which give many times must I have told you about
happiness and joy to others, to their eyes,
Generosity. I remember; once I wanted to
such things must be collected. He should
give a sari that I had from abroad. You see,
in India, the people like that kind of a sari
have such things which give symbolic
very much, although I do not understand
importance to his life, very symbolic, which
why they like this nylon sort of sari. A lady
suggest that he is a Dharmic person. He
should not have things that are symbolic said, "I have not got a sari from abroad
and I would like to have one imported sari".
of Adharmikta, of irreligious life. Everything
that he has or wears or shows should be
I had only one such sari left with me
representative of his Dharmikta. I do not
because I am quite good at giving away.
Sol told one of my niece-in-laws that I want
know the situation here but in India, when
to give away this sari to her. On a holy day,
we were young we were not allowed to
listen to all kinds of music. Not allowed, we can give it to elders and so I will give it
just not allowed to see all sort of filthy to her. She said, "You have only one left
things, filthy documentaries etc. Anything
now, why do you want to give away even
that is impure, giving bad vibrations that. You have given away all you had". I
should not be possessed. Even whatever said, "Now, I feel like giving. I will give it
away". And we were discussing this in the
you have, you should think whom you can
kitchen andI said, "why do you tell me, I
give this. So, it means you should have
am not going to take advice on this point".
possessions to express your generosity.
Sahaja Yogi has to be generous like the And at that time, the bell rang and a
sea. A miserly Sahaja Yogi-I cannot think gentleman came. He had brought three
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-38.txt 
 Jan. & Feb. 2004
37
The Divine Col Breeze Volume-XVI Issue: 18 2
things you win over as if the vibrations flow
saris for me from Africa and one of them
through those things and work out for those
as one I had.
was exactly the same
Because I had given some silk saris to people.
Then, for a Sahaja Yogi it is
this lady when she was going to Africa,
she thought she could send me some important to use things which are more
saris, and she sent me these saris. You natural in their character. Give up
are just standing in the centre; from one artificiality and be more natural. I do not
door it comes and from the other it goes.
mean that take out the roots and eat them
It is nice to see all that
or you eat the fish raw. I do not mean that.
movement. It is
Always you must avoid going too far with
very interesting.
Apart from that the way you give it, the things. But try to lead a life which is
the emotional side of it is so beautiful, you more natural. Natural, in the sense that
cannot imagine it. I met a lady after say people know that there is no vanity about
thirty years of her married life in London, you. Some people can be the other way
suddenly and she said, "Oh what a round. You see, they will dress up like a
coincidence". I said, "why"?. She said, "| tramp, just to attract more attention. I mean
am wearing the same pearl necklace you there can be both ways. Then I find some
had given me on my wedding day today, people colouring their hair and all that. So
and I should meet you". The whole thing, you have to be a natural person; very
the whole drama changed with the natural in your behavior. It can mean
anything absurd also to some people who
meeting. It is how you give even a small
thing It is the greatest art of giving that do not use their wisdom. Wisdom is very
important in Sahaja Yoga, that you have to
one has to learn in Sahaja Yoga. Give up
keep intact all the time. Natural means you
the mundane type of things, like if you go
to somebody's birthday, you send a card, must wear natural dresses, which are
'thank you, very much'. Make it a more suitable to you,for example in this climate
deeper significant thing. Let us see how there is no use to wear dress like Rama
used to wear. He will not wear anything on
you develop your symbols of love. When
you have these things of vibrations and you the top, there was no need, You have to
wear the dress of whatever country you
will give it to a Sahaja Yogi, he will know
what it is. Blever lack in generosity belong; whatever suits the occasion.
Whatever you think is dignified and good.
specially among Sahaja Yogis. Gradually,
It speaks for your more elegance and your
you will be amazed how through small
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-39.txt 
 38
Jan. & Feb. 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI issue : 182
normal is very important in Şahaja Yoga.
personality. Whatever suits you, you
Then we have to know that Sahaja
should wear, not like all the people wearing
moss colour dress, the great suit, a Yogis have to get over all kinds of
horrible looking and making clowns out of discriminations and identifications
them. No clownish things are necessary, according to races, colour and different
no dandy stuff is necessary. Simple, religions in which you are born. As a
beautiful dresses should be worn which Christian, you don't belong to a Church,
give you dignity. Actually in the East, people
you are not born in a Church. Thank God,
believe that God has given you a beautiful
otherwise all the spirits there will capture
body and it is to be adorned with the beauty
you, immediately. But these identifications
of what human beings have created, just
will linger on. To accept anything new, you
have to be reborn and you are reborn now.
to respect It, just to worship your body.
For example, in India women wear their
Now, you are Dharamatita means you need
saris and saris are expressive of their not follow any particular type of religion.
moods and expression of their worship of You are open to all religions and the
their bodies, because you must respect
essences of all religions you have to take.
You have not to denounce any religion or
your body. Dresses should be such that
they should be for utility as well as dignity.
insult any religious incarnation at any time,
it is a sin. It is a great sin in Sahaja Yoga
There is no need to have uniform clothes
for Sahaja Yogis at all. I don't like it. There
and you know who they are. There should
be no racial understanding of one self. You
should be variety as nature is. Everyone
should look a different person. For Puja could be Chinese or of any group. You
etc. all can wear something similar, it could be anything. As long as we are
doesn't matter where your attention need human beings, we should know that we
not be on the variety. But outside, you laugh the same way, we smile the same
should be normal person. You are all way, we hold the same way. This is all
householders, nobody has to renounce
conditioning in our mind of this society that
something. For you people, I don't even
are touchables some are
some
untouchable. This is in our Indian
advise to put the red mark when walking
on the street. You should be normal Community, horrible. Brahmanism of India
has ruined India completely and you learn
person, not to be pointed out. You need not
from for example, who was Vyasa, the one
be dressed absurdly or in funny way but in
a normal way as others wear. To be who wrote Geeta; who was he? He was
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-40.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue: 1&2
39
Jan. & Feb. 2004
illegitimate son of a fisherwoman. That is tempered by this Society, which teaches
why deliberately he was born like that. All
you how to smoke cigar and how to have
the Brahmins who read Geeta, ask them
your lager morning till evening. All this
who was Vyasa? Brahims are those who
training and conditioning has to be thrown
are realised souls and for realised souls,
away just like filth and see that God has
there is nothing like such non-sensical created all of you as his own children. It is
things like where and in what caste or such a beautiful thing. Why you want to
community you are born. With all education make it with these ugly ideas. All this
ugliness of "I like or dislike" is nonsense.
and everything in the West, we find this
nonsense of Racialism, I just can't Only there should be one word "I Love".
understand. If somebody is fair or dark, Forget every thing. There is no need to
after all God had to make variety, in colour, remember what British did to Indians or
in every way. Who told you that you are Germans did to Jews. Forget everything.
the most handsome people going round. Those people who did it are dead and
May be for some markets here or in finished. We are different people, we are
saints. This is from the Statutes I have told
Hollywood, it may fit but in the kingdom of
God, all these 'so called' handsome people,
you, which you have to imbibe.
will be denied entry-marrying seven
But, today, I authorise you to be the
husbands and all sort of things. They will
Gurus, so that through your own character
all be put in Hell. The beauty is of the
and through own personality, the way you
heart and not of the face, that shows and
practice Sahaja Yoga in your own life and
shines. May be, people are a little bit aware
manifest the light, others will follow you. And
of it,; that is why they go and tan the faces.
that you will establish the statutes of the
I do not know. They are quite aware but
lord in their hearts and emancipate them.
there is too much "Showing-Off" they are Give them their salvation, because you
doing, Some people like black hair others have got, your salvation. You are the
like red hair, I mean there have to be all channels, without the channels this all
pervading power cannot work out. That's
types of hair, why do you like a particular
type of hair; this I cannot understand. There
the system. If you see the Sun, its light
is nothing like or dislike. What God has spreads through it's rays, from your heart
created is all beautiful, who are you to the blood flows through arteries, they
judge that I like or dislike, 'l who is this 'l', become smaller and smaller. You are the
you see, is Mr.
Ego, which is being
arteries which is going to flow this blood of
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-41.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Voluma-XVI Issue :1& 2
40
Jan, & Feb. 2004
behaves in a very normal way and
my love to all the people. If arteries are
broken the blood will not reach the people.
sometimes you are outwitted. But you see
That is why you are so important. The how in small things also, She behaves.
bigger you become, the bigger the arteries
How Her character is expressed, how Her
become. Then you encompass more Love is expressed. Try to remember Her
forgiveness. Then you should know that
people, by that you are more responsible.
Guru must have the dignity. Guru means
you have the Guru that many people must
you!
the weight, is the Gravity, Gurutwa have desired to have, who is the source
of all Gurus. It is the ardent desire of even
means gravity. You must have the gravity
Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesha to have a
by your weight, means the weight of your
character, weight of your dignity, weight of
Guru like that. They must be all jealous of
your behavior, weight of your faith; and your you. But this Guru is very elusive, so to
You become Guru not
improve your void, say that" Mother you are
through
light.
frivolousness and vanity. Cheapness, our Guru". Because of this elusiveness,
that fear or that awe, that respect which is
vulgar language, cheap jokes, anger and
necessary, for the Guru is not established.
temper-all must be avoided completely.
Weild the weight of your sweetness of your Unless and until you develop that awe,
tongue, of the dignity, which will attract complete awe within you, your Guru
people just like the flower which is loaded
principle will not be established. No liberty
is to be taken. I am telling you Myself butI
with nectar, attract the bees from all over.
In the same way you will be attracting am extremely elusive; next moment I make
people. Be proud of that, be very very you laugh and forget about it, because I
proud of that and have sympathies for am testing your freedom to do it-
Complete freedom. I play with you in such
others and care for others.
a manner that you will be forgetting every
Now, in shortI have to tell you how
that I am
your Guru, every
you have to do it yourself. You have to work
moment
out your void clearly. First of all you have
to know that void catches when you had a
So first of all you must find about
your own Guru, establish Her in your heart.
wrong type of a Guru. You must know about
your Guru entirely. Try to find out the
character of your Guru. Rather difficult otherwise, I must say, wish I had one like
I mean you have a wonderful 'Guru'
because your Guru is very elusive. She is that myself. And She is desireless and
Mahamaya; not easy to find out. She sinless, absolutely sinless. Whatever I do
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-42.txt 
 Jan. & Feb. 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze Volumie-XVI Issue 1 & 2
it is not a sin for me. I can kill anyone and
the source of all the Shaktis - of all powers,
do whatever intrigue or anything. I really
so you can have all the powers from me,
tell you, that's a fact. Do anything, I am whatever you like. I am desireless but
above sin but I see to it that I do not do
whatever desires you have will be fulfilled.
Even about Me, you have to desire, look at
anything like that in your presence, so that
you do not get one of these things, because
that how much I am bound by you. Unless
and until you desire My good health, I will
that is my quality. You have a very supreme
have bad health. It is to that extent. But to
Guru, no doubt, but still you must know that
those powers of supremacy you don't Me, what it is bad health and good health.
have. I am above all these things. I do not Under these beautiful conditions you
should really prosper so well. There should
know what temptations are, nothing, I
be no problems for you to be Gurus.
mean I do.
Now, the void is to be established.
"Whatever I like, it is all my Whim.
But despite that I have made myseif very First of all you must know your Guru and
normal because I must appear before you She is on every chakra. Imagine what
in such a manner that you understand
tremendous Guru you have. With that you
feel the confidence and because of such
what is the Statutes. For me there are no
Statutes. I make these Statutes. Because tremendous Guru everybody is getting
of you I do all these things and teach you
Realization so easily. If you go to a rich
man for alms, he is not going to give two
small things, because you are still children.
In the same way you must pies only. Because She is so powerful
remember that when you are talking to you are getting your powers just like that.
other people about Sahaja Yoga, So you have to feel very happy about it
remember that they will see you all the time extremely happy and beautiful that you have
At least, those who have
these powers.
and try to understand how far you are in it.
been in Sahaja Yoga will know it for certain.
As I understand you, you
to
try
Those who have come to my lecture for
understand them. As I love you, you try to
love them I definitely love you, no doubt the first time will be little puzzled. All of
you know for definite what it is.
but I am Nirmala-1 am beyond love.
So, to understand for your own
Different state altogether.
Under these cięcumstances you Guru-power, you first know who is your
Guru-Sakshat Adishakti. Oh God? it is too
are much better off because no Guru ever
goes to that extent. Apart from that I am much. Then establish your void. A Guru
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-43.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue
182
Jan & Feb. 2004
42
such heights.
does not bend his head before anybody they have achieved
else, specially My disciples; except for Recognise them, Respect them. You will
mothers, sisters and you see in some establish your Guru-tatwa.
Imbibe all the Statutes within you,
relationship, if it is, so you bow to that. But
they do not bow to anybody else.
be proud about them. Don't be misguided
Secondly, you must know that your by what the people are talking. We are
Guru has been the Mother of very great
going to pull the whole multitudes towards
people. The thought of that itself should ourselves. First of all let us establish our
establish your Guru tatwa (Guru-principle).
weight, the Gravity. As Mother Earth keeps
What tremendous sons I have had! What
everybody pulling towards earth, we will be
great personalities! No words can pulling all of them to ourselves.
describe and so many of them, one after
Today, all of you must, within
another and you are in the same tradition!
yourself to your SPIRIT, promise that you
My disciples! Keep them as your ideals.
Try to follow them. Read about them,
will be a Guru worthy of your Mother.
understand them what they have said, how
May God bless you!
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-44.txt 
 Instruction of Shri Mataji to all Sahaja Yogis.
(Sahaja Yoga keeps away physical and other disorders)
|1 is necessary to be always alert
gives others great pleasure to fall on Her feet,
as regards the chakras. They should be She may find it troublesome due to 'Badhas'
always kept clear of the external 'badhas' and
in their beings. ' It is customary in India, for
catches. Regular salt water bath shall help
the young to serve the elders by pressing
ensure this. More often than not, ingress of their feet who in turn bless them. This
badhas' which cause physical and other courtesy is often extended to the Mother
ailments, is through eyes and food. Special
but, being different from others, She does
not need it. If she asks someone to do so, it
care in this regard is always advisable.
Deities are awake when the chakras are
is for clearing the chakras of that person and
open and help Sahaja Yogis. Taking not for Her personal pleasure. All should
'Bandhana' before going to bed also protects therefore make it a point not to touch Her
being without Her permission.
from 'badhas'.
Using symbolic gestures of hands
to clear own chakras, raising the Kundalini,
A devotee always likes to please his
deity. Our Mother is so kind that She is
pleased to see Her children happy and getting into Bandhana, raising left or right side
to correct imbalance should be desisted from
progressing well in Sahaja Yoga. She visits
when we are among non-Sahaja-Yogi
different places and countries to meet them
and solve their problems. They should be audiences. All this could be done equally
equally responsive and show more progress effectively with the attention. It serves no
every time She meets them, instead of telling
useful purpose to throng the gate of the hall
Her the problems. Undoubtedly, by practising
to receive the Mother at the place of Her
Her teachings Sahaja Yogis will be the discourse. Preferably all should be, seated
before Her arrival and respectfully stand up
happiest people in the world.
It is natural to feel love for the Mother.
as she enters the hall and receive Her with
Silence is the best expression of it, as She
folded hands. It is imperative to seek Her
understands the subtlest things from the permission before garlanding. Generally She
heart of hearts. Rushing forward to touch Her
allows it soon after the arrival when She also
enquires about the welfare of the people.
feet without permission, attempting to attract.
Problems if any should be explained briefly
Her attention, speaking unasked, meeting
Her at Her residence are undesirable at this time. If She does not tell the solution
to any problem, immediately it should not be
insisted upon. Her silence indicates that She
manners of expressing this love. Our Divine
Mother is the quintessence of purity. While it
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-45.txt 
 Jan. & Feb. 2004
44
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue 1& 2
has noted the problem and a solution is books and adopting Her teachings sincerely,
it is leaving all the problems to Her instead of
soon to follow.
solving, them through ego. An easy way to
and
modesty
Her
easy
surrender is to emulate Her way of life and
approachability and respectul treatment to
Her qualities.
all tend to be misunderstood. It is necessary
In the moments of temptation
to observe all decorum and protocol in Her
provocation, or tension or depression, one
presence and be humble, respectful,
attentitive and responsive to Her. All deities
can always ask aneself, "Would the Mother
behave as I am doing?" Remembering Her
always attend to Her and do not tolerate even
the slightest disrespect to Her. They may and thinking what she would do in the
circumstances, should be a guiding force and
show some restraint in Her presence out of
a great help in keeping away negative forces.
modesty and love for Her but beyond a
For the twice-borns life is a constant
certain limit they may act, in which case
punishments is in ascapable capable. All struggle with the negativity, assisted by their
personal discussion should end as soon
own ego and super ego, which may confront
them. Negativity maybe inherent; existing
as she enters the hall and should never be
done in Her presence. Disturbance in Her within us in the subtlest form accumulated
as a result of past Karmas, not only of this
speech must be avoided. She does not need
life but also previous ones. Alternatively we
may come across external negativity In daily
any explanation suggestions or comments.
Devotion is not possible without
surrender. Ego and Super ego are the life.
Inner negativity may identify itself with
obstacles to surrender. A western Sahara
outer negativity, at an opnortune moment and
Yogi truely says "I look at my ego and smile,
What trick will you not try to keep me from if not checked may neutralise all the good
myself? Surrendering ego and superego at influence of the Mother. It is therefore
the Lotus Feet of the Mother is an essential
essential thal after realisation, no one should
go to any of the negative gurus, or ricks read
step towards self-realisation. Surrendering
their literature. It is better to abstain from the
is accepting-that the Mother is supreme
and the creatrix of the universe, that she discussions on negativity and mixing with
Vibrations should be
negative people.
knows what is best for us; that every spoken
word of Hers is pranava manifest. checked before entering a temple.
Surrendering is forgetting past experiences,
The Divine Mother should have a
Gurus and knowledge gained from reading
place in our hearts. Always remembering Her
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-46.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue: 1 & 2
Jan. & Feb. 2004.
45
or maintaining thoughtlessness will cultivate
Notwithstanding all that has been said,
an attitude of detachment towards mundane
seeds of Sahaja Yoga sown by the Mother
will germinate and grow into big trees only in
affairs. Daily shoe beating (or chappal
beating) of one's own name can remove
the proper environments. The Mother protects
them by Her All Pervading Powers, but the
subtle negativity. Bandhana to
internal
negative people and shoe beating of their individuals have to provide requisite
environments, They have to make judicious
names will keep them away and may even
use of the freedom of choice given to them
improve them. Ignoring other's mistakes and
follies instead of criticising them or
and persevere along the path shown by the
complaining against them promotes Mother. Almighty God is waiting to receive
magnanimity. Efforts to inculcate these them. Those who cannot reach Him will have
qualities may be very helpful.
only themselves to blame.
Dearest Brothers and Sisters of India
Our stay in India is now drawing to an end and it has been such a rich and deep
experience for us all, we have so much to thank you all for. We thank you for the warmth
of your hospitality, your love and your patience. We will be returning horme with such
respect and love for Mother India and her people.
For most of us it was our first meeting with our Mother and what a perfect back
drop India has been for this great occasion! We thank Mataji, our Mother with all our
hearts for the Joy and learning of the past two months and we thank you too for your
great generosity, and for all that you have done to make us so welcomed and so at
home.
With our deepest love and gratitude.
Jai Mataji
An Australian Sahaja Yogini
New Delhi, February-1981
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-47.txt 
 DEVOTION
ALL Sahaja Yogis become twice- to the respective chakra. Devotion to the
borns when they get Realisation from the Mother amounts to devotion to all Gods.
Devotion has many aspects, some
who can lead them to salvation because are gross and some subtle. It may not be
she is one with Primordial Father Shiva- correct to consider one to be better than
'Shaktaikya - roopini'. Sahaja yogis have a another, as all are necessary in the interest
glimpse of the ultimate slage of the of spiritual progress. Meditation in the
evolutionary process, When they go into eariy hours of morning is of immense
the thoughtless blissful awareness at Her importance. Before leaving the bed,
one should bow with great regards to
goal and depending upon physical and the Mother Earth. It may be useful to
mental conditions, may have a long way meditate in the bed itself for someone
to go. Having got this never-before- before leaving the bed, but after cleaning
experienced, Realisation from the Mother, oneself one should meditate before the
the conviction should be firm in mind that Mother's photograph. 'Bandhan' to self and
devotion to the Mother and meditating as to the seat should be done before starting
per Her instructions, is the only way to the meditation. Bow before the Mother in
Divine Mother. It is only the Divine Mother
lotus feet. Each one therefore knows the
great reverence and beseech Her
The Mother's powers are all forgiveness for wrong doings and
pervading and distance cannot inhibit the blessings for becoming Her worthy child
spiritual communication between Sahaja The Pooja should be performed after bath
Yogis and the Mother; collective using good quality material and a clean
consciousness is Her precious gift to cloth. It is advisable to sit in meditation after
them. Her presence can always be felt Pooja also, for some time, In the evening
through vibratory awareness. She knows perform 'Aarti' and meditate. Attending the
the activities of each of Her sons and programmes of collective meditation in a
daughters through Her all pervading centre once a week is necessary for well-
salvation.
powers, takes care of their well being, being and progress.
prevents and corrects the disorders in their
systems and keeps raising
External and internal purity are of
their utmost importance. However going to an
Kundalinis. Her response to their call is extreme in respect of superficial
always assured. She is keeping Her cleanliness is not desirable as it may
promise of "Yogakshemam Vahamyaham'. detract the attention from via media.
It is incorrect to assume that God Nevertheless, salt water treatment before
and the Mother are different. All Gods fully going to bed, that is, meditating with feet
manifest themselves within Her and they dipped in lukewarm water with salt (in front
do not like to be distinguished from Her. of the Mother's photograph) should be
Any such notion is bound to cause damage
taken regularly. It is the specific.
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-48.txt 
 Jan. & Feb. 2004
The Divine Cool Breeze Volume-XVI Issue : 18 2
example of surrender and love. And we have
Letters
felt the reflection of your devotion on your own
Zurich, 10th February
behaviour, how wise you are, how confident
you are, how you begin to master the intensity
My dear sisters and brothers,
of the present! Here in the West we see the
future, we foresee, we plan and our
Back to Europe, back to the cold, the
speedometer goes mad. We do not have
snow and the wind. But it is impossible for
time to realise the beauty of the present and
us to forget your evershining sun, your
it is only through the present that we can enjoy
unforgettable sunsets, the light and the
our Mother's creation.
brightness of your country. Colourful
We have seen you for the first time,
countrysides, unspoiled villages, the
and very soon we felt that you have resided
freshness to your atmosphere and the daily
in our hearts for ages and ages and in the
life of all the people we have met have invited
first acquaintance we have recognised you
us to peace and deeper meditation. And the
as our brothers and sisters, out of joy and
Sahaja Yogis we have seen have led us to
eager to share it with all of us. We had just to
discover the inner joy of the inhabitants of
receive and let us be pushed by this dynamics
your blessed country.
of affection. Our greatest experience is that
We know that we have got, in the
we have seen for the first time intermediates
West a bad habit to thank for everything. So between our Beloved Mother and us,
we do not let speak our mind but our hearts.
Through your awareness you understand
We would try, through this letter to express
much more and you discover much more
on behalf of all the Western Sahaja Yogis
easily the Divine Beauty of The Adi Shakti,
that you have earned so much our gratitude
because you feel much more and you
for the way you have welcomed us in your
absorb through your acting spirit and not
great country, for the way you have given
through a tired mind. At the same time your
us so much love, joy and brotherhood.
ego is deflated and your humility greater.
You, all of you, have been so sweet
Thanks to your behaviour we see Mother
with us that really we could see how our
beloved Mother acted through your smiles,
higher and higher, more Divine and more
powerful, because we see how you behave
attitudes and generosity. Our heart is filled
with Her with full attention, respect, devotion
with thankfulness and admiration. Your
and adoration. You speak to Her when She
devotion to our Mother has been a perfect
speaks to you and you would never begin to
 2004_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-49.txt 
 Jan. & Feb. 2004
The Divine Coal Breeze Volume-XVI issue
1& 2
48
speak at once, or interrupt Her. You respect
and deeper.
the protocol. May we follow your
We all pray the Creator of this
universe and we make altogether this
straightfowardness and your enthusiasm in
order to glorify the one who is worthy of being
absolute promise that we shall see only the
seen and understood only by our spirit.
beauty which is sparkling in us, we shall love
each other with more intensity remembering
It was a great time where the West
and the East dissolved in our Mother's love,
how much our Mother loves us, we shall
when we discovered our own beauty
share among us the feeling of belonging to
enlightened by God and learned how to
the children of God.
Let us put ourselves under Mother's
respect each other and how to show
affection to each other. This feeling of protection, let us meet again and again under
togetherness and communicative love,
the intensity of Mother's persence and let us
bestowed by our beloved Mother is our goal
glorify Her all together all the time because it
and achievment. It is through this circulation
is only through Her Grace that we were able,
of love and joy among us that the collective
my dear brothers and sisters, to discover
being manifests more and more, that your own beauty and the sparkling of your
Mother's divinity penetrates into us deeper
joyful spirit.
Much Much love and Jai Shri Mataji
Ameau, Maria-Amelia, Marie-Laure,
Ibe
Gregoire, Catherine, Christine
Brothers and Sisters of India
With open amms and open hearts you welcomed us from the West. With Mother's
love and grace wo have been invited and your giving of love has showed us much
more about the beauty of life. The past weeks have been filled with many experiences.
From the mass realization in Kadus to the making of a film twenty four storeys up in
Bombay. You have given us so much from your beautiful hearts and taught us the love,
missing from our society. Thank you for it all and thank you dear Mother for making it
possible.
Jai Shri Mataji
Phillip.
