Yuvadrishti An offering at the lotur feet of our Divine Mother by the Yuvathakti Volume 6 June 2005 ISsue 2 ell Dajians Sahaja ayoga

 AHAHAAYAKANAHANAAAAAK Index MAHATMA GANDHI भवसागर 10 Vedavati स ब्िज 11 अडम्स Му деаr childre... 12 тей... A Scientist's Curiosity! 13 Why Seven loops? Prophetic Visions of the 16 Divine Feminine in modern Europe. THE META CULTURAL 21 REVOLUTION Cover Page Tiero, Italy Back Page David Vignolii, Brazil TAKAHAMAAKAAHAAAKAHAHAAKAKALAAAK BMMMMMMMMiMAMMM

 МАНАТМА А GANDHI (1869-1948) "The objects of this massive tribute, died as he had always lived, private man, without wealth, without property, without official title or office. Mahatma Gandhi not commander of armies, nor a ruler of vast lands. He could not boast any scientific achievement or artistic gift yet men, governments, dignitaries from all over the world have joined hands today to pay homage to this little brown man in the loin cloth who led his country to freedom. In the words of General George C. Marshall, the American Secretary of State, Mahatma Gandhi has become spokesman for the conscious of all mankind, he was a man who made humility and simple truth more powerful than empires, and Albert Einstein added, generations to come will scarce believe that such a one as this, ever in flesh and blood, walked upon this earth", is the commentary during the death procession of Mahatma Gandhi with which the award winning movie, "Gandhi" starts. It quite sums up his life's work and the reverence with which men and women around the world held him. Ordinary beginnings of an extraordinary life: There was nothing unusual about the boy Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, except perhaps that he was very shy. He had no unusual talents, and went through school as somewhat less than average student: self conscious and serious, deeply devoted to his parents, and only vaguely aware of anything outside the quiet seaside town of his birth. It was the end of nineteenth century, when the British Empire, at the peak of its wealth and power extended around the world. India was in its second century of British domination. "I was born at Porbandar, otherwise known as Sudamapuri, on the 2 October, 1869. I passed my childhood at Porbandar. I recollect having been put to school. It was with some difficulty that I got through the multiplication tables. The fact that I recollect nothing more of those days than having learnt, in company of other boys, to call our teacher all kinds of names, would strongly suggest that my intellect must have been sluggish and my memory raw." "I was afraid of anyone poking fun at me. Moreover, Iwas a coward. Iused to be haunted by the fear of thieves, ghosts and serpents. Idid not dare to stir out of doors at nights. Darkness was a terror to me. It was almost impossible for me to sleep in the dark, as I would imagine ghosts coming from one direction, thieves from another and serpents from a third. I could therefore not dare to sleep without a light in the room.'

 At the age of thirteen, while he was still in high school, Gandhi was married. It was, he wrote later, a preposterously early" age. But Kasturbai was an attractive girl and Gandhi quickly learned the role of a passionate, jealous and an exacting husband. It was, in many ways a very ordinary beginning. But it was a beginning ofan extraordinary life. Transformation: Gandhi graduated from high school with a mediocre average and then went to college. He failed in every class. Every subject seemed impossible to follow. After five SL months of consistent failure he withdrew and came back to home. It was now decided that Gandhi would go London to study law. His first few months in England were a nightmare. Everything around him was different. Never had he felt so alone. For weeks Gandhi was on the verge of turning back and taking the next boat home. But something deeper within him was determined to stick it out. He was then advised by an Indian acquaintance to learn the English way of life. Gandhi saw the point and thus started his first experiment in mimicking lifestyles. He engaged tutors in French and speaking, and bought expensive tailored suits and a silk top hat. He taught himself how to tie a necktie, and learned to admire himself before a mirror while he struggled to discipline his hair with proper an English brush. He even invested in violin lessons and tried to learn the foxtrot. In about three months the experiment failed. Far from giving him greater security, it only made him more self-conscious. The gap between his inner self and out ward selves was widening into a chasm. He began to experiment with simpler ways of life. He found an apartment, which was centrally located so that he could walk to wherever he needed to go. Then he experimented with his diet and realized that the sense of taste lies not in the tongue but in the mind. Transformation had only begun, the Mahatma world knows today was still a fair distance away. After completing law Gandhi sailed home. His brief stay in India was a complete professional failure for him. Then an opportunity came to go for a case to South Africa. He found himself in a land where color of his skin was enough to mark him off for daily contempt and even physical abuse. Within the first few days in South Africa an incident happened, which left a life long impression on Gandhi. At Maritzburg, he was thrown out of the train for traveling first class. Only the 'whites' could travel first class. He spent the night in the waiting room, brooding and shivering in the cold. Should he return in India? But to flee would be cowardice. He decided to resist the evil. Many years later in India, when Gandhi was asked about his most creative moments, he narrated the night at Maritzburg

 railway station. In South Africa he had to undergo many trials, suffer abuse and even physical attacks, but that long night in the Natal Mountains, he made the decision to never to yield to force and never to use force to win a cause. After the lawsuit settled, Gandhi prepared to sail for India. Gandhi had been in South Africa for twelve months. Before his departure he was given a farewell party. During the festivities someone handed him the day's Natal Mercury, and in it he found a brief item regarding the Natal governments proposed bill to deprive Indians of their right to elect members of their legislature. Gandhi stressed on the necessity of resisting this move. His friends were ready but they were 'unlettered, lame' men, they said, and powerless without him. He consented to stay a month. He remained twenty years fighting the battle for Indian rights. He won. Gandhi who worsted the South African government in prolonged combat had first conquered himself and transformed his living habits and inner essence. Gandhi was a self-remade man. It is not that he turned failure into success. Using the clay that was there he turned himself into another person. He was a remarkable case of second birth in one lifetime. From one battlefield to another, India: Gandhi returned to India in 1915, and then began his struggle against the British rule. His aim was not merely substitution of British rule with Indian rule. Not governments but methods and objectives interested him, not whether a William or a Chandra sat in the seat of power but whose deeds were more civilized. He believed that India's mission was to 'elevate the moral being'. Therefore, 'if the English become Indianized we can accommodate them'. His nationalism lacked the usual concomitants of nationalism; exclusiveness and hostility towards other countries. My patriotism', Gandhi declared, 'is subservient to my religion'. He was too religious to serve one land, one race, one cast, one family, one person, or even one religion. His religion was humanity. No theory guided his thoughts or actions. He strove to keep his mind open. He reserved the right to differ with himself. His life was an unending experiment. He experimented even in his seventies. There was nothing set abouthim. He wasnot a conforming Hindu, nor a conforming nationalist nor a conforming pacifist. Gandhi was independent, unfettered, unpredictable, hence exciting and difficult. A conversation with him was a voyage of discovery: he dared to go anywhere without a chart. Under attack, he rarely defended himself. Humble and simple, he did not have to pretend dignity. Thus relieved of uncreative mental tasks, he was free to be creative. Nor did say or do anything merely to gain popularity or win or mollify followers. He upset the applecart frequently. His inner need to perform a given act took precedence over its possible effects on his supporters. he 3

 Shaking the Empire with a pinch of salt: Gandhi was the most bewildering opponent any nation or empire ever faced. Every move he made was spontaneous; every year that passed more youthful, more radical and more experimental. British administrators were baffled and exasperated by this little man. No one knew what he was going to do next for his actions were prompted not by stale calculations but by a deep intuition, which often came to him only in the eleventh hour. Never was this more evident than in the salt Satyagraha of 1930 ('Satyagraha" was a term Gandhi gave to his non violent movement. 'satya' is truth, which equals love, and 'agraha' is firmness or force. It therefore, means, truth-force or love-force.) It brought Gandhi and the Indian struggle to the attention of the world. On the first of January 1930, at the stroke of midnight the Indian Congress party raised the flag of the new nation to usher in the struggle for complete independence. All of India looked to Gandhi to see what would happen next. A new Satyagraha campaign seemed imminent, but no one including Gandhi had any idea of what it would be or when it would be launched. After weeks of deliberations, the answer dawned upon Gandhi. It was breathtakingly simple. The government had imposed a law forbidding Indians to make their own salt, making them dependent on British monopoly for what is, in a tropical country a necessity of life. To Gandhi it was a perfect symbol of colonial exploitation. He proposed to march to a little coastal town of Dandi, some two hundred and forty miles away, where salt from sea lay free for taking on the sand. When he gave the signal in India was to act as if the salt laws had never been enacted at all. It was an epic march. to preach everyone Gandhi, at sixty one, covered 12 miles a days on foot, stopping at every village on the way the gospel of ahimsa and the duty of non violent non cooperation. Everywhere he passed people streamed out to meet him, lining the roads between towns and strewing his path with flowers. By the time he reached Dandi, twenty-four days later his non-violent army of sixty-eight had swelled to several thousand. Through the night of their arrival Gandhi and his followers prayed for strength to resist the vielence, which might easily sweep away so large a crowd. Then at the moment of dawn they went quickly down to the water and Gandhi with thousands of eyes watching every gesture, stooped down and picked up a pinch of salt from the sand. The response was immediate. All along India's coastline huge crowds of men, women and children swept down to the sea to gather salt in direct disobedience to the British laws. Civil disobedience erupted spontaneously through the country for weeks after Gandhi's signal. Thousands were arrested, many more beaten or killed without a hint of violent retaliation. Gandhi alone was maintaining order in that vast, unpredictable movement which was shaking the Indian subcontinent from the Himalayas to the sea. Following the Dandi march, one night British officials arrived at Gandhi's work camp accompanied by thirty men with readied guns. In the midst of this confusion leader of this national earthquake was sleeping like a baby, absolutely certain that the lord would take care of him. "We have come to arrest Mr. M.K. Gandhi", declareda British official. "Iam Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, and I am at your service", a little figure called out. "Please get your things ready we will give you the time you need". "I am ready now", said Gandhi, indicating a small bundle on the floor. His needs were few. While the 4

 policemen watched he set about brushing his teeth in his usual unhurried way. Then after a small prayer he turned to the official in charge and walked briskly to the car outside chatting cheerfully to his escorts. He knew it might be years before he returned; yet there was no trace of apprehension or resentment in his manner. The officials were so impressed by simple dignity of this man that they seemed to be not his jailers but his prisoners. Free inside the prison: Gandhi was arrested so often that he seemed always to be either in prison, just released from prison, or about to be imprisoned again. Gandhi was so detached from his physical environment that going to jail did not disrupt his work at all, and he drove some of his hardest bargains from behind the jail walls. Often the walls were those of Yervada prison (Pune), where he felt so much at home that once when a British interrogator asked for his address, he answered, "Yervada". When a man does everything in the spirit of worship everywhere he goes is sacred, and Gandhi used to mark his jail letters 'Yervada Mandir', which means "Yervada In the prison he was able to read the Bible, the Koran and the Bhagavad Gita, and to conduct his temple". usual voluminous correspondence everyday. There was plenty of physical work and plenty of enemies, on both sides of the bars, to win over as friends. He looked after them all, and even nursed when they were ill. Everyday he served in prison only added to his spiritual growth and made more converts to non-violence and independence. He was free whether inside or outside the prison. Khadi, symbol of self-respect: Under Colonial rule, India was required to export all its cotton at a nominal rate to England, where it was manufactured into cloth in the factories of Lancashire and sold back to the poor in India at many times the price they had been paid for growing it. Gandhi wanted all Indians, rich as well as poor; to learn the age-old craft of hand spinning so that the people of seven hundred thousand impoverished villages of India could regain self-employment, self-reliance, and self-respect. He asked all Indians to wear the rough white home spun cloth called Khadi, and boycott foreign clothe. Khadi became the symbol of independence, linking the upper and middle classes of Indian society to the vast masses of the poor. Once, Gandhi wore his Khadi loincloth and shawl even to tea at Buckingham palace. An English reporter asked him, "Mr. Gandhi don't you think you were a trifle underdressed for the occasion?" "His majesty", Gandhi answered, "had enough clothes for both of us". Continued on Page 24

 सूक्ष्म शरीर में स्थान णि ॐ सिर में स्थान XX ॐ नL मु० र हाथों में स्थान भो ा छि पैरों में स्थान गुरुतत्व भवसागर अनंतकाल से आदि गुरू भारत (ु राा अन देवता: श्री अदिगुरुदत्तात्रय गैसोपोटामिया] पाचन क्रिया (स्वाधिष्ठान, नाभी पर प्रभाव) मिशर प्रादुर्भाव (कार्य) : पा मोजेज ५रभया जरथ धर्म, संतुलन, स्थिरता, व्यक्त्वि गुण: ओे पीन संबंधित दिन: गुरुवार पीन रियस संबंधित रंग: संबंधित पंचतत्व: हरा सुकराव चौरा समारव आगतथा पानी (जल) मोम्मद क्का हथेली पर (बाहरी) अगूंठी दार क्षेत्र, हथेली पर जगह : मर नानक मानत का शिरडी साईश्राथ 1855 AD नारा अंगुलियों का निम्नतम भाग. व के क कि की ७

 धर्मान्धता, झक, कालीविद्या, पकड के कारण (बाधाये) : अध्यात्मवाद, कुगुरू, अज्ञानता हि परिचय: मानव के उत्थान के शुरुसे आज तक भ्रम तथा अज्ञानता के विरुद्ध हमेशा लड़ाई चलती रही है। इस अज्ञानता कि स्थिती से मानव को प्रथम उपर उठना होगा तभी वह वास्तविक आत्मा के सत्यता कि सुंदरता का अनुभव ले पायेगा। मानव शरीर में भ्रमता से वास्तविकता तक पहचने के संघर्ष क्षेत्र को भवसागर ( भ्रमसागर) कहते है। गुण: भवसागर हमारे गुरुत्व के स्थान को दर्शता है। जब कुंडलिनी उठकर इस क्षेत्र को प्रकाशित करती है तो हम अपने स्वयं के गुरु हो जाते है। गुरुशब्द का अर्थ है घनत्व या गंभीरता और इसी के कारण ही अशांति अस्तित्व की दशा में भी हम अपने को संतुलन में रख पाते है। जब कुंडलिनी उठकर भवसागर को भर लेती है तब हमारा चित्त भ्रम तथा उलझन से बाहर निकलकर उच्चतम सत्यता की चेतना की ओर जाता है। इस तरह हम बाहरी शक्तिओों से बिना प्रभावित हुए, अपनी उत्क्रांती का खुद संचालन करते है। वास्तव में हमारा आत्मनिरिक्षण ही ध्यान के समय हमारे प्रश्नों के उत्तर प्रदान करता है। अधिकांश बाहरी समस्यों का समाधान हमे मिलता है परंतु स्वयं के गुरु होने के कारण हम सत्य-असत्य तथा सही-गलत में भेद कर पाते है। इस क्षेत्र का दूसरा पहलू हैं शिष्यत्व। जिस प्रकार हम गुरु की गहानता से किसी को सलाह देते है, उसी प्रकार हमे सत्य को खुले दिमाग तथा विनम्रता से पहचानना आवश्यक है। अदिकाल से ही सभी बडे गुखे ईश्वर के विन्रम शिष्य रहे है। इस तरह से वे अपने अहंकार को दैव्य को समर्पित किये और पूर्ण अधिकार से शिक्षा देने में सक्षम हुये, यहाँ तक की विद्यमानस्थापित सत्ता को भी ललकार सके। यह कोई योगायोग नही है की धर्म का तत्त्व इस चक्र का मूलभूत स्वभाव है क्योंकि भवसागर नाभी चक्र से सीधी तरह से जुड़ा हुआ है। सभी बडे गुरु और पैगंबर जिन्होंने संसार में जन्म लेकर मानवता का मार्गदर्शन किया उन सभी ने धर्म (न्याय-परायण आचरण) को अपने शेक्षा का मूलभुत सिद्धांत बनाया था । स्वयं के दुष्प्रयोग और परनिंदा से बचकर ही सही मायने में हम एक अच्छे इन्सान बन सकते है। दूसरे शब्दों में प्रकृती के नियमों के अनुसाररहकर ही हम अच्छी तरह से जीवन व्यतीत कर सकते है । परंपरा: सभी महान गुरू जो मानव के लिए आदर्श बनकर आये और उने उच्चतम सत्य का ज्ञान दिया वे सभी भवसागर से संबंधित थे। आदि देवता आदिगुरु दत्तात्रय है और महान गुरु (पैगंबर) जैसे एब्राहम, मोझेस, लाओत्से, राजा जनक, गुरुनानक, मोहम्मद साहब, शिर्डी के साईनाथ, जरादुख्त्रा, कनफूसियस तथा सोक्रटीस ये सभी आदिगुरु दत्तात्रय के ही अवतरण है। इन लोगों ने हमे न्याय-परायण मार्ग पर चलना सिखाया जिस से हमारेसमाज से अशासनखत्म किया जा सके। इसी भवसागर में शिष्यत्व भी विराजमान है और यह तत्त्व पृथ्वी पर लव-कुश, मार्कडेय, आदिशंकराचार्य, डेव्हिड, जॉन द बॅपटिस्ट, गौतम बुद्धा, महावीर, कबीर, मायकेलएन्जेलो, खलिल गिब्रान, विलियम शेक्सपियर, विलियम ब्लेक, तथा अन्य रूप में आये है। महान गुरुओं ने दुनिया में सभी जगहो पर 1 र

 जन्म लिये है। कई बार तो उनके अवतरित होने का मूल उद्देश यह था कि वे अपने पिछले जन्म के अनुयायियों को गलत मार्ग से निकालकर सही मार्ग पर लायें। उदा. उस समय के क्रूरता पूर्ण व्यक्तियों को धर्म सिखाने मोहम्मद साहब ने जन्म लिया, परंतु उन्हें ही सताया गया। इसके फल स्वरूप घृणावश उन्होंने कसम खाई कि "यह आखरी बार हैं जब कोई पैगंबर (देवदूत) धरती पर आया है"। परंतु जब उन्होंने देखा कि उनकी सारी शिक्षा मिट्टीं मे मिला दी गई है तो वे दयावश हिंदु-मुस्लिम एकता कि शिक्षा देने गुरुनानक के रुप में इस धरती पर अवतारित हुए। आजकल इन दोनों के अनुयायी ही एक दुसरे के घृणास्पद हो गये है। इसी तरह आदिशिष्य शंकराचार्य ही कबीर के रूप में आये जिन्होंने कर्मकांड, मूर्तिपुजा, धर्मांधता में फसे अनुयायियों का पुनः मार्गदर्शन किया। शंकराचार्य ही कबीर के रूप में आये जिन्होंने कर्मकांड, मूर्तिपुजा, धर्मांधता में फसे अनुयायियों का पुनः मार्गदर्शन किया। स्थूल भौतिक पहलू : भवसागर कुंडलिनी तथा पॅरासिम्पथेटिक प्रणाली के वेगस नाडी के बीच का अन्तराल है। सृष्टी के शुरू से आज तक की मानव चेतना के उच्चतम उत्क्रांती के समय तथा जगह को यह दर्शता है। हमारी अप्रकाशित (अज्ञान की) अवस्था में यह वह खाली जगाह है जो हमारी तथा विराट चेतना को अलग करता है। स्वाधिष्ठान चक्र नाभी चक्र के चारों तरफ घूमने के कारण भवसागर का निर्माण हुआ है और इसमें सूर्य तथा चंद्रमा से संबंधित दो संस्था होती है। भवसागर की स्थिती : अपने पाचन प्रणाली में गडबडी होने के कारण हम समझ सकते है कि हमने अपने गुरुतत्व को विक्षुब्ध किया है। पेट से उत्तपन्न मचलाहट या अन्य रूप से यह प्रकटित होता है। उदा. अगर हम किसी अधार्मिक क्रिया को देखते है या अपने स्थूल या सूक्ष्म प्रणाली का दुरुपयोग करते है तो इस क्षेत्र में इसका असर महसूस कर पाते है। हमारे पेट में नाड़ी-मंडल का तनाव या किसी परीक्षा के समय का तनाव 'गुरुसिद्धांत' पर आघात है। उसी तरह अपने भवसागर की स्थिती जानकर हम सत्य और असत्य शिक्षा का निर्णय कर सकते है। अपने भवसागर के संकेत तथा चैतन्य लहरी की चेतना का मेल किसी पद्धती की भौतिकताया आध्यत्मिकता को पहचानने का एक मजबूत सूचक बन सकता है। जब हम हमारे सुक्ष्म यंत्रणा के लय में जुडना सीख जाते है तब हम स्वाभाविक ही अयोग्य चीजों से बचना तथा योग्य चीजों के सम्मुख होना जान जाते है। हमारे अंदर का गुरुतत्त्व हमारे मांगल्य के लिए एक शक्तिशाली ताकत है लेकिन हमे इसके संकेतो को पहचानना सीखना होगा। भवसागर काशुद्धिकरण: नमक के गुनगुने पानी से पैरजल क्रिया करना। १. भवसागर के क्षेत्र में मोमबत्ती का इस्तमाल करना। २. प्रार्थना: बाँया: श्रीमताजी मैं स्वयं का गुरु हूँ। स्याम दाहिना: श्री माताजी आप ही मेरे गुरु है । दाम ता श्रीमाताजी द्वारा दी गयी सलाहे: बाया हाथ फोटो की तरफ करे और दाया भवसागरपर रखे। १. बाधाओं पर जूतामारे। २. हलका नमकीन पानी ग्रहण करे। ३. पा स्वयं अनुशासनमें रहे (जैसे किजल्दीउठकर ध्यान करे) । ४. 8

 The Extraordinary Previous Birth of Shri Sita from the Devi Mahatmyam Vedavati Rathadhwaja was a king, whose forefathers had respected Goddess lakshmi. With the passage of time, it was clear that the attention on Alakshmi (principles against lakshmi Tattwa) was on the rise. In their traditions the attention on the true lakshmi Tattwa degenerated over the generations. Unfortunately, there came a time when the light of the blessing was gone from this kingdom. As the external events in a kingdom follow its subtle collective state, Rathadhwaja faced defeat in battles and lost all the kingdom and posessions. But his sons Kushadhwaja and Dharmadhwaja realized the subtle reason's behind the calamity and meditated on Shri lakshmi, inviting her to grace their family again. Shri lakshmi, pleased with their realization and humility, blessed them with Her own birth in the household. Shri lakshmi was born as a daughter to Malavati and Kushadhwaja. Being a divine personality she was full of grace and accompanied by auspicious signs during Her birth. The Vedas were on Her lips at a tender age, and hence She was named as Vedavati. Being a high souled personality, She was clear about Her purpose on the earth and travelled to the holy land of Pushkara to meditate on the Highest Cause. On the other hand, through Her advent, the position of the family was restored in the world as the ruling family. During her penances and meditations a point came where you She was blessed with an announcement from the heavens: "You have achieved the state where will marry Shri Vishnu Himself, but not before being born again." Vedavati continued her meditation, knowing Her selfand Her high destiny. It was probably the need to wait for the perfect time before the divine pair of lakshmi-Narayana came on the earth, because in the time of Her next birth She became Shri Sita who married Vishnu-incarnate Shri Rama. However, the divine play had not been over in this birth for her, as She met the demon Ravana during Her life as Vedavati. The Ravana episode unveils reasons behind the divine play of Ramayana, where Shri Sita became the cause of Ravana's death and destruction. Ravana was an extremely accomplished, arrogant and torturous ruler. In his power and glory he had no recognition or respect for Shri Narayana or other divine personalities for that matter. All deities were displeased with him and all creatures were oppressed by him. He collected taxes. Those who could not pay, like hermits in forests, had to pay with their flesh and blood. His rule wasa reign of terror, which needed an end. However, during the life of Vedavati, Ravana was traveling by air and made a stopover at Vedavati's hermitage. She, bringing forth Her true gracious nature, hosted Ravana as a guest and made his visit

 comfortable. Seeing the absolute divine form of refuge in the fire until the task of destroying Vedavati, he enquired about Her life. She told him Ravana was over. Ravana took the Chhaya Sita about Her nature, Her penance and Her distiny, and Shri Rama defeated him and ended his time including Her future life with Shri Vishnu. on earth. Ravana, being covered in ego, laughed and Shri Sita, the worldmother, returned to her derided Vedavati's destiny. He proposed original form during the "agni-pariksha". The marriage to her and to make his point called the agni actually took away the Chaaya Sita and high-souled Narayana an inferior being to him. In returned the original pure Janaki. This wonderful a last attempt he tried to force Vedavati into his set of events that gives a fresh perspective on this control by pulling Her hair, which brought Her is found between the covers of the Devi rage forward. She declared: "You have attempted Mahatmyam. to cast your shadow over me and hence I will give this tainted body to the hermitage fire, but I will be your cause of destruction and death, Ravana!" जब से तूने मुझे अपनाया जन्मों का चैन है आया Years passed and while Raja Janaka ploughed the fields during the oppressive times of Ravana- O rule, he hit upon an earthen object. From the forrows of the earth came Shri Sita, with Riddhi- Siddhi on the sides. Riddhi-Siddhi dissappeared तू ही सफर, तू ही है मंजिल तू ही लहर, तू ही है साहिल कैसा प्यार है तूने दिखाया...... जबसे तूने मुझे अपनाया instantaneously and the true nature of Shri Sita was revealed to Raja Janaka. Later, in the swayamwara ceremony, Shri Rama married Shri Sita. But truly तूही दिल, तूही है मन। तू ही नमाज। तू ही नमन। कैसा सुन्दर समय है आया. जबसे तूने मुझे अपनाया intriguing is the episode with Agni-dev.ata during Rama's तू ही रज्जा तू ही मरकज्जा तेरी छाव में ढूखः न लगे सजा। कैसी मौज मे मैं हूँ आया. जबसे तूने मुझे अपनाया exile. During the exile, when Shri Rama, Sita and Laxmana were in the forests, Shri Agni-devata came forth and informed Shri Rama of the divine destiny of जब से तूने मुझे अपनाया जन्मों का चैन है आया Ravana's destruction. Since the true nature of Shri Sita was that of the Adishakti, Ravana cannot bear to face her. Hence, Agni devata brought forth a "Chhaya Sita" i.e. Shri Sita's shadow for the fulfillment of the divine purpose. Shri Sita took मालविका अगरवाल, गुरगांव 10

 IND Pal Patk Bay अॅडम्स ब्रिज १० oRameswaram Iranaitivu is. Vellankulam ठ Pamban I. Ferry Dhanushkodi Talaimannar Adam's Bridge Mannar OMannar Island नासाद्धारा अंतराल से ली गई तस्वीरों से यह प्रतीत हुआ है कि भारत और श्रीलंका के बीच पाल्क स्ट्रेट (Palk Strait) में एक अद्भुत पौराणिक सेतु है। इस सेतु को अभी अॅडम्स ब्रिज (Adams Bridge) के नाम से जाना जाता है जो समुद्र की उथली सतह वाले बहुत से भागों से बना है और जिसकी लंबाई ३0 कि.मी. है। सेत कि अद्धितिय वक्रता और बनावट यह बतलाती है की यह मानव निर्मित हो सकता है। दंतकथाये तथा पूरातत्व विभाग के अनुसार श्रीलंका में में लगभग युग मानव जाती के प्रथम संकेत प्राचीन १७५०००० वर्ष पूर्व प्राप्त हये है। यह सूचना एक महत्त्वपूर्ण पहलू उजागर करती है रामायण नामक दंतकथा का, जो कि घटित हुई थी त्रेता युग में (१७५०००० वर्ष पूर्व)। इस महाकाव्य में पुल के बारे में उल्लेख है कि रामेश्वरम और श्रीलंका के किनारों के बीच श्रीराम चंद्रजी ने इस सेतु का निर्माण करवाया था। यह सूचना पुरतत्व विभाग के दृष्टी से इतनी महत्त्वपूर्ण नही होगी जो मनुष्य उत्पत्ती के केंद्र बिंदु कि तलाश में रूचि रखते है, पर यह जरर अध्यात्किमता के व्वार खोलेगी जो यह बया करते हैं की पुराना इतिहास भारतीय पौराणिक कथाओं से ही जुडा हुया है। 11 61 ोती

 ldren... My dear children. Beautiful words that enlightens our heart... This is the English translation of a letter written in Marathi by H.H. Shri Mataji to the early Indian Sahaja Yogis during mid 1970s. This was published in early dated Nirmala Yoga in Issue no. 14. My dear Modi and other Sahaja Yogis, Many blessings. Received your letter. I am very glad to know that your Ida Nadi has become clean and Ihope, Ida Nadis of all have become clean at least to some extent. Here I had told all, that I would work, while under anesthesia, to clean the Ida channels of all. I worked for 3 days cleaning it by vomiting nearly 50 times every day and it is nice that the cleaning has become possible. This physical being has to be used for the mission for whom it has been taken and therefore I am not bothered by the illness and other troubles. On the contrary all such and different experiments with this incarnation will have to be performed. Why are you so anxious about it? What else is the use of this body? I never have any pains. All I want is that, in the laboratory of this body, some work or the other must go on. Time is short while the work to be done is very big. You cannot do the cleaning of Ida channel only on the strength of your realization. Iknew that it had to be cleaned from within. In ancient days all seekers had to do this action (Kriya) constantly right from their childhood at the lives. residences of their gurus at isolated places. The seekers had to do it individually in many Because, now you have attained the state of collectivity I have done it in collective consciousness. Although you say I have done it, the distinction of you and I should not be there in collective consciousness. Mantras "Twam Bhawani, Twam Durga, Twam Ambika etc." are good for Ida Channel, but when you are established in Sahaja Yoga, you will have to say 'Aham Bhavani'. However this Mantra can be said only when your purity becomes one with that of 'Aham Bhavani' and I tell you now itself that this will happen. After cleaning the Ida Channel I am awakening Pingala Nadi. Sahaja Yogis had become rather lethargic due to the conditioning of Ida Channel. Laziness and a tendency of avoiding the work were dominating in them. Their attention was being frittered away on avoiding the work. But I have now started the work of awakening Pingala Channel. All of you should raise your right hand from right side over your head and leave it on the left side but while doing it, you must apply your will power so that your desires will materialize. With the awakening of collectivity, you will have many people to share your work, which you are doing alone. The sphere of Sahasrara envelops your heart. When conditioning of heart is reduced, as if Continued on page 21 12

 A Scientist's Curiosity! Why Seven loops? Following is an article, which reproduces an extract from a scientific paper written by Dr. R.C. Mishra, Toronto who has been working in the area of mental and neurological disorders for the last several years. In this beautiful journey of discovery, Dr Mishra could comprehend the mysteries only after getting self-realization and meeting Shri Mataji in 1988. "Catecholamine, Indoleamine and other amine cell surface receptors" Cell surfaces of the all-living cells contain a leads to diseases like schizophrenia, Parkinson's specific set of proteins called receptors. Among a (movement disorders), etc. The receptors for other variety of receptors, the receptors for compounds chemicals such as serotonin are also found in brain such as nor-adrenalin, adrenalin are found and other organs, and believed to be involved in virtually in every cell of the human body. The depression. receptors for dopamine, serotonins are found in Common feature of these Receptors brain cells and other tissues as well. These receptors are not only present on normal cells but All of these receptors are found in the cell they are also found in a variety of cancer cells, e.g., membrane and made up of several hundreds of human neuro-blastoma (cancer which affects amino acids. However, when the arrangements of children from age-1 to 11 years) has adrenergic these amino-acids were examined by several groups of scientists working in the United States, Canada, U.K and other countries, it became receptors. The various receptors have been classified into several subcategories on the basis their interaction and ie, 'Seven Domains' or 'Seven Spanning with various specific drugs. The adrenergic Loops'. The receptors protein is folded in such a receptors have been divided into two subclasses, way that it forms seven loops. Of course, each of e.g., alpha-adrenergic & beta-adrenergic receptor. the spanning domains has specific function. Both alpha and beta-receptors are distributed sSeveral of these receptors are linked to a protein throughout the human body and involved in called G-protein, which acts as a communicator apparent that they have one feature in common several physiological functions. Common disorders in which such receptors are involved include: high blood pressure, heart disease, depression, liver problems, stress, kidney dysfunction, etc. In fact beta-blocker and alpha- Besides, these receptors there are several other blocker drugs are frequently used as anti- receptors, which share the similar structural hypertensive drugs. Similarly receptors for other properties, i.e., seven spanning loops and compounds produced in human body from the association with G-proteins. dietary amino acids (Tyrosine and Tryptophan) are also present. For example, dopamine receptors Why SEVEN Spanning Loops? are found in the brain and also in kidney and heart. between the receptor and the inside of the cell. The G-proteins are also present in almost every living cell. The dysfunction of such receptors in the brain Dr Mishra recalls, "Ihave been working in the area 13

 of mental and neurological disorders for the last When there was no answer available, one student several years and my research work has been said, "this has to do with God and religion". I left funded by the several agencies, e.g., National this question at that stage and decided to talk to Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), USA, Medical someone who was really knowledgeable in this Research Council of Canada, Parkinson's field. Foundation of Canada, Ontario Mental Health In December 1988, I met Her Holiness Shri Mataji Foundation of Canada and National Cancer Nirmala Devi. It was a unique and joyful Institute of Canada. My main work has been experience which can be only felt by a human but directed towards development of better hard to describe. After talking and experiencing antipsychotic and anti-Parkinson's drugs. And, the self-realization with the grace and blessing of thus a detailed biochemical knowledge of the drug Shri Mataji, the mysterious arrangement of the interacting membrane receptor is essential. drug-receptors in the cell membrane began to Having all the research work done in many areas make sense. The introduction of Kundalini: and of drug-receptor interaction, it was never clear to description of seven centres (7 chakras of the me or any other scientist in this world, why these human body) in Sahaja Yoga not only explained important receptors are folded in such a way that the seven spanning domains of receptor proteins but many other aspects of pharmacological and they always form seven loops in the membrane". Significance of this Mysterious physiological principles, e.g., the communication The Arrangement was questioned by several Medical between parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous system. It was only after self-realization Students: Oligosaccharide unit Extracellular side 6. VII III П 88888888888 38888 Cytosolic side coo Seven-Helix motif is a co mmon feature of Transmembrane receptors. 14

 that I was able to feel the communication between the two systems and understood the mechanism by which these two systems operate in a coordinated fashion. This mysterious joyful situated in the individual cell. Mental, Neurological and Psychosomatic disorders, and the process of Mesmerism Having the knowledge of Sahaja Yoga which describes the human chakras in detail, and the experience is only enjoyed by Sahaja Yogis with the grace of Shri Mataji. understanding of Biochemical and physiological The joyful experience also accompanies many aspects of membrane protein receptors which are other things in life such as: (a) reduced level of folded in seven loops, one can make some stress; (b) spiritual advancement; (c) feelings of reasornable and sensible relationship between the well-being; (d) intellectual development; (e) well- two and the various diseases that catches humans. balanced state of life. It is reasonable to suggest that mini chakras of the The SEVEN Spanning Loops of the Adrenergic receptors are released in the atmosphere once a and other Related Cell Membrane Receptors person dies and the various deities also remove their blessings. And depending on the humanistic nature of the person (highly Left sided V/s highly Right sided, highly Materialistic, real cruel etc.) and their Relationship and Importance in Sahaja Yoga As mentioned earlier, the adrenergic receptors the unsatisfied mini chakras of the receptor look and other related receptors are found in virtually all-living cells, and are coupled to G-proteins. The for inhabitation. The people who practice the seven spanning loops of the receptors share control of spirit (Pretsiddhi or Samshaan Vidya) similarities with seven chakras of the body. . can capture such entities and use them to Perhaps, one can say that the receptor itself is a mesmerize other people. Such entities can be mini chakra encompassing the seven major placed or transplanted through eyes or Agnya chakras of the human body. The alteration or Chakra. The propagation of such unsatisfied cell distortion of one of the spanning loop leads to an mini chakras then can affect the normal receptors abnormal function of the cell and results to of the cell and depending upon the type of the development of a mental, neurological or receptor affected (Dopamine receptor will lead to psychosomatic disorder. Similarly blockage of a Schizophrenia, adrenergic receptor will lead to heart problems etc.) the disorder will develop. chakra leads to dysfunction of our tissSue. For example, when the heart chakra catches, the high blood pressure and other cardio vascular diseases develop. The seven loop adrenergic receptor in the heart cells is also altered in many ways. There The process of Mesmerism can be easily carried out by such technique and sometimes people who have the knowledge of Srividya can also perform such practices for their own selfish reasons. are many examples that can be cited for each The psychosomatic which include a group of chakra and the specific receptor with seven loops present in the area of chakra. Thus it can be said that cell receptor itself represents seven major chakras, and when one meditates using the divine technique taught by Shri Mataji, one not only clears up the major chakra of the entire body but disorders (E.g. Anxiety, Ulcers, Hypertension etc.) can develop in patients suffering from mental disorders, or directly when the chakra in the particular area is blocked. This sort of understanding was not possible before practicing Sahaja Yoga. also clears and relaxes the seven mini chakras 15

 Prophetic Visions of the Divine Feminine in modern Europe The notion of Sophia as Wisdom is an ancient one. Sophia was reintroduced into European Christianity in the early seventeenth century by the German Christian mystic, Jakob Boehme (1575- 1624). By the end of the eighteenth century, spiritual seekers in the German Romantic tradition, including the young George Friedrich Philipp von Hardenburg (1772-1801) who wrote under the pen- name 'Novalis', and his contemporary, Friedrich Holderlin (1770-1843), were able to draw on Boehme's theological writings, and also on Gottfried Arnold (1667-1704)'s more personal experiences, to incorporate Sophia and the feminine Divine into their fiterary writings. Thus, Novalis in his novel, Heinrich von Ofterdingen (1800), wrote: Sophia said: "The great mystery has been revealed to all, and yet remains eternally unfathomable. The new world is born from suffering and the ashes are dissolved in tears to become the drink of eternal life. The heavenly Mother dwells in everyone, in order that each child be borneternally. Do you feel the sweet birth in the beating of your hearts?" Finally Sophia said: "The Mother is among us. Her presence will bless us forever. Follow us into our dwelling; in the temple there we shall dwell eternally and guard themystery of the world." Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749-1832) ends his Faust (1832) with the enigmatic: All that is changeable Is but reflected3; The unattainable Here is effected3; Human discernment Here is passed by3B HamThe Eternal-Feminine Draws us on high. Misunderstood in their time: Blake and Barmby So much has been written on the prophetic books of William Blake (1757-1827) that one wonders what else can be said. I offer here some comments on 'Jerusalem' as a manifestation of the Divine Feminine. The idealistic usage of 'Jerusalem' as an ideal, perfect holy city is well-known and frequently encountered in both Jewish and 16c

 Christian writers; in addition there is the 'New Jerusalem' of the Book of Revelations in the New Testament of the Christian Bible (Rev 3:12; 21:2), and Blake was certainly familiar with the concept as his parents were members of Emmanuel Swedenborg's New Jerusalem Church in the London of the 1780s. So we find Blake using the imagery of Jerusalem the city in his prophetic books, especially Milton and Jerusalem, with much of the imagery and detail coming from his residence in Lambeth (south London) during the 1790s. Blake additionally suggests Jerusalem' as a female counterpart to the male 'Albion'. In The Four Zoas Blake refers to "Jerusalem which now descendeth out of heaven, a City, yet a Woman" and in Jerusalem provides in plate 46 a powerful portrayal of the female Jerusalem with her daughters. In the prophetic text of Jerusalem, the Universal Father speaks through Albion to Jerusalem: Awake! Awake Jerusalem! Olovely Emanation of Albion Awake and over spread all Nations as in Ancient Time For lo! The Night of Death is past and the Eternal Day Appears upon our Hills: Awake Jerusalem, and come away. The English social reformer, Goodwyn Barmby (1820-1881) in his younger years was involved in several short-lived attempts at communal living, particularly after his marriage to Catherine. They founded and ran the Communist Church in London (1841-1849), but met with derision from their contemporaries. Goodwyn Barmby wrote a poem, The Woman-power (1842), containing a prophetic vision of the Divine Feminine: Woman-Saviour now we muster To await thy advent sure, In the cluster of thy lustre, Come and leave the earth no more? Then before thy gentle look, Swords shall quail and warriors fail, And the spear, a shepherd's crook, Shall adorn the daisied dale. Woman-power! Incarnate love! Human Goddess come and be, If the Bridegroom's tears can move, Bride unto Humanity. Thou alone of all can save us Let us be what thou would have us! The Barmbys realised that this was in the future. Thus Goodwyn Barmby wrote to a friend in the early 1840s: 'But the Free Woman who shall give the womanly tone to the entire globe is not yet manifested.' Catherine Barmby in her pioneering feminist pamphlet, The demand for the emancipation of women (1843), insisted that 'We have the priest, we therefore demand the priestess, the Woman teacher of the world, the woman apostle of God's law!" 17

 Prophetic visions in literature in the mid-century: Hawthorne and Andersen Several times in his notebooks and novels, the American writer, Nathaniel Hawthorne (1804-1864) expressed his hope that a new religion inaugurated by a pure female apostle would come into being that would replace what he felt were the unsatisfactory remnants of Christianity. Hawthorne concludes his novel, The Scarlet Letter (1850): "The angel and apostle of the coming revelation must be a woman, indeed, but lofty, pure, and beautiful; and wise, moreover, not through dusky grief, but the ethereal medium of joy." The Danish writer, Hans Christian Andersen (1805-1875), best known for his children's short stories, attempted to diversify into what he called "philosophical stories" several of which had visionary and prophetic qualities. The New Century's Goddess (1861) begins: The muse of the twentieth century we shall never know, but our children may and our grand-children certainly will. Yet we cannot help wondering what she willlook like or what songs she will sing: which strings in man's soul she will touch, and to what heights she will raise herage. Andersen is coy as to where this Goddess will appear, tantalizing the reader with: One lovely morning she will arrive. She will come riding on the back of the modern dragon, a locomotive, through tunnels and over bridges... and in answer to the rhetorical "and when will she appear", Andersen has a prophetic comment to make: Soon the Great Wall of China will crumble. The railroads of Europe will reach the closed archives of Asian culture. The two streams of culture will meet and the rapids of the double river will have deeper tones than have ever been heard before. In this short story we find a prophetic vision of the future coming of the feminine aspect of the Divine, and of the interwining of European and Asian cultures in the globalization of the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries. Spiritualism, feminism and theosophy In the latter part of the nineteenth century, we find a number of individuals who can be described, at different points of their lives, as 'spiritualist' (or 'spiritist' in France), as 'feminist', and as 'theosophist', and, sometimes, as all three. It needs emphasing here that labels are fluid: not all spiritualists became members of theosophical societies in France some became Gnostic Christians and not al female spiritualists regarded themselves as feminists. One common demoninator for many was the understanding, based on their own or others' visions, that there would be a future manifestation of the Divine Feminine, or World Mother, to save the earth and its human inhabitants from the results of their actions. 18c

 In 1881, the wealthy spiritualist and later theosophist, Marie Sinclair, Countess of Caithness (1830-1895), hosted a seance in her palace in Nice, in southern France, in which it was revealed to her that there would be a revolution in religion which would result in a "New Age of Our Lady of the Holy Spirit" In her book, The Mystery of the Ages (1887), she comments: It was generally considered, at the turn of the next century, that the next Divine incarnation was about to come to earth and would be female, the advent of Divine Wisdom, or Theo-Sophia, and that the present age would be the age of making known all that which has been kept secret from the beginning. A long-time associate of Lady Caithness was Jules Doinel (1842-1903) who, in 1890, established the Eglise Gnostique Universelle Catholique with himself as patriarch under the mystic name of Tau Valentine II. For this church Doinel wrote a Gnostic Catechism (1895) which includes the respondo: Iam a Valentinian Gnostic. Ihave the Pleroma for my Father, Christos for my Savior, Simon and Valentinus as doctors, Helen and Sophia for moral support, and I wait for the advent of our Lady Pneuma Hagion, the eternal Feminine. Doinel was succeeded as patriarch by Leonce Fabre des Essarts (1848-1917), known as Tau Synesius, who in a lecture in Paris in 1908 stated: There is among our tenets one to which I shall call particular attention: the tenet of feminine salvation. The work of the Father has been accomplished, that of the Son, as well. There remains that of the Spirit, which alone is capable of bringing about the final salvation of humanity on earth and thereby, of laying the way for the reconstitution of the Spirit. Now the Spirit, t he P araclete, corresponds to what the divine partakes of a feminine nature, and our teachings state explicitly that this is the only facet of the godhead In this extract, Fabre des Essarts is following the Cathar and Gnostic usage of 'Paraclete' to describe. that is truly accessible to our mind. the Spirit. For him, salvation lies with the Divine Feminine. The English spiritualist, feminist and theosophist, Anna Kingsford (1846-1888) was one of the first women in Britain to qualify as a medical doctor, and was a pioneering campaigner for vegetarianism and animal rights. Throughouther life, Anna Kingsford had visions and dreams: these 'illuminations' as she called them, were recorded in the posthumously published Clothed with the Sun (1889). Included wasa prophetic vision of the Divine Feminine, received in Paris on February 7,1880: A Prophecy of the Kingdom of the Soul, mystically called the Day of the Woman And now I show you a mystery and a new thing, which is part of the mystery of the fourth day of creation. The word which shall come to save the

 world, shall be uttered by a woman. A woman shall conceive, and shall bring forth the tidings of salvation. For the reign of Adam is at its last hour; and God shall crown all things by the creation of Eve. Hitherto the man hath been alone, and hath had dominion over the earth. But when the woman shall be created, God shall give unto her the kingdom; and she shall be first in rule and highest in dignity. So that man the manifestor shall resign his office; and woman the interpreter shall give light to the world. Hers is the fourth office: she revealeth that which the Lord hath manifested. Hers is the light of the heavens, and the brightest of the planets of the holy seven. She is the fourth dimension; the enlighten; the power which draweth inward to God. And her kingdom cometh; the day of the exaltation of woman. ... For the woman is the crown of man, and the final manifestation of humanity. She is the nearest to the throne of God, when she shall be revealed. But the creation of woman is not yet complete: but it shall be complete in the time which is at hand. e eyes which All things are mine, O Mother of God: all things are mine, O Thou who 0risest from the sea; and Thou shalt have dominion over all the worlds. It should be noted that this vision precedes, by a year, the vision received by Lady Caithness and discussed above. This is a condensed version of a paper written by John Noyce for the M.A. in Religion and Theology at Monash University, Melbourne, Australia. The full version is available on request. To be continued in next issue.... Continued from Page..12 the glass of a lamp becomes clean, rays of ever-resplendent Spirit awaken Sahasrara sheath and the light of bliss spreads, which is felt in Sahasrara. This light enlightens all sides of colourful heart and decorates it with the qualities, which can be described as pleasing, blissful etc. Gradually this state will grow and become stable within you. Most of the Sahaja Yogis should try this method, but there should not be merely the mechanical movement of hands. Whatever you do, it should be done with the faith that you have in worshipping, zeal of a warrior and sensitivity of an artist. There should be complete purity in the recitation of Mantras to awaken the deities and your heart must be involved in it. Only then the awakening will take place. You should understand a simple principle. How can a big fire be lit with a small matchstick? Will a wick hold the flame if water is mixed in the oil? How can those Sahaja Yogis have enlightenment who are using Sahaja Yoga to solve only their own petty problems? And why should God give them the enlightenment? Lighthouses do not show light to themselves even for a moment. Therefore, they are considered so important and are looked after. Please circulate this letter among all Sahaja Yogis. Your Mother-NIRMALA 20

 THE META CULTURAL REVOLUTION A few weeks ago we came home late at night from a colorful collage of collective 'happenings', filled with Vibrations of the most divine nature. The Austrian Sahaja Yogis were preparing to share a myriad of sweet treats with their international brothers and sisters at the upcoming Sahasrara Day event in Cabella, and at the Vienna city ashram-complex there was something going on in every apartment that we poked our heads into: Qawwali practice; painting of small size Hanuman statues; baking of gingerbread cookie, decoration; drama rehearsals; designing of new Sahaja Yoga Website; hand-embroidery for Shri Mataji ... It was like being in another world, on a perpetual, collective 'natural high'. We flopped back with dinner after midnight in front of our TV and unexpectedly beamed into a very different world. We found ourselves back in the American 1960s, where, in the darkest depths of the "Kali' Yuga (Age of Darkness), young people were enthusiastically stumbling along and crying out for change. It was so surrealistic, and at the same time, emotionally compelling. Portrayed was a young lady, a seeker, from an average middle-class home who tried to break free from the bonds of dullness and insecurity through her heart-felt vehicle of singing. After many kinds of rejection, including a thwarted attempt to lead a normal life as a housewife, she escaped onto the uncharted waters of the rock-and-roll and drug scene. Her whole-hearted enthusiasm could not save her from the extreme Ida and Pingala confusion that she had thrown herself into, and she soon lost her life in those dark waves. I had always thought of Janis Joplin as just one of many hippies who had drifted in and out of that short-lived, haphazard revolution, not knowing that she was in fact a pioneer rebel who inspired a generation to dare to see life differently. Then, by complete chance, we stumbled onto a similar documentary (dubbed into German) about another counter-culture icon who also rose from obscurity in small-town America to capture the searching imaginations of his peers in an equally honest and raunchy musical style. The documentary was an intriguing study of influence on the minds and hearts of the generation that sought for Truth. Most of the material documented the years immediately preceding the truly revolutionary opening of the collective Sahasrara Chakra. It was moving to witness the intensity of desire for change-at-any-cost that the young people expressed, and the way it was exploding out in the land that we now recognize as the collective Vishuddhi Chakra. That anti-culture revolution became largely one of slavery to addiction, which is nothing but obsessive desire for certain pleasing electronic and chemical reactions in the brain, be it drug and alcohol stimulation or the triggering of nerve signals by the touch of skinthe highly overrated, fanatically demanded passion of sex. The 21

 to me, as it would help unprecedented, wholesale bulldozing of human 'mariadas' (subtle, inbuilt boundaries) during the Kali Yuga has led to me to realize the almost unbelievable importance of our (Sahaja Yogis') present position in history. But a recent experience in mediation gave me a the mass mutation of consciousness that whole пе w readily accepts evolutionally unsustainable feelings appreciation of the inspirational value of the future. In a and beliefs as natural moment of uplifting sweetness and hope, I clearly saw countless future generations of innocent, direction. The real Revolution turns out to be not a one- man-show that takes everyone into extremes, but Self-realized human beings, like children, a collective awakening sprouted in the fertile enthusiastically scanning their race's past to share fields of joy and innocent love by the Divine in the momentous times when the Mother walked Incarnation (so amazing that She really came at and smiled among us. Of course, they will be last in our darkest hour, in fulfillment of the looking for the experiences lived in the direct prophecies and in answer to our countless Physical Darshan (blessed Presence) of the Incarnation, but they will also want to enjoy everything that the first devotees didwhat they manifested in their lives and the societies in Shortly after my arrival in Vienna many years ago which they (we) lived. As an artist often plagued (a saint who once visited this magical city, by self-doubt, it was the single most inspiring expressed that he felt his heart beating to the idea that had ever passed through me. It shone in rhythm of poetry while strolling through her my heart like a divine guarantee, that whatever charming streets), I had a sort of feeling, a vision we create now will be preserved and deeply that revealed the source of pure (constructive, appreciated by countless loving souls. Could an divinely inspired) culture accessible within every artist ever hope for a greater reward? (But human being. Suddenly, the heart opened so wide another, even greater reward overwhelmed me that it was possible to feel that beautiful Realm recently, sitting in a stadium full of realized souls, which sometimes shines briefly into our world as when Shri Mataji appeared on the stage for prayers!) It is a revolution of multiple-harmony as opposed to lone-melody. creative geniusthe fountain of Inspiration that Shivaratri Puja. It was as if every stumbling effort poured through great souls like Shakespeare, of ascent in the past, and all the pains of Mozart, Michelangelo and Lincoln. uncertainty about the future, were all redeemed Events and feelings laid out along the illusion of and glorified in that moment of seeing God arrive the line of time can also help inspire joy to inour midst. "Soit has all come true after all!") manifest pure culture in the present. The past There are many unexpected aspects of this always seemed to bring the most encouragement 22

 heaven-sent seedling-culture of the Golden Age that the simple desire and attention of a fellow being could heal you, that lemons and coconuts would play such a prominent role? When I was growing up dnž in suburban Canada, I learned that drunken rowdiness, loud, rude jokes and hard-hitting background rhythms were the heights of social norms to enjoy and strive for. How was I to know that people could soon naturally enjoy each other in peaceful relationships and environments full of flowing, nectar-like, mutual joy? I always thought that politicians and greedy lobbyists wrote and broke all the rules and that there was nothing the rest of us could do but look on in disgust, when in fact the compassionate Divine Force was very much in charge, and some day writing something like 'All obstacles against all poor people and communities becoming healthy and self-sufficient' on a piece of paper and burning it once a day with heart-felt prayer could help.end global poverty. Could the hippy and/or the corporate executive in us ever have expected the universal, pure religion to sprout into earthly existence within our lifetimes? And who could have foresaw the birth of a new kind of pain: that felt by a Sahaja Yogi when he or she passes on the ultimate blessing of Self-realization to a fellow seeker of Truth, and then is forced to watch that precious soul turn their back on their own Mother and walk confidently away, back into darkness. The ultimate Cultural Revolution has been anticipated by seekers and seers for millennia, and was dubbed Krita Yuga', the Age of Work. After the long, hard haul that has brought us struggling up to this turning point, one may feel inclined to ask the Boss for a permanent holiday as soon as the job seems done, leaving the rest to all the others who will arrive as the future generations. But don't get teo sef on that dream of eternal retirement in Heaven. Shri Mataji once mentioned to one of Her children who toyed with this idea, that She intends to incarnate again when paradise is established on Earth. Looks like the Story just keeps getting better! Viva la Revolution! Jai (Victory to) Shri Mataji! - Edward 23

 Continued from page.5 Gandhi's magic: Gandhi's patronizing Khadi resulted in unemployment at Lancashire. It was full of workers seething with resentment and indignation against Gandhi for having helped bring this about. In spite of safety concerns Gandhi went to Lancashire and addressed the workers, "you tell me that three million people are out of employment for several months. In my country, three hundred million people are unemployed at least six months in every year. You say there are days when you get only bread and butter for dinner. But these people go for days without any food at all". At the end of Gandhi's talk they all cheered him, the man who had brought about their unemployment. Gandhi's spiritual message for the world given at Kingsley Hall, London: "There is an indefinable mysterious power that pervades everything. I feel it, though I do not see it. It is this unseen power which makes it self felt, and yet defies all proof because it is so unlike all that I perceive through my senses. It transcends the senses. But it is possible to reason out the existence of God to a limited extent. Even in ordinary affairs, we know that people do not know who rules or why and how he rules. And yet they know that there is a power that certainly rules. In my tour last year in Mysore, I met many poor villagers and I found upon enquiry that they did not know who ruled Mysore. They simply said, "Some God ruled it". If the knowledge of these poor people was so limited about their ruler, I, who an infinite lesser in respect to God than they to their ruler, need not be surprised, If I do not realize the presence of God, the King of Kings. Nevertheless, I do feel as the poor villagers felt about Mysore, that there is orderliness in the universe. There is an unalterable law governing everything and every being that exists or lives. It is not a blind law. For no blind law can govern the conduct of living beings. And thanks to the marvelous researches of Sir JC Bose, it can now be proved that even matter is life. That law, then, which governs all life, is God! Law and the lawgiver are one. I need not deny the law or the lawgiver because I know so little about it or him. Just as my denial or ignorance of the existence of an earthly power will avail me nothing, even so my denial of God and His law will not liberate me from its operation. Whereas humble and new acceptance of Divine authority makes life's journey easier even as the acceptance of earthly rule makes life under it easier. I do dimly perceive that whilst everything around me is ever changing, ever dying, there is underlying all that change, a living power that is changeless, that holds all together, that creates, dissolves and recreates. That informing power of spirit is God and since nothing else that I see merely through the senses, can or will persist, He alone is! And is this power bernevolent or malevolent? I see it as purely benevolent, for I can see that in the midst of death, life persists. In the midst of untruth, truth persists. In the midst of darkness, light persists. Hence Igather that God is life, truth, light. He is love. He is the supreme good. But, He is no God who merely satisfies the intellect, if He ever does. God, to be God must rule the heart and transform it. He must express Himself in every smallest act of His votary. This can only be done through a definite realization, more real than the five senses can ever prove use. Sense perceptions can be and often are false and deceptive. However real they may appear to us. Where there is realization outside the senses, it is infallible. It is proved not by extreme extraneous evidence, but in the 24

 transformed conduct and character of those who have felt the real presence of God within. Such testimony is to be found in the experiences of an unbroken line of prophets and sages in all countries in time. To reject this evidence is to deny oneself. This realization is preceded by an imovable faith. He who would in his own person, test the fact of God's presence can do so by a living faith. And since faith itself cannot be proved by extraneous evidence, the safest course is to believe in the moral government of the world and therefore in the supremacy of the moral law: The law of truth and love. Exercise of faith will be the safest where there is a clear determination, summarily to reject all that is contradictory to truth and love. I confess that I have no argument to convince through reason. Faith transcends reason.All that I can advice is not to attempt the impossible." Sense of collectivity: "I believe that if one man gains spiritually the whole world gains with him and, if one man fails, the whole world falls to that extent. I do not help opponents without at the same time helping myself and my co workers". References and recommended reading: 1. The story of my experiments with truth M.K. Gandhi. The Life of Mahatma Gandhi Louis Fischer. 2. 3. Gandhi, The Man Eknath Eswaran. "Gandhi" movie directed by Sir Righard 4. Attenborough. Sketch by : Gajendra Warghade, Pune ||Thank you Mother||

 THE YEARS PASSED AND JESUS WENT TO INDIA, WHERE HE MET THE EMPEROR SHALIVAHAN. I AM ISSA, HE WHO IS WITH THE PRIMORDIAL POWER OF GOD! PLEASE, TELL ME, WHO ARE YOU ? Jesus THE TRUE STORY FI



----------------------

2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Yuvadrishti
An offering at the lotur feet of
our Divine Mother by the Yuvathakti
Volume 6
June
2005
ISsue 2
ell
Dajians
Sahaja ayoga
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 AHAHAAYAKANAHANAAAAAK
Index
MAHATMA GANDHI
भवसागर
10
Vedavati
स ब्िज
11
अडम्स
Му деаr childre...
12
тей...
A Scientist's Curiosity!
13
Why Seven loops?
Prophetic Visions of the
16
Divine Feminine in modern Europe.
THE META CULTURAL
21
REVOLUTION
Cover Page Tiero, Italy
Back Page David Vignolii, Brazil
TAKAHAMAAKAAHAAAKAHAHAAKAKALAAAK
BMMMMMMMMiMAMMM
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 МАНАТМА А
GANDHI
(1869-1948)
"The objects of this massive tribute, died as he had always lived,
private man, without wealth, without property, without official
title or office. Mahatma Gandhi not commander of armies, nor a
ruler of vast lands. He could not boast any scientific achievement
or artistic gift yet men, governments, dignitaries from all over the
world have joined hands today to pay homage to this little brown man in the loin cloth who led his
country to freedom. In the words of General George C. Marshall, the American Secretary of State,
Mahatma Gandhi has become spokesman for the conscious of all mankind, he was a man who made
humility and simple truth more powerful than empires, and Albert Einstein added, generations to
come will scarce believe that such a one as this, ever in flesh and blood, walked upon this earth", is the
commentary during the death procession of Mahatma Gandhi with which the award winning movie,
"Gandhi" starts. It quite sums up his life's work and the reverence with which men and women
around the world held him.
Ordinary beginnings of an extraordinary life:
There was nothing unusual about the boy Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, except perhaps that he
was very shy. He had no unusual talents, and went through school as somewhat less than average
student: self conscious and serious, deeply devoted to his parents, and only vaguely aware of
anything outside the quiet seaside town of his birth. It was the end of nineteenth century, when the
British Empire, at the peak of its wealth and power extended around the world. India was in its second
century of British domination.
"I was born at Porbandar, otherwise known as Sudamapuri, on the 2 October, 1869. I passed my
childhood at Porbandar. I recollect having been put to school. It was with some difficulty that I got
through the multiplication tables. The fact that I recollect nothing more of those days than having
learnt, in company of other boys, to call our teacher all kinds of names, would strongly suggest that
my intellect must have been sluggish and my memory raw."
"I was afraid of anyone poking fun at me. Moreover, Iwas a coward. Iused to be haunted by the fear of
thieves, ghosts and serpents. Idid not dare to stir out of doors at nights. Darkness was a terror to me. It
was almost impossible for me to sleep in the dark, as I would imagine ghosts coming from one
direction, thieves from another and serpents from a third. I could therefore not dare to sleep without a
light in the room.'
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 At the age of thirteen, while he was still in high school,
Gandhi was married. It was, he wrote later, a
preposterously early" age. But Kasturbai was an
attractive girl and Gandhi quickly learned the role of a
passionate, jealous and an exacting husband.
It was, in many ways a very ordinary beginning. But it was
a beginning ofan extraordinary life.
Transformation:
Gandhi graduated from high school with a mediocre
average and then went to college. He failed in every class.
Every subject seemed impossible to follow. After five
SL
months of consistent failure he withdrew and came back
to
home. It was now decided that Gandhi would
go
London to study law.
His first few months in England were a nightmare.
Everything around him was different. Never had he felt so
alone. For weeks Gandhi was on the verge of turning back
and taking the next boat home. But something deeper within him was determined to stick it out.
He was then advised by an Indian acquaintance to learn the English way of life. Gandhi saw the point
and thus started his first experiment in mimicking lifestyles. He engaged tutors in French and
speaking, and bought expensive tailored suits and a silk top hat. He taught himself how to tie a
necktie, and learned to admire himself before a mirror while he struggled to discipline his hair with
proper
an English brush. He even invested in violin lessons and tried to learn the foxtrot.
In about three months the experiment failed. Far from giving him greater security, it only made him
more self-conscious. The gap between his inner self and out ward selves was widening into a chasm.
He began to experiment with simpler ways of life.
He found an apartment, which was centrally located so that he could walk to wherever he needed to
go. Then he experimented with his diet and realized that the sense of taste lies not in the tongue but in
the mind. Transformation had only begun, the Mahatma world knows today was still a fair distance
away.
After completing law Gandhi sailed home. His brief stay in India was a complete professional failure
for him. Then an opportunity came to go for a case to South Africa. He found himself in a land where
color of his skin was enough to mark him off for daily contempt and even physical abuse.
Within the first few days in South Africa an incident happened, which left a life long impression on
Gandhi. At Maritzburg, he was thrown out of the train for traveling first class. Only the 'whites' could
travel first class. He spent the night in the waiting room, brooding and shivering in the cold. Should he
return in India? But to flee would be cowardice. He decided to resist the evil. Many years later in
India, when Gandhi was asked about his most creative moments, he narrated the night at Maritzburg
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 railway station. In South Africa he had to undergo many trials, suffer abuse and even physical attacks,
but that long night in the Natal Mountains, he made the decision to never to yield to force and never to
use force to win a cause.
After the lawsuit settled, Gandhi prepared to sail for India. Gandhi had been in South Africa for
twelve months. Before his departure he was given a farewell party. During the festivities someone
handed him the day's Natal Mercury, and in it he found a brief item regarding the Natal governments
proposed bill to deprive Indians of their right to elect members of their legislature. Gandhi stressed on
the necessity of resisting this move. His friends were ready but they were 'unlettered, lame' men, they
said, and powerless without him. He consented to stay a month. He remained twenty years fighting
the battle for Indian rights. He won.
Gandhi who worsted the South African government in prolonged combat had first conquered
himself and transformed his living habits and inner essence. Gandhi was a self-remade man. It is not
that he turned failure into success. Using the clay that was there he turned himself into another
person. He was a remarkable case of second birth in one lifetime.
From one battlefield to another, India:
Gandhi returned to India in 1915, and then began his struggle against the British rule. His aim was not
merely substitution of British rule with Indian rule. Not governments but methods and objectives
interested him, not whether a William or a Chandra sat in the seat of power but whose deeds were
more civilized. He believed that India's mission was to 'elevate the moral being'. Therefore, 'if the
English become Indianized we can accommodate them'. His nationalism lacked the usual
concomitants of nationalism; exclusiveness and hostility towards other countries. My patriotism',
Gandhi declared, 'is subservient to my religion'. He was too religious to serve one land, one race, one
cast, one family, one person, or even one religion. His religion was humanity.
No theory guided his thoughts or actions. He strove to keep his mind open. He reserved the right to
differ with himself. His life was an unending experiment. He experimented even in his seventies.
There was nothing set abouthim. He wasnot a conforming Hindu, nor a conforming nationalist nor a
conforming pacifist. Gandhi was independent, unfettered, unpredictable, hence exciting and
difficult. A conversation with him was a voyage
of discovery: he dared to go anywhere without
a chart. Under attack, he rarely defended
himself. Humble and simple, he did not have to
pretend dignity. Thus relieved of uncreative
mental tasks, he was free to be creative. Nor did
say or do anything merely to gain
popularity or win or mollify followers. He
upset the applecart frequently. His inner need
to perform a given act took precedence over its
possible effects on his supporters.
he
3
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Shaking the Empire with a pinch of salt:
Gandhi was the most bewildering opponent any nation or empire ever faced. Every move he made
was spontaneous; every year that passed more youthful, more radical and more experimental. British
administrators were baffled and exasperated by this little man. No one knew what he was going to do
next for his actions were prompted not by stale calculations but by a deep intuition, which often came
to him only in the eleventh hour.
Never was this more evident than in the salt Satyagraha of 1930 ('Satyagraha" was a term Gandhi gave
to his non violent movement. 'satya' is truth, which equals love, and 'agraha' is firmness or force. It
therefore, means, truth-force or love-force.) It brought Gandhi and the Indian struggle to the attention
of the world. On the first of January 1930, at the stroke of midnight the Indian Congress party raised
the flag of the new nation to usher in the struggle for complete independence. All of India looked to
Gandhi to see what would happen next. A new Satyagraha campaign seemed imminent, but no one
including Gandhi had any idea of what it would be or when it would be launched. After weeks of
deliberations, the answer dawned upon Gandhi. It was breathtakingly simple. The government had
imposed a law forbidding Indians to make their own salt, making them dependent on British
monopoly for what is, in a tropical country a necessity of life. To Gandhi it was a perfect symbol of
colonial exploitation. He proposed to march to a little coastal town of Dandi, some two hundred and
forty miles away, where salt from sea lay free for taking on the sand. When he gave the signal
in India was to act as if the salt laws had never been enacted at all. It was an epic march.
to preach
everyone
Gandhi, at sixty one, covered 12 miles a days on foot, stopping at every village on the way
the gospel of ahimsa and the duty of non violent non cooperation. Everywhere he passed people
streamed out to meet him, lining the roads between towns and strewing his path with flowers. By the
time he reached Dandi, twenty-four days later his non-violent army of sixty-eight had swelled to
several thousand.
Through the night of their arrival Gandhi and his followers prayed for strength to resist the vielence,
which might easily sweep away so large a crowd. Then at the moment of dawn they went quickly
down to the water and Gandhi with thousands of eyes watching every gesture, stooped down and
picked up a pinch of salt from the sand. The response was immediate. All along India's coastline huge
crowds of men, women and children swept down to the sea to gather salt in direct disobedience to the
British laws. Civil disobedience erupted spontaneously through the country for weeks after Gandhi's
signal. Thousands were arrested, many more beaten or killed without a hint of violent retaliation.
Gandhi alone was maintaining order in that vast, unpredictable movement which was shaking the
Indian subcontinent from the Himalayas to the sea.
Following the Dandi march, one night British officials arrived at Gandhi's work camp accompanied
by thirty men with readied guns. In the midst of this confusion leader of this national earthquake was
sleeping like a baby, absolutely certain that the lord would take care of him. "We have come to arrest
Mr. M.K. Gandhi", declareda British official. "Iam Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, and I am at your
service", a little figure called out. "Please get your things ready we will give you the time you need". "I
am ready now", said Gandhi, indicating a small bundle on the floor. His needs were few. While the
4
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 policemen watched he set about brushing his teeth in his usual unhurried way. Then after a small
prayer he turned to the official in charge and walked briskly to the car outside chatting cheerfully to
his escorts. He knew it might be years before he returned; yet there was no trace of apprehension or
resentment in his manner. The officials were so impressed by simple dignity of this man that they
seemed to be not his jailers but his prisoners.
Free inside the prison:
Gandhi was arrested so often that he seemed
always to be either in prison, just released from
prison, or about to be imprisoned again. Gandhi
was so detached from his physical environment
that going to jail did not disrupt his work at all, and
he drove some of his hardest bargains from behind
the jail walls. Often the walls were those of Yervada
prison (Pune), where he felt so much at home that
once when a British interrogator asked for his
address, he answered, "Yervada". When a man
does everything in the spirit of worship everywhere
he goes is sacred, and Gandhi used to mark his jail letters 'Yervada Mandir', which means "Yervada
In the prison he was able to read the Bible, the Koran and the Bhagavad Gita, and to conduct his
temple".
usual voluminous correspondence everyday. There was plenty of physical work and plenty of
enemies, on both sides of the bars, to win over as friends. He looked after them all, and even nursed
when they were ill. Everyday he served in prison only added to his spiritual growth and made more
converts to non-violence and independence. He was free whether inside or outside the prison.
Khadi, symbol of self-respect:
Under Colonial rule, India was required to export all its cotton
at a nominal rate to England, where it was manufactured into
cloth in the factories of Lancashire and sold back to the poor in
India at many times the price they had been paid for growing
it. Gandhi wanted all Indians, rich as well as poor; to learn the
age-old craft of hand spinning so that the people of seven
hundred thousand impoverished villages of India could
regain self-employment, self-reliance, and self-respect. He
asked all Indians to wear the rough white home spun cloth
called Khadi, and boycott foreign clothe. Khadi became the symbol of independence, linking the
upper and middle classes of Indian society to the vast masses of the poor.
Once, Gandhi wore his Khadi loincloth and shawl even to tea at Buckingham palace. An English
reporter asked him, "Mr. Gandhi don't you think you were a trifle underdressed for the occasion?"
"His majesty", Gandhi answered, "had enough clothes for both of us".
Continued on Page 24
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 सूक्ष्म शरीर में स्थान
णि
ॐ
सिर में स्थान
XX
ॐ
नL
मु०
र
हाथों में स्थान
भो
ा
छि
पैरों में स्थान
गुरुतत्व
भवसागर
अनंतकाल से आदि गुरू
भारत
(ु
राा अन
देवता:
श्री अदिगुरुदत्तात्रय
गैसोपोटामिया]
पाचन क्रिया (स्वाधिष्ठान, नाभी पर प्रभाव)
मिशर
प्रादुर्भाव (कार्य) :
पा मोजेज
५रभया
जरथ
धर्म, संतुलन, स्थिरता, व्यक्त्वि
गुण:
ओे
पीन
संबंधित दिन:
गुरुवार
पीन
रियस
संबंधित रंग:
संबंधित पंचतत्व:
हरा
सुकराव
चौरा
समारव
आगतथा पानी (जल)
मोम्मद
क्का
हथेली पर (बाहरी) अगूंठी दार क्षेत्र,
हथेली पर जगह :
मर नानक
मानत
का
शिरडी साईश्राथ
1855 AD
नारा
अंगुलियों का निम्नतम भाग.
व
के क कि की
७
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 धर्मान्धता, झक, कालीविद्या,
पकड के कारण (बाधाये) :
अध्यात्मवाद, कुगुरू, अज्ञानता
हि
परिचय: मानव के उत्थान के शुरुसे आज तक भ्रम तथा अज्ञानता
के विरुद्ध हमेशा लड़ाई चलती रही है। इस अज्ञानता कि स्थिती से
मानव को प्रथम उपर उठना होगा तभी वह वास्तविक आत्मा के
सत्यता कि सुंदरता का अनुभव ले पायेगा। मानव शरीर में भ्रमता से
वास्तविकता तक पहचने के संघर्ष क्षेत्र को भवसागर ( भ्रमसागर)
कहते है।
गुण: भवसागर हमारे गुरुत्व के स्थान को दर्शता है। जब कुंडलिनी
उठकर इस क्षेत्र को प्रकाशित करती है तो हम अपने स्वयं के गुरु हो
जाते है। गुरुशब्द का अर्थ है घनत्व या गंभीरता और इसी के कारण
ही अशांति अस्तित्व की दशा में भी हम अपने को संतुलन में रख पाते
है। जब कुंडलिनी उठकर भवसागर को भर लेती है तब हमारा चित्त
भ्रम तथा उलझन से बाहर निकलकर उच्चतम सत्यता की चेतना
की ओर जाता है। इस तरह हम बाहरी शक्तिओों से बिना प्रभावित हुए,
अपनी उत्क्रांती का खुद संचालन करते है। वास्तव में हमारा
आत्मनिरिक्षण ही ध्यान के समय हमारे प्रश्नों के उत्तर प्रदान करता
है। अधिकांश बाहरी समस्यों का समाधान हमे मिलता है परंतु स्वयं
के गुरु होने के कारण हम सत्य-असत्य तथा सही-गलत में भेद
कर पाते है।
इस क्षेत्र का दूसरा पहलू हैं शिष्यत्व। जिस प्रकार हम गुरु की गहानता से किसी को सलाह देते है, उसी
प्रकार हमे सत्य को खुले दिमाग तथा विनम्रता से पहचानना आवश्यक है। अदिकाल से ही सभी बडे गुखे ईश्वर
के विन्रम शिष्य रहे है। इस तरह से वे अपने अहंकार को दैव्य को समर्पित किये और पूर्ण अधिकार से शिक्षा देने में
सक्षम हुये, यहाँ तक की विद्यमानस्थापित सत्ता को भी ललकार सके।
यह कोई योगायोग नही है की धर्म का तत्त्व इस चक्र का मूलभूत स्वभाव है क्योंकि भवसागर
नाभी चक्र से सीधी तरह से जुड़ा हुआ है। सभी बडे गुरु और पैगंबर जिन्होंने संसार में जन्म लेकर मानवता का
मार्गदर्शन किया उन सभी ने धर्म (न्याय-परायण आचरण) को अपने शेक्षा का मूलभुत सिद्धांत बनाया था ।
स्वयं के दुष्प्रयोग और परनिंदा से बचकर ही सही मायने में हम एक अच्छे इन्सान बन सकते है। दूसरे शब्दों में
प्रकृती के नियमों के अनुसाररहकर ही हम अच्छी तरह से जीवन व्यतीत कर सकते है ।
परंपरा: सभी महान गुरू जो मानव के लिए आदर्श बनकर आये और उने उच्चतम सत्य का ज्ञान दिया वे
सभी भवसागर से संबंधित थे। आदि देवता आदिगुरु दत्तात्रय है और महान गुरु (पैगंबर) जैसे एब्राहम, मोझेस,
लाओत्से, राजा जनक, गुरुनानक, मोहम्मद साहब, शिर्डी के साईनाथ, जरादुख्त्रा, कनफूसियस तथा सोक्रटीस
ये सभी आदिगुरु दत्तात्रय के ही अवतरण है। इन लोगों ने हमे न्याय-परायण मार्ग पर चलना सिखाया जिस से
हमारेसमाज से अशासनखत्म किया जा सके।
इसी भवसागर में शिष्यत्व भी विराजमान है और यह तत्त्व पृथ्वी पर लव-कुश, मार्कडेय,
आदिशंकराचार्य, डेव्हिड, जॉन द बॅपटिस्ट, गौतम बुद्धा, महावीर, कबीर, मायकेलएन्जेलो, खलिल गिब्रान,
विलियम शेक्सपियर, विलियम ब्लेक, तथा अन्य रूप में आये है। महान गुरुओं ने दुनिया में सभी जगहो पर
1
र
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 जन्म लिये है। कई बार तो उनके अवतरित होने का मूल उद्देश यह था कि वे अपने पिछले जन्म के अनुयायियों
को गलत मार्ग से निकालकर सही मार्ग पर लायें। उदा. उस समय के क्रूरता पूर्ण व्यक्तियों को धर्म सिखाने
मोहम्मद साहब ने जन्म लिया, परंतु उन्हें ही सताया गया। इसके फल स्वरूप घृणावश उन्होंने कसम खाई कि
"यह आखरी बार हैं जब कोई पैगंबर (देवदूत) धरती पर आया है"। परंतु जब उन्होंने देखा कि उनकी सारी
शिक्षा मिट्टीं मे मिला दी गई है तो वे दयावश हिंदु-मुस्लिम एकता कि शिक्षा देने गुरुनानक के रुप में इस धरती
पर अवतारित हुए। आजकल इन दोनों के अनुयायी ही एक दुसरे के घृणास्पद हो गये है। इसी तरह आदिशिष्य
शंकराचार्य ही कबीर के रूप में आये जिन्होंने कर्मकांड, मूर्तिपुजा, धर्मांधता में फसे अनुयायियों का पुनः
मार्गदर्शन किया।
शंकराचार्य ही कबीर के रूप में आये जिन्होंने कर्मकांड, मूर्तिपुजा, धर्मांधता में फसे अनुयायियों का पुनः
मार्गदर्शन किया।
स्थूल भौतिक पहलू : भवसागर कुंडलिनी तथा पॅरासिम्पथेटिक प्रणाली के वेगस नाडी के बीच का अन्तराल
है। सृष्टी के शुरू से आज तक की मानव चेतना के उच्चतम उत्क्रांती के समय तथा जगह को यह दर्शता है। हमारी
अप्रकाशित (अज्ञान की) अवस्था में यह वह खाली जगाह है जो हमारी तथा विराट चेतना को अलग करता है।
स्वाधिष्ठान चक्र नाभी चक्र के चारों तरफ घूमने के कारण भवसागर का निर्माण हुआ है और इसमें सूर्य तथा
चंद्रमा से संबंधित दो संस्था होती है।
भवसागर की स्थिती : अपने पाचन प्रणाली में गडबडी होने के कारण हम समझ सकते है कि हमने अपने
गुरुतत्व को विक्षुब्ध किया है। पेट से उत्तपन्न मचलाहट या अन्य रूप से यह प्रकटित होता है। उदा. अगर हम
किसी अधार्मिक क्रिया को देखते है या अपने स्थूल या सूक्ष्म प्रणाली का दुरुपयोग करते है तो इस क्षेत्र में इसका
असर महसूस कर पाते है। हमारे पेट में नाड़ी-मंडल का तनाव या किसी परीक्षा के समय का तनाव
'गुरुसिद्धांत' पर आघात है। उसी तरह अपने भवसागर की स्थिती जानकर हम सत्य और असत्य शिक्षा का
निर्णय कर सकते है। अपने भवसागर के संकेत तथा चैतन्य लहरी की चेतना का मेल किसी पद्धती की
भौतिकताया आध्यत्मिकता को पहचानने का एक मजबूत सूचक बन सकता है। जब हम हमारे सुक्ष्म यंत्रणा के
लय में जुडना सीख जाते है तब हम स्वाभाविक ही अयोग्य चीजों से बचना तथा योग्य चीजों के सम्मुख होना
जान जाते है। हमारे अंदर का गुरुतत्त्व हमारे मांगल्य के लिए एक शक्तिशाली ताकत है लेकिन हमे इसके संकेतो
को पहचानना सीखना होगा।
भवसागर काशुद्धिकरण:
नमक के गुनगुने पानी से पैरजल क्रिया करना।
१.
भवसागर के क्षेत्र में मोमबत्ती का इस्तमाल करना।
२.
प्रार्थना:
बाँया: श्रीमताजी मैं स्वयं का गुरु हूँ।
स्याम
दाहिना: श्री माताजी आप ही मेरे गुरु है ।
दाम
ता
श्रीमाताजी द्वारा दी गयी सलाहे:
बाया हाथ फोटो की तरफ करे और दाया भवसागरपर रखे।
१.
बाधाओं पर जूतामारे।
२.
हलका नमकीन पानी ग्रहण करे।
३.
पा
स्वयं अनुशासनमें रहे (जैसे किजल्दीउठकर ध्यान करे) ।
४.
8
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 The Extraordinary Previous Birth of Shri Sita
from the Devi Mahatmyam
Vedavati
Rathadhwaja was a king, whose forefathers had respected Goddess lakshmi. With the passage of
time, it was clear that the attention on Alakshmi (principles against lakshmi Tattwa) was on the rise. In
their traditions the attention on the true lakshmi Tattwa degenerated over the generations.
Unfortunately, there came a time when the light of the blessing was gone from this kingdom. As the
external events in a kingdom follow its subtle collective state, Rathadhwaja faced defeat in battles and
lost all the kingdom and posessions. But his sons Kushadhwaja and Dharmadhwaja realized the
subtle reason's behind the calamity and meditated on Shri lakshmi, inviting her to grace their family
again. Shri lakshmi, pleased with their realization and
humility, blessed them with Her own birth in the
household.
Shri lakshmi was born as a daughter to Malavati and
Kushadhwaja. Being a divine personality she was full
of grace and accompanied by auspicious signs during
Her birth. The Vedas were on Her lips at a tender age,
and hence She was named as Vedavati. Being a high
souled personality, She was clear about Her purpose on
the earth and travelled to the holy land of Pushkara to
meditate on the Highest Cause. On the other hand,
through Her advent, the position of the family was
restored in the world as the ruling family. During her penances and meditations a point came where
you
She was blessed with an announcement from the heavens: "You have achieved the state where
will marry Shri Vishnu Himself, but not before being born again." Vedavati continued her meditation,
knowing Her selfand Her high destiny.
It was probably the need to wait for the perfect time before the divine pair of lakshmi-Narayana came
on the earth, because in the time of Her next birth She became Shri Sita who married Vishnu-incarnate
Shri Rama. However, the divine play had not been over in this birth for her, as She met the demon
Ravana during Her life as Vedavati.
The Ravana episode unveils reasons behind the divine play of Ramayana, where Shri Sita became the
cause of Ravana's death and destruction. Ravana was an extremely accomplished, arrogant and
torturous ruler. In his power and glory he had no recognition or respect for Shri Narayana or other
divine personalities for that matter. All deities were displeased with him and all creatures were
oppressed by him. He collected taxes. Those who could not pay, like hermits in forests, had to pay
with their flesh and blood. His rule wasa reign of terror, which needed an end.
However, during the life of Vedavati, Ravana was traveling by air and made a stopover at Vedavati's
hermitage. She, bringing forth Her true gracious nature, hosted Ravana as a guest and made his visit
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 comfortable. Seeing the absolute divine form of refuge in the fire until the task of destroying
Vedavati, he enquired about Her life. She told him Ravana was over. Ravana took the Chhaya Sita
about Her nature, Her penance and Her distiny, and Shri Rama defeated him and ended his time
including Her future life with Shri Vishnu. on earth.
Ravana, being covered in ego, laughed and Shri Sita, the worldmother, returned to her
derided Vedavati's destiny. He proposed original form during the "agni-pariksha". The
marriage to her and to make his point called the agni actually took away the Chaaya Sita and
high-souled Narayana an inferior being to him. In returned the original pure Janaki. This wonderful
a last attempt he tried to force Vedavati into his set of events that gives a fresh perspective on this
control by pulling Her hair, which brought Her is found between the covers of the Devi
rage forward. She declared: "You have attempted Mahatmyam.
to cast your shadow over me and hence I will give
this tainted body to the hermitage fire, but I
will be your cause of destruction and death,
Ravana!"
जब से तूने मुझे अपनाया
जन्मों का चैन है आया
Years passed and while Raja Janaka ploughed the
fields during the oppressive times of Ravana- O
rule, he hit upon an earthen object. From the
forrows of the earth came Shri Sita, with Riddhi-
Siddhi on the sides. Riddhi-Siddhi dissappeared
तू ही सफर, तू ही है मंजिल
तू ही लहर, तू ही है साहिल
कैसा प्यार है तूने दिखाया......
जबसे तूने मुझे अपनाया
instantaneously and the true nature of Shri Sita
was revealed to Raja Janaka. Later, in the
swayamwara ceremony, Shri Rama married Shri
Sita. But truly
तूही दिल, तूही है मन।
तू ही नमाज। तू ही नमन।
कैसा सुन्दर समय है आया.
जबसे तूने मुझे अपनाया
intriguing is the
episode with
Agni-dev.ata
during Rama's
तू ही रज्जा तू ही मरकज्जा
तेरी छाव में ढूखः न लगे सजा।
कैसी मौज मे मैं हूँ आया.
जबसे तूने मुझे अपनाया
exile.
During the exile,
when Shri Rama,
Sita and Laxmana
were in the forests, Shri Agni-devata came forth
and informed Shri Rama of the divine destiny of
जब से तूने मुझे अपनाया
जन्मों का चैन है आया
Ravana's destruction. Since the true nature of Shri
Sita was that of the Adishakti, Ravana cannot bear
to face her. Hence, Agni devata brought forth a
"Chhaya Sita" i.e. Shri Sita's shadow for the
fulfillment of the divine purpose. Shri Sita took
मालविका अगरवाल, गुरगांव
10
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 IND
Pal
Patk Bay
अॅडम्स
ब्रिज
१०
oRameswaram
Iranaitivu is.
Vellankulam
ठ
Pamban I.
Ferry
Dhanushkodi
Talaimannar
Adam's Bridge Mannar
OMannar
Island
नासाद्धारा अंतराल से ली गई तस्वीरों से यह प्रतीत हुआ
है कि भारत और श्रीलंका के बीच पाल्क स्ट्रेट (Palk Strait)
में एक अद्भुत पौराणिक सेतु है। इस सेतु को अभी अॅडम्स
ब्रिज (Adams Bridge) के नाम से जाना जाता है जो समुद्र
की उथली सतह वाले बहुत से भागों से बना है और
जिसकी लंबाई ३0 कि.मी. है।
सेत कि अद्धितिय वक्रता और बनावट यह
बतलाती है की यह मानव निर्मित हो सकता है।
दंतकथाये तथा पूरातत्व विभाग के अनुसार श्रीलंका में
में लगभग
युग
मानव जाती के प्रथम संकेत प्राचीन
१७५०००० वर्ष पूर्व प्राप्त हये है।
यह सूचना एक महत्त्वपूर्ण पहलू उजागर करती है
रामायण नामक दंतकथा का, जो कि घटित हुई थी त्रेता
युग में (१७५०००० वर्ष पूर्व)।
इस महाकाव्य में पुल के बारे में उल्लेख है कि
रामेश्वरम और श्रीलंका के किनारों के बीच श्रीराम चंद्रजी
ने इस सेतु का निर्माण करवाया था।
यह सूचना पुरतत्व विभाग के दृष्टी से इतनी
महत्त्वपूर्ण नही होगी जो मनुष्य उत्पत्ती के केंद्र बिंदु कि
तलाश में रूचि रखते है, पर यह जरर अध्यात्किमता के
व्वार खोलेगी जो यह बया करते हैं की पुराना इतिहास
भारतीय पौराणिक कथाओं से ही जुडा हुया है।
11 61
ोती
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 ldren...
My dear children.
Beautiful words that enlightens our heart... This is the English translation of a letter written in
Marathi by H.H. Shri Mataji to the early Indian Sahaja Yogis during mid 1970s. This was published in
early dated Nirmala Yoga in Issue no. 14.
My dear Modi and other Sahaja Yogis,
Many blessings. Received your letter. I am very glad to know that your Ida Nadi has become clean and
Ihope, Ida Nadis of all have become clean at least to some extent. Here I had told all, that I would work,
while under anesthesia, to clean the Ida channels of all. I worked for 3 days cleaning it by vomiting
nearly 50 times every day and it is nice that the cleaning has become possible.
This physical being has to be used for the mission for whom it has been
taken and therefore I am not bothered by the illness and other
troubles. On the contrary all such and different experiments with this
incarnation will have to be performed.
Why are you so anxious about it? What else is the use of this body? I
never have any pains. All I want is that, in the laboratory of this body,
some work or the other must go on. Time is short while the work to be
done is very big.
You cannot do the cleaning of Ida channel only on the strength of your
realization. Iknew that it had to be cleaned from within.
In ancient days all seekers had to do this action (Kriya) constantly right from their childhood at the
lives.
residences of their gurus at isolated places. The seekers had to do it individually in many
Because, now you have attained the state of collectivity I have done it in collective consciousness.
Although you say I have done it, the distinction of you and I should not be there in collective
consciousness. Mantras "Twam Bhawani, Twam Durga, Twam Ambika etc." are good for Ida Channel,
but when you are established in Sahaja Yoga, you will have to say 'Aham Bhavani'. However this
Mantra can be said only when your purity becomes one with that of 'Aham Bhavani' and I tell you now
itself that this will happen.
After cleaning the Ida Channel I am awakening Pingala Nadi. Sahaja Yogis had become rather
lethargic due to the conditioning of Ida Channel. Laziness and a tendency of avoiding the work were
dominating in them. Their attention was being frittered away on avoiding the work. But I have now
started the work of awakening Pingala Channel. All of you should raise your right hand from right
side over your head and leave it on the left side but while doing it, you must apply your will power so
that your desires will materialize.
With the awakening of collectivity, you will have many people to share your work, which you are
doing alone. The sphere of Sahasrara envelops your heart. When conditioning of heart is reduced, as if
Continued on page 21
12
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 A Scientist's Curiosity! Why Seven loops?
Following is an article, which reproduces an extract from a scientific paper written by Dr. R.C.
Mishra, Toronto who has been working in the area of mental and neurological disorders for the
last several years. In this beautiful journey of discovery, Dr Mishra could comprehend the
mysteries only after getting self-realization and meeting Shri Mataji in 1988.
"Catecholamine, Indoleamine and other amine cell surface receptors"
Cell surfaces of the all-living cells contain a leads to diseases like schizophrenia, Parkinson's
specific set of proteins called receptors. Among a (movement disorders), etc. The receptors for other
variety of receptors, the receptors for compounds chemicals such as serotonin are also found in brain
such as nor-adrenalin, adrenalin are found and other organs, and believed to be involved in
virtually in every cell of the human body. The depression.
receptors for dopamine, serotonins are found in Common feature of these Receptors
brain cells and other tissues as well. These
receptors are not only present on normal cells but All of these receptors are found in the cell
they are also found in a variety of cancer cells, e.g., membrane and made up of several hundreds of
human neuro-blastoma (cancer which affects amino acids. However, when the arrangements of
children from age-1 to 11 years) has adrenergic these amino-acids were examined by several
groups of scientists working in the United States,
Canada, U.K and other countries, it became
receptors.
The various receptors have been classified into
several subcategories on the basis their interaction and ie, 'Seven Domains' or 'Seven Spanning
with various specific drugs. The adrenergic Loops'. The receptors protein is folded in such a
receptors have been divided into two subclasses, way that it forms seven loops. Of course, each of
e.g., alpha-adrenergic & beta-adrenergic receptor. the spanning domains has specific function.
Both alpha and beta-receptors are distributed sSeveral of these receptors are linked to a protein
throughout the human body and involved in called G-protein, which acts as a communicator
apparent that they have one feature in common
several physiological functions. Common
disorders in which such receptors are involved
include: high blood pressure, heart disease,
depression, liver problems, stress, kidney
dysfunction, etc. In fact beta-blocker and alpha- Besides, these receptors there are several other
blocker drugs are frequently used as anti- receptors, which share the similar structural
hypertensive drugs. Similarly receptors for other properties, i.e., seven spanning loops and
compounds produced in human body from the association with G-proteins.
dietary amino acids (Tyrosine and Tryptophan)
are also present. For example, dopamine receptors Why SEVEN Spanning Loops?
are found in the brain and also in kidney and heart.
between the receptor and the inside of the cell. The
G-proteins are also present in almost every living
cell.
The dysfunction of such receptors in the brain Dr Mishra recalls, "Ihave been working in the area
13
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 of mental and neurological disorders for the last When there was no answer available, one student
several years and my research work has been said, "this has to do with God and religion". I left
funded by the several agencies, e.g., National this question at that stage and decided to talk to
Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), USA, Medical someone who was really knowledgeable in this
Research Council of Canada, Parkinson's field.
Foundation of Canada, Ontario Mental Health In December 1988, I met Her Holiness Shri Mataji
Foundation of Canada and National Cancer Nirmala Devi. It was a unique and joyful
Institute of Canada. My main work has been experience which can be only felt by a human but
directed towards development of better hard to describe. After talking and experiencing
antipsychotic and anti-Parkinson's drugs. And, the self-realization with the grace and blessing of
thus a detailed biochemical knowledge of the drug Shri Mataji, the mysterious arrangement of the
interacting membrane receptor is essential.
drug-receptors in the cell membrane began to
Having all the research work done in many areas make sense. The introduction of Kundalini: and
of drug-receptor interaction, it was never clear to description of seven centres (7 chakras of the
me or any other scientist in this world, why these human body) in Sahaja Yoga not only explained
important receptors are folded in such a way that the seven spanning domains of receptor proteins
but many other aspects of pharmacological and
they always form seven loops in the membrane".
Significance of this Mysterious physiological principles, e.g., the communication
The
Arrangement was questioned by several Medical between parasympathetic and sympathetic
nervous system. It was only after self-realization
Students:
Oligosaccharide
unit
Extracellular
side
6.
VII
III
П
88888888888
38888
Cytosolic
side
coo
Seven-Helix motif is a co mmon feature of Transmembrane receptors.
14
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 that I was able to feel the communication between
the two systems and understood the mechanism
by which these two systems operate in a
coordinated fashion. This mysterious joyful
situated in the individual cell.
Mental, Neurological and Psychosomatic
disorders, and the process of Mesmerism
Having the knowledge of Sahaja Yoga which
describes the human chakras in detail, and the
experience is only enjoyed by Sahaja Yogis with
the grace of Shri Mataji.
understanding of Biochemical and physiological
The joyful experience also accompanies many aspects of membrane protein receptors which are
other things in life such as: (a) reduced level of folded in seven loops, one can make some
stress; (b) spiritual advancement; (c) feelings of reasornable and sensible relationship between the
well-being; (d) intellectual development; (e) well- two and the various diseases that catches humans.
balanced state of life.
It is reasonable to suggest that mini chakras of the
The SEVEN Spanning Loops of the Adrenergic receptors are released in the atmosphere once a
and other Related Cell Membrane Receptors person dies and the various deities also remove
their blessings. And depending on the humanistic
nature of the person (highly Left sided V/s highly
Right sided, highly Materialistic, real cruel etc.)
and their Relationship and Importance in
Sahaja Yoga
As mentioned earlier, the adrenergic receptors
the unsatisfied mini chakras of the receptor look
and other related receptors are found in virtually
all-living cells, and are coupled to G-proteins. The for inhabitation. The people who practice the
seven spanning loops of the receptors share control of spirit (Pretsiddhi or Samshaan Vidya)
similarities with seven chakras of the body.
. can capture such entities and use them to
Perhaps, one can say that the receptor itself is a mesmerize other people. Such entities can be
mini chakra encompassing the seven major placed or transplanted through eyes or Agnya
chakras of the human body. The alteration or Chakra. The propagation of such unsatisfied cell
distortion of one of the spanning loop leads to an mini chakras then can affect the normal receptors
abnormal function of the cell and results to of the cell and depending upon the type of the
development of a mental, neurological or receptor affected (Dopamine receptor will lead to
psychosomatic disorder. Similarly blockage of a Schizophrenia, adrenergic receptor will lead to
heart problems etc.) the disorder will develop.
chakra leads to dysfunction of our tissSue. For
example, when the heart chakra catches, the high
blood pressure and other cardio vascular diseases
develop. The seven loop adrenergic receptor in
the heart cells is also altered in many ways. There
The process of Mesmerism can be easily carried
out by such technique and sometimes people who
have the knowledge of Srividya can also perform
such practices for their own selfish reasons.
are
many examples that can be cited for each The psychosomatic which include a group
of
chakra and the specific receptor with seven loops
present in the area of chakra. Thus it can be said
that cell receptor itself represents seven major
chakras, and when one meditates using the divine
technique taught by Shri Mataji, one not only
clears up the major chakra of the entire body but
disorders (E.g. Anxiety, Ulcers, Hypertension etc.)
can develop in patients suffering from mental
disorders, or directly when the chakra in the
particular area is blocked. This sort of
understanding was not possible before practicing
Sahaja Yoga.
also clears and relaxes the seven mini chakras
15
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Prophetic Visions of the Divine Feminine in modern Europe
The notion of Sophia as Wisdom is an ancient one. Sophia was reintroduced into European
Christianity in the early seventeenth century by the German Christian mystic, Jakob Boehme (1575-
1624). By the end of the eighteenth century, spiritual seekers in the German Romantic tradition,
including the young George Friedrich Philipp von Hardenburg (1772-1801) who wrote under the pen-
name 'Novalis', and his contemporary, Friedrich Holderlin (1770-1843), were able to draw on
Boehme's theological writings, and also on Gottfried Arnold (1667-1704)'s more personal experiences,
to incorporate Sophia and the feminine Divine into their fiterary writings. Thus, Novalis in his novel,
Heinrich von Ofterdingen (1800), wrote:
Sophia said: "The great mystery has been revealed to all, and yet
remains eternally unfathomable. The new world is born from suffering
and the ashes are dissolved in tears to become the drink of eternal life.
The heavenly Mother dwells in everyone, in order that each child be
borneternally. Do you feel the sweet birth in the beating of your hearts?"
Finally Sophia said: "The Mother is among us. Her presence will bless
us forever. Follow us into our dwelling; in the temple there we shall
dwell eternally and guard themystery of the world."
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749-1832) ends his Faust (1832) with the enigmatic:
All that is changeable
Is but reflected3;
The unattainable
Here is effected3;
Human discernment
Here is passed by3B
HamThe Eternal-Feminine
Draws us on high.
Misunderstood in their time: Blake and Barmby
So much has been written on the prophetic books
of William Blake (1757-1827) that one wonders
what else can be said. I offer here some comments
on 'Jerusalem' as a manifestation of the Divine
Feminine. The idealistic usage of 'Jerusalem' as
an ideal, perfect holy city is well-known and
frequently encountered in both Jewish and
16c
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Christian writers; in addition there is the 'New Jerusalem' of the Book of Revelations in the New
Testament of the Christian Bible (Rev 3:12; 21:2), and Blake was certainly familiar with the concept as
his parents were members of Emmanuel Swedenborg's New Jerusalem Church in the London of the
1780s. So we find Blake using the imagery of Jerusalem the city in his prophetic books, especially
Milton and Jerusalem, with much of the imagery and detail coming from his residence in Lambeth
(south London) during the 1790s. Blake additionally suggests Jerusalem' as a female counterpart to
the male 'Albion'. In The Four Zoas Blake refers to "Jerusalem which now descendeth out of heaven, a
City, yet a Woman" and in Jerusalem provides in plate 46 a powerful portrayal of the female Jerusalem
with her daughters. In the prophetic text of Jerusalem, the Universal Father speaks through Albion to
Jerusalem:
Awake! Awake Jerusalem! Olovely Emanation of Albion
Awake and over spread all Nations as in Ancient Time
For lo! The Night of Death is past and the Eternal Day
Appears upon our Hills: Awake Jerusalem, and come away.
The English social reformer, Goodwyn Barmby (1820-1881) in his younger years was involved in
several short-lived attempts at communal living, particularly after his marriage to Catherine. They
founded and ran the Communist Church in London (1841-1849), but met with derision from their
contemporaries. Goodwyn Barmby wrote a poem, The Woman-power (1842), containing a prophetic
vision of the Divine Feminine:
Woman-Saviour now we muster
To await thy advent sure,
In the cluster of thy lustre,
Come and leave the earth no more?
Then before thy gentle look,
Swords shall quail and warriors fail,
And the spear, a shepherd's crook,
Shall adorn the daisied dale.
Woman-power! Incarnate love!
Human Goddess come and be,
If the Bridegroom's tears can move,
Bride unto Humanity.
Thou alone of all can save us
Let us be what thou would have us!
The Barmbys realised that this was in the future. Thus Goodwyn Barmby wrote to a friend in the early
1840s: 'But the Free Woman who shall give the womanly tone to the entire globe is not yet manifested.'
Catherine Barmby in her pioneering feminist pamphlet, The demand for the emancipation of women
(1843), insisted that 'We have the priest, we therefore demand the priestess, the Woman teacher of the
world, the woman apostle of God's law!"
17
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Prophetic visions in literature in the mid-century: Hawthorne and Andersen
Several times in his notebooks and novels, the American writer, Nathaniel Hawthorne (1804-1864)
expressed his hope that a new religion inaugurated by a pure female apostle would come into
being that would replace what he felt were the unsatisfactory remnants of Christianity. Hawthorne
concludes his novel, The Scarlet Letter (1850): "The angel and apostle of the coming revelation must
be a woman, indeed, but lofty, pure, and beautiful; and wise, moreover, not through dusky grief,
but the ethereal medium of joy."
The Danish writer, Hans Christian Andersen (1805-1875), best known for his children's short stories,
attempted to diversify into what he called "philosophical stories" several of which had visionary and
prophetic qualities. The New Century's Goddess (1861) begins:
The muse of the twentieth century we shall never know, but our children
may and our grand-children certainly will. Yet we cannot help wondering
what she willlook like or what songs she will sing: which strings in man's
soul she will touch, and to what heights she will raise herage.
Andersen is coy as to where this Goddess will appear, tantalizing the reader with:
One lovely morning she will arrive. She will come riding on the back
of the modern dragon, a locomotive, through tunnels and over bridges...
and in answer to the rhetorical "and when will she appear", Andersen has a prophetic comment to
make:
Soon the Great Wall of China will crumble. The railroads of Europe will
reach the closed archives of Asian culture. The two streams of culture will
meet and the rapids of the double river will have deeper tones than have
ever been heard before.
In this short story we find a prophetic vision of the future coming of the feminine aspect of the
Divine, and of the interwining of European and Asian cultures in the globalization of the late
twentieth and early twenty-first centuries.
Spiritualism, feminism and theosophy
In the latter part of the nineteenth century, we find a number of individuals who can be described, at
different points of their lives, as 'spiritualist' (or 'spiritist' in France), as 'feminist', and as 'theosophist',
and, sometimes, as all three. It needs emphasing here that labels are fluid: not all spiritualists became
members of theosophical societies in France some became Gnostic Christians and not al female
spiritualists regarded themselves as feminists. One common demoninator for many was the
understanding, based on their own or others' visions, that there would be a future manifestation of the
Divine Feminine, or World Mother, to save the earth and its human inhabitants from the results of
their actions.
18c
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 In 1881, the wealthy spiritualist and later
theosophist, Marie Sinclair, Countess of Caithness
(1830-1895), hosted a seance in her palace in Nice,
in southern France, in which it was revealed to her
that there would be a revolution in religion which
would result in a "New Age of Our Lady of the
Holy Spirit" In her book, The Mystery of the Ages
(1887), she comments:
It
was generally considered, at the turn of
the next century, that the next
Divine incarnation was about to come to
earth and would be female, the
advent of Divine Wisdom, or Theo-Sophia,
and that the present age would
be the age of making known all that which has been kept secret from the beginning.
A long-time associate of Lady Caithness was Jules Doinel (1842-1903) who, in 1890, established the
Eglise Gnostique Universelle Catholique with himself as patriarch under the mystic name of Tau
Valentine II. For this church Doinel wrote a Gnostic Catechism (1895) which includes the respondo:
Iam a Valentinian Gnostic. Ihave the Pleroma for my Father, Christos
for my Savior, Simon and Valentinus as doctors, Helen and Sophia for
moral support, and I wait for the advent of our Lady Pneuma Hagion,
the eternal Feminine.
Doinel was succeeded as patriarch by Leonce Fabre des Essarts (1848-1917), known as Tau
Synesius, who in a lecture in Paris in 1908 stated:
There is among our tenets one to which I shall call particular attention: the tenet of feminine
salvation. The work of the Father has been accomplished, that of the Son, as well. There remains that
of the Spirit, which alone is capable of bringing about the final salvation of humanity on earth and
thereby, of laying the way for the reconstitution of the Spirit. Now the Spirit, t he P araclete,
corresponds to what the divine partakes of a feminine nature, and our teachings state explicitly that
this is the only facet of the godhead
In this extract, Fabre des Essarts is following the Cathar and Gnostic usage of 'Paraclete' to describe.
that is truly accessible to our mind.
the Spirit. For him, salvation lies with the Divine Feminine.
The English spiritualist, feminist and theosophist, Anna Kingsford (1846-1888) was one of the first
women in Britain to qualify as a medical doctor, and was a pioneering campaigner for vegetarianism
and animal rights. Throughouther life, Anna Kingsford had visions and dreams: these 'illuminations'
as she called them, were recorded in the posthumously published Clothed with the Sun (1889).
Included wasa prophetic vision of the Divine Feminine, received in Paris on February 7,1880:
A Prophecy of the Kingdom of the Soul, mystically called the Day of the Woman
And now I show you a mystery and a new thing, which is part of the
mystery of the
fourth day of creation. The word which shall come to save the
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 world, shall be uttered by a woman.
A woman shall conceive, and shall bring forth the tidings of salvation. For the
reign of Adam is at its last hour; and God shall crown all things by the creation
of Eve. Hitherto the man hath been alone, and hath had dominion over the earth.
But when the woman shall be created, God shall give unto her the kingdom;
and she shall be first in rule and highest in dignity.
So that man the manifestor shall resign his office; and woman the interpreter
shall give light to the world. Hers is the fourth office: she revealeth that which
the Lord hath
manifested. Hers is the light of the heavens, and the brightest of
the planets of the holy seven. She is the fourth dimension; the
enlighten; the power which draweth inward to God. And her kingdom cometh;
the day of the exaltation of woman. ...
For the woman is the crown of man, and the final manifestation of humanity.
She is the nearest to the throne of God, when she shall be revealed. But the
creation of woman is not yet complete: but it shall be complete in the time
which is at hand.
e eyes which
All things are mine, O Mother of God: all things are mine, O Thou who
0risest from the sea; and Thou shalt have dominion over all the worlds.
It should be noted that this vision precedes, by a year, the vision received by Lady Caithness and
discussed above.
This is a condensed version of a paper written by John Noyce for the M.A. in Religion and Theology at Monash University,
Melbourne, Australia. The full version is available on request.
To be continued in next issue....
Continued from Page..12
the glass of a lamp becomes clean, rays of ever-resplendent Spirit awaken Sahasrara sheath and the
light of bliss spreads, which is felt in Sahasrara. This light enlightens all sides of colourful heart and
decorates it with the qualities, which can be described as pleasing, blissful etc. Gradually this state will
grow and become stable within you.
Most of the Sahaja Yogis should try this method, but there should not be merely the mechanical
movement of hands. Whatever you do, it should be done with the faith that you have in worshipping,
zeal of a warrior and sensitivity of an artist. There should be complete purity in the recitation of
Mantras to awaken the deities and your heart must be involved in it. Only then the awakening will
take place.
You should understand a simple principle. How can a big fire be lit with a small matchstick? Will a
wick hold the flame if water is mixed in the oil? How can those Sahaja Yogis have enlightenment who
are using Sahaja Yoga to solve only their own petty problems? And why should God give them the
enlightenment? Lighthouses do not show light to themselves even for a moment. Therefore, they are
considered so important and are looked after.
Please circulate this letter among all Sahaja Yogis.
Your Mother-NIRMALA
20
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 THE
META CULTURAL
REVOLUTION
A few weeks ago we came home late at night from a colorful collage of collective 'happenings', filled
with Vibrations of the most divine nature. The Austrian Sahaja Yogis were preparing to share a
myriad of sweet treats with their international brothers and sisters at the upcoming Sahasrara Day
event in Cabella, and at the Vienna city ashram-complex there was something going on in every
apartment that we poked our heads into: Qawwali practice; painting of small size Hanuman statues;
baking of gingerbread cookie, decoration; drama rehearsals; designing of new Sahaja Yoga Website;
hand-embroidery for Shri Mataji ... It was like being in another world, on a perpetual, collective
'natural high'.
We flopped back with dinner after midnight in front of our TV and unexpectedly beamed into a very
different world. We found ourselves back in the American 1960s, where, in the darkest depths of the
"Kali' Yuga (Age of Darkness), young people were enthusiastically stumbling along and crying out
for change. It was so surrealistic, and at the same time, emotionally compelling. Portrayed was a
young lady, a seeker, from an average middle-class home who tried to break free from the bonds of
dullness and insecurity through her heart-felt vehicle of singing. After many kinds of rejection,
including a thwarted attempt to lead a normal life as a housewife, she escaped onto the uncharted
waters of the rock-and-roll and drug scene. Her whole-hearted enthusiasm could not save her from
the extreme Ida and Pingala confusion that she had thrown herself into, and she soon lost her life in
those dark waves. I had always thought of Janis Joplin as just one of many hippies who had drifted in
and out of that short-lived, haphazard revolution, not knowing that she was in fact a pioneer rebel
who inspired a generation to dare to see life differently.
Then, by complete chance, we stumbled onto a similar documentary (dubbed into German) about
another counter-culture icon who also rose from obscurity in small-town America to capture the
searching imaginations of his peers in an equally honest and raunchy musical style. The
documentary was an intriguing study of influence on the minds and hearts of the generation that
sought for Truth. Most of the material documented the years immediately preceding the truly
revolutionary opening of the collective Sahasrara Chakra. It was moving to witness the intensity of
desire for change-at-any-cost that the young people expressed, and the way it was exploding out in
the land that we now recognize as the collective Vishuddhi Chakra. That anti-culture revolution
became largely one of slavery to addiction, which is nothing but obsessive desire for certain pleasing
electronic and chemical reactions in the brain, be it drug and alcohol stimulation or the triggering of
nerve signals by the touch of skinthe highly overrated, fanatically demanded passion of sex. The
21
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 to me, as it would help
unprecedented,
wholesale bulldozing
of human 'mariadas'
(subtle, inbuilt
boundaries) during
the Kali Yuga has led to
me to realize the
almost unbelievable
importance of our
(Sahaja Yogis') present
position in history. But
a recent experience in
mediation gave me a
the mass mutation of
consciousness that
whole
пе w
readily accepts
evolutionally
unsustainable feelings
appreciation of the
inspirational value of
the future. In a
and beliefs as natural
moment of uplifting sweetness and hope, I clearly
saw countless future generations of innocent,
direction.
The real Revolution turns out to be not a one-
man-show that takes everyone into extremes, but Self-realized human beings, like children,
a collective awakening sprouted in the fertile enthusiastically scanning their race's past to share
fields of joy and innocent love by the Divine in the momentous times when the Mother walked
Incarnation (so amazing that She really came at and smiled among us. Of course, they will be
last in our darkest hour, in fulfillment of the looking for the experiences lived in the direct
prophecies and in answer to our countless Physical Darshan (blessed Presence) of the
Incarnation, but they will also want to enjoy
everything that the first devotees didwhat they
manifested in their lives and the societies in
Shortly after my arrival in Vienna many years ago which they (we) lived. As an artist often plagued
(a saint who once visited this magical city, by self-doubt, it was the single most inspiring
expressed that he felt his heart beating to the idea that had ever passed through me. It shone in
rhythm of poetry while strolling through her my heart like a divine guarantee, that whatever
charming streets), I had a sort of feeling, a vision we create now will be preserved and deeply
that revealed the source of pure (constructive, appreciated by countless loving souls. Could an
divinely inspired) culture accessible within every artist ever hope for a greater reward? (But
human being. Suddenly, the heart opened so wide another, even greater reward overwhelmed me
that it was possible to feel that beautiful Realm recently, sitting in a stadium full of realized souls,
which sometimes shines briefly into our world as when Shri Mataji appeared on the stage for
prayers!) It is a revolution of multiple-harmony as
opposed to lone-melody.
creative geniusthe fountain of Inspiration that Shivaratri Puja. It was as if every stumbling effort
poured through great souls like Shakespeare, of ascent in the past, and all the pains of
Mozart, Michelangelo and Lincoln.
uncertainty about the future, were all redeemed
Events and feelings laid out along the illusion of and glorified in that moment of seeing God arrive
the line of time can also help inspire joy to inour midst. "Soit has all come true after all!")
manifest pure culture in the present. The past There are many unexpected aspects of this
always seemed to bring the most encouragement
22
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-24.txt 
 heaven-sent seedling-culture of the Golden Age that the simple desire and attention of a fellow being
could heal you, that lemons and coconuts would play such a prominent role? When I was growing up
dnž
in suburban Canada, I learned that drunken rowdiness, loud, rude jokes and hard-hitting
background rhythms were the heights of social norms to enjoy and strive for. How was I to know that
people could soon naturally enjoy each other in peaceful relationships and environments full of
flowing, nectar-like, mutual joy? I always thought that politicians and greedy lobbyists wrote and
broke all the rules and that there was nothing the rest of us could do but look on in disgust, when in
fact the compassionate Divine Force was very much in charge, and some day writing something like
'All obstacles against all poor people and communities becoming healthy and self-sufficient' on a
piece of paper and burning it once a day with
heart-felt prayer could help.end global poverty.
Could the hippy and/or the corporate executive
in us ever have expected the universal, pure
religion to sprout into earthly existence within
our lifetimes? And who could have foresaw the
birth of a new kind of pain: that felt by a Sahaja
Yogi when he or she passes on the ultimate
blessing of Self-realization to a fellow seeker of
Truth, and then is forced to watch that precious
soul turn their back on their own Mother and
walk confidently away, back into darkness.
The ultimate Cultural Revolution has been
anticipated by seekers and seers for millennia,
and was dubbed Krita Yuga', the Age of Work.
After the long, hard haul that has brought us
struggling up to this turning point, one may feel
inclined to ask the Boss for a permanent holiday
as soon as the job seems done, leaving the rest to
all the others who will arrive as the future
generations. But don't get teo sef on that dream
of eternal retirement in Heaven. Shri Mataji once
mentioned to one of Her children who toyed
with this idea, that She intends to incarnate
again when paradise is established on Earth.
Looks like the Story just keeps getting better!
Viva la Revolution!
Jai (Victory to) Shri Mataji!
- Edward
23
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Continued from page.5
Gandhi's magic:
Gandhi's patronizing Khadi resulted in unemployment at Lancashire. It was full of workers seething
with resentment and indignation against Gandhi for having helped bring this about. In spite of safety
concerns Gandhi went to Lancashire and addressed the workers, "you tell me that three million
people are out of employment for several months. In my country, three hundred million people are
unemployed at least six months in every year. You say there are days when you get only bread and
butter for dinner. But these people go for days without any food at all". At the end of Gandhi's talk
they all cheered him, the man who had brought about their unemployment.
Gandhi's spiritual message for the world given at Kingsley Hall, London:
"There is an indefinable mysterious power that pervades everything. I feel it, though I do not see it. It
is this unseen power which makes it self felt, and yet defies all proof because it is so unlike all that I
perceive through my senses. It transcends the senses. But it is possible to reason out the existence of
God to a limited extent.
Even in ordinary affairs, we know that people do not know who rules or why and how he rules. And
yet they know that there is a power that certainly rules. In my tour last year in Mysore, I met many
poor villagers and I found upon enquiry that they did not know who ruled Mysore. They simply said,
"Some God ruled it". If the knowledge of these poor people was so limited about their ruler, I, who an
infinite lesser in respect to God than they to their ruler, need not be surprised, If I do not realize the
presence of God, the King of Kings. Nevertheless, I do feel as the poor villagers felt about Mysore, that
there is orderliness in the universe. There is an unalterable law governing everything and every being
that exists or lives.
It is not a blind law. For no blind law can govern the conduct of living beings. And thanks to the
marvelous researches of Sir JC Bose, it can now be proved that even matter is life. That law, then, which
governs all life, is God! Law and the lawgiver are one. I need not deny the law or the lawgiver because I
know so little about it or him. Just as my denial or ignorance of the existence of an earthly power will
avail me nothing, even so my denial of God and His law will not liberate me from its operation.
Whereas humble and new acceptance of Divine authority makes life's journey easier even as the
acceptance of earthly rule makes life under it easier. I do dimly perceive that whilst everything around
me is ever changing, ever dying, there is underlying all that change, a living power that is changeless,
that holds all together, that creates, dissolves and recreates. That informing power of spirit is God and
since nothing else that I see merely through the senses, can or will persist, He alone is!
And is this power bernevolent or malevolent? I see it as purely benevolent, for I can see that in the midst
of death, life persists. In the midst of untruth, truth persists. In the midst of darkness, light persists.
Hence Igather that God is life, truth, light. He is love. He is the supreme good.
But, He is no God who merely satisfies the intellect, if He ever does. God, to be God must rule the heart
and transform it. He must express Himself in every smallest act of His votary. This can only be done
through a definite realization, more real than the five senses can ever prove use. Sense perceptions can
be and often are false and deceptive. However real they may appear to us. Where there is realization
outside the senses, it is infallible. It is proved not by extreme extraneous evidence, but in the
24
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-26.txt 
 transformed conduct and character of those who
have felt the real presence of God within. Such
testimony is to be found in the experiences of an
unbroken line of prophets and sages in all
countries in time. To reject this evidence is to deny
oneself.
This realization is preceded by an imovable
faith. He who would in his own person, test the
fact of God's presence can do so by a living faith.
And since faith itself cannot be proved
by
extraneous evidence, the safest course is to believe
in the moral government of the world and
therefore in the supremacy of the moral law: The
law of truth and love.
Exercise of faith will be the safest where there is a
clear determination, summarily to reject all that is
contradictory to truth and love. I confess that I
have no argument to convince through reason.
Faith transcends reason.All that I can advice is not
to attempt the impossible."
Sense of collectivity:
"I believe that if one man gains spiritually
the whole world gains with him and, if one
man fails, the whole world falls to that
extent. I do not help opponents without at
the same time helping myself and my co
workers".
References and recommended reading:
1.
The story of my experiments with truth M.K. Gandhi.
The Life of Mahatma Gandhi Louis Fischer.
2.
3.
Gandhi, The Man Eknath Eswaran.
"Gandhi" movie directed by Sir Righard
4.
Attenborough.
Sketch by : Gajendra Warghade, Pune
||Thank you Mother||
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-27.txt 
 THE YEARS PASSED AND
JESUS WENT TO INDIA,
WHERE HE MET THE
EMPEROR SHALIVAHAN.
I AM ISSA,
HE WHO IS WITH THE
PRIMORDIAL POWER
OF GOD!
PLEASE, TELL
ME, WHO ARE
YOU ?
Jesus
THE TRUE STORY
FI
