YUVADRISHTI Becember Volume 6 2005 Issue 4

 bvoheni x Index FY tledee Waves of Devine Love letter in marathi TANGTUTUE. William Blake ी Eight Leelas Sir C. P Srivastava's Speech chatel THE tor Narnia 12 The Journey of Ascent Sahaja Destination - Mexico 16 fior halucaiHDM The Magic Triangle 18

 Waves of Devine Love I have received letters from all of you but have Vecchia letter in marathi not been able to write because now in London Sahaja Yoga work has started with great drive. Delhi Sahaja Yogis write very few letters but most of them are happy. Sahaja yogis of Bombay are alright, Sahaja Yogis of Rahuri are enjoying. Sahaja Yogis of Bombay have great responsibility and therefore had to face many attacks. The first attack came when Iwas in U.S.A. At that time many Sahaja Yogis were affected and many fell away. Later on when an attack was on all London Sahaja Yogis collectively followed wTong path which was full of dangers and harms. Many wicked people from that part are, still hiding themselves in some Sahaja Yogis in the form of "badhas'. You have to vigorously use Sahaja Yoga methods against them. These wickeds attack you from Agnya and Heart. From Agnya they send Anti-Sahaja Yoga ideas in your mind and from Heart they make complaints. If you identify them they will become ineffective. There is one remedy for it which can be applied only after the realization. Because if your car does not start, your brakes and accelerators are of no use. But if you do not use the accelerator even after it starts, how will your car move? sVsteE You can attain any destination that you fix. All your autosuggestions will materialise. The remedy that is to be used is : your attention should be on Me and you should make the following conditioning of thoughts on your Agnya "How fortunate we are to have been realized! We are Sahaja Yogis. God has chosen us. How can we work if we remain weak? Adi Shakti has given us the Power to redeem the whole mankind. We can do it and we will do it". On heart you should criticise with these thoughts "How deep is God's love for us! He has given us the realization. He is the ocean of mercy. Ignoring all our mistakes, He is working hard day and night for our welfare and, instead of praying for His forgiveness of our mistakes, we are making complaints against Him and blaming Him"! IA The following thoughts will please your Hearts, "O God, please give us the power of Your love. May I be the drop in the ocean of Your love that is enveloping the whole universe, so that its loving pulsation is vibrated through my life and Iremain engrossed in that bliss". edT May your life be flooded by the waves of Divine love.onbhi pippM Always loving you, much more than myself. Your Mother, NIRMALA

 William Blake (1757-1827) the poet, the painter, the visionary, the mystic, the engraver To see a World in a grain of sand And a Heaven in a Wild Flower, Hold Infinity in the Palm of your hand And Eternity in an Hour. from Auguries of Innocence by William Blake I do not behold the outward creation... it is a hindrance and not action." Thus William Blake--painter, engraver, and poet--explained why his work was filled with religious visions rather than with subjects from everyday life. Few people in his time realized that Blake expressed these visions with a talent that approached genius. He lived in near poverty and died unrecognized. Today, however, Blake is acclaimed one of England's great figures of art and literature and one of the most inspired and original painters of his time. William Blake was born in London on 28 November 1757 and was christened on 11 December in St. James's Church. His father, James Blake, Self Portrait was a hosier; his mother, born Catherine Wright, had married James after the death of her first husband, Tlhomas Armitage, also a hosier. They kept a shop at 28 Broad Street and were in their mid-thirties when William arrived. Ofhis brothers and sisters, Robert (1762-87) was Blake's favorite, His eldest brother, James (1753-1827), and a sister, Catherine (1764- 1841), also figured prominently in his later life. William's childhood was happy and his parent's were unusually understanding so much so that he never went to school. As a young child of nine, he once told his parents he had seen "a tree filled with angels" on one of his walks. Later on he wrote: Thank God, Inever was sent to school To be Flog'd into following the Style of a Fool Last Judement What education he had was probably provided by his mother. He was highly When Inagiaátiáu, intelligent and always had the most receptive Art & Selencs & all the mind. Later in life he acquired the knowledge intellectual gins of the of Hebrew, Greek and Italian. Most of all he Holy Ghost, are lanked opon as no ue nd on showed an unmistakable talent for drawing Contontion rennti i and when he was ten years old he became a man. thêu thaLo pupil at the drawing academy of the highly Judgnient tiegin & ts viskm is seen by the Imaginatise eyes of Evervone according to "Due to financial constraints his parents decided that he should be a engraver instead of the situation he lholis regarded Henry Pars in the Strand. He The Last Judgement practiced at home drawing plaster casts of antique sculpture bought by his father. an artist, The first engraver they approached William Wynne Ryland, but William took 2.

 an instant disliking for him, saying that he looked as if he would live to be hanged. This turned out to be an accurate prophecy, for twelve years afterwards Ryland was executed for forgery. The engraver finally chose James Basire of Great Queen Street, from a family of distinguished craftsmen. The seven year apprenticeship began in the August of 1772. LONDON wander through each chartered street, Near where the chartered Thames does flow, f A mark in every face I meet, Marks of weakness, marks of woe. In every cry of every man, In every infant's cry of fear, In every voice, in every ban, The mind-forged manacles I hear: He completed his apprenticeship when he was 22. Soon after completion he became a student of the Royal Academy, where he attended the antique and life classes. Apart from Academy studies Blake created many works in many media (media here refers to art forms) from about 1779, including possibly one work, of dubious attribution from Michelangelo's 'Last Judgement'. The subjects were drawn from biblical, allegorical and other sources. How the chimney-sweeper's cry Every blackening church appals, And the hapless soldier's sigh Runs in blood down palace-walls. Blake lived during a time of intense social change. The American Revolution, the French Revolution, and the Industrial Revolution all happened during his lifetime. These changes gave Blake a chance to see one of the most dramatic stages in the transformation of the Western world from a somewhat feudal, agricultural society to an industrial society where philosophers and political thinkers such as Locke, Franklin, and Paine championed the rights of the individual. Some of these changes had Blake's approval; others did not. But most, through midnight streets I hear How the youthful harlot's curse Blasts the new-bom infant's tear, And blights with plagues the marriage hearse. One example of Blake's disapproval of changes that happened in his time comes in his poem "London," from his work Songs of Experience. In "London," which has been described as summing up many implications of Songs of Experience, Blake describes the woes that the Industrial Revolution and the breaking of the common man's ties to the land have brought upon him. For instance, the narrator in "London" describes both the Thames and the city streets as "chartered," or controlled by commercial interests; he refers to "mind-forged manacles"; he relates that every man's face contains "Marks of weakness, marks of woe"; and he discusses the "every cry of every Man" and "every Infant's cry of fear." He connects marriage and death by referring to a "marriage hearse" and describes it as "blighted with plague." He also talks about "the hapless Soldier's sigh" and the "youthful Harlot's curse" and describes "blackening Churches' and palaces running with blood ("London"). The Angel Gabriel Appearing to Zacharias informing him about the arrival of St. John "For Blake the notion of Last Judgment as raising the good and punishing the wicked is false, for that implied the necessity of divine vengeance; it is rather a purgation (cleansing) of the wickedness of the fallen world, and of domination of wicked states of man, through the casting(removing) out Corporeal (rel. to flesh) Understandings. "Truth is Eternal. Error, or Creation, will be Burned up, and then, & not till Then, Truth or Eternity will appear. It is burnt up the moment Men cease to behold it. I assert for myself that I do not behold the outward creation and that to me is hindrance and not action; it is as the dirt upon my feet, No part of Me." Blake

 Newton' Blake was always against rationalistic-materialistic philosophy and proclaimed the superiority of the imagination over other "organs of perception, since it is the means of perceiving "the Infinite," or God. In the creation on the right, the great philosopher and mathematician Sir Isaac Newton (16421727) appears engrossed by his diagram, and fails to see the fantastical, apparently underwater world that surrounds him. Blake faulted Newton for systematizing the universe and thus forever separating reason from imagination, mind from spirit. As Blake wrote elsewhere: "God is not a Mathematical Diagram." Newton, enslaved by reason, appears to be enthralled his senses. Irest not from my great task! To open the Eternal Worlds, to open the immortal eyes Of Man inwards into the World of Thought, into Eternity Ever expanding in the Bosom of God, the Human Imagination. from Jerusalem, Chapter I Plate 5 by William Blake On Aug. 18, 1782, Blake married a poor, illiterate girl, Catherine Boucher, who was to make a perfect companion for him. Their marriage was by all accounts happy one. He taught her to read and write and to help him in his work. Blake's major contribution was the etching of 21l copper plates drawing themes from The Old Testament (The Bible). His other works include The Body of Christ, Borne to the Tomb circa 1799-1800 Christ Blessing the Little Children 1799 The Crucifixion: "Behold Thy Mother circa 1805 A Rolling Stone is ever Bare of Moss' 1821/circa 1830, Plutus 1824-7 The Fall of Satan 1825, reprinted 1874, The Vision of Christ 1825, reprinted 1874, The Crucifixion circa 1825- 7. He also published All Religion are one, There is no Natural Religion, Vala, or The Four Zoa,. Songs of Innocence, The Book of Thel, The Marriage of Heaven and Hell, Visions of the Daughters of Albion, America a Prophecy, and For Children: The Gates of Paradise on 12 August 1827. His death seemed to have been beautiful. He died "in a most glorious manner," Richmond wrote Palmer soon afterwards: "He said He He died was going to that Country he had all His life wished to see & expressed Himself Happy hoping for Salvation through Jesus ChristJust before he died His Countenance became fairHis eyes brighten'd and He burst out in Singing of the things he Saw in Heaven 'www.ibiblio.org'<www.blakearchive.org>' Lister Raymond The Paintings of William Blake'. CambridgeUniversity Press, 1986; pp. 1-8. <www.geocities.com> 'www.geocities.com Bindman David'Blake as an artist'. Phaidon PressLimited, 1977; pp. 166-167. "Engraving is an eighteenth century art form of incising a design onto a hard, flat surface(eg. Copper) by cutting grooves into it.

 Eight Leelas the balance, like an aeroplane, and that's why the religion which is nothing but consciousness 1980-11 (collective consciousness, through Kundalini awakening) regulated by the superconsciousness. Because these people came, according to us, they were super human being, through Kundalini awakening, you become "So, as soon as you become incarnations of the Primordial Master." aware of yourself within, and you become aware of others within. This is the collective 1981-01 (Nirmala Vidya, the Divine technique consciousness; this is what Sahaja Yoga is. Sahaja by which SHE Forgive us)?!! Yoga is the system of Nature. The way this "Nirmala Vidya It is the special power by which creation took place is also Sahaja. 'Sah' means we do All Divine work, even forgiving. When you 'with' and 'ja' means 'born'; Sahaja means 'born say, 'Mother forgive us', the technique by which I with'. Everything is built in within you, like a forgive you is Nirmala Vidya. The technique by seed. If you see a seed, it has a primule within it to which all the Mantras are manifesting themselves sprout. Seed has the complete power of the tree it and are effective is also Nirmala Vidya. Nirmala is going to be. The whole thing is in the seed. In means 'pure', Vidya means knowledge, or the the same way, in the human seed, the whole knowledge of this technique. It creates loops and picture of what he is going to be, is built in, the creates also different energy formations by which whole mechanism is placed within." it acts, and draws all that is not 1985-05-27 (Ten Commandments, relating to the ten valencies within us) "Now the religion we talk of is outside religion, is myth, is mythical. But inside religion is like a valency. As we have a valency for carbon, four valencies, in the same way human beings have ten valencies, and that's how we have got the Ten Commandments, relating to the ten valencies within us, and that's how it works that you maintain the balance. Because if you go too much to this side, then you go to the left side, then you fall a prey to subconscious, to collective subconscious. If you go too much to this right t side, you fall into the supraconscious, and to the collective supraconscious. That's why the balance has to be built in. To ascend one has to maintain

 of a man. But that does not in any way mean that you compete with men in their foolish enterprises by which they have practically brought the world to such a ruinous state." 1981-01 (always try to find out sweet words) "Sweetness will cure your left Vishuddhi. Always speak very sweetly, try to find out all the sweet words, the sweet methods of addressing is the best way to wanted, impure and fills it up with its power. It is cure your guilt, because, if you say anything Divine technique, because your harsh to anyone, you may say as a matter of habit, does not do that, you don't have that instrument." or maybe because you just feel happy by saying instrument 1984-01-19 (The whole mode, the style, has to that, but as soon as you say it, you say, 'Oh God, what did I say?' That is the biggest guilt. One has change) always to try to find out sweet words. Now the "No use competing with men in their stupidity, birdsare chirping. In the amount of stupidity has been created for us quite sufficiently. The whole world is today the same way you have to learn all the sounds of expressing the nonsense that they have the everything by which you make people happy by competition, the aggression, the oppression. So your sweetness. Itis very important. Otherwise, if the other side, of the woman, which was called as your left Vishuddhi grows too much you will the dominated one, the dark side, the oppressed, develop a way of talking by which your lips will all that has to express itself in a different way. The get distorted towards the left side." whole mode, the style, has to change. See now in 1985-07-28 (the devotion actually means facing Christianity, one should understand yourself) why Christianity, even Judaism, any religion, "When you do something wrong many people even Hinduism and all that but it's more in are there who will say that, It is my left Christianity surprisingly they just had no place Swadisthana'. Some will say, 'I was possessed, for Mother Mary. And Muslims crowned it by there was a Bhoot.' Somebody will blame completely canceling Fatima. And, on top of that, something else. Whatever you are blaming. you will see that among Christians, I think actually, who is asking you the explanation? It is ordination or what you call that, is not given to the ladies, to woman, whilst Christ was not born only you asking yourself. You are not facing

 yourself. So the devotion actually means facing yourself first of all and see for yourself what you are doing." 1985-11 (do we have those qualities by which we sustain those basics?) "Everybody is not a light, you are the light givers, and it is going to work out through your will. So how powerful our will should be? How dedicated we should be about our will? That one has to know. You have to fathom out that will within you. Once you start doing this Sahaja Yoga, then you recognise how important is Sahaja Yoga, that it gives a real meaning to the whole creation, in the eyes of God and Divine Power. and higher, subtler and subtler, finer and finer. In That has to work out, that's the of Life. the refinement, ultimately the light works for the and, surprisingly, it is left to your will, not My evolutionary process. Gradually the grosser parts will. I've no will. I've no action. So it is will start becoming enlightened. You find the lower which is going to work it out. So you have to animal is not so much enlightened as the higher dedicated, and you have to weigh yourself: how animal. Gradually even the Joy starts becoming much I'm willed. The seminars help you to see subtler and subtler. We can call how much you really will that Sahaja Yoga it beautiful. Human joys are much more beautiful should be successful. This is the second thing, to than that of animals. So the also starts make it successful, what should we do? We Purpose your joy changing their manifestation in the sense you must understand the basics of Sahaja Yoga and start more and more and wider range of Joy try to see within ourselves, do we understand the comes into your hands. To a dog beauty and basics, and do we have those qualities by which decency has no meaning, so at a stage when we sustain those basics?" reach, when you are a human being to that you extent you develop your Sat, which is awareness, your Joy and creative action, now you see how the creativity of God passes into the hands of man when he turns out, how the Joy of God passes into 1983-07-16 (how His Light comes into the heart of Man as Spirit) "Now another parrot of the parabola starts when you are attaining back God Almighty. That thehands of man, and how you process now gradually starts becoming higher His Light comes into the heart of Man as Spirit."

 Sir C. P Srivastava's Speech Sydney Town Hall 6th February, 2006 Honoured and distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, Mr. Chris Kyriacou, the national Co-ordinator of Sahaja Yoga in Australia, All members of the National Council for the bow down to them and each one of them, and convey my feelings of most abiding gratitude for the wonderful work they have done, for their marvellous hospitality, for their extreme kindness. They are my beloved people, and I call them angels. They are truly angels. Well, ladies and gentlemen, I would like also to advancement of Sahaja Yoga. Ladies and gentlemen, There are moments when it becomes difficult to express my profound gratitude to Honourable Mr. express yourself, and this is one such moment. I would like first of all to say how very, very grateful I am to all of you who are here to-day. I know how preoccupied you are. That you should find time to be with us to celebrate an occasion, which is twenty-five Gough Whitlam, former Prime Minister of Australia. I had the honour of being received by him. I regard him as one of the most visionary leaders of our time, desperately needed by the world to-day. I thank him for very kind words about our visit here. And I extend n the same gratitude to Honourable Kim Beazley, spirituality, in ethics and a good life. So I bow down to Leader of the Opposition in Australia; Honourable you again, and thank you very, very much for the great Morris Iemma, Premier of NSW; Honourable Alan honour you have done Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi and Carpenter, Premier of Western Australia; Honourable years of Sahaja Yoga, shows your keen interest in myself, by being here to-day. Very, very kind things have been said about me. They're very kind. Kate Ellis, Member for Adelaide, South Australia; Ms. Jule du Varrens, Director of the Institute of Communication Please do not believe all that has Ethics; Mr. Peter Debnam, NSW Leader of the Opposition; and Lord Mayor, Clover Moore, City of Sydney. To all of them, our profound and deepest gratitude for the very kind words in which they have welcomed us here. Ladies and gentlemen, I now come to what I wanted to mention been said. But what has been said about my wife is entirely true, and I'll come back to that a little later. First of all, I would like to tell you how wonderful the Sahaja Yogis of Australia are. You know, only a few weeks ago they invited us PHO and she accepted the invitation, and within a period of about six weeks they all got together to E to you. This is too important gathering for me to miss the occasion, and I want to say what lies in my heart. But first I must transform a residence here into an ashram, and you have to see to believe what they have done. tell you, this lady who is sitting here, my wife, for thirty-five years she has been running around the world, trying to convey a message, a message of love, of togetherness. Believe me, They have converted it into a little heaven on earth for their beloved Goddess and Mother. They're so devoted, so true, so pure, that I 8

 believes in that. She herself was born in she has travelled by plane, by helicopter, by car, by bus, by bullock cart and on foot. She has gone to a Christian family, I was bom in a Hindu family, but we both believe in one Almighty power, one human family, and that's how we are together. Now this is the message she has villages, to cities, and she has gone to many, many places in all the five continents, and she has done so out of a conveyed, and she has conveyed this to many audiences, saying: You are the creation of that Almighty, you are in His or Her image, and there is in you a tremendous conviction within her that If the this world needs a new message. world has to live, has to survive, then Something new has to be communicated to humankind. And with that belief in her, single-handed congealed power which she can perhaps help to awaken. And when that is awakened, called Kundalini, then you are in communion with your for many years, she went around3; gradually Sahaja Yogis came along; what they saw, the worth of what she was saying, and Creator. And you'll have a beautiful life then, given to to-day she has followers in eighty, ninety countries. ethics, morality, everything that is good. That is what Wherever I go there are Sahaja Yogis, Sahaja Yoginis, itis, that's what your destiny is. But if you want to be in beloved children of hers, and what a wonderful thing communion, you can be in communion. she has done, what a wonder she has created. What is Now, ladies and gentlemen, the point I want to make it? How do I see it, as her husband? Well then, I must to you is my own point. My point is, I have worked for say, for her to have been doing all this meant she has India as a civil servant, and I have also had the been away from me for a long, long time, but I knew privilege of working for the United Nations, as that she was doing something wonderful work for the Secretary General of the International Maritime world, and so it was. Organisation; and believe me, ladies and gentlemen, I Now her message as I see it is simple, straight, and she tried to implement her ideas in my working at the says: all men and women and children of the world are United Nations level. You know the United Nations the creation of one Almighty. Some people say: "My means many, many countries; countries of different God is almighty", others say: "My God is almighty". growth of development, with different capability and By definition, you can't have more than one Almighty. so on and so forth, and they all come together to work have two of them, neither of them will be together: it's not an easy task. I was in the maritime If you almighty! So it's as simple as that, and sometimes world, and when I was elected Secretary General, I people don't really see that. But she says: "First thing was the first from a developing country. All my is, remember that there is only one Almighty, and that predecessors had been Europeans, and people were is the Almighty power of Divine love." And then she surprised that someone from the developing world persons who are here on this earth have been should come. The maritime scene at that time was dominated by the Western world, and the Organisation was known as a "rich man's club". And here was me: how could I be Secretary General of a says: "All created by that Almighty," Whether they are white or brown, or blue or yellow; whether they live in Africa or Australia or India or wherever, they're all her children, are children of that Almighty power. t rich man's club, poor me? What a task it was! I said: "Well, I have been elected so I must serve, and I But if that is so, why not live together happily, mustapply her message." Her message was: everyone peacefully? Why feel divided? Why feel one against is the same, everyone is equal. So I made it a point to the other? Now it's one thing to believe, and she make every member state of the Organisation an equal

 member. They were not at that time equal. The rich which I admire, here in Australia among Australians, countries who had shipping, they were dominating, but there's something more, something more that you for they had maritime expertise, many of the may not know, you may not see even, but I see, as a developing countries had not joined, and the problem visitor; and that is a certain measure of Oriental was, how to make it a proper world organisation. So dignity, humility, kindness, courtesy, and that with that message in my heart I set about, went round, combined creates a wonderful nation. Now here you mentioned first to developed countries that it was in have people coming from different countries, their interest to get the developing world in. They different origins. They're all living together happily as accepted that. It's to their great credit that they came Australians. This is her ideal, and that ideal I see in the along, helping the developing countries to build up political life of Australia. So I said: "Well, if I get a their own maritime expertise, to join the Organisation. chance to speak about her message, why not here?" Very soon they all came, and to-day it is one of the So my appeal to you is this: she has done her job. She finest agencies, because it has the support of every has for thirty-five years been running around. She has member state of the world, every country. Now that is done her job, created Sahaja Yoga in eighty, ninety a premise on which I want to present an appeal to you, countries, and she has created beautiful things. Well, and the appealis this: The world, if you read newspapers, if you see, if you Some time ago we were in London, and one evening hear news, is in trouble. People are propagating about twenty-five of her disciples were sitting round hatred for each other. There's violence in the world. talking to her, and I was sitting by her side, looking What for? Why? Who will gain from that? If we are round and seeing, and I began to wonder. In that children of the same Almighty power, why can't we gathering, (and believe me, ladies and gentlemen, it's live together? Why must we talk about differences? God's truth), there were people who came from Why can't we talk like she does of our togetherness? different countries, different walks of life, different And it's not an impossible dream. It is something colours of skin and different religions. Now one of which is achievable. But the world needs this message, them was a Catholic, one was a Protestant, one was a I'll relate to you just one incident. her message, the message of love. And why I'm Jew, one was a Muslim, one was a Sikh, several were involved in to speak to you here, because I sincerely Hindus, but do you think they ever even remembered believe from my heart that in Australia there's who they were before they came to Sahaja Yoga? No. something unique. It's not just to praise or flatter you, They were all sitting there as Sahaja Yogis, citizens of S the world, the beloved children of Shri Mataji. She had forgotten it, no difference. All together, no. I would not say that if I didn't believe it. ButIbelieve it becauseI find in Australia the best of from the heart. Occident, of the Western values. Now, that kind of thing has happened, and I wanted to appeal to you, to beg of you to help this world. I assure you, the world is in trouble. Do you not I'm a great admirer of Western values. I'm a proud Indian, I am proud of my heritage, but I am also a great admirer of the British people. They were rulers in India, well that's different, but see every evening what's happening? People wanting to kill, terrorism, this, that and the rest. That has to be conquered, not by force. Force won't work. You have to use force in certain whenever you go to live in U.K. you find they're full of values, of ethics, of rule of law, of decency. Now I find all of those values 10

 situations, I'm not saying you cannot ever use it, but at me as if I was an intruder. I said: "I didn't know that the only way for the people of the world to come anyone was to come here." And what baffled me evern together, is to come together on the basis of her more was that he was wearing my kurta and pyjama! I philosophy, which is again based on ancient Indian said: "Something gone wrong with my head." So I philosophy: one Almighty, one human family, all to went to my wife. I said: "Do I see what I see? I see a get together regardless of their colour of skin, young man sitting there. What's this?" regardless of their language, they all come together. She said: "Yes, yes, yes! There's nothing wrong with Now if this is a message which you accept, then it that. You know I had gone to London, Piccadilly must be propagated. But if this message is not given, if Circus, and there I saw a young man lying uncared people don't come to that conclusion, they continue to for, sick, so I stepped out of the car and went to him. I believe that they are different, A versus B, B versus C, said: What's the matter?' He said: We're living in there's no end to trouble, and we have such means of London without any care. So I said: "Would you destruction in this world that the world is threatened, be taken care of?' So he said: "Yes.' I said: 'OK, get up, the world is threatened to-day, the existence of the and come and sit in my car and come home." world. Let us not make light of that. It's a very, very She brought him home, and when he came home he difficult situation. But there's a saving for that. The had to be cleaned and washed. He didn't have any saving is: let us all come together. And if you in clothes except mine. OK, so he was there, sitting in Australia can accept first of all the sincerity of what I that fashion, and I loved her for that even more. I am saying, and then make ita mission of yours also, as praised her. I said: "Wonderful that you did it!" And she has made a mission of hers, then this visit will then, you see, we began to give Sahaj treatment to hin have been successful. like to He was a young man, and after every week he began This is all that I wanted to mention to you. I know you to change. He became flowered out. He had become have been here a long time. I don't want to take up too addicted to drugs: drugs went away, drinks went much of your away, and he flowered out into a beautiful, handsome said about me, I want to thank them very much. But all young man, a new person. I said: "If this can happen I can say is, they are nothing more than a reflection of to one, why not everyone?" So that converted me, and what she has given to me. My heart has been Well, ladies and gentlemen, I won't take any more of converted by her. And before I close l'll tell you one time, but if the good things haye been Ibecame a Sahaja Yogi. That's how it was. story of how Igot converted. I'ma civil servant. Idon't your time. I want to conclude by once again thanking ever believe in things unless I'm totally convinced. So you, expressing my profound and abiding gratitude when she said, thirty-five years ago: "I'm going to that you have given to us; but believe me, it fills my launch a movement, I'm going to change people," I said: "Change people?" and I laughed. I said: "Do you will kindly consider my message well, it's not my really believe you can change people?" That's how I began, a sceptic. But something happened and that message, it's her message, I'm merely a carrier of that changed me, and the story is very nice. When I was elected to this office in London, Secretary and from Australia maybe another message goes General, I went and took up a residence, and she was the wider world: we're all children of the same with me. I took a residence just outside London, so I used to commute by train, and one evening when I came back from office I pushed the bell, the door opened, I went in, and I went to the drawing-room as quarrel, why fight? Why not live together? That is the we call it, or living-room of my house, and saw a only way the world can live and survive and live young man, a young white gentleman sitting there reading a newspaper. And when I entered, he looked Thank you all, ladies and gentlemen. for the time that you have, your precious time to you heart with a feeling of abiding gratitude, and if you message then maybe the efforts of those who are promoting Sahaja Yoga, they can be further enhanced, s to Almighty God, one God. Let's live together, let's love each other, let's be brothers and sisters. Why have happily. 11

 Narnia The Journey of Ascent My Dear Lucy, Iwrote this story for you, but when I began it Ịhad not yet realized that girls grow quicker than books. As a result you are already tooold for fairy tales, and by the time it is printed and bound you will be older still. But some day ydu will be old enough to start reading fairy tales again. You can then take it down from some upper shelf, dúst it, and tell me what you think of it. I shall probably be two deaf to hear, and too old to understand a word you say, but I shall still be... Your Affectionate Godfather, C.S. Lewis Mr. Lewis tells us that his Narnia books began with a picture...a faun with an umbrella, parcels, a lamppost, a snow-covered kingdom..Narnia..a land of fantasy and adventure, where magic and a Great Lion triumph. Narnia is the land where everyone wishes to be, the land from start to finish in The Chronicles of Narnia. Pure beauty and amazing imagery allows the audience to become an explorer of Narnia and take part in the fascinating adventures bound to happen. It is like a spiritual journey for all of us, which will certainly fill up everyone's heart with love, compassion and yearning amusement. The story carries a deeper, eternal message through the portrayal of the King, Aslan his Incarnation Life, Atoning Death, Resurrection, Ascent, High Dignity, and Wisdom. The one which will remain timeless and will be heard by generations to come and will be perceived as an important insight in evolution by many of us helping to construct our lives. The signs Aslan, the Lion describes point to the ultimate truth: the context of Shri Jesus. Aslan is a symbolic representation as well, and much more than just the king of Narnia he is symbolic of the King of kings. Here we start with one of the stories, The Lion, ARNIA the Witch & the Wardrobe - Because it is World War II and bombs are falling MJONTRE WITCH TAEWARDRORE on Britain, the four Pevensie children are sent out from London to stay in the country with Professor Kirke, a bachelor who lives in a mysterious home (with a household staff). ? Lucy & Wardrobe?The children are named Lucy, Edmund, Susan and Peter. While they are playing in the unused rooms of this house, Lucy 12

 hides in an old wardrobe, which magically opens into the snow-covered land of Narnia. There she meets a faun, Mr. Tumnus, who is carrying parcels and an umbrella. Mr. Tumnus invites her home to tea in his cave, and tells her nostalgic stories of the days before the White Witch cast her spell on Narnia. When Lucy says she must return home, the faun begins to cry. With great shame, he admits that he is in the employ of the White Witch and is expected to kidnap Lucy. ??Mr. Tumnus can't go through with the abduction. Lucy is the first human he has met and, he likes her. So he backs out on his promise to the White Witch, and surprisingly, Lucy returns safely through the wardrobe. She tells her brothers and sister about her adventure, but they find it hard Chronological order 1. The Magician's Nephew 2. The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe to believe. 3. The Horse and His Boy 4. Prince Caspian 5. The Voyage of the Dawn Treader 6. The Silver Chair 7. The Last Battle Lucy, the first one to enter in the Land is pure in her thoughts, very innocent, pious, honest and very Sahaj in her actions. Because of her qualities like Mooladhara Chakra, doors to Narnia open to her. Edmond & Wardrobe Next, Edmund goes to Narnia and meets the White Witch, who attempts to bribe him with a sweet called Turkish Delight. She tells him that she is Queen of Narnia, and childless, but would like to adopt Edmund and make him her heir. She says he carn return home to persuade his sisters and brother to come with him to Narnia, where they will become part of the royal family as well. Before Edmund returns, he meets Lucy in Narnia. Lucy tells him the White Witch is evil, but Edmund refuses to believe her and says the word of fauns can't be trusted. They go back through the wardrobe together. But afterward Edmund pretends that Narnia does not existthat the whole story is a hoax. Lucy is furious. Edmond falls to magical temptations and becomes blind. He is completely unaware that he is deceived by the wicked, evil Witch and this meeting has turned his faith blind. He has no idea where he is led by evil magic. He becomes the victim of greed and self- indulgence, trapped in the void and maya-jal. Back to Narnia One day, the four children are exploring the house when they bump into Mrs. Macready, who is showing some visitors around. They have been told to stay out of the way when 13

 visitors are being shown around the house, and make a run for the wardrobe. Mrs. Macready is showing the visitors around the wardrobe room and the four children manage to hide in the wardrobe just in time to avoid being caught. They then notice light in the back of the wardrobe and walk towards it to find themselves in a snowy wood. Peter realizes that they are in Narnia. Edmund then tells them that they should be heading towards the lamp-post and Peter, realizing that Edmund obviously knew of this place beforehand, is furious with him for trying to make out that Lucy was telling lies. Lucy takes them towards Mr. Tumnus's cave. But what has happened with Mr. Tumnus? He has disappeared. The door to his cave has been wrenched off its hinges, crockery has been smashed, snow is drifting inside. The children find a notice from the Captain of the Secret Police that Mr. Tumnus has been arrested on a charge of high treason. He has been comforting Her Majesty's enemies, the charge reads, and fraternizing with humans. and Mr. & Mrs. Beaver Suddenly a robin appears and leads the children through the forest to a talking beaver. They decide to trust him because Mr. Beaver turns out to know the whole story, and Tumnus has given him Lucy's handkerchief. Mr. Beaver takes them to his home, where he and Mrs. Beaver offer warm hospitality. They describe the danger of double-crossing the White Witch. The Beavers talk about"Aslan is on the move". They explain about Aslan who is the central and most important character the Narnian stories, the Lion, who is on the move, means he is coming to save the land and his kingdom. A prophecy is revealed: The White Witch of Narnia will be overthrown when four "sons of Adam and daughters of Eve" are enthroned at the castle of Cair Paravel. But after hearing the story, Edmund is still not convinced. He eats his dinner and slips away in search of the White Witch and quietly leaves the cave. Yet there's a hint of better times ahead. The snow is beginning to melt and Father Christmas arrives on his sledge, bringing gifts to the children and the Beavers and signaling that the power of the White Witch is fading and Aslan has come to restore Narnia. The faun, the beavers that are portrayed as very gentle, compassionate, generous characters in the story are like devotees to the god. They are very loyal and faithful followers of the king, Aslan and absolutely doubtless about the wisdom & prophecies of the King. Also, they are very noble, hospitable and welcoming towards guest, bestowing all comfort and securityEshowing qualities of nabhi & heart chakra. The Stone Table As for Edmund, when he finds the witch, he also discovers her real wickedness. She makes him her prisoner. The other children and the Beavers, encouraged by C.S. Levis 14

 Father Christmas, set out for the Stone Table, where they hope to meet Aslan and somehow rescue their brother Edmund. In the meantime, the Witch has also gone to the Stone Table with Edmund and her other followers. There she plans to seize the other children and prevent them from taking their thrones. Welcome, Peter, Son of Adam," says Aslan, the lion at last in a deep, rich and reassuring voice (amazing carrier of vishuddhi). "Welcome, Susan and Lucy, Daughters of Eve." At the Stone Table, the White Witch prepares to kill Edmund, thinking that with his death the prophecy can be derailed. Does the White Witch have a right to do so? Yes. The Emperor-beyond-the- sea has decreed that the White Witch can seize traitors and slay them. But Aslan intervenes. He who is innocent of wrong-doing will give his life for Edmund, who has betrayed everything for greed. Aslan is put to death instead of Edmund, while the children look on. Heis killed with the stone knife on the Stone Table. Deeper Magic from the Dawn of Time But then, the Stone Table cracks and Aslan rises from the dead. He has overcome the White Witch's power. Aslan is fulfilling a deeper magic from the dawn of time. What is this "Deeper Magic? a greater lawof the Table: "When a willing victim who had committed no treachery was killed in a traitor's stead, the table would crack and Death itself would start working backward." By suffering a horrible, agonizing death on the Stone Table, that Aslan sets Narnia and Edmund free. With Aslan's sacrifice, the curse is broken and he is resurrected. This is very similar to what Shri Jesus did for humankind by taking their sins, forgiving them, and setting them free. This episode shows the most important qualities ofAgnya Chakra. Now Aslan has the power to free and resurrect others who have fallen under the White Witch's spell. She has turned many of her captives, including Mr. Tumnus, into stone. In a great battle led by Aslan, the White Witch is defeated and dies. A great celebration occurs, and the four Pevensies become kings and queens of Narnia. The Hunting of the white stag The Pevensies have ruled for many happy years in Narnia and they all but forgot their previous lives before coming to the realm. One day, rumors spread that a white stag is on the loose in Narnia. If it is captured, then it will give a wish to anyone who catches it. The kings and queens are out on horseback one day when they spot it in the Wild Woods of the West. They eventually lose track of the stag and dismount their horses. The monarchs then pass the lamp-post which they had seen on entering Narnia many years before. They continue walking untilE The four children then tell the professor all about their adventures in Narnia. He tells them that they will not be able to get into Narnia through the wardrobe again, and this was proved correct. But it was only the beginning of the adventures in Narnia. In another tale, Aslan offers life-changing wisdom as the band of young adventurers sets off on a great quest. Continued on pg. 17 15

 Sahaja Destination: Mexico City, Mexico Whenever humans have yearned for divine Gulf of Mexico intervention, the Goddess has taken form from the MEXICO formless to satisfy the yearning of Her children. She came on earth time and again to relieve Her devotees of the fears and challenges and Her Mexico City incarnation has blessed the land where She set Her itie cific foot. Mexico City, the capital of Mexico has long cean been blessed by a relatively recent appearance of the Divine Feminine circa 1531 When a few yogis from USA were visiting Mexico City, hosted by their Yogini sisters and brothers there, they learnt this amazing tale of the Virgin of Guadalupe who appeared to St. Juan Diego Cuauhtlataotzin. Juan is believed to be a native of the land of South and Central America, belonging to the Aztec tribe of Native Americans. One version of the story states that Juan was traveling to church for his father's health who was bed-ridden and sick. As he was traveling to Tolpetlac, near Mexico City, where the church was situated, the Virgin Mary appeared in Her complete splendor. She pray at a talked to Him in sweet words: Know for certain, dearest of my sons, that I am the perfect and perpetual Virgin Mary, Mother of the True God, through whom everything lives, the Lord of all things, who is Master of Heaven and Earth. I ardently desire a teocalli (temple) to be built for me where I will show and offer all my love, my compassion, my help and my protection to the people. I am your merciful Mother, the Mother of all who live united in this land, and of all mankind, of all those who love me, of those who cry to me, of those who have confidence in me. Here I will hear their weeping and their sorrows, and will remedy and alleviated their sufferings, necessities and misfortunes. Therefore, in order to realise my intentions, go to the house of the Bishop of Mexico City and tell him that I sent you and that it is my desire to have a teocalli (temple) built here. Tell him all that you have seen and heard. Be assured that I shall be very grateful and will reward you for doing diligently what I have asked of you. Now that you have heard my words, my son, go and do everything as best you can." Sure enough, when he recounted his vision to the authorities, no one would believe him and asked for a sign. Worried sick about his father, he returned home to find him hale and hearty, full of life, better than ever before. So Juan prayed once more, seeking a proof of Her appearance. He was asked to pluck off roses as proof. Juan was collecting a special variety of Spanish roses grown only in Castile, Spain 16

 and imported during the summer. He wrapped up the roses in the apron-like garment he was wearing. He went to the authorities and opened his apron surprising them. It was impossible to find these roses during the winter season. Another miracle took place as the events were unfolding. The roses left behind an imprint on the apron carrying them. This imprint has proven its divinity over time. It is shown in the accompanying picture of the Virgin Mary. Scientists have been baffled by the paint. They cannot duplicate the ink used to color the paining. If they can come close to making the painting again with the same materials, the duplicates degrade and destroy under natural circumstances. But Juan's apron has resisted centuries of dust and rough handling till date. The apron has even survived a bomb-blast. While all other things nearby got destroyed, the apron was not damaged. No one has been able to understand the mysterious magic behind the image of the Goddess. These were times when the Mexican history recounts wars and disturbance, with Spain's colonization efforts as a major backdrop of events. The appearance of the Mother clearly indicates the suffering of the people and their seeking a higher intervention to protect their lands which were being attacked politically and otherwise. It would be interesting to see what were the detailed reasons, for which we may have to make Mexico City our next destination. Text taken from www.wikipedia.org http://www.sancta.org/nican.html Continued from pg.15 "Here on the mountain I have spoken to you clearly: I will not often do so down in Narnia. Here on the mountain, the air is clear and your mind is clear; as you drop down into Narnia, the air will thicken. Take great care that it does not confuse your mind. And the signs which you have learned here will not look at all as you expect them to look, when you meet them there. That is why it is so important to know them by heart and pay no attention to appearances. Remember the signs and believe the signs. Nothing else matters." The heroic lion's words unleash the timeless truth in our own world as well. This, of course, is precisely the intent of the books' author, C.S. Lewis. The Chronicles of Narnia are filled with dreams and a longing desire to involve yourself in the adventures. C. S. Lewis had an unique talent for writing. His books will be passed down for generations to come, leaving all those who read the Narnia books with a smile on their faces and high hopes that they to may one day arrive in Narnia and live a life full of beauty, adventure, love and respectEand ultimate ascent! The links you can visit: www.narnia.com 17

 The Magic Triangle ktodaib dalhowini In order to reach the innermost depth of our being, to taste the ocean of its joy, we have to dive deep. Attachment and involvement in our daily life keeps us floating on the surface. We are tossed about by events, challenges and problems that confront us every day. How does home spiritualis handle this relationship with daily surroundings that can be so fraught with adversity? We can find a response in the synergy between Antar yoga and Karma yoga brought about by the Sahaja Yoga as taught by Shri Mataji. It manifests a capacity to face the outside dimension of life, equipped with spiritual powers that are awakened by the practice of meditation. This creates 'win- win' opportunities. This mechanism is shown with a drawing.deng The triangle represents the field of our existence, the battlefield (Kurukshetra) of our daily life. This is the field where we desire arnd act, where we perform and want to win at the game of life. Pole A of the Triangle represents a twice born, having gone through the experience of Kundalini awakening, yet still facing the regular challenges of the normal life of a householder. He still is in the process of discovering or testing his spiritual powers and finding out how to apply them in the surroundings. Pole B of the Triangle represents the option, opened to homo spiritualis by Self-realization, to activate through meditation. When the subject has mastered the art of meditation, the Kundalini takes the consciousness into the state of thoughtless awareness (Nirvichara sammadhi). B is thoughtless awareness; it is the inner dimension. This movement, however, is a process that may take some time, depending on the condition of the liver. Abad liver generates mental agitation. Antar yoga Pole Crepresents the solid dimension of everyday surroundings, with its rich variety of challenges. It contains the shifting shapes ofour outside dimension. Our lives, the world over, are not that different. Regular people face difficulties or ordeals that are largely similar, whatever the country or culture. We face difficulties in our relationships: family, friendships, and clan. We may be under stress in positioning ourselves within society: within profession, group assimilation and peer recognition. Many of us are facing financial constraints. Moreover, later in life, we increasingly face difficulties in the area of health. Indeed, the person for whom all these areas of life are free of problems would be very lucky indeed. But most of us, even after realization, still confront such challenges. How do we fare and how does spirituality help in daily life? Where is the magic? The trend A towards C represents the fact that now I face a specific difficulty. Something is going pulsion absorbs my wrong; I cannot ignore it and I must find a solution to the problem. This com attention, no natter where the problem lies, be it with relationships, money, job or health. The trend C towards A expresses the effect that the outside world has on me. In fact, as far as my state of being is concerned, I become reactive and the problem is having an impact on my consciousness. Let us assume the problem is serious and I cannot solve it at once. I carınot, for example, pay back my 18

 debts, or perhaps my boss is unfair to me, or my job is at risk. The succession of action and reaction in my ego and superego is troubling my equilibrium as I try to sort out the problem. I am upset, and the disturbing circumstances'in my outside world rob me of a condition of satisfaction in my inner world. I am in a losing position, for on top of the outside problem, I now face an inner one: my peace of mind is disturbed and my consciousness is unhappy. The movements A towards C and C towards A are the stuff of everyday struggle forhomo sapiens. The trend A towards B expresses the new consciousness response of homo spiritualis when faced with exactly the same range of challenges. This is where the magic starts. The subject diverts his attention from the problem, and wherever he is, he goes into meditation. Through entering thoughtless awareness, the subject regains his inner composure and peace of mind. This is the first win. Although the outside problem still exists, the problem no longer exerts a disturbing impact on his consciousness, Thoughtless awareness pushes the disturbance out of his mind, and the subject is cool and unstressed. The trend B towards C is a little hard to explain, for this is where the full magic unfolds. As consciousness reaches B, I get connected to the inner powers of the spirit. These powers are acting on my outside environment, instead of the outside environment acting on me. Information on my problem is passed to the primordial computer of the Virata. my The connection through the Sahasrara is wiring me into the greater power of the Paramchaitanya, the force of God that controls all the causalities of history. This, in turn, acts on the outside according to its own logic. It often happens that suddenly, the problem is solved, without my doing anything about it. One finds a new source of income to pay one's debts, or a difficult boss is suddenly transferred elsewhere. B towards C is not automatic, nor does it conform always to expectations. Sometimes it works, sometimes it does not and in any case, it works only after the consciousness has reached B. One cannot achieve the second win without the first one. Source: The Third Advent, Gregoire de Kalbermatten в B to C Second win A to B first win C to A C Daily life challenge or problem Relashionship-Mony-Health A' A to C 19

 There should be, all the time, compelling desire that we have to find out methods by which we can spread Sahaja Yoga H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi



----------------------

2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 YUVADRISHTI
Becember
Volume 6
2005
Issue 4
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-1.txt 
 bvoheni x
Index
FY tledee
Waves of Devine Love
letter in marathi
TANGTUTUE.
William Blake
ी
Eight Leelas
Sir C. P Srivastava's Speech
chatel
THE
tor
Narnia
12
The Journey of Ascent
Sahaja Destination - Mexico
16
fior
halucaiHDM
The Magic Triangle
18
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Waves of Devine Love
I have received letters from all of you but have
Vecchia letter in marathi
not been able to write because now in London
Sahaja Yoga work has started with great drive.
Delhi Sahaja Yogis write very few letters but most of them are happy. Sahaja yogis of Bombay are
alright, Sahaja Yogis of Rahuri are enjoying. Sahaja Yogis of Bombay have great responsibility and
therefore had to face many attacks.
The first attack came when Iwas in U.S.A. At that time many Sahaja Yogis were affected and many fell
away. Later on when an attack was on all London Sahaja Yogis collectively followed wTong path which
was full of dangers and harms.
Many wicked people from that part are, still hiding themselves in some Sahaja Yogis in the form of
"badhas'. You have to vigorously use Sahaja Yoga methods against them.
These wickeds attack you from Agnya and Heart. From Agnya they send Anti-Sahaja Yoga ideas in
your mind and from Heart they make complaints. If you identify them they will become ineffective.
There is one remedy for it which can be applied only after the realization.
Because if your car does not start, your brakes and accelerators are of no use. But if you do not use the
accelerator even after it starts, how will your car move? sVsteE
You can attain any destination that you fix. All your autosuggestions will materialise. The remedy that
is to be used is : your attention should be on Me and you should make the following conditioning of
thoughts on your Agnya "How fortunate we are to have been realized! We are Sahaja Yogis. God has
chosen us. How can we work if we remain weak? Adi Shakti has given us the Power to redeem the
whole mankind. We can do it and we will do it".
On heart you should criticise with these thoughts "How deep is God's love for us! He has given us the
realization. He is the ocean of mercy. Ignoring all our mistakes, He is working hard day and night for
our welfare and, instead of praying for His forgiveness of our mistakes, we are making complaints
against Him and blaming Him"! IA
The following thoughts will please your Hearts, "O God, please give us the power of Your love. May I
be the drop in the ocean of Your love that is enveloping the whole universe, so that its loving pulsation
is vibrated through my life and Iremain engrossed in that bliss".
edT
May your life be flooded by the waves of Divine love.onbhi pippM
Always loving you, much more than myself.
Your Mother, NIRMALA
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 William Blake (1757-1827)
the poet, the painter, the visionary, the mystic, the engraver
To see a World in a grain of sand
And a Heaven in a Wild Flower,
Hold Infinity in the Palm of your hand
And Eternity in an Hour.
from Auguries of Innocence by William Blake
I do not behold the outward creation... it is a hindrance and not action."
Thus William Blake--painter, engraver, and poet--explained why his
work was filled with religious visions rather than with subjects from
everyday life. Few people in his time realized that Blake expressed these
visions with a talent that approached genius. He lived in near poverty and
died unrecognized. Today, however, Blake is acclaimed one of England's
great figures of art and literature and one of the most inspired and
original painters of his time.
William Blake was born in London on 28 November 1757 and was
christened on 11 December in St. James's Church. His father, James Blake,
Self Portrait
was a hosier; his mother, born Catherine Wright, had married James after the death of her first husband, Tlhomas
Armitage, also a hosier. They kept a shop at 28 Broad Street and were in their mid-thirties when William arrived.
Ofhis brothers and sisters, Robert (1762-87) was Blake's favorite, His
eldest brother, James (1753-1827), and a sister, Catherine (1764-
1841), also figured prominently in his later life.
William's childhood was happy and his parent's were unusually
understanding so much so that he never went to school. As a young
child of nine, he once told his parents he had seen "a tree filled with
angels" on one of his walks. Later on he wrote:
Thank God, Inever was sent to school
To be Flog'd into following the Style of a Fool
Last Judement
What education he had was probably
provided by his mother. He was highly
When Inagiaátiáu,
intelligent and always had the most receptive Art & Selencs & all the
mind. Later in life he acquired the knowledge intellectual gins of the
of Hebrew, Greek and Italian. Most of all he Holy Ghost, are lanked
opon as no ue nd on
showed an unmistakable talent for drawing Contontion rennti i
and when he was ten years old he became a
man. thêu thaLo
pupil at the drawing academy of the highly Judgnient tiegin & ts
viskm is seen by the
Imaginatise eyes of
Evervone according to
"Due to financial constraints his parents decided that he should be a engraver instead of the situation he lholis
regarded Henry Pars in the Strand. He
The Last Judgement
practiced at home drawing plaster casts of antique sculpture bought by his father.
an artist, The first engraver they approached William Wynne Ryland, but William took
2.
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 an instant disliking for him, saying that he looked as if he would live to
be hanged. This turned out to be an accurate prophecy, for twelve years
afterwards Ryland was executed for forgery. The engraver finally
chose James Basire of Great Queen Street, from a family of
distinguished craftsmen. The seven year apprenticeship began in the
August of 1772.
LONDON
wander through each chartered street,
Near where the chartered Thames does flow,
f
A mark in every face I meet,
Marks of weakness, marks of woe.
In every cry of every man,
In every infant's cry of fear,
In every voice, in every ban,
The mind-forged manacles I hear:
He completed his apprenticeship when he was 22. Soon after
completion he became a student of the Royal Academy, where he
attended the antique and life classes. Apart from Academy studies
Blake created many works in many media (media here refers to art
forms) from about 1779, including possibly one work, of dubious
attribution from Michelangelo's 'Last Judgement'. The subjects were
drawn from biblical, allegorical and other sources.
How the chimney-sweeper's cry
Every blackening church appals,
And the hapless soldier's sigh
Runs in blood down palace-walls.
Blake lived during a time of intense social change. The American
Revolution, the French Revolution, and the Industrial Revolution all
happened during his lifetime. These changes gave Blake a chance to
see one of the most dramatic stages in the transformation of the
Western world from a somewhat feudal, agricultural society to an
industrial society where philosophers and political thinkers such as
Locke, Franklin, and Paine championed the rights of the individual. Some of these changes had Blake's
approval; others did not.
But most, through midnight streets I hear
How the youthful harlot's curse
Blasts the new-bom infant's tear,
And blights with plagues the marriage hearse.
One example of Blake's disapproval of changes that happened in his time comes in his poem "London," from his
work Songs of Experience. In "London," which has been described as summing up many implications of Songs
of Experience, Blake describes the woes that the
Industrial Revolution and the breaking of the common
man's ties to the land have brought upon him. For
instance, the narrator in "London" describes both the
Thames and the city streets as "chartered," or
controlled by commercial interests; he refers to
"mind-forged manacles"; he relates that every man's
face contains "Marks of weakness, marks of woe";
and he discusses the "every cry of every Man" and
"every Infant's cry of fear." He connects marriage and
death by referring to a "marriage hearse" and
describes it as "blighted with plague." He also talks
about "the hapless Soldier's sigh" and the "youthful
Harlot's curse" and describes "blackening Churches'
and palaces running with blood ("London").
The Angel Gabriel Appearing to Zacharias informing him
about the arrival of St. John
"For Blake the notion of Last Judgment as raising the good and punishing the wicked is false, for that implied
the necessity of divine vengeance; it is rather a purgation (cleansing) of the wickedness of the fallen world, and
of domination of wicked states of man, through the casting(removing) out Corporeal (rel. to flesh)
Understandings.
"Truth is Eternal. Error, or Creation, will be Burned up, and then, & not till Then, Truth or Eternity will
appear. It is burnt up the moment Men cease to behold it. I assert for myself that I do not behold the
outward creation and that to me is hindrance and not action; it is as the dirt upon my feet, No part of Me."
Blake
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Newton'
Blake was always against rationalistic-materialistic
philosophy and proclaimed the superiority of the
imagination over other "organs of perception, since it
is the means of perceiving "the Infinite," or God. In the
creation on the right, the great philosopher and
mathematician Sir Isaac Newton (16421727) appears
engrossed by his diagram, and fails to see the
fantastical, apparently underwater world that
surrounds him. Blake faulted Newton for
systematizing the universe and thus forever separating
reason from imagination, mind from spirit. As Blake
wrote elsewhere: "God is not a Mathematical Diagram."
Newton, enslaved by reason, appears to be enthralled
his senses.
Irest not from my great task!
To open the Eternal Worlds, to open the immortal eyes
Of Man inwards into the World of Thought, into Eternity
Ever expanding in the Bosom of God, the Human Imagination.
from Jerusalem, Chapter I Plate 5 by William Blake
On Aug. 18, 1782, Blake married a poor, illiterate girl, Catherine Boucher, who
was to make a perfect companion for him. Their marriage was by all accounts
happy one. He taught her to read and write and to help him in his work.
Blake's major contribution was the etching of 21l copper plates drawing themes
from The Old Testament (The Bible). His other works include The Body of Christ,
Borne to the Tomb circa 1799-1800 Christ Blessing the Little Children 1799 The
Crucifixion: "Behold Thy Mother circa 1805 A Rolling Stone is ever Bare of Moss' 1821/circa 1830, Plutus 1824-7
The Fall of Satan 1825, reprinted 1874, The Vision of
Christ 1825, reprinted 1874, The Crucifixion circa 1825-
7.
He also published All Religion are one, There is no Natural
Religion, Vala, or The Four Zoa,. Songs of Innocence,
The Book of Thel, The Marriage of Heaven and Hell,
Visions of the Daughters of Albion, America a Prophecy,
and For Children: The Gates of Paradise
on 12 August 1827. His death seemed to have been
beautiful. He died "in a most glorious manner,"
Richmond wrote Palmer soon afterwards: "He said He
He died
was going to that Country he had all His life wished to
see & expressed Himself Happy hoping for Salvation
through Jesus ChristJust before he died His
Countenance became fairHis eyes brighten'd and He
burst out in Singing of the things he Saw in Heaven
'www.ibiblio.org'<www.blakearchive.org>' Lister Raymond The Paintings of William Blake'. CambridgeUniversity
Press, 1986; pp. 1-8. <www.geocities.com> 'www.geocities.com Bindman David'Blake as an artist'. Phaidon
PressLimited, 1977; pp. 166-167. "Engraving is an eighteenth century art form of incising a design onto a hard, flat
surface(eg. Copper) by cutting grooves into it.
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Eight Leelas
the balance, like an aeroplane, and that's why the
religion which is nothing but consciousness
1980-11 (collective consciousness, through
Kundalini awakening)
regulated by the superconsciousness. Because
these people came, according to us, they were
super human being,
through Kundalini awakening, you become
"So, as soon as you become
incarnations of the Primordial Master."
aware of yourself within, and you become aware
of others within. This is the collective 1981-01 (Nirmala Vidya, the Divine technique
consciousness; this is what Sahaja Yoga is. Sahaja by which SHE Forgive us)?!!
Yoga is the system of Nature. The way this
"Nirmala Vidya It is the special power by which
creation took place is also Sahaja. 'Sah' means we do All Divine work, even forgiving. When you
'with' and 'ja' means 'born'; Sahaja means 'born say, 'Mother forgive us', the technique by which I
with'. Everything is built in within you, like a forgive you is Nirmala Vidya. The technique by
seed. If you see a seed, it has a primule within it to which all the Mantras are manifesting themselves
sprout. Seed has the complete power of the tree it and are effective is also Nirmala Vidya. Nirmala
is going to be. The whole thing is in the seed. In means 'pure', Vidya means knowledge, or the
the same way, in the human seed, the whole knowledge of this technique. It creates loops and
picture of what he is going to be, is built in, the creates also different energy formations by which
whole mechanism is placed within."
it acts, and draws all that is not
1985-05-27 (Ten Commandments, relating to the
ten valencies within us)
"Now the religion we talk of is outside religion, is
myth, is mythical. But inside religion is like a
valency. As we have a valency for carbon, four
valencies, in the same way human beings have
ten valencies, and that's how we have got the Ten
Commandments, relating to the ten valencies
within us, and that's how it works that
you
maintain the balance. Because if you go too much
to this side, then you go to the left side, then you
fall a prey to subconscious, to collective
subconscious. If you go too much to this right t
side, you fall into the supraconscious, and to the
collective supraconscious. That's why the balance
has to be built in. To ascend one has to maintain
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 of a man. But that does not in any
way mean that you compete with
men in their foolish
enterprises by which they have
practically brought the world to
such a ruinous state."
1981-01 (always try to find out
sweet words)
"Sweetness will cure your left
Vishuddhi. Always speak very
sweetly, try to find out all the
sweet words, the sweet methods
of addressing is the best way to
wanted, impure and fills it up with its power. It is cure your guilt, because, if you say anything
Divine technique, because your harsh to anyone, you may say as a matter of habit,
does not do that, you don't have that instrument." or maybe because you just feel happy by saying
instrument
1984-01-19 (The whole mode, the style, has to that, but as soon as you say it, you say, 'Oh God,
what did I say?' That is the biggest guilt. One has
change)
always to try to find out sweet words. Now the
"No use competing with men in their stupidity, birdsare chirping. In
the amount of stupidity has been created for us
quite sufficiently. The whole world is today the same way you have to learn all the sounds of
expressing the nonsense that they have the everything by which you make people happy by
competition, the aggression, the oppression. So your sweetness. Itis very important. Otherwise, if
the other side, of the woman, which was called as your left Vishuddhi grows too much you will
the dominated one, the dark side, the oppressed, develop a way of talking by which your lips will
all that has to express itself in a different way. The get distorted towards the left side."
whole mode, the style, has to change. See now in 1985-07-28 (the devotion actually means facing
Christianity, one should understand
yourself)
why Christianity, even Judaism, any religion, "When you do something wrong many people
even Hinduism and all that but it's more in
are there who will say that, It is my left
Christianity surprisingly they just had no place Swadisthana'. Some will say, 'I was possessed,
for Mother Mary. And Muslims crowned it by there was a Bhoot.' Somebody will blame
completely canceling Fatima. And, on top of that, something else. Whatever you are blaming.
you will see that among Christians, I think actually, who is asking you the explanation? It is
ordination or what you call that, is not given to
the ladies, to woman, whilst Christ was not born only you asking yourself. You are not facing
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 yourself. So the devotion actually
means facing yourself first of all and
see for yourself what you are doing."
1985-11 (do we have those qualities
by which we sustain those basics?)
"Everybody is not a light, you are
the light givers, and it is going to
work out through your will. So how
powerful our will should be? How
dedicated we should be about our
will? That one has to know. You have
to fathom out that will within you.
Once you start doing this Sahaja
Yoga, then you recognise how
important is Sahaja Yoga, that it
gives a real meaning to the whole
creation, in the eyes of God and Divine Power. and higher, subtler and subtler, finer and finer. In
That has to work out, that's the of Life. the refinement, ultimately the light works for the
and, surprisingly, it is left to your will, not My evolutionary process. Gradually the grosser parts
will. I've no will. I've no action. So it is will start becoming enlightened. You find the lower
which is going to work it out. So you have to animal is not so much enlightened as the higher
dedicated, and you have to weigh yourself: how animal. Gradually even the Joy starts becoming
much I'm willed. The seminars help you to see subtler and subtler. We can call
how much you really will that Sahaja Yoga it beautiful. Human joys are much more beautiful
should be successful. This is the second thing, to than that of animals. So the also starts
make it successful, what should we do? We
Purpose
your
joy
changing their manifestation in the sense you
must understand the basics of Sahaja Yoga and start more and more and wider range of Joy
try to see within ourselves, do we understand the comes into your hands. To a dog beauty and
basics, and do we have those qualities by which decency has no meaning, so at a stage when
we sustain those basics?"
reach, when you are a human being to that
you
extent you develop your Sat, which is awareness,
your Joy and creative action, now you see how the
creativity of God passes into the hands of man
when he turns out, how the Joy of God passes into
1983-07-16 (how His Light comes into the heart
of Man as Spirit)
"Now another parrot of the parabola starts when
you are attaining back God Almighty. That
thehands of man, and how
you
process now gradually starts becoming higher
His Light comes into the heart of Man as Spirit."
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Sir C. P Srivastava's Speech
Sydney Town Hall 6th February, 2006
Honoured and distinguished guests, ladies and
gentlemen,
Mr. Chris Kyriacou, the national Co-ordinator of
Sahaja Yoga in Australia,
All members of the National Council for the
bow down to them and each one of them, and convey
my feelings of most abiding gratitude for the
wonderful work they have done, for their marvellous
hospitality, for their extreme kindness. They are my
beloved people, and I call them angels. They are truly
angels.
Well, ladies and gentlemen, I would like also to
advancement of Sahaja Yoga.
Ladies and gentlemen,
There are moments when it becomes difficult to express my profound gratitude to Honourable Mr.
express yourself, and this is one such moment.
I would like first of all to say how very, very grateful I
am to all of you who are here to-day. I know how
preoccupied you are. That you should find time to be
with us to celebrate an occasion, which is twenty-five
Gough Whitlam, former Prime Minister of Australia. I
had the honour of being received by him. I regard him
as one of the most visionary leaders of our time,
desperately needed by the world to-day. I thank him
for very kind words about our visit here. And I extend
n the same gratitude to Honourable Kim Beazley,
spirituality, in ethics and a good life. So I bow down to Leader of the Opposition in Australia; Honourable
you again, and thank you very, very much for the great Morris Iemma, Premier of NSW; Honourable Alan
honour you have done Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi and Carpenter, Premier of Western Australia; Honourable
years of Sahaja Yoga, shows your keen interest in
myself, by being here to-day.
Very, very kind things have been
said about me. They're very kind.
Kate Ellis, Member for Adelaide, South Australia; Ms.
Jule du Varrens, Director of the
Institute of Communication
Please do not believe all that has
Ethics; Mr. Peter Debnam, NSW
Leader of the Opposition; and
Lord Mayor, Clover Moore, City
of Sydney. To all of them, our
profound and deepest gratitude
for the very kind words in which
they have welcomed us here.
Ladies and gentlemen, I now
come to what I wanted to mention
been said. But what has been said
about my wife is entirely true,
and I'll come back to that a little
later.
First of all, I would like to tell you
how wonderful the Sahaja Yogis
of Australia are. You know, only a
few weeks ago they invited us
PHO
and she accepted the invitation,
and within a period of about six
weeks they all got together to
E to you. This is too important
gathering for me to miss the
occasion, and I want to say what
lies in my heart. But first I must
transform a residence here into
an ashram, and you have to see to
believe what they have done.
tell you, this lady who is sitting
here, my wife, for thirty-five
years she has been running
around the world, trying to
convey a message, a message of
love, of togetherness. Believe me,
They have converted it into a little
heaven on earth for their beloved
Goddess and Mother. They're so
devoted, so true, so pure, that I
8
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 believes in that. She herself was born in
she has travelled by plane, by
helicopter, by car, by bus, by bullock
cart and on foot. She has gone to
a Christian family, I was bom in a
Hindu family, but we both believe in
one Almighty power, one human
family, and that's how we are together.
Now this is the message she has
villages, to cities, and she has gone to
many, many places in all the five
continents, and she has done so out of a
conveyed, and she has conveyed this
to many audiences, saying: You are the
creation of that Almighty, you are in
His or Her image, and there is in you a
tremendous conviction within her that
If the
this world needs a new message.
world has to live, has to survive, then
Something new has to be
communicated to humankind. And
with that belief in her, single-handed
congealed power which she can
perhaps help to awaken. And when
that is awakened, called Kundalini,
then you are in communion with your
for many years, she went around3;
gradually Sahaja Yogis came along;
what they saw, the worth of what she was saying, and Creator. And you'll have a beautiful life then, given to
to-day she has followers in eighty, ninety countries. ethics, morality, everything that is good. That is what
Wherever I go there are Sahaja Yogis, Sahaja Yoginis, itis, that's what your destiny is. But if you want to be in
beloved children of hers, and what a wonderful thing communion, you can be in communion.
she has done, what a wonder she has created. What is Now, ladies and gentlemen, the point I want to make
it? How do I see it, as her husband? Well then, I must to you is my own point. My point is, I have worked for
say, for her to have been doing all this meant she has India as a civil servant, and I have also had the
been away from me for a long, long time, but I knew privilege of working for the United Nations, as
that she was doing something wonderful work for the Secretary General of the International Maritime
world, and so it was.
Organisation; and believe me, ladies and gentlemen, I
Now her message as I see it is simple, straight, and she tried to implement her ideas in my working at the
says: all men and women and children of the world are United Nations level. You know the United Nations
the creation of one Almighty. Some people say: "My means many, many countries; countries of different
God is almighty", others say: "My God is almighty". growth of development, with different capability and
By definition, you can't have more than one Almighty. so on and so forth, and they all come together to work
have two of them, neither of them will be together: it's not an easy task. I was in the maritime
If
you
almighty! So it's as simple as that, and sometimes world, and when I was elected Secretary General, I
people don't really see that. But she says: "First thing was the first from a developing country. All my
is, remember that there is only one Almighty, and that predecessors had been Europeans, and people were
is the Almighty power of Divine love." And then she surprised that someone from the developing world
persons who are here on this earth have been should come. The maritime scene at that time was
dominated by the Western world, and the
Organisation was known as a "rich man's club". And
here was me: how could I be Secretary General of a
says: "All
created by that Almighty," Whether they are white or
brown, or blue or yellow; whether they live in Africa or
Australia or India or wherever, they're all her children,
are children of that Almighty power.
t
rich man's club, poor me? What a task it was!
I said: "Well, I have been elected so I must serve, and I
But if that is so, why not live together happily, mustapply her message." Her message was: everyone
peacefully? Why feel divided? Why feel one against is the same, everyone is equal. So I made it a point to
the other? Now it's one thing to believe, and she make every member state of the Organisation an equal
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 member. They were not at that time equal. The rich which I admire, here in Australia among Australians,
countries who had shipping, they were dominating, but there's something more, something more that you
for they had maritime expertise, many of the may not know, you may not see even, but I see, as a
developing countries had not joined, and the problem visitor; and that is a certain measure of Oriental
was, how to make it a proper world organisation. So dignity, humility, kindness, courtesy, and that
with that message in my heart I set about, went round, combined creates a wonderful nation. Now here you
mentioned first to developed countries that it was in have people coming from different countries,
their interest to get the developing world in. They different origins. They're all living together happily as
accepted that. It's to their great credit that they came Australians. This is her ideal, and that ideal I see in the
along, helping the developing countries to build up political life of Australia. So I said: "Well, if I get a
their own maritime expertise, to join the Organisation. chance to speak about her message, why not here?"
Very soon they all came, and to-day it is one of the So my appeal to you is this: she has done her job. She
finest agencies, because it has the support of every has for thirty-five years been running around. She has
member state of the world, every country. Now that is done her job, created Sahaja Yoga in eighty, ninety
a premise on which I want to present an appeal to you, countries, and she has created beautiful things. Well,
and the appealis this:
The world, if you read newspapers, if you see, if you Some time ago we were in London, and one evening
hear news, is in trouble. People are propagating about twenty-five of her disciples were sitting round
hatred for each other. There's violence in the world. talking to her, and I was sitting by her side, looking
What for? Why? Who will gain from that? If we are round and seeing, and I began to wonder. In that
children of the same Almighty power, why can't we gathering, (and believe me, ladies and gentlemen, it's
live together? Why must we talk about differences? God's truth), there were people who came from
Why can't we talk like she does of our togetherness? different countries, different walks of life, different
And it's not an impossible dream. It is something colours of skin and different religions. Now one of
which is achievable. But the world needs this message, them was a Catholic, one was a Protestant, one was a
I'll relate to you just one incident.
her message, the message of love. And why I'm Jew, one was a Muslim, one was a Sikh, several were
involved in to speak to you here, because I sincerely Hindus, but do you think they ever even remembered
believe from my heart that in Australia there's who they were before they came to Sahaja Yoga? No.
something unique. It's not just to praise or flatter you, They were all sitting there as Sahaja Yogis, citizens of
S the world, the beloved children
of Shri Mataji. She had forgotten
it, no difference. All together,
no. I would not say that if I didn't
believe it. ButIbelieve it becauseI
find in Australia the best of
from the heart.
Occident, of the Western values.
Now, that kind of thing has
happened, and I wanted to
appeal to you, to beg of you to
help this world. I assure you, the
world is in trouble. Do you not
I'm a great admirer of Western
values. I'm a proud Indian, I am
proud of my heritage, but I am
also a great admirer of the British
people. They were rulers in India,
well that's different, but
see every evening what's
happening? People wanting to
kill, terrorism, this, that and the
rest. That has to be conquered,
not by force. Force won't work.
You have to use force in certain
whenever you go to live in U.K.
you find they're full of values, of
ethics, of rule of law, of decency.
Now I find all of those values
10
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 situations, I'm not saying you cannot ever use it, but at me as if I was an intruder. I said: "I didn't know that
the only way for the people of the world to come anyone was to come here." And what baffled me evern
together, is to come together on the basis of her more was that he was wearing my kurta and pyjama! I
philosophy, which is again based on ancient Indian said: "Something gone wrong with my head." So I
philosophy: one Almighty, one human family, all to went to my wife. I said: "Do I see what I see? I see a
get together regardless of their colour of skin, young man sitting there. What's this?"
regardless of their language, they all come together. She said: "Yes, yes, yes! There's nothing wrong with
Now if this is a message which you accept, then it that. You know I had gone to London, Piccadilly
must be propagated. But if this message is not given, if Circus, and there I saw a young man lying uncared
people don't come to that conclusion, they continue to for, sick, so I stepped out of the car and went to him. I
believe that they are different, A versus B, B versus C, said: What's the matter?' He said: We're living in
there's no end to trouble, and we have such means of London without any care. So I said: "Would you
destruction in this world that the world is threatened, be taken care of?' So he said: "Yes.' I said: 'OK, get up,
the world is threatened to-day, the existence of the and come and sit in my car and come home."
world. Let us not make light of that. It's a very, very She brought him home, and when he came home he
difficult situation. But there's a saving for that. The had to be cleaned and washed. He didn't have any
saving is: let us all come together. And if you in clothes except mine. OK, so he was there, sitting in
Australia can accept first of all the sincerity of what I that fashion, and I loved her for that even more. I
am saying, and then make ita mission of yours also, as praised her. I said: "Wonderful that you did it!" And
she has made a mission of hers, then this visit will then, you see, we began to give Sahaj treatment to hin
have been successful.
like to
He was a young man, and after every week he began
This is all that I wanted to mention to you. I know you to change. He became flowered out. He had become
have been here a long time. I don't want to take up too addicted to drugs: drugs went away, drinks went
much of your away, and he flowered out into a beautiful, handsome
said about me, I want to thank them very much. But all young man, a new person. I said: "If this can happen
I can say is, they are nothing more than a reflection of to one, why not everyone?" So that converted me, and
what she has given to me. My heart has been Well, ladies and gentlemen, I won't take any more of
converted by her. And before I close l'll tell you one
time, but if the good things haye been
Ibecame a Sahaja Yogi. That's how it was.
story of how Igot converted. I'ma civil servant. Idon't your time. I want to conclude by once again thanking
ever believe in things unless I'm totally convinced. So you, expressing my profound and abiding gratitude
when she said, thirty-five years ago: "I'm going to that you have given to us; but believe me, it fills my
launch a movement, I'm going to change people," I
said: "Change people?" and I laughed. I said: "Do you will kindly consider my message well, it's not my
really believe you can change people?" That's how I
began, a sceptic. But something happened and that message, it's her message, I'm merely a carrier of that
changed me, and the story is very nice.
When I was elected to this office in London, Secretary and from Australia maybe another message goes
General, I went and took up a residence, and she was the wider world: we're all children of the same
with me. I took a residence just outside London, so I
used to commute by train, and one evening when I
came back from office I pushed the bell, the door
opened, I went in, and I went to the drawing-room as quarrel, why fight? Why not live together? That is the
we call it, or living-room of my house, and saw a only way the world can live and survive and live
young man, a young white gentleman sitting there
reading a newspaper. And when I entered, he looked Thank you all, ladies and gentlemen.
for the time that you have, your precious time
to
you
heart with a feeling of abiding gratitude, and if you
message then maybe the efforts of those who are
promoting Sahaja Yoga, they can be further enhanced,
s to
Almighty God, one God. Let's live together, let's love
each other, let's be brothers and sisters. Why have
happily.
11
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Narnia
The Journey of Ascent
My Dear Lucy,
Iwrote this story for you, but when I began it Ịhad not yet realized that girls grow quicker than books.
As a result you are already tooold for fairy tales, and by the time it is printed and bound you will be
older still. But some day ydu will be old enough to start reading fairy tales again. You can then take it
down from some upper shelf, dúst it, and tell me what you think of it. I shall probably be two deaf to
hear, and too old to understand a word you say, but I shall still be...
Your Affectionate Godfather,
C.S. Lewis
Mr. Lewis tells us that his Narnia books began with a picture...a faun with an umbrella, parcels, a
lamppost, a snow-covered kingdom..Narnia..a land of fantasy and adventure, where magic and a
Great Lion triumph. Narnia is the land where everyone wishes to be, the land from start to finish in
The Chronicles of Narnia. Pure beauty and amazing imagery allows the audience to become an
explorer of Narnia and take part in the fascinating adventures bound to happen. It is like a spiritual
journey for all of us, which will certainly fill up everyone's heart with love, compassion and yearning
amusement.
The story carries a deeper, eternal message through the portrayal of the King, Aslan his Incarnation
Life, Atoning Death, Resurrection, Ascent, High
Dignity, and Wisdom. The one which will remain
timeless and will be heard by generations to
come and will be perceived as an important
insight in evolution by many of us helping to
construct our lives. The signs Aslan, the Lion
describes point to the ultimate truth: the context
of Shri Jesus. Aslan is a symbolic representation
as well, and much more than just the king of
Narnia he is symbolic of the King of kings.
Here we start with one of the stories, The Lion,
ARNIA
the Witch & the Wardrobe -
Because it is World War II and bombs are falling
MJONTRE WITCH TAEWARDRORE
on Britain, the four Pevensie children are sent out
from London to stay in the country with
Professor Kirke, a bachelor who lives in a
mysterious home (with a household staff). ?
Lucy & Wardrobe?The children are named Lucy,
Edmund, Susan and Peter. While they are
playing in the unused rooms of this house, Lucy
12
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 hides in an old wardrobe, which magically opens into the
snow-covered land of Narnia. There she meets a faun, Mr.
Tumnus, who is carrying parcels and an umbrella.
Mr. Tumnus invites her home to tea in his cave, and tells her
nostalgic stories of the days before the White Witch cast her
spell on Narnia. When Lucy says she must return home, the
faun begins to cry. With great shame, he admits that he is in
the employ of the White Witch and is expected to kidnap
Lucy. ??Mr. Tumnus can't go through with the abduction.
Lucy is the first human he has met and, he likes
her. So he backs out on his promise to the White Witch, and
surprisingly,
Lucy returns safely through the wardrobe. She tells her
brothers and sister about her adventure, but they find it hard
Chronological order
1. The Magician's Nephew
2. The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe to believe.
3. The Horse and His Boy
4. Prince Caspian
5. The Voyage of the Dawn Treader
6. The Silver Chair
7. The Last Battle
Lucy, the first one to enter in the Land is pure in her thoughts,
very innocent, pious, honest and very Sahaj in her actions.
Because of her qualities like Mooladhara Chakra, doors to
Narnia open to her.
Edmond & Wardrobe
Next, Edmund goes to Narnia and meets the White Witch, who attempts to bribe him with a sweet
called Turkish Delight. She tells him that she is Queen of Narnia, and childless, but would like to
adopt Edmund and make him her heir. She says he carn return home to persuade his sisters and
brother to come with him to Narnia, where they will become part of the royal family as well.
Before Edmund returns, he meets Lucy in Narnia. Lucy tells him the White Witch is evil, but Edmund
refuses to believe her and says the word of fauns can't be trusted. They go back through the wardrobe
together. But afterward Edmund pretends that Narnia does not existthat the whole story is a hoax.
Lucy is furious.
Edmond falls to magical temptations and
becomes blind. He is completely unaware
that he is deceived by the wicked, evil Witch
and this meeting has turned his faith blind.
He has no idea where he is led by evil magic.
He becomes the victim of greed and self-
indulgence, trapped in the void and maya-jal.
Back to Narnia
One day, the four children are exploring the
house when they bump into Mrs. Macready,
who is showing some visitors around. They
have been told to stay out of the way when
13
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 visitors are being shown around the house, and make a run for the wardrobe. Mrs. Macready is
showing the visitors around the wardrobe room and the four children manage to hide in the
wardrobe just in time to avoid being caught. They then notice light in the back of the wardrobe and
walk towards it to find themselves in a snowy wood. Peter realizes that they are in Narnia. Edmund
then tells them that they should be heading towards the lamp-post and Peter, realizing that Edmund
obviously knew of this place beforehand, is furious with him for trying to make out that Lucy was
telling lies.
Lucy takes them towards Mr. Tumnus's cave. But what has happened with Mr. Tumnus? He has
disappeared. The door to his cave has been wrenched off its hinges, crockery has been smashed,
snow is drifting inside. The children find a notice from the Captain of the Secret Police that Mr.
Tumnus has been arrested on a charge of high treason. He has been comforting Her Majesty's
enemies, the charge reads, and fraternizing with humans.
and
Mr. & Mrs. Beaver
Suddenly a robin appears and leads the children through the forest to a talking beaver. They decide to
trust him because Mr. Beaver turns out to know the whole story, and Tumnus has given him Lucy's
handkerchief. Mr. Beaver takes them to his home, where he and Mrs. Beaver offer warm hospitality.
They describe the danger of double-crossing the White Witch. The Beavers talk about"Aslan is on the
move". They explain about Aslan who is the central and most important character the Narnian stories,
the Lion, who is on the move, means he is coming to save the land
and his kingdom. A prophecy is revealed: The White Witch of
Narnia will be overthrown when four "sons of Adam and
daughters of Eve" are enthroned at the castle of Cair Paravel.
But after hearing the story, Edmund is still not convinced. He eats
his dinner and slips away in search of the White Witch and quietly
leaves the cave.
Yet there's a hint of better times ahead. The snow is beginning to
melt and Father Christmas arrives on his sledge, bringing gifts to
the children and the Beavers and signaling that the power of the
White Witch is fading and Aslan has come to restore Narnia.
The faun, the beavers that are portrayed as very gentle,
compassionate, generous characters in the story are like devotees
to the god. They are very loyal and faithful followers of the king,
Aslan and absolutely doubtless about the wisdom & prophecies
of the King. Also, they are very noble, hospitable and welcoming
towards guest, bestowing all comfort and securityEshowing
qualities of nabhi & heart chakra.
The Stone Table
As for Edmund, when he finds the witch, he also discovers her
real wickedness. She makes him her prisoner. The other children and the Beavers, encouraged by
C.S. Levis
14
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Father Christmas, set out for the Stone Table, where they hope to meet Aslan and somehow rescue
their brother Edmund. In the meantime, the Witch has also gone to the Stone Table with Edmund and
her other followers. There she plans to seize the other children and prevent them from taking their
thrones.
Welcome, Peter, Son of Adam," says Aslan, the lion at last in a deep, rich and reassuring voice
(amazing carrier of vishuddhi). "Welcome, Susan and Lucy, Daughters of Eve."
At the Stone Table, the White Witch prepares to kill Edmund, thinking that with his death the
prophecy can be derailed. Does the White Witch have a right to do so? Yes. The Emperor-beyond-the-
sea has decreed that the White Witch can seize traitors and slay them.
But Aslan intervenes. He who is innocent of wrong-doing will give his life for Edmund, who has
betrayed everything for greed. Aslan is put to death instead of Edmund, while the children look on.
Heis killed with the stone knife on the Stone Table.
Deeper Magic from the Dawn of Time
But then, the Stone Table cracks and Aslan rises from the dead. He has overcome the White Witch's
power. Aslan is fulfilling a deeper magic from the dawn of time.
What is this "Deeper Magic? a greater lawof the Table: "When a willing victim who had committed no
treachery was killed in a traitor's stead, the table would crack and Death itself would start working
backward." By suffering a horrible, agonizing death on the Stone Table, that Aslan sets Narnia and
Edmund free. With Aslan's sacrifice, the curse is broken and he is resurrected. This is very similar to
what Shri Jesus did for humankind by taking their sins, forgiving them, and setting them free. This
episode shows the most important qualities ofAgnya Chakra.
Now Aslan has the power to free and resurrect others who have fallen under the White Witch's spell.
She has turned many of her captives, including Mr. Tumnus, into stone. In a great battle led by Aslan,
the White Witch is defeated and dies. A great celebration occurs, and the four Pevensies become kings
and queens of Narnia.
The Hunting of the white stag
The Pevensies have ruled for many happy years in Narnia and they all but forgot their previous lives
before coming to the realm. One day, rumors spread that a white stag is on the loose in Narnia. If it is
captured, then it will give a wish to anyone who catches it. The kings and queens are out on horseback
one day when they spot it in the Wild Woods of the West. They eventually lose track of the stag and
dismount their horses. The monarchs then pass the lamp-post which they had seen on entering
Narnia many years before. They continue walking untilE
The four children then tell the professor all about their adventures in Narnia. He tells them that they
will not be able to get into Narnia through the wardrobe again, and this was proved correct. But it was
only the beginning of the adventures in Narnia.
In another tale, Aslan offers life-changing wisdom as the band of young adventurers sets off on a great
quest.
Continued on pg. 17
15
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Sahaja Destination: Mexico City, Mexico
Whenever humans have yearned for divine
Gulf of Mexico
intervention, the Goddess has taken form from the
MEXICO
formless to satisfy the yearning of Her children.
She came on earth time and again to relieve Her
devotees of the fears and challenges and Her
Mexico City
incarnation has blessed the land where She set Her itie
cific
foot. Mexico City, the capital of Mexico has long
cean
been blessed by a relatively recent appearance of
the Divine Feminine circa 1531
When a few yogis from USA were visiting Mexico City, hosted by their Yogini sisters and brothers
there, they learnt this amazing tale of the Virgin of Guadalupe who appeared to St. Juan Diego
Cuauhtlataotzin. Juan is believed to be a native of the land of South and Central America, belonging to
the Aztec tribe of Native Americans. One version of the story states that Juan was traveling to
church for his father's health who was bed-ridden and sick. As he was traveling to Tolpetlac, near
Mexico City, where the church was situated, the Virgin Mary appeared in Her complete splendor. She
pray at a
talked to Him in sweet words:
Know for certain, dearest of my sons, that I am the perfect and perpetual
Virgin Mary, Mother of the True God, through whom everything lives, the
Lord of all things, who is Master of Heaven and Earth. I ardently desire a
teocalli (temple) to be built for me where I will show and offer all my love, my
compassion, my help and my protection to the people. I am your merciful
Mother, the Mother of all who live united in this land, and of all mankind, of
all those who love me, of those who cry to me, of those who have confidence in
me. Here I will hear their weeping and their sorrows, and will remedy and
alleviated their sufferings, necessities and misfortunes. Therefore, in order
to realise my intentions, go to the house of the Bishop of Mexico City and tell
him that I sent you and that it is my desire to have a teocalli (temple) built
here. Tell him all that you have seen and heard. Be assured that I shall be very
grateful and will reward you for doing diligently what I have asked of you.
Now that you have heard my words, my son, go and do everything as best
you can."
Sure enough, when he recounted his vision to the authorities, no one would believe him and asked for
a sign. Worried sick about his father, he returned home to find him hale and hearty, full of life, better
than ever before. So Juan prayed once more, seeking a proof of Her appearance. He was asked to pluck
off roses as proof. Juan was collecting a special variety of Spanish roses grown only in Castile, Spain
16
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 and imported during the summer. He wrapped up the roses in the apron-like garment he was
wearing.
He went to the authorities and opened his apron surprising them. It was impossible to find these roses
during the winter season. Another miracle took place as the events were unfolding. The roses left
behind an imprint on the apron carrying them. This imprint has proven its divinity over time. It is
shown in the accompanying picture of the Virgin Mary.
Scientists have been baffled by the paint. They cannot duplicate the ink used to color the paining. If
they can come close to making the painting again with the same materials, the duplicates degrade and
destroy under natural circumstances. But Juan's apron has resisted centuries of dust and rough
handling till date. The apron has even survived a bomb-blast. While all other things nearby got
destroyed, the apron was not damaged. No one has been able to understand the mysterious magic
behind the image of the Goddess.
These were times when the Mexican history recounts wars and disturbance, with Spain's colonization
efforts as a major backdrop of events. The appearance of the Mother clearly indicates the suffering of
the people and their seeking a higher intervention to protect their lands which were being attacked
politically and otherwise. It would be interesting to see what were the detailed reasons, for which we
may have to make Mexico City our next destination.
Text taken from
www.wikipedia.org
http://www.sancta.org/nican.html
Continued from pg.15
"Here on the mountain I have spoken to you clearly: I will not often do so down in Narnia. Here on the
mountain, the air is clear and your mind is clear; as you drop down into Narnia, the air will thicken.
Take great care that it does not confuse your mind. And the signs which you have learned here will not
look at all as you expect them to look, when you meet them there. That is why it is so important to
know them by heart and pay no attention to appearances. Remember the signs and believe the signs.
Nothing else matters."
The heroic lion's words unleash the timeless truth in our own world as well. This, of course, is
precisely the intent of the books' author, C.S. Lewis.
The Chronicles of Narnia are filled with dreams and a longing desire to involve yourself in the
adventures. C. S. Lewis had an unique talent for writing. His books will be passed down for
generations to come, leaving all those who read the Narnia books with a smile on their faces and high
hopes that they to may one day arrive in Narnia and live a life full of beauty, adventure, love and
respectEand ultimate ascent!
The links you can visit:
www.narnia.com
17
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-19.txt 
 The Magic Triangle
ktodaib
dalhowini
In order to reach the innermost depth of our being, to taste the ocean of its joy, we have to dive deep.
Attachment and involvement in our daily life keeps us floating on the surface. We are tossed about by
events, challenges and problems that confront us every day. How does home spiritualis handle this
relationship with daily surroundings that can be so fraught with adversity?
We can find a response in the synergy between Antar yoga and Karma yoga brought about by the
Sahaja Yoga as taught by Shri Mataji. It manifests a capacity to face the outside dimension of life,
equipped with spiritual powers that are awakened by the practice of meditation. This creates 'win-
win' opportunities. This mechanism is shown with a drawing.deng
The triangle represents the field of our existence, the battlefield (Kurukshetra) of our daily life. This is
the field where we desire arnd act, where we perform and want to win at the game of life.
Pole A of the Triangle represents a twice born, having gone through the experience of Kundalini
awakening, yet still facing the regular challenges of the normal life of a householder. He still is in the
process of discovering or testing his spiritual powers and finding out how to apply them in the
surroundings.
Pole B of the Triangle represents the option, opened to homo spiritualis by Self-realization, to activate
through meditation. When the subject has mastered the art of meditation, the Kundalini
takes the consciousness into the state of thoughtless awareness (Nirvichara sammadhi). B is
thoughtless awareness; it is the inner dimension. This movement, however, is a process that may take
some time, depending on the condition of the liver. Abad liver generates mental agitation.
Antar
yoga
Pole Crepresents the solid dimension of everyday surroundings, with its rich variety of challenges. It
contains the shifting shapes ofour outside dimension. Our lives, the world over, are not that different.
Regular people face difficulties or ordeals that are largely similar, whatever the country or culture. We
face difficulties in our relationships: family, friendships, and clan. We may be under stress in
positioning ourselves within society: within profession, group assimilation and peer recognition.
Many of us are facing financial constraints. Moreover, later in life, we increasingly face difficulties in
the area of health. Indeed, the person for whom all these areas of life are free of problems would be
very lucky indeed. But most of us, even after realization, still confront such challenges. How do we
fare and how does spirituality help in daily life? Where is the magic?
The trend A towards C represents the fact that now I face a specific difficulty. Something is going
pulsion absorbs my
wrong; I cannot ignore it and I must find a solution to the problem. This com
attention, no natter where the problem lies, be it with relationships, money, job or health.
The trend C towards A expresses the effect that the outside world has on me. In fact, as far as my state
of being is concerned, I become reactive and the problem is having an impact on my consciousness.
Let us assume the problem is serious and I cannot solve it at once. I carınot, for example, pay back my
18
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 debts, or perhaps my boss is unfair to me, or my job is at risk. The succession of action and reaction in
my ego and superego is troubling my equilibrium as I try to sort out the problem. I am upset, and the
disturbing circumstances'in my outside world rob me of a condition of satisfaction in my inner world. I
am in a losing position, for on top of the outside problem, I now face an inner one: my peace of mind is
disturbed and my consciousness is unhappy. The movements A towards C and C towards A are the
stuff of everyday struggle forhomo sapiens.
The trend A towards B expresses the new consciousness response of homo spiritualis when faced with
exactly the same range of challenges. This is where the magic starts. The subject diverts his attention
from the problem, and wherever he is, he goes into meditation. Through entering thoughtless
awareness, the subject regains his inner composure and peace of mind. This is the first win. Although
the outside problem still exists, the problem no longer exerts a disturbing impact on his consciousness,
Thoughtless awareness pushes the disturbance out of his mind, and the subject is cool and unstressed.
The trend B towards C is a little hard to explain, for this is where the full magic unfolds. As
consciousness reaches B, I get connected to the inner powers of the spirit. These powers are acting on
my outside environment, instead of the outside environment acting on me. Information on my
problem is passed to the primordial computer of the Virata.
my
The connection through the Sahasrara is wiring me into the greater power of the Paramchaitanya, the
force of God that controls all the causalities of history. This, in turn, acts on the outside according to its
own logic. It often happens that suddenly, the problem is solved, without my doing anything about it.
One finds a new source of income to pay one's debts, or a difficult boss is suddenly transferred
elsewhere. B towards C is not automatic, nor does it conform always to expectations. Sometimes it
works, sometimes it does not and in any case, it works only after the consciousness has reached B. One
cannot achieve the second win without the first one.
Source: The Third Advent, Gregoire de Kalbermatten
в
B to C Second win
A to B first win
C to A
C Daily life challenge or problem
Relashionship-Mony-Health
A'
A to C
19
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 There should be, all the time, compelling desire
that we have to find out methods by which
we can spread Sahaja Yoga
H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
