The Divine Cool Breeze 1Vin 00 Nov.-Dec. 2005

 VISHWA NIKMALA. VIVERSAL PURE RELIGIO In This Issue:- 1. SHRI KRISHNA PUJA 2. HER HOLINESS SHRI MATAJI'S ADVICE 11 15 3. MAHASAHASRARADAY 4. SHRI MATAJI'S ADVICE 19 22 5. ALPHA AND OMEGA 6. FROM DELHI 25 28 7. SAHAJA YOGA & PHYSICAL CURE-II 8. SHRI MATAJI'SAUSTRALIATOUR-1983 31 9. BALANCING THE INTERNAL & EXTERNAL GROWTH 38 10. CHRIST IN KASHMIR 41 11. LETTER FROM AN ENGLISH SAHAGA YOGI 43 12. PARIS - IT'S DONE 46 DHARMA

 C o OL BRE E ZE DIVINE OL B RE E Z E THE Published by Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. Infosys House, Plot No. 8, Chandragupt Housing Society, Paud Road,Kothrud, Pune-411 029 Printed at Partha Sarthi Press WHS 2/50, Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi - 15 Ph.: 25268673 TE Please Send Your Suggestions and Subscription to:- Shri GL. Aggarwal Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 222, Desh Bandhu Apartments Kalkaji, New Dehi-110019 Tel. No.:011-26216654 And Your Sahaja Experiences, Articles, Miracle Photographs etc. to: Shri O.P. Chandna G-11-(463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110034 Mobile No. 9818124803

 SHRI KRISHNA PUJA GENEVA - AUG 28, 1983 PRAVACHAN OF HER HOLINESS MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI Krishna. He's called as "Khrist" in Indian Today we are celebrating here in this holy land the birthday of Shri Krishna. Shri Languages, Khrist. And I have told you Krishna is the ultimate of the fatherhood, before why he was called as "Yeshu" or that I described before you, who came on "Jesu". So today we are going to see to the two aspects of Shri Krishna, which were this Earth and illustrated the ultimate of that. So on this Earth, the highest the manifestation of His divine birth. fatherhood is Shri Krishna's awareness. But in the Kingdom of God, we can say in In Rama's life they showed a man; Heavens, or even above everything else, man, a "Purushottama", the best of the resides Sadashiva who does not take father in wordly affairs. And in Shri incarnations. He is one of the aspects, Shri Krishna's life they showed Him the highest Krishna is one of the aspect of Sadashiva fatherhood as in Yogeshwara or in divine which is the Father. And the Adi Shakti or work. So the first aspect of Shri Krishna the Holy Ghost is the other aspect of we have to understand is the Yogeshwara Sadashiva which is His power. So when and the second aspect of him as the Virata. Shri Krishna incarnated on this Earth, an aspect of this Adi Shakti came on this earth Yogeshwara means the Lord of the as Radha. She is the same who came as Yoga, or the power of Yoga. He is called the Mother of Chirst, and She gave the because He reached the optimum that one name of Christ as the surname of Shri has to reach as a Yogi. As if He is the Krishna, as if it is Krishna's name, from ideal you have to reach. Now as a yogi,

 Nov. - Dec., 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze driver. He was born of a royal family but He lived in the jungles in the forest, with the cows, with ordinary people. He used to sleep The another great quality of on the ordinary places like sometimes on Yogeshwara was complete discretion the stones, on the grass, when he would power built-in. So He knew who was a devil go with His cows for their feeding. He was and who was not, who is good who is bad, very aware, very very aware, absolutely who is possessed who is not possessed, aware of His powers, without any ego. He who is innocent who is not. This was built had a special power called "Samhara in within Him, this power of complete Shakti" by which He could destroy all those discrimination. people who tried to harm the divine manifestation. And He had a capacity more expressing His witnesshood, as a This "Samhara Shakti" is expressed Sakshi'. He had the capacity, I mean He as the Chakra (Sudarshan) in His hand. was a Sakshi Himself I should say this way And another is the "Gada" (Mace) in His is easier to understand. He was a Sakshi, hand. These two powers were within Him, He had the capacity of witnessing the and He acted according to the power of whole world as a play. At the time of Rama, Radha, because She is the one who Rama was one who got involved into his sustained the power of Shri Krishna. The problems, to show as if he is a full human proof of that is this that when He was in being so that human beings should not say Gokul with Radha He did all His 'Samhara that he was God, so how could we accept work. And afterwards He just became a God because 'He was God after all? Now driver for Arjuna. So for His this capacity in Him to witness has to be chariot - disciple Arjuna, He became even a chariot seen in every yogi. The element He

 The Divine Cool Breeze Nov. - Dec. 2005 controls is ether. We cal it "Akasha" in super-ego you should see it as a play, you Sanskrit. This ether now as you know, we should see the play of the negativity. are using for our television, for our radio, Negativity will run away, but don't get for every sort of a collective work. So we- involved into it, don't play into their hands. Then the negativity will separate from you. have to be incharge of the ether element as yogis. And that is the subtlest of all, in the sense that you permeate everything So the ego and the super-ego both with that, and is above all. Like plastic rise from the Vishuddhi chakra. They can also permeates into everything, into be receded by the Agnaya chakra but have matter, into everything up to the air. But it to be sucked into the Vishuddhi. cannot enter into ether. So the negativity cannot enter into ether. So when you The greatest quality of Yogeshwara enter into your ethereal zone, you is that He is not at all involved into it, actually enter into the area which is detached, absolutely. If He eats His food, thoughtless awareness. So to achieve He does not eat it. If He speaks, He does your ethereal state, you have to not speak. If sees, He does not see. If He expand your thoughtless awareness. hears, He does not hear. It has no effect And the sustenance of that is done by on Him, no retention on Him, no action on Christ, by the spirit. So you can realise Him. Whatever He is, He is complete : now as a yogi, your state of mind sixteen petals is complete moon, sixteenth should be ethereal. day of the moon is the Purnima. That is how one has to be, complete in one self, And what should be the state of your complete confidence in oneself. But super-ego? This is the ego part of it, that confidence should not be confused with you should be in ethereal state. And as a

 The Divine Cool Breeze 7. Nov. Dec., 2005 ego. Confidence is complete wisdom, it's within us. We have to know all the qualities of a divine brain are within. So whatever It is complete love, complete dharma. complete beauty, and is complete God. we do with our brain like intrigue, the deception, all which are bad things by your That's what it should be. brain as they call it, are done by Him for the divine purpose without getting any Now when He said that "you give up blemish upon himself. And the other side all your dharmas and surrender to Me." In Gita, what he was meaning is that all other · of it, so called positive, like politics like diplomacy, or like leadership, all that is His things about which you are worried "You own doing. Like even the thinking of the give up and become one with me, so I look future and all that. He does planning, after you". Give up the responsibility to thinking all those things, administration, as Shri Krishna, so the complete integrated a play. Everything is done as a play, Divinity will start expressing through you. because He's the Master, as we call, a Means if you say that you have to be "sutradhara", the one who does the responsible, then He says alright, go prologue in a drama, the one who plays ahead, try! But if you say that "You are with the strings with the pantomimes. responsible, I'm just an institution or an instrument in Your hand", then you start manifesting it well. And that is how your Now the other thing that we have to Vishuddhi chakra gets opened up. understand Shri Krishna at this stage of Sahaja Yoga, that it is the Virata Shakti that is manifesting at this time and not the This is some part of the Yogeshwara Shri Krishna Shakti which was at His time. I have spoken to you. But as He is the And the power that is working here is no brain within us, He becomes the brain more that of Radha or of Mary, but of

 Nov Dec 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze power is used for the construction. As if it Viratangana. That's why the knowledge of Sahaja-yogis is much wider than the is tricked. knowledge of all the saints of ages. But it is not deeper than them. If you can deepen Like now I told them a trick, how to your knowledge, this wider knowledge will trick these gurus. The power that they have have proper roots within you. So the brains can be tricked against them, as is said that are the roots, here are the roots of the theinteeth must be put into their necks, into whole tree of life. Actually Kundalini comes their throats. Instead of taking out their up and waters the brain first, so that the teeth better put them back into their whole tree of life is drenched in the Divine throats, And if you can do that, then there Bliss and Divine Knowledge. is no problem as far as their effect on us is concerned, because you are more So this Virata Shakti that we have powerful and more tricky. to work out, gives us the sense of collective consciousness first. First we Because the Virata Shakti has now understand it through our brain power. But taken that form, like the tree when it grows, the whole brain power is to be guided by it grows upward. But when it is laden with the Heart, is to be watered; but in Sanskrit fruit it comes down. First it is attractive by is a very beautiful word "sinchan", like its flowers, by its timber, by the other parts dewdrops, spray, with the Love of God. of its body. And people try to destroy it for So the integration of this brain has to take it. But when the fruit appear, they want to with Heart and with your liver. Then only preserve it, and the tree bends down, with the Virata-Shakti takes another form. The humility, is very valuable. weapons of killing become the weapons of forgiveness. Every sort of destructive

 Nov. - Dec., 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze So you That fruits. the is to bend down towards the Mother Earth. are Viratangana Shakti, you are the fruits. To be humble. Absolutely the humility inside is really going to give you the complete Because you are so valuable that those people who wanted to ruin or to destroy value of Sahaja-yoga fruits. the Divine power from this Earth will start thinking that they have to gain something Those Sahaja-yogis who boast out of these fruits. So today the Virata about themselves are like the fruit which Shakti .has given you a great value, are getting ruined only on the tree. The only because people see that by having one fruits that bend down are accepted as Sahaja-yogi with them it is so precious. good and matured fruits, and not those who ordinary his gets Say man assert that they are the highest. But some one Realization, then he develops his value. In of the negative people should not by any that his own value he can be respected, chance take advantage of this and say that loved and he can be given the highest if they are good because they are bending he's a proper Sahaja-yogi. down. It's not the logic. Some of them pose they are humble; even a rotten fruit bends So you should understand today that down. But the mature fruit shows its humility by its weight. That is the guru tatwa weight. Virata-Shakti is "we are going to worship that Virata Shakti which has given fruits". As a result of that, all these different So from the Viratangana power you churches, fanaticism and atheism and get the power of maturity up to the fruit and communism and all that-ism, all these will then we become blessed by Guru neutralize because they will see their Principle. Those who are still involved in benefit in it. But you have to become that. getting to better sunshine or getting to That is the biggest thing one has to know

 Nov. - Dec, 2005 10 The Divine Cool Bretze in English language, but it means a "sweet better water supply or all these things, are not yet matured, because the fruit doesn't power". Like the fruit becomes sweet. That's how you all have to become very need anything anymore. It doesn't need sweet. Krishna tried to make everything anything from the Mother Earth, nor from the elements. But is surrenders, bends, it very sweet in the sense it was all a Madhurya Shakti that was acting, all His bows to the Mother Earth. play, all His dancing, all His stories if you So the Sahaja-yogi who goes on read, is nothing but Madhurya Shakti, towards Gopas and Gopis, towards other asking questions to Mother, bringing personal problems, stupid ideas, Sahaja-yogis. negatively, all those people are still not So you have to keep you Mother yet the fruits. But the matured people are those pleased by pleasing other Sahaja- yogis, and not other people. They are who surrender, who bow to the Mother not important. So today we are going to Earth. So the capacity to bow is the shorten the Puja, and that's why it took so best judgment of yourself. And leaving much time upstairs, to shorten it! So the everything to the power of gravity of your Mother to do every work for you, time lost is time gained for ever and ever. May God bless you. And leaving all your small little worries behind, you have to rise above these distracting powers and achieve the Bolo Shri Radha Krishna sakshat, Shri completion of this Virata-Shakti which Virata sakshat, Shri Yogeshwara ultimately becomes a "Madhurya sakshat, Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Shakti". "Madhurya", there is no word Nirmala Devi ki Jai

 HER HOLINESS SHRI MATAJI'S ADVICE take a house. You must see that the Being a living force we should try to 1. house is giving good vibrations. We find out "Are we going to be the living see the comfort, we see other things. force or the dead one." Now, when We might even see if it is good for we live in the world, we start thinking other people to come in or not but we about our comforts; where we have do not see the house fromn vibrations to live, what, we have to do. When point of view. For anything that we do, we think of all these, you see, we are we have, now, to think in terms of thinking of the dead. But when we vibrations awareness which means think of havinga place or a house or awareness that is working upon living an ashram, from the angle that you things. will be doing some living work, then you are giving life to that place. That Once you are realised, you have got atmosphere should be created from that living force within you. This is the all that is dead- to create the living living force you feel. So, you have to force. know how to use this living force to keep your body, mind, ego, super Now, this is very subtle thing, which ego, and everything in the enlightened very few people understand; for state, by understanding the planning example, somebody brings me a of the living force. photograph of Shri Ganesha and says, 'Should I worship this Shri On the left side the problem starts Ganesha's photograph or not? First from left Swadisthan, because that is of all we should see if vibrations are the first chakra that starts emitting the coming from it or not. Supposing you 2.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Nov - Dec., 2005 12 negativity within us. Now, left sub-conscious. Swadisthan is actually under the Then it moves higher to the left Nabhi control only of Shri Ganesha because and at left Nabhi we start becoming Shri Ganesha is the beginning of life crazy about these dead things. Time and also the link between the life and is a dead thing. It is not a living thing. the death. So, Shri Ganesha is one It has nothing to do with living thing. who gives the balance, the Vivek' the 3. By seeing to the needs of the Spirit understanding to you by which you can overcome the left side. You know how far to go with things. But start looking after your Spirit from this left sided thing can also come which, you know, that you get your from own desire for wrong things, we vibrations. If your spirit is happy, you might be desiring something very get your vibrations, if it is unhappy you wrong, some dead thing (a dead is do not get vibrations. that which cannot move by itself so, the 'self' part does not remain in it). People should overcome their left side by putting their attention away The best way to look at all dead from the dead things. You should things is not to go too far with them. watch from the centre when you are If you have, well and good. If you do on the left side. You do not see what not have well and good. You can live with minimum of minimum or you can you want to see. live with maximum of maximum. But 4. In Sahaja Yoga some things are when we start expanding our dead prohibited that nobody should touch possessions, it is very much bad. any body's feet and no Sahaja Yogi Then our attention goes into the dead. should allow anyone to touch his or That is how we move into our sub- her feet. This is one of the great conscious, then over to collective

 Nov. - Dec., 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze 13 bandhans for all Sahaja Yogis. No good for nothing. Now raise your right side and put down the left. Now why one should touch other's feet and no do we do this? Because from your body should ask other to touch his or her feet whatever may be your quality. right side you get the grace and put down the left side. Such people who Those who will touch will loose suffer from the left side should try this vibrations and those who will get one. The thing is that when these salutation will also catch on the Heart. ideas come to you, that you are good We all are growing together. We are for nothing etc., it is better to beat part and parcel of one personality. yourself (your name) with shoes. Go Nobody is higher or lower. One who and sing the praise of the lord and say thinks even the slightest, like this will I am so happy, I have got every thing go down faster. This is the left side around me. conditioning where people falter very In the right side, mostly you catch on much. So you must have very wide 6. 'Swadisthan'. This is because you desires in Sahaja Yoga, that all of us think. This is another kind of thinking must help get realisation say as many that gives you catch at right as possible. We should try to save Swadisthan. Thinking whether it as many people as possible. We comes from right or left will first give should try to improve ourselves as far problem to your liver. The worst as we can improve and have so comes when both the sides are many blessings. involved. Thoughts can come to you from the 5. So one must understand that, in left side also, like if you have some Sahaja Yoga, you are developing that bhoots in your head they can give you sharp edge, that central point from the thoughts 'Oh you are useless and

 Nov. - Dec. 2005 14 The Divine Cool Breeze choose. This is growth. Then you which you do not deviate to the right don't ask Mother. You do not ask any or the left and to balance it you have to watch yourselves carefully. If going one. to the right, come to the left, if going This development should come to to the left come to right. Now come you, that what I do, I should know what to the centre, you just separate I am doing. I should know what is You detach yourself all the yourself. correct. I should know how to correct time. Use this point just to see and t.I should know. . I' here, is the Spirit i guide yourself. Guidance is very and not the Ego. No more ego exists different from getting lost. Living force or super ego exists. It is the Spirit knows how to guide itself. In the same which guides you. way you will learn to guide yourself, if The God is the enjoyer. You can enjoy 9. you have learnt, if you have mastered God and it is the greatest enjoyment Sahaja Yoga. to feel what God has created for you. If the Heart is catching, such people 7. What a beautiful life he has given you can never progress. The Heart is the in human awareness, by which you source of light; it is the source of can know how much He has loved Brahma Shakti. Heart is the seat of you, how much he has worked for you. Atma. If in the Heart there is no living- He has brought you to this level. What force, then how can you progress? he has given you, you can give to You must know what to choose. This others and make others happy. If you 8. is what Sahaja Yoga should make out think like that immediately both of of you. You should grow mature to your sides will be settled and you that point where you know what to yourself will be filled with Divine Vibrations.

 MAHA SAHASRARA DAY Gorai Creek (A REPORT) In the presence of Our Divine Mother, Shri progress - the physical journey reflecting Mahalakshmi, Sahaja Yogis from the journeys of the seeker from his Bombay, Pune, Rahuri, Dhulia and Delhi struggles through the Maya until that together with representatives from the precious moment when he attained his Kundalini Awakening and felt the Joy of the Mooladhara and the Heart of the Universe, gathered together on 5th May to celebrate Spirit. Maha Sahasrara Day. We left central Bombay by train early It was on 5th May, 1970, at Nargol, in the morning and experienced - some Maharashtra - the Kundalini of the for the first time- the rush hour of a crowded universe - that the Adi Shakti, Shri Mataji Indian metropolis. This seemed to Nirmala Devi, opened the Sahasrara of epitomize in many ways the franticness the Virata and offered to human kind the and confusion of Kali Yuga. Having arrived gift of spontaneous Self Realisation. And, at Borivali station, we disembarked and with this blessing of our Holy Mother to all boarded a local bus for the ferry wharf., true seekers, the blossom time of human This was a more relaxed and settled awareness had arrived when we could all section of the journey - and indicative, become fruits on the tree of life, children perhaps, of that level of human life where in the Kingdom of God. one has settled into a comfortable and This year the Sahasrara Day Puia complacent existence and is content with the status qo that "comfort of the body" was performed at Gorai Creek, a fishing with which affluent Westerners are so hamlet on an island located 30 KM or so familiar. North West of Bombay. The journey to the Puja site seemed a sort of pilgrim's The jetty was soon reached and

 The Divine Cool Breeze Nov. - Dec 2DOS 16 A short, pleasant walk led through the eager Sahaja Yogis crowded into the village - a Christian settlement pervaded small weather beaten ferry which was to carry us over to the island. The coast and by the briny odour of drying fish - down to the sea. On the beach, a stream of Sahaja landward side of the island were fringed by thick mangroves and swamps past Yogis - true "fishers of men" - moved. which the boat safely sailed. So, too, much towards the coconut grove and cottage the pilgrim, the seeker, when in sight of where Shri Mataji's Puja was to be held. his goal avoid the bogs and tangled roots What a beautiful spot Mother Earth of his conditioning and intellectualizing that had given us for this special festival of grow to the left and right. Sahasrara Day. The coconut trees, laden An excited and happy group of Shri with many fruit, all leaned towards the ocean and towards the prevailing winds. Mother's family alighted on the island, and Their fronds almost touched overhead to their delight found they were to catch shielding Shri Mother's expectant children "tongas" - colourful horse drawn from the heat of Lord Surya. carriages-to the Puja site. A long, straight road led across grassy undulating land to the seaward side of the island, where the And it was like children, that many Sahaja fishing settlement was situated. It may Yogis greeted Grandfather Ocean- the the seem amazing but even representative of Dharma - as they lightheartedness of this ride, the enjoyed His warm water washing over straightness and smoothness of the road. them. seemed an earthly parallel to that crossing Our Divine Mother arrived towards of the Ocean of illusion, the Bhava Sagara, Her disciples and midday eager by Mother Kundalini, a crossing which has welcomed her. She seated Herself under brought us to the realm of renewed hope, the silk-fringed umbrella and accepted a peace and joy.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Nov. - Dec., 2005 17 coconut full of refreshing milk. The and from the cornucopia of Her Love and Bombay Sahaja Yogis presented Her with Generosity, She gave beautiful opal rings a pair of silver chappals embossed with to several Sahaja Yogis. Children came auspicious signs in gold - a Sahasrara forward to wash Our Holy Mother's Feet3; Lotus, the Shesha, Sun, Moon, Swastika, curd, milk, butter, honey and sugar was Cross, Bandhan and Lotuses representing applied and Shri Mataji's Lotus Feet and Hands painied with Kumkum. The Queen the chakras. Shri Mother graciously wore of all the Prophets, Devas and Saints was these chappals and, after some moments of deep silence, She commenced Her crowned and adorned with necklaces, wonderful Sahasrara Day Talk (translation garlands, girdle, and fragrant floral to be printed soon) and invoked the armbands. Aarti was sung and the Devi, blessings of the Deities and God almighty with the most radiani and sweet smile upon all Sahaja Yogis. The significance invited Her Devotees to obtain yet more of the coconut grove and the blessings at Her Lotus Feet. auspiciousness of the coconut fruit was Dusk was approaching and many explained to us. (One begins to realise Sahaja Yoçis had left for ihe journey home how everywhere Mother Earth speaks to when Shri Mother appeared, dressed in a us the message of the Divine, humming simple white cotton sari with red designs. with various but harmonious melodies, the She walked sedately and solemnly hymn of creation.) towards the sea. Following Her were After lunch and a rest Shri Mother's Sahaja Yogis carrying garlands and coconuts from the Puja which they gave to Puja commenced. Grandfather Ocean. Shri Mahalakshmi, dressed in a Shri Mother stopped some distance deep red sari with a blue border and embossed gold motifs, was seated regally from the retreating tide She bent down under the coconut palms heavy with fruit, and began to create a Ganesh in the sand

 18 Nov. - Dec 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze and then ornamented it with flowers and to Her. Spontaneously, many took turns to kneel in front of Shri Mother to wash and kumkum. She moved a few paces forward and then stood quite still, with an intent adorn Her Feet. At these moments yet more miracles occurred, for whenever a expression, and looked out to the sea and devotee touched Shri Mataji's Lotus Feet, the sunset-reddened horizon. Great power and majesty emanated from Her. To some Grandfather ocean responded by sending wavelets to wash over them. present, it felt as though the Adi Shakti was ushering out forever the dying embers of The time of Our Blessed Mother's Kali Yuga and invoking the ocean, departure arrived. We, who had been so Dharma, to assert itself. The image of Shri privileged and fortunate to witness this sea Ganesh lay in the sand, a symbol of the ceremony, wandered homewards down the advent of the age of truth, innocence and lane lit only by starlight. Acar drove by and wisdom. She Mataji called upon the sea a beloved voice called out : to wash over us all. We chanted the "Why are you walking? There's a truck mantra to "Samudra Devata"- the God of waiting for you." Despite the fact all public l the Ocean-asking His blessings. Several transport had ceased at sunset, Our Great Sahaja Yogis saw the wave coming Mother, Maha Mata, ever nurturing Her inward to the shore and leaving steps in children and caring for our welfare, had the sand as they retreated. Then the sea attended to the smallest and most came rushing up Shri Mother, flowed past everyone present and encircled the mundane detail: Our trarsportation home. Ganesha. The Evening Star, Venus-The BOLO SHRI MAHALAKSHMI SHRI Devi's own sign - was seen high in the JAGAN-MATA SHRI NIRMALA DEVI KI JAI twilight sky directly opposite the Devi, Our Most Beneficent Mother. At this auspicious BEOUGHONIA moment a basket of marigold was brought

 Her Holiness Shri Mataji's ADVICE Steady your attention by keeping 1. I want you to resolve that you all wilI become absolutely 'Dharmik', It is hard your attention on the Mother earth. Thus to be a 'Dharmik'. The Society and you get the loving 'Bandhan' of your environment force you to be Adharmic. Grandmother and you become free of You are born in innocence and later you enslavement to your lust. go on compromising and accepting 2. Divinity is not a fashion. It is the way of Adharmic patterns as normal. life. If is the need of your being. You have to become THAT. Fora Sahaja Yogi, it is difficult to be Adharmic. If he tries to do a wrong thing, he is corrected by the vibrations, But if 3. You have to know that truth is not going to fall at your feet. You have to you go on killing your awakened fall at the feet of truth, if you want to conscience, you are free to do so and kill achieve it. all your chances of ascent. 4. In 'Sahaja Yoga' when one is realised, In Sahaja Yoga you have to forget the one starts seeking one's own faults. Man is so much identified with himself that he does not want to know his faults, and when he knows them he wants to run away. But past as you have been bathed with Divine love, like a newly born baby. Purity of Heart expressed as fidelity in marriage for both husband and wife is the most enjoyable it is better that, instead of carrying the virtue and is the most powerful. When you burden of your faults from life to life, you understand the purity of relationship, you know them and correct them. enjoy them the most.

 Nov, - Dec 20 The Divine Cool Breeze 2005 There is nothing in it to be scared of. If awakened Your ego cools down by just seeing, as the seeing is illuminating, In that you make yourself a little steady you will understand how powerful is the Shakti light you witness the play of your ego and laugh at it. As you start seeing yourself which not only brings into light the faults your ego starts getting deflated and as ego within you but also completely removes is deflated you rise in your light. them. 5. Karmas are done by your ego. You must 6. Man's intellect comes up with many have observed that after coming to Sahaja doubts. The first doubt that comes, which Yoga, you can very clearly see your ego is very common, is "Who is Mataji?" I want (Ahankar) and the way it works. In Sahaja to tell you that you cannot understand Me Yoga also you come across many so long as the eye of your Spirit is not temptations and in that, when your ego opened and you should not even make dominates, you forget whether you have efforts to understand. First you open the to go to Sahaja Yoga or Sahaja Yoga is to eye of your Spirit. come to you. Many people when they succumb to their ego, turn their backs to Sahaja Yoga, expecting Sahaja Yoga to 7. Once you get the realisation, the follow them. "Chiranjivas' surrender to you. They are watching you. You are their responsibility. All the deities are awakened in you. If you So long as your ego is enveloping do anything against the deities, you, you cannot have the glimpse of your immediately they will harm you. If a person Spirit. But it is useless to fight with your who has got realisation, goes to a place ego. In Sahaja Yoga you do not have to which is not to be seen or which is not to fight with your ego but you have just to see, be felt or which is not a good place, or to a because your attention itself gets

 will become like any other ordinary person. fake Guru, immediately he will feel heated up. If he does not run away and if he still Nirmal Yoga. goes on, he will lose his vibrations and he (1983)

 Alpha and Omega Here is a poem which hopefully head a crown of twelve stars. And She explains two passages in the book of being with child cried, travailing in birth and pained to be delivered. Revelations, which is the last book of the New Testament of the Bible. The And there appeared another wonder Revelations is a book considered very a red dragon, in heaven; and behold obscure and difficult to understand and is having seven heads and ten horns and a prophetic work dealing with the coming seven crowns upon his heads. And his tail of the New Jerusalem. John of Patmos, drew the third part of the stars of heaven who wrote the book, was somewhat supra- and did cast them upon the earth: and conscious and therefore not to be taken the dragon stood before the woman which töo literally, although much is very true and relevant to the present time. First the was ready to be delivered for to devour Her child as soon as it was born. passages from Revelations, and then the poem, the first part of which is intended And She brought forth a man child for groping western seekers rather than who was to rule all nations with a rod of Sahaja Yogis. iron: and her child was caught up unto God and to His throne. And the woman fled into "I am Alpha and Omega, the the wilderness, where She had a place beginning and the ending,' saith the Lord, prepared of God that should feed Her "which is, and which was, and which is to there..." Chap. 12, Verses 1-6. come, the Almighty." (Chap. I, verse 8). "The woman' is of course Shri Mataji, "And there appeared a great wonder the dragon' the negativity in the form of in heaven; a woman clothed in the sun, and the false gurus, and 'the rod of iron' must the moon under Her feet, and upon Her

 Nov. - Dec., 2005 23 The Divine Cool Breeze refer to the Kundalini, which is also So we persist in the delusion - creation must be a chance event! described in this manner in the beautiful Let us make the great experiment, the 23rd Psalm. This is the Poem: experiment of the soul: In the book of Revelations very little is Let us surrender our mental wanderings in the search for the goal, revealed, From the furtive intellectual are the Let us abandon our aggression and our answers well concealed. passion to control. We have endeavoured to use our minds Perhaps if we stop asking questions we to make matter our slave may hope to crack the code, Maybe the desire for inner wisdom will lead And have pursued material happiness from us on the road. the cradle to the grave. But when all is said and done what paths What are the cogent questions of the great to heaven did it pave? quest for life? Who are the real protagonists that lead This road of disaster leads surely to the atomic bomb, men ever on to strife? How can we find the answer if we don't So some foolhard youngsters explored know where to start? other paths (equally wrong), The path of inner blasting via fake gurus, How join in the cosmic drama if we don't know our own part? drugs and violent song. We've tried to categorize the universe with laws of Probability and Chance Denying the possibility of an ordered, eternal dance. Where is the One who is Alpha and We dare not face the Dancers; our great Omega? egos are to bent, Where is the One who will call it the day?

 Nov. - Dec 2005 24 The Divine Cool Breeze Then Her Spirit will fill us as sound fills a Did the seers of old merely write stirring flute. stories? No. They foresaw through the tunnel of time Then we'll dance for the Dancers, the Lords of Creation, where the war is. And we'll bow to Our maker in wonder and This war's raging within us; the prize mankind's soul, love.. But first we must seek Her, concealed in Because man is a mirror, microcosm of our wilderness, God. The dragons and devils are here now, Not argue and question what comes from above. among us, When in silent humility we'll admit we're All doing their best to appear - Oh, so just human, good! Bombardments of evil sport disguises of Then she'll come as a human bringing heaven on earth. freedom, Self-destruction's allowed, nothing's She'll show us our Spirit and make us barred from us now. divine, And Her son will through man have His own But the Woman is here, with the Stars in Her crown, second birth. And we are Her man-child, if we Om twamewa Sakshat Shri Kalki, Sakshat understand how. She is here to effect a transmuting of Shri Adi Shakti, Sakshat Shri Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi, consciousness: Namo Namah. If She doesn't, there'll soon be naught left Twamekam Sharanyam gacchami. to transmute. When She gives the great secrets, quite Nirmala Yoga. freely, in earnestness,

 FROM DELHI 15 APRIL, 1983 ittle children of Adi Shakti, your own loving It has been raining vibrated water dear brothers and sisters. How we came and vibrations these last few days in Delhi. The weathermen may call it un-seasonal, to deserve such a wonderful blessing amazes us! Truly the compassion of Shri but we say such showers are always timely because Delhi is always in need of a Mataji is beyond words or imagination! thorough 'washing'. During those beautiful days, Shri Hanuman must have been kept very busy We Sahaja Yogis know how much strengthening the roots of Sahaja Yoga attention Shri Mataji has been giving to Delhi. Like every year we had Mother's within the homes. And what better programmes almost every day for about instruments could He have had than Sahaja Yogis - who had for a full month two weeks. Her blessings are just proving. been with Shri Adi Shakti in Maharashtra (the great land) and had come overflowing This year was more unique for HER with vibrations to Delhi. children in Delhi. SHE blessed them with the chance to meet so many saints, our The result of having so much love from dear brothers and sisters from distant lands and learn from them more about Shri Mataji flowing through our dearest brothers and sisters was really miraculous dedication, surrender, sincerity and in certain homes and in all cases without collectivity. What more could have been exception, our sincerity as seekers and asked for? We actually had them to stay Sahaja Yogis increased appreciably. with us for a whole week! It must really be a great fortune to have in your home brave

 Nov. - Dec. 2005 The Divine Ccol Breeze 26 The public programmes were not to felicitate HER was Sahaja Yogi, as dignified and humble as Dr. Nagendra very well attended in that no huge throngs Singh, who delivered his address in the of seekers came. But our ever-loving form of Stuti (Praise) of his Sadguru and Mother gifted to us many more brothers and sisters who are settling in Sahaja Divine Mother. At this function of joy, who Yoga, this year than any of the preceding ever spoke, spoke beautifully. And we years. For Delhi Sahaja Yogis it just has witnessed the creation of a new Raga in been coming -flowing, flowing, flowing, Indian Classical Music created by a Sahaja Yogi and dędicated to SHRI ADIMA ever increasing, without efforts on their SHRI SARASWATI SHRI MATAJI named part. the raga, SWANANDESHRI (divine joy of As if to show to us that Divine grace Self). And it did produce within us the is infinite and never does it stop flowing SWANAND- it was really joyful to see to those in need Shri Parmananda Mother creating Divine music, vibrations Pradayini Shri Moksha Pradayini Mataji from HER instrument, Debu Chaudhary, as came again to Delhi. On 28h March, Shri so many of us had earlier seen at a public Mataji blessed Delhi by giving us a programme seven weeks before! heavenly chance to felicitate HER on HER We had a very great surprise when 60h Birth Anniversary. we learnt of Puja to be held the next day The celebrations were unique and which was Holi, the festival of colours. At extremely beautiful & joyful to say the least. the Puja. SHRI RADHA SHRI MATAJI did In fact any celebration would be, if the away with all the seriousness of Puja, much person" to be honoured is "SHRI like as she told us, Shri Krishana had done MAHAMAYA SHRI ADI SHAKTI MATAJI centuries ago. Thereafter we experienced and relived the Holi that Shri Radha and SHRI NIRMALA DEVI. The Chief Guest

 Nov. - Dec., 2005 27 The Divine Cool Breeze Our mother is so Gracious, so Shri Krishna used to play it because the Benevolent; She has really spared no festival of great joy that it was made to be. efforts to establish Sahaja Yoga in Delhi, which is still a weak Centre, which just Sahaja Yogis danced and laughed means it offers the greatest promise; so much is to come, so much more is waiting and in the traditional way hugged and put colours on each other. Some sang to be realised, to be uncovered. Bhajans in praise of Shri Krishna as Shri So all of us, all the different parts of Radha sprinkled colours at HER Mother Earth join together (with JAI SHRI CHILDREN paying obeisance at HER lotus feet - and that gave more joy and MAHA MAYA on our lips) and pray, we clapped and sang and danced to Shri "Dearest Mother, may Delhi become a Krishna's tune with joy, with bliss pouring stepping stone firm enough and strong and showering on us. enough to sustain and assist in the final flying leaf of Sahaja Yoga". JAI MATAJI. PARAM PUJYASHRI SARWASWARUPINI JAI SHRI RADHA, JAI SHRI KRISHNA, SHRI ADI SHAKTI MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA JAI JAI JAI SHRI MATAJI. DEVI, we bow at your lotus feet. (NIRMALA YOGA)

 Sahaja Yoga & Physical Cure-Il Common Cold: Asthma: In this problem, either left Vishuddhi It is a problem of left side in which or right Vishuddhi is caught. Hamsa is also become lethargic lungs causing difficulties in breathing. Feeling of affected. If suffering from left Vishuddhi, insecurity or bad relations with one's father nose is blocked, if suffering from right For flowing can also be the root cause of this disease, Vishuddhi, nose is running. nose, one should burn Ajwain on charcoal in which case Centre Heart or Right Heart and inhale its fumes. Also drink decoction In this case respectively are affected. of Tulsi leaves, ajwain, ginger and sugar WBC outnumber RBC, which is due to the and take rest in the bed. If nose is blocked, catch on left Nabhi and Swadisthan. one should put clarified butter in the nose. Tuberculosis: In order to avoid the problems of This is also a problem of left side lungs and throat, it is necessary to change and is caused by mal-nutrition and lack of protein and other left side problems. our ideas regarding bath. Cold water bath is preferable in the summer. In the winter Chakras affected are Left Nabhi, one should bathe in luke warm water but Swadisthan and Centre Heart. Patients of both the diseases, should raise right should not get exposed to cold weather after bath for some time. side and add the God's grace into left side take salt water treatment with left hand Jaundice: towards the photo and right hand raised. Right Nabhi and Swadisthan are Eat nutritious food. Also, give vibrations affected. Our belověd Mother has to affected charkas. prescribed a very simple medicine for this

 The Divine Coot Breeze Nov. Dec, 2005 29 disease, which doctors find very difficult Insomnia: This is due to over-active right side. to cure. Fresh radish leaves be boiled and Left side may be raised and God's grace added into right sympathetic. The following mantra may be recited: candy sugar be mixed in this boiled water which should be drunk for 3 days instead of plain water. Fried food, proteins etc. may be avoided and the disease is cured Ya Devi sarvabhooteshu Nidra Roopena Samsthita ! Namastasyai in 3 days. Mantra to be said 10 times Namastasyai "Mother you are my Guru', with left hand Namastasyai Namo Namah! on liver and right towards photo of Shri Lack of Memory Mataji. Left side may be raised and God's grace added to right side. The following Mantra Diabetes: may be recited thrice: Right nabhi and Swadisthan are Ya devi saryabhooteshu smruti affected. Left sympathetic may be raised roopena samasthita Namastasyai and God's grace be passed into right Namastasyai Namastasyai Namo Namah sympathetic 108 times every day. Foot- soaking in luke-warm salt water, placing right hand on pancreas. These patients Spondylitis: should take lot of vibrated salt and say the This could be due to the problem of left or Mantra in front of the photo of Shri Mataji right sympathetic nervous system, owing "Mother I am my own Guru". The mantra to respectively, malnutrition or over-work may be repeated 10times. It is necessary and over-anxious nature regarding one's up the habit of planning one's responsibilities. Imbalance in sympathetic to give future. may be corrected and affected parts be treated with vibrations and vibrated

 Nov. - Doc. 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze 30 system and treating affected charkas with kerosene, and foot-soaking in Luke-warm vibrations and massaging with vibrated salt water. kerosene. Sciatica: This is a problem of left-sympathetic. Left Nabhi and Swadisthan are affected. NIRMALA YOGA Imbalance may be corrected by adding God's grace in left sympathetic nervous

 Shri Mataji's Australia Tour, 1983. When Shri Mataji rose to speak a On Thursday 17" March, 1983 in the Maccabean Hall, Sydney, Dr. Warren few moments later absolute silence Reeves introduced the second last reigned. In a very quiet voice She said program of our Holy Mother's Australian simply, "It is true," and a new age had begun. tour. Earlier that morning at Darshan A jounalist and a photographer from a major newspaper was present as Dr. Mother had told of Her decision to speak openly to the world on this but left the time Warren gave an introduction totally different from any used before. As he amystery. "Perhaps tomorrow night," She said. spoke of the previous incarnations of the Adi Shakti, of Her Manifestations as the It was a fitting climax to the public Holy Mother of Christ, as Fatima, and all the other great incarnations that have section of a triumphant tour. From the first day in Perth on March 2, a steady stream come, a thrill went through every Sahaja of seekers had come. So had the press, Yogi gathered in Shri Mataji's presence. We all knew we were sharing a radio and television people opening the way for Mother to speak directly to millions momentous occasion. At the end of his introduction Dr. Warren declared to the of Australians. world that Her Holiness is the incarnation of the Holy Ghost, the Adi Shakti that has Early in the tour our beloved Mother come again and again when Her Presence decided to visit only four cities, each of them a State capital. There were two was needed. public meetings in each of the smaller

 The Divine Cool Breeze 32 Now Dec., 2005 cities, Perth and Adelaide, three in appearances that morning was a stunning Melbourne and four in Sydney. success. The seats were full, the floor at the front crowded and people standing round the sides and back of the hall. After The most spectacular success was in Adelaide, a city where negativity had the meeting many of them came to often stifled the efforts of the resident Mother's feet, something that would Sahaja Yogis to expand. Shri Mataji's first normally not occur in Australia. It was a very program was on Saturday, March, 5. beautiful demonstration of the defeat of the Australians who had toured India with negativity. Mother had arrived back to find an On the Sunday morning Mother had unexpected national election day coinciding with the first Adelaide program. held a workshop in a park on the banks of Naturally the media was dominated by this the River Torrens which a large number event, power being more attractive to them attended, and on the Monday morning the than spiritual matters, but nevertheless a Sahaja Yogis of Adelaide were blessed very thorough postering of the city with a with a superb new ashram, large, well situated and handsome. In just three days beautiful full colour poster, a small article the press the Monday before our Beloved Mother transformed this announcing Shri Mataji's visit, and several difficult city. well placed advertisements let the seekers know Our Mother was coming. And Perth had been a beautiful but despite all the difficulties they came to Her. quieter opening to the tour. Most of the newspaper and radio coverage didn't The first meeting on election night reach the public until after the two was well attended, but the Monday night programs in Perth Town Hall. Even so the meeting following television and radio seekers came, the hard working Perth

 Nov. - Dec, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze 33 Sahaja Yogis had also thoroughly Melbourne, March 8, and as the postered the city and suburbs. This plus Divine Mother flew in from Adelaide several newspaper ads let them know members of the press and television were where Mother would be. The Divine gathering at Melbourne's Windsor Hotel for a press conference. Mother held a Puja shortly after arrival and Some were the next few days showed the obstacles cynical, some professional, and some had had truly been removed. Many new people already recognized the very special Being are settling into their realisation and who was coming. The press conference regularly attending the Perth ashram. concluded witha television interview which These two new centres, never visited was broadcast that evening in the main news bulletin, the most highly rated before by our Beloved Mother are now very solidly established and growing, thanks to program in Australian television. Over a Her Grace. million people saw Mother as She actually gave realisation over this powerful As Shri Mataji left the Western medium, and in the days that followed States to travel Eastwards, fierce bushfires many came to the programs as the result were ragning across much of South- of the experience they had felt. Following Eastern Australia. Following four years of the broadcast the phones at the T.V. station drought the country was very dry with no rang continually as people called to find water to fight fires. But as Mother travelled out more. The same experience was east the soothing rain came with Her, a repeated the following day when Mother very special blessing on this land of Lord appeared on an evening radio program. Ganesha. It has continued after Her Again the phones rang and rang. departure, a sign of the great changes Our Mother has wrought. As usual the power of the Adi Shakti manifested in the form of miracles. One

 Nov Dec, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze small girl watching the television had been airport Mother had said to those in the car, born with a stiff wrist and all medical "Now I've come it will have to rain." This attempts to correct it had failed. Sitting was told to the T.V. lady and as the press watching the television she felt the cool conference broke up several Sahajis were breeze in her hands and suddenly the wrist carrying equipment out of cars. As the T.V. was cured as the Divine Grace flowed over lady stepped out onto the pavement the her. first drops of rain fell on her. She stopped, up, then smiled her Tooked The Divine Grace also flowed over acknowledgement as she walked away. Melbourne in a special way. A critical The rain developed into the first steady rain water problem had existed there for years. seen in Melbourne for a long time. One morning Mother decided to have a puja to the sea. Everyone in the ashram But more was to come for journeyed some distance to the shore Melbourne: several successful radio where Mother presided over a simple broadcasts and gradually increasing beautiful ceremony during which She numbers at the public programs. This constructed a Shri Ganesha on the sand. culminated on Sunday, the 13th with a Afterwards Mother told the assembled workshop in the spacious grounds of the Sahaja Yogis that Melbourne's water new Melbourne ashram. The gardens were problem was permanently solved. crowded with visitors who had come to learn more about their realisation. They Not only Sahaja Yogis the were blessed with a special lunch cooked associated Mother's visit with the rain, but by Mother Herself. It had been a joyous at the press conference one lady from a week for everyone. T.V. station quietly asked several Sahajis if rain would come. On the drive from the Mother's arrival at Sydney Airport

 35 Nov. Dec., 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze rain had followed the Holy Mother and as startled many people. Although it was a the car headed into the city in the morning late night flight a large group of Sahaja Yogis were waiting when our Beloved peak hour traffic there was chaos. No matter what alternative route was tried the mother arrived almost two years after Her last visit. Many celebrities on the plane traffic was snarled. It soon became were puzzled as they were ignored in the obvious to those in the car that Mother would arrive at the studio after the time joyous crowd surrounding Shri Mataji. arranged for Her appearance. The other four in the car were perturbed to various The following evening Mother held a degrees, Mother Herself reassured them puja, as she had on arrival in each of the cities. The marvelous vibrations that that all would be fine as She put it into bandhan. Arriving at the studio 15 minutes flowed that evening were a special benefit late it was found another guest scheduled to many established Sahaja Yogis who to appear after Our Mother, had arrived were meeting Mother for the first time, though She had been part of their lives for early and was already on air. This proved to be an American management consultant a year or more. Once again this puja to Lord Ganesha and the Adi Shakti cleared who talked glibly and shallowly about the obstacles away, though for a short while stress relief and management. It proved to be a perfect prelude as the interviewer next morning for some of us the Maya was in full play. with immense respect introduced Mother and revealed the shallowness of what had Mother's first engagement on the gone before. morning of Tuesday, the 15h was as a What followed was a magical twenty guest on a major radio program called City Extra on the A.B.C., the national minutes. The depth, warmth, compassion broadcasting network. As elsewhere the and wisdom that flowed enriched everyone

 Nov. - Dec., 2O05 36 The Divine Cool Breeze The public programs over, there was who heard it. After the broadcast even time for Mother to relax a little and on the normally blasé station staff for whom celebrities were an everyday occurrence Saturday a picnic was held in the Lane came to pay their respects. On the way Cove River National Park. Here on the She lawns, riverside home Mother gently pointed out how the green was surrounded by the fragrant Australian bush Divine works this out! It was a lesson not with Her children seated on the grass to be forgotten. around her. It was a day of laughter and relaxation as Mother in a green sari that Again in Sydney an interview with blended perfectly with the surroundings, Shri Mataji appeared on the main evening nursed and named the new babies and news bulletin to over a million viewers and talked gently with parents about the raising another television channel interviewed Mother in depth and also filmed part of the of children. The informality even extended to Mother teaching the men how to tie second Sydney public program. dhotis in the manner of Shri Krishna. Every Early in the tour Mother had now and then the paddle wheel ferry expressed Her thoughts that television chugged along the river with its was the best medium, and so it proved. passengers staring at the joyous group on the banks and wondering what was going Each night brought bigger crowds, on. and the Sunday workshop, though held in The highlight of the tour however, was pouring rain stretched the ashram limits as two hundred visitors plus Sahaja Yogis Monday 21, our Beloved Mother's Birthday. Sahaja Yogis came from all over jammed inside to hear Mother and enjoy Australia to share it with Her and no words her blessings, including another meal can describe the beauty and depth of the cooked by He.

 37 Nov. - Dec, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze puja that day. It will forever stay in the Swastika) much to the joy of the small memories of all who were privileged to children. As was fitting, a joyous Mother finished the evening by bestowing on the attend. As the puja finished heavy rain poured down and with a beautiful smile. sitarist and his two accompanists Her Mother looked out at it and said, "All nature greatest gift-realisation. is washing my feet." To us it seemed like At midday next day, fare -welled by all Creation. a large crowd, Mother left Australia, Her That night to celebrate, one of the few blessings however have remained. Night sitar players in Australia arrived to play for after night new seekers are coming, old Mother. The ashram became a totally ones are progressing, and Sahaja Yoga relaxed, warm home though there were 80 is growing before our eyes. people present, and when Mother joined us with Her hair down and wearing a softly May the triumph of this tour be repeated all over the world and by Divine the warmth was patterned sari, overwhelming. Marvelous music flowed Grace what we have experienced here in from the sitarist and from several Sahajis Australia may be repeated elsewhere. who played to honour Mother. Then came With full hearts we all shout : JAI SHRI MATAJI a giant birthday cake (in the form of a -The Australian Sahaja Yogis.

 Balancing the Internal and External Growth Growth is triggered by our attention. Every Sahaja Yogi must grow. It is his This attention will be our guide and will tll responsibility to grow, in fact his only us how or whatever the roots are growing responsibility towards his brothers and and penetrating into our Being. So growth sisters and towards himself. What it means to grow in Sahaja Yoga and how to grow also means watching oneself being nourished by the divine vibrations of the within as well as without? Holy Spirit. When we watch, we can Growing means becoming stronger Correct and when we correct we grow, like a tree which grows within and without because we adjust ourselves like a root surrounding a stone and finding a new way the Mother earth. To grow, a tree has to find his way to let his roots penetrate to penetrate more effectively in the depth deeply into the earth. When the roots are of the earth. Growing is then one's being nourished by the Mother Earth they adaptation to all the asperities and obstacles of life in order to overcome and as well as they make the whole tree grow master them. grow. Through Self-Realisation we become aware of being the tree of life. Finally to grow means balancing Growth means first being aware that the Kundalini is the tree of life and has to oneself to feel the softness of the earth and strengthen within ourselves. The Self- the confidence of the tree. Growing in Sahaja Yoga gives us the power to witness Realisation gives us the power not only to our own growth. By witnessing, we feel the become the tree of life but to make us arow and gain vigour and strength. Growth presence of the All Pervading Power irradiating the whole atmosphere, means feeling the beauty of the tree of life enveloping the whole treo with the wind of through the light of the Spirit, enjoying its love of ADI SHAKTI, blowing on the shoots action and nature.

 Nov. - Dec The Divine Cool Breeze 39 2005 with peace and joy. Then the whole tree manifestation of our Spirit. How to grow? responds to the wind in a shiver of joy Simply by opening our heart to feel the showing to himself and to the nature the bliss of the Self and by surrendering ourselves to the Divine Laws of God majesty of his shape and the generosity of his shadow. Almighty. Then we grow because we enjoy to grow and in the spontaneity of our How to grow? Simply like a tree, with growth we start feeling the depth of our full spontaneity and detachment. The roots and the strength of the shoots, we Kundalini is the sap of the tree. In order toenjoy the internal as well as the external growth of the Self. This internal and external grow the Kundalini has to circulate along the path in a tremendous flow of vitality growth become the two wheels of the building Her own strength by the frequency chariot of our own emancipation. of Her Rising up to our Sahasrara. The more She rises, the more She gets When we are conscious of our strength and the more we grow. Like the growth and willing to grow, we start loving sap in a tree, the Divine vibrations circulate others, for we feel the strength of the roots in our being making our growth effective which makes the tree defy the storms and and living. thunder, as well as the beauty of the branches which give shadow against the But we must be willing to grow, sun and protection against the rain. We otherwise how can the sap circulate? The cannot love if we do not grow, and we growth of the Self goes through the cannot grow without love. Love makes us nourishment of the Kundalini but how can grow. At first we grow inwardly, because the Kundalini be nourished without joy. Joy we have to love and respect ourselves is the motor of our growth because how first. Then we can grow outwardly to give can we grow without joy? And joy is the all the love we have stored in our heart.

 Nov. - Dec., 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze 40 innergrowth fills us with peace and joy and The love for others has to be nourished by enables us to hear the voice of the Self our heart as well as the branches have to be nourished through the roots. The roots and to feel the glory of own Spirit. The make the shoots grow and the shoots outside growth makes us ask for make the roots penetrate deeper in the forgiveness and forgive by absorbing heart of the earth. The love for his own within our heart the Unlimited Compassion of our Beloved Mother. The outside-growth Spirit makes the Spirit of others sparkle within themselves and each of their creates all the bondages which tie us to sparkle reflects itself with love and our brothers and sisters. The inner growth detachment in our heart. This is the makes the external growth expressing balance between internal and external automatically, but the external growth vanishes if it is not looked after by the inner growth, By growing inwardly we try to see as far as we can the manifestation of Shri growth, because how can we love others, if we do not love the Self? Mother's love and compassion within us and by growing outwardly we try to make We have to grow inwardly to show others see as far as we can see. So to let our love outwardly and the outward love has grow our love for others, we have to grow within ourselves first. We have to grow to be sustained by the manifestation of our from our spirit through our Kundalini, by Spirit. Then balancing internal and external growth makes us feel that there is only one strengthening Her and making our Chakras steady and strong. growth, one love and one collective joy under the light and the Eternal Glory of our The inner growth makes us humble Beloved Mother. and humility establishes our connection Arneau de Kalbermatten with Shri Mataji who is Unending Love and (NirmalaYoga) the Quintessence of Divine Beauty. The

 CHRIST IN KASHMIR the World Spirit had incarnated. He As reported in "The Advent", Shri Mataji declared that Christ came to came to India from a foreign country, India and that, after His resurrection, studied in the temples, entered in he lived in Kashmir. As documented conflict with the priests of the Brahmin class (sounds only too likely) and the by a report in a Swiss newspaper, the 'Tages Anzeiger", there are more and caste system. He had thus to take refuge during six years in Nepal before more evidences pointing out towards His presence in that part of the world, he returned to Palestine. In the same which, however, did not appear in the vein, a Persian author who lived long time back, Mir Khwand, collected oral gospels. traditions. In his work, "Rauzat - aus But unofficial gospels, that is, Safa", he mentioned that Yus Asaf scriptures which are not recognized (from the Hebrew: Jesus and gatherer) by church, such as the apocryphal traveled towards the East, through gospels of Saint Thomas and of Levi Mesopotamia and Afghanistan. He have already ascertained that Christ mentions also, that his mother Mary is went to India before His short lived buried in Murree, north of Rawalpindi manifestation as spiritual leader in in Pakistan. Today, there is still a Galilea. This assertion, according to narrow valley leading to Kashmir the newspaper, seems corroborated which is traditionally called "Yus- by some ancient Tibetan texts kept in marg" meaning 'Jesus way'. the Himis Gampa monastery in Ladakh that the Russian scholar, Niklaus The last bit of information we find in this article is rather interesting. The These Notowithsch, could study. texts speak of the "Child Isa" in whom Eastern Institute of Bombay

 The Divine Cool Breeze Nov - Dec, 2005 42 University keeps the fragmented preaching love, purity and the remains of the manuscripts which cleanliness of heart. Now this had belonged to the earlier kings of emperor Shalivahan, ruler from Kashmir. In one of these texts the Maharashtra, is the ancestor of Shri chronicler reports the following: Mataji and apparently, some Sahaja yogis got informed that he At a date corresponding to 76AD reincarnated as Mr. Salve, the very the emperor SHALIVAHAN met in father of Shri Mataji. If this is the case Kashmir an aged saint "with a clear it really sounds like God's family keeps complexion and white clothes" who meeting through lives and ages. But was calling himself "Isa Massih" we, the children gathered at Her Lotus (Jesus the Messiah) and the son of Feet, didn't we know this already? God. He told the emperor that he came from a far away country where truth A Swiss Sahaja Yogi. had no more place and where evil knew no boundaries. He was

 LETTER FROM AN ENGLISH SAHAJA YOGI Here are some extracts from the letter. matter and that is the main reason why "It is impossible to describe in people do not come back. short the many meetings with Ma, Her powerful speeches and Her loving After Her speech Ma answered kindness to us all. some questions, in particular about On several other Buddhism. First of all there were about 150 occasions also Ma was very fierce people at the airport some of whom about Tibetan Lamas and so called were seeing Ma for the first time. Buddhists. Three weeks ago there Mother left Here car waiting in order was Shri Buddha's Birthday Puja to see us. She looked pleased and which was held in Brighton. Mother had a loving smile and a kind word for gave a very long talk about Buddha's many of us. life and the message of His teaching. "Budhha means enlightened soul and Then on Thursday there was a I wish many people from your area public meeting at the Friend's Meeting could Buddhists. real become House in Hampstead (London). Mother Buddha did not talk about God from spoke about our approach to new fear of self appointed men of God and people. She stressed the importance increasing ritualism. Buddha spoke of raising their even half frozen only about self-realisation. Kundalinis above the Sahasrara instead of leaving them half way. Both Ma asked the English Sahaja the Westerners and the Indian Sahaja Yogis to work out the ego in England. Yogis are at fault for being lazy in that She gave us three mantras to be

 Nov. - Dec., 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze 44 repeated every day in the following England was covered with violent thunderstorms with flashes of strong order : bright lightning every five minutes and Dharmam Sharanam Gacchami this went on right through the night. - I surrender myself to my virtues. About two weeks ago Ma went to ii) Buddham Sahranam Gacchami Paris for a puja and a public 1 surrender myself to my programme. 150 people turned up for Englightenment. the programmme and many were from ii) Sangham Sharanam Gacchami previous meetings. During the Havan, I surrender myself to Mother threw some grapes into the fire collectivity (The Virat). saying that they will gradually lose their ability to ferment (and become There were various other public wine and brandy). A funny thing has meetings and the last which was recently happened in Scotland; the again in Hampstead, this time at the water has suddenly become very hard Town Hall, was great. The room was which has made all the whisky packed with new people who couldn't companies up there panic because it quite hear what Shri Mataji was saying means they cannot even produce because the microphone wasn't medium quality whisky, let alone functioning properly. So no one good' stuff. (It is vital to have soft asked questions and all of them held water for whisky). their hands up to receive their realisation, just like in India. Ma was Many great people have recently very fierce in Her Speech, telling the come to Sahaja Yoga here but Shri negativity that enough is enough. Mataji isn't too pleased and says that After the meeting the whole of

 Nov. - Dec. 2005 The Divine Coal Breeze 45 of love and laughter and music and we are moving too slowly. She has warm welcomes so that is good. pointed out once more that the Australian success is largely due to Om twameva Sakshat, Shri Shiva Parvati collectivity which we still lack. Sakshat, Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri However the new ashram is a place Nirmala Devinamoh namah.

 PARIS-IT'S DONE After years of preparation, were addressing newcomers at the Sahaja Yoga in France is finding its programme. It was wonderful! Thank cruising speed. Last year we felt it you, yogis of France! was starting; this year we felt it had started. From the 16 to the 19 June, It is not rare that Shri Mataji starts 1983 Shri Mataji blessed the French a statement by saying :"You will be Sahaja Yogis and Paris with Her amazed...." In Paris we were amazed presence, her masterful command to witness once more how truly over the power of love. Even the most amazing our Mother is; how, in a yellowish livers of this place, leisurely way, and, so to say, jokingly, somehow, must have felt it... She was handling so many situations, people and universe at the same time. The Sahajis of various countries On Saturday, 18th June, we had a were received with great joy and care Havan in the garden of the ashram and by our French brothers and sisters a puja. Thereafter the weather who had prepared the visit of Shri changed completely from cold- Mataji with efficiency and dedication. moody-cloudy to sunny and warm. A We could feel this dedication in so gentle breeze started fanning the many little details, in beautiful branches of the trees and, on Sunday, decorations, in the poems they had we enjoyed the garden of Eden, laying composed in praise of the Goddess; around, chatting, everybody floating we could feel their love in the food in the oneness of friendship, they had prepared for us; we could vibrations and gaiety. There was so feel their confidence in the way they much love around to give and take: We

 Nov- Dec., 2005: The Divine Cool Breeze 47 building on the famed place Saint were bathing in the aura of Her PREM, of Her Divine Love, And, surely, God Germain des Pres, a huge fire-works enjoyed that His children were broke out. Multicolored rockets were exploding in the sky of Paris, one after enjoying themselves so much. the other, opening up in the night umbrellas of fire, Sahasraras of light! At the last public programme all the Sahaja Yogis felt that Shri Mataji We all laughed aloud, cheered, was breaking into another dimension. applauded in a joyous tumult. Shri Wrapped in a white silk saree, Hanuman was putting a nice dot at the standing before a white wall, Her black end of His Mother's statement. all, hair, rivers of night, on Her shoulders, Actually, with this fire-works, the city council of Paris was celebrating some magnificent, She spoke with immense power; "In the past, France has in important event of the French history. many ways, given a bad example to Sahaja Yogis guess they'll never quite know which one. the rest of the world. It is time that the people of France take to self VICTORY TO THE PURIFIER OF THE realisation... The last Judgement has EARTH'S PAINFUL LIVER! started. Don't worry whether you are VICTORY TO HER WHO RESTS ON ready or not: this is for ME to decide THE COSMIC SERPENT! It is your Kundalini who will judge VICTORY TO OUR EXTRAORDINARY you..." MOTHER! Walking out of the conference hall Shri VICTORY TO SHRI MATAJI! Mataji, with a laugh and a gesture of the hand, exclaimed: "We won Paris; The European Sahaja Yogis it is done!" As She stepped out of the

 िर्मल धाम LDAS



----------------------

2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
1Vin
00
Nov.-Dec. 2005
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-2.txt 
 VISHWA NIKMALA.
VIVERSAL PURE RELIGIO
In This Issue:-
1. SHRI KRISHNA PUJA
2. HER HOLINESS SHRI MATAJI'S ADVICE
11
15
3. MAHASAHASRARADAY
4. SHRI MATAJI'S ADVICE
19
22
5. ALPHA AND OMEGA
6. FROM DELHI
25
28
7. SAHAJA YOGA & PHYSICAL CURE-II
8. SHRI MATAJI'SAUSTRALIATOUR-1983
31
9. BALANCING THE INTERNAL & EXTERNAL
GROWTH 38
10. CHRIST IN KASHMIR
41
11. LETTER FROM AN ENGLISH SAHAGA YOGI
43
12. PARIS - IT'S DONE
46
DHARMA
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-3.txt 
 C o OL
BRE E ZE
DIVINE
OL B RE E Z E
THE
Published by
Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
Infosys House, Plot No. 8,
Chandragupt Housing Society,
Paud Road,Kothrud,
Pune-411 029
Printed at
Partha Sarthi Press
WHS 2/50, Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi - 15
Ph.: 25268673
TE
Please Send Your Suggestions and Subscription to:-
Shri GL. Aggarwal
Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
222, Desh Bandhu Apartments
Kalkaji, New Dehi-110019
Tel. No.:011-26216654
And Your Sahaja Experiences, Articles, Miracle Photographs etc. to:
Shri O.P. Chandna
G-11-(463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110034
Mobile No. 9818124803
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-4.txt 
 SHRI KRISHNA PUJA
GENEVA - AUG 28, 1983
PRAVACHAN OF HER HOLINESS MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA DEVI
Krishna. He's called as "Khrist" in Indian
Today we are celebrating here in this
holy land the birthday of Shri Krishna. Shri
Languages, Khrist. And I have told you
Krishna is the ultimate of the fatherhood,
before why he was called as "Yeshu" or
that I described before you, who came on
"Jesu". So today we are going to see to
the two aspects of Shri Krishna, which were
this Earth and illustrated the ultimate of
that. So on this Earth, the highest the manifestation of His divine birth.
fatherhood is Shri Krishna's awareness.
But in the Kingdom of God, we can say in
In Rama's life they showed a man;
Heavens, or even above everything else, man, a "Purushottama", the best of the
resides Sadashiva who does not take
father in wordly affairs. And in Shri
incarnations. He is one of the aspects, Shri
Krishna's life they showed Him the highest
Krishna is one of the aspect of Sadashiva
fatherhood as in Yogeshwara or in divine
which is the Father. And the Adi Shakti or
work. So the first aspect of Shri Krishna
the Holy Ghost is the other aspect of we have to understand is the Yogeshwara
Sadashiva which is His power. So when
and the second aspect of him as the Virata.
Shri Krishna incarnated on this Earth, an
aspect of this Adi Shakti came on this earth
Yogeshwara means the Lord of the
as Radha. She is the same who came as
Yoga, or the power of Yoga. He is called
the Mother of Chirst, and She gave the
because He reached the optimum that one
name of Christ as the surname of Shri
has to reach as a Yogi. As if He is the
Krishna, as if it is Krishna's name, from
ideal you have to reach. Now as a yogi,
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Nov. - Dec., 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
driver.
He was born of a royal family but He lived
in the jungles in the forest, with the cows,
with ordinary people. He used to sleep
The another great quality of
on the ordinary places like sometimes on
Yogeshwara was complete discretion
the stones, on the grass, when he would
power built-in. So He knew who was a devil
go with His cows for their feeding. He was
and who was not, who is good who is bad,
very aware, very very aware, absolutely
who is possessed who is not possessed,
aware of His powers, without any ego. He
who is innocent who is not. This was built
had a special power called "Samhara in within Him, this power of complete
Shakti" by which He could destroy all those
discrimination.
people who tried to harm the divine
manifestation.
And He had a capacity more
expressing His witnesshood, as a
This "Samhara Shakti" is expressed
Sakshi'. He had the capacity, I mean He
as the Chakra (Sudarshan) in His hand.
was a Sakshi Himself I should say this way
And another is the "Gada" (Mace) in His
is easier to understand. He was a Sakshi,
hand. These two powers were within Him,
He had the capacity of witnessing the
and He acted according to the power of
whole world as a play. At the time of Rama,
Radha, because She is the one who Rama was one who got involved into his
sustained the power of Shri Krishna. The
problems, to show as if he is a full human
proof of that is this that when He was in
being so that human beings should not say
Gokul with Radha He did all His 'Samhara
that he was God, so how could we accept
work. And afterwards He just became a
God because 'He was God after all? Now
driver for Arjuna. So for His this capacity in Him to witness has to be
chariot -
disciple Arjuna, He became even a chariot
seen in every yogi. The element He
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-6.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Nov. - Dec. 2005
controls is ether. We cal it "Akasha" in
super-ego you should see it as a play, you
Sanskrit. This ether now as you know, we should see the play of the negativity.
are using for our television, for our radio, Negativity will run away, but don't get
for every sort of a collective work. So we-
involved into it, don't play into their hands.
Then the negativity will separate from you.
have to be incharge of the ether element
as yogis. And that is the subtlest of all, in
the sense that you permeate everything
So the ego and the super-ego both
with that, and is above all. Like plastic
rise from the Vishuddhi chakra. They can
also permeates into everything, into
be receded by the Agnaya chakra but have
matter, into everything up to the air. But it
to be sucked into the Vishuddhi.
cannot enter into ether. So the negativity
cannot enter into ether. So when you
The greatest quality of Yogeshwara
enter into your ethereal zone, you
is that He is not at all involved into it,
actually enter into the area which is
detached, absolutely. If He eats His food,
thoughtless awareness. So to achieve
He does not eat it. If He speaks, He does
your ethereal state, you have to
not speak. If sees, He does not see. If He
expand your thoughtless awareness.
hears, He does not hear. It has no effect
And the sustenance of that is done by
on Him, no retention on Him, no action on
Christ, by the spirit. So you can realise
Him. Whatever He is, He is complete :
now as a yogi, your state of mind
sixteen petals is complete moon, sixteenth
should be ethereal.
day of the moon is the Purnima. That is
how one has to be, complete in one self,
And what should be the state of your
complete confidence in oneself. But
super-ego? This is the ego part of it, that
confidence should not be confused with
you should be in ethereal state. And as a
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-7.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
7.
Nov. Dec., 2005
ego. Confidence is complete wisdom, it's
within us. We have to know all the qualities
of a divine brain are within. So whatever
It is complete love,
complete dharma.
complete beauty, and is complete God. we do with our brain like intrigue, the
deception, all which are bad things by your
That's what it should be.
brain as they call it, are done by Him for
the divine purpose without getting any
Now when He said that "you give up
blemish upon himself. And the other side
all your dharmas and surrender to Me." In
Gita, what he was meaning is that all other · of it, so called positive, like politics like
diplomacy, or like leadership, all that is His
things about which you are worried "You
own doing. Like even the thinking of the
give up and become one with me, so I look
future and all that. He does planning,
after you". Give up the responsibility to
thinking all those things, administration, as
Shri Krishna, so the complete integrated
a play. Everything is done as a play,
Divinity will start expressing through you.
because He's the Master, as we call, a
Means if you say that you have to be
"sutradhara", the one who does the
responsible, then He says alright, go
prologue in a drama, the one who plays
ahead, try! But if you say that "You are
with the strings with the pantomimes.
responsible, I'm just an institution or an
instrument in Your hand", then you start
manifesting it well. And that is how your
Now the other thing that we have to
Vishuddhi chakra gets opened up.
understand Shri Krishna at this stage of
Sahaja Yoga, that it is the Virata Shakti
that is manifesting at this time and not the
This is some part of the Yogeshwara
Shri Krishna Shakti which was at His time.
I have spoken to you. But as He is the
And the power that is working here is no
brain within us, He becomes the brain
more that of Radha or of Mary, but of
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Nov Dec 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
power is used for the construction. As if it
Viratangana. That's why the knowledge of
Sahaja-yogis is much wider than the is tricked.
knowledge of all the saints of ages. But it
is not deeper than them. If you can deepen
Like now I told them a trick, how to
your knowledge, this wider knowledge will
trick these gurus. The power that they have
have proper roots within you. So the brains
can be tricked against them, as is said that
are the roots, here are the roots of the theinteeth must be put into their necks, into
whole tree of life. Actually Kundalini comes
their throats. Instead of taking out their
up and waters the brain first, so that the
teeth better put them back into their
whole tree of life is drenched in the Divine throats, And if you can do that, then there
Bliss and Divine Knowledge.
is no problem as far as their effect on us is
concerned, because you are more
So this Virata Shakti that we have
powerful and more tricky.
to work out, gives us the sense of
collective consciousness first. First we
Because the Virata Shakti has now
understand it through our brain power. But
taken that form, like the tree when it grows,
the whole brain power is to be guided by
it grows upward. But when it is laden with
the Heart, is to be watered; but in Sanskrit
fruit it comes down. First it is attractive by
is a very beautiful word "sinchan", like
its flowers, by its timber, by the other parts
dewdrops, spray, with the Love of God.
of its body. And people try to destroy it for
So the integration of this brain has to take
it. But when the fruit appear, they want to
with Heart and with your liver. Then only
preserve it, and the tree bends down, with
the Virata-Shakti takes another form. The
humility, is very valuable.
weapons of killing become the weapons
of forgiveness. Every sort of destructive
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Nov. - Dec., 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
So you
That
fruits.
the
is to bend down towards the Mother Earth.
are
Viratangana Shakti, you are the fruits.
To be humble. Absolutely the humility inside
is really going to give you the complete
Because you are so valuable that those
people who wanted to ruin or to destroy
value of Sahaja-yoga fruits.
the Divine power from this Earth will start
thinking that they have to gain something
Those Sahaja-yogis who boast
out of these fruits. So today the Virata
about themselves are like the fruit which
Shakti .has given you a great value,
are getting ruined only on the tree. The only
because people see that by having one fruits that bend down are accepted as
Sahaja-yogi with them it is so precious.
good and matured fruits, and not those who
ordinary
his
gets
Say
man
assert that they are the highest. But some
one
Realization, then he develops his value. In of the negative people should not by any
that his own value he can be respected,
chance take advantage of this and say that
loved and he can be given the highest if
they are good because they are bending
he's a proper Sahaja-yogi.
down. It's not the logic. Some of them pose
they are humble; even a rotten fruit bends
So you should understand today that
down. But the mature fruit shows its humility
by its weight. That is the guru tatwa weight.
Virata-Shakti is "we are going to worship
that Virata Shakti which has given fruits".
As a result of that, all these different
So from the Viratangana power you
churches, fanaticism and atheism and
get the power of maturity up to the fruit and
communism and all that-ism, all these will then we become blessed by Guru
neutralize because they will see their
Principle. Those who are still involved in
benefit in it. But you have to become that.
getting to better sunshine or getting to
That is the biggest thing one has to know
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Nov. - Dec, 2005
10
The Divine Cool Bretze
in English language, but it means a "sweet
better water supply or all these things, are
not yet matured, because the fruit doesn't power". Like the fruit becomes sweet.
That's how you all have to become very
need anything anymore. It doesn't need
sweet. Krishna tried to make everything
anything from the Mother Earth, nor from
the elements. But is surrenders, bends, it very sweet in the sense it was all a
Madhurya Shakti that was acting, all His
bows to the Mother Earth.
play, all His dancing, all His stories if you
So the Sahaja-yogi who goes on read, is nothing but Madhurya Shakti,
towards Gopas and Gopis, towards other
asking questions to Mother, bringing
personal problems, stupid ideas, Sahaja-yogis.
negatively, all those people are still not
So you have to keep you Mother
yet the fruits.
But the matured people are those pleased by pleasing other Sahaja-
yogis, and not other people. They are
who surrender, who bow to the Mother
not important. So today we are going to
Earth. So the capacity to bow is the
shorten the Puja, and that's why it took so
best judgment of yourself. And leaving
much time upstairs, to shorten it! So the
everything to the power of gravity of
your Mother to do every work for you, time lost is time gained for ever and ever.
May God bless you.
And leaving all your small little worries
behind, you have to rise above these
distracting powers and achieve the
Bolo Shri Radha Krishna sakshat, Shri
completion of this Virata-Shakti which
Virata sakshat, Shri Yogeshwara
ultimately becomes a "Madhurya
sakshat, Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri
Shakti". "Madhurya", there is no word
Nirmala Devi ki Jai
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-11.txt 
 HER HOLINESS
SHRI MATAJI'S ADVICE
take a house. You must see that the
Being a living force we should try to
1.
house is giving good vibrations. We
find out "Are we going to be the living
see the comfort, we see other things.
force or the dead one." Now, when
We might even see if it is good for
we live in the world, we start thinking
other people to come in or not but we
about our comforts; where we have
do not see the house fromn vibrations
to live, what, we have to do. When
point of view. For anything that we do,
we think of all these, you see, we are
we have, now, to think in terms of
thinking of the dead. But when we
vibrations awareness which means
think of havinga place or a house or
awareness that is working upon living
an ashram, from the angle that you
things.
will be doing some living work, then
you are giving life to that place. That
Once you are realised, you have got
atmosphere should be created from
that living force within you. This is the
all that is dead- to create the living
living force you feel.
So, you have to
force.
know how to use this living force to
keep your body, mind, ego, super
Now, this is very subtle thing, which
ego, and everything in the enlightened
very few people understand; for
state, by understanding the planning
example, somebody brings me a
of the living force.
photograph of Shri Ganesha and
says, 'Should I worship this Shri
On the left side the problem starts
Ganesha's photograph or not? First
from left Swadisthan, because that is
of all we should see if vibrations are
the first chakra that starts emitting the
coming from it or not. Supposing you
2.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-12.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Nov - Dec., 2005
12
negativity within us. Now, left
sub-conscious.
Swadisthan is actually under the
Then it moves higher to the left Nabhi
control only of Shri Ganesha because
and at left Nabhi we start becoming
Shri Ganesha is the beginning of life
crazy about these dead things. Time
and also the link between the life and
is a dead thing. It is not a living thing.
the death. So, Shri Ganesha is one
It has nothing to do with living thing.
who gives the balance, the Vivek' the
3.
By seeing to the needs of the Spirit
understanding to you by which
you can overcome the left side. You
know how far to go with things. But
start looking after your Spirit from
this left sided thing can also come
which, you know, that you get your
from own desire for wrong things, we
vibrations. If your spirit is happy, you
might be desiring something very
get your vibrations, if it is unhappy you
wrong, some dead thing (a dead is
do not get vibrations.
that which cannot move by itself so,
the 'self' part does not remain in it).
People should overcome their left
side by putting their attention away
The best way to look at all dead
from the dead things. You should
things is not to go too far with them.
watch from the centre when you are
If you have, well and good. If you do
on the left side. You do not see what
not have well and good. You can live
with minimum of minimum or you can
you want to see.
live with maximum of maximum. But
4.
In Sahaja Yoga some things are
when we start expanding our dead
prohibited that nobody should touch
possessions, it is very much bad.
any body's feet and no Sahaja Yogi
Then our attention goes into the dead.
should allow anyone to touch his or
That is how we move into our sub-
her feet. This is one of the great
conscious, then over to collective
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Nov. - Dec., 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
13
bandhans for all Sahaja Yogis. No
good for nothing. Now raise your right
side and put down the left. Now why
one should touch other's feet and no
do we do this? Because from your
body should ask other to touch his or
her feet whatever may be your quality.
right side you get the grace and put
down the left side. Such people who
Those who will touch will loose
suffer from the left side should try this
vibrations and those who will get
one. The thing is that when these
salutation will also catch on the Heart.
ideas come to you, that you are good
We all are growing together. We are
for nothing etc., it is better to beat
part and parcel of one personality.
yourself (your name) with shoes. Go
Nobody is higher or lower. One who
and sing the praise of the lord and say
thinks even the slightest, like this will
I am so happy, I have got every thing
go down faster. This is the left side
around me.
conditioning where people falter very
In the right side, mostly you catch on
much. So you must have very wide
6.
'Swadisthan'. This is because you
desires in Sahaja Yoga, that all of us
think. This is another kind of thinking
must help get realisation say as many
that gives you catch at right
as possible. We should try to save
Swadisthan. Thinking whether it
as many people as possible. We
comes from right or left will first give
should try to improve ourselves as far
problem to your liver. The worst
as we can improve and have so
comes when both the sides are
many blessings.
involved.
Thoughts can come to you from the
5.
So one must understand that, in
left side also, like if you have some
Sahaja Yoga, you are developing that
bhoots in your head they can give you
sharp edge, that central point from
the thoughts 'Oh you are useless and
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Nov. - Dec. 2005
14
The Divine Cool Breeze
choose. This is growth. Then you
which you do not deviate to the right
don't ask Mother. You do not ask any
or the left and to balance it you have
to watch yourselves carefully. If going
one.
to the right, come to the left, if going
This development should come to
to the left come to right. Now come
you, that what I do, I should know what
to the centre, you just separate
I am doing. I should know what is
You detach yourself all the
yourself.
correct. I should know how to correct
time. Use this point just to see and
t.I should know.
. I' here, is the Spirit
i
guide yourself. Guidance is very
and not the Ego. No more ego exists
different from getting lost. Living force
or super ego exists. It is the Spirit
knows how to guide itself. In the same
which guides you.
way you will learn to guide yourself, if
The God is the enjoyer. You can enjoy
9.
you have learnt, if you have mastered
God and it is the greatest enjoyment
Sahaja Yoga.
to feel what God has created for you.
If the Heart is catching, such people
7.
What a beautiful life he has given you
can never progress. The Heart is the
in human awareness, by which you
source of light; it is the source of
can know how much He has loved
Brahma Shakti. Heart is the seat of
you, how much he has worked for you.
Atma. If in the Heart there is no living-
He has brought you to this level. What
force, then how can you progress?
he has given you, you can give to
You must know what to choose. This
others and make others happy. If you
8.
is what Sahaja Yoga should make out
think like that immediately both of
of you. You should grow mature to
your sides will be settled and you
that point where you know what to
yourself will be filled with Divine
Vibrations.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-15.txt 
 MAHA SAHASRARA DAY
Gorai Creek (A REPORT)
In the presence of Our Divine Mother, Shri
progress - the physical journey reflecting
Mahalakshmi, Sahaja Yogis from the journeys of the seeker from his
Bombay, Pune, Rahuri, Dhulia and Delhi struggles through the Maya until that
together with representatives from the precious moment when he attained his
Kundalini Awakening and felt the Joy of the
Mooladhara and the Heart of the Universe,
gathered together on 5th May to celebrate
Spirit.
Maha Sahasrara Day.
We left central Bombay by train early
It was on 5th May, 1970, at Nargol,
in the morning and experienced - some
Maharashtra - the Kundalini of the
for the first time- the rush hour of a crowded
universe - that the Adi Shakti, Shri Mataji
Indian metropolis. This seemed to
Nirmala Devi, opened the Sahasrara of
epitomize in many ways the franticness
the Virata and offered to human kind the
and confusion of Kali Yuga. Having arrived
gift of spontaneous Self Realisation. And,
at Borivali station, we disembarked and
with this blessing of our Holy Mother to all
boarded a local bus for the ferry wharf.,
true seekers, the blossom time of human This was a more relaxed and settled
awareness had arrived when we could all
section of the journey - and indicative,
become fruits on the tree of life, children
perhaps, of that level of human life where
in the Kingdom of God.
one has settled into a comfortable and
This year the Sahasrara Day Puia complacent existence and is content with
the status qo that "comfort of the body"
was performed at Gorai Creek, a fishing
with which affluent Westerners are so
hamlet on an island located 30 KM or so
familiar.
North West of Bombay. The journey to the
Puja site seemed a sort of pilgrim's
The jetty was soon reached and
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-16.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Nov. - Dec
2DOS
16
A short, pleasant walk led through the
eager Sahaja Yogis crowded into the
village - a Christian settlement pervaded
small weather beaten ferry which was to
carry us over to the island. The coast and
by the briny odour of drying fish - down to
the sea. On the beach, a stream of Sahaja
landward side of the island were fringed
by thick mangroves and swamps past Yogis - true "fishers of men" - moved.
which the boat safely sailed.
So, too, much
towards the coconut grove and cottage
the pilgrim, the seeker, when in sight of
where Shri Mataji's Puja was to be held.
his goal avoid the bogs and tangled roots
What a beautiful spot Mother Earth
of his conditioning and intellectualizing that
had given us for this special festival of
grow to the left and right.
Sahasrara Day. The coconut trees, laden
An excited and happy group of Shri with many fruit, all leaned towards the
ocean and towards the prevailing winds.
Mother's family alighted on the island, and
Their fronds almost touched overhead
to their delight found they were to catch
shielding Shri Mother's expectant children
"tongas" - colourful horse
drawn
from the heat of Lord Surya.
carriages-to the Puja site. A long, straight
road led across grassy undulating land to
the seaward side of the island, where the
And it was like children, that many Sahaja
fishing settlement was situated. It may
Yogis greeted Grandfather Ocean- the
the
seem amazing but
even
representative of Dharma - as they
lightheartedness of this ride, the
enjoyed His warm water washing over
straightness and smoothness of the road.
them.
seemed an earthly parallel to that crossing
Our Divine Mother arrived towards
of the Ocean of illusion, the Bhava Sagara,
Her
disciples
and
midday
eager
by Mother Kundalini, a crossing which has
welcomed her. She seated Herself under
brought us to the realm of renewed hope,
the silk-fringed umbrella and accepted a
peace and joy.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-17.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Nov. - Dec., 2005
17
coconut full of refreshing milk. The
and from the cornucopia of Her Love and
Bombay Sahaja Yogis presented Her with
Generosity, She gave beautiful opal rings
a pair of silver chappals embossed with
to several Sahaja Yogis. Children came
auspicious signs in gold - a Sahasrara
forward to wash Our Holy Mother's Feet3;
Lotus, the Shesha, Sun, Moon, Swastika,
curd, milk, butter, honey and sugar was
Cross, Bandhan and Lotuses representing
applied and Shri Mataji's Lotus Feet and
Hands painied with Kumkum. The Queen
the chakras. Shri Mother graciously wore
of all the Prophets, Devas and Saints was
these chappals and, after some moments
of deep silence, She commenced Her crowned and adorned with necklaces,
wonderful Sahasrara Day Talk (translation garlands, girdle, and fragrant floral
to be printed soon) and invoked the armbands. Aarti was sung and the Devi,
blessings of the Deities and God almighty with the most radiani and sweet smile
upon all Sahaja Yogis. The significance
invited Her Devotees to obtain yet more
of the coconut grove and the blessings at Her Lotus Feet.
auspiciousness of the coconut fruit was
Dusk was approaching and many
explained to us. (One begins to realise Sahaja Yoçis had left for ihe journey home
how everywhere Mother Earth speaks to
when Shri Mother appeared, dressed in a
us the message of the Divine, humming
simple white cotton sari with red designs.
with various but harmonious melodies, the She walked sedately and solemnly
hymn of creation.)
towards the sea. Following Her were
After lunch and a rest Shri Mother's
Sahaja Yogis carrying garlands and
coconuts from the Puja which they gave to
Puja commenced.
Grandfather Ocean.
Shri Mahalakshmi, dressed in a
Shri Mother stopped some distance
deep red sari with a blue border and
embossed gold motifs, was seated regally
from the retreating tide She bent down
under the coconut palms heavy with fruit,
and began to create a Ganesh in the sand
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-18.txt 
 18
Nov. - Dec 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
and then ornamented it with flowers and
to Her. Spontaneously, many took turns to
kneel in front of Shri Mother to wash and
kumkum. She moved a few paces forward
and then stood quite still, with an intent adorn Her Feet. At these moments yet
more miracles occurred, for whenever a
expression, and looked out to the sea and
devotee touched Shri Mataji's Lotus Feet,
the sunset-reddened horizon. Great power
and majesty emanated from Her. To some
Grandfather ocean responded by sending
wavelets to wash over them.
present, it felt as though the Adi Shakti was
ushering out forever the dying embers of
The time of Our Blessed Mother's
Kali Yuga and invoking the ocean, departure arrived. We, who had been so
Dharma, to assert itself. The image of Shri
privileged and fortunate to witness this sea
Ganesh lay in the sand, a symbol of the
ceremony, wandered homewards down the
advent of the age of truth, innocence and
lane lit only by starlight. Acar drove by and
wisdom. She Mataji called upon the sea
a beloved voice called out :
to wash over us all. We chanted the
"Why are you walking? There's a truck
mantra to "Samudra Devata"- the God of
waiting for you." Despite the fact all public
l
the Ocean-asking His blessings. Several
transport had ceased at sunset, Our Great
Sahaja Yogis saw the wave coming
Mother, Maha Mata, ever nurturing Her
inward to the shore and leaving steps in
children and caring for our welfare, had
the sand as they retreated. Then the sea
attended to the smallest and most
came rushing up Shri Mother, flowed past
everyone present and encircled the mundane detail: Our trarsportation home.
Ganesha. The Evening Star, Venus-The BOLO SHRI MAHALAKSHMI SHRI
Devi's own sign - was seen high in the JAGAN-MATA SHRI NIRMALA DEVI
KI JAI
twilight sky directly opposite the Devi, Our
Most Beneficent Mother. At this auspicious
BEOUGHONIA
moment a basket of marigold was brought
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Her Holiness Shri Mataji's
ADVICE
Steady your attention by keeping
1. I want you to resolve that you all wilI
become absolutely 'Dharmik', It is hard
your attention on the Mother earth. Thus
to be a 'Dharmik'. The Society and you get the loving 'Bandhan' of your
environment force you to be Adharmic. Grandmother and you become free of
You are born in innocence and later you enslavement to your lust.
go on compromising and accepting
2. Divinity is not a fashion. It is the way of
Adharmic patterns as normal.
life. If is the need of your being. You have
to become THAT.
Fora Sahaja Yogi, it is difficult to be
Adharmic. If he tries to do a wrong thing,
he is corrected by the vibrations, But if 3. You have to know that truth is not
going to fall at your feet. You have to
you go on killing your awakened
fall at the feet of truth, if you want to
conscience, you are free to do so and kill
achieve it.
all your chances of ascent.
4. In 'Sahaja Yoga' when one is realised,
In Sahaja Yoga you have to forget the
one starts seeking one's own faults. Man
is so much identified with himself that he
does not want to know his faults, and when
he knows them he wants to run away. But
past as you have been bathed with Divine
love, like a newly born baby. Purity of Heart
expressed as fidelity in marriage for both
husband and wife is the most enjoyable
it is better that, instead of carrying the
virtue and is the most powerful. When you
burden of your faults from life to life, you
understand the purity of relationship, you
know them and correct them.
enjoy them the most.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Nov, - Dec
20
The Divine Cool Breeze
2005
There is nothing in it to be scared of. If awakened Your ego cools down by just
seeing, as the seeing is illuminating, In that
you make yourself a little steady you will
understand how powerful is the Shakti light you witness the play of your ego and
laugh at it. As you start seeing yourself
which not only brings into light the faults
your ego starts getting deflated and as ego
within you but also completely removes
is deflated you rise in your light.
them.
5. Karmas are done by your ego. You must
6. Man's intellect comes up with many
have observed that after coming to Sahaja
doubts. The first doubt that comes, which
Yoga, you can very clearly see your ego
is very common, is "Who is Mataji?" I want
(Ahankar) and the way it works. In Sahaja
to tell you that you cannot understand Me
Yoga also you come across many so long as the eye of your Spirit is not
temptations and in that, when your ego
opened and you should not even make
dominates, you forget whether you have
efforts to understand. First you open the
to go to Sahaja Yoga or Sahaja Yoga is to
eye of your Spirit.
come to you. Many people when they
succumb to their ego, turn their backs to
Sahaja Yoga, expecting Sahaja Yoga to 7. Once you get the realisation, the
follow them.
"Chiranjivas' surrender to you. They are
watching you. You are their responsibility.
All the deities are awakened in you. If you
So long as your ego is enveloping
do anything against the deities,
you, you cannot have the glimpse of your
immediately they will harm you. If a person
Spirit. But it is useless to fight with your
who has got realisation, goes to a place
ego. In Sahaja Yoga you do not have to
which is not to be seen or which is not to
fight with your ego but you have just to see,
be felt or which is not a good place, or to a
because your attention itself gets
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-21.txt 
 will become like any other ordinary person.
fake Guru, immediately he will feel heated
up. If he does not run away and if he still
Nirmal Yoga.
goes on, he will lose his vibrations and he
(1983)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Alpha and Omega
Here is a poem which hopefully head a crown of twelve stars. And She
explains two passages in the book of being with child cried, travailing in birth and
pained to be delivered.
Revelations, which is the last book of the
New Testament of the Bible. The
And there appeared another wonder
Revelations is a book considered very
a red dragon,
in heaven; and behold
obscure and difficult to understand and is
having seven heads and ten horns and
a prophetic work dealing with the coming
seven crowns upon his heads. And his tail
of the New Jerusalem. John of Patmos,
drew the third part of the stars of heaven
who wrote the book, was somewhat supra-
and did cast them upon the earth: and
conscious and therefore not to be taken
the dragon stood before the woman which
töo literally, although much is very true and
relevant to the present time. First the was ready to be delivered for to devour
Her child as soon as it was born.
passages from Revelations, and then the
poem, the first part of which is intended
And She brought forth a man child
for groping western seekers rather than
who was to rule all nations with a rod of
Sahaja Yogis.
iron: and her child was caught up unto God
and to His throne. And the woman fled into
"I am Alpha and Omega, the
the wilderness, where She had a place
beginning and the ending,' saith the Lord,
prepared of God that should feed Her
"which is, and which was, and which is to
there..." Chap. 12, Verses 1-6.
come, the Almighty." (Chap. I, verse 8).
"The woman' is of course Shri Mataji,
"And there appeared a great wonder
the dragon' the negativity in the form of
in heaven; a woman clothed in the sun, and
the false gurus, and 'the rod of iron' must
the moon under Her feet, and upon Her
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Nov. - Dec., 2005
23
The Divine Cool Breeze
refer to the Kundalini, which is also So we persist in the delusion - creation
must be a chance event!
described in this manner in the beautiful
Let us make the great experiment, the
23rd Psalm.
This is the Poem:
experiment of the soul:
In the book of Revelations very little is Let us surrender our mental wanderings
in the search for the goal,
revealed,
From the furtive intellectual are the Let us abandon our aggression and our
answers well concealed.
passion to control.
We have endeavoured to use our minds
Perhaps if we stop asking questions we
to make matter our slave
may hope to crack the code,
Maybe the desire for inner wisdom will lead
And have pursued material happiness from
us on the road.
the cradle to the grave.
But when all is said and done what paths
What are the cogent questions of the great
to heaven did it pave?
quest for life?
Who are the real protagonists that lead This road of disaster leads surely to the
atomic bomb,
men ever on to strife?
How can we find the answer if we don't
So some foolhard youngsters explored
know where to start?
other paths (equally wrong),
The path of inner blasting via fake gurus,
How join in the cosmic drama if we don't
know our own part?
drugs and violent song.
We've tried to categorize the universe with
laws of Probability and Chance
Denying the possibility of an ordered,
eternal dance.
Where is the One who is Alpha and
We dare not face the Dancers; our great
Omega?
egos are to bent,
Where is the One who will call it the day?
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Nov. - Dec
2005
24
The Divine Cool Breeze
Then Her Spirit will fill us as sound fills a
Did the seers of old merely write stirring
flute.
stories?
No. They foresaw through the tunnel of time Then we'll dance for the Dancers, the
Lords of Creation,
where the war is.
And we'll bow to Our maker in wonder and
This war's raging within us; the prize
mankind's soul,
love..
But first we must seek Her, concealed in
Because man is a mirror, microcosm of
our wilderness,
God.
The dragons and devils are here now, Not argue and question what comes from
above.
among us,
When in silent humility we'll admit we're
All doing their best to appear - Oh, so
just human,
good!
Bombardments of evil sport disguises of Then she'll come as a human bringing
heaven on earth.
freedom,
Self-destruction's allowed, nothing's She'll show us our Spirit and make us
barred from us now.
divine,
And Her son will through man have His own
But the Woman is here, with the Stars in
Her crown,
second birth.
And we are Her man-child, if we
Om twamewa Sakshat Shri Kalki, Sakshat
understand how.
She is here to effect a transmuting of Shri Adi Shakti,
Sakshat Shri Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi,
consciousness:
Namo Namah.
If She doesn't, there'll soon be naught left
Twamekam Sharanyam gacchami.
to transmute.
When She gives the great secrets, quite
Nirmala Yoga.
freely, in earnestness,
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-25.txt 
 FROM DELHI
15 APRIL, 1983
ittle children of Adi Shakti, your own loving
It has been raining vibrated water
dear brothers and sisters. How we came
and vibrations these last few days in Delhi.
The weathermen may call it un-seasonal, to deserve such a wonderful blessing
amazes us! Truly the compassion of Shri
but we say such showers are always timely
because Delhi is always in need of a Mataji is beyond words or imagination!
thorough 'washing'.
During those beautiful days, Shri
Hanuman must have been kept very busy
We Sahaja Yogis know how much
strengthening the roots of Sahaja Yoga
attention Shri Mataji has been giving to
Delhi. Like every year we had Mother's within the homes. And what better
programmes almost every day for about instruments could He have had than
Sahaja Yogis - who had for a full month
two weeks. Her blessings are just proving.
been with Shri Adi Shakti in Maharashtra
(the great land) and had come overflowing
This year was more unique for HER
with vibrations to Delhi.
children in Delhi. SHE blessed them with
the chance to meet so many saints, our
The result of having so much love from
dear brothers and sisters from distant
lands and learn from them more about Shri Mataji flowing through our dearest
brothers and sisters was really miraculous
dedication, surrender, sincerity and
in certain homes and in all cases without
collectivity. What more could have been
exception, our sincerity as seekers and
asked for? We actually had them to stay
Sahaja Yogis increased appreciably.
with us for a whole week! It must really be
a great fortune to have in your home brave
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Nov. - Dec. 2005
The Divine Ccol Breeze
26
The public programmes were not to felicitate HER was Sahaja Yogi, as
dignified and humble as Dr. Nagendra
very well attended in that no huge throngs
Singh, who delivered his address in the
of seekers came. But our ever-loving
form of Stuti (Praise) of his Sadguru and
Mother gifted to us many more brothers
and sisters who are settling in Sahaja
Divine Mother. At this function of joy, who
Yoga, this year than any of the preceding
ever spoke, spoke beautifully. And we
years. For Delhi Sahaja Yogis it just has
witnessed the creation of a new Raga in
been coming -flowing, flowing, flowing, Indian Classical Music created by a
Sahaja Yogi and dędicated to SHRI ADIMA
ever increasing, without efforts on their
SHRI SARASWATI SHRI MATAJI named
part.
the raga, SWANANDESHRI (divine joy of
As if to show to us that Divine grace Self). And it did produce within us the
is infinite and never does it stop flowing SWANAND- it was really joyful to see
to those in need Shri Parmananda Mother creating Divine music, vibrations
Pradayini Shri Moksha Pradayini Mataji
from HER instrument, Debu Chaudhary, as
came again to Delhi. On 28h March, Shri
so many of us had earlier seen at a public
Mataji blessed Delhi by giving us a
programme seven weeks before!
heavenly chance to felicitate HER on HER
We had a very great surprise when
60h Birth Anniversary.
we learnt of Puja to be held the next day
The celebrations were unique and
which was Holi, the festival of colours. At
extremely beautiful & joyful to say the least.
the Puja. SHRI RADHA SHRI MATAJI did
In fact any celebration would be, if the
away with all the seriousness of Puja, much
person" to be honoured is "SHRI
like as she told us, Shri Krishana had done
MAHAMAYA SHRI ADI SHAKTI MATAJI
centuries ago. Thereafter we experienced
and relived the Holi that Shri Radha and
SHRI NIRMALA DEVI. The Chief Guest
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Nov. - Dec., 2005
27
The Divine Cool Breeze
Our mother is so Gracious, so
Shri Krishna used to play it because the
Benevolent; She has really spared no
festival of great joy that it was made to be.
efforts to establish Sahaja Yoga in Delhi,
which is still a weak Centre, which just
Sahaja Yogis danced and laughed
means it offers the greatest promise; so
much is to come, so much more is waiting
and in the traditional way hugged and put
colours on each other. Some sang to be realised, to be uncovered.
Bhajans in praise of Shri Krishna as Shri
So all of us, all the different parts of
Radha sprinkled colours at HER
Mother Earth join together (with JAI SHRI
CHILDREN paying obeisance at HER
lotus feet - and that gave more joy and MAHA MAYA on our lips) and pray,
we clapped and sang and danced to Shri
"Dearest Mother, may Delhi become a
Krishna's tune with joy, with bliss pouring stepping stone firm enough and strong
and showering on us.
enough to sustain and assist in the final
flying leaf of Sahaja Yoga". JAI MATAJI.
PARAM PUJYASHRI SARWASWARUPINI
JAI SHRI RADHA, JAI SHRI KRISHNA,
SHRI ADI SHAKTI MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA
JAI JAI JAI SHRI MATAJI.
DEVI, we bow at your lotus feet.
(NIRMALA YOGA)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Sahaja Yoga & Physical Cure-Il
Common Cold:
Asthma:
In this problem, either left Vishuddhi
It is a problem of left side in which
or right Vishuddhi is caught. Hamsa is also
become
lethargic
lungs
causing
difficulties in breathing. Feeling of affected. If suffering from left Vishuddhi,
insecurity or bad relations with one's father nose is blocked, if suffering from right
For flowing
can also be the root cause of this disease, Vishuddhi, nose is running.
nose, one should burn Ajwain on charcoal
in which case Centre Heart or Right Heart
and inhale its fumes. Also drink decoction
In this case
respectively are affected.
of Tulsi leaves, ajwain, ginger and sugar
WBC outnumber RBC, which is due to the
and take rest in the bed. If nose is blocked,
catch on left Nabhi and Swadisthan.
one should put clarified butter in the nose.
Tuberculosis:
In order to avoid the problems of
This is also a problem of left side
lungs and throat, it is necessary to change
and is caused by mal-nutrition and lack of
protein and other left side problems. our ideas regarding bath. Cold water bath
is preferable in the summer. In the winter
Chakras affected are Left Nabhi,
one should bathe in luke warm water but
Swadisthan and Centre Heart. Patients
of both the diseases, should raise right should not get exposed to cold weather
after bath for some time.
side and add the God's grace into left side
take salt water treatment with left hand
Jaundice:
towards the photo and right hand raised.
Right Nabhi and Swadisthan are
Eat nutritious food. Also, give vibrations
affected. Our belověd Mother has
to affected charkas.
prescribed a very simple medicine for this
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-29.txt 
 The Divine Coot Breeze
Nov. Dec, 2005
29
disease, which doctors find very difficult
Insomnia:
This is due to over-active right side.
to cure. Fresh radish leaves be boiled and
Left side may be raised and God's grace
added into right sympathetic. The
following mantra may be recited:
candy sugar be mixed in this boiled water
which should be drunk for 3 days instead
of plain water. Fried food, proteins etc.
may be avoided and the disease is cured
Ya Devi sarvabhooteshu Nidra
Roopena Samsthita !
Namastasyai
in 3 days. Mantra to be said 10 times Namastasyai
"Mother you are my Guru', with left hand
Namastasyai Namo Namah!
on liver and right towards photo of Shri
Lack of Memory
Mataji.
Left side may be raised and God's grace
added to right side. The following Mantra
Diabetes:
may be recited thrice:
Right nabhi and Swadisthan are Ya devi saryabhooteshu smruti
affected. Left sympathetic may be raised
roopena samasthita
Namastasyai
and God's grace be passed into right Namastasyai
Namastasyai Namo Namah
sympathetic 108 times every day. Foot-
soaking in luke-warm salt water, placing
right hand on pancreas. These patients
Spondylitis:
should take lot of vibrated salt and say the
This could be due to the problem of left or
Mantra in front of the photo of Shri Mataji
right sympathetic nervous system, owing
"Mother I am my own Guru". The mantra
to respectively, malnutrition or over-work
may be repeated 10times. It is necessary
and over-anxious nature regarding one's
up the habit of planning one's responsibilities. Imbalance in sympathetic
to give
future.
may be corrected and affected parts be
treated with vibrations and vibrated
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Nov. - Doc. 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
30
system and treating affected charkas with
kerosene, and foot-soaking in Luke-warm
vibrations and massaging with vibrated
salt water.
kerosene.
Sciatica:
This is a problem of left-sympathetic. Left
Nabhi and Swadisthan are affected.
NIRMALA YOGA
Imbalance may be corrected by adding
God's grace in left sympathetic nervous
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Shri Mataji's Australia Tour, 1983.
When Shri Mataji rose to speak a
On Thursday 17" March, 1983 in the
Maccabean Hall, Sydney, Dr. Warren few moments later absolute silence
Reeves introduced the second last reigned. In a very quiet voice She said
program of our Holy Mother's Australian simply, "It is true," and a new age had
begun.
tour.
Earlier that morning at Darshan
A jounalist and a photographer from
a major newspaper was present as Dr. Mother had told of Her decision to speak
openly to the world on this but left the time
Warren gave an introduction totally
different from any used before. As he amystery. "Perhaps tomorrow night," She
said.
spoke of the previous incarnations of the
Adi Shakti, of Her Manifestations as the
It was a fitting climax to the public
Holy Mother of Christ, as Fatima, and all
the other great incarnations that have section of a triumphant tour. From the first
day in Perth on March 2, a steady stream
come, a thrill went through every Sahaja
of seekers had come. So had the press,
Yogi gathered in Shri Mataji's presence.
We all knew we were sharing a radio and television people opening the
way for Mother to speak directly to millions
momentous occasion. At the end of his
introduction Dr. Warren declared to the of Australians.
world that Her Holiness is the incarnation
of the Holy Ghost, the Adi Shakti that has
Early in the tour our beloved Mother
come again and again when Her Presence decided to visit only four cities, each of
them a State capital. There were two
was needed.
public meetings in each of the smaller
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-32.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
32
Now Dec., 2005
cities, Perth and Adelaide, three in appearances that morning was a stunning
Melbourne and four in Sydney.
success. The seats were full, the floor at
the front crowded and people standing
round the sides and back of the hall. After
The most spectacular success was
in Adelaide, a city where negativity had the meeting many of them came to
often stifled the efforts of the resident Mother's feet, something that would
Sahaja Yogis to expand. Shri Mataji's first
normally not occur in Australia. It was a very
program was on Saturday, March, 5. beautiful demonstration of the defeat of the
Australians who had toured India with negativity.
Mother had arrived back to find an
On the Sunday morning Mother had
unexpected national election day
coinciding with the first Adelaide program.
held a workshop in a park on the banks of
Naturally the media was dominated by this
the River Torrens which a large number
event, power being more attractive to them
attended, and on the Monday morning the
than spiritual matters, but nevertheless a
Sahaja Yogis of Adelaide were blessed
very thorough postering of the city with a
with a superb new ashram, large, well
situated and handsome. In just three days
beautiful full colour poster, a small article
the press the Monday before our Beloved Mother transformed this
announcing Shri Mataji's visit, and several
difficult city.
well placed advertisements let the seekers
know Our Mother was coming. And
Perth had been a beautiful but
despite all the difficulties they came to Her.
quieter opening to the tour. Most of the
newspaper and radio coverage didn't
The first meeting on election night reach the public until after the two
was well attended, but the Monday night
programs in Perth Town Hall. Even so the
meeting following television and radio seekers came, the hard working Perth
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Nov. - Dec, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
33
Sahaja Yogis had also thoroughly
Melbourne, March 8, and as the
postered the city and suburbs. This plus Divine Mother flew in from Adelaide
several newspaper ads let them know members of the press and television were
where Mother would be. The Divine gathering at Melbourne's Windsor Hotel
for a press
conference.
Mother held a Puja shortly after arrival and
Some were
the next few days showed the obstacles
cynical, some professional, and some had
had truly been removed. Many new people
already recognized the very special Being
are settling into their realisation and who was coming. The press conference
regularly attending the Perth ashram. concluded witha television interview which
These two new centres, never visited was broadcast that evening in the main
news bulletin, the most highly rated
before by our Beloved Mother are now very
solidly established and growing, thanks to
program in Australian television. Over a
Her Grace.
million people saw Mother as She actually
gave realisation over this powerful
As Shri Mataji left the Western medium, and in the days that followed
States to travel Eastwards, fierce bushfires
many came to the programs as the result
were ragning across much of South- of the experience they had felt. Following
Eastern Australia. Following four years of
the broadcast the phones at the T.V. station
drought the country was very dry with no
rang continually as people called to find
water to fight fires. But as Mother travelled out more. The same experience was
east the soothing rain came with Her, a
repeated the following day when Mother
very special blessing on this land of Lord
appeared on an evening radio program.
Ganesha. It has continued after Her Again the phones rang and rang.
departure, a sign of the great changes Our
Mother has wrought.
As usual the power of the Adi Shakti
manifested in the form of miracles. One
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Nov Dec, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
small girl watching the television had been
airport Mother had said to those in the car,
born with a stiff wrist and all medical "Now I've come it will have to rain." This
attempts to correct it had failed. Sitting
was told to the T.V. lady and as the press
watching the television she felt the cool
conference broke up several Sahajis were
breeze in her hands and suddenly the wrist
carrying equipment out of cars. As the T.V.
was cured as the Divine Grace flowed over
lady stepped out onto the pavement the
her.
first drops of rain fell on her. She stopped,
up, then smiled her
Tooked
The Divine Grace also flowed over
acknowledgement as she walked away.
Melbourne in a special way.
A critical
The rain developed into the first steady rain
water problem had existed there for years.
seen in Melbourne for a long time.
One morning Mother decided to have a
puja to the sea. Everyone in the ashram
But more was to come for
journeyed some distance to the shore Melbourne: several successful radio
where Mother presided over a simple broadcasts and gradually increasing
beautiful ceremony during which She numbers at the public programs. This
constructed a Shri Ganesha on the sand. culminated on Sunday, the 13th with a
Afterwards Mother told the assembled
workshop in the spacious grounds of the
Sahaja Yogis that Melbourne's water new Melbourne ashram. The gardens were
problem was permanently solved.
crowded with visitors who had come to
learn more about their realisation. They
Not
only
Sahaja
Yogis
the
were blessed with a special lunch cooked
associated Mother's visit with the rain, but
by Mother Herself. It had been a joyous
at the press conference one lady from a
week for everyone.
T.V. station quietly asked several Sahajis
if rain would come. On the drive from the
Mother's arrival at Sydney Airport
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-35.txt 
 35
Nov. Dec., 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
rain had followed the Holy Mother and as
startled many people. Although it was a
the car headed into the city in the morning
late night flight a large group of Sahaja
Yogis were waiting when our Beloved peak hour traffic there was chaos. No
matter what alternative route was tried the
mother arrived almost two years after Her
last visit. Many celebrities on the plane traffic was snarled. It soon became
were puzzled as they were ignored in the obvious to those in the car that Mother
would arrive at the studio after the time
joyous crowd surrounding Shri Mataji.
arranged for Her appearance. The other
four in the car were perturbed to various
The following evening Mother held a
degrees, Mother Herself reassured them
puja, as she had on arrival in each of the
cities. The marvelous vibrations that that all would be fine as She put it into
bandhan. Arriving at the studio 15 minutes
flowed that evening were a special benefit
late it was found another guest scheduled
to many established Sahaja Yogis who
to appear after Our Mother, had arrived
were meeting Mother for the first time,
though She had been part of their lives for
early and was already on air. This proved
to be an American management consultant
a year or more. Once again this puja to
Lord Ganesha and the Adi Shakti cleared who talked glibly and shallowly about
the obstacles away, though for a short while
stress relief and management. It proved
to be a perfect prelude as the interviewer
next morning for some of us the Maya was
in full play.
with immense respect introduced Mother
and revealed the shallowness of what had
Mother's first engagement on the gone before.
morning of Tuesday, the 15h was as a
What followed was a magical twenty
guest on a major radio program called
City Extra on the A.B.C., the national minutes. The depth, warmth, compassion
broadcasting network. As elsewhere the
and wisdom that flowed enriched everyone
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-36.txt 
 Nov. - Dec., 2O05
36
The Divine Cool Breeze
The public programs over, there was
who heard it. After the broadcast even
time for Mother to relax a little and on the
normally blasé station staff for whom
celebrities were an everyday occurrence Saturday a picnic was held in the Lane
came to pay their respects. On the way Cove River National Park. Here on the
She
lawns,
riverside
home Mother gently pointed out how the
green
was
surrounded by the fragrant Australian bush
Divine works this out! It was a lesson not
with Her children seated on the grass
to be forgotten.
around her. It was a day of laughter and
relaxation as Mother in a green sari that
Again in Sydney an interview with
blended perfectly with the surroundings,
Shri Mataji appeared on the main evening
nursed and named the new babies and
news bulletin to over a million viewers and
talked gently with parents about the raising
another television channel interviewed
Mother in depth and also filmed part of the
of children. The informality even extended
to Mother teaching the men how to tie
second Sydney public program.
dhotis in the manner of Shri Krishna. Every
Early in the tour Mother had now and then the paddle wheel ferry
expressed Her thoughts that television chugged along the river with its
was the best medium, and so it proved.
passengers staring at the joyous group on
the banks and wondering what was going
Each night brought bigger crowds,
on.
and the Sunday workshop, though held in
The highlight of the tour however, was
pouring rain stretched the ashram limits
as two hundred visitors plus Sahaja Yogis
Monday 21, our Beloved Mother's
Birthday. Sahaja Yogis came from all over
jammed inside to hear Mother and enjoy
Australia to share it with Her and no words
her blessings, including another meal
can describe the beauty and depth of the
cooked by He.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-37.txt 
 37
Nov. - Dec, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
puja that day. It will forever stay in the Swastika) much to the joy of the small
memories of all who were privileged to
children. As was fitting, a joyous Mother
finished the evening by bestowing on the
attend. As the puja finished heavy rain
poured down and with a beautiful smile. sitarist and his two accompanists Her
Mother looked out at it and said, "All nature
greatest gift-realisation.
is washing my feet." To us it seemed like
At midday next day, fare -welled by
all Creation.
a large crowd, Mother left Australia, Her
That night to celebrate, one of the few
blessings however have remained. Night
sitar players in Australia arrived to play for
after night new seekers are coming, old
Mother. The ashram became a totally ones are progressing, and Sahaja Yoga
relaxed, warm home though there were 80
is growing before our eyes.
people present, and when Mother joined
us with Her hair down and wearing a softly
May the triumph of this tour be
repeated all over the world and by Divine
the warmth was
patterned
sari,
overwhelming. Marvelous music flowed
Grace what we have experienced here in
from the sitarist and from several Sahajis
Australia may be repeated elsewhere.
who played to honour Mother. Then came
With full hearts we all shout :
JAI SHRI MATAJI
a giant birthday cake (in the form of a
-The Australian Sahaja Yogis.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-38.txt 
 Balancing the Internal and External Growth
Growth is triggered by our attention.
Every Sahaja Yogi must grow. It is his
This attention will be our guide and will tll
responsibility to grow, in fact his only
us how or whatever the roots are growing
responsibility towards his brothers and
and penetrating into our Being. So growth
sisters and towards himself. What it means
to grow in Sahaja Yoga and how to grow also means watching oneself being
nourished by the divine vibrations of the
within as well as without?
Holy Spirit. When we watch, we can
Growing means becoming stronger Correct and when we correct we grow,
like a tree which grows within and without because we adjust ourselves like a root
surrounding a stone and finding a new way
the Mother earth. To grow, a tree has to
find his way to let his roots penetrate to penetrate more effectively in the depth
deeply into the earth. When the roots are of the earth. Growing is then one's
being nourished by the Mother Earth they adaptation to all the asperities and
obstacles of life in order to overcome and
as well as they make the whole tree
grow
master them.
grow. Through Self-Realisation we
become aware of being the tree of life.
Finally to grow means balancing
Growth means first being aware that the
Kundalini is the tree of life and has to oneself to feel the softness of the earth and
strengthen within ourselves. The Self- the confidence of the tree. Growing in
Sahaja Yoga gives us the power to witness
Realisation gives us the power not only to
our own growth. By witnessing, we feel the
become the tree of life but to make us arow
and gain vigour and strength. Growth presence of the All Pervading Power
irradiating the whole atmosphere,
means feeling the beauty of the tree of life
enveloping the whole treo with the wind of
through the light of the Spirit, enjoying its
love of ADI SHAKTI, blowing on the shoots
action and nature.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-39.txt 
 Nov. - Dec
The Divine Cool Breeze
39
2005
with peace and joy. Then the whole tree
manifestation of our Spirit. How to grow?
responds to the wind in a shiver of joy Simply by opening our heart to feel the
showing to himself and to the nature the bliss of the Self and by surrendering
ourselves to the Divine Laws of God
majesty of his shape and the generosity
of his shadow.
Almighty. Then we grow because we enjoy
to grow and in the spontaneity of our
How to grow? Simply like a tree, with
growth we start feeling the depth of our
full spontaneity and detachment. The
roots and the strength of the shoots, we
Kundalini is the sap of the tree. In order toenjoy the internal as well as the external
growth of the Self. This internal and external
grow the Kundalini has to circulate along
the path in a tremendous flow of vitality growth become the two wheels of the
building Her own strength by the frequency
chariot of our own emancipation.
of Her Rising up to our Sahasrara. The
more She rises, the more She gets
When we are conscious of our
strength and the more we grow. Like the
growth and willing to grow, we start loving
sap in a tree, the Divine vibrations circulate
others, for we feel the strength of the roots
in our being making our growth effective
which makes the tree defy the storms and
and living.
thunder, as well as the beauty of the
branches which give shadow against the
But we must be willing to grow, sun and protection against the rain. We
otherwise how can the sap circulate? The cannot love if we do not grow, and we
growth of the Self goes through the cannot grow without love. Love makes us
nourishment of the Kundalini but how can
grow. At first we grow inwardly, because
the Kundalini be nourished without joy. Joy
we have to love and respect ourselves
is the motor of our growth because how
first. Then we can grow outwardly to give
can we grow without joy? And joy is the
all the love we have stored in our heart.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-40.txt 
 Nov. - Dec., 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
40
innergrowth fills us with peace and joy and
The love for others has to be nourished by
enables us to hear the voice of the Self
our heart as well as the branches have to
be nourished through the roots. The roots and to feel the glory of own Spirit. The
make the shoots grow and the shoots outside growth makes us ask for
make the roots penetrate deeper in the forgiveness and forgive by absorbing
heart of the earth. The love for his own
within our heart the Unlimited Compassion
of our Beloved Mother. The outside-growth
Spirit makes the Spirit of others sparkle
within themselves and each of their creates all the bondages which tie us to
sparkle reflects itself with love and our brothers and sisters. The inner growth
detachment in our heart. This is the makes the external growth expressing
balance between internal and external automatically, but the external growth
vanishes if it is not looked after by the inner
growth, By growing inwardly we try to see
as far as we can the manifestation of Shri
growth, because how can we love others,
if we do not love the Self?
Mother's love and compassion within us
and by growing outwardly we try to make
We have to grow inwardly to show
others see as far as we can see. So to let
our love outwardly and the outward love has
grow our love for others, we have to grow
within ourselves first. We have to grow to be sustained by the manifestation of our
from our spirit through our Kundalini, by
Spirit. Then balancing internal and external
growth makes us feel that there is only one
strengthening Her and making our
Chakras steady and strong.
growth, one love and one collective joy
under the light and the Eternal Glory of our
The inner growth makes us humble
Beloved Mother.
and humility establishes our connection
Arneau de Kalbermatten
with Shri Mataji who is Unending Love and
(NirmalaYoga)
the Quintessence of Divine Beauty. The
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-41.txt 
 CHRIST IN KASHMIR
the World Spirit had incarnated. He
As reported in "The Advent", Shri
Mataji declared that Christ came to came to India from a foreign country,
India and that, after His resurrection, studied in the temples, entered in
he lived in Kashmir. As documented
conflict with the priests of the Brahmin
class (sounds only too likely) and the
by a report in a Swiss newspaper, the
'Tages Anzeiger", there are more and caste system. He had thus to take
refuge during six years in Nepal before
more evidences pointing out towards
His presence in that part of the world,
he returned to Palestine. In the same
which, however, did not appear in the
vein, a Persian author who lived long
time back, Mir Khwand, collected oral
gospels.
traditions. In his work, "Rauzat - aus
But unofficial gospels, that is, Safa", he mentioned that Yus Asaf
scriptures which are not recognized (from the Hebrew: Jesus and gatherer)
by church, such as the apocryphal traveled towards the East, through
gospels of Saint Thomas and of Levi
Mesopotamia and Afghanistan. He
have already ascertained that Christ
mentions also, that his mother Mary is
went to India before His short lived buried in Murree, north of Rawalpindi
manifestation as spiritual leader in in Pakistan. Today, there is still a
Galilea. This assertion, according to narrow valley leading to Kashmir
the newspaper, seems corroborated which is traditionally called "Yus-
by some ancient Tibetan texts kept in
marg" meaning 'Jesus way'.
the Himis Gampa monastery in Ladakh
that the Russian scholar, Niklaus
The last bit of information we find
in this article is rather interesting. The
These
Notowithsch, could study.
texts speak of the "Child Isa" in whom
Eastern
Institute
of
Bombay
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-42.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Nov - Dec, 2005
42
University keeps the fragmented preaching love, purity and the
remains of the manuscripts which cleanliness of heart. Now this
had belonged to the earlier kings of emperor Shalivahan, ruler from
Kashmir. In one of these texts the Maharashtra, is the ancestor of Shri
chronicler reports the following:
Mataji and apparently, some Sahaja
yogis got informed that he
At a date corresponding to 76AD reincarnated as Mr. Salve, the very
the emperor SHALIVAHAN met in
father of Shri Mataji. If this is the case
Kashmir an aged saint "with a clear
it really sounds like God's family keeps
complexion and white clothes" who meeting through lives and ages. But
was calling himself "Isa Massih"
we, the children gathered at Her Lotus
(Jesus the Messiah) and the son of Feet, didn't we know this already?
God. He told the emperor that he came
from a far away country where truth
A Swiss Sahaja Yogi.
had no more place and where evil
knew no boundaries.
He was
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-43.txt 
 LETTER FROM AN ENGLISH SAHAJA YOGI
Here are some extracts from the letter.
matter and that is the main reason why
"It is impossible to describe in
people do not come back.
short the many meetings with Ma, Her
powerful speeches and Her loving
After Her speech Ma answered
kindness to us all.
some questions, in particular about
On several other
Buddhism.
First of all there were about 150 occasions also Ma was very fierce
people at the airport some of whom about Tibetan Lamas and so called
were seeing Ma for the first time. Buddhists. Three weeks ago there
Mother left Here car waiting in order was Shri Buddha's Birthday Puja
to see us. She looked pleased and which was held in Brighton. Mother
had a loving smile and a kind word for
gave a very long talk about Buddha's
many of us.
life and the message of His teaching.
"Budhha means enlightened soul and
Then on Thursday there was a I wish many people from your area
public meeting at the Friend's Meeting
could
Buddhists.
real
become
House in Hampstead (London). Mother Buddha did not talk about God from
spoke about our approach to new
fear of self appointed men of God and
people. She stressed the importance increasing ritualism. Buddha spoke
of raising their even half frozen only about self-realisation.
Kundalinis above the Sahasrara
instead of leaving them half way. Both
Ma asked the English Sahaja
the Westerners and the Indian Sahaja
Yogis to work out the ego in England.
Yogis are at fault for being lazy in that She gave us three mantras to be
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-44.txt 
 Nov. - Dec., 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
44
repeated every day in the following England was covered with violent
thunderstorms with flashes of strong
order :
bright lightning every five minutes and
Dharmam Sharanam Gacchami
this went on right through the night.
- I surrender myself to my
virtues.
About two weeks ago Ma went to
ii) Buddham Sahranam Gacchami Paris for a puja and a public
1 surrender myself to my
programme. 150 people turned up for
Englightenment.
the programmme and many were from
ii) Sangham Sharanam Gacchami previous meetings. During the Havan,
I surrender myself to
Mother threw some grapes into the fire
collectivity (The Virat).
saying that they will gradually lose
their ability to ferment (and become
There were various other public wine and brandy). A funny thing has
meetings and the last which was
recently happened in Scotland; the
again in Hampstead, this time at the
water has suddenly become very hard
Town Hall, was great. The room was which has made all the whisky
packed with new people who couldn't companies up there panic because it
quite hear what Shri Mataji was saying
means they cannot even produce
because the microphone wasn't
medium quality whisky, let alone
functioning properly. So no one good' stuff. (It is vital to have soft
asked questions and all of them held
water for whisky).
their hands up to receive their
realisation, just like in India. Ma was
Many great people have recently
very fierce in Her Speech, telling the
come to Sahaja Yoga here but Shri
negativity that enough is enough. Mataji isn't too pleased and says that
After the meeting the whole of
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-45.txt 
 Nov. - Dec. 2005
The Divine Coal Breeze
45
of love and laughter and music and
we are moving too slowly. She has
warm welcomes so that is good.
pointed out once more that the
Australian success is largely due to
Om twameva Sakshat, Shri Shiva Parvati
collectivity which we still lack.
Sakshat, Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri
However the new ashram is a place
Nirmala Devinamoh namah.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-46.txt 
 PARIS-IT'S DONE
After years of preparation, were addressing newcomers at the
Sahaja Yoga in France is finding its programme. It was wonderful! Thank
cruising speed. Last year we felt it you, yogis of France!
was starting; this year we felt it had
started. From the 16 to the 19 June,
It is not rare that Shri Mataji starts
1983 Shri Mataji blessed the French a statement by saying :"You will be
Sahaja Yogis and Paris with Her amazed...." In Paris we were amazed
presence, her masterful command to witness once more how truly
over the power of love. Even the most amazing our Mother is; how, in a
yellowish livers of this place,
leisurely way, and, so to say, jokingly,
somehow, must have felt it...
She was handling so many situations,
people and universe at the same time.
The Sahajis of various countries On Saturday, 18th June, we had a
were received with great joy and care
Havan in the garden of the ashram and
by our French brothers and sisters a puja. Thereafter the weather
who had prepared the visit of Shri changed completely from cold-
Mataji with efficiency and dedication.
moody-cloudy to sunny and warm. A
We could feel this dedication in so gentle breeze started fanning the
many little details, in beautiful
branches of the trees and, on Sunday,
decorations, in the poems they had we enjoyed the garden of Eden, laying
composed in praise of the Goddess;
around, chatting, everybody floating
we could feel their love in the food
in the oneness of friendship,
they had prepared for us; we could vibrations and gaiety. There was so
feel their confidence in the way they
much love around to give and take: We
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-47.txt 
 Nov- Dec., 2005:
The Divine Cool Breeze
47
building on the famed place Saint
were bathing in the aura of Her PREM,
of Her Divine Love, And, surely, God
Germain des Pres, a huge fire-works
enjoyed that His children were broke out. Multicolored rockets were
exploding in the sky of Paris, one after
enjoying themselves so much.
the other, opening up in the night
umbrellas of fire, Sahasraras of light!
At the last public programme all
the Sahaja Yogis felt that Shri Mataji We all laughed aloud, cheered,
was breaking into another dimension. applauded in a joyous tumult. Shri
Wrapped in a white silk saree,
Hanuman was putting a nice dot at the
standing before a white wall, Her black
end of His Mother's statement.
all,
hair, rivers of night, on Her shoulders,
Actually, with this fire-works, the city
council of Paris was celebrating some
magnificent, She spoke with immense
power; "In the past, France has in important event of the French history.
many ways, given a bad example to Sahaja Yogis guess they'll never quite
know which one.
the rest of the world. It is time that the
people of France take to self
VICTORY TO THE PURIFIER OF THE
realisation... The last Judgement has
EARTH'S PAINFUL LIVER!
started. Don't worry whether you are
VICTORY TO HER WHO RESTS ON
ready or not: this is for ME to decide
THE COSMIC SERPENT!
It is your Kundalini who will judge
VICTORY TO OUR EXTRAORDINARY
you..."
MOTHER!
Walking out of the conference hall Shri
VICTORY TO SHRI MATAJI!
Mataji, with a laugh and a gesture of
the hand, exclaimed: "We won Paris;
The European Sahaja Yogis
it is done!" As She stepped out of the
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-50.txt 
 िर्मल धाम LDAS
