The Divine Cool Breeze 1Vin 1 May-June, 2005

 12

 NIRMALA UNIVERSAL PURE RELIGION In This Issue:- Adi Guru Puja - London - 4th July 1982 12 Seeking and Finding 19 Sayings of the Adi Gurus 20 Incarnations 20 An Experience 21 Realisation 21 After Realization 22 Fearlessness Action Related to Spirit 23 25 A Letter to Shri Mataji 27 An Encounter with the Truth Shri C. P. Srivastava's speach 26-12-1980 29 32 Protocol to be observed at Puja 34 In flight to U.S.A. with the Mother 36 Shri Mataji's letter 37 Shri Mataji's letter 39 Confidence in our Vibrations 40 Antar Yoga 41 Lighting the Lamps DHARMA VMHSIA

 THE D IVINE Co OL BRE E ZE ТнE Published by Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. Infosys House, Plot No. 8, Chandragupt Housing Society, Paud Road,Kothrud, Pune-411 029 eeleinnt Printed at Amarnath Press (P) Ltd. WHS 2/50, Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi - 15 Ph.:25268673 Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions and Subscription to:- Shri G.L. Aggarwal Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 222, Desh Bandhu Apartments Kalkaji, New Dehi-110019 Tel. No. :011-26422054, 26216654 Please Send Your Experiences, Articles, Miracle Photographs etc. to: Shri O.P. Chandna G-11-(463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110 034

 "ESTABLISHING THE GURU PRINCIPLE" ADI GURU PUJA Nightingale Lane, London, July 4, 1982 We all have assembled here to is not looked after or maintained, that is understand the ways and methods of destroyed. If you do not pay attention, say, establishing our principle of a Master. to these beautiful plants here they will be Krita Yuga means the time when you have destroyed. Even matter which is not to do something; Krita: when it is done. attended to is destroyed. So first of all we So you are the channels of that way, doing have to know that we must be attentive and the work of God. You are the channels of alert that if we do not maintain ourselves God Almighty and His Power. On one side you have to carry the maintenance is not for maintenance sake. dignity, the glory and the assumption that It is for stopping the destruction of your you are a Guru, on the other side you have Guru Principle. When we are negligent or to be compietely surrendered to your God lazy about it we are responsible for Almighty. All your dignity, your authority, destroying our Guru Principle. So the comes from Him. And the third thing is attention that we have is to be given to the that the way He has created this universe maintenance of this Guru Principle. and you in a mood of play, you have to see His play. So a kind of mood that is maintain themselves and maintain others. cheerfulness should be really bubbling In the beginning when the Gurus tried to through you. So far the idea of Guru was that such put very very strong rules and regulations. a person never laughs, never smiles, If you read Bible in the Levi Chapter you always in a temper. That was alright for will find all the Shariats (rules) that are Gurus who did not have to have any described which they are following now in contact with the public but hang Riyadh, or in the Arabic countries. To themselves with a string somewhere in the maintain that principle within yourself it's Himalayas. But here we are facing the written in such strong language like: such entire universe which has to receive the a person who does not do this should be bubbling streams of your love. But that killed to death, such a person does does not mean that you have to be anything wrong of this kind should be killed frivolous, because you cannot be. The by stonning. That was at the very divine play is not frivolous, it is joyful. And beginning, so the people now at that stage the joy does not have that duality. So, to get to the establishment of This was not meant in any way to insult or your Guru Principle first we should know to harm, or to take away the freedom of how it is destroyed. As it is, anything that human beings. But it was meant for people we will be destroyed. Because The Gurus have the capacity to establish this maintenance principle they of evolution required that kind of a fear.

 The Divine Cool Bireeze May- June, 2005 to give a great idea of the importance of placed under the most fortunate the principle of Guru within themselves. At circumstances that you are realised souls that stage they used the frightening before your Guru Tatwa is fully established. methods I should say, horribly dangerous You have all the power that any Guru can type. And that time people obeyed also. Then another evolutionary state took Guru Tatwa. Specially you are under the place where a stage started, people complete blanket of the clouds of your thought they must become austere and Mother's love. start maintaining themselves by tremendous austerity, so it was self to allow you to destroy your Guru Principle. projected, it was not projected towards the As I told you that Guru Principle is a very others, but projected towards themselves. sensitive thing and is destroyed if We can say that the first wave yourself do not try to maintain it. First of all started when the Guru, the Primordial the destruction starts from the very source Guru, said that if you don't do this then you of our being. I mean to say that our being will be killed. The second stage was when is created by five elements, and the five the disciples accepted this within elements have a capacity all the time to themselves and started telling themselves get destroyed. Any one of these elements that if we do not do it we will kill ourselves. if they are not looked after, get destroyed. Austerity started on the basis of wisdom That is the built-in capacity of the elements and not on obstinacy. But then it became or of the matter as you can say. So to even fanaticism. So it went to one maintain them is important. extreme. It started with the idea of maintenance. But maintenance itself you become a Guru you need not maintain became impossible or perhaps they anything, it is maintained by itself. It is not. thought they are not being able to Agreed that the Spirit definitely enhanced maintain, they got confused and to them the beauty and the health of this element. rules and regulations became more But at the human level there is always a important than maintenance itself. Thus greater force that is trying to destroy it. So you find they destroyed themselves. The wisdom or the essence of Guru there is chance of this destruction working Tatwa is a balance. Like when you itout. maintain a plant, if you do not give it water it will die, if you give it too much water it needed?" And this is the important will die. So the wisdom lies in question we should be able to answer all understanding how much water should be the people who ask us. Without the given to the plant so that it comes up at balance you cannot ascend. If you cannot it's best. Now this wisdom has to be achieved human beings? For example, everything through vibratory awareness. You are aspire, without having established your But in no way Mother's love is going you So people have an idea that once till we have completely become the Spirit One will say "why is this balance ascend what's the use of our becoming is God but nobody is aware. At the human

 May - June, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze level you become aware, means not bathing. Some people are fond of everything exists, everything is there, but getting up early in the morning singing it is not aware. So there is a stone, that is songs and waking up everyone, some are also God, but it is not yet aware. Like say good at sleeping till 10 o'clock. Some like this area is completely dark and we are very light coloured dresses, some very gold blind. There is nothing to be seen, to be coloured dresses. If you are French, you felt or experienced when you are in that want to have wine little bit. If you are Italian, condition. Actually one thinks that darkness you want to have carbohydrates too much. is the truth, that ignorance is the truth, but If you are Spanish you want to have too when the sun comes up and the light much of fats. If you are Indians you want to comes in and your eyes open, you start have too much of spices. So to change seeing everything. You start becoming this habit you have to give up first of all the aware. So at human level you are aware extremes that you like. at the highest point. Now this awareness has to become then you should sayI must eat lot of chilies. the awareness of the Spirit. That has Ifyou say I like pale colours, than you wear happened to you, you have felt the Spirit. very gold ones. Go from one extreme to But the balance is not there as yet. Your another extreme to begin with. But I have Mother has pulled you out and made you seen people when they go from one that but still there is imbalance inside. If extreme they get stuck up on the other side you go slightly to the left you can be also. So we have to be in the centre- not destroyed, you go to the right you will be to the extremes. destroyed. So you have to try both the things as I have told you the methods which who is a great Master, can never be I will explain. First of all you have to be austere ruled by any ideas that "I like this." He sees with yourself, just separate yourself from beauty in the lush greenery and he sees yourself. Separate yourself as a Spirit, and beauty in the trees which are devoid of any look at your ego and superego. Now you leaves. start watching the ego and super ego- do not maintain it, they are the destroying ina very funny way, has started in the West. forces. Now when you see the play as a Like if you comb your hair then you are no witness of these destroying forces you will good. If you do not smell in the body then know how to also maintain yourself better. you are no good. If you don't look like a To separate yourself is easier when you pig, you are no good. All kinds of funny sort take to austerity. The worst thing that elements have because they are going to the other done to you is that you have formed habits. extreme. All kind of hang ups. Some people are fond of bathing, some people are fond of Nature dresses up itself when it has to Now if you say that I like bland food, A man who is an Avadhuta, the one hanged up by any hang ups. He cannot be Now the trend of getting to austerity of ideas have crawled into the mind But we have to learn from the nature.

 May - June, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze actually what happens that you 'see' it yourselves, so let us see. Get out of that mental conception that you know already about it. You do not know, because what you know is just mental. That should be a part and parcel of your being. Now how to do it? Some will say that we'll just go on being austere about it. Then that will become again another obsession. Some will say, alright Mother has said we should enjoy, so we will just enjoy. How to strike the balance is the big problem. But should not be with people who have vibratory awareness. In that also you can be obsessed. I've seen people talking like they are all great Sahaja Yogis and they are getting no vibrations and saying they are getting vibrations. It is so deceptive. So one has to think that we have to go further and see more and know about it. But if you then ask the French how are you, they like this - that means they are always in imbalance. You ask an Englishman he will say "Don't know" or they say "I know" - there is nothing in between. Now we have to understand that we are greet the spring, and when it is the winter, it just gets completely undressed, I should say, because the leaves have to get to the Mother Earth and that the sun has to reach the Mother Earth. It is not attached to anything. Surprisingly, it is much more elemental than we are. While we, who are spiritual, should have no attachment. But this idea is also a mental idea, which is the worst attachment. It's very funny attachment which makes me laugh, that is the biggest joke that l've seen, that people get attached to mental ideas. It is like believing that whatever you think mentally will just happen to you. Say for a mental person he has to go to a picnic, he will mentally put in his mind that he is going to take this, that and that. He may even open a file and write it down thatIam going to take this, this and this with me. And when he goes to the picnic he finds that he is high and dry because he has not taken anything with him, that it is all in the file. Your Mother is good at speaking and She speaks to you but it should not be your mental attachment. Like, "Yes Mother says so" and every body discusses with such great enthusiasm this is that, but is a very common attachment nowadays with all the people knowing about everything and having nothing. This mental attachment is to be really attacked. Becoming is seeing, becoming is experiencing. Becoming is seeking, it is experiencing. Like if I have to come to this place I must come and 'see' it. Ifl only have thoughts about it and mental ideas, mental pictures, it is no good, it is not mine, it's not the truth. So when you become aware carrying the light in our hands, and the light should not shake; we have to hold the light tight. And we should have a concentrated attention towards the maintenance of the light. And then to tell yourself that we have to 'see' not just to understand mentally, - is to be actually aware. Because you are complete otherwise- you are the part and parcel of the whole- you are! But only thing is that you have not yet seen that. You have mentally accepted, but you have not "become' that. Because mental projection comes from thought. That means you are

 May - June, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze at the level of the thought. You have to it so much that they feel that protocol is not become thoughtless. But if you live on the alright and there should be proper basis of thought, then you are still below protocol, so we are looking after protocol, the Agnaya chakra. So all the thought we are the guards of the protocol, and all waves must be stopped to being with and these things. should say that alright let us 'see' now. So from the Nabhi chakra you come side see the ego of others while those who up to the Agnaya Chakra. Then above that are on the ego side see the emotions of comes the third problem of destruction, - others. So one criticizes another. But they is emotional. The emotional is a 'very' don't see themselves, that they are falling subtle one. Like some people Sahaja into a trap into one of the extremes. So Yogis, will sit down with a guitar and start unless and until you are detached you singing as if they are all lovebirds, you see. So the most delicate one is the emotional. This emotional one is a collectivity in a mistake but it happened to be a mistake. camouflage. For example when the For the first three years of Sahaja Yoga, I Sahaja Yogis meet they will hug never talked of a bhoot. I thought that themselves, kiss each other, they will be would be able to manage without that. But very very nice to each other and sit down a lady came in Sahaja Yoga who was and sing songs like hippies. Take the possessed and who tried all kinds of tantric guitar in the hand and swing on the tune of tricks, so I had to tell them. Now every love. This is actually Vishuddhi at the Sahaja Yogi is a bundle of bhoots. You collectivity point. And that of course is very ask any Sahaja Yogi," why did you do it?" difficult to get rid of, because it gives you"Must be a bhoot". If you say that how is it a very comfortable feeling. And people that you have done such a thing. Then they get confused with emotions, they think it will say "I do not know, it is the bhoot who is joy. Joy only can be achieved through has done." They are never there, all the complete detachment. The detachment bhoots are there. which is egoless and super egoless. But now the problem that human even as a Guru, because if my disciples beings start facing is the assumption that are there I can tell them but if they are they are Gurus. They start speaking about bhoots what am I to tell them? I can talk Sahaja Yoga, talking that they have to Sahaja Yogis but not to bhoots, they become already Shri Krishna. They have won't listen to me. So this is the greatest even a greater ego than the person who escape which Sahaja Yogis have found is actually ignorant about Sahaja Yoga. now, which is the worst, which was never They start talking with such tremendous before. So sometimes I feel it was a ego that I myself am frightened of them. mistake How much they know about Sahaja Yoga, They excuse themselves by just saying," I sometimes think. And they start asserting Mother, it is some negativity". Now those who are on the emotional cannot see it. I will not say that I committed a NowI don't understand how to deal, I introduced this word "bhoot."

 May - June, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze If you are detached, like stone, then What have we to do? Just stand in the you cannot contain this negative water in centre'. At the axis. Try to keep yourself itself in it. You don't become more at the Axis. And then you just see the negativity, you become more a guru. Now, periphery moving, you don't mind. when I say that you should not be negative, supposing under such circumstances you in any way, punish yourself. It is better that should not be a bhoot, you should be you punish than the Divine punishes you, yourself, then they start feeling guilty. So because that is a severe punishment. But all kinds of anti-Guru tricks are working out. do not feel guilty: because you have not am your Guru, and it is anti your Guru, to done anything wrong, it is the bhoot which play these tricks upon yourself. Now you will play these tricks with we should realize that we are Gurus a me-what's the use? You have to gain we cannot be bhoots. something and you are playing tricks against me. You have to be more aware. You are not to be destroyed. Apart from have to learn good manners. These that you have to save others. How will you manners become your nature. Sometimes do it in case if you do not accept that it is people who are very fond of food, I always your privilege, that it is your fortune, that tell them they should fast. Whatever you you have been chosen to be the medium are fond of, try to give up. Try to overcome of God's work. Sometimes I feel that all your sicknesses of attachments, your the bhoots have come to me for realization habits. Once your Guru Tatwa is and I am now going to become a bhoot established, you will be accepted as a myself! Bhoot also means Bhootnath, is Guru. There will not be any need for you to the name of Shri Shankara, Shri Shiva, say that you are a Guru, people will know because He gets after the bhoots all the that you are. We don't have to then write time. When you see yourself misbehaving has done! So we come to the point that nd We have to change our outside also to become good Gurus. For example, we But you have to be the present and on our foreheads that we are Gurus, not the bhoot, bhoot means the past. Then what is there to be known? you can see the divinity walking, you can You become,-when you are in the see the dignity walking, the glory coming present. You just start becoming, up. evolving, blossoming. Try to be in the present. Do not escape the present, face the light of that within enlightenment will be it. Don't feel guilty, nor blame the bhoot, shown outside. But it should not be a both things are going to take you away mental idea or an emotional idea but from the present. Now just see the whole should be the happening, the becoming, nature, the whole divine power, your ardent the awareness. You have to experience desire of ages, everything is on your side. through your own experimentation upon The time has come. You are just there. yourself. Even I do that. When I cannot people will know that this is a Guru walking, You have to change from within and

 The Divine Cool Breeze May - June, 2005 wears the green upon herself. And the green is the Guru principle. She is the detached personality. She is the magnetism, She attracts. When people are walking on Her, She is looking after them. reach you from one end because you are a bhoot, I reach you from ane end because you are a bhoot, I reach you from the other. If somebody says he is a bhoot, then I see that he suffers a little, and faces it, the bhoot in him. For example, somebody-l tell someone that please do this and he forgets completely about it, and he says that it is a bhoot that has done. So then he loses his purse and then I say the bhoots must have taken away the purse. But I experiment with myself. first see how I should approach you. If it does not work out I try something else, within myself. Because it's a very tricky time we are with. If you had gone according to the shariat (rules) or the chapter of Levi, all the bhoots would not be here! May be no Sahaja Yogis might have been left also! And this mental projection is such a common thing that it is difficult to detach people, but only way I can play tricks with you is by experimenting myself on you. In the same way you must play with yourself and try to put yourself in an experimental She creates out of Her Svayambhoos, the self manifested stones. Her attraction and concern is so great that without Her we would be hanging in the air. And She keeps me to the brass tacks, as they say, to the reality. If I wanted I could be just the Spirit and not bother about anybody else. The way She bears our sins, the way She always looks after us and nourishes us despite our so many defects, in the same way a Guru should do. She is 'extremely' forgiving. But She explodes as an earthquake, and sometimes hot calcium and hot potassium can come out of Her. She produces sulfur for your cure. If England's soil becomes vibrated, then this soil can be used for medicine. In India people use clay for medicine, for every kind of treatment. The understanding about Guru Tattva one can have from the Mother Earth. So let us touch the Mother Earth and bow to Her. box. Today is the day of Guru Puja, the day when you have to worship your Guru. You are really fortunate to have a Guru which is a Mother. And my Mother and Guru is this Mother Earth which teaches me how to deal with human beings. And She is the one who also at every stage of difficulties helps me to correct my own methods of Nirmala Vidya. She has been such a kind Mother and a kind Guru to me. May God Bless you. In the Kundalini Shastra, Mother Earth is the Kundalini. Mooladhara is the Mother Earth. So for us, Kundalini is the most important thing. We don't have to worry about what they have talked about in the Levi, that you must not steal, you must not tell lies. What we have to worry is to keep your Kundalini up. And She is such a soothing personality. All this green though is given to her by Sun, as they say, is just to soothe us all. She

 10 May- Jurie, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze You know that we cannot take So the Guru has to be a person who is 'absolutely practical'. He must have anything with us. Only the Guru can take common sense and 'absolutely practical', with him something. Nobody else can take he cannot be an impractical person. A it. Only the Guru has all the disciples and person who's impractical is not a Guru. But practical in the common way is ages' who will sing the praise. No other understood as a man who is cunning, who relationship is that eternal. It goes on knows how to deviate from right path and reflecting for ages and ages and ages. It's all that. That is the most impractical thing one wave that falls and disappears, in to do! Something absurd, something out anything that you do every wave of the blue is not the way a Guru has to disappears, but not the wave of knowledge move. There is all common sense which from a Guru. It's even higher than the should guide a Guru how to deal with a Divine principle cannot explain, it is the person. And common sense is a thing Guru who explains it. Not that it manifests which is not cunningness by any chance. but it explains and it works out, so he is The source of common sense is the Spirit. the master of the Divine Power. The expression of a Guru is very very paradoxical. For example, a Guru will be meaning of the Guru. Like the word has extremely practical, supposing he has to the meaning, and the word serves the build his own house, a house or an ashram, or anything, he will be extremely serves the Guru. Everything is at your practical. He will be very economical, he disposal. When you are a Guru all your will create something out of the blue, charkas are at your disposal. All the people will be amazed how he has done universe is at your disposal. Because you it, so practical. But he will be so detached are the Guru! Its like the director of the that if this ashram is to be donated to show. The stage man, the gentleman who somebody, in one second he will donate is in charge of the lights, the gentleman it. For acquiring, say for example, for who is in charge of the loud speaker, acquiring a lamp, the Guru will be very 'everybody' has to serve the director, practical, he will get the best and the because he is training the actors. cheapest and the most beautiful. And he will be very intense about it. But when it much unchallenged, it should be of such a will come to giving he will be even more capacity that nobody can challenge that, it intense about it. That when he will give should be such a capable personality that with the same intensity. He will find out all nobody should be able to challenge the practical methods how to donate, also to Guru, then only it will work out. So you have give away. So his acquiring is actually to work it out in a such a way that you are giving. He acquires to give. That's how absolutely unchallengeable. And you are he is the most practical. disciples and disciples and disciples for So in a way, Divine Power is like the meaning. But ina Guru Principle, the Divine But the Guru Principle has to be so specially fortunate that you can see

 11 May June, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze yourself and correct yourself, which accept, you are our mother also". Solsaid, nobody could do before, you are your own "I am going to be very hard like a Guru and Guru. This situation 'never' happened. nothing-doing today, nothing is going to You are your own Guru. And let me be convince me". your Mother. That would be the best for Because again you become the Mother, then the whole thing becomes me. So today is the day when one has to again that soft business. Solwent to open determine how far you are a Guru - first a tap, - because in India we don't believe point. You have to take a pledge that you in wash basins you see, - to wash my will establish your Guru Principle. - hands. And Indian taps as they are, you Second point. Thirdly, you have to pledge see, it gave in and I got completely that you will establish Guru Principles in drenched. AndI came out and I said please others. Fourthly, you have to know that give me the sari to wear!. there is a little snag, that your Guru is a Mother. She is too kind to be a Guru. Too Guru and a very hard one! Then Warren mild to be a Guru. And extremely tolerant. came to say that Mother somebody has So it is better that you take up this bought a sari and this is that and that is strictness towards yourself and look after that, he gave lot of arguments. And Rustom Today I had decided to be a 'real' and Warren were trying to, you see, put me yourself. May God bless you. Become your down in my place! But then they used the own Guru, On every Guru day, I have a problem. said the sari is beautiful, this, that it was And one of the problems is that on every alright; then they said the vibrations are too Guru Puja day I think I should become a good, even before opening the sari, the complete Guru at least on one day I should vibrations were there. O all my efforts not be a Mother. But every time I try these fizzled out. tricks it works against me. Last year in India I told them that this time I am going Divine. What is called as Madhurya. to be just Guru and you have to only give "Madhurya' means the sweetness. The me a shawl, and I will not take any sari sweetness. And this is the one that is such a nd nothing like a Mother. And I was very a hide and seek of joy in life. And that is stern with them and I said that at any cost what I have accepted, so first we will have I am not going to take a sari, whatever you the Mother's Pooja. may do. And they were very unhappy because they had bought a sari for me and they said, "we h also stitched a blouse and petticoat ar ther you must greatest argument to out-wit me, - first they This is the play of the sweetness of (Nirmala Yoga)

 SEEKING AND FINDING By JASON COPELAND When I look at the longings and passions I felt before meeting Mother, it is hard to discern how I merited the title of seeker. I have to look closely into the jumble of aims and conflicting desires that moved my life then, and see if any of it had any consistent thread. In fact there were several. Religion was not noticeably one of them; I was brought up a Catholic in the dogmatic Irish tradition, and hated the Catholic Church with a violent rage born of the brutal, insensitive, mindless terrorI had received owning classes and bureaucrats with spurious hopes of a better life after death. It should be remembered here that Christians do not believe in reincarnation, so their despair and drive to ingratiate themselves with authority- is thus total. Religion seemed to me to be the ultimate fraud, the sickest con trick played in the history of the universe, the cruelest and most foul tradition of the human spirit that the perversity of the human spirit could concoct. So much for religion. That of course was entirely without prejudice as to the question of whether or not God exists. I went through several different stages on that one, sometimes believing that God doesn't exist, sometimes that he did but was busy elsewhere on a less ambitious project than trying to create intelligent life on Earth, sometimes just that God must be the essence of crueity and hardness to allow such brutality, violence, injustice and savagery to continue. In 1971, having been a dope- smoking revolutionary hippie for some years, I looked at one of the varieties of imported oriental mysticism then available in England, a pouty-looking brat of an alleged Guru called Guru Maharaj ji, who was then about thirteen years old. His acolytes said many interesting things about spirituality and "the knowledge", and impressed me with what seemed to my misted eyes to be a degree of sincerity and depth that I had not found elsewhere, from it. I didn't grow up in a happy home, my parents broke up when I was small and after that all I remember is unhappiness and fear. Everything seemed to be a sin, especially speaking to adults they didn't want to hear what you said. Religion to me means black clothing, miserable old men putting the frighteners on small children, mystifying ceremonies in a long- dead language, and violent punishment for the slightest sin (especially if it was fun or involved thinking for oneself) and ultimately eternal damnation to a hell of sadistic tortures in which burning flesh seemed to be the main component, by a vindictive elderly male deity with no sense of humour. That was my early view of religion. AsI grew up and found out just how many true faiths there are, I concluded that Marx was right, and the whole and only purpose of religion was to drug the populace into cringing submission to the property

 13 May - June, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze God I wanted – the God I was looking for was warm and generous and full of love, which fat brat visibly wasn't. I had always envisaged saints and large, loving, forgiving, great-hearted, generous people who shone with laughter of infinite love. I was never very interested in the rest of the gurus that battened on the detritus of the druggy generation after that, so in the following decade I went back into the revolution in its many forms, hoping to build a better world. I got into the claimants' Union strugglers for justice for the sick and unemployed, into squatting struggles for justice for the homeless, into law centres, therapy and the "growth movement", housing co-ops, and lots of other efforts intended as blows against the empire of mammon. It was a great adventure and a great training ground; I learned much, became good at administration and social security advice. I spent most of my spare time in meetings, and saw almost everything as a political struggle. The trouble was, most of the rest of humanity didn't seem to grasp that view, and the situation on the planet as a whole went on getting worse, with wars and battles on the increase daily, socialites and other fighters for human rights and dignity getting mauled, the rich getting richer every day by robbing the poor and the man in the street getting more insular and apathetic all the time. The result of that was that I so I decided to try it. I wasn't at all sure that I possessed the requisite degree of sincerity since my main motive for looking for God seemed to be a desire to escape from the suicidal lunatic asylum I found Earth to be, but I was sufficiently motivated not to want to miss out on God and real love at last if this was it, so I hung around for long enough to persuade the "mahatmas" of my interest and eventually asked for 'the knowledge". On the appointment day, I was taken with several other postulants to an upstairs room, and after the introductory 'satsang" was shown four meditation techniques with which I tried to meditate for a few months. The movement in Britain was much populated by not very bright young people whose rejection of intellectuality seemed mainly to stem from their inability to pursue a thought for more than ten words. That was the first thing that made me suspicious. I could see the need in spiritual pursuits to bring the rational mind to a recognition of the narrowness of its own limits, but the extent of the willing mindlessness of little fatso's devotees seemed to me to mock the dignity of man and God, and to insult the tools God gave man. Secondly the abject abnegation of ego espoused by the premise seemed to produce an unhealthily degrading effect, an atmosphere of self-hatred rather than one of sincere and warm humility. I couldn't understand what sort of God would want to be worshipped by such cringing ciphers as the long-term devotees made of themselves at any rate, such a mean, spiteful and power-hungry deity wasn't the took increasing solace in my other two consuming passions, alcohol and women, when I became too tired or despondent to work myself to distraction. Marriages as an institution had no credibility in my view3;

 14 The Divine Cool Breeze May June, 2005 wasn't into having a Guru at that time either (Oh Mother, what an idiot!) so l just smiled and put the picture down again... but there did commence then an unconscious my parents were disastrously mismatched and couldn't cope with each other at all, and many friends had parents who stayed together for decades in silent misery and consuming bitterness "for the sake of the children" and multiplied every- one's unhappiness by so doing. So life for me was a series of attempts to love a women that failed or succeeded for only a short process of anxiety-suppose this time it was a real incarnation of God? Later that year I was languishing in bed with one of the frequent colds that my imbibing and smoking habits left me prey to, when the same girlfriend dropped in That then was my life consisted of: with her Sahaja Yogi friend in tow. That lady unending work in the cause of creating a breezed in smiling and laughing and better a society – with fewer people saying encouraging things, and her believing in it, and me beginning to doubt freshness, purity and laughing warmth the ability of humans to behave rationally made the most profound impression on in their own interest-booze taking its slow me. Thus were two seeds planted which were before very long to bear the greatest not giving me the warm and gentle lovel possible fruit. Though for the moment my sought nor accepting what I offered. A conscious mind forgot about them (thank threefold path that led nowhere. But God it did that instead of messing the therefore I describe the simultaneously memory around with rationalizations) the end of these paths, I shall mention a impressions created by the two encounters stayed with me, quickening my were to have a much greater significance vibrations, and were later to return to consciousness with devastating effect. But let us return to what happened showed me a small picture of Mataji. She "before". In 1980 I knew much despair. had been taken to a meeting by a friend, Lunatics in governments throughout the and thought Mother was very nice but world were taking increasingly loudly about wasn't into having a guru at that particular nuclear weapons, and a climate of tension moment. I looked closely at the picture and was being created which as a student of thought how lovely and warm She looked, history I recognized, and which terrified me and what a lovely idea it would be to have to the depths of my being. Meanwhile a lady guru if you were going to have one exploiters seeking profit continued apace at all.I though that was just the sort of joke to strip the planet of all the resources they that God (the warm loving God I was after could thieve from it, whole species of that is) would play on people's animals were being wiped out, and the expectations, as God is always thought of very capacity of the Earth to support life as exclusively male in the west. But it was being systematically destroyed. The time. but mounting toll on my health, and women couple of incidents along the way which than was at first apparent. In spring 1979 my then girl friend

 May - June, 2005 15 The Divine Cool Breeze burning of the Amazonian forests of my beliefs, and brought out the question particularly frightened me-with the I had been avoiding for years. Although I amount of foliage destroyed by that was never a communist, my political hopes wanton vandalism, a shortage of oxygen for a better world were in general tied in to breathe was being caused. So which with the struggle of the left for economic was going to happen first, was the planet and political liberation for the world as a going to choke on the pollutions and whole, and this article landed me squarely poisons of humanity's unfettered greed, with the conclusion that self-govermment by or was it going to be a radioactive cinder humans was not possible, they always by the paranoid genocide machines. All the time people walked about improvement in the human condition by apparently unconcerned while at night I rational effort alone. cried aloud in fright "God, if you exist help!" Through real and bitter tears I called out less than twelve hours, my world had "God, please come into my life, help me!" collapsed. I walked out into the rain with In the summer of 1980 my fear quickened one thing left to check out, and that was a with every newspaper I read. At the same friend who had been telling me for weeks time, the negative process of my other that she wanted me to meet her spiritual passions quickened pace. On July 19th I teacher. AsI stumbled along, I was crying, got a rude brush-off from a women with and muttering myself through the pain whom I was hoping to get off. I felt awfully "God, if this is all there is to life, you can hurt by the shock and got excessively stick it!" For the first time in my life, I actually drunk. This, and overdrinking of past 3 wanted to die. The fight had gone out of weeks caused nausea for alcohol and I Swore it off on the spot. On the same day, sobbed. "I want out of it." I read an article in the newspaper. It was a fluent and well written travel saw straight away the state I was in. She piece by a writer who knew Russia well, took me upstairs and made some coffee, and described at great length the moral and we talked a little. After a few minutes corruption, self-seeking, time-serving, the mist started to clear a little and I noticed cynicism and general climate of pettiness a small pink picture on her mantelpiece. and purposelessness prevailing in the went over and looked at it a little more showpiece of communism. The Russian closely. Then ! leaned forward to look at it people, he said, had a strong spirituality, a bit closer still. And closer and closer. but since the revolution religion had been Kaboom! A thousand megaton explosion forbidden in any from, the nation's heart, tore away the remaining vestiges of my deprived of an outlet for its aspirations, mind and slammed the life back into my fouled it up, and thus there was no hope of That was it. In three easy stages over me, I had no hope left. "If this all there is."I I arrived at my friend's house and she heart. A tiny voice within me whispered deafeningly "Mary!" and I knew in that split had turned black. This article affected me to the core

 May - June, 2005 16 The Divine Col Breeze second that I had found God's incamation. The tears of joy and sweet, blessed relief ran rivers down the windows of my soul. For the next twenty-four hours I was out of my head with joy, relief and excitement. There was no doubt in my mind as to precisely what I had been lucky enough to discover, and the importance of it, and the incredible fact that little me had been smiled on by God, that God had answered my anguished cry for help, sent me completely over the moon with excitement. I knew that this was the goodness I had always wanted. My exultation cannot be described. After Her talk, Mother asked me which false guru I had been to, and I told her. She then sat me down on the floor in front of Her and laid Her feet on various parts of my back and front. I didn't know about bhoots then, but I did physically feel negativity, bad energy, leaving my body at various points, and pains and blockages moving about. Mother cricked my neck and did several other things to straighten my spine up a bit, and kept Her feet on my suffering body for what felt like at least half an hour. Great heat came out, and became dazed with the intensity of the operation as the vibration flooded through me. Afterwards, I felt much cleaner, much lighter, straighter of body and of mind, and filled with great love, peace, security and bliss, and a sense of the vastness of God and the permanence of the spirit. The presence of the Kundalini was so palpable. in all my sensations that I hardly needed to ask my hands whether they felt cool breeze - I felt strong sensations on my head, in my heart and throughout my body. The sense of well-being pervaded all over me, along with the tangible effects of the clearing-out mother had given me. On the way home, I threw away my tobacco tin and gave up smoking permanently, and then leapt in the air and Swung round lampposts for sheer joy and exuberance. I felt like a long-lost son who discovery of a thousand life-times, and that certainty sustained me for much of the succeeding week during which time I had precious little interest in food or sleep or indeed anything at all save Mother and the vibration. I could hardly contain myself until the Monday night. When I was due to attend a meeting of Sahaja Yoga in Westminster, where mother was expected to appear. I took my place early in the meeting hall, and meditated on Mother's picture. When She arrived, my wildest dreams were instantly fulfilled; by Her gentleness, warmth, sweetness, joy, laughter, charm and general unbounded lovingness. I knew the Goddess of love was here, and I felt a great relief as all the terrors of the stern punitive masculine God of the Catholics evaporated-and I laughed with joy and freedom from fear. Mother sat down and gave a talk, of which I remember little, so wild was my joy, save that She was full of humor and laughter- and my cup of joy ran truly over at the amazing revelation of the Goddess of bountiful love and had just been welcomed home by his Mother, and my awe and joy were uncontainable. The intense excitement continued as my mind began to grasp in a

 May - June, 2005 17 The Divine Cool Breeze little more detail the implications and the longer smoke or drink or take any drugs, I enormity of what had happened to me. am physically, mentally and emotionally That night, like the night before and most healthier, I've lost much of the neurotic way of the succeeding fortnight, I slept hardly of life I sued to pursue and most of the at all, and thought only about mother, and attitudes that went with it, I no longer waste everything that flowed from realization. my time on political endeavor. By One by one pieces of my life came to mother's immense and infinitely generous consciousness to be completely re- grace I am now married to a Sahaja evaluated in the new and searching light Yogini, and we are a family of four, of Sahaja Yoga. I realized for example that including two children, Some material I would not be in my current job for very problems remain, but far fewer than I had much longer. The organisation I was before. Very much remains for me to learn working for was wrongly based-like all from the consequences of omissions that political initiatives it was based in ego, in I really have to meditate regularly twice a the idea that humans could govern day and shoe beat at least as often, and themselves, so that was out. Also, it to be constantly aware of the state of my contained people who took drugs, vibrations and chakras. Now, having learnt smoked and drank unrestrainedly, and the necessity, I must learn to actually do followers of false gurus. My earnest desire these things! was to escape from that situation now-I didn't want to work for such people or be all my desires. if at any time I feel the in contact with such rubbish. I wanted to necessity to change the world, Mother so live dharmically, but knew it would take a arranges things that I give an introductory little while to find anew the right and wrong. talk at a public meeting for newcomers, In the meantime I learned also to put my and lam filled with joy that my voice is used trust in Mother's love, and not to feel guilty as a vehicle for persuading people to try for real or imagined errors. The friend who the one thing that is worth looking for. I introduced me to Sahaja Yoga gave much know that realization will have a far greater help over the first week, teaching me about effect on people's lives than any of the bandhans, foot soaking and various political solutions I used to advocate, and mantras, and introduced me to the chakras I feel privileged to be allowed to play a part and the Deities. It seemed so much to in spreading Sahaja Yoga. Life is not learn at first, and I wondered how I would easy, but now it is worthwhile, it is suffused ever remember it all, or cope with the great with a glorious optimism and positivity that number of new things to do and changes was totally lacking before. Every day there to go through. It did however cope with my life, and struggle to curb one's ego and surrender as time went on, had an increasingly wide to Mother, and the ever present necessity effect on me. Now, a year and a half later, to inculcate discipline in looking after it has transformed almost everything. I no one's spirit in all the ways Mother has I have the source of satisfaction of arises in some challenging form the

 The Divine Cool Breeze 18 May-June, 2005 am now part of a growing, loving and supporting collective under the guidance and protection of our Holy Mother. O Mother, from the bottom of my heart, I thank you! Bolo Shri Bhagawati Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Ki Jai. taught us; but all that happens in the context of great hope, joy and love, and the all- pervading certainty that one is on the right path at last. For me that certainty, in contrast to the agonizing doubt that preceded it, is the greatest of Mother's magnificent gifts. I am, above all, profoundly grateful that I have at last been released from the more of Maya that the rest of humanity is still stuck in, and that I Jason Copeland 10.12.1981 (Nirmala Yoga)

 SAYINGS OF THE ADI GURUS "No one asks with wisdom. My treasury is open. No one brings carts to take away the real treasures. I say: dig and search, but no one wants to take any pains. Be the true sons of the Divine Mother and fully stock yourself. What is to become of us? This body will return to earth and the air we breathe will melt into air. This opportunity will not return." "Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord; and you shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul, and with all your might." MOSES Men of superior righteousness spontaneously keep practicing the middle path, equally away from extremes." CONFUCIUS SHIRDI SAI BABA "Not knowing that one knows is best. Thinking that one knows when one does not know is sickness ; only when one becomes sick of this sickness can be one free from sickness. "O Queen of the Parabrahman! the knower of the Agamas call only Thee as the goddess of letters who is the wife of Druhina; they call only Thee as Padma who The sage is never sick ; because he is is the wife of Hari ; they call only Thee sick of this sickness, therefore he is not Partner of Hare, the daughter of the Mountain, while Thou perplexest the world, LAOTSE as the transcendent forth entity unattainable, and with Thy boundiess splendour, as the great illusory Being and sick." "Our true lover of knowledge naturally strives for reality, and will not rest content with each set of particulars which opinion takes for reality, but soars with undimmed and unwearied passion till he grasps the nature of each things as it is.... that is, with the faculty which is akin to reality and which approaches and unites with it." the fountain of all chastity. ADI SHANKARACHARYA Om Tvameva Sakshat Shri Jagatguru sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Bhagawati Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah. SSOCRATES (Nirmala Yoga)

 INCARNATIONS Different stages of human evolution you cannot have a direct rapport. took place when all these incarnations came on this earth. Incarnations have to come. If you many incarnations came on this earth. reason it out you will understand why an incarnation is needed to come on this After Our Self Realization it is our earth. The unconscious can guide you Responsibility to: through symbols which appear in your Show dreams. There are so many other ways Mother at all Times by certain happenings the unconscious, Give VIBRATIONS Always the Divine can guide you; but it is all and to VENTILATE Constantly. vague, extremely vague. The conscious must have a mouth to explain itself. It must Please Remember the 3 V's have proper body to be able to communicate what it has to say otherwise how are you going to have a rapport with unconscious. You are to be connected. Now somebody has to do this job. That is why VENERATION to our VENERATION VIBRATION VENTILATION You cannot have any rapport with the divine unless and until you know you are Atman, your Atma. Before that whatever you may try may create a depth in you, a serenity in you, a character in you but still Then VICTORY is Ours JAI SHRI MATAJI PHILIP-BIRMINGHAM (Nirmala Yoga) AN EXPERIENCE Bombay March - 1981 I'm giving this experience of my hip meet our respected Mataji and he came bone fracture which took place on 30h and met Mataji and got realised by Her. I November, 1980. I was told by my doctor only pray that more people will come to our that I would not be able to walk with out a Sahaja Yoga and take blessings of our stick for six months, but on the fifth day of respected Mataji who's a Real Goddess my operation Our Dear Respected Mataji Incarnation and we are really one of the came to see me in the hospital and with fortunate to have this Great Mother who is H. H. Mataji's grace and vibrations I felt full of Great Love and Blessings for those so much energy and such strong who come to her Lotus Feet. vibrations that I started walking without a JAI MATAJI stick within fifteen days. At this experience my doctor also was so surprised that he became very keen to Mrs. Mahtaney Nirmala Yoga

 REALISATION AFTER REALIZATION The awareness space of the I did not know Sahajyoga upto January, 1980. But l always harboured in conscious mind has increased. Ego and my heart an ambition to achieve super-ego gradually drop down and are something in "Yoga' invented by our ancient people. And due to this, I had an attraction towards, 'Yoga' from childhood. a direct link with the unconscious. It Because of this ever present manifests as the flow of vibrations. attraction, I attended the lecture of Mataji Shri Nirmala Deviji. And in that awakened. They are the reflections of the programme of Kundalini awakening, I got original deities on the Adi Chakras of the a rare thread of happiness and peace. Virata and they "organize" our awareness With the help of this thread I want to make accordingly. As they are linked together my life, full of real peace and happiness. by the ascended Kundalini the personality I realize that God is present in our becomes integrated. They decode and body also. As, through eyes, we get the respond to the messages from the Holy sensation of vision, through nose, the Spirit. They read other human beings as sensation of smell, through ears the awareness systems. They direct our sensation of hearing Kundalini is our spiritual growth. means of realizing presence of God in the 4. Collective Consciousness is World. 1. sucked back into Pingla and Ida. 2. The ascended Kundalini establishes t The deities on the charkas are 3. achieved. The attention is drawn inside because of the inward happening of Kundalini's rise. In a fully mature realized being, the Deities ascend from their place of work in the Chakra, to their own seats within the Sahasrara. This is the stage of complete Divine Integration. By means of cold, clean, holy vibration given by 'Mataji' we feel calm and happy. We can confirm the holiness of Mataji and vibration given by her photo also. Therefore, we can imagine how much great is our 'Mataji'. 5. The Advent (IIl-4 (92) JAI SHRI MATAJI Ravee Bhavsar Nehru Nagar, Dhule (Nirmala Yoga)

 FEARLESSNESS A realized being is someone who clouds dissipate when searched with the has felt the wind of the Spirit and whose stronger beam of enlightened attention. Sahasrara Chakra has been opened. He is not yet a real Sahaja Yogi. Areal Sahaja forget that your Mother is very powerfl, Yogi is someone who understands and that, She knows everything and that She realizes in his life a few basic principles loves you very much". So, to become of behaviour. One of them is fearlessness. fearless, a Sahaja Yogi has simply to Fear is cloud full of murmurs and, realize the truth, the depth and the power sometimes full of horror which spreads of this statement. To do so, we need from the left side through the heart chakra actualizing the nature, the divine nature of into the field of consciousness. Why do our relationship to Shri Mataji. And the we fear? Some of the Sahaja Yogis are One who can help us in this, is the great saints whose Ida Nadi still store the child-God: Shri Ganesha-Christ. memory of past lives' persecutions. Some others, in their seeking explorations have So, it may well be concretely helpful to pray been exposed to the various aspects of in our Mooladhara and agya charkas so hell. And a few are just plain cowards. Yet, as to become better aware that we are there is simply nothing but a cloud! It has sakshat children of the Adi Shakti. And no substance, no reality. Actually it is fear we should also pray Shri Jagadamba in which creates its own object: the thing we the heart chakra to bless us with a strong fear is created by fear itself. For, there is feeling of security. The key to the success simply nothing to be afraid of within the of these prayers is, of course, surrender. glorious beauty of reality. This reality can be encompassed in one statement: Shri Indeed, a Sahaja Yogi can always take Mataji Nirmala Devi, Mother of Sahaja refuge behind the indestructible all Yogis is Sakshat, the incarnated Adi pervading cosmic shield of Shri Shakti. This is a fact. This fact cannot be Bhagawati's attention. And then we also affected by mere opinions about it. Do become Her swords, because the fearless we realize that Her Power is beyond the attention of an enlightened being starts scrutiny of the Trimurties? Have we read burning away many forms of negativity. in the Devi Mahatmyam how the gently Fear itself is afraid of you when you are smiling Goddess became an enraged fearless! demons killer for the sake of Her children? Do we understand again that this is not a mythological tale but the actuality? How dare we fear? Really, if we look straight into our various fears, they will vanish: the Shri Mataji always says: "Never. With my best regards and Jai ShriMataji Gregoire de Kalbermatten ZUERICH (Nirmala Yoga - 81)

 ACTION RELATED TO SPIRIT: Our beloved Mother Shri Mataji has explained to us quite often that Sahaja Yoga is a dynamic, living process. Sahaja Yoga nourishes itself through itself and grows for itself. This dynamic, tremendous movement of positivity is ignited by our spirit which is the reflection of our Mother's divinity in our being. Every Sahaja Yogi's spirit is a part, a cell of Shri Mataji's body. This spirit must be activated to become a dynamic power, ready to attain and gain the hearts of the seekers who are still his spirit more and more. As our beloved Mother told us, we must express our desires. But what is desire? Desire is will put into action.' What should we desire? Not to have more money or more success in life, but we should desire our spirit to act. What does our spirit desire in order to act? The spirit desires to manifest his essence of joy outside and to spread the. flow of the divine vibrations of our beloved Mother. The spirit desires to be fully itself, bound to the Adi Shakti, and to increase the channels which unite us to Shri Mataji. So we have to let our spirit manifest its desire. If we do so, the spirit will do the job. It will automatically act. Enjoying its own fulfilment, it will express its joy through action and enjoy it's press its joy through action and enjoy it's own action. The spirit will be the motor of the engine, ready to go and put the Sahaja Yogi's wherever and whenever he likes; that means every Sahaja Yogi can be in thoughtless awareness wherever and whenever he searching God. As Sahaja Yogi's we must understand how to use our spirit, work with and leave our EGO and our misidentifications. When a new person gets his realization and stabilized his feelings and beliefs, the Unconscious will give him signs to help him to strengthen his faith towards Sahaja Yoga. Because he is still weak and shattered he goes up and down, very sensitive towards other people, catch from them and put his attention on other's negativity without knowing that he gets identified by this negativity. It is the first step where he may become a lethargic, trying to avoid those who did not get yet their realization, afraid of some "bhoots" hanging around in the air. But when he grows inside, discovering the subtleties of Sahaja Yoga and feeling manifestations of his spirit, he gets out of his mood of fear little by little, leaves his shell which covered his spirit and did not allow him to see around. likes, because it is his spirit which acts, and not his EGO. Then, the more our spirit acts, the more our EGO decreases and we are able to see our own beauty enlightened by this spirit. But to train our spirit to act, it would befoolish to say. "Now, Mr. X let your spirit act". It would not work. No, let's jump the water, let's work and live like the others, let's mix up ourselves with the "others" so that they can discover us only through the inside to the inside, from their heart to our heart. And the more we confront them, the the into A Sahaja Yogi, when his faith is settled down in this heart must manifest

 24 The Divine Cool Breeze May - June, 2005 over the world, we must let our spirit act so that we can improve the tides of love among ourselves and move together under the divine attention of our divine more we train ourselves and the more we use the powers of Sahaja Yoga. These are the powers of love and understanding, a perfect balance between patience and determination, tolerance and courage of telling the truth. Confronted with them, we leam how to adapt ourselves to every kind of situations, every specimen of "bhoots" and so we strengthen ourselves. Little by little we know how to deal with them and Mother Adi Shakti, the Holy Spirit, the desire of God Almighty, the Redemptor of the Humanity, the Absolute of all Absolutes, and so it knows to that the absolute does not move because He is the integration of all integrations, the action of all actions as well as the inaction of all inactions. In this sense every Sahaja Yogi's spirit must grow in order to understand that desire put into action means to move closer and closer to this especially we begin to understand that it is only through the action of our spirit that we can show authority upon them. When we meet Shri Mataji, we meet the absolute and we receive the absolute. So let's be Absolute and let flow into the collective Absolute through the inner manifestation of our acting spirit. We, all the Sahaja Yogis, should pray to our Mother to let us act through our spirit, because our spirit which acts, desires the other Sahaja Yogis to act too and so the collectivity increases. If we want to spread Sahaja Yoga all being the incomparable love and the extraordinary beauty of his Divine Mother. Maria -Amelia et Arneau de Kalberamatten (Nirmala Yoga-81)

 A LETTER TO SHRI MATAJI been flowing and how blessed we all are! All thanks to you, Mother 'O Adi Shakti. Needless to say to you Mother, we have made many mistakes for which we sincerely beg for forgiveness. Our ego, super ego, lack of precise knowledge, our often 'not so clear vibrations many mis- identifications and conditionings-all these things make us so unworthy of your continuous and overflowing grace. But the love has always been there. Many of your children have, by your grace, gained their self-realization here in Australia. This, very naturally, has given us and all the Sahaja- yogis and Yoginis great joy. There will be about 35 of your Australian children coming to India to be with you and the joy that they feel inside cannot be described. My beloved Mother, It is with great joy that I am writing to you, Mother, in that blessed land of India, where by your grace I gained the realization of myself, my whole being thrills with excitement, that in just several more weeks I shall be with the one, who has bestowed upon one of Her children, the gift of knowing one's Self. And of course, Terence feels just the same. When we left you, Mother, in Delhi were in all truth somewhat apprehensive of the future. We had been close to our Mother for 8 weeks and in the warmth of Her being we felt secure. When we left you, we felt like rather fearful baby- birds taking their first tentative flying lesson. And the confidence was far from established. Then when we arrived back we India gave us so much and taught us so much that we wished that as many as possible should gain these blessings and experiences, first hand in India, We are so grateful to you, Mother that materially so many have been able to afford to come to India. We have been so blessed by you their in Australia we said "OK Here we go and take a big jump" And we found that our wings did work and we knew that the confidence would come. The desire to grow was there no doubt. So, with Mother's love, we surged ahead and took great joy in all the new discoveries and in all these ways. Many have given up fresh challenges and especially in finding old homes where they lived in isolation and joyful company in 'other baby-birds' which with all sorts of misidentification and in were learning to fly with us. As time went giving up these attachments they have by, we had so many cases where our been given back so much more. Mother's ever-watchful eyes and loving (Sometimes the process of giving up has and caring kept us on the right way and been painful; but by your grace the determination and will have been stopped from getting too badly bumped. So we were giving others self- realization and this was the greatest joy. And what has happened this year, Mother has just been your love and grace. We have really done nothing-just the grace has triumphant). Many have had to give up very gross sexual misidentifications and this has been and is a real battle in this Kali- yuga. The war is on and we are winning. That is the important thing and it is all

 The Divine Cool Breeze 26 May June, 2005 Nature and learn more of that Divine thanks to Mother's grace that the inner strength prevails. We all have much work to do so that wisdom which just flows and flows. What more can we ask that the drop becomes our spirit can more and more manifest and the ocean. so that we set our vibration right. We are confident that with Mother's ever flowing awe, with humility and most of us are grace it will just happen. You have met Barbara and Kerry and creator of this Universe and in whose being their letters have been so filled with joy. reside all the Deities that have been And yet Barbara's letter which came just manifest and unmanifest on this beautiful today is so full of Shri Ego that we had to earth. May we more and more please laugh. How Mother plays with us to teach these Deities that are a part of Adi-Shakti. Lus! One lesson many of us have learned Now manifest in Her in complete form and this year is that if we get into ego or super with her complete powers. In so doing with ego our Mother will give us more and more apure heart we can more and more know of such situations and in the end we will God both manifest and unmanifest. Thus, fall over and then face the real situation may the self become reunited with God and put down our 'Balloons'. Every time it Almighty. This is our prayer 'O' Mataji Shri happens in myself and others, I just laugh Nirmala Devi. out loudly. So again, Mother please forgive us, in Australia, if in our work here in Australia we have transgressed too badly, or if we have not always shown wisdorn, or our ego and super ego have blown us too much. All we now ask is that we can come to our beloved Mother and sit at her lotus feet and imbibe Her Divine Love and Her We are coming to India with joy, with coming to worship our Divine Mother, the With love and respect from all of us WARREN & TERENCE, 10-Catherene Street, Liechhardt 2040 NSW AUSTRALIA 10h December, 1980. (Nirmala Yoga 1981)

 AN ENCOUNTER WITH THE TRUTH I realized the importance of vibrations decision !! Somehow I answered the and kindness of our Divine Mother only questions but failed in that subject. I told during the days of my final MBBS myself "Doesn't matter, it is just a home examination. HH Mataji gave me realization in October, 1979. Since then I in final examinations also". Further, I cherish this precious gift of God. I was a decided to study that subject properly, as topper in my middle school days but inadequate preparation was the main thereafter I hardly ever got good marks. cause of my failure. So, after the realization, I thought I would again score highest marks. I was preparing for my third terminal studying hard I felt nervous and felt that my exams when I came to know of HH Mataji's preparation was not upto the mark. Istood programmes in Delhi, in February 1980. in front of Mataji's photograph and prayed As time was very short,I attended the for help. For a moment I felt as if I was programme on one Saturday with a wish bathing in a shower of vibrations !! Next in mind to ask the Mother for blessings to day, i.e. on the examination day, I was very stand 1 in final examinations. To my much scared. Before leaving for the surprise it appeared that the Mother had examsI said my prayers, but avoided my understood my wish, as She told the story earlier mistake said 'Ma, please give me of a girl who topped in all activities, which blessings-so that I may be able to attempt made her an egoist and a tom-boy, to every every question howsoever difficult it may body's annoyance. I understood that my be". I received the blessings through the wish was unwise as a top position would divine of vibrations which were almost bloat my ego and cause my dissent on the poured on me. I bowed before the spiritual path. One day, in the third terminal examination I was to write my Gynaecology paperI realized that I had answered all the Paper. Before starting, I prayed to the questions very well, although I had not Mother before her photograph" Ma, please prepared for them. This was repeated in do such a miracle that only the questions I respect of all subjects. I had fared much am prepared for, are asked in the exams". better than I could even dream of. It Perhaps no vibrations came. Ientered the became possible only due to the Mother's examination hall with a curiosity, as to grace. I did my practical examinations whether my prayers would be answered also and my final MBBS examinations or not. I was shocked to read the question were over. exam. Please Ma, lest this would repeat My final examination came. Medicine was the first subject. Despite Mother's photograph and left. And lo ! As I finished the question 1 paper. Everything asked appeared to be Greek and Latin and no choice was I had topped in Medicine; scored very allowed. I felt dismayed at the Mother's good marks in the subject in which I had The result was a pleasant surprise.

 28 May-June, 2005 The Divine Col Breeze failed in the third terminal examination & stood fourth in the class. Yes, my position was quite high and still it would not puff up any ego. I bowed to the Mother's photograph, with tears of joy and gratitude rolling from eyes. How kind of our Divine Mother to have fulfilled my wish without making me an egoist. "Om Twamev Sakshat Shree Adi Shakti Mataji Shree Nirmala Devi namo namah." Dr. Nitin Kumar Gupta, 27 LIG, DDA Flats (RPS), Mayapuri, New Delhi - 110064. (Nirmala Yoga)

 SHRI C.P. SHRIVASTAVA`S SPEACH 26-12-1980 On 26TH December, 1980, Bombay me to apply myself for the responsibility Sahaja yogis alongwith their foreign which the Govt. of the country entrusted to counterparts offered very warm me. Iam deeply grateful to her. But today tributes to Mr. C. P. Srivastava for his whatI want to state is that I'm not grateful appointment as Secretary General of to her but l am very proud of her. And why Maritime am I proud of her? Tam proud because, Organisation) at a time when the world is afflicted everywhere, whether you are in the East Following is the text of the reply given by or in the West, whether you are in the North or in the South, everywhere you find a Dear Members of the Universal certain feeling of unrest, of unhappiness or a little frustration and people all over I am very greatly honoured and very the world are wanting to know, "how can we all members of this universal world generous observations which have been community live together in happiness and made about me and about my in peace?" This is the question before work..whatever I can do to deserve the every thinking individual in the world today. love and affection that you have chosen to And there must be some answer to that, shower upon me. You have mentioned that because after all we have to live together, I have been sacrificing in order that my and answer really is that all of us whether wife who is Mataji to you would be able to we belong to one country of another, we are members of one great universal family. want to inform you is; it is not a sacrifice, After all, if we just remember, that the whole it's a great privilege. When we got of universe that we know of there is only married, and that was more than a third of one planet on which there is life, such as a century ago (34 years ago) we had our we have and that, we are the most family, a little family, and we agreed among fortunate persons to be those created by ourselves that our first duty would be to the Almighty to be the best of creations, bring up our two daughters. We also that itself is a very great privilege and the agreed that once the daughters got least that we should somehow do is to live married, She would be free to devote her together as brothers and sisters genuinely, time as much as possible to the service not merely thro lips but thro' hearts and it of humanity. While our children were is most important for us to come to that growing up - she gave all her time and stage. I have a feeling that the world is now ready fora new revolution. There was gave me tremendous support. Without her the industrial revolution in the 19th century support, it would have been impossible for which brought economic prosperity to IMCO (International Consultative successively for the third time. Mr. C. P. Srivastava, on this occasion. Sahajyoga family, overwhelmingly touched by the most devote her time for Sahajyoga. What I devotion to them to bring them up and She

 30 May - June, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze many parts of the world, thus bringing this more than anything else. This country prosperity to other parts. But that is not needs this much more than anything else. enough. For human beings material It is the transformation; it is the uplifting of prosperity is important, but is not the the individual from within, which is most ultimate aim. There is much more in important. If that uplifting does not come, human being than a mere desire for you will have conflicts, you will not have the material weil being - the spiritual part. It kind of homogeneity or goodwill, which is is only through spiritual attainment, so essential for all of us to be able to live through spiritual satisfaction that genuine together in peace. So, she is giving you happiness can be attained, and there must spiritual guidance and I have no doubt that be some spark which has to light and the I am one of those thousands and source of the spark is before you. THIS thousands who admire HER, respect HER, LADY! So when I say l am not sacrificing and my fullest support is available to HER at all, indeed I am feeling to be a part of in everyway for the work that she is doing. you, feeling to be a part of this great But, I think, support is not the right word endeavour, and I am proud of HER and because she does not need support from anybody; but you see you must forgive me because I have a dicotomy. It is very Very recently I had a unique experience. difficult for me to forget that I am HER She is a very busy person and if I may say husband, so please do forgive the So without being immodest, I am also very expression that I have used but, it was in busy with my work, but one evening she my capacity as a consort and I want you to invited me very kindly to a function like this know that the work She is doing is to my way of thinking very very important for Sahajyoga family, Sahajyogis and Yoginis. humanity. In fact, I feel that it is only by What a wonderful expression they had, uplifting men & women everywhere what a feeling of internal peace and calm throughout the world, that we can really they had, what feelings of togetherness become worthy of the Almighty God who they had ! That gave me a very deep has created us all. Now, in IMCO, the impression, a feeling that, that family had Organisation thatI am privileged to serve, been transformed from desperate l am very grateful for the kind words about individuals coming from different parts of my re-election. It was most gratifying. the country into a family mended together, Perhaps you know that this was knitted together with one purpose, viz., unanimous. I mention this only for one reason, viz that you would hear that there family. They all wanted to assist each other are many issues that divide the world. On to help each other to grow together and to very few issues the Govts. of the world agree. Now, if they agreed upon re- marvellous task. I think the world needs election, whether it was Soviet Union, the work SHE is doing. I might tell you something more. in London. There I saw another family a realizing that we are members of one develop spiritually. Now, this is a

 The Divine Cool Breeze May June, 2005 Sahaja Yoga on one side and United Nations activity on the other. I have onlya small responsibility in the United Nations system but to the extent that I can, it is my duty and it has been my endeavour always to serve the World Community in a far more elevated sphere-the spiritual sphere. Now member countries of the to friends who have come from abroad, as an Indian I would like to extend a very groups. I do not believe in groupism. I do hearty and a very warm welcome. I feel not believe in confrontation, I do not believe very greatly honoured & privileged that you that by fighting, the world can get along; I should be here at this time that you should do not believe that the developing world spend your new Year Day in our country can develop by fighting the developed and I want to take this opportunity to wish world. I believe, and I believe very sincerely you the very very best for 1981 and the & genuinely, that all of us can get together best that I can do is to say 'let Sahaja Yoga only by way of togetherness, by co- which is universal, grow and grow & operation and this is the message that I develop and really lift up the world to a new give continuously." Now this is only one level of awareness, new level of human aspect of Sahaja Yoga, only an aspect, relationship based on love, affection & but this is the message that I am privileged realisation that human beings are born for to serve and I am most gratified & great purposes, they are born merely to delighted that the governments as they are live a routine life but the purposes are represented in this Maritime Organisation spiritual much highly elevated.' For your of the United Nations System, accept that success, for your happiness and your philosophy and they accept that by wellbeing I will pray and with these few working together the people of the world words I want to thank you once again for engaged in Maritime activity can make the very very kind words in which all progress, which would be satisfactory speakers referred me today andI may also from the point of view of everybody and if thank HER for all that SHE is doing for me they re-elected me unanimously, honour by supporting me really. THANK YOU United States, United Kingdom or Developing countries or China or Pakistan, well, they agreed to uphold a certain principle and in some way perhaps the message of Sahaja Yoga was being given to them through me coming from HER. And the message that I always give to the Organisation is: "We are not divided into me greatly and my country but to my way of thinking they honoured the principle which is to guide the whole of United Nations system. So, in some way there has been action and interaction between VERY MUCH. (Laughter & claps) (Nirmala Yoga - 1981)

 PROTOCOL TO BE OBSERVED AT PUJA On the eve of the arrival of our Holy in the search of the Truth-the Divine. The Mother to India this winter, as a brother I functioning of Sahaja Yoga is based on take it as my prime duty to tell you, through collectivity and during Poojan of H. H. the experience and with the grace of our Mataji; the vibrations with various Powers Mother, the holy rules that each one of us are emitted by the Mother which cleanup should follow during Poojan of our Mother the chakras of various Sadhakas through which definitely help in attaining the higher the representatives selected for Poojan. place in the life of the Seeker. The function of Poojan of Mataji is by seekers during such poojans. Hence planned at a right place and a right time during such occasions of Poojan by the Divine. Hence Sahaja Yogi brothers Sadhakas should not waste time allowing and sisters should not insist on any himself/herself to think of other things specific time and place of their choice. around, but should concentrate on Poojan Further, at the place of Poojan all actions of Her Holiness Mataji and try to gain should be carried out peacefully. All should maximum that is given out by Mataji. Every assemble at the place of Poojan always fraction of second, during Poojan is thus before arrival of Her Holiness Mataji. Till very precious and the Sahaja Yogi brothers arrival of the Mother all should sit in and sisters should try to gain maximum meditation by taking Bandhan. All should from the opportunity that they get at the standup when Mother arrives and pay occasions of such Poojans. Everybody respect and should not sit down unless should remember that he/she is sitting in Mother takes Her seat. To avoid front of Sakshat Adi Shakti during such diversification of attention the Seekers Poojans and should not close the eyes should not come with empty stomach and unless specifically instructed by the Mother. tight clothes. H. H. Mataji asks any one or few of Poojan and should not get disturbed the Sahaja Yogis to perform the Holy because of the temporary troubles that are Poojan of Mataji as the representatives. experienced in front of Mataji by the new In Sahaja Yoga everything is preplanned comers to suoh functions. Sahaja Yogis by the Divine and Sadhakas should not should not bring such persons who have leave the place which he/she has not yet got the Jagruti. Any action which OCcupied, unless for the specific reasons, and should not feel nervous for the reasons be avoided and thus the Sadhakas should that he/she is not chosen to represent the try to remain by heart at the function of group for poojan or he/she is sitting at far poojan every second and try to gain the distant place from Mataji. The place so maximum. given by the Almighty is the proper place for the Sadhak for his/her advancement permitted by the Mother, the Seekers Further, many of such powers are gained The Chitta should be always towards the will divert his/her attention outside should After the function of poojan, if

 The Divine Cool Breeze. May-June, 2005 one should leave the place without taking should take holy darshan of the Mother. Nobody should touch the Poojan materials unless permitted by the Mother. When Mother leaves the place of poojan everybody should get up and pay respect and say Jay Jay Kar of the Mother. No the Prasad. "Jai Shri Mataji" Madhukar Dhumal Rahuri, Distt. Ahmed Nagar Maharashtra, India. (Nirmala Yoga)

 IN FLIGHT TO U.S.A. WITH THE MOTHER Now that Mother goes to America, Dear Brothers and Sisters, So at last our Beloved Mother is on the collective Being of the realised Souls Her way to U.S.A. What lies ahead very of the Universe has to grow and become much depends upon how hungry the strong. Those who do not recognize this seekers show themselves to be. On the and content themselves with old one hand Mother says that She will "individualist" ideas and actions and announce Her Advent, publicly, in America, feeling will go down spiritually. The reward on the other hand She fears that many for growing with the Collective Beings will may miss out because they are so far into the ego and affected by the impure establishment of Self-Realisation. All wil knowledge and false gurus; this land of get better and better vibrations and feel America is the Vishuddhi chakra of the the joy and watch the ego and super-ego Universe and so, is where the ego begins. Let's pray that the impure knowledge can Australia often as an example of how great become Nirmala Vidya and the ego can is the Recognition and She says that this recognize that all the knowledge so far comes from the innocence, which is acquired is of little use and is, in fact, a Intrinsic. Innocence knows Truth when it severe limitation to Self-Realisation. be tremendous growth towards the full grow smaller and smaller. Mother uses meets it : and so even if the superficial damage is extensive, the speed with which But Mother wants many to get it in this visit and her Love and Compassion is over flowing more than ever. Sometimes back in Britain the Deities recognition comes helps to very smoothly and quickly repair the damage. In fact the Recognition has been so strong in Australia says Mother, that the next stage of surrender is reached very became so angry with things that Her Chakras became so active that it was soon. When this happens, the real almost unbearable for Her. The Deities recede from people who are damaging Integration can happen. But there's a themselves or others or who are attempting to step outside the Collective being. I have seen some amazing Collectivity. Mother has said again and examples of what happens in Britain when again that "it is not enough just to love people go against their Spirit or the Mataji..only by loving each other, in Collectivity and it is not very nice! Mother collectivity, can you really please Adi says there have been several cases in Shakti". So many Sahaja Yogis have Australia (as elsewhere) and the people/ surrendered to Mother (they say they have groups have been given a 'not-so-gentle ) and yet are not at all loving and caring warning. danger at this point-Surrender/Integration has to be part and parcel of the growth and for all their brothers and sisters and often

 The Divine Cool Breeze May - June, 2005 35 very un-collective. Mother will not say PRAYER: much here for it is a lesson that each Vishwe-shwari twam Paripaasi Vishwam "individual" must learn for him or herself. Vishwaatmika dhaarayaseeti Vishwam. He has learnt the lesson when he/she Vishwesh-vandyaa bhavatee bhavanti loses his "individuality" ! And then and only Vishwaa-shrayaa ye twayi Bhakti then, can the final integration stage namraaha. commence. Mother is the Collective Being of Translation: God and so Surrender to Collectivity is the only way to know Her. And this is the point Queen of the Universe you are its guardian. at which we must be absolutely honest with In the form of the Universe, are its ourselves ! Again I say, Mother won't say receptacle. much and in fact you may appear to be You are worshiped by the Lords of the growing, when in fact you are going down. Universe. This is how the Maya works : so that you Those who are devoted to you themselves get 'bumped' in order to learn. So She become supporters of the universe. urges that you sincerely and honestly assess the way in which your collectivity Prana-taanaam praseeda twam devi is growing with your surrender. AsI said, Vishwaarti-haarini if it isn't, then it isn't really surrender at all Trailokya Vaasinaa-meedya lokaanaam - just mental activity. If it is, you will varadaa bhawa. increasingly feel the joy and the love for all your brothers and sisters and so the love (Prounciation a Other aa-Amen ee-meet.) for our Divine Mother. Translation: Every Sahaja Yogi should pray for the growth of Sahaja Yoga in U.S.A. and the world. Your attention must be kept pure and steady, Do the Sahaja Yoga practices and reduce mental activity to a minimum. Just enjoy Mother's Grace.-LOVE O Devi, the remover of the afflictions of universe, be pleased to us who are prostrating on your feet. O Devi, who are worthy of all praise by the dwellers of three worlds, grant boons to all the poele. WARREN 17.9.1981 (NIRMALA YOGA 1982)

 TRANSLATION OF HER HOLINESS SHRI MATAJI'S MARATHI LETTER (1979) over. Hence all should be alert and awake My dear Sahaja Yogis, Received your loving and beautiful letters and messages of greetings. Here, I am busy in the work in London and could not write. and also awaken others. My life is dedicated to you. Every moment it is working. All I want is that pure gold should enlighten human history while Once I told you that Sahaja Yoga is getting heated in the hell of Kali Yuga. beginning from Navaratri this year. That is, Satya Yuga, for which you were so far kindled in every home, may its joy spread preparing, will now be seen. As a tree has to sprout first in the earth and then its resound all countries and may this power sapling peeps out, in the same way, on the first day of Navaratri i.e. on 8th April universe. the sapling of Satya Yuga will be seen. It is the day of great joy. Whole long time. But your brothers are living here Nature will now have new life. You must and also in other countries. You will meet understand that the importance of this day each other in course of time. But I often will be known only if the whole mankind is feel that one day of such great joy of love enlightened with vibrations of love. In this world Brahma Shakti was desire will happen. Therefore, your awakened from the very day of My birth. attention should be fully on Sahaja Yoga. I You have received it to some extent, and have offered my body, mind and wealth, are using it in many ways. I was telling you that light of that great power of love will spread all over the world. Chitta because only that will be The first lamp will be lit on that day. But enlightened. night of Diwali is blind. It cannot see the lamps. In this Kali-Yuga, this work will be done only if many lamps are lit. Whatever is God's work, it will be My blessings are: may this lamp be in the society, may the cheers of its victory of Brahman fill in every molecule of I have to be away from you for very should dawn in our life. Whatever you every thing. You have to take care of only your Always remembering you, Your Separated Mother Nirmala (NIRMALA YOGA)

 TRANSLATION OF HER HOLINESS SHRI MATAJI'S MARATHI LETTER My dear Sahaja Yogis Brahma tatwa which is flowing within you in the form of vibrations cleans all your three sheaths viz. Body, Mind and Ego. When any of these sheaths becomes impure your vibrations give you the indications. 5. Human Chitta has many illusions. When they are removed, human Chitta becomes enlightened and blissful. Many of your illusions have been removed by Kundalini awakening. You have realised that Kundalini is 1. You get the bliss of the spirit, if you become of sound body, pure mind and egoless. Vibrations of bliss flow from the spirit because its light beams unaffected. 6. not an imaginary but a living power in man. This power is within every human being and its awakening take place spontaneously in a normal person. How has this universe been made? Why made? Is Paramatma existing? These doubts are basic. Even Gods (Devas) have not understood them. But whatI have 7. This awakening does not take place by any act. But if a person has committed bad deeds, 3. awakening is not possible because in sleeping state Kundalini is aware of the past deeds of the person. She has righteousness and although she is mother in witness state, she knows what is good and bad for the person. Diseased body and mind get cured by the grace of Kundalini. told is right or wrong, can be ascertained on vibrations. For that vibrations should be good. When you will learn with your experience that love and truth are one and when with your experiences you will realise your very subtle Brahma-tatwa, then your illusion, that Brahma is detached, will go. Divine principle i.e. Brahma will blossom from within you as lotus and its fragrance will spread. Impurities will go from physical, subtle and casual bodies. When Kundalini Shakti is the power of desire of Bhagwati. She is easily awakened just by the wish (Sankalpa) of Bhagwati. A person of very high order has to put in great efforts for it. But it is not his 4. your Chitta becomes Brahma then fault. 2.

 May - June, 2005 38 The Divine Cool Breeze (Jada-Shakti) in solids, in living beings, it is beauty (Saundarya Shakti), in waking state it is the power of bliss, in Sahaja Yoga, it is the power of consciousness bliss, in Param Yoga it is supreme bliss and within Bhagwati it is the power of being Brahma (Brahma Bhootwa Shakti). You have understood all these, but should experience them. You should have steady mind and surrendering your heart become free from the illusion. These are my the illusion due to unreal will be destroyed. Although Brahma - tatwa (Divine element) is like sun, its rays reflect on unreal (water) and that disturbs your attention. It will not be disturbed when your Chitta becomes Brahma (sun) itself. This illusion will go by meditation in the company of ever loving Bhagwati. 8. You have become collective conscious. This power of collective consciousness which is awakened within you, is Brahma Shakti and it is present in the universe, in different forms and even in molecules. It is the solidity 9. blessings. Ever yours Mother Nirmala (Nirmala Yoga)

 CONFIDENCE IN OUR VIBRATIONS Vibratory awareness is a precious particular way, but when the moment of gift we receive after our Realisation. Anew action arrives, the moment of taking the field of judgment is opened in front of us, final decision we go backwards. We are shows us wider horizons. Our sense of afraid, In that moment joy goes away from discrimination, symbolized by the swan our hearts and instead of it non-confidence who can separate the milk from the water, settles there. The decision will not any develops and gives us more assurance, more confidence in our decisions. Where Unconscious. there was darkness we now see light, more be the one coming from the On the contrary, if we deeply believe we were given this power, we will always be confident and we will always feel the attention of Shri Mataji on us. We are like little birds learning how to fly, and as soon as we cannot go further we are taken in the nest. And again through HER GRACE we will try, till we are capable of doing in where we would feel incertitude we are now sure. The correct way, the Right path is shown to us through vibrations. But sometimes, we misuse this wonderful gift and try to get an answer to our petty daily things, through vibrations. This power was given to us by the enormous generosity of ADI SHAKTI, best to be used in a correct our own. way. We should not waste it. If not used correctly we may lose it, and then the answer we had looked for will not be the good one. At such stage we lose confidence-confidence in ourselves and immediately in Sahaja Yoga. But if each time we use it, we do it from the heart, for a worthy purpose, the sure answer will come even when not expected but with a sign easily recognized by a Sahaja Yogi, as coming from the Divine. The same way Shri Mataji gives us the powers, shows us the way of the way of doing things, and then leaves us free to act by ourselves, always under Her Loving Care, Wise Guidance, Tremendous Compassion. It is time for us to be strong to grow to face reality and to learn how to fly with all the jov in our HEARTS through the unlimited LOVE flowing from Shri Mataji. JAI MATAJI This sort of happening should give us confidence in ourselves, in our own judgments. Sometimes, we feel that a particular situation should be handled in a Maria Amelia De Kalbermatten (Nirmala Yoga)

 SETA ANTAR YOGA0HO BECAUSE of the enlightenment of ourselves we will see these effects more the Chakras, whatever is done externally clearly. As Christ has said, watch and pray. after self realisation is reflected within. When the flow of vibration in our meditation Thus mantra and yantra, prayers and is absolutely even, silent, without direction gestures, have a meaning only after towards any object, then we have realisation. Even so, gestures and words balanced our outward behaviour and the remain empty if we do not have our Mother inner yoga can work to take us deeper as the pesiding deity of all chakras, and without outward effort or show on the part specially we have to place our Mother in of our ego. Again, this will only happen if our hearts if Antar Yoga is to be complete. Shri Mataji is in our hearts as the Kshipra It seems so obvious, but many Sahaja Prasadini – who showers blessings on Yogi's remain half hearted nevertheless Her devotees very quickly- and as the because this has not been understood. Vanchhitartha Prasadini – who bestows Recognition of Shri Mataji as the complete on Her devotees the objects of worship. incarnation of Adi Shakti, embodying Thus oneself becomes one with the every deity which is to be worshipped, is formless, all-pervading, attributeless the only way to get rid of inner negativity, Queen of the Universe who cannot be to feel vibrations properly, and to establish known except through worship, praise, oneself in the divine kingdom of joy and meditation and ultimately silence. bliss. This has to be verified, but it is a On the birthday of our Divine Mother we all thank Her to havo been born in an fact. Because external action and desire age when it has been possible to know is reflected within, the chakras become personally the most complete incarnation clean or dirty according to our outward which has been known in all the history of behaviour. If the behaviour is false or mankind. Again and again we pray to Her, artificial, even if we are doing the gestures not to lead us into the Maya of believing of what we believe is Sahaja Yoga, still that deities are different and Mataji Shri our left side will be weak. Sins of Nirmala Devi is different. To know the commission are corroded by correct deities one must know Mataji, and not the outward gesture, but we must also correct other way round. Thank you Mother, for the sins of commission, that is the failure giving us this big chance. May Your to become, for instance, sweeter and Children be worthy of You and manifest more considerate people. As we watch Your glory on Earth. (Nirmala Yoga)

 LIGHTING THE LAMPS When a child becomes more aware he begins to observe his surroundings. He in recent times in the living example of listens intently to all sounds and watches carefully the movements of his parents. As permeated the hearts of millions and his faculties develop he beings to imitate inspired their course of action which the mannerism of his parents and changed the destiny of India despite the gradually learns by their example. In fact most formidable odds. from the child we can know the quality of his parents for his behaviour reflects their upbringing. We learn by example and it continues to be the most effective method example. The example we set should be of education. In fact moral education can only be imparted through this method. A child is taught to speak the truth but if the like this. This will bring glory to our Mother teacher tells lies then the teaching loses and She will be proud of us. Then our credibility and fails to register. Our small family will cross all frontiers and politicians preach honesty but if they are become a universal family. Therefore, we themselves corrupt then no one lends ear to their lectures and the moral standards quotation buta reality which was verified Mahatma Gandhi. His personal example In becoming the example lies the secret of a successful teacher. Sahaj Yogis have to become the samples of t Sahaja Yoga that others may learn by their so sincere that others are compelled to enquire who we are, who has adorned us have to be careful and should investigate and check ourselves, whether our deeds are in harmony with our speech. While we talk of love and forgiveness our actions are not a negation. While we accuse others of fanaticism we are not ourselves being carried away. For the eyes of the world have become very suspicious and are always looking for an opportunity for further deteriorate. Their message fails to inspire because it does not come from the source of truth. Truth has its own strength. When one has become the truth then his words have great authority and strike deep. The words of the Christ, the Buddha and Lord Krishna had this authority and hence the power to transform humanity. A leader who practices what he preaches is like the rising sun which sheds vibrations, as loving, generous, gracious, light and shows the way. Lord Krishna states in the Sri Bhagwat Gita, the greatest blessing to have found the "Whatsoever.a great man does, the same is done by others as well. Whatever (Trigunatmika) now let us imbibe those standards he sets the world follows". II qualities and mature. Then we shall (21). This is not a mere scriptural transmitting that great blessing. The sweet criticism. Yes, we are to be as gentle as the for giving and patient as our Mother. It is source of all great examples become pure and effective channels of

 The Divine Cool Breeze May - June, 2005 (42 alt or ryaol FO SH Onnaluts lone ma fragrance and colours of a flower attract naturally. Similarly the fragrance and beauty of our quality will attract others spontaneously and the message will of the sun like wise we may exemplify Her..... will be done on earth as it is in that 'thy Kingdom come Thy . Heaven.. spread. e Let us pray to Shri Mataji that as a beam of ray exemplifies all the goodness Yogi Mahajan (Nirmala Yoga)

 800068888580 వినినినని 9999336 Five minutes after Shiv Pooja - 2003 Chaitanya flowing from the left heart of Shri Mataji. in Moghul Sarai Centre fire of Hawana assumes the shape of Durga (Navratri-2003)

 22



----------------------

2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
1Vin
1
May-June, 2005
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-1.txt 
 12
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-2.txt 
 NIRMALA
UNIVERSAL PURE RELIGION
In This Issue:-
Adi Guru Puja - London - 4th July 1982
12
Seeking and Finding
19
Sayings of the Adi Gurus
20
Incarnations
20
An Experience
21
Realisation
21
After Realization
22
Fearlessness
Action Related to Spirit
23
25
A Letter to Shri Mataji
27
An Encounter with the Truth
Shri C. P. Srivastava's speach 26-12-1980
29
32
Protocol to be observed at Puja
34
In flight to U.S.A. with the Mother
36
Shri Mataji's letter
37
Shri Mataji's letter
39
Confidence in our Vibrations
40
Antar Yoga
41
Lighting the Lamps
DHARMA
VMHSIA
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-3.txt 
 THE D IVINE Co OL
BRE E ZE
ТнE
Published by
Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
Infosys House, Plot No. 8,
Chandragupt Housing Society,
Paud Road,Kothrud,
Pune-411 029
eeleinnt
Printed at
Amarnath Press (P) Ltd.
WHS 2/50, Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi - 15
Ph.:25268673
Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions and Subscription to:-
Shri G.L. Aggarwal
Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
222, Desh Bandhu Apartments
Kalkaji, New Dehi-110019
Tel. No. :011-26422054, 26216654
Please Send Your Experiences, Articles, Miracle Photographs etc. to:
Shri O.P. Chandna
G-11-(463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110 034
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-4.txt 
 "ESTABLISHING THE GURU PRINCIPLE"
ADI GURU PUJA
Nightingale Lane, London,
July 4, 1982
We all have assembled here to is not looked after or maintained, that is
understand the ways and methods of destroyed. If you do not pay attention, say,
establishing our principle of a Master. to these beautiful plants here they will be
Krita Yuga means the time when you have destroyed. Even matter which is not
to do something; Krita: when it is done. attended to is destroyed. So first of all we
So you are the channels of that way, doing have to know that we must be attentive and
the work of God. You are the channels of alert that if we do not maintain ourselves
God Almighty and His Power.
On one side you have to carry the maintenance is not for maintenance sake.
dignity, the glory and the assumption that It is for stopping the destruction of your
you are a Guru, on the other side you have Guru Principle. When we are negligent or
to be compietely surrendered to your God lazy about it we are responsible for
Almighty. All your dignity, your authority, destroying our Guru Principle. So the
comes from Him. And the third thing is attention that we have is to be given to the
that the way He has created this universe maintenance of this Guru Principle.
and you in a mood of play, you have to
see His play. So a kind of mood that is maintain themselves and maintain others.
cheerfulness should be really bubbling In the beginning when the Gurus tried to
through you.
So far the idea of Guru was that such put very very strong rules and regulations.
a person never laughs, never smiles, If you read Bible in the Levi Chapter you
always in a temper. That was alright for will find all the Shariats (rules) that are
Gurus who did not have to have any described which they are following now in
contact with the public but hang Riyadh, or in the Arabic countries. To
themselves with a string somewhere in the maintain that principle within yourself it's
Himalayas. But here we are facing the written in such strong language like: such
entire universe which has to receive the a person who does not do this should be
bubbling streams of your love. But that killed to death, such a person does
does not mean that you have to be anything wrong of this kind should be killed
frivolous, because you cannot be. The by stonning. That was at the very
divine play is not frivolous, it is joyful. And beginning, so the people now at that stage
the joy does not have that duality.
So, to get to the establishment of This was not meant in any way to insult or
your Guru Principle first we should know to harm, or to take away the freedom of
how it is destroyed. As it is, anything that human beings. But it was meant for people
we will be destroyed. Because
The Gurus have the capacity to
establish this maintenance principle they
of evolution required that kind of a fear.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-5.txt 
 The Divine Cool Bireeze
May- June, 2005
to give a great idea of the importance of placed under the most fortunate
the principle of Guru within themselves. At circumstances that you are realised souls
that stage they used the frightening before your Guru Tatwa is fully established.
methods I should say, horribly dangerous You have all the power that any Guru can
type. And that time people obeyed also.
Then another evolutionary state took Guru Tatwa. Specially you are under the
place where a stage started, people complete blanket of the clouds of your
thought they must become austere and Mother's love.
start maintaining themselves by
tremendous austerity, so it was self to allow you to destroy your Guru Principle.
projected, it was not projected towards the As I told you that Guru Principle is a very
others, but projected towards themselves. sensitive thing and is destroyed if
We can say that the first wave yourself do not try to maintain it. First of all
started when the Guru, the Primordial the destruction starts from the very source
Guru, said that if you don't do this then you of our being. I mean to say that our being
will be killed. The second stage was when is created by five elements, and the five
the disciples accepted this within elements have a capacity all the time to
themselves and started telling themselves get destroyed. Any one of these elements
that if we do not do it we will kill ourselves. if they are not looked after, get destroyed.
Austerity started on the basis of wisdom That is the built-in capacity of the elements
and not on obstinacy. But then it became or of the matter as you can say. So to
even fanaticism. So it went to one maintain them is important.
extreme. It started with the idea of
maintenance. But maintenance itself you become a Guru you need not maintain
became impossible or perhaps they anything, it is maintained by itself. It is not.
thought they are not being able to Agreed that the Spirit definitely enhanced
maintain, they got confused and to them the beauty and the health of this element.
rules and regulations became more But at the human level there is always a
important than maintenance itself. Thus greater force that is trying to destroy it. So
you find they destroyed themselves.
The wisdom or the essence of Guru there is chance of this destruction working
Tatwa is a balance. Like when you itout.
maintain a plant, if you do not give it water
it will die, if you give it too much water it needed?" And this is the important
will die. So the wisdom lies in question we should be able to answer all
understanding how much water should be the people who ask us. Without the
given to the plant so that it comes up at balance you cannot ascend. If you cannot
it's best.
Now this wisdom has to be achieved human beings? For example, everything
through vibratory awareness. You are
aspire, without having established your
But in no way Mother's love is going
you
So people have an idea that once
till we have completely become the Spirit
One will say "why is this balance
ascend what's the use of our becoming
is God but nobody is aware. At the human
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-6.txt 
 May - June, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
level you become aware, means not bathing. Some people are fond of
everything exists, everything is there, but getting up early in the morning singing
it is not aware. So there is a stone, that is songs and waking up everyone, some are
also God, but it is not yet aware. Like say good at sleeping till 10 o'clock. Some like
this area is completely dark and we are very light coloured dresses, some very gold
blind. There is nothing to be seen, to be coloured dresses. If you are French, you
felt or experienced when you are in that want to have wine little bit. If you are Italian,
condition. Actually one thinks that darkness you want to have carbohydrates too much.
is the truth, that ignorance is the truth, but If you are Spanish you want to have too
when the sun comes up and the light much of fats. If you are Indians you want to
comes in and your eyes open, you start have too much of spices. So to change
seeing everything. You start becoming this habit you have to give up first of all the
aware. So at human level you are aware extremes that you like.
at the highest point.
Now this awareness has to become then you should sayI must eat lot of chilies.
the awareness of the Spirit. That has Ifyou say I like pale colours, than you wear
happened to you, you have felt the Spirit. very gold ones. Go from one extreme to
But the balance is not there as yet. Your another extreme to begin with. But I have
Mother has pulled you out and made you seen people when they go from one
that but still there is imbalance inside. If extreme they get stuck up on the other side
you go slightly to the left you can be also. So we have to be in the centre- not
destroyed, you go to the right you will be to the extremes.
destroyed. So you have to try both the
things as I have told you the methods which who is a great Master, can never be
I will explain.
First of all you have to be austere ruled by any ideas that "I like this." He sees
with yourself, just separate yourself from beauty in the lush greenery and he sees
yourself. Separate yourself as a Spirit, and beauty in the trees which are devoid of any
look at your ego and superego. Now you leaves.
start watching the ego and super ego- do
not maintain it, they are the destroying ina very funny way, has started in the West.
forces. Now when you see the play as a Like if you comb your hair then you are no
witness of these destroying forces you will good. If you do not smell in the body then
know how to also maintain yourself better. you are no good. If you don't look like a
To separate yourself is easier when you pig, you are no good. All kinds of funny sort
take to austerity.
The worst thing that elements have because they are going to the other
done to you is that you have formed habits. extreme.
All kind of hang ups. Some people are
fond of bathing, some people are fond of Nature dresses up itself when it has to
Now if you say that I like bland food,
A man who is an Avadhuta, the one
hanged up by any hang ups. He cannot be
Now the trend of getting to austerity
of ideas have crawled into the mind
But we have to learn from the nature.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-7.txt 
 May - June, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
actually what happens that you 'see' it
yourselves, so let us see. Get out of that
mental conception that you know already
about it. You do not know, because what
you know is just mental. That should be a
part and parcel of your being.
Now how to do it? Some will say that
we'll just go on being austere about it.
Then that will become again another
obsession. Some will say, alright Mother
has said we should enjoy, so we will just
enjoy. How to strike the balance is the big
problem. But should not be with people
who have vibratory awareness. In that also
you can be obsessed. I've seen people
talking like they are all great Sahaja Yogis
and they are getting no vibrations and
saying they are getting vibrations. It is so
deceptive.
So one has to think that we have to
go further and see more and know about
it. But if you then ask the French how are
you, they like this - that means they are
always in imbalance. You ask an
Englishman he will say "Don't know" or they
say "I know" - there is nothing in between.
Now we have to understand that we are
greet the spring, and when it is the winter,
it just gets completely undressed, I should
say, because the leaves have to get to the
Mother Earth and that the sun has to reach
the Mother Earth. It is not attached to
anything. Surprisingly, it is much more
elemental than we are. While we, who are
spiritual, should have no attachment.
But this idea is also a mental idea,
which is the worst attachment. It's very
funny attachment which makes me laugh,
that is the biggest joke that l've seen, that
people get attached to mental ideas. It is
like believing that whatever you think
mentally will just happen to you. Say for a
mental person he has to go to a picnic, he
will mentally put in his mind that he is going
to take this, that and that. He may even
open a file and write it down thatIam going
to take this, this and this with me. And
when he goes to the picnic he finds that
he is high and dry because he has not
taken anything with him, that it is all in the
file.
Your Mother is good at speaking and
She speaks to you but it should not be your
mental attachment. Like, "Yes Mother says
so" and every body discusses with such
great enthusiasm this is that, but is a very
common attachment nowadays with all the
people knowing about everything and
having nothing. This mental attachment is
to be really attacked.
Becoming is seeing, becoming is
experiencing. Becoming is seeking, it is
experiencing. Like if I have to come to this
place I must come and 'see' it. Ifl only have
thoughts about it and mental ideas, mental
pictures, it is no good, it is not mine, it's
not the truth. So when you become aware
carrying the light in our hands, and the light
should not shake; we have to hold the light
tight. And we should have a concentrated
attention towards the maintenance of the
light. And then to tell yourself that we have
to 'see' not just to understand mentally, - is
to be actually aware. Because you are
complete otherwise- you are the part and
parcel of the whole- you are! But only thing
is that you have not yet seen that. You have
mentally accepted, but you have not
"become' that. Because mental projection
comes from thought. That means you are
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-8.txt 
 May - June, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
at the level of the thought. You have to it so much that they feel that protocol is not
become thoughtless. But if you live on the alright and there should be proper
basis of thought, then you are still below protocol, so we are looking after protocol,
the Agnaya chakra. So all the thought we are the guards of the protocol, and all
waves must be stopped to being with and these things.
should say that alright let us 'see' now.
So from the Nabhi chakra you come side see the ego of others while those who
up to the Agnaya Chakra. Then above that are on the ego side see the emotions of
comes the third problem of destruction, - others. So one criticizes another. But they
is emotional. The emotional is a 'very' don't see themselves, that they are falling
subtle one. Like some people Sahaja into a trap into one of the extremes. So
Yogis, will sit down with a guitar and start unless and until you are detached you
singing as if they are all lovebirds, you see.
So the most delicate one is the emotional.
This emotional one is a collectivity in a mistake but it happened to be a mistake.
camouflage. For example when the For the first three years of Sahaja Yoga, I
Sahaja Yogis meet they will hug never talked of a bhoot. I thought that
themselves, kiss each other, they will be would be able to manage without that. But
very very nice to each other and sit down a lady came in Sahaja Yoga who was
and sing songs like hippies. Take the possessed and who tried all kinds of tantric
guitar in the hand and swing on the tune of tricks, so I had to tell them. Now every
love. This is actually Vishuddhi at the Sahaja Yogi is a bundle of bhoots. You
collectivity point. And that of course is very ask any Sahaja Yogi," why did you do it?"
difficult to get rid of, because it gives you"Must be a bhoot". If you say that how is it
a very comfortable feeling. And people that you have done such a thing. Then they
get confused with emotions, they think it will say "I do not know, it is the bhoot who
is joy. Joy only can be achieved through has done." They are never there, all the
complete detachment. The detachment bhoots are there.
which is egoless and super egoless.
But now the problem that human even as a Guru, because if my disciples
beings start facing is the assumption that are there I can tell them but if they are
they are Gurus. They start speaking about bhoots what am I to tell them? I can talk
Sahaja Yoga, talking that they have to Sahaja Yogis but not to bhoots, they
become already Shri Krishna. They have won't listen to me. So this is the greatest
even a greater ego than the person who escape which Sahaja Yogis have found
is actually ignorant about Sahaja Yoga. now, which is the worst, which was never
They start talking with such tremendous before. So sometimes I feel it was a
ego that I myself am frightened of them. mistake
How much they know about Sahaja Yoga, They excuse themselves by just saying,"
I sometimes think. And they start asserting Mother, it is some negativity".
Now those who are on the emotional
cannot see it.
I will not say that I committed a
NowI don't understand how to deal,
I introduced this word "bhoot."
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-9.txt 
 May - June, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
If you are detached, like stone, then What have we to do? Just stand in the
you cannot contain this negative water in centre'. At the axis. Try to keep yourself
itself in it. You don't become more at the Axis. And then you just see the
negativity, you become more a guru. Now, periphery moving, you don't mind.
when I say that you should not be negative,
supposing under such circumstances you in any way, punish yourself. It is better that
should not be a bhoot, you should be you punish than the Divine punishes you,
yourself, then they start feeling guilty. So because that is a severe punishment. But
all kinds of anti-Guru tricks are working out. do not feel guilty: because you have not
am your Guru, and it is anti your Guru, to done anything wrong, it is the bhoot which
play these tricks upon yourself.
Now you will play these tricks with we should realize that we are Gurus a
me-what's the use? You have to gain we cannot be bhoots.
something and you are playing tricks
against me. You have to be more aware.
You are not to be destroyed. Apart from have to learn good manners. These
that you have to save others. How will you manners become your nature. Sometimes
do it in case if you do not accept that it is people who are very fond of food, I always
your privilege, that it is your fortune, that tell them they should fast. Whatever you
you have been chosen to be the medium are fond of, try to give up. Try to overcome
of God's work. Sometimes I feel that all your sicknesses of attachments, your
the bhoots have come to me for realization habits. Once your Guru Tatwa is
and I am now going to become a bhoot established, you will be accepted as a
myself! Bhoot also means Bhootnath, is Guru. There will not be any need for you to
the name of Shri Shankara, Shri Shiva, say that you are a Guru, people will know
because He gets after the bhoots all the that you are. We don't have to then write
time.
When you see yourself misbehaving
has done! So we come to the point that
nd
We have to change our outside also
to become good Gurus. For example, we
But you have to be the present and on our foreheads that we are Gurus,
not the bhoot, bhoot means the past.
Then what is there to be known? you can see the divinity walking, you can
You become,-when you are in the see the dignity walking, the glory coming
present. You just start becoming, up.
evolving, blossoming. Try to be in the
present. Do not escape the present, face the light of that within enlightenment will be
it. Don't feel guilty, nor blame the bhoot, shown outside. But it should not be a
both things are going to take you away mental idea or an emotional idea but
from the present. Now just see the whole should be the happening, the becoming,
nature, the whole divine power, your ardent the awareness. You have to experience
desire of ages, everything is on your side. through your own experimentation upon
The time has come. You are just there. yourself. Even I do that. When I cannot
people will know that this is a Guru walking,
You have to change from within and
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-10.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
May - June, 2005
wears the green upon herself. And the
green is the Guru principle. She is the
detached personality. She is the
magnetism, She attracts. When people
are walking on Her, She is looking after
them.
reach you from one end because you are
a bhoot, I reach you from ane end because
you are a bhoot, I reach you from the other.
If somebody says he is a bhoot, then I see
that he suffers a little, and faces it, the
bhoot in him. For example, somebody-l
tell someone that please do this and he
forgets completely about it, and he says
that it is a bhoot that has done. So then
he loses his purse and then I say the
bhoots must have taken away the purse.
But I experiment with myself. first
see how I should approach you. If it does
not work out I try something else, within
myself. Because it's a very tricky time we
are with. If you had gone according to the
shariat (rules) or the chapter of Levi, all
the bhoots would not be here! May be no
Sahaja Yogis might have been left also!
And this mental projection is such a
common thing that it is difficult to detach
people, but only way I can play tricks with
you is by experimenting myself on you. In
the same way you must play with yourself
and try to put yourself in an experimental
She creates out of Her
Svayambhoos, the self manifested stones.
Her attraction and concern is so great that
without Her we would be hanging in the air.
And She keeps me to the brass tacks, as
they say, to the reality. If I wanted I could
be just the Spirit and not bother about
anybody else. The way She bears our
sins, the way She always looks after us and
nourishes us despite our so many defects,
in the same way a Guru should do. She is
'extremely' forgiving. But She explodes as
an earthquake, and sometimes hot
calcium and hot potassium can come out
of Her. She produces sulfur for your cure.
If England's soil becomes vibrated, then
this soil can be used for medicine. In India
people use clay for medicine, for every kind
of treatment. The understanding about
Guru Tattva one can have from the Mother
Earth. So let us touch the Mother Earth
and bow to Her.
box.
Today is the day of Guru Puja, the
day when you have to worship your Guru.
You are really fortunate to have a Guru
which is a Mother. And my Mother and
Guru is this Mother Earth which teaches
me how to deal with human beings. And
She is the one who also at every stage of
difficulties helps me to correct my own
methods of Nirmala Vidya. She has been
such a kind Mother and a kind Guru to me.
May God Bless you.
In the Kundalini Shastra, Mother
Earth is the Kundalini. Mooladhara is the
Mother Earth. So for us, Kundalini is the
most important thing. We don't have to
worry about what they have talked about
in the Levi, that you must not steal, you
must not tell lies. What we have to worry
is to keep your Kundalini up.
And She is such a soothing personality.
All this green though is given to her by Sun,
as they say, is just to soothe us all. She
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-11.txt 
 10
May- Jurie, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
You know that we cannot take
So the Guru has to be a person who
is 'absolutely practical'. He must have anything with us. Only the Guru can take
common sense and 'absolutely practical', with him something. Nobody else can take
he cannot be an impractical person. A it. Only the Guru has all the disciples and
person who's impractical is not a Guru.
But practical in the common way is ages' who will sing the praise. No other
understood as a man who is cunning, who relationship is that eternal. It goes on
knows how to deviate from right path and reflecting for ages and ages and ages. It's
all that. That is the most impractical thing one wave that falls and disappears, in
to do! Something absurd, something out anything that you do every wave
of the blue is not the way a Guru has to disappears, but not the wave of knowledge
move. There is all common sense which from a Guru. It's even higher than the
should guide a Guru how to deal with a Divine principle cannot explain, it is the
person. And common sense is a thing Guru who explains it. Not that it manifests
which is not cunningness by any chance. but it explains and it works out, so he is
The source of common sense is the Spirit. the master of the Divine Power.
The expression of a Guru is very very
paradoxical. For example, a Guru will be meaning of the Guru. Like the word has
extremely practical, supposing he has to the meaning, and the word serves the
build his own house, a house or an
ashram, or anything, he will be extremely serves the Guru. Everything is at your
practical. He will be very economical, he disposal. When you are a Guru all your
will create something out of the blue, charkas are at your disposal. All the
people will be amazed how he has done universe is at your disposal. Because you
it, so practical. But he will be so detached are the Guru! Its like the director of the
that if this ashram is to be donated to show. The stage man, the gentleman who
somebody, in one second he will donate is in charge of the lights, the gentleman
it. For acquiring, say for example, for who is in charge of the loud speaker,
acquiring a lamp, the Guru will be very 'everybody' has to serve the director,
practical, he will get the best and the because he is training the actors.
cheapest and the most beautiful. And he
will be very intense about it. But when it much unchallenged, it should be of such a
will come to giving he will be even more capacity that nobody can challenge that, it
intense about it. That when he will give should be such a capable personality that
with the same intensity. He will find out all nobody should be able to challenge the
practical methods how to donate, also to Guru, then only it will work out. So you have
give away. So his acquiring is actually to work it out in a such a way that you are
giving. He acquires to give. That's how absolutely unchallengeable. And you are
he is the most practical.
disciples and disciples and disciples for
So in a way, Divine Power is like the
meaning. But ina Guru Principle, the Divine
But the Guru Principle has to be so
specially fortunate that you can see
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-12.txt 
 11
May June, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
yourself and correct yourself, which accept, you are our mother also". Solsaid,
nobody could do before, you are your own "I am going to be very hard like a Guru and
Guru. This situation 'never' happened. nothing-doing today, nothing is going to
You are your own Guru. And let me be convince me".
your Mother. That would be the best for
Because again you become the
Mother, then the whole thing becomes
me.
So today is the day when one has to again that soft business. Solwent to open
determine how far you are a Guru - first a tap, - because in India we don't believe
point. You have to take a pledge that you in wash basins you see, - to wash my
will establish your Guru Principle. - hands. And Indian taps as they are, you
Second point. Thirdly, you have to pledge see, it gave in and I got completely
that you will establish Guru Principles in drenched. AndI came out and I said please
others. Fourthly, you have to know that give me the sari to wear!.
there is a little snag, that your Guru is a
Mother. She is too kind to be a Guru. Too Guru and a very hard one! Then Warren
mild to be a Guru. And extremely tolerant. came to say that Mother somebody has
So it is better that you take up this bought a sari and this is that and that is
strictness towards yourself and look after that, he gave lot of arguments. And Rustom
Today I had decided to be a 'real'
and Warren were trying to, you see, put me
yourself.
May God bless you. Become your down in my place! But then they used the
own Guru,
On every Guru day, I have a problem. said the sari is beautiful, this, that it was
And one of the problems is that on every alright; then they said the vibrations are too
Guru Puja day I think I should become a good, even before opening the sari, the
complete Guru at least on one day I should vibrations were there. O all my efforts
not be a Mother. But every time I try these fizzled out.
tricks it works against me. Last year in
India I told them that this time I am going Divine. What is called as Madhurya.
to be just Guru and you have to only give "Madhurya' means the sweetness. The
me a shawl, and I will not take any sari sweetness. And this is the one that is such
a nd nothing like a Mother. And I was very a hide and seek of joy in life. And that is
stern with them and I said that at any cost what I have accepted, so first we will have
I am not going to take a sari, whatever you the Mother's Pooja.
may do. And they were very unhappy
because they had bought a sari for me
and they said, "we h also stitched a
blouse and petticoat ar ther you must
greatest argument to out-wit me, - first they
This is the play of the sweetness of
(Nirmala Yoga)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-13.txt 
 SEEKING AND FINDING
By
JASON COPELAND
When I look at the longings and
passions I felt before meeting Mother, it is
hard to discern how I merited the title of
seeker. I have to look closely into the
jumble of aims and conflicting desires that
moved my life then, and see if any of it
had any consistent thread.
In fact there were several. Religion
was not noticeably one of them; I was
brought up a Catholic in the dogmatic Irish
tradition, and hated the Catholic Church
with a violent rage born of the brutal,
insensitive, mindless terrorI had received
owning classes and bureaucrats with
spurious hopes of a better life after death.
It should be remembered here that
Christians do not believe in reincarnation,
so their despair and drive to ingratiate
themselves with authority- is thus total.
Religion seemed to me to be the ultimate
fraud, the sickest con trick played in the
history of the universe, the cruelest and
most foul tradition of the human spirit that
the perversity of the human spirit could
concoct.
So much for religion. That of course
was entirely without prejudice as to the
question of whether or not God exists. I
went through several different stages on
that one, sometimes believing that God
doesn't exist, sometimes that he did but
was busy elsewhere on a less ambitious
project than trying to create intelligent life
on Earth, sometimes just that God must
be the essence of crueity and hardness to
allow such brutality, violence, injustice and
savagery to continue. In 1971, having been
a dope- smoking revolutionary hippie for
some years, I looked at one of the varieties
of imported oriental mysticism then
available in England, a pouty-looking brat
of an alleged Guru called Guru Maharaj ji,
who was then about thirteen years old. His
acolytes said many interesting things about
spirituality and "the knowledge", and
impressed me with what seemed to my
misted eyes to be a degree of sincerity
and depth that I had not found elsewhere,
from it. I didn't grow up in a happy home,
my parents broke up when I was small and
after that all I remember is unhappiness
and fear. Everything seemed to be a sin,
especially speaking to adults they didn't
want to hear what you said. Religion to
me means black clothing, miserable old
men putting the frighteners on small
children, mystifying ceremonies in a long-
dead language, and violent punishment for
the slightest sin (especially if it was fun or
involved thinking for oneself) and ultimately
eternal damnation to a hell of sadistic
tortures in which burning flesh seemed to
be the main component, by a vindictive
elderly male deity with no sense of humour.
That was my early view of religion.
AsI grew up and found out just how many
true faiths there are, I concluded that Marx
was right, and the whole and only purpose
of religion was to drug the populace into
cringing submission to the property
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-14.txt 
 13
May - June, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
God I wanted – the God I was looking for
was warm and generous and full of love,
which fat brat visibly wasn't. I had always
envisaged saints and large, loving,
forgiving, great-hearted, generous people
who shone with laughter of infinite love. I
was never very interested in the rest of the
gurus that battened on the detritus of the
druggy generation after that, so in the
following decade I went back into the
revolution in its many forms, hoping to build
a better world. I got into the claimants'
Union strugglers for justice for the sick and
unemployed, into squatting struggles for
justice for the homeless, into law centres,
therapy and the "growth movement",
housing co-ops, and lots of other efforts
intended as blows against the empire of
mammon. It was a great adventure and a
great training ground; I learned much,
became good at administration and social
security advice. I spent most of my spare
time in meetings, and saw almost
everything as a political struggle. The
trouble was, most of the rest of humanity
didn't seem to grasp that view, and the
situation on the planet as a whole went on
getting worse, with wars and battles on the
increase daily, socialites and other fighters
for human rights and dignity getting
mauled, the rich getting richer every day
by robbing the poor and the man in the
street getting more insular and apathetic
all the time. The result of that was that I
so I decided to try it. I wasn't at all sure
that I possessed the requisite degree of
sincerity since my main motive for looking
for God seemed to be a desire to escape
from the suicidal lunatic asylum I found
Earth to be, but I was sufficiently motivated
not to want to miss out on God and real
love at last if this was it, so I hung around
for long enough to persuade the
"mahatmas" of my interest and eventually
asked for 'the knowledge". On the
appointment day, I was taken with several
other postulants to an upstairs room, and
after the introductory 'satsang" was shown
four meditation techniques with which I
tried to meditate for a few months.
The movement in Britain was much
populated by not very bright young people
whose rejection of intellectuality seemed
mainly to stem from their inability to pursue
a thought for more than ten words. That
was the first thing that made me
suspicious. I could see the need in
spiritual pursuits to bring the rational mind
to a recognition of the narrowness of its
own limits, but the extent of the willing
mindlessness of little fatso's devotees
seemed to me to mock the dignity of man
and God, and to insult the tools God gave
man. Secondly the abject abnegation of
ego espoused by the premise seemed to
produce an unhealthily degrading effect,
an atmosphere of self-hatred rather than
one of sincere and warm humility. I couldn't
understand what sort of God would want
to be worshipped by such cringing ciphers
as the long-term devotees made of
themselves at any rate, such a mean,
spiteful and power-hungry deity wasn't the
took increasing solace in my other two
consuming passions, alcohol and women,
when I became too tired or despondent to
work myself to distraction. Marriages as
an institution had no credibility in my view3;
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-15.txt 
 14
The Divine Cool Breeze
May June, 2005
wasn't into having a Guru at that time either
(Oh Mother, what an idiot!) so l just smiled
and put the picture down again... but
there did commence then an unconscious
my parents were disastrously mismatched
and couldn't cope with each other at all,
and many friends had parents who stayed
together for decades in silent misery and
consuming bitterness "for the sake of the
children" and multiplied every- one's
unhappiness by so doing. So life for me
was a series of attempts to love a women
that failed or succeeded for only a short
process of anxiety-suppose this time it
was a real incarnation of God?
Later that year I was languishing in
bed with one of the frequent colds that my
imbibing and smoking habits left me prey
to, when the same girlfriend dropped in
That then was my life consisted of: with her Sahaja Yogi friend in tow. That lady
unending work in the cause of creating a breezed in smiling and laughing and
better a society – with fewer people saying encouraging things, and her
believing in it, and me beginning to doubt freshness, purity and laughing warmth
the ability of humans to behave rationally made the most profound impression on
in their own interest-booze taking its slow me. Thus were two seeds planted which
were before very long to bear the greatest
not giving me the warm and gentle lovel possible fruit. Though for the moment my
sought nor accepting what I offered. A conscious mind forgot about them (thank
threefold path that led nowhere. But God it did that instead of messing the
therefore I describe the simultaneously memory around with rationalizations) the
end of these paths, I shall mention a impressions created by the two
encounters stayed with me, quickening my
were to have a much greater significance vibrations, and were later to return to
consciousness with devastating effect.
But let us return to what happened
showed me a small picture of Mataji. She "before". In 1980 I knew much despair.
had been taken to a meeting by a friend, Lunatics in governments throughout the
and thought Mother was very nice but world were taking increasingly loudly about
wasn't into having a guru at that particular nuclear weapons, and a climate of tension
moment. I looked closely at the picture and was being created which as a student of
thought how lovely and warm She looked, history I recognized, and which terrified me
and what a lovely idea it would be to have to the depths of my being. Meanwhile
a lady guru if you were going to have one exploiters seeking profit continued apace
at all.I though that was just the sort of joke to strip the planet of all the resources they
that God (the warm loving God I was after could thieve from it, whole species of
that is) would play on people's animals were being wiped out, and the
expectations, as God is always thought of very capacity of the Earth to support life
as exclusively male in the west. But it was being systematically destroyed. The
time.
but mounting toll on my health, and women
couple of incidents along the way which
than was at first apparent.
In spring 1979 my then girl friend
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-16.txt 
 May - June, 2005
15
The Divine Cool Breeze
burning of the Amazonian forests of my beliefs, and brought out the question
particularly frightened me-with the I had been avoiding for years. Although I
amount of foliage destroyed by that was never a communist, my political hopes
wanton vandalism, a shortage of oxygen for a better world were in general tied in
to breathe was being caused. So which with the struggle of the left for economic
was going to happen first, was the planet and political liberation for the world as a
going to choke on the pollutions and whole, and this article landed me squarely
poisons of humanity's unfettered greed, with the conclusion that self-govermment by
or was it going to be a radioactive cinder humans was not possible, they always
by the paranoid genocide machines.
All the time people walked about improvement in the human condition by
apparently unconcerned while at night I rational effort alone.
cried aloud in fright "God, if you exist help!"
Through real and bitter tears I called out less than twelve hours, my world had
"God, please come into my life, help me!" collapsed. I walked out into the rain with
In the summer of 1980 my fear quickened one thing left to check out, and that was a
with every newspaper I read. At the same friend who had been telling me for weeks
time, the negative process of my other that she wanted me to meet her spiritual
passions quickened pace. On July 19th I teacher. AsI stumbled along, I was crying,
got a rude brush-off from a women with and muttering myself through the pain
whom I was hoping to get off. I felt awfully "God, if this is all there is to life, you can
hurt by the shock and got excessively stick it!" For the first time in my life, I actually
drunk. This, and overdrinking of past 3 wanted to die. The fight had gone out of
weeks caused nausea for alcohol and I
Swore it off on the spot. On the same day, sobbed. "I want out of it."
I read an article in the newspaper.
It was a fluent and well written travel saw straight away the state I was in. She
piece by a writer who knew Russia well, took me upstairs and made some coffee,
and described at great length the moral and we talked a little. After a few minutes
corruption, self-seeking, time-serving, the mist started to clear a little and I noticed
cynicism and general climate of pettiness a small pink picture on her mantelpiece.
and purposelessness prevailing in the went over and looked at it a little more
showpiece of communism. The Russian closely. Then ! leaned forward to look at it
people, he said, had a strong spirituality, a bit closer still. And closer and closer.
but since the revolution religion had been Kaboom! A thousand megaton explosion
forbidden in any from, the nation's heart, tore away the remaining vestiges of my
deprived of an outlet for its aspirations, mind and slammed the life back into my
fouled it up, and thus there was no hope of
That was it. In three easy stages over
me, I had no hope left. "If this all there is."I
I arrived at my friend's house and she
heart. A tiny voice within me whispered
deafeningly "Mary!" and I knew in that split
had turned black.
This article affected me to the core
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-17.txt 
 May - June, 2005
16
The Divine Col Breeze
second that I had found God's incamation.
The tears of joy and sweet, blessed relief
ran rivers down the windows of my soul.
For the next twenty-four hours I was
out of my head with joy, relief and
excitement. There was no doubt in my
mind as to precisely what I had been lucky
enough to discover, and the importance
of it, and the incredible fact that little me
had been smiled on by God, that God had
answered my anguished cry for help, sent
me completely over the moon with
excitement. I knew that this was the
goodness I had always wanted. My
exultation cannot be described.
After Her talk, Mother asked me
which false guru I had been to, and I told
her. She then sat me down on the floor in
front of Her and laid Her feet on various
parts of my back and front. I didn't know
about bhoots then, but I did physically feel
negativity, bad energy, leaving my body at
various points, and pains and blockages
moving about. Mother cricked my neck
and did several other things to straighten
my spine up a bit, and kept Her feet on my
suffering body for what felt like at least half
an hour. Great heat came out, and
became dazed with the intensity of the
operation as the vibration flooded through
me. Afterwards, I felt much cleaner, much
lighter, straighter of body and of mind, and
filled with great love, peace, security and
bliss, and a sense of the vastness of God
and the permanence of the spirit. The
presence of the Kundalini was so palpable.
in all my sensations that I hardly needed to
ask my hands whether they felt cool breeze
- I felt strong sensations on my head, in
my heart and throughout my body. The
sense of well-being pervaded all over me,
along with the tangible effects of the
clearing-out mother had given me.
On the way home, I threw away my
tobacco tin and gave up smoking
permanently, and then leapt in the air and
Swung round lampposts for sheer joy and
exuberance. I felt like a long-lost son who
discovery of a thousand life-times, and that
certainty sustained me for much of the
succeeding week during which time I had
precious little interest in food or sleep or
indeed anything at all save Mother and the
vibration. I could hardly contain myself until
the Monday night. When I was due to
attend a meeting of Sahaja Yoga in
Westminster, where mother was expected
to appear.
I took my place early in the meeting
hall, and meditated on Mother's picture.
When She arrived, my wildest dreams
were instantly fulfilled; by Her gentleness,
warmth, sweetness, joy, laughter, charm
and general unbounded lovingness. I knew
the Goddess of love was here, and I felt a
great relief as all the terrors of the stern
punitive masculine God of the Catholics
evaporated-and I laughed with joy and
freedom from fear. Mother sat down and
gave a talk, of which I remember little, so
wild was my joy, save that She was full of
humor and laughter- and my cup of joy
ran truly over at the amazing revelation of
the Goddess of bountiful love and
had just been welcomed home by his
Mother, and my awe and joy were
uncontainable. The intense excitement
continued as my mind began to grasp in a
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-18.txt 
 May - June, 2005
17
The Divine Cool Breeze
little more detail the implications and the longer smoke or drink or take any drugs, I
enormity of what had happened to me. am physically, mentally and emotionally
That night, like the night before and most healthier, I've lost much of the neurotic way
of the succeeding fortnight, I slept hardly of life I sued to pursue and most of the
at all, and thought only about mother, and attitudes that went with it, I no longer waste
everything that flowed from realization. my time on political endeavor. By
One by one pieces of my life came to mother's immense and infinitely generous
consciousness to be completely re- grace I am now married to a Sahaja
evaluated in the new and searching light Yogini, and we are a family of four,
of Sahaja Yoga. I realized for example that including two children, Some material
I would not be in my current job for very problems remain, but far fewer than I had
much longer. The organisation I was before. Very much remains for me to learn
working for was wrongly based-like all from the consequences of omissions that
political initiatives it was based in ego, in I really have to meditate regularly twice a
the idea that humans could govern day and shoe beat at least as often, and
themselves, so that was out. Also, it to be constantly aware of the state of my
contained people who took drugs, vibrations and chakras. Now, having learnt
smoked and drank unrestrainedly, and the necessity, I must learn to actually do
followers of false gurus. My earnest desire these things!
was to escape from that situation now-I
didn't want to work for such people or be all my desires. if at any time I feel the
in contact with such rubbish. I wanted to necessity to change the world, Mother so
live dharmically, but knew it would take a arranges things that I give an introductory
little while to find anew the right and wrong. talk at a public meeting for newcomers,
In the meantime I learned also to put my and lam filled with joy that my voice is used
trust in Mother's love, and not to feel guilty as a vehicle for persuading people to try
for real or imagined errors. The friend who the one thing that is worth looking for. I
introduced me to Sahaja Yoga gave much know that realization will have a far greater
help over the first week, teaching me about effect on people's lives than any of the
bandhans, foot soaking and various political solutions I used to advocate, and
mantras, and introduced me to the chakras I feel privileged to be allowed to play a part
and the Deities. It seemed so much to in spreading Sahaja Yoga. Life is not
learn at first, and I wondered how I would easy, but now it is worthwhile, it is suffused
ever remember it all, or cope with the great with a glorious optimism and positivity that
number of new things to do and changes was totally lacking before. Every day there
to go through.
It did however cope with my life, and struggle to curb one's ego and surrender
as time went on, had an increasingly wide to Mother, and the ever present necessity
effect on me. Now, a year and a half later, to inculcate discipline in looking after
it has transformed almost everything. I no one's spirit in all the ways Mother has
I have the source of satisfaction of
arises in some challenging form the
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-19.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
18
May-June, 2005
am now part of a growing, loving and
supporting collective under the guidance
and protection of our Holy Mother.
O Mother, from the bottom of my heart, I
thank you!
Bolo Shri Bhagawati Mataji Shri Nirmala
Devi Ki Jai.
taught us; but all that happens in the context
of great hope, joy and love, and the all-
pervading certainty that one is on the right
path at last. For me that certainty, in
contrast to the agonizing doubt that
preceded it, is the greatest of Mother's
magnificent gifts. I am, above all,
profoundly grateful that I have at last been
released from the more of Maya that the
rest of humanity is still stuck in, and that I
Jason Copeland
10.12.1981
(Nirmala Yoga)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-20.txt 
 SAYINGS OF THE ADI GURUS
"No one asks with wisdom. My treasury is
open. No one brings carts to take away
the real treasures. I say: dig and search,
but no one wants to take any pains. Be
the true sons of the Divine Mother and fully
stock yourself. What is to become of us?
This body will return to earth and the air
we breathe will melt into air. This
opportunity will not return."
"Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one
Lord; and you shall love the Lord your
God with all your heart and with all your
soul, and with all your might."
MOSES
Men of superior righteousness
spontaneously keep practicing the middle
path, equally away from extremes."
CONFUCIUS
SHIRDI SAI BABA
"Not knowing that one knows is best.
Thinking that one knows when one does
not know is sickness ; only when one
becomes sick of this sickness can be one
free from sickness.
"O Queen of the Parabrahman! the knower
of the Agamas call only Thee as the
goddess of letters who is the wife of
Druhina; they call only Thee as Padma who
The sage is never sick ; because he is is the wife of Hari ; they call only Thee
sick of this sickness, therefore he is not Partner of Hare, the daughter of the
Mountain, while Thou perplexest the world,
LAOTSE as the transcendent forth entity
unattainable, and with Thy boundiess
splendour, as the great illusory Being and
sick."
"Our true lover of knowledge naturally
strives for reality, and will not rest content
with each set of particulars which opinion
takes for reality, but soars with undimmed
and unwearied passion till he grasps the
nature of each things as it is.... that
is, with the faculty which is akin to reality
and which approaches and unites with it."
the fountain of all chastity.
ADI SHANKARACHARYA
Om Tvameva Sakshat Shri Jagatguru
sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Bhagawati Mataji,
Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah.
SSOCRATES
(Nirmala Yoga)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-21.txt 
 INCARNATIONS
Different stages of human evolution you cannot have a direct rapport.
took place when all these incarnations
came on this earth.
Incarnations have to come. If you many incarnations came on this earth.
reason it out you will understand why an
incarnation is needed to come on this After Our Self Realization it is our
earth. The unconscious can guide you Responsibility to:
through symbols which appear in your Show
dreams. There are so many other ways Mother at all Times
by certain happenings the unconscious, Give VIBRATIONS Always
the Divine can guide you; but it is all and to VENTILATE Constantly.
vague, extremely vague. The conscious
must have a mouth to explain itself. It must Please Remember the 3 V's
have proper body to be able to
communicate what it has to say otherwise
how are you going to have a rapport with
unconscious.
You are to be connected. Now
somebody has to do this job. That is why
VENERATION to our
VENERATION
VIBRATION
VENTILATION
You cannot have any rapport with the
divine unless and until you know you are
Atman, your Atma. Before that whatever
you may try may create a depth in you, a
serenity in you, a character in you but still
Then VICTORY is Ours
JAI SHRI MATAJI
PHILIP-BIRMINGHAM
(Nirmala Yoga)
AN EXPERIENCE
Bombay March - 1981
I'm giving this experience of my hip meet our respected Mataji and he came
bone fracture which took place on 30h and met Mataji and got realised by Her. I
November, 1980. I was told by my doctor only pray that more people will come to our
that I would not be able to walk with out a Sahaja Yoga and take blessings of our
stick for six months, but on the fifth day of respected Mataji who's a Real Goddess
my operation Our Dear Respected Mataji Incarnation and we are really one of the
came to see me in the hospital and with fortunate to have this Great Mother who is
H. H. Mataji's grace and vibrations I felt full of Great Love and Blessings for those
so much energy and such strong who come to her Lotus Feet.
vibrations that I started walking without a JAI MATAJI
stick within fifteen days. At this
experience my doctor also was so
surprised that he became very keen to
Mrs. Mahtaney
Nirmala Yoga
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-22.txt 
 REALISATION
AFTER REALIZATION
The awareness space of the
I did not know Sahajyoga upto
January, 1980. But l always harboured in conscious mind has increased. Ego and
my heart an ambition to achieve super-ego gradually drop down and are
something in "Yoga' invented by our
ancient people. And due to this, I had an
attraction towards, 'Yoga' from childhood. a direct link with the unconscious. It
Because of this ever present manifests as the flow of vibrations.
attraction, I attended the lecture of Mataji
Shri Nirmala Deviji. And in that awakened. They are the reflections of the
programme of Kundalini awakening, I got original deities on the Adi Chakras of the
a rare thread of happiness and peace. Virata and they "organize" our awareness
With the help of this thread I want to make accordingly. As they are linked together
my life, full of real peace and happiness. by the ascended Kundalini the personality
I realize that God is present in our becomes integrated. They decode and
body also. As, through eyes, we get the respond to the messages from the Holy
sensation of vision, through nose, the Spirit. They read other human beings as
sensation of smell, through ears the awareness systems. They direct our
sensation of hearing Kundalini is our spiritual growth.
means of realizing presence of God in the 4. Collective Consciousness is
World.
1.
sucked back into Pingla and Ida.
2. The ascended Kundalini establishes
t
The deities on the charkas are
3.
achieved. The attention is drawn inside
because of the inward happening of
Kundalini's rise.
In a fully mature realized being, the
Deities ascend from their place of work in
the Chakra, to their own seats within the
Sahasrara. This is the stage of complete
Divine Integration.
By means of cold, clean, holy
vibration given by 'Mataji' we feel calm and
happy.
We can confirm the holiness of
Mataji and vibration given by her photo
also. Therefore, we can imagine how
much great is our 'Mataji'.
5.
The Advent (IIl-4 (92)
JAI SHRI MATAJI
Ravee Bhavsar
Nehru Nagar, Dhule
(Nirmala Yoga)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-23.txt 
 FEARLESSNESS
A realized being is someone who clouds dissipate when searched with the
has felt the wind of the Spirit and whose stronger beam of enlightened attention.
Sahasrara Chakra has been opened. He
is not yet a real Sahaja Yogi. Areal Sahaja forget that your Mother is very powerfl,
Yogi is someone who understands and that, She knows everything and that She
realizes in his life a few basic principles loves you very much". So, to become
of behaviour. One of them is fearlessness. fearless, a Sahaja Yogi has simply to
Fear is cloud full of murmurs and, realize the truth, the depth and the power
sometimes full of horror which spreads of this statement. To do so, we need
from the left side through the heart chakra actualizing the nature, the divine nature of
into the field of consciousness. Why do our relationship to Shri Mataji. And the
we fear? Some of the Sahaja Yogis are One who can help us in this, is the great
saints whose Ida Nadi still store the child-God: Shri Ganesha-Christ.
memory of past lives' persecutions. Some
others, in their seeking explorations have So, it may well be concretely helpful to pray
been exposed to the various aspects of in our Mooladhara and agya charkas so
hell. And a few are just plain cowards. Yet, as to become better aware that we are
there is simply nothing but a cloud! It has sakshat children of the Adi Shakti. And
no substance, no reality. Actually it is fear we should also pray Shri Jagadamba in
which creates its own object: the thing we the heart chakra to bless us with a strong
fear is created by fear itself. For, there is feeling of security. The key to the success
simply nothing to be afraid of within the of these prayers is, of course, surrender.
glorious beauty of reality. This reality can
be encompassed in one statement: Shri Indeed, a Sahaja Yogi can always take
Mataji Nirmala Devi, Mother of Sahaja refuge behind the indestructible all
Yogis is Sakshat, the incarnated Adi pervading cosmic shield of Shri
Shakti. This is a fact. This fact cannot be Bhagawati's attention. And then we also
affected by mere opinions about it. Do become Her swords, because the fearless
we realize that Her Power is beyond the attention of an enlightened being starts
scrutiny of the Trimurties? Have we read burning away many forms of negativity.
in the Devi Mahatmyam how the gently Fear itself is afraid of you when you are
smiling Goddess became an enraged fearless!
demons killer for the sake of Her children?
Do we understand again that this is not a
mythological tale but the actuality? How
dare we fear? Really, if we look straight
into our various fears, they will vanish: the
Shri Mataji always says: "Never.
With my best regards and
Jai ShriMataji
Gregoire de Kalbermatten
ZUERICH
(Nirmala Yoga - 81)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-24.txt 
 ACTION RELATED TO SPIRIT:
Our beloved Mother Shri Mataji has
explained to us quite often that Sahaja
Yoga is a dynamic, living process. Sahaja
Yoga nourishes itself through itself and
grows for itself. This dynamic, tremendous
movement of positivity is ignited by our
spirit which is the reflection of our Mother's
divinity in our being. Every Sahaja Yogi's
spirit is a part, a cell of Shri Mataji's body.
This spirit must be activated to become a
dynamic power, ready to attain and gain
the hearts of the seekers who are still
his spirit more and more. As our beloved
Mother told us, we must express our
desires. But what is desire? Desire is
will put into action.' What should we
desire? Not to have more money or more
success in life, but we should desire our
spirit to act. What does our spirit desire
in order to act?
The spirit desires to manifest his
essence of joy outside and to spread the.
flow of the divine vibrations of our beloved
Mother. The spirit desires to be fully itself,
bound to the Adi Shakti, and to increase
the channels which unite us to Shri Mataji.
So we have to let our spirit manifest its
desire. If we do so, the spirit will do the
job. It will automatically act. Enjoying its
own fulfilment, it will express its joy through
action and enjoy it's press its joy through
action and enjoy it's own action. The spirit
will be the motor of the engine, ready to
go and put the Sahaja Yogi's wherever and
whenever he likes; that means every
Sahaja Yogi can be in thoughtless
awareness wherever and whenever he
searching God. As Sahaja Yogi's we must
understand how to use our spirit, work with
and leave our EGO and
our
misidentifications.
When a new person gets his
realization and stabilized his feelings and
beliefs, the Unconscious will give him
signs to help him to strengthen his faith
towards Sahaja Yoga. Because he is still
weak and shattered he goes up and down,
very sensitive towards other people, catch
from them and put his attention on other's
negativity without knowing that he gets
identified by this negativity. It is the first
step where he may become a lethargic,
trying to avoid those who did not get yet
their realization, afraid of some "bhoots"
hanging around in the air. But when he
grows inside, discovering the subtleties
of Sahaja Yoga and feeling
manifestations of his spirit, he gets out of
his mood of fear little by little, leaves his
shell which covered his spirit and did not
allow him to see around.
likes, because it is his spirit which acts,
and not his EGO. Then, the more our spirit
acts, the more our EGO decreases and
we are able to see our own beauty
enlightened by this spirit.
But to train our spirit to act, it would
befoolish to say. "Now, Mr. X let your spirit
act". It would not work. No, let's jump
the water, let's work and live like the others,
let's mix up ourselves with the "others" so
that they can discover us only through the
inside to the inside, from their heart to our
heart. And the more we confront them, the
the
into
A Sahaja Yogi, when his faith is
settled down in this heart must manifest
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-25.txt 
 24
The Divine Cool Breeze
May - June, 2005
over the world, we must let our spirit act
so that we can improve the tides of love
among ourselves and move together
under the divine attention of our divine
more we train ourselves and the more we
use the powers of Sahaja Yoga. These
are the powers of love and understanding,
a perfect balance between patience and
determination, tolerance and courage of
telling the truth. Confronted with them, we
leam how to adapt ourselves to every kind
of situations, every specimen of "bhoots"
and so we strengthen ourselves. Little by
little we know how to deal with them and
Mother Adi Shakti, the Holy Spirit, the
desire of God Almighty, the Redemptor
of the Humanity, the Absolute of all
Absolutes, and so it knows to that the
absolute does not move because He is
the integration of all integrations, the action
of all actions as well as the inaction of all
inactions. In this sense every Sahaja
Yogi's spirit must grow in order to
understand that desire put into action
means to move closer and closer to this
especially we begin to understand that it
is only through the action of our spirit that
we can show authority upon them. When
we meet Shri Mataji, we meet the absolute
and we receive the absolute. So let's be
Absolute and let flow into the collective
Absolute through the inner manifestation
of our acting spirit.
We, all the Sahaja Yogis, should pray
to our Mother to let us act through our
spirit, because our spirit which acts,
desires the other Sahaja Yogis to act
too and so the collectivity increases.
If we want to spread Sahaja Yoga all
being the incomparable love and the
extraordinary beauty of his Divine
Mother.
Maria -Amelia et Arneau de
Kalberamatten
(Nirmala Yoga-81)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-26.txt 
 A LETTER TO SHRI MATAJI
been flowing and how blessed we all are!
All thanks to you, Mother 'O Adi Shakti.
Needless to say to you Mother, we have
made many mistakes for which we
sincerely beg for forgiveness. Our ego,
super ego, lack of precise knowledge, our
often 'not so clear vibrations many mis-
identifications and conditionings-all these
things make us so unworthy of your
continuous and overflowing grace. But the
love has always been there. Many of your
children have, by your grace, gained their
self-realization here in Australia. This, very
naturally, has given us and all the Sahaja-
yogis and Yoginis great joy. There will be
about 35 of your Australian children coming
to India to be with you and the joy that they
feel inside cannot be described.
My beloved Mother,
It is with great joy that I am writing to
you, Mother, in that blessed land of India,
where by your grace I gained the
realization of myself, my whole being thrills
with excitement, that in just several more
weeks I shall be with the one, who has
bestowed upon one of Her children, the
gift of knowing one's Self.
And of course, Terence feels just the
same. When we left you, Mother, in Delhi
were in all truth somewhat
apprehensive of the future. We had been
close to our Mother for 8 weeks and in the
warmth of Her being we felt secure. When
we left you, we felt like rather fearful baby-
birds taking their first tentative flying
lesson. And the confidence was far from
established. Then when we arrived back
we
India gave us so much and taught us
so much that we wished that as many as
possible should gain these blessings and
experiences, first hand in India, We are
so grateful to you, Mother that materially
so many have been able to afford to come
to India. We have been so blessed by you
their
in Australia we said "OK Here we go and
take a big jump" And we found that our
wings did work and we knew that the
confidence would come. The desire to
grow was there no doubt. So, with
Mother's love, we surged ahead and took
great joy in all the new discoveries and in all these ways. Many have given up
fresh challenges and especially in finding old homes where they lived in isolation and
joyful company in 'other baby-birds' which with all sorts of misidentification and in
were learning to fly with us. As time went giving up these attachments they have
by, we had so many cases where our been given back so much more.
Mother's ever-watchful eyes and loving (Sometimes the process of giving up has
and caring kept us on the right way and been painful; but by your grace the
determination and will have been
stopped from getting too badly bumped.
So we were giving others self-
realization and this was the greatest joy.
And what has happened this year, Mother
has just been your love and grace. We
have really done nothing-just the grace has
triumphant). Many have had to give up very
gross sexual misidentifications and this
has been and is a real battle in this Kali-
yuga. The war is on and we are winning.
That is the important thing and it is all
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-27.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
26
May June, 2005
Nature and learn more of that Divine
thanks to Mother's grace that the inner
strength prevails.
We all have much work to do so that
wisdom which just flows and flows. What
more can we ask that the drop becomes
our spirit can more and more manifest and the ocean.
so that we set our vibration right. We are
confident that with Mother's ever flowing awe, with humility and most of us are
grace it will just happen.
You have met Barbara and Kerry and creator of this Universe and in whose being
their letters have been so filled with joy. reside all the Deities that have been
And yet Barbara's letter which came just manifest and unmanifest on this beautiful
today is so full of Shri Ego that we had to earth. May we more and more please
laugh. How Mother plays with us to teach these Deities that are a part of Adi-Shakti.
Lus! One lesson many of us have learned Now manifest in Her in complete form and
this year is that if we get into ego or super with her complete powers. In so doing with
ego our Mother will give us more and more apure heart we can more and more know
of such situations and in the end we will God both manifest and unmanifest. Thus,
fall over and then face the real situation may the self become reunited with God
and put down our 'Balloons'. Every time it Almighty. This is our prayer 'O' Mataji Shri
happens in myself and others, I just laugh Nirmala Devi.
out loudly.
So again, Mother please forgive us, in Australia,
if in our work here in Australia we have
transgressed too badly, or if we have not
always shown wisdorn, or our ego and
super ego have blown us too much. All
we now ask is that we can come to our
beloved Mother and sit at her lotus feet
and imbibe Her Divine Love and Her
We are coming to India with joy, with
coming to worship our Divine Mother, the
With love and respect from all of us
WARREN & TERENCE,
10-Catherene Street,
Liechhardt 2040 NSW
AUSTRALIA
10h December, 1980.
(Nirmala Yoga 1981)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-28.txt 
 AN ENCOUNTER WITH THE TRUTH
I realized the importance of vibrations decision !! Somehow I answered the
and kindness of our Divine Mother only questions but failed in that subject. I told
during the days of my final MBBS myself "Doesn't matter, it is just a home
examination. HH Mataji gave me
realization in October, 1979. Since then I in final examinations also". Further, I
cherish this precious gift of God. I was a decided to study that subject properly, as
topper in my middle school days but inadequate preparation was the main
thereafter I hardly ever got good marks. cause of my failure.
So, after the realization, I thought I would
again score highest marks.
I was preparing for my third terminal studying hard I felt nervous and felt that my
exams when I came to know of HH Mataji's preparation was not upto the mark. Istood
programmes in Delhi, in February 1980. in front of Mataji's photograph and prayed
As time was very short,I attended the for help. For a moment I felt as if I was
programme on one Saturday with a wish bathing in a shower of vibrations !! Next
in mind to ask the Mother for blessings to day, i.e. on the examination day, I was very
stand 1 in final examinations. To my much scared. Before leaving for the
surprise it appeared that the Mother had examsI said my prayers, but avoided my
understood my wish, as She told the story earlier mistake said 'Ma, please give me
of a girl who topped in all activities, which blessings-so that I may be able to attempt
made her an egoist and a tom-boy, to every every question howsoever difficult it may
body's annoyance. I understood that my be". I received the blessings through the
wish was unwise as a top position would divine of vibrations which were almost
bloat my ego and cause my dissent on the poured on me. I bowed before the
spiritual path.
One day, in the third terminal
examination I was to write my Gynaecology paperI realized that I had answered all the
Paper. Before starting, I prayed to the questions very well, although I had not
Mother before her photograph" Ma, please prepared for them. This was repeated in
do such a miracle that only the questions I respect of all subjects. I had fared much
am prepared for, are asked in the exams". better than I could even dream of. It
Perhaps no vibrations came. Ientered the became possible only due to the Mother's
examination hall with a curiosity, as to grace. I did my practical examinations
whether my prayers would be answered also and my final MBBS examinations
or not. I was shocked to read the question were over.
exam. Please Ma, lest this would repeat
My final examination came.
Medicine was the first subject. Despite
Mother's photograph and left.
And lo ! As I finished the question
1
paper. Everything asked appeared to be
Greek and Latin and no choice was I had topped in Medicine; scored very
allowed. I felt dismayed at the Mother's good marks in the subject in which I had
The result was a pleasant surprise.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-29.txt 
 28
May-June, 2005
The Divine Col Breeze
failed in the third terminal examination &
stood fourth in the class. Yes, my position
was quite high and still it would not puff up
any ego. I bowed to the Mother's
photograph, with tears of joy and gratitude
rolling from eyes. How kind of our Divine
Mother to have fulfilled my wish without
making me an egoist.
"Om Twamev Sakshat Shree Adi Shakti
Mataji Shree Nirmala Devi namo namah."
Dr. Nitin Kumar Gupta,
27 LIG, DDA Flats (RPS),
Mayapuri,
New Delhi - 110064.
(Nirmala Yoga)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-30.txt 
 SHRI C.P. SHRIVASTAVA`S SPEACH
26-12-1980
On 26TH December, 1980, Bombay me to apply myself for the responsibility
Sahaja yogis alongwith their foreign which the Govt. of the country entrusted to
counterparts offered very warm me. Iam deeply grateful to her. But today
tributes to Mr. C. P. Srivastava for his whatI want to state is that I'm not grateful
appointment as Secretary General of to her but l am very proud of her. And why
Maritime am I proud of her? Tam proud because,
Organisation) at a time when the world is afflicted
everywhere, whether you are in the East
Following is the text of the reply given by or in the West, whether you are in the North
or in the South, everywhere you find a
Dear Members of the Universal certain feeling of unrest, of unhappiness
or a little frustration and people all over
I am very greatly honoured and very the world are wanting to know, "how can
we all members of this universal world
generous observations which have been community live together in happiness and
made about me and about my in peace?" This is the question before
work..whatever I can do to deserve the every thinking individual in the world today.
love and affection that you have chosen to And there must be some answer to that,
shower upon me. You have mentioned that because after all we have to live together,
I have been sacrificing in order that my and answer really is that all of us whether
wife who is Mataji to you would be able to we belong to one country of another, we
are members of one great universal family.
want to inform you is; it is not a sacrifice, After all, if we just remember, that the whole
it's a great privilege. When we got of universe that we know of there is only
married, and that was more than a third of one planet on which there is life, such as
a century ago (34 years ago) we had our we have and that, we are the most
family, a little family, and we agreed among fortunate persons to be those created by
ourselves that our first duty would be to the Almighty to be the best of creations,
bring up our two daughters. We also that itself is a very great privilege and the
agreed that once the daughters got least that we should somehow do is to live
married, She would be free to devote her together as brothers and sisters genuinely,
time as much as possible to the service not merely thro lips but thro' hearts and it
of humanity. While our children were is most important for us to come to that
growing up - she gave all her time and stage. I have a feeling that the world is
now ready fora new revolution. There was
gave me tremendous support. Without her the industrial revolution in the 19th century
support, it would have been impossible for which brought economic prosperity to
IMCO (International
Consultative
successively for the third time.
Mr. C. P. Srivastava, on this occasion.
Sahajyoga family,
overwhelmingly touched by the most
devote her time for Sahajyoga. What I
devotion to them to bring them up and She
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-31.txt 
 30
May - June, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
many parts of the world, thus bringing this more than anything else. This country
prosperity to other parts. But that is not needs this much more than anything else.
enough. For human beings material It is the transformation; it is the uplifting of
prosperity is important, but is not the the individual from within, which is most
ultimate aim. There is much more in important. If that uplifting does not come,
human being than a mere desire for you will have conflicts, you will not have the
material weil being - the spiritual part. It kind of homogeneity or goodwill, which is
is only through spiritual attainment, so essential for all of us to be able to live
through spiritual satisfaction that genuine together in peace. So, she is giving you
happiness can be attained, and there must spiritual guidance and I have no doubt that
be some spark which has to light and the I am one of those thousands and
source of the spark is before you. THIS thousands who admire HER, respect HER,
LADY! So when I say l am not sacrificing and my fullest support is available to HER
at all, indeed I am feeling to be a part of in everyway for the work that she is doing.
you, feeling to be a part of this great But, I think, support is not the right word
endeavour, and I am proud of HER and because she does not need support from
anybody; but you see you must forgive me
because I have a dicotomy. It is very
Very recently I had a unique experience. difficult for me to forget that I am HER
She is a very busy person and if I may say husband, so please do forgive the
So without being immodest, I am also very expression that I have used but, it was in
busy with my work, but one evening she my capacity as a consort and I want you to
invited me very kindly to a function like this know that the work She is doing is to my
way of thinking very very important for
Sahajyoga family, Sahajyogis and Yoginis. humanity. In fact, I feel that it is only by
What a wonderful expression they had, uplifting men & women everywhere
what a feeling of internal peace and calm throughout the world, that we can really
they had, what feelings of togetherness become worthy of the Almighty God who
they had ! That gave me a very deep has created us all. Now, in IMCO, the
impression, a feeling that, that family had Organisation thatI am privileged to serve,
been transformed from desperate l am very grateful for the kind words about
individuals coming from different parts of my re-election. It was most gratifying.
the country into a family mended together, Perhaps you know that this was
knitted together with one purpose, viz., unanimous. I mention this only for one
reason, viz that you would hear that there
family. They all wanted to assist each other are many issues that divide the world. On
to help each other to grow together and to very few issues the Govts. of the world
agree. Now, if they agreed upon re-
marvellous task. I think the world needs election, whether it was Soviet Union,
the work SHE is doing.
I might tell you something more.
in London. There I saw another family a
realizing that we are members of one
develop spiritually. Now, this is a
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-32.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
May June, 2005
Sahaja Yoga on one side and United
Nations activity on the other. I have onlya
small responsibility in the United Nations
system but to the extent that I can, it is my
duty and it has been my endeavour always
to serve the World Community in a far more
elevated sphere-the spiritual sphere. Now
member countries of the to friends who have come from abroad, as
an Indian I would like to extend a very
groups. I do not believe in groupism. I do hearty and a very warm welcome. I feel
not believe in confrontation, I do not believe very greatly honoured & privileged that you
that by fighting, the world can get along; I should be here at this time that you should
do not believe that the developing world spend your new Year Day in our country
can develop by fighting the developed and I want to take this opportunity to wish
world. I believe, and I believe very sincerely you the very very best for 1981 and the
& genuinely, that all of us can get together best that I can do is to say 'let Sahaja Yoga
only by way of togetherness, by co- which is universal, grow and grow &
operation and this is the message that I develop and really lift up the world to a new
give continuously." Now this is only one level of awareness, new level of human
aspect of Sahaja Yoga, only an aspect, relationship based on love, affection &
but this is the message that I am privileged realisation that human beings are born for
to serve and I am most gratified & great purposes, they are born merely to
delighted that the governments as they are live a routine life but the purposes are
represented in this Maritime Organisation spiritual much highly elevated.' For your
of the United Nations System, accept that success, for your happiness and your
philosophy and they accept that by wellbeing I will pray and with these few
working together the people of the world words I want to thank you once again for
engaged in Maritime activity can make the very very kind words in which all
progress, which would be satisfactory speakers referred me today andI may also
from the point of view of everybody and if thank HER for all that SHE is doing for me
they re-elected me unanimously, honour by supporting me really. THANK YOU
United States, United Kingdom or
Developing countries or China or
Pakistan, well, they agreed to uphold a
certain principle and in some way perhaps
the message of Sahaja Yoga was being
given to them through me coming from
HER. And the message that I always give
to the
Organisation is: "We are not divided into
me greatly and my country but to my way
of thinking they honoured the principle
which is to guide the whole of United
Nations system. So, in some way there
has been action and interaction between
VERY MUCH.
(Laughter & claps)
(Nirmala Yoga - 1981)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-33.txt 
 PROTOCOL TO BE OBSERVED AT PUJA
On the eve of the arrival of our Holy in the search of the Truth-the Divine. The
Mother to India this winter, as a brother I functioning of Sahaja Yoga is based on
take it as my prime duty to tell you, through collectivity and during Poojan of H. H.
the experience and with the grace of our Mataji; the vibrations with various Powers
Mother, the holy rules that each one of us are emitted by the Mother which cleanup
should follow during Poojan of our Mother the chakras of various Sadhakas through
which definitely help in attaining the higher the representatives selected for Poojan.
place in the life of the Seeker.
The function of Poojan of Mataji is by seekers during such poojans. Hence
planned at a right place and a right time during such occasions of Poojan
by the Divine. Hence Sahaja Yogi brothers Sadhakas should not waste time allowing
and sisters should not insist on any himself/herself to think of other things
specific time and place of their choice. around, but should concentrate on Poojan
Further, at the place of Poojan all actions of Her Holiness Mataji and try to gain
should be carried out peacefully. All should maximum that is given out by Mataji. Every
assemble at the place of Poojan always fraction of second, during Poojan is thus
before arrival of Her Holiness Mataji. Till very precious and the Sahaja Yogi brothers
arrival of the Mother all should sit in and sisters should try to gain maximum
meditation by taking Bandhan. All should from the opportunity that they get at the
standup when Mother arrives and pay occasions of such Poojans. Everybody
respect and should not sit down unless should remember that he/she is sitting in
Mother takes Her seat. To avoid front of Sakshat Adi Shakti during such
diversification of attention the Seekers Poojans and should not close the eyes
should not come with empty stomach and unless specifically instructed by the Mother.
tight clothes.
H. H. Mataji asks any one or few of Poojan and should not get disturbed
the Sahaja Yogis to perform the Holy because of the temporary troubles that are
Poojan of Mataji as the representatives. experienced in front of Mataji by the new
In Sahaja Yoga everything is preplanned comers to suoh functions. Sahaja Yogis
by the Divine and Sadhakas should not should not bring such persons who have
leave the place which he/she has not yet got the Jagruti. Any action which
OCcupied, unless for the specific reasons,
and should not feel nervous for the reasons be avoided and thus the Sadhakas should
that he/she is not chosen to represent the try to remain by heart at the function of
group for poojan or he/she is sitting at far poojan every second and try to gain the
distant place from Mataji. The place so maximum.
given by the Almighty is the proper place
for the Sadhak for his/her advancement permitted by the Mother, the Seekers
Further, many of such powers are gained
The Chitta should be always towards the
will divert his/her attention outside should
After the function of poojan, if
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-34.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze.
May-June, 2005
one should leave the place without taking
should take holy darshan of the Mother.
Nobody should touch the Poojan materials
unless permitted by the Mother. When
Mother leaves the place of poojan
everybody should get up and pay respect
and say Jay Jay Kar of the Mother. No
the Prasad.
"Jai Shri Mataji"
Madhukar Dhumal
Rahuri,
Distt. Ahmed Nagar
Maharashtra, India.
(Nirmala Yoga)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-35.txt 
 IN FLIGHT TO U.S.A. WITH THE MOTHER
Now that Mother goes to America,
Dear Brothers and Sisters,
So at last our Beloved Mother is on the collective Being of the realised Souls
Her way to U.S.A. What lies ahead very of the Universe has to grow and become
much depends upon how hungry the strong. Those who do not recognize this
seekers show themselves to be. On the and content themselves with old
one hand Mother says that She will "individualist" ideas and actions and
announce Her Advent, publicly, in America, feeling will go down spiritually. The reward
on the other hand She fears that many for growing with the Collective Beings will
may miss out because they are so far into
the ego and affected by the impure establishment of Self-Realisation. All wil
knowledge and false gurus; this land of get better and better vibrations and feel
America is the Vishuddhi chakra of the the joy and watch the ego and super-ego
Universe and so, is where the ego begins.
Let's pray that the impure knowledge can Australia often as an example of how great
become Nirmala Vidya and the ego can is the Recognition and She says that this
recognize that all the knowledge so far comes from the innocence, which is
acquired is of little use and is, in fact, a Intrinsic. Innocence knows Truth when it
severe limitation to Self-Realisation.
be tremendous growth towards the full
grow smaller and smaller. Mother uses
meets it : and so even if the superficial
damage is extensive, the speed with which
But Mother wants many to get it in
this visit and her Love and Compassion
is over flowing more than ever.
Sometimes back in Britain the Deities
recognition comes helps to very smoothly
and quickly repair the damage.
In fact the Recognition has been so
strong in Australia says Mother, that the
next stage of surrender is reached very
became so angry with things that Her
Chakras became so active that it was
soon. When this happens, the real
almost unbearable for Her. The Deities
recede from people who are damaging Integration can happen. But there's a
themselves or others or who are
attempting to step outside the Collective
being. I have seen some amazing Collectivity. Mother has said again and
examples of what happens in Britain when again that "it is not enough just to love
people go against their Spirit or the Mataji..only by loving each other, in
Collectivity and it is not very nice! Mother collectivity, can you really please Adi
says there have been several cases in Shakti". So many Sahaja Yogis have
Australia (as elsewhere) and the people/ surrendered to Mother (they say they have
groups have been given a 'not-so-gentle ) and yet are not at all loving and caring
warning.
danger at this point-Surrender/Integration
has to be part and parcel of the growth and
for all their brothers and sisters and often
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-36.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
May - June, 2005
35
very un-collective. Mother will not say PRAYER:
much here for it is a lesson that each Vishwe-shwari twam Paripaasi Vishwam
"individual" must learn for him or herself. Vishwaatmika dhaarayaseeti Vishwam.
He has learnt the lesson when he/she Vishwesh-vandyaa bhavatee bhavanti
loses his "individuality" ! And then and only Vishwaa-shrayaa ye twayi Bhakti
then, can the final integration stage namraaha.
commence.
Mother is the Collective Being of Translation:
God and so Surrender to Collectivity is the
only way to know Her. And this is the point Queen of the Universe you are its guardian.
at which we must be absolutely honest with In the form of the Universe, are its
ourselves ! Again I say, Mother won't say receptacle.
much and in fact you may appear to be You are worshiped by the Lords of the
growing, when in fact you are going down. Universe.
This is how the Maya works : so that you Those who are devoted to you themselves
get 'bumped' in order to learn. So She become supporters of the universe.
urges that you sincerely and honestly
assess the way in which your collectivity Prana-taanaam praseeda twam devi
is growing with your surrender. AsI said, Vishwaarti-haarini
if it isn't, then it isn't really surrender at all Trailokya Vaasinaa-meedya lokaanaam
- just mental activity. If it is, you will varadaa bhawa.
increasingly feel the joy and the love for all
your brothers and sisters and so the love (Prounciation a Other aa-Amen ee-meet.)
for our Divine Mother.
Translation:
Every Sahaja Yogi should pray for the
growth of Sahaja Yoga in U.S.A. and the
world. Your attention must be kept pure
and steady, Do the Sahaja Yoga practices
and reduce mental activity to a minimum.
Just enjoy Mother's Grace.-LOVE
O Devi, the remover of the afflictions of
universe, be pleased to us who are
prostrating on your feet.
O Devi, who are worthy of all praise by the
dwellers of three worlds, grant boons to all
the poele.
WARREN
17.9.1981
(NIRMALA YOGA 1982)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-37.txt 
 TRANSLATION OF HER HOLINESS SHRI MATAJI'S
MARATHI LETTER (1979)
over. Hence all should be alert and awake
My dear Sahaja Yogis,
Received your loving and beautiful
letters and messages of greetings. Here,
I am busy in the work in London and could
not write.
and also awaken others.
My life is dedicated to you. Every
moment it is working. All I want is that pure
gold should enlighten human history while
Once I told you that Sahaja Yoga is getting heated in the hell of Kali Yuga.
beginning from Navaratri this year. That
is, Satya Yuga, for which you were so far kindled in every home, may its joy spread
preparing, will now be seen. As a tree has
to sprout first in the earth and then its resound all countries and may this power
sapling peeps out, in the same way, on
the first day of Navaratri i.e. on 8th April universe.
the sapling of Satya Yuga will be seen.
It is the day of great joy. Whole long time. But your brothers are living here
Nature will now have new life. You must and also in other countries. You will meet
understand that the importance of this day each other in course of time. But I often
will be known only if the whole mankind is feel that one day of such great joy of love
enlightened with vibrations of love.
In this world Brahma Shakti was desire will happen. Therefore, your
awakened from the very day of My birth. attention should be fully on Sahaja Yoga. I
You have received it to some extent, and have offered my body, mind and wealth,
are using it in many ways.
I was telling you that light of that great
power of love will spread all over the world. Chitta because only that will be
The first lamp will be lit on that day. But enlightened.
night of Diwali is blind. It cannot see the
lamps. In this Kali-Yuga, this work will be
done only if many lamps are lit.
Whatever is God's work, it will be
My blessings are: may this lamp be
in the society, may the cheers of its victory
of Brahman fill in every molecule of
I have to be away from you for very
should dawn in our life. Whatever you
every thing.
You have to take care of only your
Always remembering you,
Your Separated Mother
Nirmala
(NIRMALA YOGA)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-38.txt 
 TRANSLATION OF HER HOLINESS SHRI MATAJI'S
MARATHI LETTER
My dear Sahaja Yogis
Brahma tatwa which is flowing
within you in the form of vibrations
cleans all your three sheaths viz.
Body, Mind and Ego. When any of
these sheaths becomes impure
your vibrations give you the
indications.
5.
Human Chitta has many illusions. When
they are removed, human Chitta becomes
enlightened and blissful. Many of your
illusions have been removed by Kundalini
awakening.
You have realised that Kundalini is
1.
You get the bliss of the spirit, if you
become of sound body, pure mind
and egoless. Vibrations of bliss
flow from the spirit because its light
beams unaffected.
6.
not an imaginary but a living power
in man.
This power is within every human
being and its awakening take place
spontaneously in a normal person.
How has this universe been made?
Why made? Is Paramatma
existing? These doubts are basic.
Even Gods (Devas) have not
understood them. But whatI have
7.
This awakening does not take
place by any act. But if a person
has committed bad deeds,
3.
awakening is not possible because
in sleeping state Kundalini is
aware of the past deeds of the
person. She has righteousness
and although she is mother in
witness state, she knows what is
good and bad for the person.
Diseased body and mind get cured
by the grace of Kundalini.
told is right or wrong, can be
ascertained on vibrations. For that
vibrations should be good.
When you will learn with your
experience that love and truth are
one and when with your
experiences you will realise your
very subtle Brahma-tatwa, then your
illusion, that Brahma is detached,
will go. Divine principle i.e. Brahma
will blossom from within you as
lotus and its fragrance will spread.
Impurities will go from physical,
subtle and casual bodies. When
Kundalini Shakti is the power of
desire of Bhagwati. She is easily
awakened just by the wish
(Sankalpa) of Bhagwati. A person
of very high order has to put in
great efforts for it. But it is not his
4.
your Chitta becomes Brahma then
fault.
2.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-39.txt 
 May - June, 2005
38
The Divine Cool Breeze
(Jada-Shakti) in solids, in living
beings, it is beauty (Saundarya
Shakti), in waking state it is the
power of bliss, in Sahaja Yoga, it is
the power of consciousness bliss,
in Param Yoga it is supreme bliss
and within Bhagwati it is the power
of being Brahma (Brahma Bhootwa
Shakti). You have understood all
these, but should experience them.
You should have steady mind and
surrendering your heart become
free from the illusion. These are my
the illusion due to unreal will be
destroyed.
Although Brahma - tatwa (Divine
element) is like sun, its rays reflect
on unreal (water) and that disturbs
your attention. It will not be
disturbed when your Chitta
becomes Brahma (sun) itself. This
illusion will go by meditation in the
company of ever loving Bhagwati.
8.
You have become collective
conscious. This power of
collective consciousness which is
awakened within you, is Brahma
Shakti and it is present in the
universe, in different forms and
even in molecules. It is the solidity
9.
blessings.
Ever yours Mother
Nirmala
(Nirmala Yoga)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-40.txt 
 CONFIDENCE IN OUR VIBRATIONS
Vibratory awareness is a precious particular way, but when the moment of
gift we receive after our Realisation. Anew action arrives, the moment of taking the
field of judgment is opened in front of us, final decision we go backwards. We are
shows us wider horizons. Our sense of afraid, In that moment joy goes away from
discrimination, symbolized by the swan our hearts and instead of it non-confidence
who can separate the milk from the water, settles there. The decision will not any
develops and gives us more assurance,
more confidence in our decisions. Where Unconscious.
there was darkness we now see light,
more be the one coming from the
On the contrary, if we deeply believe
we were given this power, we will always
be confident and we will always feel the
attention of Shri Mataji on us. We are like
little birds learning how to fly, and as soon
as we cannot go further we are taken in
the nest. And again through HER GRACE
we will try, till we are capable of doing in
where we would feel incertitude we are
now sure. The correct way, the Right path
is shown to us through vibrations. But
sometimes, we misuse this wonderful gift
and try to get an answer to our petty daily
things, through vibrations. This power was
given to us by the enormous generosity of
ADI SHAKTI, best to be used in a correct
our own.
way. We should not waste it. If not used
correctly we may lose it, and then the
answer we had looked for will not be the
good one. At such stage we lose
confidence-confidence in ourselves and
immediately in Sahaja Yoga.
But if each time we use it, we do it
from the heart, for a worthy purpose, the
sure answer will come even when not
expected but with a sign easily recognized
by a Sahaja Yogi, as coming from the
Divine.
The same way Shri Mataji gives us
the powers, shows us the way of the way
of doing things, and then leaves us free to
act by ourselves, always under Her Loving
Care, Wise Guidance, Tremendous
Compassion.
It is time for us to be strong to grow
to face reality and to learn how to fly with
all the jov in our HEARTS through the
unlimited LOVE flowing from Shri Mataji.
JAI MATAJI
This sort of happening should give
us confidence in ourselves, in our own
judgments. Sometimes, we feel that a
particular situation should be handled in a
Maria Amelia De Kalbermatten
(Nirmala Yoga)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-41.txt 
 SETA ANTAR YOGA0HO
BECAUSE of the enlightenment of ourselves we will see these effects more
the Chakras, whatever is done externally clearly. As Christ has said, watch and pray.
after self realisation is reflected within. When the flow of vibration in our meditation
Thus mantra and yantra, prayers and is absolutely even, silent, without direction
gestures, have a meaning only after towards any object, then we have
realisation. Even so, gestures and words balanced our outward behaviour and the
remain empty if we do not have our Mother inner yoga can work to take us deeper
as the pesiding deity of all chakras, and without outward effort or show on the part
specially we have to place our Mother in of our ego. Again, this will only happen if
our hearts if Antar Yoga is to be complete. Shri Mataji is in our hearts as the Kshipra
It seems so obvious, but many Sahaja Prasadini – who showers blessings on
Yogi's remain half hearted nevertheless Her devotees very quickly- and as the
because this has not been understood. Vanchhitartha Prasadini – who bestows
Recognition of Shri Mataji as the complete on Her devotees the objects of worship.
incarnation of Adi Shakti, embodying Thus oneself becomes one with the
every deity which is to be worshipped, is formless, all-pervading, attributeless
the only way to get rid of inner negativity, Queen of the Universe who cannot be
to feel vibrations properly, and to establish known except through worship, praise,
oneself in the divine kingdom of joy and meditation and ultimately silence.
bliss. This has to be verified, but it is a
On the birthday of our Divine Mother
we all thank Her to havo been born in an
fact.
Because external action and desire age when it has been possible to know
is reflected within, the chakras become personally the most complete incarnation
clean or dirty according to our outward which has been known in all the history of
behaviour. If the behaviour is false or mankind. Again and again we pray to Her,
artificial, even if we are doing the gestures not to lead us into the Maya of believing
of what we believe is Sahaja Yoga, still that deities are different and Mataji Shri
our left side will be weak. Sins of Nirmala Devi is different. To know the
commission are corroded by correct deities one must know Mataji, and not the
outward gesture, but we must also correct other way round. Thank you Mother, for
the sins of commission, that is the failure giving us this big chance. May Your
to become, for instance, sweeter and Children be worthy of You and manifest
more considerate people. As we watch Your glory on Earth.
(Nirmala Yoga)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-42.txt 
 LIGHTING THE LAMPS
When a child becomes more aware
he begins to observe his surroundings. He in recent times in the living example of
listens intently to all sounds and watches
carefully the movements of his parents. As permeated the hearts of millions and
his faculties develop he beings to imitate inspired their course of action which
the mannerism of his parents and changed the destiny of India despite the
gradually learns by their example. In fact most formidable odds.
from the child we can know the quality of
his parents for his behaviour reflects their
upbringing.
We learn by example and it
continues to be the most effective method example. The example we set should be
of education. In fact moral education can
only be imparted through this method. A
child is taught to speak the truth but if the like this. This will bring glory to our Mother
teacher tells lies then the teaching loses and She will be proud of us. Then our
credibility and fails to register. Our small family will cross all frontiers and
politicians preach honesty but if they are become a universal family. Therefore, we
themselves corrupt then no one lends ear
to their lectures and the moral standards
quotation buta reality which was verified
Mahatma Gandhi. His personal example
In becoming the example lies the
secret of a successful teacher. Sahaj
Yogis have to become the samples of
t Sahaja Yoga that others may learn by their
so sincere that others are compelled to
enquire who we are, who has adorned us
have to be careful and should investigate
and check ourselves, whether our deeds
are in harmony with our speech. While
we talk of love and forgiveness our actions
are not a negation. While we accuse
others of fanaticism we are not ourselves
being carried away. For the eyes of the
world have become very suspicious and
are always looking for an opportunity for
further deteriorate. Their message fails to
inspire because it does not come from the
source of truth. Truth has its own strength.
When one has become the truth then his
words have great authority and strike
deep. The words of the Christ, the Buddha
and Lord Krishna had this authority and
hence the power to transform humanity.
A leader who practices what he
preaches is like the rising sun which sheds vibrations, as loving, generous, gracious,
light and shows the way. Lord Krishna
states in the Sri Bhagwat Gita, the greatest blessing to have found the
"Whatsoever.a great man does, the same
is done by others as well. Whatever (Trigunatmika) now let us imbibe those
standards he sets the world follows". II qualities and mature. Then we shall
(21).
This is not a mere scriptural transmitting that great blessing. The sweet
criticism.
Yes, we are to be as gentle as the
for giving and patient as our Mother. It is
source of all great examples
become pure and effective channels of
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-43.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
May - June, 2005
(42
alt
or ryaol
FO SH Onnaluts
lone ma
fragrance and colours of a flower attract
naturally. Similarly the fragrance and
beauty of our quality will attract others
spontaneously and the message will
of the sun like wise we may exemplify
Her.....
will be done on earth as it is in
that 'thy Kingdom come Thy
.
Heaven..
spread.
e Let us pray to Shri Mataji that as a
beam of ray exemplifies all the goodness
Yogi Mahajan
(Nirmala Yoga)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-44.txt 
 800068888580
వినినినని
9999336
Five minutes after Shiv Pooja - 2003 Chaitanya flowing
from the left heart of Shri Mataji.
in Moghul Sarai Centre fire of Hawana assumes
the shape of Durga (Navratri-2003)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-45.txt 
 22
