The Divine Cool Breeze January-February, 2005

 CONTENTS m Sahasrara Puja - Italy - 4.5.1986 1. Advent of the Masters 8. Mahakali Puja - Lonawala - 19.12.1982 17. 121 Letter of Shri Mataji - 1 23. 25. Letter of Shri Mataji - 2 Letter of Shri Mataji 26. 3 28. Mother's Shield of Love A Poem by- William Blake 29. 30. Ray Harris's reflections on Pluto

 COOL BREEZE DIVINE THE Published by Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. Infosys House, Plot No. 8, Chandragupt Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411029 Printed by Krishna Printer & Designer Vishram Nagar, Tri Nagar, Delhi-35 Mob.: 9868230100 es For Subscription Please Write to : Shri G.L. Agrawal Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 222, Desh Bandhu Apartments Kalkaji, New Delhi-110019 Tel. No.: 011-26422054, 26216654 Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles, Miracle Photographs etc. to : Shri O.P. Chandna G-11 (463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110 034 Tel. No. 011-55356811" Mor.: 8.00 AM - 9.00 AM Eve.: 8.30 PM - 10.30 PM

 Sahasrara Puja Parvachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Madesimo, Italy - 4.5.1986 brain for all kinds of fruitless purposes. They Today is a great day as it is the sixteenth Sahasrara dayi.e. sixteen movements or sixteen were not aware of the warning that Sri Krishna beads to reach the highest position in the coil. It is complete. Sri Krishna is called as complete incarnation because he has sixteen petals. So had given that if you use human awareness except for your ascent you will go downwards. In the west, people thought that by using their brain power they can use matter for their own now we go into another dimension. The first was where you got your self realization. In the purpose. If they had done it after their self realization it would have been a very different evolutionary process the animals are not conscious of many things which human beings situation because after self realization you have are conscious of. Like matter cannot be used by animals for their own purpose. Also they all become aware of vibrations, and also of your chakras. With this new awareness you would have avoided all that is wrong. But it is like a greedy person who gets a bit of money and spends it all. Now this problem has complicated are not concerned about themselves at all. If you show a mirror to animals they do not react to their own image in it. When we become human beings we become aware of many things your brains. in our consciousness which were unconscious to the animals. In their brains they could not The way we have started with machines we have understand that they could put matter to their become machines ourselves. So we have no own use. feelings and we cannot relate to others in a As human beings you were all unaware of the chakras that existed within you. Your consciousness was still working half through natural way. In human awareness you had achieved how to relate to others and to yourself. But this ego oriented approach took you away unconscious working of the chakras and the conscious working of the mind. You also never felt the autonomous nervous system or your inner organs and how it worked. You did not even feel how you are getting affected by other from natural real life. And we become artificial. Like its fashionable to be arrogant or snobbish. This is just the opposite of your ascent and evolutionary process. All the organizations which you have formed on collective influences. As a result, the freedom that human understanding are also artificial. Then a beings were granted they gathered all kinds of movement started that we have to be natural. That is also another copying of the artificial. things into their brain, into the Sahasrara, without being aware of it. They used the Sahasrara/ Natural does not mean we become artificial. It

 Issue: 1 & 2- 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze When I started my life I saw complicated means to evolve. The whole purpose of creation is to evolve. Sahasraras. The more I tried to solve the complications within my own awareness the This arrogant concept you accepted very easily more difficult it became because if you see my because you have got brains and you accept age, in 50 years you can see how much every thing that comes your way. So you became so artificial that you needed some complicated human beings have become and afteropening the Sahasrara when I came to the sensations to feel yourself. In every walk of life west within these 16 years, I saw that they are there is a conceptual artificial understanding e.g. sex is such a natural normal thing, but you now incorrigible. Now the stage for you is laid make down to ascend higher. it so artificial that you now have sex in your brain. Not only have you silenced Ganesha in the You can see that there will be five hundred Mooladhara but also Maha Ganesha in your people for a program and within two weeks all brain. will disappear. Because when the ascent takes place, the Kundalini pushes out the ego and brings the person close to reality. But again that ego which is being built up so fast in its Even art should be according to what is laid down. So you condemn everyone. And vou ultimately reach aconclusion that the most insipid speed, overpowers the speed of the Kundalini and covers the head. Then it suggests that how thing is art. Like when you take out all the juice out of sugarcane whatever is left is art. The you can have godly life.. you will miss all the alcohol, all the madness, all the fun of life, and brain which does not nourish the heart is absolutely an artificial brain just like a robot. you will lose all the freedom to become mad. And people have become just like robots. A robot can be handled by anyone who has a You have to do something really stupid to sell it to their minds. e.g. somebody has become rich mastermind. Because you do not have your selling empty tins as lamps. All kinds of stupid own heart so the brain be controlled by things which are nowhere near natural beauty somebody who has a greater brain of concepts. All these concepts are destructive. As Hitler got or natural joy are accepted as sophisticated. On the other side the asuri vidya (black the concept that he is an Aryan and he is ofa superior race, He did not mind destroying ue vidya)has taken over. As Sri Krishana has amed in the first chapter that if asuri vidya whole world. Same is the case in the religious takes over then shudha vidya cannot compete field. Every religion was poured into the cups with the speed of the asuri vidya. Like in America there has been a big argument among of concepts. First they also tried for political domination. Sahaja Yogis if myphotograph should be in the

 Issue: 1 & 2-2005 3. The Divine Cool Breeze you have to achieve the highest. drawing room or not. But if you ask them to paint their nails black, their faces black and wear The time is very short and the background is so black clothes, they will do it. Even at this stage dark. You are surrounded by people who are when we are Sahaja Yogis we are shy of our pouring out destructive concepts every moment. godly life. You are the people who have to shoot out much faster than all of them. Though you understand that your awareness is very different from them, When they became hippies or punks or stupid they gave all their life, time and money. They changed their dresses, their family life, their life a kind of lethargy does not accept it the way it styles and went all out. Even when Sahaja Yogis should accept Sahaja Yoga. Everyone of you are convinced about the godliness of Sahaja must think everyday what have I done for Sahaja Yoga. But you all are still very busy with your jobs, or making money or have Yoga, they are shy. Now you know that your Mother does not take money from you. On the contrary She spends. You have gained out relationships with people who do not matter at of it. But when it comes to giving, everybody all in Sahaja Yoga. We have to make an all out feels shy. From such a background you are coming to the light of God's Grace. But you do not want to dash at it. You want to take your effort to rise to that point that whatever we know or believe in, we act on that and become one with it. You can do that with concepts but not time gradually, so gradually that may be you may with reality. This is the problem. For e.g. a lose your chance. fanatic believes that he can do such and such things in his own religion, he'll do it. But the So in the awareness of Sahaja Yogis where you concept is not reality. It has given no benefit know all about chakras, you know about and shown no performance of any substance vibrations, you know how to relate to others, and still people do it. When they were fighting for freedom, my father himself gave up all his property, gave up his practice and with eleven children in the family still all this knowledge is for personal advantages. So the shadow of the past still lingers on, even when you have this new awareness. Animals can swim automatically. They don't have to learn to swim. But human we were living in places and we started living in huts for years together. For the gross freedom beings have to leam to swim. They have forgotten the techniques which were known to the animals and have taken to the techniques of human beings. But in Sahaja Yoga you have got your realization in one life time and in this we do anything but for the subtle freedom Sahaja Yogis have to do everything that is possible. The first thing is to realize and be aware in your life time you have to grow, and in this life time

 Issue; 1 & 2- 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze conscious mind all the time that you are Yogis. system not yet so conscious. This is the reason why you do not know why you have to do a particular thing at a particular time. Unless you You are the ones who are very much higher than the rest of humanity. That the salvation of the whole ofhumanity depends on you. The purpose rise to this nirvikalpa stage you cannot go further, of creation will be served by you. So first of all e.g. I know everything what I do. I can handle any power wherever I want to. I can absorb you have to be conscious in your conscioUSness any negativity I want to. I need not absorb any that you are so important, that's why you were given realization. How can you be living with negativity I do not want to. You may be thousands of miles away from me, I know your conditionings and your ego. The conditionings are like this- you are coming from a Christian religion, you bring little bit of that Christian religion into Sahaja Yoga. Or if you about each one of you. I may not know your wordly names but I know you as a part and parcel in my being. I also can behave are a Hindu you want to bring something of Hindu religion. We have all the pure essences of these in Sahaja Yoga, but we can have the gross nonsense. All these things are like dirt like a human, absolutely like you, ageing like you, using spectacles, doing all the things that will make me a complete human being. I have accepted this role consciously not unconsciously, to me nothing is unconscious. So if you have to be conscious of what you are doing you have over our Sahasrara which must be shaken off. Though now you are aware and conscious of your chakras you do not keep them clean. to be alert about it. Ordinary human beings have clothes and houses The first thing you have achieved is the peace. But even now I find that peace which should become joy becomes a quarrel. Truth is one, You cannot argue about truth. It is homogenous. which they try to keep clean. But you do not feel ashamed of them also when they are bad because after some time you also lose It does not quarrel with each other. We are awareness of them. That means you have become subtler but in your consciousness you unconscious about our fingers but when we have to hold something all of them come together. So the part of the brain., the unconscious part are not yet subtle and there are so many things you know more than non-realised people as absolute reality e.g. we do not even have of it, is to be made conscious. This is what evolution is. Adherence to anyconcept is against vibrations whenever it is needed. Or sometimes mechanically like a machine we start giving bandhans. So you are still unconscious about evolution. You must learn to face and accept the reality and act in a real way. Miracles may be for human beings, may be for Sahaja Yogis also, but not for me, for I know what it is. your chakras. Slightly conscious when you put your mind to it but in your central nervous

 Issue: 1 & 2 - 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze, Above this half way consciousness one has to conscious of whatever you are doing, there will see how you are working it out. The whole system of relating to each other must change completely. That is very important because be no mistake. Whatever you will do which appears to be a mistake will turn out alright. For example today I want to set my watch so I human efforts lead you nowhere. You have to take your ascent. Some of them do take advantage of Sahaja Yoga and then disappear. But mostly they know that you have to be conscious of what you have got. So we can say we have got self knowledge but we have not yet got self-consciousness. For example you take the name of a great saint and the vibrations start flowing. Also you know why, hecause he is a saint. But not you Sahaja Yogis. pulled the screw out. This I did in a way unconsciously but quite consciously, because the watch stopped and I knew what time I had to be there. So consciously I put myself against myself. If the watch had not stopped I would have come earlier but that was not the time to come and I had to pull the screw to keep it stopped. So whatever mischief you play, you know and you can play it against yourself and then you can make drama. But such a stage is far off. Just now the stage at which we are, making lots of mistakes because we are not conscious of the self. If your names are taken why don't the vibrations flow? And in this you have greater advantage because the Adi Shakti herself is before you. They did not have anyone to tell But when it is your ascent, are we alert or them all these things. But you take it for granted. are we taking it for granted that Mother In expressing when we say something, are we - natural, that is, from our heart? The consciousness that I am doing it from my heart is what I want you to achieve. Like there are people who work very hard in Sahaja Yoga and will take us there. This is being childish. You have to mature in your in your ascent. Face yourself, everyday. In reality see how much time you spend in mundane worries and how much about your ascent. Have you left everything, all your worries to God others take it for granted. They do not want to help. They want everything readymade. That Almighty? Have you completely jumped out of your background ? Have you come shows that they are not conscious of their own powers of enjoyment. If they do it from their heart they will never feel the effort put in or what out all the way leaving all nonsensical things ? And how do I relate and talk to they have achieved. The sense offulfillment and satisfaction will overcome all your problems, other Sahaja Yogis? I am surprised that if one Sahaja Yogi is attacked by a non-Sahaja Yogi, a Sahaja Yogi group specially your left vishuddhis. The second stage will be when you will be supports a non-Sahaja Yogi. Or a Sahaja Yogi

 Issue: 1 & 2 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze great that no incarnation can enjoy that as I can. who has to come up pays more attention to So the women should not feel degraded if they have to look after the heart. They are in a way negative people than the positive. He is more friendly with such negative people. You have on a higher aspect, for you can do without thinking but you cannot do without the heart. to cling to the positive people. It is also a very subtle ego in them. One should not argue. If the women are very But with your complicated brains which is like argumentative the men become deaf. They do a spoiled computer you can reach wrong conclusions of whatever I say. LikeI say forget not listen to the women. If they are very aggressive then the men absolutely shut up. So the past. Does that mean that you forget all the you must behave in a natural way that you are a good of the past ? Forget the past means not man and you are a woman. You should become to allow the past to overpower you. A brain which is simple and straightforward and has love in it can understand what I am saying straight And then you more a woman and more a man. n will see the fun. Inour awareness we have to be conscious how forward. This complicated brain is to be put right and the best way is to stop thinking. When far we have achieved the consciousness for our relationship with each other i.e. the collective you stop thinking you feel that you cannot do anything. Forexample I give you a speech, but you only think about it. Can you hear my thinking? Just by thinking of these lights they cannot get enlightened. Thinking is a lazy man's garb and is used to avoid work. It is consciousness of Virata, of the brain i.e. the Sahasrara. So in principle Sahasrara is Vishnu Tattwa. But the Deity is Sri Mataji Nirmala Devi. So you can see the beautiful integration that has taken place. All the powers of Sri Vishnu have to act according to the Deity at the lotus an escape, a cleverness. feet of the Deity. So the consciousness of Sri Do not argue about Sahaja Yoga. Do not argue Vishnu is absolutely in the hands of the Deity. with your leaders. You may be his wife but you So whatever is working out allow it to work out. Surrender your Sahasrara to this Deity. It is so simple for you because you have the Deity. You have your own Sahasrara and its only you do not argue. And as far as Sahaja Yoga is concerned the wives should not influence their husbands against as they have nothing to do with it. In this case the women should nourish the organsiation and nourish the husband with love the people who are Sahaja Yogis today in modern times who have seen that Deity. from their heart and not their brains. I think it is You have asked for three things Salokyam Saamipyam so great to have been a woman myself because To see God. I can enjoy the heart, the emotions of my love, the working and the play of my love. Its so Closeness to God

 Issue: 1 & 2-2005 7. The Divine Cool Breeze. 124212AM RTRO THEY Sanidhyam - The companionship with God. today. So one must know that the calendar of God has nothing to do with the human calendar. According to certain calendars I should have come 2000 years later and some think I should have come 2000 years before, in this form. So the calendar is alright. But you have taadaatmyam i.e. oneness with God, which is not in the concept of anyone of the Yogis, saitns and the seers. For this Taadaatmyam you have when you are outside my body, while they have this Taadaatmyam when they are inside my body when they are no You are not robots or machines. You are evolved through evolutionary process and more, through evolutionary process only you have to achieve the highest. Its you who have to show the results. We may take your Sahasrara to a great enlightenment but again it will collapse. So you should understand the time limit. You must understand your greatness and you must understand how you people are chosen for the highest work in this creation. Now there is no time for lethargy. You have to rise and awake. ण So you have to know whatever heights you are brought to, it is you who will have to maintain it with full will power and action. Today is the day when I hope you jump into Nirvikalpa. But only by effort you will stay there otherwise you will slip down again. So go through this lecture again and again. Think about it. You This lecture is a concern of your Mother. You can understand it but it has to become your consciousness. It can happen if you keep it must know yourself how far you are going everyday. there. Today is the special day of Sahasrara. The puja May God Bless You. would have been tomorrow but we are having it CHE MIL

 ADVENT OF THE MASTERS 10,000-16,000 B.C. INDIA JANAKA 32 MESOPOTAMIA 2,000 B.C. ABRAHAM EGYPT A0 MOSES 1,300 B.C. PERSIA ZARATHUSTRA 1,000 B.C. CHINA 604 B.C. LAO TZE CHINA CONFUCIUS 551 B.C. cipretigs Σ) GREECE SOCRATES ell469 B.C. MECCA 570 A.D. МОНАММED NANAKA INDIA 1469 A.D. SAI NATH INDIA 1856 A.D. EMIN CREATION OF DATTATREYA The sage Narada went to the Goddesses their original form, were trapped at her hermitage. Saraswati, Lakshmi and Parvati came in search of their husbands, but she said Saraswati, Lakshmi and Parvati, saying that Anasuya, wife of Atri, was the most virtuous woman in any of the worlds. The Goddesses sent their husbands, Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva she had some claim as she had nursed them so long The Gods agreed to create a combined form with three heads andi six arms if she to test the piety of this women. Anasuya washed her husband's feet and then sprinkled This three headeddivinity released them. the Gods, who were disguised as Brahmins, with named Dattatreya The central head represents Vishan, the nght head represent Shiva and the other Brahma. The dogs which are depicted this water. They were turned into babes The three Gods deprived of the power to return to

 Issue: I & 2 - 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze of the guru of Wisdom. In his manifest forms, with Dattatreya represent the perfect devotees, as Confucius, Zarathustra, Lao Tze, Nanaka, faithful to their master. Moses, Abraham and Muhammad, Lord Adi Guru Dattatreya is the archetypal Guru, that Dattatreya has been the foundation of great is, He is the prototype or original model from religions, preserving man's dhama. which all gunus emerge. Heisthe Guru Principle: As the Adi Guru, He has incamated many times Shri Mataji has explained, "Adi Guru Dattatreya worshipped Mother along the banks of the River guide mankind. He came as the ten great to Tamasa. Tamasa is the same as your Thames. Primordial Masters. From Janaka through to And He Himself came and worshipped Sai Nath, this great principle has incarnated to here...in this great country of Shiva, of the give form to God's love for mankind, retuming again and again to correct our mistakes and bring Spirit. us back to a God-centered life. RAJA JANAKA AND 35 THE BOWL OF MILK The patience and love of the true guru is clearly illustrated in Shri Dattatreya's repeated, There is a beautiful story told by Shri Mataji preserving, incarnating guidance. It is Guru about Raja Janaka: Dattatreya who leads mankind across the Void, bringing us from the treacherous oceans of "You know, kind Janaka was called as "Videha'. illusion to the safety of the far shore where Shri The great sage Narada asked him one day, Mataji, as Shri Durga, waits for us with "Revered Sir, how are you called as Videha ? You live in this world. How can you be a outstretched arms! Lord Dattatreya had only Videha? Raja Janaka said, ' this is very simple. one job to do, to establish our dharma, so that we could evolve. Each of his manifestations Iwill tell you about it in the evening. Now please do this little job for me. There is milk in this had only this to do. bowl. You take this bowl and come along with me. Please see that not a single drop of milk is Lord Dattatreya himself is the essence and innocence of Shri Brahmadeva, Shri Vishnu and spilled on the earth. Then only will I tell you Shri Shiva. Heis the integration of all the three Gunas, and above all is innocence itself. One is constantly reminded of Shri Mataji's emphasis why I am called Videha. Narada took the bowl and followed Janaka everywhere. He had to be very careful because on the first, and most important aspect of the the bowl was such that by the slightest Guru, Shri Ganeslka. Innocence is the wellspring

 Issue: I & 2- 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze 10 humility and total surrender. Hewould rush from movement the milk might have spilled. He got his tent and greet the traveler on the dusty road, quite tired. When they retired for the evening, beseeching them to enter his own tent and have Narada asked, "please tell me now. Iam getting "just a little bread". Abraham would treat the quite fed up with carrying this bowl and travelers as if they were honoring the tent with following you everywhere at the same time. Raja Janaka said, "first of all tell me what you their visit. So in aprofusely ingratiating manner, have seen ? Narada replied, Nothing except the prophet would receive his guests as gems this bowl of milk so that it won't spill.' Raja Janaka said, 'Didn't you see there was a big dropped from Heaven. "My Lord, if I have found favour in your sight, , procession in My honour, then there was a court wherein there was a program of dancing? Didn't you see anything? Narada answered,'No, Sir, I have not seen anything.' Raja Janaka said, "My Child, likewise with Me, do not pass by your servant. Let a little water be brought, and wash your feet, and rest vourselves under the tree, while I fetch a morsel of bread, that you may refresh yourselves, and after that you may pass on-since you have come I also see nothing. All the time, I just watch my to your servant (Genesis 18, 3-5). attention, where it is going making sure that it | MOSES won't spill away like the milk." Explaining Chitta-nirodh, Shri Mataji said, "this The "Ten Commandments" contain the ten basic sort of attention one has to develop by watching virtues or dharmas for all mankind. Shri Mataji attention. Chitta-Nirodh. Nirodh means the says that as carbon has four valancies, as the quality of gold is its un-tarnishable nature, so man has ten valencies. These are the ten saving of your attention. So your attention should not be on saving money and worldly things and all that, but attention itself must be sustenance points representing the ten petals of saved. As you watch your money, as you watch the Nabhi Chakra. It is because of these that your road when you drive, as you watch your child when it is growing, as you watch the beauty of your wife, or the care of your husband- all we stay spiritually pure enough to ascend. The significant difference between man's valencies and those of carbon is that man has the free will put together you watch yourself, your attention. to consciously choose them, whereas carbon is ABRAHAM bound to its valencies by the laws of nature. Abraham exemplified virtue, righteousness, These are the Commandments that God

 Issue: 1 & 2- 2005 11 The Divine Cool Breeze: h Joy proclaimed to Moses on Mt. Sinai: I am the Lord your God. The Avesta tells us that the highest aim of our lives is to attain perfect happiness (Joy). The means of doing this is to know God's Will and to act in harmony with it. "Let the joyof living You shall have no other God before Me. You shall not take the name of the Lord your God in vain. Remember the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy. fill your heart to overflowing. Honour your father and your mother. Marriage You shall not kill. Chastity is one of the chief virtues of You shall not commit adultery Zoroastrianism. Marriage is one of the most You shall not steal. inviolable contracts and children are a blessing. Women are the sustaining powers of marriage You shall not bear false witness against your neighbour. and mankind. "A chaste woman is the noblest You shall not covet your neighbour's house. creation of Ahura Mazda". ZARATHUSTRA Woman is the marvel of creation. Unrivaled and unequalled in form and beauty is she in the Ideas of good and evil, Heaven and Hell, angels and devils, are inherent. Everything was seven realms. Sheis the blooming flower in the garden of life that breathes perfume all around." harmonious in the Universe until the angel Ahriman rebelled and was driven from Heaven. "Woman is the teacher of gentility to man. She helps man grow in moral height. She is the sustaining power of the Life of man." Hence the fight between good and evil will endure until the judgement Day. Then the World will be renewed and evil will pass away. The pure soul will attain the realization of the LAO TZE kingdom of Heaven. The Tao is most akin to water, since water has the quality of being able to take the form of any "The soul which is afraid to fight against evil has vessel which contains it. Hence it is the most failed to carry out its Divine mission and has flexible and spontaneous. wasted its life during its sojoum in this world." The Tao is female in nature and is described as "On the day of Resurrection you shall be the Mother of all things. It is obviously the answerable to Ahura Mazda for your thoughts, Kundalini Herself. words and deeds in this world."

 Issue: 1 & 2- 2005 12 The Divine Cool Breeze "The spirit of the valley never dies. This is called when you know the Mother the mysterious female. The gateway of the go on to know the Child mysterious female is called the root of Heaven go back to holding fast to the Mother, and Earth, Dimly visible it seems as it were And to the end of your days there yet use will never train it." You will not meet with danger." L CONFUCIUS From Lao Tze's teaching we learn that a Guru's purpose is to spread the light of the Divine by IS Like His personality His teaching are natural, becoming a channel that enlightens seekers and human and simple. Actual life was used to takes them to higher levels. Lao Tze was the illustrate His points since this was easy for the embodiment of the Guru that expresses the people to understand. He divided life into five relationships which were: Divine. This is not only seen through His teachings but also in his life. He could only see i) Kind and ministerDUTon one thing: Tao or God as the absolute. There Husband and wife ASL was no compromise. He was pure in attention. Father and son A Guru teaches by having tremendous Brother to brotherbo iv) compassion. Lao Tze could love any seeker v) Friend to friend because He could recognize the Divine in them. To conduct these relationships in a virtuous and It was that which he loved and it was that to respectable manner was to follow the will of which He directed His teaching. A Guru icaches that which is pure. Purity enables us to heaven. He distinguished between a spiritual see thorugh the illusion of the Divine and there and a materialistic man thus: "the superior man understands what is right, the inferior man we find detachment in joy, contentment in love understands what is profitable." There were and absoluteness in the Spirit. When one five virtues of nature according to the sage: becomes the Guru, one is absorbed in the ocean benevolence, righteousness, propriety, wisdom of the Divine. We are soothed, we find nothing matters, we know it is going to be all right because we become purity. andsincerity. Just as Shri Mataji has stressed the importance of sincerity in Sahaja Yoga, for example the "The world had a beginning necessity of singing and praying with love from and this beginning could be the Mother of the world, the heart, so also Confucius said, "Sincerity is

 & 2-2005 Issue: 1 13 The Divine Cool Brecze that by which self-completion is finished. The + MOHAMMAD possessor of sincerity does not merely Shri Mohammad spoke extensively about the accomplish completion of himself, with this day of Judgment, promising Paradise to those quality he completes other men."This quotation takes an added significance when it is considered in the light of Sahaja Yoga : an open who followed a righteous life as explained in the Koran, and Hell for those who turned agai. God and his Messengers. Speaking of the i sincere heart facilitates the Kundalini's passage of Judgment in Sura XXIV He says: the Sushumna nadi. up "24 On the Day when their tongues, Σ SOCRATES Their hands, and their feet Socrates guided his pupils lo the truth by Will bear witness against them considering ideas in their various aspects until As to their actions. the right answer was establislhed. He brought 25 On that Day God forward the Thcory of Forms "as above, so Will pay them back helow." The unseen Realm of Forms is the (All) their just dues, Divine and heavenly strata ofthe Virata which And they will realize contains the blueprint for all the earthly replicas. That god is liverything on the earthly plane of existence is The (Very) Truth merely an imperfect reflection which is subject That makes all things manifest." to changes and human imperfection, while that which exists in the absolute is divine, perfect And in Sura XXXVI: etemal and unchanging. The soul originates in 65. That Day shall we set the realm of forms and through seeking and A seal on their mouths aspiration eventually returns to it. This is the But their hands will speak ovo Tous, and their feet point in our spiritual evolution which we are now. working towards in Sahaja Yoga - by putting Bear witness, to all our vibrations we enter the kingdom of God. That they did." "He who enters the next world unanimated and From Sura VII: unenlightened shall be in the mire but he who arrives there purified and enlightened shall dwell 57. It is he who sendeth among the Gods." UThe Winds like heralds

 Issue: 1 & 2-2005 14 The Divine Cool Breeze thread of mercy and contentment." Of glad tidings, going before His Mercy: When they have Rita"A tree is known from the fruits it bears, so a Carried the heavy Laden man's religion is known from the deeds that he Clouds, we drive them performs. Robes, symbols, forms, rites, rituals To a land that is dead, and ceremonies that do not lead to righteous Make rain to descend thereon deeds will not take man farin the path of spiritual And produce every kind progress. The real problem is to rid the mind of IS Ofharvest therewith : thus evil propensities. If that's not accomplished all Shall we raise up the dead: our austerities are of no avail. " Perchance ye may remember. "This body is a palace and it is the house of "58. From the land that is clean God. Within it God kept the infinite flame." And good, by the will SAI NATH Of its Cherisher, springs up Produce (rich)after its kind: "My master told me to give bounteously to all But from the land that is that ask. No one asks with wisdom. My Bad, Springs up nothing But that which is niggardly: treasury is open. No one brings carts to take away the real treasures. I say dig and search, Thus do we explain the Signs but no one wants to take any pains. Be the true By various (symbols) to those sons of the DIVINE MOTHER and fully stock Who are grateful. yourself. What is to become of us? This body will return to earth and the air we breathe will NANAKA melt into air. This opportunity will not return. At ten years of age His mother thought it was "Your Mother is the Mother time He took part in the sacred thread of all the Adi Gurus ceremony. As the thread was being put over uShe is the one who taught Nanaka's neck, Nanaka cried, "Wait, Sir, why All the Adi Gurus must Iwear this thread ? Will it make me good She created the Adi Gurus and kind ? And She Creates out of you, "I'm not sure." The Adi Gurus." "Then it is of no use to me. Give me instead a

 Issue: 1 & 2-2005 The Divine Cool Breeze 6"TO THE MOTHER OF ALL GURUS" Poem composed at Guru Puja Where the emerald green lake washes the feet of the Almighty. Where the Almighty goddess spreads a cloak of green forests And blushes in myriads of flowers Where enthralled by Her splendour time stands in awe. Where cool winds of Spirit whisper sweet odes to the Primordial Guru. Where iron open its heart to love. The Guru tattwa of the universe opens. Here come a thousand pilgrims to anoint the Mother of all Gurus. O'Devi we offer our gratitude from the inner most core of our hearts, Again and again. You have opened our hearts But give us the iron tattwa to strengthen our love. Bless us with wisdom But also give us humility to sustain the wisdom You have showered upon us Your choicest gifts But also teach us how to share them. Please keep us forever like the yonder emerald lake Sparkling blissfully at Your feet. By Yogi Mahajan (India) AGNYA Our Father, which art in heaven, May Thy Son be the leaven of Our Souls, to make them rise In glory and aflame So truly hallowed be Thy name. For we, Thy journeying children Feel as one and long to see Thy kingdom come.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 1 & 2 - 2005 16 We know the battle must be fought" And at what price has Jesus Bought our freedom to become. We cannot shirk the task ahead - We cannot say as Jesus said3; "Father, Thy will be done !" For here on earth with chakras Seven; so must we be as 'tis in heaven, And sallying forth-uplifted head, We care not for our daily bread, For just as He, a babe, was fed, So too His Mother fondly said To all your children here on earth; Each one that tries to prove his worth; That long before his battle wins, Will lovingly forgive our sins; Provided we likewise repay, Those who aggress us on the way, So lead us from temptation's laid And guide us through that evil snare Of Satan's make; that is so hard For us to spy: and once ensnared To break! Dear Father, all Is Thine we know; the power & the glory So-even as the lamb was slain, We humbly beg to rise again: To claim our own divinity; In penitence to journey home : To glory in Thy Kingdom come And live there tīll infinity! Steven Taylor, Australia

 MAHAKALI PUJA"omawala 19.12.1982 Advice given by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Welcome to you all Sahaja Yogis to this great The first hurdle that you face as soon as you get your realization is that you just start thinking of country of Yoga. your family. You start thinking, "My mother has Today, first of all we have to establish our desire not got it, my father has not got it, my wife has not got it, my children have not got it." You within ourselves, that we are seekers and that we have to achieve our full growth and maturity. must know that these relations are wordlyB Today's Puja is for the whole universe. The Sanskrit is LOKIK, they are not ALOKIK, they whole universe should have to be enlightened are not beyond the wordly relations. These are with this desire. Your desire should be so intense wordly relations, and these attachments are Wordly. So if you play into that force, as you know that Maha Maya Shakti allows you to that they should emit out the pure vibrations of Mahakali Shakti which is the pure desire of attaining the Spirit. That's the real desire. All the other desires are like mirage. play with. You go ahead as long as you like. People bring to me their relations, their parents, this and that and ultimately they discover that You are the people who are chosen by God specially, first to express the desire and then to achieve that intense desire of purity. You have to purify the whole world, not only the seekers this was a very wrong thing they did. They lost so many precious moments, so many hours, so many years, wasting their energyon people who but even those who are not seekers. You have never deserve any attention of the Mother. to create an aura around this universe of desire Sooner you realise the better, that this desire to achieve the Ultimate - the Spirit. may be within you and may not be in any one of Without desire this universe would not have your so called wordly relations, makes 'no' existed. This desire of God is the one that is the Holy Ghost. It is the all pervading power, it is the Kundalini within us. Kundalini has only one desire - it is to be the Spirit and anything else if you desire the Kundalini does not rise. Only when it knows that this desire is going to be fulfilled by somebody who is facing the seeker, it is awakened. If you do not have a difference. As Christ was told that His brothers and sisters are waiting outside, He said, Who are my brothers and who are my sisters?" So one has to realise that those people who involve themselves into the problems of their family all the time and attract My attention - you must know that I am just playing about. It is of no desire no one can raise it. Sahaja Yogi should value to you. For your ascent it is important never try to force his desire on other people.

 18 issue: 1 & 2- 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze their family, they have to see to it that they do not force Sahaja Yoga on any of your relations. first of all to have no desire, the pure desire in your kith and kin. This is the first principle of establishment of Mahakali power. Specially in India where people are too much attached to At least don't force them on Me. Now, this desire within us, which is the their family, it is a verybig problem. If you give realization to one person, you are amazed to Mahakali power, which is manifesting, comes to us in so many ways. As I told you first of all see that, all the relationship they have is with a big bunch of bhoots. And once you give realization to one person you are in for trouble, it comes to us after realization because you are all Sahaja Yogis, to do something about our relations. Then the second desire that comes and all the bhoots walk in slowly, torturing My to us, that let us try to cure people who are our relations. This is the second desire. You should life, wasting My encrgy and 'absolutely' of no use. It should happen to you to understand that feel yourself and see that this has happened to this is not auspicious. If you want to waste many of you. So, right from leprosy to any small thing like cold or sneezing, whatever they your time, I will allow you to waste your time. But if you want to have the ascent have they think they should bring to Mother. fast first of all one must remember that And all the worries of the family should be brought to Me- simple thing like pregnancy or these are relations which are 'absolutely wordly relations and this is not your pure sneezing, very simple things, which are so natural are brought into your attention. So when have them in your attention, I say, 'go ahead with it, try to solve it, if possible 'But If you desire. you So try to separate your pure desire from your wordly desire. It does not by any means suggest that you give up your family, you give up your mother, you give up your sister. Nothing, but don't have any of them in your attention then they are in my attention. You leave them you witness them and see as you would see anybody else and see for yourselfwhether they are really desirous or not. Ifthey are well and good, they should not be disqualified, because they are your relations. It works both ways, as they cannot be qualified because they are your relations; they cannot be disqualified because they are your relations. In Sahaja Yoga, you in my attention, I will manage that. But then it is a vicious circle, it is very subtle projection of the mind that thinks, 'All right. Mother, we don't t have this thing in our attention, you better look after it.' But this is not the way. We should have onlyone intense desire within us, ourselves, have I become the Spirit? Have l achieved my ? Have I risen above the worldly ultimate desires? PURIFY. Once you start purifying, make your desire a pure desire. You have to get out of so many things but for people who are attached to their family and are bound by whatever falls out, I look after that. This is just an assurance but not a guarantee. Ifit deserves

 Issue: 1 & 2 -2005 The Divine Cool Breeze 19 My attention, I will definitely look after it. You have to value your attention, as I value My whole attitude will change. The attitude should be: what can I give? How can I give ? What my mistake in giving ?Ihave to be more alert, is where is my attention? Ihave to be more alert attention -I think you have to value much more of your attention than Me becauseI can manage towards myself, what am I doing? What is my very well things within Myselfbecause everything responsibility? You must desire that you should Is in my attention. be pure. You should be pure desire that means you should be Spirit. But what is your But you try to purify your desires away from the worldly problems that are facing you. So if responsibility to yourself? You should desire you extend it more, then you start thinking, "Mother what about the problems of our country?" All right, give Me the map of your country. Finished, that is more than sufficient. that your responsibility to yourself should be manifested - should be complete. Then, your responsibility to Sahaja Yoga ! What is your responsibility to Sahaja Yoga - which is the work of God, which has Then purify yourself,- the desire that you have, you leave it. And once you are purified, that area will be covered through your attention. It started and you are My hands. You have to do the work of God and you have to fight the anti-God Elements the Satanic is very interesting. When you get over it, then only you can throw light. But if you are inside, your light is hidden. There is no light emitted. Element. You are not responsible for your family any more. Those who are, are the half-baked Sahaja Yogis I said are You have to rise above that desire. Every time you get a desire, you rise above that till your light is emitted on that wider problem that you useless, absolutely good for nothing. All such will drop out, their families will suffer and I know that this is going to happen. Because, now the forces are gathering in such a way that sorting out will start. are facing, which you think should be solved by Me. These are all my headaches which you are putting on yourself. You have to do only one thing, is to become the Spirit. That's all. It is simple thing- rest ofitis My headache. Your responsibility to yourself to be the Spirit3; your responsibility to Sahaja Yoga; your responsibility to understand Me better and Now, the problem that should take your desire on to the collective, should be very different. To substantiate your purity, to be fragrant with your purity, your attention should be on the other side. Now you are not facing Me, you are facing with Me the whole world. See, the better and better; your responsibility to understand this mechanism that is within you; your responsibility to understand how this mechanism works out and behaves.

 Issue: 1 & 2- 2005 20 The Divine Cool Breeze will immediately think of the person who is aggressive, not about him. You immediately start shifting your mind to other person, finding fault with other people. So, this desire become gradually lower and lower because of the loads that are put on it. Responsibility is to how to become a Guru yourself. Your responsibility to be a dignified and glorified personality. Responsibility to be respectable personality and not a cheap personality. Everyone of you is worth the whole universe, if you want to rise to that height. Universes of universes can be thrown away at So, the alertness is very important, complete alertness, Satarkta that we should keep our your feet, if you want to rise to that height, to that magnitude that is within you to foster. attention purely for the sustenance of our pure desire. Desire comes from your heart and Those people who still want to live on a very you low level cannot rise. Forexample, the Western are so built that your Brahmarandhra is also the heart. If you do not have a clean heart it won't keep clean. For the people who think if they talk about Sahaja Yoga big and all that, they are alright. But they are cheating themselves, if Sahaja Yogis have certain problems of committing the sin against the Mother and the Eastern Sahaja Yogis have certain problems of committing the sin against the Father. It is not difficult at all for you to get out of it. The attention is to be kept pure. In Sahaja Yoga you know all the methods, how this attention one can keep it pure. If the attention is not the heart is not open. So try to open your heart. Thope today when you do this Puja and you do the worship of Mahakali and this special Yagna, we will definitelyestablish this aura and enlighten pure, then this desire will be always attacked the world. But your outlook should be how by all petty, nonsensical things which has no much have I contributed to this ? Am I still meaning in your ascent. Now, a person who is thinking of other people? Am I still thinking of a good Sahaja Yogi is not bothered about his clothes, what others say to him, how they are e petty small problems or I am thinking of my Spirit? behaving towards him. The attention is not on So, the left side starts and ends with Shri that criticisms that this person is like this, that Ganesha. Shri Ganesha has only basic one person is like that. Nor there is the quality- that He is completely surrendered to His Mother,. He does not know any other God. He does not even know His Father. He only knows His Mother and completely surrender to Her. But this pure desire has to have action aggressiveness of anyone else because nobody is the other. But the problem is, when I say that, no one thinks that I am saying about you each person. Those who are non-aggressive think the other way. LikeI say something for a and about whichI will tell you later as we will person who is aggressive, the non-aggressive

 Issue: 1& 2 - 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze 21 be having more Pujas and more Pujas. But pathological cases, I don't know. So, it is today let us establish ourselves into that pure important for you to understand all attacks that desire to be the Spirit. came on you and be alert and don't be identified with anyone of them. Now, as it is the Western mind will say, How ? It alwavs comes. how to do it ? Should I tell Last, I would say you have come to this country vou, it is very simple! Adi Shankaracharya to see the roots and not the shoots. Change wrole Vivek Chudamani and so many other your attitude of Western style. Telephones are books and treatises and then all these big no good, you carnot get any telephones done. Postage is horrible. Railways are worst, (I intellectuals got after his life and they said, 'have this and have that and have it.' He said, forget should not say because we are in Railway these people. Then he wrote Saundarya Lahiri Bungalow). But the people are excellent. They know what is 'Dharma'. They are not being -just the description of his Mother and his devotion to Her. And every couplet that he attacked somehow or the other as this being the Kundalini, Shri Ganesha is sitting here. How wrote is a Mantra. It is not the surrender of your mind through your mind but the surrender of your heart. It is absolutely the surrender of dare anybody attack this great Mahrashtra, has got eight Ganeshas protecting them ? I don't your heart. Western Sahaja Yogis know very know if Maharashtrians know this fact. And well how there have been attacks and attacks so many Marutis, so who can attack this of negativity on them, specially when the country. There is no negative attack except that horrible people like Freud came to destroy their they themselves are rather money minded sort. basics, the roots. And how the West accepted That only curse they have. If they can get out it blindfolded and put them on the path of hell. of it, they are a great people. All that has to be brought out. That is all you have come to this country not to enjoy nonsense, is wrong absolutely and that is the So anti-God activity. Then you will realise that you will fight fully, say 'this is the destruction of our the comfort of the West, but that comfort of the Spirit. So you change your attitude towards India. I don't mean Air-India, by any chance. basics, our roots. When our Mother is the source of everything that is sublime, noble, all that is nourishing, all that is elevating, This is a wrong idea that you come by Air-India because you are a Sahaja Yogi. Not at all. Air emancipating, you are cutting us from our roots." You have been dealt with. I think, as animal like India has nothing to do with Sahaja Yoga. All our Railways, all our everything, they have nothing to do with Sahaja Yoga. So what ? So, you be patriotic and use your own airline, creature and he wants all ofus to go down to that low level of human beings, which exist as

 22 Issue: 1 & 2 - 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze Though according to the schedule time, it may not be but according to Me, let us establish within ourselves at our subtler level, the desire for Heaven's sake. When you arrive here you will see that the people are too innocent. They cannot understand Freud. You cannot talk to to be pure and to be cleansed out of all the barriers and unclean things that are within us. them, it is beyond them. They are higher type of people in this respect, because they are not attacked, while you are higher in a way that Desire to be great Sahaja Yogis. Desire to be though you are attacked, you have come out of responsible Sahaja Yogis. Desire to be surrendered to your Mother. It is not difficult. it. You just tum your faces and you are on the other side. That is something great. That is the ego, the last one to go because what you surrender? I don't want anything from So. you will also have a confidence that there are many people who believe the same way as you except that you accept My Love. you believe, in this big country where there is Surrender just means that you open your big population to support. So you should not heart to accept My Love. Give up this EGO, that's all and it will work out. I am feel lost. trying to push myself into your heart and I will definitely settle down there. Thus, today we have to start with Puja of Mahakali Tatwa. And this is the day of Gauri, ma May God Bless You. U (From Nimala Yoga) vou can say Ganesh, Gauri's day, today.

 Translation of Her Holiness Shri Mataji's Old Marathi Letter - 1 19th Dec. 1982 My dear Modi and other Sahaja Yogis, never have any pains. AllI want is that, in the Manyblessings. Receiving your letter I am very laboratory of this body, some work corthe other glad to know that your Ida Nadi has become must go on. Time is short while the work to be clean and I hope, Ida Nadis ofall have become done is very big. clean at least to some extent. Here I had told all, that I would work, while under anesthesia, to clean the Ida Channels to all. I worked for 3 days cleaning it by vomiting nearly 50 times every day and it is nice that the cleaning has become possible. This physical being has to be used for mission for which it has been taken and You cannot do the cleaning of Ida Channel only on the strength of your realization. Iknew that it had to be cleaned from within. In ancient days all seekers had to do this action (Kriya) constantly right from their childhood at the residences oftheir gurus at isolated places. The seekers had to do it individually in many lives. Because, now you have attained the state of collectivity, I have done the collective therefore I am not bothered by the illness and other troubles. On the contrary all such and different experiments with this incamation will have to be performed. Why are you so anxious consciousness. Although you sayI have done about it ? What else is the use of this body? I it, the distinction of you and I should not be

 Issue: 1 & 2-2005 24 The Divine Cool Breeze and decorates it with the qualities which can be there in collective consciousness Mantras described as pleasing, blissful etc. Gradually "Twam Bhawani, Twam Durga, Twam Ambika etc." are good for Ida Channel, but when you are established in Sahaja Yoga, you will have to say 'Aham Bhavani'. However this mantra this state will grow and beeome stable within you. Most of the Sahaja Yogis should try this method, but there should not be merely the mechanical movement of hands. Whatever you one with that of 'Aham Bhavani' and I tell you do, it should be done with the faith that you now itself that this will happen. have in worshipping, zeal of a warrior and sensitivity of an artist. There should be complete purity in the recitation of Mantras to After cleaning the Ida Channel I am awakening Pingala Nadi. Sahaja Yogis had become rather lethargic due to the conditioning of Ida Channel. Laziness and a tendency of avoiding the work awaken the deities and your heart must be involved in it. Only then the awakening will take was dominating in them. Their attention was place. You should understand a simple principle. being frittered away on avoiding the work. But I have now started the work of awakening Pingala Channel. All of you should raise your How can a big fire be lit with a small match stick ? Will a wick hold the flame if water is mixed in the oil? How can those Sahaja Yogis have enlightenment who are using Sahaja Yoga to solve only their own petty problem? And why should God give them the right hand from right side over your head and leave it on the left side but while doing it, you must apply your will power so that your desires will materialize. With the awakening of collectivity, you will have manypeople to share enlightenment ? Light houses do not show light to themselves even for a moment. your work which you are doing alone. Therefore, they are considered so important and The sphere of Sahasrara envelops your heart. When conditioning of heart is reduced, as if the are looked after. Please circulate this letter among all Sahaja glass of a lamp becomes clean, rays of ever Yogis. resplendent Spirit awaken Sahasrar sheath and the light of bliss spreads, which is felt in Sahasrar. This light enlightens all sides of Colourful heart Your Mother NIRMALA (From Nimala Yoga)

 Translation of Her Holiness Shri Mataji's Old Marathi Letter 2 19th Dec. 1982 to be used is : your attention should be on Me and you should make the following conditioning of thoughts on your Agnya "How fortunate we I have received letters from all of you but have not been able to write because now in London Sahaja Yoga work has started with great drive. are to have been realised ! We are Sahaja Delhi Sahaja Yogis write very few letters but Yogis. God has chosen us. How can we work if we remain weak ? Adi Shakti has given us most of them are happy. Sahaja Yogis of Bombay are alright, Sahaja Yogis of Rahuri are enjoying. Sahaja Yogis of Bombay have great the Power to redeem the whole mankind. You should criticize with these thoughts. "How deep responsibility and therefore had to face many is God's love for us! He has given us the allacks: The first attack came when I was in realization. He is the ocean of mercy. Ignoring USA. Atthat time many Sahaja Yogis were all our mistakes, He is working hard day and affected and many fell away. Later on when an attack was on all London Sahaja Yogis night for our welfare and, instead of praying for His forgiveness of our mistakes, we are making collectively followed wrong path which was full complaints against Him"! The following thoughts will please your Hearts, "O God, please give us of dangers and harms. Many wicked people Irom that part are, still hiding theemselves in some the power of Your love. May I be the drop in the ocean of Your love that is enveloping the whole universe, so that its loving pulsation is Sahaja Yogis in the form of 'badhas'. You have to vigorously use Sahaja Yoga methods against them. These wicked attack you from Agnya and Heart. From Agnya they send Anti-Sahaja Yoga ideas in your mind and from heart they make complaints. If you identify them they will become ineffective. There is one remedy for it vibrated through my life and Iremain engrossed in that bliss". May your life be flooded by thewaves of Divine love. Always loving you, much more than myself. which can be applied only after the realization. Because if your car does not start, your brakes and accelerators are of no use, But if you do Your Mother not use the accelerator even after it starts, how NIRMALA THEO will your car move ? You can attain any destination that you fix. All your auto (From Nirmala Yoga) suggestions will materialize. The remedy that is

 Translation of Her Holiness Shri Mataji's Old Marathi Letter - 3 19th Dec. 1982 etemity so that you will have etemal life. Man wants peace, wealth, power etc. but God is the origin ofall these. Then why should not there is the desire for God ? Why should there be no aspiration and ambition to meet the God? We should pray to the God for peace and keep the desire to meet the God who is peace itself. This should be the difference in satisfaction of a You are the officials of God's kingdom then why are you sulking ? All deities are your elder brothers in this kingdom. They are present in many forms along the path of Kundalini. You should recognize them and attain them. Kundalini is your Mother. Learn to always common man and that of a Sahaja Yogi. One remain under Her care. Be her child and she should be ready to surrender the very desire to meet God at the God's holy feet. All attention will take you to the ultimate Once you accomplish that from where everything is borm must be on Him. For that, one must have you will have the rest very easily. dedication, determination and concentration But you are not consistent in the practice of (tapasvita) and in that all material attachments meditation, love and peaceful life. You are taking casually even to me. But how eager you are in the worldly matters? How you become should be destroyed. What is there in this world to cling to ? You must realise the glory of those feet in which all fades and becomes adamant on having what you want ? Why are peaceful. Only then you will have your glory. you not casual in that respect ? Do not run Why should one brag of one's achievements? You must understand that whatever is being done away from the reality because I am Mahamaya. Attain me. Iam yours. I am for you. I have by you, is all God's power, i.e. working of Adi- given you that which has been beyond the reach of very great sages and saints. How will you Shakti and you are only the witnesses to see these miracles. For achieving that stage you make use of it ? You have been given a big should pray "May our T consciousness fade asset. Thousands of stars and planets were away, may the truth that all of us are small parts of your being be assimilated within us, so that your Divine bliss would resonate every particle of our bodies and this life would be filled with beautiful melodies enchanting the wholemankind created with it's just one wave. There is great significance to your rebirth. But you yourself have to achieve that; find the meaning of 'SWA' (Self) Sahaja Yogis can do it. It is a big contrivance. I have told you the and would show light to the whole world." Let love flow from your hearts. Love is unlimited. Your attention is on material things and you are secret but what have you achieved? Nobody sulks having been benefitted. If you achieve talking about eternity! You should merge in the trick, you will open the gate ofjoy and forget

 27 İssue: 1 & 2- 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze ure you will be deprived of the great source of joy and on the other, you will lose your authority yourself while enjoying that bliss. Nobody becomes happy from wordly matters. due to incomplete knowledge of Sahaja Yoga. T have given you the key to the treasure, which Hence be wise and stand firmm. Every moment others haven't got. But you must work to open has thousands of directions. You will welfare, the door. You have taken everything casually. You want Mataji to feed you, to wake you up to the whole world. Get over your inaction to act. You are to be captains. Let God's melodies be sounded from your flutes. in the moming and make you sit in the meditation. to clear you of your anger hatred etc. Transcend in your feelings above those who Today is the day of Guru Puja. What 'Guru Dakshina' (Gift to the Guru) have you given me? have not been realized and blessed and God's kingdom will be yours. May you get that Understand, that your money is net worth the auspiciousness? All my efforts are for that. You have been made like temples. Keep it clean. dust on the feet your Mother-Guru, You should give your hearts; only clean and holy hearts. You must clean your physical beings. Do not Some of you are enjoying in the ocean of bliss. Myblessings are that all of you should be happy. be lazy in that. Take a vow. You must get up Your worldly life and satisfaction should be of early in the moming and spend at least one hour the same level. Sahaja Yogi's satisfaction and in meditation and worshipping, perform 'Arti' and meditation in the evening. the circumstances he is in are balanced. Our both legs grow together. If one leg is shorter Satan's disciples work hard at a funeral place than the other, you will become lame. I do not I cannot understand why you are taking want to tell you to lower the level of your everything so casually. Stop all gossiping, Leave jealousies and quarrels. Time never waits for circumstances if contentment is less. But Sahaja Yogi's satisfaction does not depend on the circumstances. Heis happy in the circumstances anyone. Do you want to go empty-handed despite having the key to the treasure? that are prevailing. If he is not, then his If you do not accept God's kingdom Satan's kingdom will come and you wil have yourself satisfaction is superficial and not from within. May God grant you eterneral place at His feet. to blame for it. Remember, because you Sahaja Yogis are dear people, you have been selected as officials, If you ignore it, on the one hand Yours Mother ThormNIRMALA (From Nirmala Yoga)

 Mother's Shield of Love Sakshat Prematatwa Sakshat Prema Dayini Sakshat Prema Shakti Sakshat Adishakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah other they shrieked and laughed with joy; love flowing from their hearts and happiness made their eyes shine and smiles lighted their radiant faces. The Oneness was just overwhelming It is truly the greatest divine blessing that now in Sahaja Yoga each one of us has been granted our reality and most important our Dearest Loving Mataji. Our dearest Mother loves us so much; and how she takes care of us at every instant ! Her compassion and love are so great. and Sakshat Prem - Dayini, Sakshat Sarwavyapini Shri Mataji showered more and more of Her love, vibrations on Her joyful She is verily the source from where all Love children. As the children of 'Shri Prema - originates and flows. Swarupa, met each other, with Her love flowing through each and elevating each, the place was greatly blessed and in this supreme living atmosphere no negativity could dare stay. In this blissful ocean of Love we all are playing. junping with joy, dancing with each other in harmony, singing together-which, in turm, leads to ever more vibrations and joy. There have been so many such instances when we realize that Shri Adi Shakti's 'Love' is All Powerful and Al Mighty. So secure are we cradled in Shri Jagadamba's 'arms' of love that nothing whatsoever need disturb or distract us. To be amongst Sahaja Yogis and share this love is always wonderful. The divine love flowing among Sahaja brothers and sisters is verily the hand that plays the harp of divine music. Where there is love, no negativity dare stay, no badhas'. No problems. She had readied for us, the stallions of courage and fearlessness. She has made us the warriors This, Shri Mahamaya showed to us very clearly to ride them. If we only just realize that it is on the very first day of the shivir at Lonavala (Dec.82). One Sahaja Yogi was 'caught up' and feeling not too well. Others were working with him for some time with little improvement. Suddenly the Kundalini shot up and everything was all right. Heart and Sahasrara opened and the person started feeling quite nice and beautiful. Her' Sword of love that we hold in our hand; it is 'Her' Shieldof Love that protects us; it is Her support of love that guides and steadies us, then we have the confidence to be Her humble little instruments. Letusrideout and proclaim the victory of Sahaja Yoga over all small, insignificant mounds of negativity and ring aloud throughout the world the great mantra - The reason for this transformation was very apparent. Just then a group of Sahajis from Europe had arTived and met their brothers and 'JAI SHRI MATAJI (From Nimala Yoga) sisters from India who were there - and how beautiful such meetings are! As they hugged each

 29 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: I & 2 - 2005 As Shri William Blake has written: Mrnuddban Bring me my Bow of burning gold, Bring me my Arrows of Desire, Bring me my Spear! O Cloud unfold ! Bring me shall not cease from mental fight ! Nor shall my Chariot of Fire ! my soul sleep in my hand. And to these melodious lines may one add: Till we have build the Kingdom of god, In this beautiful world Our Mother has made! And to achieve this we can only pray. "Shri Mataji, You are Shri Mahata Ahankara Complete worlds are ereated from the tiniest speck Gathered from the dust of Your lotus-feet. We, Your ignorant little children, bow at Your Feet Mother, we pray, grant us that May we be the channels of your breath, the flute in your hands May we be the channels of Your love, the harp in Your hanids And May we ever remain in Sahaja Yoga, Your dancing, prancing, jouful, playful children." DIT JAI SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI Sahaji Smile Shri Mataji "You must remind me to return your money else Twill have to repay it in the next life." Kay hat's fine by me, Mother" (From Nirmala Yoga)

 Ray Harris's reflections On Pluto as inspired by Shri Mataji's Words transforming power of Scorpio as fired by Pluto. Scorpio is also the ruler of the planet Mars. which is the planet of Shri Ganesha, Mars is the little youth and warrior while Pluto is the effect Lastauitumn, in Evcter. England. Shri Mataji told us that Pluto is the planet of Shri Kalaki, and is her scat in the solar system in this incarnation. The astrononmers discovered Pluto in 1931. and substate of war, or one can say that if Mars soon after Shri Adi Shakti took Her birth on is Shri Ganesha then Pluto is Shri Mahaganesha. earth in this Her greatest incamation. Ironicaly, This is the same as Lord Jesus Christ and as the planet was actually discovered by a young farm boy who was an assistant to the astronomers assigned to the task. As far as the astrologers are concerned Pluto is associated Christ returned as Shri Kalaki, with the eleven fold destroying powers of Christ Who comes at the end of the age on a white horse. with death, rebirth, destruction and the The present age in which we live has long been recognized as highly significant in termsof world history, Nostradamus assumed that 1999 would manifestation of the deep collective unconscious. The planet is still ill understood both in terms of its highly irregular orbit and its effects on our be the last year before the new age. The Jewish calendar is approaching the number of 6000 collective psyche. The orbit is indeed highly unusual. All the other major planets circle the and William Blake talks about years sun on the same plane but Pluto slices across reawakening after six thousand years. But how them at an angle, follows an oval path. and at specific should we be? Astrologically we are times even enters the orbit of Neptune so it is in a unique position with Pluto: not only is the planet just entering its own sign but at the same no longer then further planet so far discovered in the sun's family. time is entering the orbit of Neptune. Now Pluto came within the orbit of Neptune in 1979 Neptune is the God of the ocean, and is depicted holding a trident- perhaps symbolic of the three nadis or the three gunas or three and remains there until 1999, In November 1983 Pluto also moved into the sign of Scorpio, which in astrological terms is the sign of its basie aspects of Shri Adi Kundalini, Shri Maha Laxshmi, Shri Maha Saraswati and Shri Maha rulership, where it is most powerful. (Scorpio is the sign of the guru and that of death and resurrection.) In Indian Astrology Neptune is Varuna, the God of the Waters and Pluto itself Kali. Within us Neptune is the Swadhishthana, the outermost limit of the void or Bhavasagara, the ocean of illusion and of material existence. is the God of the underworld or of hidden Neptune is the totality of all that we experience unfathomable depths. Astrology recognizes the and comprehend within the ocean of relative

 Issue: 1 & 2- 2005 31 The Divine Cool Breeze for two thousand years. The Age of Lord Jesus existence, beyond, which is unknown to sense was the age of Pisces and we are now at the end of that, astrologically speaking. Pisces is the Maya-the epitome of the Age of Illusion whereas Aquarius is the Water Carrier-the collective vessel of the waters of the Spirit, the Kundalini i.e. the Sahaja Yogis. Therefore the Sahaja Yogis must be the instruments to allow Shri Mataji to carry mankind through to the new age and we must realize the awesome magnitude perception or the intellect. So Pluto, the planet of change, of death, destruction and deep transformation, i.e. Shri Kalki has come within the field of human awareness, i.e. the orbit of Neptune at this time until 1999, It is interesting that most seekers have Pluto strongly expected in their astrological charts. The ocean of the void is Bhavsagara and Pluto is just for a short while active within our awareness. But why is of our work and the necessity for humanity to this so special? Pluto has no doubt been within the orbit of Neptune many times about every 250 years and has also been within the limits of get its collective enlightenment. If Pisces is uncertainty then Aquarius has to be certainty for the human race. There will not be much left its own sign Scorpio equally as often, about once to be uncertain about if Sahaja Yoga does not take off and become established soon. every 200-250 years or so. Compute the two together or the answer is about every 6000 So the likelihood of both these events years. This is all underlined by the present position of happening simultaneously are exceedingly rare. Pluto-entering Neptune's orbit, entering its own If we look back at history in the west for sign of Scorpio and the earth entering the Age of Aquarius, all at the same time. Transformation example, we see that each time Pluto is in Scorpio there is a time of laxity and hedonism will take place with or without us. followed by a period of Puritanism and the rise The temperature on the surface of Pluto is just about the coldest anywhere. It is about 3 of new religious ideas. The American Revolution, the Renaissance and the zenith of degrees above absolute zero and only just above the ambient temperature of the void of the Middle Ages are some examples. Each time Pluto goes into its own sign long lasting and interspaced between the stars and galaxies. Coldness is the quality of the Spirit. Pluto is dramatic changes occur in the collective consciousness of mankind. composed largely of frozen or solidified of Methane. Even as far away from the sun as In addition to all this we are now on the cusp of a new world age, the Age of Aquarius. It is Jupiter and Saturn this is in a gaseous or liquid rather complicated to explain this to a layman, state and only solidifies at just above absolute but there are twelve ages, like the twelve signs zero, the temperature of the Spirit. Methane is CH4 or 4 Hydrogen atoms plus one carbon of the Zodiac, and the earth stays in each one

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 1 & 2- 2005 32 Kalaki. It is a means to an end and not an atom (tetravalent). It is the basic building block of organic compounds. Carbon itselfis a very absolute. Theirregularities of Pluto'sorbit bring drastic changes to humanity and we must hard black or occasionally diamond like substance. It cannot form life on its own but surrender to the Spirit whatever changes must becomes a support for further evolution oflife by its four-fold valency, hence it is like Shri Ganesh. Methane or CH4 as often as not is come about as a single race of beings. Pluto only has an atmosphere some of the time when occasionally the faint sun-light vaporizes the end decay product of organic dissolution. the methane. This is when the planet comes For example it is found in very old oil reservoirs as natural Gas, or in ancient swamps and marsh gas. So even here Pluto or Shri Kalaki has nearer to the sun in its eccentric orbit and when the moon is not in the way, and even then it is only on the side facing the sun. This is like the final dissolution and rebirth embodied in its symbol of the manifestation of Pluto's power chemical makeup. by the all powerful sun which is the opposite of A'day' on Pluto, or rather one revolution of the planet on its axis is almost seven of our days which are perhaps significant. It has also been recently discovered by observing the further eccentricities of its orbit and shape that it has a moon. This has been given the name of Charon after the boatman who ferries the souls across Pluto's dark eternal cold. Shri Mataji has three main seats in the solar system: Venus in Her heart, the moon is supported on Her head and of course Pluto. In this incarnation She has Pluto as a vehicle-Shri Kalaki-the power of final dissolution. We must therefore at this time look towards our inner spiritual development, that part which is beyond material decay, and forget the river of death to the underworld in Greek mythology This moon was discovered round about 1979, i.e. when every thing relevant to the outside concerns all the time. This is the in moment when we are taking a big jump the transformation of human consciousness evolution, the jump is certain but which way we connected with the planet seemed to happen and also around about the time when Shri Mataji began telling us that Shri Kalaki was starting to manifest. The moon is very large in relation to the size of the planet itselfand it is almost like a double planet system. Charon is the white horse of Kalaki, or the vehicle. Shri Kalaki judges go is up to us. Pluto is also known for its connection with joint emotional and financial ventures in conventional astrology, and it is interesting that in December/January of 82/3 Pluto approached to within % Constellation of Scorpio, and the world of the currencies such as the pound sterling, dropped dramatically and unaccountably. One has only without mercy and Charon is like the vehicle of Pluto just as Sahaja Yoga is the vehicle of Shri to read some pages of William Blake's

 & 2-2005. The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: I 33 "Jerusalem" or "Milton" to appreciate that in the this year Shri Mataji said in one lecture that Pluto can be both the cause and cureof many diseases next few years any efforts ofmankind which are not directed towards the spirit, for example found in today's world. Let us pray that we may surrender to the power of Pluto in a fashion such things asconcentrating enormous amounts of effort on such things as economics based on currencies, will flounder dramatically as the manifestation of Kalaki urges man to put his attention on higher values. Where will all that that may allow for the cure to take place, not only of diseases on the individual level, but that mankind as a whole may discover the simple cure for the collective diseases which cause the time wasted on business and money have led us, when the universe is marching on to another level ofexpression, and man withit? It will slowly entire race of man to suffer and be alienated from one another. The cure is to bow to the Lotus feet of Shri Mataji and allow Her to transform us through the vehicleof Sahaja Yoga. become obvious to mankind as a whole that onlyby transfomation through surrender to the Spirit and death of the ego and superego of Shri Mataji has asked us to pray for Her health at this time, March, 83, and Her body reflects the collective health of the Sahaja Yogis. individuals, nations and races will mankind survive. The blossom time is coming, let the Therefore it is vital that we allow the harvest of the Spiritual rebirth be very plentiful, for otherwiseevena small shift in the equilibrium on the material level of this planet could cause transforming power of Pluto to cure us individually and collectively, so that our beloved Mother does not have to suffer for us in Her great discomfort and suffering. This is not boundless love. As is written in the Koran, for scaremongering, but we must take to Sahaja the man who has eyes to see and ears to Yoga and establish ourselves as instruments for this next most dramatic stage of human hear, the evidence of God and his works and plans are everywhere. development as directed by Shri Mataji. In Delhi We, the Children, are bowing to the Immaculate Desire of God the Almighty. (FROM NIRMAL YOGA)

 ी जयोग आज का महार। परप पमाताजी निर्म द । वी के कुका अंातीय [मम] कुण्डलिमी जा पानर ना रु ु १र



----------------------

2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
January-February, 2005
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-2.txt 
 CONTENTS
m
Sahasrara Puja - Italy - 4.5.1986
1.
Advent of the Masters
8.
Mahakali Puja - Lonawala - 19.12.1982
17.
121
Letter of Shri Mataji - 1
23.
25.
Letter of Shri Mataji - 2
Letter of Shri Mataji
26.
3
28.
Mother's Shield of Love
A Poem by- William Blake
29.
30.
Ray Harris's reflections on Pluto
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-3.txt 
 COOL BREEZE
DIVINE
THE
Published by
Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
Infosys House, Plot No. 8, Chandragupt Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411029
Printed by
Krishna Printer & Designer
Vishram Nagar, Tri Nagar, Delhi-35
Mob.: 9868230100
es
For Subscription Please Write to :
Shri G.L. Agrawal
Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
222, Desh Bandhu Apartments
Kalkaji, New Delhi-110019
Tel. No.: 011-26422054, 26216654
Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles, Miracle Photographs etc. to :
Shri O.P. Chandna
G-11 (463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110 034
Tel. No. 011-55356811"
Mor.: 8.00 AM - 9.00 AM
Eve.: 8.30 PM - 10.30 PM
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Sahasrara Puja
Parvachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Madesimo, Italy - 4.5.1986
brain for all kinds of fruitless purposes. They
Today is a great day as it is the sixteenth
Sahasrara dayi.e. sixteen movements or sixteen
were not aware of the warning that Sri Krishna
beads to reach the highest position in the coil.
It is complete. Sri Krishna is called as complete
incarnation because he has sixteen petals. So
had given that if you use human awareness
except for your ascent you will go downwards.
In the west, people thought that by using their
brain power they can use matter for their own
now we go into another dimension. The first
was where you got your self realization. In the
purpose. If they had done it after their self
realization it would have been a very different
evolutionary process the animals are not
conscious of many things which human beings
situation because after self realization you have
are conscious of. Like matter cannot be used
by animals for their own purpose. Also they
all become aware of vibrations, and also of your
chakras. With this new awareness you would
have avoided all that is wrong. But it is like a
greedy person who gets a bit of money and
spends it all. Now this problem has complicated
are not concerned about themselves at all. If
you show a mirror to animals they do not react
to their own image in it. When we become
human beings we become aware of many things
your brains.
in our consciousness which were unconscious
to the animals. In their brains they could not
The way we have started with machines we have
understand that they could put matter to their
become machines ourselves. So we have no
own use.
feelings and we cannot relate to others in a
As human beings you were all unaware of the
chakras that existed within you. Your
consciousness was still working half through
natural way. In human awareness you had
achieved how to relate to others and to yourself.
But this ego oriented approach took you away
unconscious working of the chakras and the
conscious working of the mind. You also never
felt the autonomous nervous system or your
inner organs and how it worked. You did not
even feel how you are getting affected by other
from natural real life. And we become artificial.
Like its fashionable to be arrogant or snobbish.
This is just the opposite of your ascent and
evolutionary process. All the organizations
which you have formed on collective
influences. As a result, the freedom that human
understanding are also artificial. Then a
beings were granted they gathered all kinds of
movement started that we have to be natural.
That is also another copying of the artificial.
things into their brain, into the Sahasrara, without
being aware of it. They used the Sahasrara/
Natural does not mean we become artificial. It
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Issue: 1 & 2- 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
When I started my life I saw complicated
means to evolve. The whole purpose of creation
is to evolve.
Sahasraras. The more I tried to solve the
complications within my own awareness the
This arrogant concept you accepted very easily
more difficult it became because if you see my
because you have got brains and you accept
age, in 50 years you can see how much
every thing that comes your way. So you
became so artificial that you needed some
complicated human beings have become and
afteropening the Sahasrara when I came to the
sensations to feel yourself. In every walk of life
west within these 16 years, I saw that they are
there is a conceptual artificial understanding e.g.
sex is such a natural normal thing, but you
now incorrigible. Now the stage for you is laid
make
down to ascend higher.
it so artificial that you now have sex in your brain.
Not only have you silenced Ganesha in the
You can see that there will be five hundred
Mooladhara but also Maha Ganesha in your
people for a program and within two weeks all
brain.
will disappear. Because when the ascent takes
place, the Kundalini pushes out the ego and
brings the person close to reality. But again
that ego which is being built up so fast in its
Even art should be according to what is laid
down. So you condemn everyone. And vou
ultimately reach aconclusion that the most insipid
speed, overpowers the speed of the Kundalini
and covers the head. Then it suggests that how
thing is art. Like when you take out all the juice
out of sugarcane whatever is left is art. The
you can have godly life.. you will miss all the
alcohol, all the madness, all the fun of life, and
brain which does not nourish the heart is
absolutely an artificial brain just like a robot.
you will lose all the freedom to become mad.
And people have become just like robots. A
robot can be handled by anyone who has a
You have to do something really stupid to sell it
to their minds. e.g. somebody has become rich
mastermind. Because you do not have your
selling empty tins as lamps. All kinds of stupid
own heart so the brain be controlled by
things which are nowhere near natural beauty
somebody who has a greater brain of concepts.
All these concepts are destructive. As Hitler got
or natural joy are accepted as sophisticated.
On the other side the asuri vidya (black
the concept that he is an Aryan and he is ofa
superior race, He did not mind destroying ue
vidya)has taken over. As Sri Krishana has
amed in the first chapter that if asuri vidya
whole world. Same is the case in the religious
takes over then shudha vidya cannot compete
field. Every religion was poured into the cups
with the speed of the asuri vidya. Like in
America there has been a big argument among
of concepts. First they also tried for political
domination.
Sahaja Yogis if myphotograph should be in the
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Issue: 1 & 2-2005
3.
The Divine Cool Breeze
you have to achieve the highest.
drawing room or not. But if you ask them to
paint their nails black, their faces black and wear
The time is very short and the background is so
black clothes, they will do it. Even at this stage
dark. You are surrounded by people who are
when we are Sahaja Yogis we are shy of our
pouring out destructive concepts every moment.
godly life.
You are the people who have to shoot out much
faster than all of them. Though you understand
that your awareness is very different from them,
When they became hippies or punks or stupid
they gave all their life, time and money. They
changed their dresses, their family life, their life
a kind of lethargy does not accept it the way it
styles and went all out. Even when Sahaja Yogis
should accept Sahaja Yoga. Everyone of you
are convinced about the godliness of Sahaja
must think everyday what have I done for
Sahaja Yoga. But you all are still very busy
with your jobs, or making money or have
Yoga, they are shy. Now you know that your
Mother does not take money from you. On
the contrary She spends. You have gained out
relationships with people who do not matter at
of it. But when it comes to giving, everybody
all in Sahaja Yoga. We have to make an all out
feels shy. From such a background you are
coming to the light of God's Grace. But you do
not want to dash at it. You want to take your
effort to rise to that point that whatever we know
or believe in, we act on that and become one
with it. You can do that with concepts but not
time gradually, so gradually that may be you may
with reality. This is the problem. For e.g. a
lose your chance.
fanatic believes that he can do such and such
things in his own religion, he'll do it. But the
So in the awareness of Sahaja Yogis where you
concept is not reality. It has given no benefit
know all about chakras, you know about
and shown no performance of any substance
vibrations, you know how to relate to others,
and still people do it.
When they were fighting for freedom, my father
himself gave up all his property, gave up his
practice and with eleven children in the family
still all this knowledge is for personal
advantages. So the shadow of the past still
lingers on, even when you have this new
awareness. Animals can swim automatically.
They don't have to learn to swim. But human
we were living in places and we started living in
huts for years together. For the gross freedom
beings have to leam to swim.
They have
forgotten the techniques which were known to
the animals and have taken to the techniques of
human beings. But in Sahaja Yoga you have
got your realization in one life time and in this
we do anything but for the subtle freedom
Sahaja Yogis have to do everything that is
possible.
The first thing is to realize and be aware in your
life time you have to grow, and in this life time
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Issue; 1 & 2- 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
conscious mind all the time that you are Yogis.
system not yet so conscious. This is the reason
why you do not know why you have to do a
particular thing at a particular time. Unless you
You are the ones who are very much higher than
the rest of humanity. That the salvation of the
whole ofhumanity depends on you. The purpose
rise to this nirvikalpa stage you cannot go further,
of creation will be served by you. So first of all
e.g. I know everything what I do. I can handle
any power wherever I want to. I can absorb
you have to be conscious in your conscioUSness
any negativity I want to. I need not absorb any
that you are so important, that's why you were
given realization. How can you be living with
negativity I do not want to. You may be
thousands of miles away from me, I know
your conditionings and your ego. The
conditionings are like this- you are coming from
a Christian religion, you bring little bit of that
Christian religion into Sahaja Yoga. Or if you
about each one of you. I may not know
your wordly names but I know you as a part
and parcel in my being. I also can behave
are a Hindu you want to bring something of
Hindu religion. We have all the pure essences
of these in Sahaja Yoga, but we can have the
gross nonsense. All these things are like dirt
like a human, absolutely like you, ageing like
you, using spectacles, doing all the things that
will make me a complete human being. I have
accepted this role consciously not unconsciously,
to me nothing is unconscious. So if you have to
be conscious of what you are doing you have
over our Sahasrara which must be shaken off.
Though now you are aware and conscious of
your chakras you do not keep them clean.
to be alert about it.
Ordinary human beings have clothes and houses
The first thing you have achieved is the peace.
But even now I find that peace which should
become joy becomes a quarrel. Truth is one,
You cannot argue about truth. It is homogenous.
which they try to keep clean. But you do not
feel ashamed of them also when they are bad
because after some time you also lose
It does not quarrel with each other. We are
awareness of them. That means you have
become subtler but in your consciousness you
unconscious about our fingers but when we have
to hold something all of them come together.
So the part of the brain., the unconscious part
are not yet subtle and there are so many things
you know more than non-realised people as
absolute reality e.g. we do not even have
of it, is to be made conscious. This is what
evolution is. Adherence to anyconcept is against
vibrations whenever it is needed. Or sometimes
mechanically like a machine we start giving
bandhans. So you are still unconscious about
evolution. You must learn to face and accept
the reality and act in a real way. Miracles may
be for human beings, may be for Sahaja Yogis
also, but not for me, for I know what it is.
your chakras. Slightly conscious when you put
your mind to it but in your central nervous
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Issue: 1 & 2 - 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze,
Above this half way consciousness one has to
conscious of whatever you are doing, there will
see how you are working it out. The whole
system of relating to each other must change
completely. That is very important because
be no mistake. Whatever you will do which
appears to be a mistake will turn out alright.
For example today I want to set my watch so I
human efforts lead you nowhere. You have to
take your ascent. Some of them do take
advantage of Sahaja Yoga and then disappear.
But mostly they know that you have to be
conscious of what you have got. So we can
say we have got self knowledge but we have
not yet got self-consciousness. For example
you take the name of a great saint and the
vibrations start flowing. Also you know why,
hecause he is a saint. But not you Sahaja Yogis.
pulled the screw out. This I did in a way
unconsciously but quite consciously, because the
watch stopped and I knew what time I had to
be there. So consciously I put myself against
myself. If the watch had not stopped I would
have come earlier but that was not the time to
come and I had to pull the screw to keep it
stopped. So whatever mischief you play, you
know and you can play it against yourself and
then you can make drama. But such a stage is
far off. Just now the stage at which we are,
making lots of mistakes because we are not
conscious of the self.
If your names are taken why don't the
vibrations flow? And in this you have greater
advantage because the Adi Shakti herself is
before you. They did not have anyone to tell
But when it is your ascent, are we alert or
them all these things. But you take it for granted.
are we taking it for granted that Mother
In expressing when we say something, are we
- natural, that is, from our heart? The
consciousness that I am doing it from my heart
is what I want you to achieve. Like there are
people who work very hard in Sahaja Yoga and
will take us there. This is being childish.
You have to mature in your in your ascent.
Face yourself, everyday. In reality see how
much time you spend in mundane worries
and how much about your ascent. Have
you left everything, all your worries to God
others take it for granted. They do not want to
help. They want everything readymade. That
Almighty? Have you completely jumped
out of your background ? Have you come
shows that they are not conscious of their own
powers of enjoyment. If they do it from their
heart they will never feel the effort put in or what
out all the way leaving all nonsensical
things ? And how do I relate and talk to
they have achieved. The sense offulfillment and
satisfaction will overcome all your problems,
other Sahaja Yogis?
I am surprised that if one Sahaja Yogi is attacked
by a non-Sahaja Yogi, a Sahaja Yogi group
specially your left vishuddhis.
The second stage will be when you will be
supports a non-Sahaja Yogi. Or a Sahaja Yogi
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Issue: 1 & 2 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
great that no incarnation can enjoy that as I can.
who has to come up pays more attention to
So the women should not feel degraded if they
have to look after the heart. They are in a way
negative people than the positive. He is more
friendly with such negative people. You have
on a higher aspect, for you can do without
thinking but you cannot do without the heart.
to cling to the positive people. It is also a very
subtle ego in them.
One should not argue. If the women are very
But with your complicated brains which is like
argumentative the men become deaf. They do
a spoiled computer you can reach wrong
conclusions of whatever I say. LikeI say forget
not listen to the women. If they are very
aggressive then the men absolutely shut up. So
the past. Does that mean that you forget all the
you must behave in a natural way that you are a
good of the past ? Forget the past means not
man and you are a woman. You should become
to allow the past to overpower you. A brain
which is simple and straightforward and has love
in it can understand what I am saying straight
And then you
more a woman and more a man.
n
will see the fun.
Inour awareness we have to be conscious how
forward. This complicated brain is to be put
right and the best way is to stop thinking. When
far we have achieved the consciousness for our
relationship with each other i.e. the collective
you stop thinking you feel that you cannot do
anything. Forexample I give you a speech, but
you only think about it. Can you hear my
thinking? Just by thinking of these lights they
cannot get enlightened. Thinking is a lazy
man's garb and is used to avoid work. It is
consciousness of Virata, of the brain i.e. the
Sahasrara. So in principle Sahasrara is Vishnu
Tattwa. But the Deity is Sri Mataji Nirmala
Devi. So you can see the beautiful integration
that has taken place. All the powers of Sri Vishnu
have to act according to the Deity at the lotus
an escape, a cleverness.
feet of the Deity. So the consciousness of Sri
Do not argue about Sahaja Yoga. Do not argue
Vishnu is absolutely in the hands of the Deity.
with your leaders. You may be his wife but
you
So whatever is working out allow it to work
out. Surrender your Sahasrara to this Deity. It
is so simple for you because you have the Deity.
You have your own Sahasrara and its only you
do not argue. And as far as Sahaja Yoga is
concerned the wives should not influence their
husbands against as they have nothing to do with
it. In this case the women should nourish the
organsiation and nourish the husband with love
the people who are Sahaja Yogis today in
modern times who have seen that Deity.
from their heart and not their brains. I think it is
You have asked for three things
Salokyam
Saamipyam
so great to have been a woman myself because
To see God.
I can enjoy the heart, the emotions of my love,
the working and the play of my love. Its so
Closeness to God
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Issue: 1 & 2-2005
7.
The Divine Cool Breeze.
124212AM RTRO THEY
Sanidhyam - The companionship with God.
today. So one must know that the calendar of
God has nothing to do with the human calendar.
According to certain calendars I should have
come 2000 years later and some think I should
have come 2000 years before, in this form. So
the calendar is alright.
But you have taadaatmyam i.e. oneness with
God, which is not in the concept of anyone of
the Yogis, saitns and the seers. For this
Taadaatmyam you have when you are outside
my body, while they have this Taadaatmyam
when they are inside my body when they are no
You are not robots or machines. You are
evolved through evolutionary process and
more,
through evolutionary process only you have to
achieve the highest. Its you who have to show
the results. We may take your Sahasrara to a
great enlightenment but again it will collapse.
So you should understand the time limit. You
must understand your greatness and you must
understand how you people are chosen for the
highest work in this creation. Now there is no
time for lethargy. You have to rise and awake.
ण
So you have to know whatever heights you are
brought to, it is you who will have to maintain it
with full will power and action.
Today is the day when I hope you jump into
Nirvikalpa. But only by effort you will stay there
otherwise you will slip down again. So go through
this lecture again and again. Think about it. You
This lecture is a concern of your Mother. You
can understand it but it has to become your
consciousness. It can happen if you keep it
must know yourself how far you are going
everyday.
there.
Today is the special day of Sahasrara. The puja
May God Bless You.
would have been tomorrow but we are having it
CHE
MIL
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-11.txt 
 ADVENT OF THE MASTERS
10,000-16,000 B.C. INDIA
JANAKA
32
MESOPOTAMIA
2,000 B.C.
ABRAHAM
EGYPT
A0 MOSES
1,300 B.C.
PERSIA
ZARATHUSTRA
1,000 B.C.
CHINA
604 B.C.
LAO TZE
CHINA
CONFUCIUS
551 B.C.
cipretigs
Σ)
GREECE
SOCRATES
ell469 B.C.
MECCA
570 A.D.
МОНАММED
NANAKA
INDIA
1469 A.D.
SAI NATH
INDIA
1856 A.D.
EMIN
CREATION OF DATTATREYA
The sage Narada went to the Goddesses
their original form, were trapped at her
hermitage. Saraswati, Lakshmi and Parvati
came in search of their husbands, but she said
Saraswati, Lakshmi and Parvati, saying that
Anasuya, wife of Atri, was the most virtuous
woman in any of the worlds. The Goddesses
sent their husbands, Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva
she had some claim as she had nursed them so
long The Gods agreed to create a combined
form with three heads andi six arms if she
to test the piety of this women. Anasuya
washed her husband's feet and then sprinkled
This three headeddivinity
released them.
the Gods, who were disguised as Brahmins, with
named Dattatreya The central head represents
Vishan, the nght head represent Shiva and the
other Brahma. The dogs which are depicted
this water. They were turned into babes The
three Gods deprived of the power to return to
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Issue: I & 2 - 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
of the guru of Wisdom. In his manifest forms,
with Dattatreya represent the perfect devotees,
as Confucius, Zarathustra, Lao Tze, Nanaka,
faithful to their master.
Moses, Abraham and Muhammad, Lord
Adi Guru Dattatreya is the archetypal Guru, that
Dattatreya has been the foundation of great
is, He is the prototype or original model from
religions, preserving man's dhama.
which all gunus emerge. Heisthe Guru Principle:
As the Adi Guru, He has incamated many times
Shri Mataji has explained, "Adi Guru Dattatreya
worshipped Mother along the banks of the River
guide mankind. He came as the ten great
to
Tamasa. Tamasa is the same as your Thames.
Primordial Masters. From Janaka through to
And He Himself came and worshipped
Sai Nath, this great principle has incarnated to
here...in this great country of Shiva, of the
give form to God's love for mankind, retuming
again and again to correct our mistakes and bring
Spirit.
us back to a God-centered life.
RAJA JANAKA AND
35
THE BOWL OF MILK
The patience and love of the true guru is clearly
illustrated in Shri Dattatreya's repeated,
There is a beautiful story told by Shri Mataji
preserving, incarnating guidance. It is Guru
about Raja Janaka:
Dattatreya who leads mankind across the Void,
bringing us from the treacherous oceans of
"You know, kind Janaka was called as "Videha'.
illusion to the safety of the far shore where Shri
The great sage Narada asked him one day,
Mataji, as Shri Durga, waits for us with
"Revered Sir, how are you called as Videha ?
You live in this world. How can you be a
outstretched arms! Lord Dattatreya had only
Videha? Raja Janaka said, ' this is very simple.
one job to do, to establish our dharma, so that
we could evolve. Each of his manifestations
Iwill tell you about it in the evening. Now please
do this little job for me. There is milk in this
had only this to do.
bowl. You take this bowl and come along with
me. Please see that not a single drop of milk is
Lord Dattatreya himself is the essence and
innocence of Shri Brahmadeva, Shri Vishnu and
spilled on the earth. Then only will I tell you
Shri Shiva. Heis the integration of all the three
Gunas, and above all is innocence itself. One is
constantly reminded of Shri Mataji's emphasis
why I am called Videha.
Narada took the bowl and followed Janaka
everywhere. He had to be very careful because
on the first, and most important aspect of the
the bowl was such that by the slightest
Guru, Shri Ganeslka. Innocence is the wellspring
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Issue: I & 2- 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
10
humility and total surrender. Hewould rush from
movement the milk might have spilled. He got
his tent and greet the traveler on the dusty road,
quite tired. When they retired for the evening,
beseeching them to enter his own tent and have
Narada asked, "please tell me now. Iam getting
"just a little bread". Abraham would treat the
quite fed up with carrying this bowl and
travelers as if they were honoring the tent with
following you everywhere at the same time.
Raja Janaka said, "first of all tell me what you
their visit. So in aprofusely ingratiating manner,
have seen ? Narada replied, Nothing except
the prophet would receive his guests as gems
this bowl of milk so that it won't spill.' Raja
Janaka said, 'Didn't you see there was a big
dropped from Heaven.
"My Lord, if I have found favour in your sight,
,
procession in My honour, then there was a court
wherein there was a program of dancing?
Didn't you see anything? Narada
answered,'No, Sir, I have not seen anything.'
Raja Janaka said, "My Child, likewise with Me,
do not pass by your servant. Let a little water
be brought, and wash your feet, and rest
vourselves under the tree, while I fetch a morsel
of bread, that you may refresh yourselves, and
after that you may pass on-since you have come
I also see nothing. All the time, I just watch my
to your servant (Genesis 18, 3-5).
attention, where it is going making sure that it
| MOSES
won't spill away like the milk."
Explaining Chitta-nirodh, Shri Mataji said, "this
The "Ten Commandments" contain the ten basic
sort of attention one has to develop by watching
virtues or dharmas for all mankind. Shri Mataji
attention. Chitta-Nirodh. Nirodh means the
says that as carbon has four valancies, as the
quality of gold is its un-tarnishable nature, so
man has ten valencies. These are the ten
saving of your attention. So your attention
should not be on saving money and worldly
things and all that, but attention itself must be
sustenance points representing the ten petals of
saved. As you watch your money, as you watch
the Nabhi Chakra. It is because of these that
your road when you drive, as you watch your
child when it is growing, as you watch the beauty
of your wife, or the care of your husband- all
we stay spiritually pure enough to ascend. The
significant difference between man's valencies
and those of carbon is that man has the free will
put together you watch yourself, your attention.
to consciously choose them, whereas carbon is
ABRAHAM
bound to its valencies by the laws of nature.
Abraham exemplified virtue, righteousness,
These are the Commandments that God
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Issue: 1 & 2- 2005
11
The Divine Cool Breeze:
h Joy
proclaimed to Moses on Mt. Sinai:
I am the Lord your God.
The Avesta tells us that the highest aim of our
lives is to attain perfect happiness (Joy). The
means of doing this is to know God's Will and
to act in harmony with it. "Let the joyof living
You shall have no other God before Me.
You shall not take the name of the Lord your
God in vain.
Remember the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy.
fill your heart to overflowing.
Honour your father and your mother.
Marriage
You shall not kill.
Chastity is one of the chief virtues of
You shall not commit adultery
Zoroastrianism. Marriage is one of the most
You shall not steal.
inviolable contracts and children are a blessing.
Women are the sustaining powers of marriage
You shall not bear false witness against your
neighbour.
and mankind. "A chaste woman is the noblest
You shall not covet your neighbour's house.
creation of Ahura Mazda".
ZARATHUSTRA
Woman is the marvel of creation. Unrivaled
and unequalled in form and beauty is she in the
Ideas of good and evil, Heaven and Hell, angels
and devils, are inherent. Everything was
seven realms. Sheis the blooming flower in the
garden of life that breathes perfume all around."
harmonious in the Universe until the angel
Ahriman rebelled and was driven from Heaven.
"Woman is the teacher of gentility to man. She
helps man grow in moral height. She is the
sustaining power of the Life of man."
Hence the fight between good and evil will
endure until the judgement Day. Then the
World will be renewed and evil will pass away.
The pure soul will attain the realization of the
LAO TZE
kingdom of Heaven.
The Tao is most akin to water, since water has
the quality of being able to take the form of any
"The soul which is afraid to fight against evil has
vessel which contains it. Hence it is the most
failed to carry out its Divine mission and has
flexible and spontaneous.
wasted its life during its sojoum in this world."
The Tao is female in nature and is described as
"On the day of Resurrection you shall be
the Mother of all things. It is obviously the
answerable to Ahura Mazda for your thoughts,
Kundalini Herself.
words and deeds in this world."
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Issue: 1 & 2- 2005
12
The Divine Cool Breeze
"The spirit of the valley never dies. This is called
when you know the Mother
the mysterious female. The gateway of the
go on to know the Child
mysterious female is called the root of Heaven
go back to holding fast to the Mother,
and Earth, Dimly visible it seems as it were
And to the end of your days
there yet use will never train it."
You will not meet with danger."
L CONFUCIUS
From Lao Tze's teaching we learn that a Guru's
purpose is to spread the light of the Divine by
IS
Like His personality His teaching are natural,
becoming a channel that enlightens seekers and
human and simple. Actual life was used to
takes them to higher levels. Lao Tze was the
illustrate His points since this was easy for the
embodiment of the Guru that expresses the
people to understand. He divided life into five
relationships which were:
Divine. This is not only seen through His
teachings but also in his life. He could only see
i)
Kind and ministerDUTon
one thing: Tao or God as the absolute. There
Husband and wife
ASL
was no compromise. He was pure in attention.
Father and son
A Guru teaches by having tremendous
Brother to brotherbo
iv)
compassion. Lao Tze could love any seeker
v)
Friend to friend
because He could recognize the Divine in them.
To conduct these relationships in a virtuous and
It was that which he loved and it was that to
respectable manner was to follow the will of
which He directed His teaching. A Guru
icaches that which is pure. Purity enables us to
heaven. He distinguished between a spiritual
see thorugh the illusion of the Divine and there
and a materialistic man thus: "the superior man
understands what is right, the inferior man
we find detachment in joy, contentment in love
understands what is profitable." There were
and absoluteness in the Spirit. When one
five virtues of nature according to the sage:
becomes the Guru, one is absorbed in the ocean
benevolence, righteousness, propriety, wisdom
of the Divine. We are soothed, we find nothing
matters, we know it is going to be all right
because we become purity.
andsincerity.
Just as Shri Mataji has stressed the importance
of sincerity in Sahaja Yoga, for example the
"The world had a beginning
necessity of singing and praying with love from
and this beginning could be the Mother
of the world,
the heart, so also Confucius said, "Sincerity is
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-16.txt 
 & 2-2005
Issue: 1
13
The Divine Cool Brecze
that by which self-completion is finished. The
+ MOHAMMAD
possessor of sincerity does not merely
Shri Mohammad spoke extensively about the
accomplish completion of himself, with this
day of Judgment, promising Paradise to those
quality he completes other men."This quotation
takes an added significance when it is
considered in the light of Sahaja Yoga : an open
who followed a righteous life as explained in
the Koran, and Hell for those who turned agai.
God and his Messengers. Speaking of the i
sincere heart facilitates the Kundalini's passage
of Judgment in Sura XXIV He says:
the Sushumna nadi.
up
"24 On the Day when their tongues,
Σ
SOCRATES
Their hands, and their feet
Socrates guided his pupils lo the truth by
Will bear witness against them
considering ideas in their various aspects until
As to their actions.
the right answer was establislhed. He brought
25 On that Day God
forward the Thcory of Forms "as above, so
Will pay them back
helow." The unseen Realm of Forms is the
(All) their just dues,
Divine and heavenly strata ofthe Virata which
And they will realize
contains the blueprint for all the earthly replicas.
That god is
liverything on the earthly plane of existence is
The (Very) Truth
merely an imperfect reflection which is subject
That makes all things manifest."
to changes and human imperfection, while that
which exists in the absolute is divine, perfect
And in Sura XXXVI:
etemal and unchanging. The soul originates in
65. That Day shall we set
the realm of forms and through seeking and
A seal on their mouths
aspiration eventually returns to it. This is the
But their hands will speak
ovo Tous, and their feet
point in our spiritual evolution which we are now.
working towards in Sahaja Yoga - by putting
Bear witness, to all
our vibrations we enter the kingdom of God.
That they did."
"He who enters the next world unanimated and
From Sura VII:
unenlightened shall be in the mire but he who
arrives there purified and enlightened shall dwell
57. It is he who sendeth
among the Gods."
UThe Winds like heralds
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Issue: 1 & 2-2005
14
The Divine Cool Breeze
thread of mercy and contentment."
Of glad tidings, going before
His Mercy: When they have
Rita"A tree is known from the fruits it bears, so a
Carried the heavy Laden
man's religion is known from the deeds that he
Clouds, we drive them
performs. Robes, symbols, forms, rites, rituals
To a land that is dead,
and ceremonies that do not lead to righteous
Make rain to descend thereon
deeds will not take man farin the path of spiritual
And produce every kind
progress. The real problem is to rid the mind of
IS
Ofharvest therewith : thus
evil propensities. If that's not accomplished all
Shall we raise up the dead:
our austerities are of no avail.
"
Perchance ye may remember.
"This body is a palace and it is the house of
"58. From the land that is clean
God. Within it God kept the infinite flame."
And good, by the will
SAI NATH
Of its Cherisher, springs up
Produce (rich)after its kind:
"My master told me to give bounteously to all
But from the land that is
that ask. No one asks with wisdom. My
Bad, Springs up nothing
But that which is niggardly:
treasury is open. No one brings carts to take
away the real treasures. I say dig and search,
Thus do we explain the Signs
but no one wants to take any pains. Be the true
By various (symbols) to those
sons of the DIVINE MOTHER and fully stock
Who are grateful.
yourself. What is to become of us? This body
will return to earth and the air we breathe will
NANAKA
melt into air. This opportunity will not return.
At ten years of age His mother thought it was
"Your Mother is the Mother
time He took part in the sacred thread
of all the Adi Gurus
ceremony. As the thread was being put over
uShe is the one who taught
Nanaka's neck, Nanaka cried, "Wait, Sir, why
All the Adi Gurus
must Iwear this thread ? Will it make me good
She created the Adi Gurus
and kind ?
And She Creates out of you,
"I'm not sure."
The Adi Gurus."
"Then it is of no use to me. Give me instead a
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Issue: 1 & 2-2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
6"TO THE MOTHER OF ALL GURUS"
Poem composed at Guru Puja
Where the emerald green lake washes the feet of the Almighty.
Where the Almighty goddess spreads a cloak of green forests
And blushes in myriads of flowers
Where enthralled by Her splendour time stands in awe.
Where cool winds of Spirit whisper sweet odes to the Primordial Guru.
Where iron open its heart to love.
The Guru tattwa of the universe opens.
Here come a thousand pilgrims to anoint the Mother of all Gurus.
O'Devi we offer our gratitude from the inner most core of our hearts,
Again and again.
You have opened our hearts
But give us the iron tattwa to strengthen our love.
Bless us with wisdom
But also give us humility to sustain the wisdom
You have showered upon us Your choicest gifts
But also teach us how to share them.
Please keep us forever like the yonder emerald lake
Sparkling blissfully at Your feet.
By Yogi Mahajan (India)
AGNYA
Our Father, which art in heaven,
May Thy Son be the leaven of
Our Souls, to make them rise
In glory and aflame
So truly hallowed be Thy name.
For we, Thy journeying children
Feel as one and long to see
Thy kingdom come.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-19.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 1 & 2 - 2005
16
We know the battle must be fought"
And at what price has Jesus
Bought our freedom to become.
We cannot shirk the task ahead -
We cannot say as Jesus said3;
"Father, Thy will be done !"
For here on earth with chakras
Seven; so must we be as 'tis in heaven,
And sallying forth-uplifted head,
We care not for our daily bread,
For just as He, a babe, was fed,
So too His Mother fondly said
To all your children here on earth;
Each one that tries to prove his worth;
That long before his battle wins,
Will lovingly forgive our sins;
Provided we likewise repay,
Those who aggress us on the way,
So lead us from temptation's laid
And guide us through that evil snare
Of Satan's make; that is so hard
For us to spy: and once ensnared
To break! Dear Father, all
Is Thine we know; the power & the glory
So-even as the lamb was slain,
We humbly beg to rise again:
To claim our own divinity;
In penitence to journey home :
To glory in Thy Kingdom come
And live there tīll infinity!
Steven Taylor, Australia
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-20.txt 
 MAHAKALI PUJA"omawala
19.12.1982
Advice given by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Welcome to you all Sahaja Yogis to this great
The first hurdle that you face as soon as you get
your realization is that you just start thinking of
country of Yoga.
your family. You start thinking, "My mother has
Today, first of all we have to establish our desire
not got it, my father has not got it, my wife has
not got it, my children have not got it." You
within ourselves, that we are seekers and that
we have to achieve our full growth and maturity.
must know that these relations are wordlyB
Today's Puja is for the whole universe. The
Sanskrit is LOKIK, they are not ALOKIK, they
whole universe should have to be enlightened
are not beyond the wordly relations. These are
with this desire. Your desire should be so intense
wordly relations, and these attachments are
Wordly. So if you play into that force, as you
know that Maha Maya Shakti allows you to
that they should emit out the pure vibrations of
Mahakali Shakti which is the pure desire of
attaining the Spirit. That's the real desire. All
the other desires are like mirage.
play with. You go ahead as long as you like.
People bring to me their relations, their parents,
this and that and ultimately they discover that
You are the people who are chosen by God
specially, first to express the desire and then to
achieve that intense desire of purity. You have
to purify the whole world, not only the seekers
this was a very wrong thing they did. They lost
so many precious moments, so many hours, so
many years, wasting their energyon people who
but even those who are not seekers. You have
never deserve any attention of the Mother.
to create an aura around this universe of desire
Sooner you realise the better, that this desire
to achieve the Ultimate - the Spirit.
may be within you and may not be in any one of
Without desire this universe would not have
your so called wordly relations, makes 'no'
existed. This desire of God is the one that is
the Holy Ghost. It is the all pervading power, it
is the Kundalini within us. Kundalini has only
one desire - it is to be the Spirit and anything
else if you desire the Kundalini does not rise.
Only when it knows that this desire is going to
be fulfilled by somebody who is facing the
seeker, it is awakened. If you do not have a
difference.
As Christ was told that His brothers and sisters
are waiting outside, He said, Who are my
brothers and who are my sisters?" So one has
to realise that those people who involve
themselves into the problems of their family all
the time and attract My attention - you must
know that I am just playing about. It is of no
desire no one can raise it. Sahaja Yogi should
value to you. For your ascent it is important
never try to force his desire on other people.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-21.txt 
 18
issue: 1 & 2- 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
their family, they have to see to it that they do
not force Sahaja Yoga on any of your relations.
first of all to have no desire, the pure desire in
your kith and kin. This is the first principle of
establishment of Mahakali power. Specially in
India where people are too much attached to
At least don't force them on Me.
Now, this desire within us, which is the
their family, it is a verybig problem. If you give
realization to one person, you are amazed to
Mahakali power, which is manifesting, comes
to us in so many ways. As I told you first of all
see that, all the relationship they have is with a
big bunch of bhoots. And once you give
realization to one person you are in for trouble,
it comes to us after realization because you are
all Sahaja Yogis, to do something about our
relations. Then the second desire that comes
and all the bhoots walk in slowly, torturing My
to us, that let us try to cure people who are our
relations. This is the second desire. You should
life, wasting My encrgy and 'absolutely' of no
use. It should happen to you to understand that
feel yourself and see that this has happened to
this is not auspicious. If you want to waste
many of you. So, right from leprosy to any
small thing like cold or sneezing, whatever they
your time, I will allow you to waste your
time. But if you want to have the ascent
have they think they should bring to Mother.
fast first of all one must remember that
And all the worries of the family should be
brought to Me- simple thing like pregnancy or
these are relations which are 'absolutely
wordly relations and this is not your pure
sneezing, very simple things, which are so natural
are brought into your attention. So when
have them in your attention, I say, 'go ahead
with it, try to solve it, if possible 'But If you
desire.
you
So try to separate your pure desire from your
wordly desire. It does not by any means suggest
that you give up your family, you give up your
mother, you give up your sister. Nothing, but
don't have any of them in your attention
then they are in my attention. You leave them
you witness them and see as you would see
anybody else and see for yourselfwhether they
are really desirous or not. Ifthey are well and
good, they should not be disqualified, because
they are your relations. It works both ways, as
they cannot be qualified because they are your
relations; they cannot be disqualified because
they are your relations. In Sahaja Yoga, you
in my attention, I will manage that. But then it is
a vicious circle, it is very subtle projection of
the mind that thinks, 'All right. Mother, we don't
t
have this thing in our attention, you better look
after it.' But this is not the way. We should
have onlyone intense desire within us, ourselves,
have I become the Spirit? Have l achieved my
? Have I risen above the worldly
ultimate
desires? PURIFY. Once you start purifying,
make your desire a pure desire. You have to
get out of so many things but for people who
are attached to their family and are bound by
whatever falls out, I look after that. This is just
an assurance but not a guarantee. Ifit deserves
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Issue: 1 & 2 -2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
19
My attention, I will definitely look after it. You
have to value your attention, as I value My
whole attitude will change. The attitude should
be: what can I give? How can I give ? What
my mistake in giving ?Ihave to be more alert,
is
where is my attention? Ihave to be more alert
attention -I think you have to value much more
of your attention than Me becauseI can manage
towards myself, what am I doing? What is my
very well things within Myselfbecause everything
responsibility? You must desire that you should
Is in my attention.
be pure. You should be pure desire that means
you should be Spirit. But what is your
But you try to purify your desires away from
the worldly problems that are facing you. So if
responsibility to yourself? You should desire
you extend it more, then you start thinking,
"Mother what about the problems of our
country?" All right, give Me the map of your
country. Finished, that is more than sufficient.
that your responsibility to yourself should be
manifested - should be complete.
Then, your responsibility to Sahaja Yoga !
What is your responsibility to Sahaja Yoga
- which is the work of God, which has
Then purify yourself,- the desire that you have,
you leave it. And once you are purified, that
area will be covered through your attention. It
started and you are My hands. You have
to do the work of God and you have to fight
the anti-God Elements the Satanic
is very interesting. When you get over it, then
only you can throw light. But if you are inside,
your light is hidden. There is no light emitted.
Element. You are not responsible for your
family any more. Those who are, are the
half-baked Sahaja Yogis I said are
You have to rise above that desire. Every time
you get a desire, you rise above that till your
light is emitted on that wider problem that you
useless, absolutely good for nothing. All
such will drop out, their families will suffer
and I know that this is going to happen.
Because, now the forces are gathering in
such a way that sorting out will start.
are facing, which you think should be solved by
Me. These are all my headaches which you
are putting on yourself. You have to do only
one thing, is to become the Spirit. That's all. It
is simple thing- rest ofitis My headache.
Your responsibility to yourself to be the Spirit3;
your responsibility to Sahaja Yoga; your
responsibility to understand Me better and
Now, the problem that should take your desire
on to the collective, should be very different.
To substantiate your purity, to be fragrant with
your purity, your attention should be on the
other side. Now you are not facing Me, you
are facing with Me the whole world. See, the
better and better; your responsibility to
understand this mechanism that is within you;
your responsibility to understand how this
mechanism works out and behaves.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Issue: 1 & 2- 2005
20
The Divine Cool Breeze
will immediately think of the person who is
aggressive, not about him. You immediately start
shifting your mind to other person, finding fault
with other people. So, this desire become
gradually lower and lower because of the loads
that are put on it.
Responsibility is to how to become a Guru
yourself. Your responsibility to be a dignified
and glorified personality. Responsibility to be
respectable personality and not a cheap
personality. Everyone of you is worth the whole
universe, if you want to rise to that height.
Universes of universes can be thrown away at
So, the alertness is very important, complete
alertness, Satarkta that we should keep our
your feet, if you want to rise to that height, to
that magnitude that is within you to foster.
attention purely for the sustenance of our pure
desire. Desire comes from your heart and
Those people who still want to live on a very
you
low level cannot rise. Forexample, the Western
are so built that your Brahmarandhra is also the
heart. If you do not have a clean heart it won't
keep clean. For the people who think if they
talk about Sahaja Yoga big and all that, they
are alright. But they are cheating themselves, if
Sahaja Yogis have certain problems of
committing the sin against the Mother and the
Eastern Sahaja Yogis have certain problems of
committing the sin against the Father. It is not
difficult at all for you to get out of it. The
attention is to be kept pure. In Sahaja Yoga
you know all the methods, how this attention
one can keep it pure. If the attention is not
the heart is not open. So try to open your heart.
Thope today when you do this Puja and you do
the worship of Mahakali and this special Yagna,
we will definitelyestablish this aura and enlighten
pure, then this desire will be always attacked
the world. But your outlook should be how
by all petty, nonsensical things which has no
much have I contributed to this ? Am I still
meaning in your ascent. Now, a person who is
thinking of other people? Am I still thinking of
a good Sahaja Yogi is not bothered about his
clothes, what others say to him, how they are
e
petty small problems or I am thinking of my
Spirit?
behaving towards him. The attention is not on
So, the left side starts and ends with Shri
that criticisms that this person is like this, that
Ganesha. Shri Ganesha has only basic one
person is like that. Nor there is the
quality- that He is completely surrendered to
His Mother,. He does not know any other God.
He does not even know His Father. He only
knows His Mother and completely surrender
to Her. But this pure desire has to have action
aggressiveness of anyone else because nobody
is the other. But the problem is, when I say
that, no one thinks that I am saying about you
each person. Those who are non-aggressive
think the other way. LikeI say something for a
and about whichI will tell you later as we will
person who is aggressive, the non-aggressive
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Issue: 1& 2 - 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
21
be having more Pujas and more Pujas. But
pathological cases, I don't know. So, it is
today let us establish ourselves into that pure
important for you to understand all attacks that
desire to be the Spirit.
came on you and be alert and don't be identified
with anyone of them.
Now, as it is the Western mind will say, How ?
It alwavs comes. how to do it ? Should I tell
Last, I would say you have come to this country
vou, it is very simple! Adi Shankaracharya
to see the roots and not the shoots. Change
wrole Vivek Chudamani and so many other
your attitude of Western style. Telephones are
books and treatises and then all these big
no good, you carnot get any telephones done.
Postage is horrible. Railways are worst, (I
intellectuals got after his life and they said, 'have
this and have that and have it.' He said, forget
should not say because we are in Railway
these people. Then he wrote Saundarya Lahiri
Bungalow). But the people are excellent. They
know what is 'Dharma'. They are not being
-just the description of his Mother and his
devotion to Her. And every couplet that he
attacked somehow or the other as this being
the Kundalini, Shri Ganesha is sitting here. How
wrote is a Mantra. It is not the surrender of
your mind through your mind but the surrender
of your heart. It is absolutely the surrender of
dare anybody attack this great Mahrashtra, has
got eight Ganeshas protecting them ? I don't
your heart. Western Sahaja Yogis know very
know if Maharashtrians know this fact. And
well how there have been attacks and attacks
so many Marutis, so who can attack this
of negativity on them, specially when the
country. There is no negative attack except that
horrible people like Freud came to destroy their
they themselves are rather money minded sort.
basics, the roots. And how the West accepted
That only curse they have. If they can get out
it blindfolded and put them on the path of hell.
of it, they are a great people.
All that has to be brought out. That is all
you have come to this country not to enjoy
nonsense, is wrong absolutely and that is the
So
anti-God activity. Then you will realise that you
will fight fully, say 'this is the destruction of our
the comfort of the West, but that comfort of the
Spirit. So you change your attitude towards
India. I don't mean Air-India, by any chance.
basics, our roots. When our Mother is the
source of everything that is sublime, noble, all
that is nourishing, all that is elevating,
This is a wrong idea that you come by Air-India
because you are a Sahaja Yogi. Not at all. Air
emancipating, you are cutting us from our roots."
You have been dealt with. I think, as animal like
India has nothing to do with Sahaja Yoga. All
our Railways, all our everything, they have
nothing to do with Sahaja Yoga. So what ?
So, you be patriotic and use your own airline,
creature and he wants all ofus to go down to
that low level of human beings, which exist as
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-25.txt 
 22
Issue: 1 & 2 - 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
Though according to the schedule time, it may
not be but according to Me, let us establish
within ourselves at our subtler level, the desire
for Heaven's sake. When you arrive here you
will see that the people are too innocent. They
cannot understand Freud. You cannot talk to
to be pure and to be cleansed out of all the
barriers and unclean things that are within us.
them, it is beyond them. They are higher type
of people in this respect, because they are not
attacked, while you are higher in a way that
Desire to be great Sahaja Yogis. Desire to be
though you are attacked, you have come out of
responsible Sahaja Yogis. Desire to be
surrendered to your Mother. It is not difficult.
it. You just tum your faces and you are on the
other side. That is something great.
That is the ego, the last one to go because what
you surrender? I don't want anything from
So. you will also have a confidence that there
are many people who believe the same way as
you except that you accept My Love.
you believe, in this big country where there is
Surrender just means that you open your
big population to support. So you should not
heart to accept My Love. Give up this
EGO, that's all and it will work out. I am
feel lost.
trying to push myself into your heart and I
will definitely settle down there.
Thus, today we have to start with Puja of
Mahakali Tatwa. And this is the day of Gauri,
ma May God Bless You.
U (From Nimala Yoga)
vou can say Ganesh, Gauri's day, today.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Translation of Her Holiness Shri Mataji's
Old Marathi Letter - 1
19th Dec. 1982
My dear Modi and other Sahaja Yogis,
never have any pains. AllI want is that, in the
Manyblessings. Receiving your letter I am very
laboratory of this body, some work
corthe other
glad to know that your Ida Nadi has become
must go on. Time is short while the work to be
clean and I hope, Ida Nadis ofall have become
done is very big.
clean at least to some extent. Here I had told
all, that I would work, while under anesthesia,
to clean the Ida Channels to all. I worked for 3
days cleaning it by vomiting nearly 50 times every
day and it is nice that the cleaning has become
possible. This physical being has to be used
for mission for which it has been taken and
You cannot do the cleaning of Ida Channel only
on the strength of your realization. Iknew that
it had to be cleaned from within. In ancient
days all seekers had to do this action (Kriya)
constantly right from their childhood at the
residences oftheir gurus at isolated places. The
seekers had to do it individually in many lives.
Because, now you have attained the state of
collectivity, I have done the collective
therefore I am not bothered by the illness and
other troubles. On the contrary all such and
different experiments with this incamation will
have to be performed. Why are you so anxious
consciousness. Although you sayI have done
about it ? What else is the use of this body? I
it, the distinction of you and I should not be
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Issue: 1 & 2-2005
24
The Divine Cool Breeze
and decorates it with the qualities which can be
there in collective consciousness Mantras
described as pleasing, blissful etc. Gradually
"Twam Bhawani, Twam Durga, Twam Ambika
etc." are good for Ida Channel, but when you
are established in Sahaja Yoga, you will have
to say 'Aham Bhavani'. However this mantra
this state will grow and beeome stable within
you. Most of the Sahaja Yogis should try this
method, but there should not be merely the
mechanical movement of hands. Whatever you
one with that of 'Aham Bhavani' and I tell you
do, it should be done with the faith that you
now itself that this will happen.
have in worshipping, zeal of a warrior and
sensitivity of an artist. There should be
complete purity in the recitation of Mantras to
After cleaning the Ida Channel I am awakening
Pingala Nadi. Sahaja Yogis had become rather
lethargic due to the conditioning of Ida Channel.
Laziness and a tendency of avoiding the work
awaken the deities and your heart must be
involved in it. Only then the awakening will take
was dominating in them. Their attention was
place. You should understand a simple principle.
being frittered away on avoiding the work. But
I have now started the work of awakening
Pingala Channel. All of you should raise your
How can a big fire be lit with a small match
stick ? Will a wick hold the flame if water is
mixed in the oil? How can those Sahaja Yogis
have enlightenment who are using Sahaja
Yoga to solve only their own petty problem?
And why should God give them the
right hand from right side over your head and
leave it on the left side but while doing it, you
must apply your will power so that your desires
will materialize. With the awakening of
collectivity, you will have manypeople to share
enlightenment ? Light houses do not show
light to themselves even for a moment.
your work which you are doing alone.
Therefore, they are considered so important and
The sphere of Sahasrara envelops your heart.
When conditioning of heart is reduced, as if the
are looked after.
Please circulate this letter among all Sahaja
glass of a lamp becomes clean, rays of ever
Yogis.
resplendent Spirit awaken Sahasrar sheath and
the light of bliss spreads, which is felt in Sahasrar.
This light enlightens all sides of Colourful heart
Your Mother
NIRMALA
(From Nimala Yoga)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Translation of Her Holiness Shri Mataji's
Old Marathi Letter 2
19th Dec. 1982
to be used is : your attention should be on Me
and you should make the following conditioning
of thoughts on your Agnya "How fortunate we
I have received letters from all of you but have
not been able to write because now in London
Sahaja Yoga work has started with great drive.
are to have been realised ! We are Sahaja
Delhi Sahaja Yogis write very few letters but
Yogis. God has chosen us. How can we work
if we remain weak ? Adi Shakti has given us
most of them are happy. Sahaja Yogis of
Bombay are alright, Sahaja Yogis of Rahuri are
enjoying. Sahaja Yogis of Bombay have great
the Power to redeem the whole mankind. You
should criticize with these thoughts. "How deep
responsibility and therefore had to face many
is God's love for us! He has given us the
allacks: The first attack came when I was in
realization. He is the ocean of mercy. Ignoring
USA. Atthat time many Sahaja Yogis were
all our mistakes, He is working hard day and
affected and many fell away. Later on when an
attack was on all London Sahaja Yogis
night for our welfare and, instead of praying for
His forgiveness of our mistakes, we are making
collectively followed wrong path which was full
complaints against Him"! The following thoughts
will please your Hearts, "O God, please give us
of dangers and harms. Many wicked people
Irom that part are, still hiding theemselves in some
the power of Your love. May I be the drop in
the ocean of Your love that is enveloping the
whole universe, so that its loving pulsation is
Sahaja Yogis in the form of 'badhas'. You have
to vigorously use Sahaja Yoga methods against
them. These wicked attack you from Agnya
and Heart. From Agnya they send Anti-Sahaja
Yoga ideas in your mind and from heart they
make complaints. If you identify them they will
become ineffective. There is one remedy for it
vibrated through my life and Iremain engrossed
in that bliss".
May your life be flooded by thewaves of Divine
love. Always loving you, much more than
myself.
which can be applied only after the realization.
Because if your car does not start, your brakes
and accelerators are of no use, But if you do
Your Mother
not use the accelerator even after it starts, how
NIRMALA
THEO
will your car move ? You can attain any
destination that you fix. All your auto
(From Nirmala Yoga)
suggestions will materialize. The remedy that is
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-29.txt 
 Translation of Her Holiness Shri Mataji's
Old Marathi Letter - 3
19th Dec. 1982
etemity so that you will have etemal life.
Man wants peace, wealth, power etc. but God
is the origin ofall these. Then why should not
there is the desire for God ? Why should there
be no aspiration and ambition to meet the God?
We should pray to the God for peace and keep
the desire to meet the God who is peace itself.
This should be the difference in satisfaction of a
You are the officials of God's kingdom then why
are you sulking ? All deities are your elder
brothers in this kingdom. They are present in
many forms along the path of Kundalini. You
should recognize them and attain them.
Kundalini is your Mother. Learn to always
common man and that of a Sahaja Yogi. One
remain under Her care. Be her child and she
should be ready to surrender the very desire to
meet God at the God's holy feet. All attention
will take you to the ultimate Once you
accomplish that from where everything is borm
must be on Him. For that, one must have
you will have the rest very easily.
dedication, determination and concentration
But you are not consistent in the practice of
(tapasvita) and in that all material attachments
meditation, love and peaceful life. You are
taking casually even to me. But how eager you
are in the worldly matters? How you become
should be destroyed. What is there in this
world to cling to ? You must realise the glory of
those feet in which all fades and becomes
adamant on having what you want ? Why are
peaceful. Only then you will have your glory.
you not casual in that respect ? Do not run
Why should one brag of one's achievements?
You must understand that whatever is being done
away from the reality because I am Mahamaya.
Attain me. Iam yours. I am for you. I have
by you, is all God's power, i.e. working of Adi-
given you that which has been beyond the reach
of very great sages and saints. How will you
Shakti and you are only the witnesses to see
these miracles. For achieving that stage you
make use of it ? You have been given a big
should pray "May our T consciousness fade
asset. Thousands of stars and planets were
away, may the truth that all of us are small parts
of your being be assimilated within us, so that
your Divine bliss would resonate every particle
of our bodies and this life would be filled with
beautiful melodies enchanting the wholemankind
created with it's just one wave.
There is great significance to your rebirth. But
you yourself have to achieve that; find the
meaning of 'SWA' (Self) Sahaja Yogis can do
it. It is a big contrivance. I have told you the
and would show light to the whole world." Let
love flow from your hearts. Love is unlimited.
Your attention is on material things and you are
secret but what have you achieved? Nobody
sulks having been benefitted. If you achieve
talking about eternity! You should merge in
the trick, you will open the gate ofjoy and forget
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-30.txt 
 27
İssue: 1 & 2- 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
ure
you will be deprived of the great source of joy
and on the other, you will lose your authority
yourself while enjoying that bliss.
Nobody becomes happy from wordly matters.
due to incomplete knowledge of Sahaja Yoga.
T have given you the key to the treasure, which
Hence be wise and stand firmm. Every moment
others haven't got. But you must work to open
has thousands of directions. You will welfare,
the door. You have taken everything casually.
You want Mataji to feed you, to wake you up
to the whole world. Get over your inaction to
act. You are to be captains. Let God's melodies
be sounded from your flutes.
in the moming and make you sit in the meditation.
to clear you of your anger hatred etc.
Transcend in your feelings above those who
Today is the day of Guru Puja. What 'Guru
Dakshina' (Gift to the Guru) have you given me?
have not been realized and blessed and God's
kingdom will be yours. May you get that
Understand, that your money is net worth the
auspiciousness? All my efforts are for that. You
have been made like temples. Keep it clean.
dust on the feet your Mother-Guru, You should
give your hearts; only clean and holy hearts.
You must clean your physical beings. Do not
Some of you are enjoying in the ocean of bliss.
Myblessings are that all of you should be happy.
be lazy in that. Take a vow. You must get up
Your worldly life and satisfaction should be of
early in the moming and spend at least one hour
the same level. Sahaja Yogi's satisfaction and
in meditation and worshipping, perform 'Arti'
and meditation in the evening.
the circumstances he is in are balanced. Our
both legs grow together. If one leg is shorter
Satan's disciples work hard at a funeral place
than the other, you will become lame. I do not
I cannot understand why you are taking
want to tell you to lower the level of
your
everything so casually. Stop all gossiping, Leave
jealousies and quarrels. Time never waits for
circumstances if contentment is less. But Sahaja
Yogi's satisfaction does not depend on the
circumstances. Heis happy in the circumstances
anyone. Do you want to go empty-handed
despite having the key to the treasure?
that are prevailing. If he is not, then his
If you do not accept God's kingdom Satan's
kingdom will come and you wil have yourself
satisfaction is superficial and not from within.
May God grant you eterneral place at His feet.
to blame for it. Remember, because you Sahaja
Yogis are dear people, you have been selected
as officials, If you ignore it, on the one hand
Yours Mother
ThormNIRMALA
(From Nirmala Yoga)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Mother's Shield of Love
Sakshat Prematatwa Sakshat Prema Dayini Sakshat Prema Shakti
Sakshat Adishakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namo Namah
other they shrieked and laughed with joy; love
flowing from their hearts and happiness made
their eyes shine and smiles lighted their radiant
faces. The Oneness was just overwhelming
It is truly the greatest divine blessing that now in
Sahaja Yoga each one of us has been granted
our reality and most important our Dearest
Loving Mataji. Our dearest Mother loves us
so much; and how she takes care of us at every
instant ! Her compassion and love are so great.
and Sakshat Prem - Dayini, Sakshat
Sarwavyapini Shri Mataji showered more and
more of Her love, vibrations on Her joyful
She is verily the source from where all Love
children. As the children of 'Shri Prema -
originates and flows.
Swarupa, met each other, with Her love flowing
through each and elevating each, the place was
greatly blessed and in this supreme living
atmosphere no negativity could dare stay.
In this blissful ocean of Love we all are playing.
junping with joy, dancing with each other in
harmony, singing together-which, in turm, leads
to ever more vibrations and joy.
There have been so many such instances when
we realize that Shri Adi Shakti's 'Love' is All
Powerful and Al Mighty. So secure are we
cradled in Shri Jagadamba's 'arms' of love that
nothing whatsoever need disturb or distract us.
To be amongst Sahaja Yogis and share this love
is always wonderful. The divine love flowing
among Sahaja brothers and sisters is verily the
hand that plays the harp of divine music. Where
there is love, no negativity dare stay, no badhas'.
No problems.
She had readied for us, the stallions of courage
and fearlessness. She has made us the warriors
This, Shri Mahamaya showed to us very clearly
to ride them. If we only just realize that it is
on the very first day of the shivir at Lonavala
(Dec.82). One Sahaja Yogi was 'caught up'
and feeling not too well. Others were working
with him for some time with little improvement.
Suddenly the Kundalini shot up and everything
was all right. Heart and Sahasrara opened and
the person started feeling quite nice and
beautiful.
Her' Sword of love that we hold in our hand; it
is 'Her' Shieldof Love that protects us; it is Her
support of love that guides and steadies us, then
we have the confidence to be Her humble little
instruments.
Letusrideout and proclaim the victory of Sahaja
Yoga over all small, insignificant mounds of
negativity and ring aloud throughout the world
the great mantra -
The reason for this transformation was very
apparent. Just then a group of Sahajis from
Europe had arTived and met their brothers and
'JAI SHRI MATAJI
(From Nimala Yoga)
sisters from India who were there - and how
beautiful such meetings are! As they hugged each
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-32.txt 
 29
The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: I & 2 - 2005
As Shri William Blake has written:
Mrnuddban
Bring me my Bow of burning gold, Bring me my Arrows of Desire,
Bring me my Spear! O Cloud unfold ! Bring me
shall not cease from mental fight ! Nor shall my
Chariot of Fire !
my
soul sleep in my hand.
And to these melodious lines may one add:
Till we have build the Kingdom of god,
In this beautiful world Our Mother has made!
And to achieve this we can only pray.
"Shri Mataji,
You are Shri Mahata Ahankara
Complete worlds are ereated from the tiniest speck
Gathered from the dust of Your lotus-feet.
We, Your ignorant little children, bow at Your Feet
Mother, we pray, grant us that
May we be the channels of your breath, the flute in your hands
May we be the channels of Your love, the harp in Your hanids
And May we ever remain in Sahaja Yoga,
Your dancing, prancing, jouful, playful children."
DIT
JAI SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
Sahaji Smile
Shri Mataji "You must remind me to return your money else
Twill have to repay it in the next life."
Kay hat's fine by me, Mother"
(From Nirmala Yoga)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Ray Harris's reflections On Pluto
as inspired by Shri Mataji's Words
transforming power of Scorpio as fired by Pluto.
Scorpio is also the ruler of the planet Mars.
which is the planet of Shri Ganesha, Mars is the
little youth and warrior while Pluto is the effect
Lastauitumn, in Evcter. England. Shri Mataji told
us that Pluto is the planet of Shri Kalaki, and is
her scat in the solar system in this incarnation.
The astrononmers discovered Pluto in 1931.
and substate of war, or one can say that if Mars
soon after Shri Adi Shakti took Her birth on
is Shri Ganesha then Pluto is Shri Mahaganesha.
earth in this Her greatest incamation. Ironicaly,
This is the same as Lord Jesus Christ and as
the planet was actually discovered by a young
farm boy who was an assistant to the
astronomers assigned to the task. As far as the
astrologers are concerned Pluto is associated
Christ returned as Shri Kalaki, with the eleven
fold destroying powers of Christ Who comes
at the end of the age on a white horse.
with death, rebirth, destruction and the
The present age in which we live has long been
recognized as highly significant in termsof world
history, Nostradamus assumed that 1999 would
manifestation of the deep collective unconscious.
The planet is still ill understood both in terms of
its highly irregular orbit and its effects on our
be the last year before the new age. The Jewish
calendar is approaching the number of 6000
collective psyche. The orbit is indeed highly
unusual. All the other major planets circle the
and William Blake talks about
years
sun on the same plane but Pluto slices across
reawakening after six thousand years. But how
them at an angle, follows an oval path. and at
specific should we be? Astrologically we are
times even enters the orbit of Neptune so it is
in a unique position with Pluto: not only is the
planet just entering its own sign but at the same
no longer then further planet so far discovered
in the sun's family.
time is entering the orbit of Neptune. Now
Pluto came within the orbit of Neptune in 1979
Neptune is the God of the ocean, and is
depicted holding a trident- perhaps symbolic
of the three nadis or the three gunas or three
and remains there until 1999, In November
1983 Pluto also moved into the sign of Scorpio,
which in astrological terms is the sign of its
basie aspects of Shri Adi Kundalini, Shri Maha
Laxshmi, Shri Maha Saraswati and Shri Maha
rulership, where it is most powerful. (Scorpio
is the sign of the guru and that of death and
resurrection.) In Indian Astrology Neptune is
Varuna, the God of the Waters and Pluto itself
Kali. Within us Neptune is the Swadhishthana,
the outermost limit of the void or Bhavasagara,
the ocean of illusion and of material existence.
is the God of the underworld or of hidden
Neptune is the totality of all that we experience
unfathomable depths. Astrology recognizes the
and comprehend within the ocean of relative
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Issue: 1 & 2- 2005
31
The Divine Cool Breeze
for two thousand years. The Age of Lord Jesus
existence, beyond, which is unknown to sense
was the age of Pisces and we are now at the
end of that, astrologically speaking. Pisces is
the Maya-the epitome of the Age of Illusion
whereas Aquarius is the Water Carrier-the
collective vessel of the waters of the Spirit, the
Kundalini i.e. the Sahaja Yogis. Therefore the
Sahaja Yogis must be the instruments to allow
Shri Mataji to carry mankind through to the new
age and we must realize the awesome magnitude
perception or the intellect. So Pluto, the planet
of change, of death, destruction and deep
transformation, i.e. Shri Kalki has come within
the field of human awareness, i.e. the orbit of
Neptune at this time until 1999, It is interesting
that most seekers have Pluto strongly expected
in their astrological charts. The ocean of the
void is Bhavsagara and Pluto is just for a short
while active within our awareness. But why is
of our work and the necessity for humanity to
this so special? Pluto has no doubt been within
the orbit of Neptune many times about every
250 years and has also been within the limits of
get its collective enlightenment. If Pisces is
uncertainty then Aquarius has to be certainty
for the human race. There will not be much left
its own sign Scorpio equally as often, about once
to be uncertain about if Sahaja Yoga does not
take off and become established soon.
every 200-250 years or so. Compute the two
together or the answer is about every 6000
So the likelihood of both these events
years.
This is all underlined by the present position of
happening simultaneously are exceedingly rare.
Pluto-entering Neptune's orbit, entering its own
If we look back at history in the west for
sign of Scorpio and the earth entering the Age
of Aquarius, all at the same time. Transformation
example, we see that each time Pluto is in
Scorpio there is a time of laxity and hedonism
will take place with or without us.
followed by a period of Puritanism and the rise
The temperature on the surface of Pluto is just
about the coldest anywhere. It is about 3
of new religious ideas. The American
Revolution, the Renaissance and the zenith of
degrees above absolute zero and only just
above the ambient temperature of the void of
the Middle Ages are some examples. Each time
Pluto goes into its own sign long lasting and
interspaced between the stars and galaxies.
Coldness is the quality of the Spirit. Pluto is
dramatic changes occur in the collective
consciousness of mankind.
composed largely of frozen or solidified of
Methane. Even as far away from the sun as
In addition to all this we are now on the cusp of
a new world age, the Age of Aquarius. It is
Jupiter and Saturn this is in a gaseous or liquid
rather complicated to explain this to a layman,
state and only solidifies at just above absolute
but there are twelve ages, like the twelve signs
zero, the temperature of the Spirit. Methane is
CH4 or 4 Hydrogen atoms plus one carbon
of the Zodiac, and the earth stays in each one
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-35.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 1 & 2- 2005
32
Kalaki. It is a means to an end and not an
atom (tetravalent). It is the basic building block
of organic compounds. Carbon itselfis a very
absolute. Theirregularities of Pluto'sorbit bring
drastic changes to humanity and we must
hard black or occasionally diamond like
substance. It cannot form life on its own but
surrender to the Spirit whatever changes must
becomes a support for further evolution oflife
by its four-fold valency, hence it is like Shri
Ganesh. Methane or CH4 as often as not is
come about as a single race of beings.
Pluto only has an atmosphere some of the time
when occasionally the faint sun-light vaporizes
the end decay product of organic dissolution.
the methane. This is when the planet comes
For example it is found in very old oil reservoirs
as natural Gas, or in ancient swamps and marsh
gas. So even here Pluto or Shri Kalaki has
nearer to the sun in its eccentric orbit and when
the moon is not in the way, and even then it is
only on the side facing the sun. This is like the
final dissolution and rebirth embodied in its
symbol of the manifestation of Pluto's power
chemical makeup.
by the all powerful sun which is the opposite of
A'day' on Pluto, or rather one revolution of the
planet on its axis is almost seven of our days
which are perhaps significant. It has also been
recently discovered by observing the further
eccentricities of its orbit and shape that it has a
moon. This has been given the name of Charon
after the boatman who ferries the souls across
Pluto's dark eternal cold. Shri Mataji has three
main seats in the solar system: Venus in Her
heart, the moon is supported on Her head and
of course Pluto. In this incarnation She has
Pluto as a vehicle-Shri Kalaki-the power of final
dissolution. We must therefore at this time look
towards our inner spiritual development, that
part which is beyond material decay, and forget
the river of death to the underworld in Greek
mythology This moon was discovered round
about 1979, i.e. when every thing relevant to
the outside concerns all the time. This is the
in
moment when we are taking a big jump
the transformation of human consciousness
evolution, the jump is certain but which way we
connected with the planet seemed to happen
and also around about the time when Shri Mataji
began telling us that Shri Kalaki was starting to
manifest. The moon is very large in relation to
the size of the planet itselfand it is almost like a
double planet system. Charon is the white horse
of Kalaki, or the vehicle. Shri Kalaki judges
go is up to us. Pluto is also known for its
connection with joint emotional and financial
ventures in conventional astrology, and it is
interesting that in December/January of 82/3
Pluto approached to within %
Constellation of Scorpio, and the world
of the
currencies such as the pound sterling, dropped
dramatically and unaccountably. One has only
without mercy and Charon is like the vehicle of
Pluto just as Sahaja Yoga is the vehicle of Shri
to read some pages of William Blake's
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-36.txt 
 & 2-2005.
The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: I
33
"Jerusalem" or "Milton" to appreciate that in the
this year Shri Mataji said in one lecture that Pluto
can be both the cause and cureof many diseases
next few years any efforts ofmankind which
are not directed towards the spirit, for example
found in today's world. Let us pray that we
may surrender to the power of Pluto in a fashion
such things asconcentrating enormous amounts
of effort on such things as economics based on
currencies, will flounder dramatically as the
manifestation of Kalaki urges man to put his
attention on higher values. Where will all that
that may allow for the cure to take place, not
only of diseases on the individual level, but that
mankind as a whole may discover the simple
cure for the collective diseases which cause the
time wasted on business and money have led
us, when the universe is marching on to another
level ofexpression, and man withit? It will slowly
entire race of man to suffer and be alienated
from one another. The cure is to bow to the
Lotus feet of Shri Mataji and allow Her to
transform us through the vehicleof Sahaja Yoga.
become obvious to mankind as a whole that
onlyby transfomation through surrender to the
Spirit and death of the ego and superego of
Shri Mataji has asked us to pray for Her health
at this time, March, 83, and Her body reflects
the collective health of the Sahaja Yogis.
individuals, nations and races will mankind
survive. The blossom time is coming, let the
Therefore it is vital that we allow the
harvest of the Spiritual rebirth be very plentiful,
for otherwiseevena small shift in the equilibrium
on the material level of this planet could cause
transforming power of Pluto to cure us
individually and collectively, so that our beloved
Mother does not have to suffer for us in Her
great discomfort and suffering.
This is not
boundless love. As is written in the Koran, for
scaremongering, but we must take to Sahaja
the man who has eyes to see and ears to
Yoga and establish ourselves as instruments for
this next most dramatic stage of human
hear, the evidence of God and his works
and plans are everywhere.
development as directed by Shri Mataji. In Delhi
We, the Children, are bowing to the
Immaculate Desire of God the Almighty.
(FROM NIRMAL YOGA)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-39.txt 
 ी
जयोग आज का महार।
परप पमाताजी निर्म द ।
वी के
कुका अंातीय [मम]
कुण्डलिमी जा पानर
ना
रु
ु
१र
