TheDivine Cool Breeze IVIne 00 September - October 2005

 SHWA NIRMALA. "IVERSAL PU PURE In This Issue:- 1. Saraswati Puja – Dhulia 14.1.1983 Maha Sahasrara Day 13 2. The First Shajayoga Seminar, Austria Sept, 1982 15 3. 4. Maria Smith's Account of the miracles at Bedford. 17 5. Little Stories from the Rome Centre 20 In memory of a great man 23 6. 7. The memories of our Divine Mother. 26 DHARMA RELIGION

 Co oL THE DIVINE C o OL B R E E ZE Published by Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. Infosys House, Plot No. 8, Chandragupt Housing Society, Paud Road,Kothrud, Pune-411 029 Printed at Amarnath Press (P) Ltd. WHS 2/50, Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi - 15 Ph.:25268673 Please Send Your Suggestions and Subscription to:- Shri G.L. Aggarwal Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 222, Desh Bandhu Apartments Kalkaji, New Dehi-110019 Tel. No.:011-26422054, 26216654 And Your Sahaja Experiences, Articles, Miracle Photographs etc. to: Shri O.P. Chandna G-11-(463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110 034

 SHRI SARASWATI PUJA Dhulia 14.1.1983 With love all kinds of creative action gradually stop, when they will be fed up. takes place. You see how Raulbai has So all the activity on right hand side, of love for me and in this place you all also Saraswati, basically has to end up in love. got new idea of creating a beautiful thing. Starts with love and ends up in love. And as love will increase your creativity Whichever does not end up in love, coils will develop. So the basis of all creativity up and finishes off. It just disappears. So of Saraswati is love. If there is no love you can see that even matter which is not there is no creativity. It is even in the deeper used for love, just finishes off. The basis sense, you see; people who have created has to be love. Otherwise all such matter all the scientific things are also out of love that we crate which has angularity, which to the masses, not for themselves. is not fitting into the mass media, which is Nobody has produced anything for not appealing to the masses; of course, it themselves. If they make something for takes time, you have seen that it takes time themselves it has to become for universal - but it does have that terdency always to use, otherwise it has no meaning. Even if disappear in the thin air as soon as you you say atom bomb and all these things find it does not appeal to the masses. are created from science, they are also very protective. If they had not created, Now this love of, that we talk of, the those people would not have taken out great love of God we talk of, we know that their minds from war. Now, nobody can it is, for definite, through vibrations. People think of having a big war. Of course, they do not have vibrations but still they can leel are having cold wars, but that also will the vibrations in a very unconscious way

 September-October, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze I told you, it cannot. Because the time will All the great paintings of the world have kill it. All these things have to disappear vibrations. All the great creative works of and already you can see the result, how the world have vibrations. Only those who things are changing every-where, even in have vibrations have been sustained by time - otherwise all other things are the West. So there is no need to be so much disappointed with the West and to destroyed. There must have been say that the Western world is a waste-land. monuments and horrible statues and horrible things that have been created long It is going to be alright and it has to be done. Specially it has done lot of Puja of time back. But they are all destroyed by Saraswati. I should say in the West. Much Nature as they could not stand the impact more than they have done in India because of the KALA-that is the destructive power they have gone to learn it and they have of time. So, all that is sustaining, all that is tried to find out so many things. But only nurturing, all that is ennobling comes from thing they forgot that it is a Goddess, God this sense of love, which is within us very much developed but within others also is the Giver. Everything comes from the Goddess. That is what they forgot. And who are not yet realised. Ultimately the that is why all the problems have been whole world has to realise that one has to go to that ultimate love of God, otherwise created. If there is no Spirit in your learning, it has no meaning. if there is no source of the goddess in your learning, then it is- absolutely useless. If they had realised that there is the Spirit that Now you have seen in arts people have taken to other methods of appealing is working it out, they would not have gone that far. And that is what I was warning the to people by using cheap things and very Indians, although, that you are now taking vulgar things, just to make people think to industrial revolution in a way and to avoid that this is art. But this will all disappear. It cannot sustain the impact of the time as all the complications of industrial

 September-October, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze revolution, you must try to know the Spirit. Christ then it is even more essential that If you do not know the Spirit you will have the purity of life, what you call 'Niti', is the morality of life. Now morality itself has the same problem as these people have. Because they are also human beings, you become very much sort of an argument in the West. People don't have any sense of are also human beings. You will also go the same way. At random you will run and absolute morality. On vibrations of course there will be problems, the same problems you know. But they have all gone against it. Those who are worshippers of Lord as the Western people have. Jesus, those who are the worshippers of Now Saraswati's blessings are so the Surya, of the Saraswati have all gone against, against the powers, of Surya, just many that one cannot describe in such a short time. And the Surya (Sun) has given disobeying it. Because you cannot be a us so many powers that it is impossible to Surya if you don't have a proper sense of morality and holiness. The Surya itself tell them even in one lecture, even in ten brings light to see everything clearly. So lectures. But how we go against Surya and many qualities Surya has got. It dries up how we go against Saraswati, while doing everything that is wet, dirty, filthy. It dries the worship of Saraswati, it is to be seen up all those places which create parasites. very clearly within ourselves. For example But so many parasites are created in the the Western people are very fond of Surya West. Not only parasites, but there are because they have no Surya. But they go too far with it, as you know, and create horrible cults and horrible things which have come into that; those countries which complications within themselves of Surya. are supposed to be full of light, and in that But the main thing that one has to achieve darkness they exist. Darkness about the through Surya is the light 'Vivek'- is the tight within. And if Surya Chakra at the Spirit, darkness about their own Agnaya level is occupied by lord Jesus knowledge and darkness about love.

 September-October, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze that. All our brain activity goes against pure These three things have taken over in the intelligence. And that is what one has to places where you are supposed to love understand- that this pure intelligence, is light. Light does not mean, light does not notto be soiled by our thinking. Ourthinking mean what you see with your gross eyes, Light means from within-the light of love, can make us so bumptious, so ego- That one should understand-Light of love. oriented, so impure, that we can really eat the poison and say 'what is wrong in it? And it is so soothing, it is so sweet, it is so beautiful, it is so enamouring, it is so Just the opposite of Saraswati. If abounding that unless and until you can Saraswati is within us, She give us "Subuddhi', wisdom. And that is why, to feel that light within you-that light which is of pure love - of purity, pure relationship, worship Saraswati, to worship Surya, we must have that clear vision as to what we pure understanding. If you can develop What we are doing. What that kind of a light within yourself, then the have to be. whole thing will be cleansed. "Wash me filth we are living in. What our mind is and I shall be whiter than snow.' This is getting into. After all we are here for what happens to you when you are emancipation and not for, just for pampering our ego and living with our filth completely cleansed. The purest form of Nature is within us. The purest form of that is with us. So this light has come Nature is within us. Our Chakras are within us and we should try to rise above our own mental filth which is being created made out of that 'purest' form of Nature. around us. Apart from that, you have to go We are the only people who are spoiling it by our mental thinking. higher and understand that there is, within Against the us, a thing called ego. And this ego is false, same Saraswati power, you are going against Saraswati itself. Saraswati absolutely false. You do not do anything. Actually when you turn your eyes here and cleanses all that is impure in nature, while there when your attention is here and there, with our brain activity we are spoiling all

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October, 2005 7. it is nothing but your ego that is trying to then they become Gurus, they themselves have lots of defects in themselves and they overpower you. But actually ego is an try to pull people into those horrible stuff absolute falsehood because there is only one ego and that is the God Almighty, which is described as absolute NARAKA. NARAKA is the movement of ego on all 'Mahatahankara'. There is no really any the sides. ego that exists, it is myth. It is a very big myth, because if you start thinking you are Now when people try to use their right doing everything-you are doing this, you are doing that-which you are not doing; Vishuddhi, that is, to talk about themselves, is the worst of all. Whatever then this non-sensical ego comes in and you start working it out, it can project in type of ego you may have, if you start boasting about it and talking about it, then direction. When it projects forward, every it encircles, thickens the walls of ego so it overpowers others, it tries to dominate much, that it is impossible to penetrate into others, tries to kill others, becomes Hitler. that, because such a person is completely When it moves to right side, it becomes satisfied with himself and he believes that supraconscious. It starts seeing things he is so. And once he starts believing into which are absurd, which are foolish, which a non-sense like that, its an impossibility are stupid. When it moves to left side then then-impossibility to penetrate. it starts, talking-Imean, seeing things- yourself as a big man, as a big Christ or So when you boast about these as a big Devi or something like Adi Gurus and 'l am a very great personality' that is things or you talk big, be careful, you see. You know what I am, but how many times left sided. When it moves backwards, that is the dangerous one. do l say 'l am that'. Even ifI say once, you Then people become Gurus which are ruining other get tremendous vibrations for you. But how many times do I say so? At the most if you people. When their ego moves backwards

 September-October, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze say something, I say 'yes'. But I don't say this talking. And once they take to talking that. IfI say it loudly, I don't know what may and they talk about it, the whole power goes out. But if they do not talk about it and keep The whole thing, might be happen. it within themselves, it is alright. You can blasted! So, one has to understand that Mahatahankara is the one that acts, that tell me about your experiences, alright, but works, that creates. Sometimes I shout if you start telling others, and talking about it too much, then the power that you have at you. Immediately all the bhoots run away. Just once I shout. Yesterday, you got will be all disappearing gradually. And you will just come down to absolutely lowest saw all the bhoots that were talking, they So one should not too much talk that all ran away. Yesterday this I talked to you. level. So you should understand that now you Ihave this power, I have this power or I think are a realised soul, you can also do the this orI do this, which is a very wrong thing. Use your right Vishuddhi to I warn you, DO NOT TRY TO SHOW OFF. same. Yes, you can talk about my powers. It is all shout at yourself, "Now will you please right. But don't try to talk about your powers. stop boasting, will you stop talking all this nonsense, will you stop showing When it comes, of course, you talk to off!" Then it will stop. somebody who is a negative person or to tell somebody, then you should say that WE, NOT I. "We' have, 'some of us' have Now this thickening takes place by felt this power within us. 'We' have seen people who really are active. They want people. It may be you only, but you need to do something about it, not that they are not say, 'I'have. What you've to say WE'. not active. They want to do. But they know Then you become the Mahatahankara. only one way, is to act talkative. They don't When you say 'We' 'here some of us' 'we understand that there are inner ways by which you control it much more.. Because do'. Like in Gregoire's book I made it, I saw to it that he should not have many 'I's they don't want to take to that, they take to

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October, 2005 but he should have 'We'. We think', 'we always think in the words of "WE', so your do', 'we', means the whole collective ego will become much less, much less, much less. And the same ego which looks being, the whole collective organism, living organism of SHAJAYOGIS. So if you so funny and absurd will fall tomorrow to say, 'yes, some of us have got', that the EKADASHA. means, you put yourself down, but put all Today, individual ego will merge into others above you. Say "Yes, some of us have, I know some people have this.' That EKADASHA. But we all must remember is the way one should do it. Because if to say 'WE' all time. This is what is today's day is great day for us to change, because you have to overpower your ego, you must the Sun has changed its move, now. Sun allow it to spread into every body else. That is coming this side. So let us welcome the is how, you will make it perfectly all right. Sun, coming to the North now, this way. And Let it spread. We all SAHAJA YOGIS 'WE ALL'. But that pride is not there. I've seen for Australians to say that though the Sun that pride is not there. Still it is very has gone, let us establish the Sun, the individualistic. If you start thinking, 'we' domain of Sun, within ourselves. Because SAHAJA YOGIS', then what happens is Sun never disappears from our inside. So become 'one' personality, 'one' that is how we have to take a mode by which we should think of 'one' personality, organisation. 'all of us together, all of us together.' And But the person will look down upon anybody who tries to be something separate or different, he will drop out. I other people. He will see that person is will drop him out. What ever it may be, it low, that person is higher, that person is there. But he will not think 'We' the Sahaja So you judge yourself, will drop out. Yogis, how beautiful we are! We' the body anybody who tries to be singled out or of Sahaja Yoga, how beautiful we are! So anything. Everybody must do whatever

 10 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October, 2005 they like, to nurture the whole, to help the thing today that we are having puja at Dhulia. Like the Dhulia means the dust. whole, to help the whole, to emancipate the whole. But not to, in anyway, put anyone Dust. And one day I had written in Childhood, a poem, I remember. Very down always. Because this is not the way the Sahaja Yoga is. Sahaja Yoga only interesting poem it was - I don't know where it is now-but which said that 'I want works in collectivity. And the one who has developed this permeating spirit, to be smaller like a dust particle which is a real Sahaja Yogi. Who has not, is moves with the wind. It goes everywhere. Can go, sit on the head of a king, or can not! Whatever you may think of yourself, I go and fall at the feet of someone. And it have nothing to say. But this permeating can go and sit on a little flower, and it can personality which moves from places to go and sit everywhere. But I want to be a places, whether you talk or not. Like your Mother is. Whether I meet you or not, particle of dust, that is fragrant, that is makes no difference, but I am permeating nourishing, that is enlightening,' Like that, I had written a very beautiful poem, I was through all of you, by little-little things also I am there with you. So like that, try to about seven year of age, I remember-To be a dust partiole, 'I remember that very permeate into each other and see the clearly, long time back, 'that I should be a beauty in you. Enjoy yourself the best dust particle. So that I will permeate into because that is the biggest thing. That's the biggest thing that is to be achieved. people,' which is a very big thing to become a dust particle of that kind. To just Because this ego you know makes you whatever you touch, you see, that becomes like a nutshell and it just cannot have a enliving, whatever you just feel, that is rapport with that beauty of permeation and fragrance. It is such a great thing to be like just see how the notes move into each that. And that was my desire, and it will be other. achieved. At that young age, I had this idea It will be a great idea today, it is great

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October, 2005 11 of becoming a dust particle and today just around. And this is the way to overcome while talking to you, I remembered that I the problems of the right side and that is wanted to be that, and that is what this how to worship Saraswati. Because place is. And Raulbai is like that. She is a Saraswati has a Veena in Her hand and very simple woman, very simple woman that Veena is the primordial instrument and she lives like a very simple person. which She plays like music, and music She has a sense of permeation. And now penetrates into the heart. You don't know how it goes into you and how it works out. there are so many Sahaja Yogis, yesterday who came; and I am sure there That is how a person who is Sahaja Yogi should permeate- like music. There are are going to be more people.I hope you so many qualities as I told you which have met all of them. Make friends with cannot be described in one lecture. But all of them. Try to know them who they one of the greatest quality of Her's is that are. They may not know English. You get somebody to translate. Talk to them and She ends up into subtler things like the Mother Earth will end up into fragrance. be nice to them. Be friendly with them. I wanted you to meet them for permeation. Music will end up into inelody like that You should know who are the people here, whatever She creates ends up into something greater. Matter whatever She who are in Nasik. Because somehow we never meet the Sahaja Yogis, you see, produces ends up into aesthetics. If matter who are in that particular place. And when does not have aesthetics then it is gross, we go back we have only one or two like that everything. Now you will say what is water. Water becomes the river addresses. It is not a good idea. Try to see how many people there are. Ask Ganges! These are the subtler things. So the matter gets into subtler thing because questions about them. And all that. it has to permeate, it has to permeate. So This permeation is only possible when your ego starts permeating all everything whatever it is. And the best of

 The Divine Cool Breeze 12 September-October, 2005 all is the air. That air becomes the that and that is how one has to look at your vibrations! own life, to make it a beautiful combination of love and matter. So you can see how whatever has May god bless you. come out from this matter, from these five elements, becomes that subtler thing. Of (Nirmala Yoga) course, the left and right side both work it out. Because the love has to work on this 1983 and when love acts on matter it becomes

 MAHA SAHASRARA DAY on a motor-cycle, I had taken guidance We draw your attention to the article from Mr. B.G. Pradhan, who was present with the above heading in NIRMALA YOGA there on 5th May, 1970 and is one of the (May-June, 1983) Vol. 15, page 16. It is first twelve who got their realisation there. to be noted that on 5th May, 1970, Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi opened the I located the place where this grea. Sahasrara of VIRATA at NARGOLand not at Bordi as mentioned in the above event had taken place by the help of vibrations and then sat there in meditation. mentioned article. It is very difficult to describe the intense peace of the Grace which I enjoyed in the NARGOL is a small village near the meditation. It was very deep and blissful. seashore and is about 35 KM by State highway from Bordi. By Railway one has Thereafter, I returned back to the to get down at UMARGAON Railway house in whose compound I had parked Station on Central Railway and then to my motorcycle. As I was walking with my reach NARGOL by road. hands out stretched enjoying the vibrations, people of the house enquired On 25th Sept.,1983, I visited Bordi whether I was searching something. I told in connection with the arrangements of the them "About thirteen years back our Shri International Shivir for 600 Sahaja brothers and sisters who would be attending it Mataji Nirmala Devi had come there and during 10th to 15th Feb.. 1984. After meditated near the seashore. I wanted to find out the exact place where She had finishing my work at Bordi at about 1 PM meditated." They at once remembered in the afternoon I journeyed to NARGOL

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October, 2005 14 that Shri Mataji had been there and they DEVI KI JAI. with some other local people had attended Her programme. BOLO SHRI R.N. PEREKAR (BOMBAY) SAHASRARA SWAMINI MOKSHA PRADAYANI MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA NIRMALA YOGA 1983

 THE FIRST SAHAJA YOGA SEMINAR IN AUSTRIA Our Holy Mother visited Vienna in because the collectivity in the group was September 82, gave Her blessings to the very good. Fixing the attention to the Spirit and not to the outward appearance of a whole city and realization to about 6000 seekers. About 25 remained in Sahaja person, we somehow melted together. Yoga in an active capacity and gathered Finally nobody could bear to see the end to our first seminar in April. of the seminar coming. The three children of the manager of the youth hostel were You can't imagine, it was such a attracted to us one after the other and they blessing to attend it! Just thinking about it all got their realization; it was really sweet! one gets breathless... but we have to go All this sounds very nice, yet there is much beyond thought anyway. We had a work to do in Austria. With the help and programme of videos, workshops, guidance of the Divine we will spread Sahaja Yoga until the last valley of our Alps meditation, exchange of experiences and above all, a beautiful Shiva-Shakti- will be vibrated. And we now need an ashram to adore our Mother, who is Beauty Ganesh Puja, which according to the vibrations, was kindly accepted by the and Bliss itself and to set the example of a new life style to this Austria. deities. No doubt, all problems will be solved We gathered together to surrender if we to the realm of joy and silence, to get the the surrender ourselves to Enlightened One, the Spirit. We pray to our Divine Vibrations flowing from the Eternal Shri Mother that She opens our hearts for One. This happened in such a way, that, in a very short time, we grew remarkably Her Grace, compassion and guidance. strong in our yoga. This was possible,

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October, 2005 16 O Devi, who else but you can take are Your children, playing with Your gifts. away our misidentifications so that we can Thank You ! face your shining love without shadow in - Guent her Nirmala Yoga our eyes. Let us always remember that we

 Maria Smith's account of the miracle at Bedford and the events leading up to it. the visit was temporarily called off by Shri Bedford is a provincial town in the midlands of England. Sahaja Yoga Mataji. We realized at this point that we had been completely drained and wasted programmes were started there about by going about things in a human rather eighteen months ago, during which time a number of people were given realization than a Sahaja fashion. So collectivity, the English Sahaja Yogis decided to work on and three became Sahaja Yogis, In 1982 Shri Mataji was invited by local Sahaja the midlands area by cleansing and strengthening themselves and the area by Yogis to come to Bedford and other doing pujas and by asking the elements neighbouring cities. to help in the process. Every Sunday we would have pujas in one of the three main Initially, absolutely nothing worked towns and would work on the map of the district in the presence of Shri Mataji's out as far as arrangements for Shri Mataji's trip were concerned. There was total photograph. We would use the vibrations negativity and opposition from the media, coming from different parts of the map to and even Sahaja Yogis were sucked into feel and work out the collective problems the vortex of inertia. A lot of energy was of a particular town. lost in the process of trying to make people understand the importance of this Just before all this took place, when visit by intellectual reasoning and the meetings had been cancelled, Maria persuasion, None of the approaches to telephoned Shri Mataji and our Holy media or any of the plans bore fruit through Mother explained that something was complete lack of local interest. As a result taking place on a level beyond our

 18 September-October, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze awareness and beyond our ability to so completely. control. Shri Mataji had consulted the stars After a month or two of all this Shri and deities so that they would work it in Mataji suggested more dates for the way that the Divine knows best. programmes which She would attend in the midlands area. All the money for hiring halls After some weeks a series of etc. was gone, but due to one timely phone extremely violent rain storms occurred. call the right person appeared at the right One minute the summer skies would be moment to help with this side of things. The clear and blue; the next they would be filled with unnaturally heavy clouds, which second boon was that the media were totally positive; the newspaper, radio and seemed to come out of nowhere. The rain was so heavy that people could hardly even TV were only too delighted to believe it and it was accompanied by cooperate. It seemed almost as if everyone connected with the media had lightning which rent the skies from end to end and frightful and deafening thunder. been previously convinced about Shri Mataji and Sahaja Yoga prior to our visiting The rivers flooded and overflowed on to team. the surrounding lands. After every storm Shri Mataji arrived and was on two there would be spectacular rainbows -not TV programmes, and the Sahaja a normal, single rainbow, but many bows all crossing each other. These spectacular Programmes were jam packed with people standing in the corridors outside. shows would delight everyone with their beauty and people would even stop their It was during the first meeting at cars to watch this heavenly wonder. All Bedford that the greatest miracle Jews and Christians will recall that God occurred. Shri Mataji was driven to the sent Noah a rainbow after the great flood meeting and reached the hall at about 7.30 as a symbol of His love and as a promise that He would never flood the earth again p.m. Our Mother left at about 11.00 p.m.

 September-October, 2005 The Divine Copl Breeze 19 and was in the hall constantly in between. Yogis were accompanying Shri Mataji in Her car to the meeting at Canmbridge. One At about 9.15 p.m. a young man person complained that she was named Jason Haynes, who lived in suffering from a bed left nabhi catch. Bedford, was knocked off his motor bike The reply of Shri Mataji is instructive in one of the streets of the town and was for all: our Mother explained that it was lying seriously injured waiting for the not this lady's left nabhi, but the ambulance to arrive. Some minutes later collective catch of the whole area he was aware of a kind Indian lady which was being felt. She was told to standing over him, touching him where open her charkas, and pray to the particular he was most injured and each time She deity, then vibrations could be emitted touched him the pain left that part of the through that person's chakra out to the body. Then She left, and later the whole environment. Thus the problem was ambulance arrived and took him to the that of the whole area and the lady was to hospital, where he was treated for minor stop assuming that the catch revolved injuries and shock. The onlookers at the about the problems of her small self; it was scene of the accident did not see any something much bigger. "Indian lady' at any time, and Shri Mataji was at that time visibly giving realization Mother, please let us surrender to in the hall in another part of Bedford. The You completely so that we may be worthy next day the young man, Jason Haynes, instruments for the great work You are saw a photograph of Shri Mataji in the accomplishing on this earth of Yours which local paper and was certain beyond have so graciously given us to enjoy. you doubt that this was the 'mysterious lady who had helped him. NIRMALA YOGA 1983 The following day some Sahaja

 Little Stories from the Rome Center discussions on the need to stop smoking It was the first time I was going to but without any results. Yet the day after the apartment where the Sahaja Yogis meet and I could not remember the these comments of the Sahaja Yogis and after I had bitterly complained to them indications my husband gave me to find about all those smokers, without any their house. As I did not want to go all the apparentreasons, all the colleagues in the experiment way back home I decided to with the guidance from the vibrations on office decided to stop smoking in the room. All of a sudden they were all taking the hands. So, I went on it in the street till care of my right Vishuddhi. I was stunned, I arrived in front of the right gate and happy, and, from the bottom of my heart, I pushed on the right interphone button. thanked Shri Hanumana and Shri Mataji. When I got the confirmation that I had EDUARDO indeed found the flat I was looking for I just couldn't believe it. I started my study as I was 23, with a RITA lot of insecurity and fear of the exams. During the first series of exams after my Shortly after my realization I was told realization I was still afraid though feeling by the Sahaja Yogis that my right the Presence of Shri Mataji in the room. Vishuddhi was catching as smokers' Then something strange happened : the Vishuddhi usually do. I don't smoke but in examiners, well known for being harsh and my office they all do it. That same day the nasty, started beaming with smiles, Sahaja Yogis also told me that, as a child became so human and so nice as soon of Shri Mataji, I was protected; I could not as they proceeded with the girls of my really understand what they meant. group. Everything went so well as if a good In my office there had been regular fairy had entered the room on a cloud

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October, 2005 21 towards our Mother). The next morning we sparkling with beauty. The same thing were amazed to find that the picture of the repeated itself for all the exams I had to "guru" had fallen down on the floor. Only go through. The wonderful thing about it is that my girl friends noted the change the picture of Shri Mataji remained. After this event, somehow, I felt that we should Occurring every time, and now, funnily not sleep with our feet towards the picture of Shri Mataji. enough, they all wanted to be examined at the same time as me. CRISTINA ANTONIO & ANNY Before meeting Shri Mataji, Anny It was 9.30 pm. I was returning home and myself were keeping in our bedroom when suddenly some boys forcefully took the picture of a "guru" whose meditation away my bag. It contained pictures of Shri techniques we had followed for a while. Mataji, my identification papers, money, Although we had found that his system did gold, jewels that I wanted to sell, a shawl not give any results we were still from India, my keys and newspapers to intellectually convinced that he was a saint. look for a place suitable for our ashram. Hence his picture remained on the wall, On arriving home I prayed to Mother that fortunately at the foot of the bed. Her angels should not be too harsh with the thieves. My husband told me to go to The night Anny and myself received the police right away but I refused:I was our realization from Shri Mataji we deeply convinced that the bag would be received Her picture for meditation. returned. It had to be so as lama daughter Returning happily home, we fixed Her of Shri Mataji. I went to bed, praying as picture on the wall near the one of the usual to Shri Mother, and, confidently, I went "guru". (We did not know anything about to sleep. The next day, I hardly protocol but probably we have been remembered what had happened when the forgiven for sleeping that night with the feet doorbell rang. It was the doorman holding

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October, 2005 22 the bag in his hand. Astreet cleaner had been smashed into pieces... found it on a lawn and brought it back to Jai Shri Mataji the correct address. Nothing had been touched. Just an old amulet that, I had forgotten in a side pocket of the purse, had EMMA (Nirmala Yoga)

 In Memory of a Great Man The prize winning film of R. Attenborough on Mahatma Gandhi has been seen by many Sahaja Yogis throughout the world. For once the link between Gandhi and Sahaja Yoga cannot be stressed enough: in enabling Bharata to regain its political freedom. Gandhi brought back to the land of yoga its lost dignity without which it could not unveil to other civilizations the priceless secret of its spiritual tradition: Kundalini Yoga. He was, in this way, the precursor of this little girl who was staying in his ashram. I refer to Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi of course. Gandhiji used to call Her "Nepali" which, indeed, was quite accurate: the Devi is the daughter of Himavat, the king of the nmountains, and the Sahasrara of the planet is in Nepal, in the Himalayas. On a general level the film on Gandhi brings to a wide public's attention some features in the life of this remarkable man that Sahaja Yogis can, perhaps, best analyse. Young Europeans do not always realize what colonialism really meant to the rest of the world. They often consider that, after all, it was a good thing to bring science and technology to other continents without realizing that only too often the colonial powers behave with gross brutality; they destroyed in the process of their so quote "civilizing mission" the delicate fabric of human and social values which, in the light of spiritual life, were by far superior to their own. The real victory of Gandhi was to beat the major colonial power of the time merely by resorting to these values. In many ways the mode of action of Gandhiji was sahaj. For instance, he firmly derived his political activity from a couple of Dharmik principles and he refused to compromise with what was wrong. These principles, his very firmness, stemmed from his (correct) conviction that it is God who leads history. Thus God answered back the call, or, in other words, the Unconscious started working for Gandhi.

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October, 2005 How did it happen? - Gandhi's greatest leverage was his command over the Indian masses, He gained such a command because the simple folk could recognize that he was inspired from above. The people felt it from their own individual unconscious and thus they believed in the legitimacy and the credibility of his leadership; they, indeed, called him "Mahatma", gave him confidence in his mission, lent him in any possible way their support. Therefore, to take but one example, merely by his hunger strike the Mahatma could control the behaviour of millions of people. But alas, this process cannot work outside India, in countries where the common man does not have the required level of sensitivity to his own unconscious. This is why Gandhi's schemes of peaceful revolution has not yet been implemented anywhere else in the world. Other countries could, possibly have their own Gandhi. But would these lone voices be heard, let alone listened to and obeyed ? Even in India the elite of the country, the clever people, missed the best part of Gandhi's teachings. They have largely borrowed the western ways of the westem power they were supposed to have expelled and, in this respect, remained colonized. Perhaps this has been Gandhi's greatest shortcoming. He could transform a country but he could not transform men. He could bring political freedom but not the freedom from conditionings and ego. In other words, he could not raise Kundalinis. Well, Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi can! This is why the spiritual revolution She has triggered with Sahaja Yoga is simply the most practical, the most effective revolution of all times. As Shri Mataji can transform the basic cell of society, man, transform him, that is, into a higher being, the gradual impact of this positive transformation will be felt in all the dimensions of society. As this transformation will be duiy opposed, there will be crises and clashes; the earth may shiver, the seas may rise. But the outcome can

 The Divine Cool Breeze 25 September-October, 2005 be predicted with the kind of quiet certainty which distinguishes Nature's doings. At the given time some eggs become chicken, some flowers turn into fruits, some people become Sahaja Yogis. Like Gandhi we should be collective and wish this new freedom for many, many more. And we should be confident about it. For not only is nature doing the job, She has even taken an incarnated form to explain us how She does it ! Really we can only wish to Gandhiji to be back as one of us... Gregoire (Nirmala Yoga) 1983

 THE MEMORIES OF OUR DIVINE MOTHER (CONTD.) THE BEGINNINGS IN ENGLAND I've found this new sort of yoga front of this photograph of Shri Mataji and First of all, the area where I used to live put your hands to it." And he produced a was round by Euston, near Tolmers little black and white photograph. It wasn't Square (in London) and that area was a much bigger than a postcard. And we sat sort of high energy area. There were a lot there in his rather cold draughty, old bank of squatters and things like that there. We that we used to use as a social club and used to have a little community club there we sat there with our hands like this before and one day (in 1973) this fellow turned Shri Mataji's photograph. There was about up -Mukund shah-to teach us yoga. five or six of us. And he came round and Over a year he tried all sorts of different felt our hands and asked us what we felt yoga and meditation and then one day he and we all felt different sorts of things went to see Shri Mataji and, because he because we were all in different sorts of had so much experience of so many sorts states of awareness due to what we'd of yoga, he tended to be a bit skeptical done before. And anyway, we all obviously and he felt vibrations, but not to sort of felt something and he said, "You get these quantify it. vibrations from Shri Mataji. Would you like to come and meet Her at the Bharata So he had this group of half a dozen Vidya Bhavan? (which was at that time on of us that he used to teach yoga. So he New Oxford Street). said, "Look, I've found this new sort of Well, the following Friday, I believe, yoga and all we have to do is sit down in

 September-October, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze 27 She said, "Put your hands over your ears we went off to the Bharata Vidya Bhavan and cover them up completely and you'll and we met Shri Mataji and we just sort of still be able to hear Me."And we could. We sat there at the back and listened to what She had to say and we realized it was had our hands over our ears and we could something really nice. And She was actually clearly hear what Shri Mataji was working on somebody at the time. At that saying because we were hearing through our Sahasraras. Our Sahasraras had particular point we were aware that it was something special, but we had an inkling actually opened. So that was perhaps the of what it might be, but weren't prepared first experience, apart from feeling the to admit to anybody, least of all ourselves, vibrations, that was one of the real that we had actually met Adi Shakti. ButI amazing, first amazing experience we had. think, basically, we knew that it was Now we had a few meetings at this special. Judd Street, but then, because the fellow that took us there was going to leave, we Then we went to Bharata Vidya Bhavan about two or three times and then, had to find somewhere else and we started to meet in a house in North Gower Street. because we wanted to go somewhere else, because the series was over, we And when we met in North Gower Street, I moved to a house in Clare Court, Judd think that's when it actually began to take Street, where Mukund Shah used to live root. Because there it had got a base for just over the road from Kings Cross. We the Sahaja Yoga to actually put roots down. had a few meetings there and Shri Mataji Then what would happen would be that told us about raising Kundalini and this is Shri Mataji would come round and She one of the first experiences we had of would sit there and there'd be may be half actually hearing through Sahasrara. She a dozen of us and Shri Mataji would talk to us and tell us all about Sahaja Yoga and told us all our Sahasraras were open and

 28 September-October, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze heard that there was a yogi lady and I had the way She'd work on us would be that this kind of idea that I'd walk into a room we would put our hands under Her Feet and She'd sort of do various bits and full of sort of silence and perhaps little bells tinkling somewhere and I walked in the pieces to clear us out. Because there was so few of us, within a couple of days we'd room. And it was so unlike what I'd expected that the effect on me was really be caught up again which was rather sad, quite profound. I immediately felt that this but it just shows the sort of state we were is what it must have been like to come in. across Christ teaching in the marketplace. Douglas Fry It completely hit me like that, which was HOW COULD SOMEONE LIKE THIS quite strange because I didn't have any kind of religious-you know, religion wasn't BE HERE? part of my life. Quite the opposite, I was Actually, I'd seen Shri Mataji's coming from a hippie background. And I photograph before I met Mother. I'd left that just felt that here was an amazing yoga group before you brought the photo. personality and my feeling was, "How can How could I'd moved over to Baker Street and I did a being like this exist? notice the photograph appearing, being someone like that be here?" And the kind of furtively concealed from me and I whole room seemed full of light and there did hear about Shri Mataji, but I didn't hear was a tremendous impression of how anything that direct about it, but then I just powerful Shri Mataji was, but She was just said that I would like to come and see her very sweet. She asked us to come and I had heard about these meetings and I see Her and I came up and She put Her hand on me and said, "This one's sick," I came to the last meeting at Judd Street. One damp Sunday afternoon-raining-and think were the first words She said to me. I came with (my sister) Maureen (Rossi). And the meeting went on. It was just really It had a huge impact on me because l'd amazing-quite magical, the whole thing.

 September-October. 2005 29 The Divine Cool Breeze didn't really have a chance to figure out trying to kind of see how that made sense what it was all about, but I knew it was and fitted in. something quite momentous. That was Pat Anslow the first meeting. She said I was sick and thatI needed HAD NO IDEA WHAT I HAD BUT I something for my stomach and She asked KNEW I HAD IT. for a bottle and the strange thing was- It was the 16th September 1975 that no one else seemed to see this- but I saw we first met Shri Mataji in that (Judd Street) Her take the bottle, turn round and open a flat and, similar to (my brother) Pat sort of door into some kind of an atomic (Anslow), it couldn't have helped being a furnace and put the bottle in, take it out, most momentous feeling. Even walking up shut the door and gave it to me. And I was the street to go to that flat, I had this quite astonished. And I took it home, strongest urge to run away l've ever had in drank it and it had the most extraordinary my life. Even though I didn't know where | effect. It cleared me out. She said I had was going and I had only been told that, six months to live. Yes, I was really in quite "This lady is a yoga teacher, but she a bad way. doesn't teach Hatha Yoga." But I can remember thinking that if I wasn't with We went back for more meetings people that I felt would say, "What on Earth and I had a whole series of extraordinary are you up to?" l'd have run away. That's experiences when she was there, but l how strong I could feel the force I was think the thing that really hit me was a kind walking towards. of gut: 2action, a kind of recognition that this was someone. I kept getting the And when we went in the flat and we feeling that this was someone like Christ. were told to take off our shoes, which was That was the feeling that I had. And I was strange, and told to sit down and I saw Shri

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October, 2005 30 my Realisation in 1975. The first time I Mataji working on this Indian gentleman, very strongly and sort of telling him off and met Mother was quite a marked memory. sorting him out, I thought She was a My father, Pat (Anslow), used to bring me up to London at that time, sometimes, for Goddess. That was my first thought that came into my head and then I thought, the weekend. I used to live with my "What on Earth do I mean by that? I don't grandparents until ny father was remarried. He first met Shri Mataji about even know what a Goddess is." But that's that time. So he brought me up and said I what it felt like. And then She got on with was going to meet this very special Indian seeing to everybody and when my turn came, if you like, She actually got up and lady. Ihad never actually met an Indian lady of any description before that point, which walked around, as well as sat down, and made it a little bit daunting actually, coming She told me to put my hands out and asked me what I felt and that second I felt my from a middle class commuter town just near Brighton. He took me up to London, attention drawn to my hands and said, "Oh, I feel something." And She just said, "May and that was a special thing in itself, and God bless you. You've got it." And I we got there and Shri Mataji was very different from what I imagined because thought, "I've got it." I had no idea what I had, but I knew I had it. And that was it. Indian ladies to me would have been a distant person in a sari. There was not a And She then went on to everybody else. It was just great. I was dealt with. person behind that, more a sort of image. And there was this quite remarkable Maureen Rossi lady who was very friendly. And instead of IT's GREAT BEING A KID me being all sort of anxious and kind of I got my Realisation when I was not knowing what to do because it was a seven year old. I was born in '68 and got strange adult, it was really rather fun.

 September-October, 2005 31 The Divine Cool Breeze laughed and laughed. And my father, People who remember seeing Mother with think, was horrified, sort of "Oh no, what's children-I mean, She sort of comes alive he doing." But She really took it on board and says, "Really?" and that sort of tone that She takes. She really sort of gets their and She really brought the situation alive attention and makes them feel comfortable and made it all rather fun. And there was and sort of creates this instantaneous no sort of anxiety or anything like that. I connection. So it was a bit like that. mean, it's great being a kid, I suppose. With Shri Mataji, you don't have to think, "DoI have to be this or that?" You just sort She asked me questions and Her eyes kind of lit up and there was a huge smileof are, if you know what I mean. Kevin Anslow and for some mysterious reason-being an adult now, I can't remember the logic behind it, if there was any - I decidedI had to be an elephant. Sol got these - it I REALISED THIS LADY WAS SOMETHING VERY HIGH. My first reaction to Mother was that I was in this flat in Gower Street where this Sahaja Yogi at the time, he had this-well, feit that I had met this lady before. And I what I think of now as rather unpleasant thought I had seen Her in Oxford Street (in London), in a shop somewhere. That was seventies-style furniture, including these wickerwork drinks things. You kind of put my first impression. And She just touched your drinks inside. I turned these things my hand and said, "You will be all right. You are not all right now, but you will be all upside down and stuck them on my feet right." Sol went home and had a shower. legs and kind of roared around the and I was alone at that moment, in the house I room and pretended to be an elephant. was sharing with some people. All of a When I did this Mother just pitched Her sudden, I went completely thoughtless. I wanted to think, but I couldn't. So I knew head back with laughter and laughed and

 September-Octoher, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze 32 had to lie down, so I lay on the bed and everything, every point. She would debate closed my eyes. Iwas aware of this energy everything with us. We were obviously very impressed with Her and we could see that rising up through my stomach and then all what Mother was saying was enlightening the way to my chest and then on to the top and amazing, but there was still lots of of my head like a sort of crown. And my body felt very light and I felt totally in the ideas we had which we didn't agree about bliss. So I realised that this lady was and we would argue about all kinds something very high and I never things. experienced that before. So that was my first experience of Sahaja Yoga. It took a Shri Mataji would resolve that by patiently going through every point and long time and is still taking a long time to correct all of my problems. explain. Really, Mother put Herself into Miodrag Radosavljevic quite a rough kind of environment. Gavin and Jane (Brown) were sort of respectable, WHAT ON EARTH CAN I DO WITH but the rest of us weren't. We all came from THEM? a hippie background, One thing we should perhaps say more about was just how amazing Mother Pat Anslow was with us in our ignorance of any kind of protorol or anything. We had no idea LAM BACK HOME how to behave with Her and we had no T remember entering in Her house in Oxted (In 1975). I was in jeans and was idea how to behave with each other, never mind with Shri Mataji. She was just so wearing an old US Army jacket full of amazing. She just must have put Herself holes, I kissed Her hand and gave Her out so much, in so many ways. It was just flowers. Interestingly, I remember bowing incredible. We would argue about and looking at the ground, so

 33 September-October, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze stage, l'll never forget it, Mother just sort of She commanded spontaneously. immediate respect. But my heart felt such hugged Herself and seemed to be saying, a relief almost immediately. "What on Earth can I do with them?" She looked forlorn really and so unhappy. It just It is hard to say when exactly Istarted hit me then. I was looking at this scene and recognizing Mother, but clearly the heart it was just like a mother with her children. was faster than the brain. It was greatly It was the first time I really felt that She was helped, no doubt, by the contagious like a Mother. She had been saying, "You feeling of lightness and joy, an enveloping must stop taking drugs." Solsaw this and feeling of affection and wellbeing that said, "Okay, l'll do it." And immediately all you feel, "I am back home! Home, these other people turned around and made sweet home!". glared at me. It just really hit me. And Gregoire was on his knees saying, Gregoire de Kalbermatten "Mother, you must forgive them. They know not what they do" - very dramatic, but very My first memory of Gregoire (de true. He understood what was going on. Kalbermatten)-he came over and he met Mother and he was staying in the area and Pat Anslow. he had seen Her several times. He came to one of the meetings at Gavin and Jane's When Mother named me leader of and on that particular day the whole place the USA for a brief period, She told, "You was full of people who used drugs. Mother are quite qualified for this because you was arguing with them and saying it was know hell best." It is true that before Sahaja bad and they were saying, "No it is I had experimented with many forms of absolutely not true. You can experience adharma, but had also discovered their this. You can experience that." At one limitations. I mean, I felt like the Rolling

 34 September-October, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze Stones, "I can get no satisfaction." And I Sahaja Yogis hadn't developed this basic was tired to keep trying. So, for me, it was discretion. Like one chap went off to try the vibrations of the graveyard. He came not at all a problem to change my lifestyle back and Mother had to work on him for after meeting Mother. The way She hours on end. "What did you do this for?" presented it made full sense, while the moral teachers of my past could not And he just couldn't explain it. Oh, things explain why I should not do something I like an early Sahaja Yogi went off fancied doing. I had done it all and I knew somewhere and she brought a necklace and Mother was saying, "Well, you've got it was dust. to try the vibrations of things". And She On one hand I finally understood from said, "This thing, there's something not Mother why virtue was good for me. But, quite right". And She got her to get a all the same, I did not know how to purify bucket of water and stuck this necklace in the water and the water turned black, like my attention right away and only meditation did help destroy the addictions. this black cloud came out of it. And She said, "Ah!" like She does and "See!" And they saw, but they didn't learn that quickly. Gregoire de Kalbermatten She had to be very patient with them. SHE HAD TO BE VERY PATIENT WITH THEM Kevin Anslow I remember Her being quite stern with the early Sahaja Yogis at times. She A DIFFERENT UNIVERSE ALTOTHER could be incredibly humorous and very Mother arranged this weekend at Her warm, but quite stern when She needed house at Hurst Green- Icehouse Wood, to be. She was very much a mother figure Hurst Green in Sussex (near Oxsted). We in every way in those days. The early all went down there by train. It was

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October, 2005 35 vibrations, while stepping back. And it did extraordinary because it was this very strange collection of people in an have vibrations. That is the wooden statue extremely nice neighborhood, extremely we had in Chelsham Road (Ashram in London). nice and-Shri Mataji once described it- not even a rat was allowed to enter in or One of the things that struck me also would enter in because the houses there were so perfect. They never had visitors in the house of Mother, was that it looked and felt as if every statue that She had in let alone about fifteen straggling, hippie - the house was vibrating with power. And type people dressed in jeans and any old everywhere you went, you felt a kind of gear. There was a big drawing room Silent, peaceful, but extremely powerful downstairs with beautiful Indian rugs and things like that and then this room up the environment, which is very difficult to stairs that was on the mezzanine room- describe, except to say that you knew something very powerful was working very very sunny and there were large statues deep inside you and working it out. And of deities, a beautiful Shri Ganesha there. yet, you were in the middle of this and you Maureen Rossi felt you were in a different universe altogether. Pat (Anslow) took me to somewhere Djamel Metouri upstairs on the first floor and showed me this big statue of Shri Ganesha. And he And Shri Mataji worked on us and said, "See this statue has such vibrations". And I said, "Hang on". I didn't sort of react. talked to us and there was this incredible Being from a Muslim background, being smell of Indian cooking for about three hours. We were all dying of hunger. They of a Muslim background, I thought, "What started cooking so early and then I started What is he talking is he talking about? to be ill. Thad to keep rushing off and being So I about? tried just feeling the

 36 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October, 2005 ill, but I felt brilliant. It was just a fantastic background, I hadn't with come nightclothes that were particularly smart or clear-out and then everybody went down to this big drawing room and fell asleep anything and She dressed me in petticoats on the floor - and we've got pictures of and cardigans. And She worked on my back all night in Her sleep and I kept having these bodies all over this floor- just to get up to be sick. And She snored and everywhere. then She'd stop snoring and say, "That's Again, then we had another session with Shri Mataji working on us and I had to better now." And then She'd carry on putting Her hand on my back and various keep dashing in and out, but it was like being totally divorced from the actual places and then She'd snore for a bit I felt fantastic. The house longer and then stop and say, "How do you bodily feeling. feel now? And it just went on all night and had almost like a balcony inside that ran round and went off all the rooms. in the morning I was allowed to have bananas and cardamom seeds. That was the absolute minute attention She'd give But because l'd been ill, Shri Mataji US. Said, "Maureen, you can come and sleep us. in my room." And when it came to bedtime, I tried to hide behind everybody It's just incredible to think of Her because I was convinced that Shri Mataji doing that for us and then She went to India for about six months and we used to meet disappeared when She went out of the together, a handful of us, to try to meditate, She went up these stairs curved room. but we weren't very good at all. And Shri round the middle of the house and She Mataji, before She went, had said, "You can went half up the stairs and spotted me and hauled me out from the crowd and I was come to lIndia next year when I go -with so scared as to what was going to happen Me and meet all the Sahaja Yogis there." So we started saving and when She came and anyway She had this enormous lovely bed. Being from a sort of hippie back we were in such a state She said,

 September-October, 2005 37 The Divine Coal Breeze SHE GAVE US SO MUCH AFFECTION "forget it. You're not up to it." But then She Now we are talking about early days again started meeting us each week, generally on a Sunday or Saturday, and and for me early days was the spring and She again had us to Her house. summer of 1977. What is special about the early days is that Shri Mataji had just a Maureen Rossi few Sahaja Yogis. She hadn't got many. She is trying to bring them up to the level HOW AM I GOING TO VISIT YOU? where they can be strong enough so we We went to Her house in Oxsted, but can then expand our collectivity. I can remember patchy things because I When I arrived, probably about six or was quite young at the time. One of them was that I used to love drawing maps -I seven people-I was probably the eighth. still do, actually-andI do them for the sort Some of us in those days have left. I guess of stories that I write now. But in those days I used to draw maps and I had no I remember how She worked on an Australian boy, Gus, for so many weeks. idea why. And I drew this map which had She took him home. She looked after him. some islands. There was an island for me She cured him. He was like an and an island for Shri Mataji. So She said, encyclopedia of drugs. He was really bad. "Well that's no good because how am I He had so many problems and She going to visit you?" And I said, "Well, I can't worked on him day in and day out, every take the train." Sol said, "Well, what about day. She never spared any effort. The an underground train?" So Mother said, most extraordinary thing is that She gave "Okay, that's fine". So, with Her direction, him all the love and, after three months, he we drew in this little sort of underground just left. He left Sahaja Yoga. He could train track. That solved the problem. have, in fact, stayed and She never said. In fact, She said, "Okay". When you look Kevin Anslow

 The Divine Cool Breeze 38 September-October, 2005 house She had in Hurst Green or in the flat at it from our point of view, he wasted Mother's efforts. But She never actually in Ashley Gardens, in those days, She always had -She did everything. She talked about it that way. To Her, She just gave love and that love, there was no gave us so much affection. Djamel Metouri condition put on it. TRULY LIKE A MOTHER The most extraordinary thing about Shri Shri Mataji used to cook for us and Mataji is Her capacity as a Mother to vibrate lemons for us and She would work basically - to nourish the Sahaja Yogis on us constantly and effortlessly andall the who came at that time. To nourish them time. Every week She would come into with enough love so they stayed in Sahaja Yoga, so they felt-may be She gives us the ashram and would work on our chakras what we didn't have, so, as Sai Nath of and check our vibrations and see how we Shirdi said, "We may want what She wants were doing. So She was really truly like a mother, taking care of us. to give us." And She worked tirelessly, taking us to Her home. She never hesitated to cook for LIS. Just think, the Adi Miodrag Radosavljevic Shakti in Her Home, cooking for the few SHE'D BUY THE JACKETS AND THE of us. There may have been seven, eight, TIES FOR US. nine, even ten Sahaja Yogis. She would, Herself, cook food for us because Shri Mataji would actually go out to a obviously She wanted to put those vibrations in our Nabhis. She wanted to shop. I know because She took me out and She took several other people out. improve our Nabhis, which were in such a state anyway. And the way She actually She'd give them Sir CP's second-hand, old ties and Sir CP, Her Husband, was very received us in Her home, whether it be the

 September-October, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze 39 much the head of the IMO (International Maritime Organisation), so totally opposite Vicky Halperin from us. He was one of the highest placed Yes, She would never take money. people in International society and we were That was the difference. You'd hear of dug up from a gutter somewhere, relatively speaking. I remember I got a tie. She'd gurus and people they have. They're always give ties to people at pujas. She'd always taking money off them. You give them everything. give ties, jackets, clothes. She took me I tried to pay Shri Mataji back for the out and bought a jacket for me. She clothes She bought my sister, Sharon bought clothes for my sister. She must have spent well over a hundred pounds on [Vincent], and She just threw it away, said, clothes. That was down Brick Lane (In the "Don't be silly. What are you doing? I don't East End of London). want your money. Don't be silly." Ray Harris Ray Harris. When I bought Her a gift, She asked INCREDIBLY CHEAP me if I was being patronizing. She didn't She'd bought me a dress and I don't want gifts. She said, "You can't treat Me think anybody had bought me anything like the gurus." It was inappropriate to buy since l'd been a child and I was -I didn't individual gifts. I think at some point later know how to take it: I didn't know if I was we were told that collective gifts were supposed to pay for it. I didn't really appropriate and individual gifts were not understand what the protocol was for that appropriate. I mean, I think Mother went moment. I said I couldn't accept it. I from my house and I had big tears in niy wanted to pay and She let me. And then eyes at the thought that l'd offended Her She got another one. So I got two. and I really didn't. I'd wanted to do the

 The Divine Cool Breeze 40 September-October, 2005 happened was that we were at this opposite. reception and somebody, by mistake, gave me a glass of wine and l drank it." Vicky Halperin WE FELT WHAT SHRI MATAJI FELT So what happened was we felt the effects of the wine that Shri Mataji drank. We were painting various bits of the Because it had an effect on the house [Hurst Green in Sussex in about unconscious and we actually felt it from 1974]. Now one particular experience that Her. So obviously, at that time, we were in I remember was that Shri Mataji went out such deep meditation that we actually felt with Mr. Srivastava to go to a meeting, a what Shri Mataji felt through the collective reception of some sort. He was at that unconscious. That was quite an amazing time the director-general of IMCO experience. [International Maritime Consultative Douglas Fry Organization] and She left us. We were KIND S OF just cleaning this wall and painting it. About SHE TRIED ALL DIFFERENTTHINGS half way through the night we suddenly got One of the most memorable things this terrific headache and it felt really for me took place at Oxted, at he house strange, but we just carried on working. there. We spent actually quite a lot of time So it passed. there and Mother, as we say, the attention. I mean, She used to cook for us. There So when Shri Mataji came home were servants there who cooked, but and asked us how we were, I said, "I got sometimes She'd cook specially for us this really terrible headache halfway and She would work on us. It was so through. I didn't know what was happening." And She said, "Oh, what intensive. You'd bow down with your hands

 41 September-October, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze worked. I felt very clear after that. under Mother's Feet and the other Sahaja Yogis would be gathered around and it Pat Anslow on for hours would literally sometimes go just to clear one person out. And they'd be down for that length of time with their SHE TRIED THINGS OUT WITH head on Mother's Feet. She tried all kinds PEOPLE of different things, mostly just looking after She used to give me little presents us in beautiful ways. sometimes. It's so fragmentary because Iremember once She gave me a it's a long, long time ago. I tend to find head massage with oil and we'd do odd these memories sort of suddenly come to jobs sometimes around the house. I me, but then they vanish again. remember once we were sandpapering remember in Gower Street Shri Mataji something ready to paint and Mother came used to - well, my father says it was over and joined in, got a bit of sandpaper somewhere else - well, the older Sahaja and sandpapered with us. And the meals Yogis at the time were a collection of ex- used to be the most memorable, weren't hippies and I was younger and clearer. they? We were really spoiled, spoiled They had had a bit of a wild time and it rotten. had sort of left its imprint on their charkas. Shri Mataji sometimes used to use me to I remember one day I turned up at sort of try things out or to clear things out. Her house and She said, "You just go out. She discovered the neck crick on me. This I clear you out and you just get caught up. is a form of treatment which no longer "And She made me lie down in front of exists, I think because some of the people Her and took Her shoe and actually shoe- got rather damaged necks when they did bashed my spine - very hard - hard it to each other. But Shri Mataji had me enough for me to see stars. And that sitting down and said, "I've discovered this

 The Divine Cool Breeze September-October, 2005 42 great new treatment for the Vishuddhi." Mataji and She said, "You shouldn't actually And She got my head and went see that." She said, "One is power and one is purity." I could actually see them, but "huwhump!" And it went "Click!" And I screamed and was in absolute outrage, She said, "Ilf you can actually see those but She found it very amusing. colours, it means you are not actually in the center. You are off to one side." There was this sense that Sahaja Douglas Fry Yoga was sort of experimental. She tried things out with people. She would get them I WAS SEEING MOTHER AS A CHILD to do things and see if it worked or not. I WOULD mean, I think it sort of goes on, on a larger I was seeing Mother as a child scale, as well today. would. Imean every timel saw Her, I would run up and hug Her. It is not something Kevin Anslow you get to do when you get older. There was a definite change of protocol there. ONE IS POWER AND ONE IS And I do remember that as I got older, I PURITY was not quite aware of this protocol and not knowing what to make of it, particularly Because I wasn't properly centered, as the Sahaja Yogis were sort of T had a bit of an Agnaya problem at that intellectually engaging with ;it in some sort time. I used to see Shri Mataji flash from different colours. She used to go this of sense. But I do remember that I could sort of run up and hug Mother. She was beautiful rainbow green and this beautiful It was very sort of like a big friend. rainbow red and I'd just see this light sort different. She was very accessible in those of flashing from Her. But apparently the reason for that was because I had an days to people and yet it didn't quite have the intensity that people have in encounters Agnaya problem. I mentioned this to Shri

 43 September-October, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze with Mother in more recent times or as trying to sort of teach us who She was, trying to tell us who She was. And then time went on. She said, "The power of God actually just I remember my Aunt Maureen [Rossi) goes to the back of Me. I am like the saying that She was very direct and source and it's just flowing behind Me." And that is when we started realizing that sociable, especially with the ladies, in a Mother was trying to tell us who She was. way that She wasn't with the men. But, And then She was trying to work on our generally speaking, like in talks and things, Mooladhara. And Gus was saying that he will notice that at a certain moment you some aspect of Her will come out, saw Mother as Shri Ganesha, He was quite struck by it and he was very surprised. He something very serious and quite didactic hadn't seen Mother in that aspect. and sometimes a great jocularity. She did Djamel Metouri have that, but it was very much more toned down in those days. I think people were Her THE SHOES OF THE ADI SHAKTI perhaps not up to the scope of | believe I saw from the very first days manifesting these things in their fuller the colossal meaning of what Shri Mataji sense. was doing. 1 recognized She brings the Kevin AnsloW total, the grand revolution, the most radical factor of global change for mankind. The TAM LIKE THE SOURCE French and Russian revolutions are I also remember this meeting we had nothing compared to this ! with Mother. She gave us this sort of On the other hand, I was looking meditation in Her lounge, you know, where around me. How on Earth and in the we were seven or eight people. We were heavens are we going to get there? Maureen, Gus, from the early days, Pat, This was the problem and the tension Douglas. At some stage Mother was within me. It was like being at the

 44 September-October, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze bottom of a huge rock and not looking at a bunch of stunned people, sitting around a table looking at pairs knowing how to climb it. of shoes on the table and thinking, "Is I remember one day in August 1975, it with this lot we are going to change in the house of Shri Mataji in Hurst the world?" My mistake was to focus on the people, not the shoes. I did not Green, there were about seven Sahaja know what shoes can do if these are Yogis around the table. Needless to in those days we were all new and the shoes of the Adi Shakti. And if the say, there was nobody else. Shri Mataji world, indeed, will be transformed, let started putting Her shoes on the table us handle these shoes with the very nice and elegant ones, no feelings that Bharat had in handling doubts! But, of course, we did not the shoes of his brother, Shri Rama. know then that Mother was doing it Gregoire de because the vibrations from Her Kalbermatten shoes are so powerful. So I was Nirmala Yoga.

 212



----------------------

2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-0.txt 
 TheDivine Cool Breeze
IVIne
00
September - October 2005
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-2.txt 
 SHWA NIRMALA.
"IVERSAL PU
PURE
In This Issue:-
1. Saraswati Puja – Dhulia 14.1.1983
Maha Sahasrara Day
13
2.
The First Shajayoga Seminar, Austria Sept, 1982
15
3.
4. Maria Smith's Account of the miracles at Bedford.
17
5. Little Stories from the Rome Centre
20
In memory of a great man
23
6.
7. The memories of our Divine Mother.
26
DHARMA
RELIGION
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Co oL
THE DIVINE C o OL B R
E E ZE
Published by
Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
Infosys House, Plot No. 8,
Chandragupt Housing Society,
Paud Road,Kothrud,
Pune-411 029
Printed at
Amarnath Press (P) Ltd.
WHS 2/50, Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi - 15
Ph.:25268673
Please Send Your Suggestions and Subscription to:-
Shri G.L. Aggarwal
Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
222, Desh Bandhu Apartments
Kalkaji, New Dehi-110019
Tel. No.:011-26422054, 26216654
And Your Sahaja Experiences, Articles, Miracle Photographs etc. to:
Shri O.P. Chandna
G-11-(463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110 034
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-4.txt 
 SHRI SARASWATI PUJA
Dhulia 14.1.1983
With love all kinds of creative action
gradually stop, when they will be fed up.
takes place. You see how Raulbai has
So all the activity on right hand side, of
love for me and in this place you all also
Saraswati, basically has to end up in love.
got new idea of creating a beautiful thing.
Starts with love and ends up in love.
And as love will increase your creativity
Whichever does not end up in love, coils
will develop. So the basis of all creativity
up and finishes off. It just disappears. So
of Saraswati is love. If there is no love
you can see that even matter which is not
there is no creativity. It is even in the deeper
used for love, just finishes off. The basis
sense, you see; people who have created
has to be love. Otherwise all such matter
all the scientific things are also out of love
that we crate which has angularity, which
to the masses, not for themselves.
is not fitting into the mass media, which is
Nobody has produced anything for
not appealing to the masses; of course, it
themselves. If they make something for
takes time, you have seen that it takes time
themselves it has to become for universal
- but it does have that terdency always to
use, otherwise it has no meaning. Even if
disappear in the thin air as soon as you
you say atom bomb and all these things
find it does not appeal to the masses.
are created from science, they are also
very protective. If they had not created,
Now this love of, that we talk of, the
those people would not have taken out
great love of God we talk of, we know that
their minds from war. Now, nobody can it is, for definite, through vibrations. People
think of having a big war. Of course, they
do not have vibrations but still they can leel
are having cold wars, but that also will
the vibrations in a very unconscious way
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-5.txt 
 September-October, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
I told you, it cannot. Because the time will
All the great paintings of the world have
kill it. All these things have to disappear
vibrations. All the great creative works of
and already you can see the result, how
the world have vibrations. Only those who
things are changing every-where, even in
have vibrations have been sustained by
time - otherwise all other things are the West. So there is no need to be so
much disappointed with the West and to
destroyed. There must have been
say that the Western world is a waste-land.
monuments and horrible statues and
horrible things that have been created long It is going to be alright and it has to be
done. Specially it has done lot of Puja of
time back. But they are all destroyed by
Saraswati. I should say in the West. Much
Nature as they could not stand the impact
more than they have done in India because
of the KALA-that is the destructive power
they have gone to learn it and they have
of time. So, all that is sustaining, all that is
tried to find out so many things. But only
nurturing, all that is ennobling comes from
thing they forgot that it is a Goddess, God
this sense of love, which is within us very
much developed but within others also is the Giver. Everything comes from the
Goddess. That is what they forgot. And
who are not yet realised. Ultimately the
that is why all the problems have been
whole world has to realise that one has to
go to that ultimate love of God, otherwise
created. If there is no Spirit in your learning,
it has no meaning.
if there is no source of the goddess in your
learning, then it is- absolutely useless. If
they had realised that there is the Spirit that
Now you have seen in arts people
have taken to other methods of appealing
is working it out, they would not have gone
that far. And that is what I was warning the
to people by using cheap things and very
Indians, although, that you are now taking
vulgar things, just to make people think
to industrial revolution in a way and to avoid
that this is art. But this will all disappear.
It cannot sustain the impact of the time as
all the complications of industrial
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-6.txt 
 September-October, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
revolution, you must try to know the Spirit.
Christ then it is even more essential that
If you do not know the Spirit you will have
the purity of life, what you call 'Niti', is the
morality of life. Now morality itself has
the same problem as these people have.
Because they are also human beings, you
become very much sort of an argument in
the West. People don't have any sense of
are also human beings. You will also go
the same way. At random you will run and
absolute morality. On vibrations of course
there will be problems, the same problems
you know. But they have all gone against
it. Those who are worshippers of Lord
as the Western people have.
Jesus, those who are the worshippers of
Now Saraswati's blessings are so
the Surya, of the Saraswati have all gone
against, against the powers, of Surya, just
many that one cannot describe in such a
short time. And the Surya (Sun) has given
disobeying it. Because you cannot be a
us so many powers that it is impossible to
Surya if you don't have a proper sense of
morality and holiness. The Surya itself
tell them even in one lecture, even in ten
brings light to see everything clearly. So
lectures. But how we go against Surya and
many qualities Surya has got. It dries up
how we go against Saraswati, while doing
everything that is wet, dirty, filthy. It dries
the worship of Saraswati, it is to be seen
up all those places which create parasites.
very clearly within ourselves. For example
But so many parasites are created in the
the Western people are very fond of Surya
West. Not only parasites, but there are
because they have no Surya. But they go
too far with it, as you know, and create horrible cults and horrible things which
have come into that; those countries which
complications within themselves of Surya.
are supposed to be full of light, and in that
But the main thing that one has to achieve
darkness they exist. Darkness about the
through Surya is the light 'Vivek'- is the
tight within. And if Surya Chakra at the Spirit, darkness about their own
Agnaya level is occupied by lord Jesus knowledge and darkness about love.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-7.txt 
 September-October, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
that. All our brain activity goes against pure
These three things have taken over in the
intelligence. And that is what one has to
places where you are supposed to love
understand- that this pure intelligence, is
light. Light does not mean, light does not
notto be soiled by our thinking. Ourthinking
mean what you see with your gross eyes,
Light means from within-the light of love,
can make us so bumptious, so ego-
That one should understand-Light of love.
oriented, so impure, that we can really eat
the poison and say 'what is wrong in it?
And it is so soothing, it is so sweet, it is
so beautiful, it is so enamouring, it is so
Just the opposite of Saraswati. If
abounding that unless and until you can Saraswati is within us, She give us
"Subuddhi', wisdom. And that is why, to
feel that light within you-that light which
is of pure love - of purity, pure relationship,
worship Saraswati, to worship Surya, we
must have that clear vision as to what we
pure understanding. If you can develop
What we are doing. What
that kind of a light within yourself, then the
have to be.
whole thing will be cleansed. "Wash me filth we are living in. What our mind is
and I shall be whiter than snow.' This is getting into. After all we are here for
what happens to you when you are emancipation and not for, just for
pampering our ego and living with our filth
completely cleansed. The purest form of
Nature is within us. The purest form of that is with us. So this light has come
Nature is within us. Our Chakras are
within us and we should try to rise above
our own mental filth which is being created
made out of that 'purest' form of Nature.
around us. Apart from that, you have to go
We are the only people who are spoiling
it by our mental thinking.
higher and understand that there is, within
Against the
us, a thing called ego. And this ego is false,
same Saraswati power,
you are going
against Saraswati itself. Saraswati absolutely false. You do not do anything.
Actually when you turn your eyes here and
cleanses all that is impure in nature, while
there when your attention is here and there,
with our brain activity we are spoiling all
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-8.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October, 2005
7.
it is nothing but your ego that is trying to
then they become Gurus, they themselves
have lots of defects in themselves and they
overpower you. But actually ego is an
try to pull people into those horrible stuff
absolute falsehood because there is only
one ego and that is the God Almighty, which is described as absolute NARAKA.
NARAKA is the movement of ego on all
'Mahatahankara'. There is no really any
the sides.
ego that exists, it is myth. It is a very big
myth, because if you start thinking you are
Now when people try to use their right
doing everything-you are doing this, you
are doing that-which you are not doing; Vishuddhi, that is, to talk about
themselves, is the worst of all. Whatever
then this non-sensical ego comes in and
you start working it out, it can project in type of ego you may have, if you start
boasting about it and talking about it, then
direction. When it projects forward,
every
it encircles, thickens the walls of ego so
it overpowers others, it tries to dominate
much, that it is impossible to penetrate into
others, tries to kill others, becomes Hitler.
that, because such a person is completely
When it moves to right side, it becomes
satisfied with himself and he believes that
supraconscious. It starts seeing things
he is so. And once he starts believing into
which are absurd, which are foolish, which
a non-sense like that, its an impossibility
are stupid. When it moves to left side then
then-impossibility to penetrate.
it starts, talking-Imean, seeing things-
yourself as a big man, as a big Christ or
So when you boast about these
as a big Devi or something like Adi Gurus
and 'l am a very great personality' that is
things or you talk big, be careful, you see.
You know what I am, but how many times
left sided. When it moves backwards, that
is the dangerous one.
do l say 'l am that'. Even ifI say once, you
Then people
become Gurus which are ruining other get tremendous vibrations for you. But how
many times do I say so? At the most if you
people. When their ego moves backwards
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-9.txt 
 September-October, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
say something, I say 'yes'. But I don't say
this talking. And once they take to talking
that. IfI say it loudly, I don't know what may
and they talk about it, the whole power goes
out. But if they do not talk about it and keep
The whole thing, might be
happen.
it within themselves, it is alright. You can
blasted! So, one has to understand that
Mahatahankara is the one that acts, that
tell me about your experiences, alright, but
works, that creates. Sometimes I shout
if you start telling others, and talking about
it too much, then the power that you have
at you. Immediately all the bhoots run
away. Just once I shout. Yesterday, you
got will be all disappearing gradually. And
you will just come down to absolutely lowest
saw all the bhoots that were talking, they
So one should not too much talk that
all ran away. Yesterday this I talked to you.
level.
So you should understand that now you
Ihave this power, I have this power or I think
are a realised soul, you can also do the
this orI do this, which is a very wrong thing.
Use your right Vishuddhi to
I warn you, DO NOT TRY TO SHOW OFF.
same.
Yes, you can talk about my powers. It is all
shout at yourself, "Now will you please
right. But don't try to talk about your powers.
stop boasting, will you stop talking all
this nonsense, will you stop showing When it comes, of course, you talk to
off!" Then it will stop.
somebody who is a negative person or to
tell somebody, then you should say that
WE, NOT I. "We' have, 'some of us' have
Now this thickening takes place by
felt this power within us. 'We' have seen
people who really are active. They want
people. It may be you only, but you need
to do something about it, not that they are
not say, 'I'have. What you've to say WE'.
not active. They want to do. But they know
Then you become the Mahatahankara.
only one way, is to act talkative. They don't
When you say 'We' 'here some of us' 'we
understand that there are inner ways by
which you control it much more.. Because
do'. Like in Gregoire's book I made it, I
saw to it that he should not have many 'I's
they don't want to take to that, they take to
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-10.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October, 2005
but he should have 'We'. We think', 'we
always think in the words of "WE', so your
do', 'we', means the whole collective ego will become much less, much less,
much less. And the same ego which looks
being, the whole collective organism,
living organism of SHAJAYOGIS. So if you
so funny and absurd will fall tomorrow to
say, 'yes, some of us have got', that the EKADASHA.
means, you put yourself down, but put all
Today, individual ego will merge into
others above you. Say "Yes, some of us
have, I know some people have this.' That
EKADASHA. But we all must remember
is the way one should do it. Because if
to say 'WE' all time. This is what is today's
day is great day for us to change, because
you have to overpower your ego, you must
the Sun has changed its move, now. Sun
allow it to spread into every body else. That
is coming this side. So let us welcome the
is how, you will make it perfectly all right.
Sun, coming to the North now, this way. And
Let it spread. We all SAHAJA YOGIS 'WE
ALL'. But that pride is not there. I've seen
for Australians to say that though the Sun
that pride is not there. Still it is very has gone, let us establish the Sun, the
individualistic. If you start thinking, 'we'
domain of Sun, within ourselves. Because
SAHAJA YOGIS', then what happens is
Sun never disappears from our inside. So
become 'one' personality, 'one' that is how we have to take a mode by
which we should think of 'one' personality,
organisation.
'all of us together, all of us together.' And
But the person will look down upon anybody who tries to be something
separate or different, he will drop out. I
other people. He will see that person is
will drop him out. What ever it may be, it
low, that person is higher, that person is
there. But he will not think 'We' the Sahaja
So you judge yourself,
will drop out.
Yogis, how beautiful we are! We' the body anybody who tries to be singled out or
of Sahaja Yoga, how beautiful we are! So anything. Everybody must do whatever
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-11.txt 
 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October, 2005
they like, to nurture the whole, to help the thing today that we are having puja at
Dhulia. Like the Dhulia means the dust.
whole, to help the whole, to emancipate
the whole. But not to, in anyway, put anyone Dust. And one day I had written in
Childhood, a poem, I remember. Very
down always. Because this is not the way
the Sahaja Yoga is. Sahaja Yoga only interesting poem it was - I don't know
where it is now-but which said that 'I want
works in collectivity. And the one who
has developed this permeating spirit, to be smaller like a dust particle which
is a real Sahaja Yogi. Who has not, is
moves with the wind. It goes everywhere.
Can go, sit on the head of a king, or can
not! Whatever you may think of yourself, I
go and fall at the feet of someone. And it
have nothing to say. But this permeating
can go and sit on a little flower, and it can
personality which moves from places to
go and sit everywhere. But I want to be a
places, whether you talk or not. Like your
Mother is. Whether I meet you or not, particle of dust, that is fragrant, that is
makes no difference, but I am permeating
nourishing, that is enlightening,' Like that,
I had written a very beautiful poem, I was
through all of you, by little-little things also
I am there with you. So like that, try to
about seven year of age, I remember-To
be a dust partiole, 'I remember that very
permeate into each other and see the
clearly, long time back, 'that I should be a
beauty in you. Enjoy yourself the best
dust particle. So that I will permeate into
because that is the biggest thing. That's
the biggest thing that is to be achieved. people,' which is a very big thing
to
become a dust particle of that kind. To just
Because this ego you know makes you
whatever you touch, you see, that becomes
like a nutshell and it just cannot have a
enliving, whatever you just feel, that is
rapport with that beauty of permeation and
fragrance. It is such a great thing to be like
just see how the notes move into each
that. And that was my desire, and it will be
other.
achieved. At that young age, I had this idea
It will be a great idea today, it is great
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-12.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October, 2005
11
of becoming a dust particle and today just
around. And this is the way to overcome
while talking to you, I remembered that I
the problems of the right side and that is
wanted to be that, and that is what this
how to worship Saraswati. Because
place is. And Raulbai is like that. She is a
Saraswati has a Veena in Her hand and
very simple woman, very simple woman that Veena is the primordial instrument
and she lives like a very simple person. which She plays like music, and music
She has a sense of permeation. And now
penetrates into the heart. You don't know
how it goes into you and how it works out.
there are so many Sahaja Yogis,
yesterday who came; and I am sure there
That is how a person who is Sahaja Yogi
should permeate- like music. There are
are going to be more people.I hope you
so many qualities as I told you which
have met all of them. Make friends with
cannot be described in one lecture. But
all of them. Try to know them who they
one of the greatest quality of Her's is that
are. They may not know English. You get
somebody to translate. Talk to them and
She ends up into subtler things like the
Mother Earth will end up into fragrance.
be nice to them. Be friendly with them. I
wanted you to meet them for permeation. Music will end up into inelody like that
You should know who are the people here, whatever She creates ends up into
something greater. Matter whatever She
who are in Nasik. Because somehow we
never meet the Sahaja Yogis, you see,
produces ends up into aesthetics. If matter
who are in that particular place. And when
does not have aesthetics then it is gross,
we go back we have only one or two like that everything. Now you will say what
is water. Water becomes the river
addresses. It is not a good idea. Try to
see how many people there are. Ask Ganges! These are the subtler things. So
the matter gets into subtler thing because
questions about them. And all that.
it has to permeate, it has to permeate. So
This permeation is only possible
when your ego starts permeating all everything whatever it is. And the best of
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-13.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
12
September-October, 2005
all is the air. That air becomes the
that and that is how one has to look at your
vibrations!
own life, to make it a beautiful combination
of love and matter.
So you can see how whatever has
May god bless you.
come out from this matter, from these five
elements, becomes that subtler thing. Of
(Nirmala Yoga)
course, the left and right side both work it
out. Because the love has to work on this
1983
and when love acts on matter it becomes
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-14.txt 
 MAHA SAHASRARA DAY
on a motor-cycle, I had taken guidance
We draw your attention to the article
from Mr. B.G. Pradhan, who was present
with the above heading in NIRMALA YOGA
there on 5th May, 1970 and is one of the
(May-June, 1983) Vol. 15, page 16. It is
first twelve who got their realisation there.
to be noted that on 5th May, 1970, Shri
Mataji Nirmala Devi opened the
I located the place where this grea.
Sahasrara of VIRATA at NARGOLand not
at Bordi as mentioned in the above event had taken place by the help of
vibrations and then sat there in meditation.
mentioned article.
It is very difficult to describe the intense
peace of the Grace which I enjoyed in the
NARGOL is a small village near the
meditation. It was very deep and blissful.
seashore and is about 35 KM by State
highway from Bordi. By Railway one has
Thereafter, I returned back to the
to get down at UMARGAON Railway
house in whose compound I had parked
Station on Central Railway and then to
my motorcycle. As I was walking with my
reach NARGOL by road.
hands out stretched enjoying the
vibrations, people of the house enquired
On 25th Sept.,1983, I visited Bordi
whether I was searching something. I told
in connection with the arrangements of the
them "About thirteen years back our Shri
International Shivir for 600 Sahaja brothers
and sisters who would be attending it Mataji Nirmala Devi had come there and
during 10th to 15th Feb.. 1984. After meditated near the seashore. I wanted to
find out the exact place where She had
finishing my work at Bordi at about 1 PM
meditated." They at once remembered
in the afternoon I journeyed to NARGOL
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-15.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October, 2005
14
that Shri Mataji had been there and they
DEVI KI JAI.
with some other local people had attended
Her programme.
BOLO SHRI
R.N. PEREKAR (BOMBAY)
SAHASRARA SWAMINI MOKSHA
PRADAYANI MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA
NIRMALA YOGA
1983
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-16.txt 
 THE FIRST SAHAJA YOGA
SEMINAR IN AUSTRIA
Our Holy Mother visited Vienna in
because the collectivity in the group was
September 82, gave Her blessings to the
very good. Fixing the attention to the Spirit
and not to the outward appearance of a
whole city and realization to about 6000
seekers. About 25 remained in Sahaja person, we somehow melted together.
Yoga in an active capacity and gathered
Finally nobody could bear to see the end
to our first seminar in April.
of the seminar coming. The three children
of the manager of the youth hostel were
You can't imagine, it was such a
attracted to us one after the other and they
blessing to attend it! Just thinking about it
all got their realization; it was really sweet!
one gets breathless... but we have to go All this sounds very nice, yet there is much
beyond thought anyway. We had a work to do in Austria. With the help and
programme of videos, workshops, guidance of the Divine we will spread
Sahaja Yoga until the last valley of our Alps
meditation, exchange of experiences and
above all, a beautiful Shiva-Shakti- will be vibrated. And we now need an
ashram to adore our Mother, who is Beauty
Ganesh Puja, which according to the
vibrations, was kindly accepted by the
and Bliss itself and to set the example of a
new life style to this Austria.
deities.
No doubt, all problems will be solved
We gathered together to surrender
if we
to the realm of joy and silence, to get the
the
surrender
ourselves
to
Enlightened One, the Spirit. We pray to our
Divine Vibrations flowing from the Eternal
Shri Mother that She opens our hearts for
One. This happened in such a way, that,
in a very short time, we grew remarkably
Her Grace, compassion and guidance.
strong in our yoga. This was possible,
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-17.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October, 2005
16
O Devi, who else but you can take
are Your children, playing with Your gifts.
away our misidentifications so that we can
Thank You !
face your shining love without shadow in
- Guent her
Nirmala Yoga
our eyes. Let us always remember that we
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Maria Smith's account of the miracle at Bedford
and the events leading up to it.
the visit was temporarily called off by Shri
Bedford is a provincial town in the
midlands of England. Sahaja Yoga Mataji. We realized at this point that we
had been completely drained and wasted
programmes were started there about
by going about things in a human rather
eighteen months ago, during which time
a number of people were given realization
than a Sahaja fashion. So collectivity, the
English Sahaja Yogis decided to work on
and three became Sahaja Yogis, In 1982
Shri Mataji was invited by local Sahaja the midlands area by cleansing and
strengthening themselves and the area by
Yogis to come to Bedford and other
doing pujas and by asking the elements
neighbouring cities.
to help in the process. Every Sunday we
would have pujas in one of the three main
Initially, absolutely nothing worked
towns and would work on the map of the
district in the presence of Shri Mataji's
out as far as arrangements for Shri Mataji's
trip were concerned. There was total
photograph. We would use the vibrations
negativity and opposition from the media,
coming from different parts of the map to
and even Sahaja Yogis were sucked into
feel and work out the collective problems
the vortex of inertia. A lot of energy was
of a particular town.
lost in the process of trying to make
people understand the importance of this
Just before all this took place, when
visit by intellectual reasoning and
the meetings had been cancelled, Maria
persuasion, None of the approaches to
telephoned Shri Mataji and our Holy
media or any of the plans bore fruit through
Mother explained that something was
complete lack of local interest. As a result
taking place on a level beyond our
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-19.txt 
 18
September-October, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
awareness and beyond our ability to so completely.
control. Shri Mataji had consulted the stars
After a month or two of all this Shri
and deities so that they would work it in
Mataji suggested more dates for
the way that the Divine knows best.
programmes which She would attend in the
midlands area. All the money for hiring halls
After some weeks a series of
etc. was gone, but due to one timely phone
extremely violent rain storms occurred.
call the right person appeared at the right
One minute the summer skies would be
moment to help with this side of things. The
clear and blue; the next they would be filled
with unnaturally heavy clouds, which second boon was that the media were
totally positive; the newspaper, radio and
seemed to come out of nowhere. The rain
was so heavy that people could hardly even TV were only too delighted to
believe it and it was accompanied by cooperate. It seemed almost as if
everyone connected with the media had
lightning which rent the skies from end to
end and frightful and deafening thunder. been previously convinced about Shri
Mataji and Sahaja Yoga prior to our visiting
The rivers flooded and overflowed on to
team.
the surrounding lands. After every storm
Shri Mataji arrived and was on two
there would be spectacular rainbows
-not
TV programmes, and the Sahaja
a normal, single rainbow, but many bows
all crossing each other. These spectacular Programmes were jam packed with
people standing in the corridors outside.
shows would delight everyone with their
beauty and people would even stop their
It was during the first meeting at
cars to watch this heavenly wonder. All
Bedford that the greatest miracle
Jews and Christians will recall that God
occurred. Shri Mataji was driven to the
sent Noah a rainbow after the great flood
meeting and reached the hall at about 7.30
as a symbol of His love and as a promise
that He would never flood the earth again
p.m. Our Mother left at about 11.00 p.m.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-20.txt 
 September-October, 2005
The Divine Copl Breeze
19
and was in the hall constantly in between.
Yogis were accompanying Shri Mataji in
Her car to the meeting at Canmbridge. One
At about 9.15 p.m. a young man
person complained that she was
named Jason Haynes, who lived in
suffering from a bed left nabhi catch.
Bedford, was knocked off his motor bike
The reply of Shri Mataji is instructive
in one of the streets of the town and was
for all: our Mother explained that it was
lying seriously injured waiting for the
not this lady's left nabhi, but the
ambulance to arrive. Some minutes later
collective catch of the whole area
he was aware of a kind Indian lady
which was being felt. She was told to
standing over him, touching him where
open her charkas, and pray to the particular
he was most injured and each time She
deity, then vibrations could be emitted
touched him the pain left that part of the
through that person's chakra out to the
body. Then She left, and later the
whole environment. Thus the problem was
ambulance arrived and took him to the
that of the whole area and the lady was to
hospital, where he was treated for minor
stop assuming that the catch revolved
injuries and shock. The onlookers at the
about the problems of her small self; it was
scene of the accident did not see any
something much bigger.
"Indian lady' at any time, and Shri Mataji
was at that time visibly giving realization
Mother, please let us surrender to
in the hall in another part of Bedford. The
You completely so that we may be worthy
next day the young man, Jason Haynes,
instruments for the great work You are
saw a photograph of Shri Mataji in the
accomplishing on this earth of Yours which
local paper and was certain beyond
have so graciously given us to enjoy.
you
doubt that this was the 'mysterious lady
who had helped him.
NIRMALA YOGA
1983
The following day some Sahaja
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Little Stories from the Rome Center
discussions on the need to stop smoking
It was the first time I was going to
but without any results. Yet the day after
the apartment where the Sahaja Yogis
meet and I could not remember the these comments of the Sahaja Yogis and
after I had bitterly complained to them
indications my husband gave me to find
about all those smokers, without any
their house. As I did not want to go all the
apparentreasons, all the colleagues in the
experiment
way back home I decided to
with the guidance from the vibrations on office decided to stop smoking in the
room. All of a sudden they were all taking
the hands. So, I went on it in the street till
care of my right Vishuddhi. I was stunned,
I arrived in front of the right gate and
happy, and, from the bottom of my heart, I
pushed on the right interphone button.
thanked Shri Hanumana and Shri Mataji.
When I got the confirmation that I had
EDUARDO
indeed found the flat I was looking for I just
couldn't believe it.
I started my study as I was 23, with a
RITA
lot of insecurity and fear of the exams.
During the first series of exams after my
Shortly after my realization I was told
realization I was still afraid though feeling
by the Sahaja Yogis that my right
the Presence of Shri Mataji in the room.
Vishuddhi was catching as smokers'
Then something strange happened : the
Vishuddhi usually do. I don't smoke but in
examiners, well known for being harsh and
my office they all do it. That same day the
nasty, started beaming with smiles,
Sahaja Yogis also told me that, as a child
became so human and so nice as soon
of Shri Mataji, I was protected; I could not
as they proceeded with the girls of my
really understand what they meant.
group. Everything went so well as if a good
In my office there had been regular
fairy had entered the room on a cloud
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-22.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October, 2005
21
towards our Mother). The next morning we
sparkling with beauty. The same thing
were amazed to find that the picture of the
repeated itself for all the exams I had to
"guru" had fallen down on the floor. Only
go through. The wonderful thing about it
is that my girl friends noted the change the picture of Shri Mataji remained. After
this event, somehow, I felt that we should
Occurring every time, and now, funnily
not sleep with our feet towards the picture
of Shri Mataji.
enough, they all wanted to be examined
at the same time as me.
CRISTINA
ANTONIO & ANNY
Before meeting Shri Mataji, Anny
It was 9.30 pm. I was returning home
and myself were keeping in our bedroom
when suddenly some boys forcefully took
the picture of a "guru" whose meditation
away my bag. It contained pictures of Shri
techniques we had followed for a while.
Mataji, my identification papers, money,
Although we had found that his system did
gold, jewels that I wanted to sell, a shawl
not give any results we were still from India, my keys and newspapers to
intellectually convinced that he was a saint.
look for a place suitable for our ashram.
Hence his picture remained on the wall,
On arriving home I prayed to Mother that
fortunately at the foot of the bed.
Her angels should not be too harsh with
the thieves. My husband told me to go to
The night Anny and myself received
the police right away but I refused:I was
our realization from Shri Mataji we deeply convinced that the bag would be
received Her picture for meditation.
returned. It had to be so as lama daughter
Returning happily home, we fixed Her of Shri Mataji. I went to bed, praying as
picture on the wall near the one of the
usual to Shri Mother, and, confidently, I went
"guru". (We did not know anything about to sleep. The next day, I hardly
protocol but probably we have been remembered what had happened when the
forgiven for sleeping that night with the feet
doorbell rang. It was the doorman holding
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-23.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October, 2005
22
the bag in his hand. Astreet cleaner had
been smashed into pieces...
found it on a lawn and brought it back to
Jai Shri Mataji
the correct address. Nothing had been
touched. Just an old amulet that, I had
forgotten in a side pocket of the purse, had
EMMA
(Nirmala Yoga)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-24.txt 
 In Memory of a Great Man
The prize winning film of R. Attenborough on Mahatma Gandhi has been seen by
many Sahaja Yogis throughout the world. For once the link between Gandhi and Sahaja
Yoga cannot be stressed enough: in enabling Bharata to regain its political freedom.
Gandhi brought back to the land of yoga its lost dignity without which it could not unveil
to other civilizations the priceless secret of its spiritual tradition: Kundalini Yoga. He
was, in this way, the precursor of this little girl who was staying in his ashram. I refer to
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi of course. Gandhiji used to call Her "Nepali" which, indeed,
was quite accurate: the Devi is the daughter of Himavat, the king of the nmountains, and
the Sahasrara of the planet is in Nepal, in the Himalayas.
On a general level the film on Gandhi brings to a wide public's attention some
features in the life of this remarkable man that Sahaja Yogis can, perhaps, best analyse.
Young Europeans do not always realize what colonialism really meant to the rest
of the world. They often consider that, after all, it was a good thing to bring science and
technology to other continents without realizing that only too often the colonial powers
behave with gross brutality; they destroyed in the process of their so quote "civilizing
mission" the delicate fabric of human and social values which, in the light of spiritual
life, were by far superior to their own. The real victory of Gandhi was to beat the major
colonial power of the time merely by resorting to these values.
In many ways the mode of action of Gandhiji was sahaj. For instance, he firmly
derived his political activity from a couple of Dharmik principles and he refused to
compromise with what was wrong. These principles, his very firmness, stemmed from
his (correct) conviction that it is God who leads history. Thus God answered back the
call, or, in other words, the Unconscious started working for Gandhi.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-25.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October, 2005
How did it happen? - Gandhi's greatest leverage was his command over the
Indian masses, He gained such a command because the simple folk could recognize
that he was inspired from above. The people felt it from their own individual unconscious
and thus they believed in the legitimacy and the credibility of his leadership; they, indeed,
called him "Mahatma", gave him confidence in his mission, lent him in any possible
way their support. Therefore, to take but one example, merely by his hunger strike the
Mahatma could control the behaviour of millions of people. But alas, this process
cannot work outside India, in countries where the common man does not have the
required level of sensitivity to his own unconscious. This is why Gandhi's schemes of
peaceful revolution has not yet been implemented anywhere else in the world. Other
countries could, possibly have their own Gandhi. But would these lone voices be heard,
let alone listened to and obeyed ?
Even in India the elite of the country, the clever people, missed the best part of
Gandhi's teachings. They have largely borrowed the western ways of the westem power
they were supposed to have expelled and, in this respect, remained colonized. Perhaps
this has been Gandhi's greatest shortcoming. He could transform a country but he
could not transform men. He could bring political freedom but not the freedom from
conditionings and ego. In other words, he could not raise Kundalinis.
Well, Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi can! This is why the spiritual revolution She has
triggered with Sahaja Yoga is simply the most practical, the most effective revolution
of all times. As Shri Mataji can transform the basic cell of society, man, transform him,
that is, into a higher being, the gradual impact of this positive transformation will be felt
in all the dimensions of society. As this transformation will be duiy opposed, there will
be crises and clashes; the earth may shiver, the seas may rise. But the outcome can
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-26.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
25
September-October, 2005
be predicted with the kind of quiet certainty which distinguishes Nature's doings. At
the given time some eggs become chicken, some flowers turn into fruits, some people
become Sahaja Yogis. Like Gandhi we should be collective and wish this new freedom
for
many, many more. And we should be confident about it. For not only is nature doing
the job, She has even taken an incarnated form to explain us how She does it ! Really
we can only wish to Gandhiji to be back as one of us...
Gregoire
(Nirmala Yoga)
1983
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-27.txt 
 THE MEMORIES OF OUR DIVINE MOTHER
(CONTD.)
THE BEGINNINGS IN ENGLAND
I've found this new sort of yoga
front of this photograph of Shri Mataji and
First of all, the area where
I used to live
put your hands to it." And he produced a
was round by Euston, near Tolmers
little black and white photograph. It wasn't
Square (in London) and that area was a
much bigger than a postcard. And we sat
sort of high energy area. There were a lot
there in his rather cold draughty, old bank
of squatters and things like that there. We
that we used to use as a social club and
used to have a little community club there
we sat there with our hands like this before
and one day (in 1973) this fellow turned
Shri Mataji's photograph. There was about
up -Mukund shah-to teach us yoga.
five or six of us. And he came round and
Over a year he tried all sorts of different
felt our hands and asked us what we felt
yoga and meditation and then one day he and we all felt different sorts of things
went to see Shri Mataji and, because he
because we were all in different sorts of
had so much experience of so many sorts states of awareness due to what we'd
of yoga, he tended to be a bit skeptical
done before. And anyway, we all obviously
and he felt vibrations, but not to sort of
felt something and he said, "You get these
quantify it.
vibrations from Shri Mataji. Would you like
to come and meet Her at the Bharata
So he had this group of half a dozen
Vidya Bhavan? (which was at that time on
of us that he used to teach yoga. So he
New Oxford Street).
said, "Look, I've found this new sort of
Well, the following Friday, I believe,
yoga and all we have to do is sit down in
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-28.txt 
 September-October, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
27
She said, "Put your hands over your ears
we went off to the Bharata Vidya Bhavan
and cover them up completely and you'll
and we met Shri Mataji and we just sort of
still be able to hear Me."And we could. We
sat there at the back and listened to what
She had to say and we realized it was
had our hands over our ears and we could
something really nice. And She was actually clearly hear what Shri Mataji was
working on somebody at the time. At that
saying because we were hearing through
our Sahasraras. Our Sahasraras had
particular point we were aware that it was
something special, but we had an inkling
actually opened. So that was perhaps the
of what it might be, but weren't prepared
first experience, apart from feeling the
to admit to anybody, least of all ourselves, vibrations, that was one of the real
that we had actually met Adi Shakti. ButI
amazing, first amazing experience we had.
think, basically, we knew that it was
Now we had a few meetings at this
special.
Judd Street, but then, because the fellow
that took us there was going to leave, we
Then we went to Bharata Vidya
Bhavan about two or three times and then,
had to find somewhere else and we started
to meet in a house in North Gower Street.
because we wanted to go somewhere
else, because the series was over, we
And when we met in North Gower Street, I
moved to a house in Clare Court, Judd
think that's when it actually began to take
Street, where Mukund Shah used to live
root. Because there it had got a base for
just over the road from Kings Cross. We
the Sahaja Yoga to actually put roots down.
had a few meetings there and Shri Mataji
Then what would happen would be that
told us about raising Kundalini and this is
Shri Mataji would come round and She
one of the first experiences we had of would sit there and there'd be may be half
actually hearing through Sahasrara. She
a dozen of us and Shri Mataji would talk to
us and tell us all about Sahaja Yoga and
told us all our Sahasraras were open and
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-29.txt 
 28
September-October, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
heard that there was a yogi lady and I had
the way She'd work on us would be that
this kind of idea that I'd walk into a room
we would put our hands under Her Feet
and She'd sort of do various bits and
full of sort of silence and perhaps little bells
tinkling somewhere and I walked in the
pieces to clear us out. Because there was
so few of us, within a couple of days we'd
room. And it was so unlike what I'd
expected that the effect on me was really
be caught up again which was rather sad,
quite profound. I immediately felt that this
but it just shows the sort of state we were
is what it must have been like to come
in.
across Christ teaching in the marketplace.
Douglas Fry
It completely hit me like that, which was
HOW COULD SOMEONE LIKE THIS quite strange because I didn't have any
kind of religious-you know, religion wasn't
BE HERE?
part of my life. Quite the opposite, I was
Actually, I'd seen Shri Mataji's
coming from a hippie background. And I
photograph before I met Mother. I'd left that
just felt that here was an amazing
yoga group before you brought the photo.
personality and my feeling was, "How can
How could
I'd moved over to Baker Street and I did
a being like this exist?
notice the photograph appearing, being
someone like that be here?" And the
kind of furtively concealed from me and I
whole room seemed full of light and there
did hear about Shri Mataji, but I didn't hear
was a tremendous impression of how
anything that direct about it, but then I just
powerful Shri Mataji was, but She was just
said that I would like to come and see her
very sweet. She asked us to come and
I had heard about these meetings and I
see Her and I came up and She put Her
hand on me and said, "This one's sick," I
came to the last meeting at Judd Street.
One damp Sunday afternoon-raining-and
think were the first words She said to me.
I came with (my sister) Maureen (Rossi).
And the meeting went on. It was just really
It had a huge impact on me because l'd
amazing-quite magical, the whole thing.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-30.txt 
 September-October. 2005
29
The Divine Cool Breeze
didn't really have a chance to figure out
trying to kind of see how that made sense
what it was all about, but I knew it was
and fitted in.
something quite momentous. That was
Pat Anslow
the first meeting.
She said I was sick and thatI needed
HAD NO IDEA WHAT I HAD BUT I
something for my stomach and She asked
KNEW I HAD IT.
for a bottle and the strange thing was-
It was the 16th September 1975 that
no one else seemed to see this- but I saw
we first met Shri Mataji in that (Judd Street)
Her take the bottle, turn round and open a
flat and, similar to (my brother) Pat
sort of door into some kind of an atomic
(Anslow), it couldn't have helped being a
furnace and put the bottle in, take it out,
most momentous feeling. Even walking up
shut the door and gave it to me. And I was
the street to go to that flat, I had this
quite astonished.
And I took it home,
strongest urge to run away l've ever had in
drank it and it had the most extraordinary
my life. Even though I didn't know where |
effect. It cleared me out. She said I had
was going and I had only been told that,
six months to live. Yes, I was really in quite
"This lady is a yoga teacher, but she
a bad way.
doesn't teach Hatha Yoga." But I can
remember thinking that if I wasn't with
We went back for more meetings
people that I felt would say, "What on Earth
and I had a whole series of extraordinary
are you up to?" l'd have run away. That's
experiences when she was there, but l how strong I could feel the force I was
think the thing that really hit me was a kind
walking towards.
of gut: 2action, a kind of recognition that
this was someone. I kept getting the
And when we went in the flat and we
feeling that this was someone like Christ.
were told to take off our shoes, which was
That was the feeling that I had. And I was
strange, and told to sit down and I saw Shri
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-31.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October, 2005
30
my Realisation in 1975. The first time I
Mataji working on this Indian gentleman,
very strongly and sort of telling him off and
met Mother was quite a marked memory.
sorting him out, I thought She was a
My father, Pat (Anslow), used to bring me
up to London at that time, sometimes, for
Goddess. That was my first thought that
came into my head and then I thought, the weekend. I used to live with my
"What on Earth do I mean by that? I don't
grandparents until ny father was
remarried. He first met Shri Mataji about
even know what a Goddess is." But that's
that time. So he brought me up and said I
what it felt like. And then She got on with
was going to meet this very special Indian
seeing to everybody and when my turn
came, if you like, She actually got up and
lady. Ihad never actually met an Indian lady
of any description before that point, which
walked around, as well as sat down, and
made it a little bit daunting actually, coming
She told me to put my hands out and asked
me what I felt and that second I felt my
from a middle class commuter town just
near Brighton. He took me up to London,
attention drawn to my hands and said, "Oh,
I feel something." And She just said, "May
and that was a special thing in itself, and
God bless you. You've got it." And I we got there and Shri Mataji was very
different from what I imagined because
thought, "I've got it." I had no idea what I
had, but I knew I had it. And that was it.
Indian ladies to me would have been a
distant person in a sari. There was not a
And She then went on to everybody else.
It was just great. I was dealt with.
person behind that, more a sort of image.
And there was this quite remarkable
Maureen Rossi
lady who was very friendly. And instead of
IT's GREAT BEING A KID
me being all sort of anxious and kind of
I got my Realisation when I was
not knowing what to do because it was a
seven year old. I was born in '68 and got strange adult, it was really rather fun.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-32.txt 
 September-October, 2005
31
The Divine Cool Breeze
laughed and laughed. And my father,
People who remember seeing Mother with
think, was horrified, sort of "Oh no, what's
children-I mean, She sort of comes alive
he doing." But She really took it on board
and says, "Really?" and that sort of tone
that She takes. She really sort of gets their
and She really brought the situation alive
attention and makes them feel comfortable
and made it all rather fun. And there was
and sort of creates this instantaneous
no sort of anxiety or anything like that. I
connection. So it was a bit like that.
mean, it's great being a kid, I suppose.
With Shri Mataji, you don't have to think,
"DoI have to be this or that?" You just sort
She asked me questions and Her eyes
kind of lit up and there was a huge smileof are, if you know what I mean.
Kevin Anslow
and for some mysterious reason-being an
adult now, I can't remember the logic
behind it, if there was any - I decidedI
had to be an elephant. Sol got these - it
I REALISED THIS LADY
WAS
SOMETHING VERY HIGH.
My first reaction to Mother was that I
was in this flat in Gower Street where this
Sahaja Yogi at the time, he had this-well,
feit that I had met this lady before. And I
what I think of now as rather unpleasant
thought I had seen Her in Oxford Street (in
London), in a shop somewhere. That was
seventies-style furniture, including these
wickerwork drinks things. You kind of put
my first impression. And She just touched
your drinks inside. I turned these things
my hand and said, "You will be all right.
You are not all right now, but you will be all
upside down and stuck them on my feet
right." Sol went home and had a shower.
legs and kind of roared around the
and
I was alone at that moment, in the house I
room and pretended to be an elephant.
was sharing with some people. All of a
When I did this Mother just pitched Her
sudden, I went completely thoughtless. I
wanted to think, but I couldn't. So
I knew
head back with laughter and laughed and
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-33.txt 
 September-Octoher, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
32
had to lie down, so I lay on the bed and
everything, every point. She would debate
closed my eyes. Iwas aware of this energy
everything with us. We were obviously very
impressed with Her and we could see that
rising up through my stomach and then all
what Mother was saying was enlightening
the way to my chest and then on to the top
and amazing, but there was still lots of
of my head like a sort of crown. And my
body felt very light and I felt totally in the
ideas we had which we didn't agree about
bliss. So I realised that this lady was and we would argue about all kinds
something very high and I never things.
experienced that before. So that was my
first experience of Sahaja Yoga. It took a
Shri Mataji would resolve that by
patiently going through every point and
long time and is still taking a long time to
correct all of my problems.
explain. Really, Mother put Herself into
Miodrag Radosavljevic
quite a rough kind of environment. Gavin
and Jane (Brown) were sort of respectable,
WHAT ON EARTH CAN I DO WITH
but the rest of us weren't. We all came from
THEM?
a hippie background,
One thing we should perhaps say
more about was just how amazing Mother
Pat Anslow
was with us in our ignorance of any kind
of protorol or anything. We had no idea
LAM BACK HOME
how to behave with Her and we had no
T remember entering in Her house in
Oxted (In 1975). I was in jeans and was
idea how to behave with each other, never
mind with Shri Mataji. She was just so
wearing an old US Army jacket full of
amazing. She just must have put Herself
holes, I kissed Her hand and gave Her
out so much, in so many ways. It was just
flowers. Interestingly, I remember bowing
incredible. We would argue about and looking at the ground, so
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-34.txt 
 33
September-October, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
stage, l'll never forget it, Mother just sort of
She
commanded
spontaneously.
immediate respect. But my heart felt such
hugged Herself and seemed to be saying,
a relief almost immediately.
"What on Earth can I do with them?" She
looked forlorn really and so unhappy. It just
It is hard to say when exactly Istarted
hit me then. I was looking at this scene and
recognizing Mother, but clearly the heart
it was just like a mother with her children.
was faster than the brain. It was greatly
It was the first time I really felt that She was
helped, no doubt, by the contagious
like a Mother. She had been saying, "You
feeling of lightness and joy, an enveloping
must stop taking drugs." Solsaw this and
feeling of affection and wellbeing that
said, "Okay, l'll do it." And immediately all
you feel, "I am back home! Home, these other people turned around and
made
sweet home!".
glared at me. It just really hit me. And
Gregoire was on his knees saying,
Gregoire de Kalbermatten
"Mother, you must forgive them. They know
not what they do" - very dramatic, but very
My first memory of Gregoire (de true. He understood what was going on.
Kalbermatten)-he came over and he met
Mother and he was staying in the area and
Pat Anslow.
he had seen Her several times. He came
to one of the meetings at Gavin and Jane's
When Mother named me leader of
and on that particular day the whole place
the USA for a brief period, She told, "You
was full of people who used drugs. Mother are quite qualified for this because you
was arguing with them and saying it was
know hell best." It is true that before Sahaja
bad and they were saying, "No it is I had experimented with many forms of
absolutely not true. You can experience
adharma, but had also discovered their
this. You can experience that." At one
limitations. I mean, I felt like the Rolling
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-35.txt 
 34
September-October, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
Stones, "I can get no satisfaction." And I
Sahaja Yogis hadn't developed this basic
was tired to keep trying. So, for me, it was
discretion. Like one chap went off to try
the vibrations of the graveyard. He came
not at all a problem to change my lifestyle
back and Mother had to work on him for
after meeting Mother. The way She
hours on end. "What did you do this for?"
presented it made full sense, while the
moral teachers of my past could not And he just couldn't explain it. Oh, things
explain why I should not do something I like an early Sahaja Yogi went off
fancied doing. I had done it all and I knew
somewhere and she brought a necklace
and Mother was saying, "Well, you've got
it was dust.
to try the vibrations of things". And She
On one hand I finally understood from said, "This thing, there's something not
Mother why virtue was good for me. But, quite right". And She got her to get a
all the same, I did not know how to purify
bucket of water and stuck this necklace in
the water and the water turned black, like
my attention right away and only
meditation did help destroy the addictions.
this black cloud came out of it. And She
said, "Ah!" like She does and "See!" And
they saw, but they didn't learn that quickly.
Gregoire de Kalbermatten
She had to be very patient with them.
SHE HAD TO BE VERY PATIENT WITH
THEM
Kevin Anslow
I remember Her being quite stern
with the early Sahaja Yogis at times. She
A DIFFERENT UNIVERSE ALTOTHER
could be incredibly humorous and very
Mother arranged this weekend at Her
warm, but quite stern when She needed
house at Hurst Green- Icehouse Wood,
to be. She was very much a mother figure
Hurst Green in Sussex (near Oxsted). We
in every way in those days. The early all went down there by train. It was
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-36.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October, 2005
35
vibrations, while stepping back. And it did
extraordinary because it was this very
strange collection of people in an have vibrations. That is the wooden statue
extremely nice neighborhood, extremely we had in Chelsham Road (Ashram in
London).
nice and-Shri Mataji once described it-
not even a rat was allowed to enter in or
One of the things that struck me also
would enter in because the houses there
were so perfect. They never had visitors in the house of Mother, was that it looked
and felt as if every statue that She had in
let alone about fifteen straggling, hippie -
the house was vibrating with power. And
type people dressed in jeans and any old
everywhere you went, you felt a kind of
gear. There was a big drawing room
Silent, peaceful, but extremely powerful
downstairs with beautiful Indian rugs and
things like that and then this room up the environment, which is very difficult to
stairs that was on the mezzanine room- describe, except to say that you knew
something very powerful was working very
very sunny and there were large statues
deep inside you and working it out. And
of deities, a beautiful Shri Ganesha there.
yet, you were in the middle of this and you
Maureen Rossi felt you were in a different universe
altogether.
Pat (Anslow) took me to somewhere
Djamel Metouri
upstairs on the first floor and showed me
this big statue of Shri Ganesha. And he
And Shri Mataji worked on us and
said, "See this statue has such vibrations".
And I said, "Hang on". I didn't sort of react. talked to us and there was this incredible
Being from a Muslim background, being smell of Indian cooking for about three
hours. We were all dying of hunger. They
of a Muslim background, I thought, "What
started cooking so early and then I started
What is he talking
is he talking about?
to be ill. Thad to keep rushing off and being
So I
about?
tried just feeling the
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-37.txt 
 36
The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October, 2005
ill, but I felt brilliant. It was just a fantastic
background, I hadn't
with
come
nightclothes that were particularly smart or
clear-out and then everybody went down
to this big drawing room and fell asleep
anything and She dressed me in petticoats
on the floor - and we've got pictures of
and cardigans. And She worked on my
back all night in Her sleep and I kept having
these bodies all over this floor- just
to get up to be sick. And She snored and
everywhere.
then She'd stop snoring and say, "That's
Again, then we had another session
with Shri Mataji working on us and I had to
better now." And then She'd carry on
putting Her hand on my back and various
keep dashing in and out, but it was like
being totally divorced from the actual places and then She'd snore for a bit
I felt fantastic. The house
longer and then stop and say, "How do you
bodily feeling.
feel now? And it just went on all night and
had almost like a balcony inside that ran
round and went off all the rooms.
in the morning I was allowed to have
bananas and cardamom seeds. That was
the absolute minute attention She'd give
But because l'd been ill, Shri Mataji
US.
Said, "Maureen, you can come and sleep
us.
in my room." And when it came to
bedtime, I tried to hide behind everybody
It's just incredible to think of Her
because I was convinced that Shri Mataji
doing that for us and then She went to India
for about six months and we used to meet
disappeared when She went out of the
together, a handful of us, to try to meditate,
She went up these stairs curved
room.
but we weren't very good at all. And Shri
round the middle of the house and She
Mataji, before She went, had said, "You can
went half up the stairs and spotted me and
hauled me out from the crowd and I was
come to lIndia next year when I go -with
so scared as to what was going to happen
Me and meet all the Sahaja Yogis there."
So we started saving and when She came
and anyway She had this enormous lovely
bed. Being from a sort of hippie back we were in such a state She said,
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-38.txt 
 September-October, 2005
37
The Divine Coal Breeze
SHE GAVE US SO MUCH AFFECTION
"forget it. You're not up to it." But then She
Now we are talking about early days
again started meeting us each week,
generally on a Sunday or Saturday, and
and for me early days was the spring and
She again had us to Her house.
summer of 1977. What is special about
the early days is that Shri Mataji had just a
Maureen Rossi few Sahaja Yogis. She hadn't got many.
She is trying to bring them up to the level
HOW AM I GOING TO VISIT YOU?
where they can be strong enough so we
We went to Her house in Oxsted, but
can then expand our collectivity.
I can remember patchy things because I
When I arrived, probably about six or
was quite young at the time. One of them
was that I used to love drawing maps -I
seven people-I was probably the eighth.
still do, actually-andI do them for the sort
Some of us in those days have left. I guess
of stories that I write now. But in those
days I used to draw maps and I had no
I remember how She worked on an
Australian boy, Gus, for so many weeks.
idea why. And I drew this map which had
She took him home. She looked after him.
some islands. There was an island for me She cured him. He was like an
and an island for Shri Mataji. So She said,
encyclopedia of drugs. He was really bad.
"Well that's no good because how am I He had so many problems and She
going to visit you?" And I said, "Well, I can't
worked on him day in and day out, every
take the train." Sol said, "Well, what about
day. She never spared any effort. The
an underground train?" So Mother said,
most extraordinary thing is that She gave
"Okay, that's fine". So, with Her direction,
him all the love and, after three months, he
we drew in this little sort of underground
just left. He left Sahaja Yoga. He could
train track. That solved the problem.
have, in fact, stayed and She never said.
In fact, She said, "Okay". When you look
Kevin Anslow
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-39.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
38
September-October, 2005
house She had in Hurst Green or in the flat
at it from our point of view, he wasted
Mother's efforts. But She never actually in Ashley Gardens, in those days, She
always had -She did everything. She
talked about it that way. To Her, She just
gave love and that love, there was no gave us so much affection.
Djamel Metouri
condition put on it.
TRULY LIKE A MOTHER
The most extraordinary thing about Shri
Shri Mataji used to cook for us and
Mataji is Her capacity as a Mother to
vibrate lemons for us and She would work
basically - to nourish the Sahaja Yogis
on us constantly and effortlessly andall the
who came at that time. To nourish them
time. Every week She would come into
with enough love so they stayed in Sahaja
Yoga, so they felt-may be She gives us
the ashram and would work on our chakras
what we didn't have, so, as Sai Nath of
and check our vibrations and see how we
Shirdi said, "We may want what She wants
were doing. So She was really truly like a
mother, taking care of us.
to give us." And She worked tirelessly,
taking us to Her home. She never
hesitated to cook for LIS. Just think, the Adi
Miodrag Radosavljevic
Shakti in Her Home, cooking for the few
SHE'D BUY THE JACKETS AND THE
of us. There may have been seven, eight,
TIES FOR US.
nine, even ten Sahaja Yogis. She would,
Herself, cook food for us because
Shri Mataji would actually go out to a
obviously She wanted to put those
vibrations in our Nabhis. She wanted to
shop. I know because She took me out
and She took several other people out.
improve our Nabhis, which were in such a
state anyway. And the way She actually She'd give them Sir CP's second-hand,
old ties and Sir CP, Her Husband, was very
received us in Her home, whether it be the
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-40.txt 
 September-October, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
39
much the head of the IMO (International
Maritime Organisation), so totally opposite
Vicky Halperin
from us. He was one of the highest placed
Yes, She would never take money.
people in International society and we were
That was the difference. You'd hear of
dug up from a gutter somewhere, relatively
speaking. I remember I got a tie. She'd gurus and people they have. They're
always give ties to people at pujas. She'd
always taking money off them. You give
them everything.
give ties, jackets, clothes. She took me
I tried to pay Shri Mataji back for the
out and bought a jacket for me. She
clothes She bought my sister, Sharon
bought clothes for my sister. She must have
spent well over a hundred pounds on [Vincent], and She just threw it away, said,
clothes. That was down Brick Lane (In the
"Don't be silly. What are you doing? I don't
East End of London).
want your money. Don't be silly."
Ray Harris
Ray Harris.
When I bought Her a gift, She asked
INCREDIBLY CHEAP
me if I was being patronizing. She didn't
She'd bought me a dress and I don't want gifts. She said, "You can't treat Me
think anybody had bought me anything
like the gurus." It was inappropriate to buy
since l'd been a child and I was -I didn't
individual gifts. I think at some point later
know how to take it: I didn't know if I was
we were told that collective gifts were
supposed to pay for it. I didn't really
appropriate and individual gifts were not
understand what the protocol was for that
appropriate. I mean, I think Mother went
moment. I said I couldn't accept it. I
from my house and I had big tears in niy
wanted to pay and She let me. And then
eyes at the thought that l'd offended Her
She got another one. So I got two.
and I really didn't. I'd wanted to do the
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-41.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
40
September-October, 2005
happened was that we were at this
opposite.
reception and somebody, by mistake, gave
me a glass of wine and l drank it."
Vicky Halperin
WE FELT WHAT SHRI MATAJI FELT
So what happened was we felt the
effects of the wine that Shri Mataji drank.
We were painting various bits of the Because it had an effect on the
house [Hurst Green in Sussex in about
unconscious and we actually felt it from
1974]. Now one particular experience that
Her. So obviously, at that time, we were in
I remember was that Shri Mataji went out
such deep meditation that we actually felt
with Mr. Srivastava to go to a meeting, a
what Shri Mataji felt through the collective
reception of some sort. He was at that
unconscious. That was quite an amazing
time the director-general of IMCO experience.
[International Maritime Consultative
Douglas Fry
Organization] and She left us. We were
KIND
S OF
just cleaning this wall and painting it. About
SHE
TRIED
ALL
DIFFERENTTHINGS
half way through the night we suddenly got
One of the most memorable things
this terrific headache and it felt really
for me took place at Oxted, at he house
strange, but we just carried on working.
there. We spent actually quite a lot of time
So it passed.
there and Mother, as we say, the attention.
I mean, She used to cook for us. There
So when Shri Mataji came home
were servants there who cooked, but
and asked us how we were, I said, "I got
sometimes She'd cook specially for us
this really terrible headache halfway
and She would work on us. It was so
through. I didn't know what was
happening." And She said, "Oh, what intensive. You'd bow down with your hands
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-42.txt 
 41
September-October, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
worked. I felt very clear after that.
under Mother's Feet and the other Sahaja
Yogis would be gathered around and it
Pat Anslow
on for hours
would literally sometimes go
just to clear one person out. And they'd
be down for that length of time with their
SHE TRIED THINGS OUT WITH
head on Mother's Feet. She tried all kinds
PEOPLE
of different things, mostly just looking after
She used to give me little presents
us in beautiful ways.
sometimes. It's so fragmentary because
Iremember once She gave me a
it's a long, long time ago. I tend to find
head massage with oil and we'd do odd
these memories sort of suddenly come to
jobs sometimes around the house. I
me, but then they vanish again.
remember once we were sandpapering remember in Gower Street Shri Mataji
something ready to paint and Mother came used to - well, my father says it was
over and joined in, got a bit of sandpaper
somewhere else - well, the older Sahaja
and sandpapered with us. And the meals
Yogis at the time were a collection of ex-
used to be the most memorable, weren't
hippies and I was younger and clearer.
they? We were really spoiled, spoiled They had had a bit of a wild time and it
rotten.
had sort of left its imprint on their charkas.
Shri Mataji sometimes used to use me to
I remember one day I turned up at
sort of try things out or to clear things out.
Her house and She said, "You just go out.
She discovered the neck crick on me. This
I clear you out and you just get caught up.
is a form of treatment which no longer
"And She made me lie down in front of
exists, I think because some of the people
Her and took Her shoe and actually shoe-
got rather damaged necks when they did
bashed my spine - very hard - hard
it to each other. But Shri Mataji had me
enough for me to see stars. And that
sitting down and said, "I've discovered this
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-43.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
September-October, 2005
42
great new treatment for the Vishuddhi."
Mataji and She said, "You shouldn't actually
And She got my head and went see that." She said, "One is power and
one is purity." I could actually see them, but
"huwhump!" And it went "Click!" And I
screamed and was in absolute outrage,
She said, "Ilf you can actually see those
but She found it very amusing.
colours, it means you are not actually in
the center. You are off to one side."
There was this sense that Sahaja
Douglas Fry
Yoga was sort of experimental. She tried
things out with people. She would get them
I WAS SEEING MOTHER AS A CHILD
to do things and see if it worked or not. I WOULD
mean, I think it sort of goes on, on a larger
I was seeing Mother as a child
scale, as well today.
would. Imean every timel saw Her, I would
run up and hug Her. It is not something
Kevin Anslow
you get to do when you get older. There
was a definite change of protocol there.
ONE IS POWER AND ONE IS
And I do remember that as I got older, I
PURITY
was not quite aware of this protocol and
not knowing what to make of it, particularly
Because I wasn't properly centered,
as the Sahaja Yogis were sort of
T had a bit of an Agnaya problem at that
intellectually engaging with ;it in some sort
time. I used to see Shri Mataji flash from
different colours. She used to go this of sense. But I do remember that I could
sort of run up and hug Mother. She was
beautiful rainbow green and this beautiful
It was very
sort of like a big friend.
rainbow red and I'd just see this light sort
different. She was very accessible in those
of flashing from Her. But apparently the
reason for that was because I had an days to people and yet it didn't quite have
the intensity that people have in encounters
Agnaya problem. I mentioned this to Shri
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-44.txt 
 43
September-October, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
with Mother in more recent times or as trying to sort of teach us who She was,
trying to tell us who She was. And then
time went on.
She said, "The power of God actually just
I remember my Aunt Maureen [Rossi) goes to the back of Me. I am like the
saying that She was very direct and source and it's just flowing behind Me."
And that is when we started realizing that
sociable, especially with the ladies, in a
Mother was trying to tell us who She was.
way that She wasn't with the men. But,
And then She was trying to work on our
generally speaking, like in talks and things,
Mooladhara. And Gus was saying that he
will notice that at a certain moment
you
some aspect of Her will come out, saw Mother as Shri Ganesha, He was quite
struck by it and he was very surprised. He
something very serious and quite didactic
hadn't seen Mother in that aspect.
and sometimes a great jocularity. She did
Djamel Metouri
have that, but it was very much more toned
down in those days. I think people were
Her THE SHOES OF THE ADI SHAKTI
perhaps not up to the scope of
| believe I saw from the very first days
manifesting these things in their fuller
the colossal meaning of what Shri Mataji
sense.
was doing. 1 recognized She brings the
Kevin AnsloW total, the grand revolution, the most radical
factor of global change for mankind. The
TAM LIKE THE SOURCE
French and Russian revolutions are
I also remember this meeting we had
nothing compared to this !
with Mother. She gave us this sort of
On the other hand, I was looking
meditation in Her lounge, you know, where
around me. How on Earth and in the
we were seven or eight people. We were
heavens are we going to get there?
Maureen, Gus, from the early days, Pat,
This was the problem and the tension
Douglas. At some stage Mother was within me. It was like being at the
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-45.txt 
 44
September-October, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
bottom of a huge rock and not looking at a bunch of stunned people,
sitting around a table looking at pairs
knowing how to climb it.
of shoes on the table and thinking, "Is
I remember one day in August 1975,
it with this lot we are going to change
in the house of Shri Mataji in Hurst
the world?" My mistake was to focus
on the people, not the shoes. I did not
Green, there were about seven Sahaja
know what shoes can do if these are
Yogis around the table. Needless to
in those days we were all new and
the shoes of the Adi Shakti. And if the
say,
there was nobody else. Shri Mataji world, indeed, will be transformed, let
started putting Her shoes on the table
us handle these shoes with the
very nice and elegant ones, no feelings that Bharat had in handling
doubts! But, of course, we did not the shoes of his brother, Shri Rama.
know then that Mother was doing it
Gregoire de
because the vibrations from Her
Kalbermatten
shoes are so powerful.
So I was
Nirmala Yoga.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-46.txt 
 212
