Yuvadirishti Volume 6 Septembes 2005 Issue 3

 AWAAAWWWAKAHAHA Index Award Presented to Sir C. P. Srivastava by President of Inida 1 Heart Chakra SOUNDARYA LAHARI The Magnetic Field of Everlasting Love 12 Mata Khir Bhawani 13 18 Einstein's Centennial Prophetic Visions of the Divine Feminine in modern Europe 20 Shri Mataji' house in Chhinduana 24 ward изе MMMMTMMMMMTHM AAAHAKAKAHAAAKAHAAAHAKATAEAAR

 Award Presented To Sir C. P. Srivastava by President Of India At last the much awaited historic moment came live on 1" October in the evening at 4:30 p.m. in the Rashtrapati Bhavan, (President House), New Delhi on Saturday, when the prestigious award in due recognition for his contribution in the field of maritime exploration and Excellence in Public Administration, Academics and Management was awarded to retired LAS officer, Sir. C.P. Srivastava, our beloved Papaji by the President of India, H.E. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam. Sir C.P. Srivastava has been designated as a Lal Bahadur Shastri Fellow and his name inscribed on the honours roll of the Lal Bahadur Shastri Institute of Management, Delhi. The participants in the Rasthrapati Bhavan award ceremony included Prime Minister Dr.Manmohan Singh, United Progressive Alliance Chairperson Ms.Sonia Gandhi, Union Home Minister Mr.Shivraj Patil, and the former Union Minister and son of Lal Bahadur Shastri, Mr.Anil Shastri along with other important dignitaries. Mr. Shastri, who is also the chairman of the institute, said: "The award honours people from whom the younger generation can draw inspiration." Sir C.P. Srivastava is the founding Chancellor Emeritus of the World Maritime University, Malmo, Sweden . He has also been the chairman of the governing board of the IMO International Maritime Law Institute, Malta , and chairman of the Government of India Committee on Maritime Education and Training. 1.

 The Sahaja yogis present there at that gracious moment fondly recollect that the presence of Our Holy Mother gave the event a special quality and auspiciousness and that She was pleased. After, Sir C.P. was honoured with the prestigious award; he was subsequently invited to deliver a speech. The speech itself turned out to be historic in its own essence as our Papaji, Sir C.P. Srivastava addressed the gathering with a very powerful English diction in praise of the service he rendered under the principles and guidance of the erstwhile Prime Minister of India, the late Mr. Lal Bahadur Shastri. Concluding his speech, the eyewitness recollected that Sir spoke with all candid gesture and confided that whatever position he held today at the age of 85, along with, all his achievements for which he is being honoured today, owe its all due credit to the values he has held through the love he received throughout his 58 years of married life and association with Shri Mataji and also the love that he received from his daughters Kalpana and Sadhna. He also mentioned that Shri Mataji as his wife "Nirmala", who had always been at his side as inspiration and that Her principles were all that Mr. Lal Bahadur Shastri once prophesised as values in life and serving the cause of the humanity. She had been in that path only, helping mankind to improve upon all social activities and make a better living. He also added that he is now totally devoted and dedicated to this cause which our beloved Mother, has taken up as the holy task of uplifting the humanity and transforming them to be persons with values. Later he thanked the President and all the honourable members present there for the honour conferred upon him. 2.

 Heart Chakra Imanga Odicen Center Heart Deity: Shri Jagadamba Gross (physical) level: Center of cardiac plexus, part of left plexus, sternum bone. Manifestation (controls): Breathing, Heart, breasts Qualities : Mother of the Universe, physical mother, sense of security, creation and nourishment of antibodies. Associated Day: Friday No. of Petals: Twelve (12) Associated Color: Purple Associated Planet: Venus Associated Gem: Ruby Place on hand: Little fingers Associated Element: Air Associated Symbol: Flame Causes of Catch/Obstruction:Fear, Fanaticism, fantasy, spiritualism. Left Heart Deity: Shri Shiva, The Spirit-Atma, (Shri Parvati) Gross (physical) level: Heart organ, and left cardiac plexus. Manifestation: Heartbeat (Anahat - sound that is without percussion). Qualities: Existence, life, joy, after Realisation Attention-Truth Joy (sat chit ananda).

 Place on hand: Left little fingers Causes of Catch / Obstruction : Extreme physical/mental activity, heartfelt bad relations (especially mother 's), outside Attention, Hatha Yoga, drugs, no seeking, no faith in God, anti-God activities. Right Heart Deity: Shri Rama (Shri Sita) Gross (physical) level:Cardiac plexus (right side) Qualities : Dutiful life as father, husband, brother, Gracious, auspicious boundaries maintained (Maryadas) Place on hand: Right little finger Causes of Catch / Obstruction : Father or fatherhood problems, emotional aggression, arrogant or inconsiderate behavior, unlawful domination. QUALITY The Heart Chakra is the home of the Self, the Spirit, Atma all meaning the same thing. Time and again Shri Mataji has stressed that "You are nothing but an eternal Spirit". In this way she is telling us that we have to realise and become our Spirit, and leave behind the futility of the illusion we live in. We start the process of becoming our Spirit after realisation, as we start to lose our false identifications with our body, mind, and feelings. Only after this enlightenment can we take our Attention to our Heart and cleanse it. The Spirit can only manifest when our heart is open and clean, at which point we feel the eternal joy of the creation and the meaning and purpose of our place in it. We clean our heart through our pure Desire, and through our Attention. Saying Affirmations such as "Iam the Spirit" are effective in this process, butit must not be a mechanical action. Love Pure love, which enlightens us all, is the real quality of the Heart Chakra. In the unrealised state we rarely love for love's sake. Because of our conditionings we confuse feelings of love with those of possession, sex and selfishness. Pure love is detached, it gives without interest. Like the tree which gives shade to one and all, it is without prejudice and motive. True love is the quality that emanates from the Spirit and not from the body or mind. When we talk of loving someone, we should understand the direction in which this love is flowing. Bodily attraction is physical. There are even those who exercise seductive arts to ensnare a good "catch". We can see this in those who indulge in excessively trendy fashions. These people are especially at risk in their relationships because they relate not as two Spirits, but as two fashionable physical forms. This kind of physical attraction is not true love because it comes from the mind, and mind does not love-it merely wants. When the want of the mind is attained, then the novelty wears off. For instance a child is excited and attached to a new toy, but after a few days as the novelty wears away, the excitement dies. The same occurs with relationships which are based simply on physical attraction. The marriage is a spiritual union. Without recognition of the Spirit marriage results in transitory relationships of the make and break kind. This casual state in turn adversely affects the heart center and causes insecurity. Hence, instead

 of confidence between the husband and wife, an undercurrent of fear runs between them. Love is often mistakenly taken as restricted to male and female. In fact love is the flow of life in all relationships, between children/ parents, brothers/sisters, friends, old people, etc. Where many people share and care, then the whole society opens up its heart centre. It becomes a collective society and changes the world. This is the power of love. Love is the principle behind all creation, all vibrations. We say that God is love and love is God, because in its depths we cease to be. In true love there is no "I" and "You", there is simply the merging in the Spirit. In this state we experience true human unity, the true oneness of life. Hate and jealousy develop an anti- current which flows against the cosmic rhythm. Where there is love there is growth, celebration, joy and evolution. Security A lot of problems arise from fear. If we have self-confidence, we have strong defenses which protect against base desires and negative outside influences. If we live in fear, then our natural immune is weakened and we become vulnerable to allergies and disease. Our personality grows and system shines when our heart is strong, and we approach life with a will to win like a warrior. When we weaken, we become trapped in the cage of fear, afraid to venture out and experience the joy and wonders of the kaleidoscope of life. We attract to ourselves what we give out. If we have a constricted heart, then we are likely to attract corresponding people and to perpetuate the problem. Hence it is important to be strong and grounded so that we can nourish our relationships. Where a mother's love has been denied in childhood, it is possible that a fulfilling relationship can bridge the gap. A strong heart center is the basis for a healthy personality. Nourished with love, we emanate warmth and happiness. Love is nature's way. Through love, the seed attracts nourishment fromn the soil and comes to life. It is the love which becomes compassion which makes us reach out without thinking to help mankind. It is a spontaneous act, not an intellectual decision. 5.

 Relationships Our relationships with our parents have their place in the Heart Chakra. Our physical mother has her place on the left heart, and our father has his place on the right heart. Once we realize that our parents have this place within us, we don't try to run away from any problems in any way, we face up to our responsibilities towards them. At all times we should treat them with the love and respect which is their due. Parents should likewise raise their children in a pure life, which will encourage their spiritual development. They should love them without attachment and fear, knowing that they are the trustees of their children. If parents do not practice what they preach, they cannot set a proper example to their offspring. Parents should be respectable, in order to be respected themselves. How we get on with our spouse is also a matter of the heart. Where one partner dominates the other, or is possessive, then the love is stifled and the relationship is disturbed. As the relationship flourishes and gains in understanding, both husband and wife realize their equal status, their position as two wheels on the same chariot. In situations where the female is unable to make her full contribution to the household (for instance where the man thinks he is superior because of this physical advantage and wage earning capability) she can develop a suppressed anger, which in itself can be directed towards the children or develop into neuroses. The family unit is important to society, and the foundations of this unit are respect, love and duty between the members- parents and children. If the family ideal collapses then the society will soon follow. Money cannot buy emotional security, and a society which respects old age as a kind of childhood where love and care are of paramount importance will have a much more stable existence. TRADITION The seat of the Heart Chakra is located in the Brahmarandra at the crown of the head (in the Sahasrara). This is where Shri Gauri (the Kundalini) in her form of Shri Parvati is united with Shri Shiva. Shri Shiva presides as the witness in the left Heart Chakra, controlling our very existence. GROSS PHYSICAL ASPECT The heart is the pump of the body, hence any mental and physical excess strains this center and can lead in advanced stages to a heart attack. Using the body as an instrument of athletic display fatigues the heart center. In a similar way modern Hatha Yoga is a form of athleticism which has no correlation to the Spirit, and this too can harm the center. The sages of old time developed certain exercises for correcting the spinal problems caused by wrong living, thus aligning the body to its natural form in preparation for the search for knowledge of the Spirit. This led to the development of Hatha Yoga schools, and hence to the modern form of 'Yoga'. Unfortunately today Hatha Yoga is mistaken for spirituality. People spend hours doing all kinds of asanas (positions). By standing on our heads (or wearing white/saffron robes or being vegetarian or whatever) we are not going to know God. The word Yoga means Union in Sanskrit, and the union is that of our Kundalini with the all pervading God is realised when the Kundalini evolves through right living, deed, thought and Divine energy. action. If we treat our body like a gadget we become like a gadget. Excessive right side activity in such pursuits as Hatha Yoga can dry out a person, and make his personality cold and without love. 6.

 Suffering is often misidentified with purification. We are led to believe that if something hurts it must be good for us ('no pain, no gain'), while anything that is nice is evil. This numbs the left heart, which is the seat of the Spirit. Both self denial and self torture are against the dignity of the Spirit. CLEARING THE HEART Clearing the Center Chakra: Using the Elements: The use of a candle around the heart area can be very effective. Exercise deep and relaxed slow breathing in and out for a while. Take a deep breath and hold it in for a while, then release. Don'tstrain. Repeat a few times. Affirmations: Mother, please make me a fearless person. General Advice: Breathe in, hold the breath. Say to yourself 'Jagadamba' twelve times, then release the breath. Give vibration to the front and back of the heart. Recite the 23rd Psalm from the Bible. Read the Devi Mahatmyam. Use the candle treatment if the left Swadisthan Chakra is also catching. Clearing the Left Heart Chakra: Using the Elements: Candle treatment around the heart area. Affirmations: Mother, I am the Spirit Mother, I am the Spirit, only the Spirit, I am not the ego, not this body, not this emotion-Iam only the pure Spirit. General Advice: Give vibrations to the left Heart Chakra Keep your Attention on the Atma residing in the Heart. Where the heart catches due to overactivity of the right side, raise the left side 108 times, and also use the vibrations by putting the left hand towards the photograph with the right hand pointing upwards to the sky (or ceiling). The ether will dissolve the heat. Clearing the Right Heart Chakra: Using the Elements: Candle treatment around the heart area. General Advice: Give vibrations to the Right Heart Chakra. Develop the boundaries of good conduct in family life and in society (Maryadas). Don't take on too much responsibility, also don't be too under- responsible. Develop the qualities and protectiveness of a father and husband. Correct any wrong situations arising from your relationship as a father, husband, son or brother. Where the right heart catch is of an overemotional nature, raise the right side (and lower the left) 108 times, and use the vibrations to clear out by putting the left hand towards the photograph and the right hand on the motherearth. This will release the left side problem which is causing the rightheart to catch.

 SOUNDARYA LAHARI Shri Aadishankaracharya has authored a number of descriptive texts which extol the various aspects of divinity. Shri Mataji explained how he was especially inspired to write the Soundarya Lahiri, which describe the glories of Mother. In his descriptive writings and debates with scholars, Aadishankaracharya had described Divinity like no one had before. His composition, The Vivekachudamani, created a wave amongst various schools of Vedic thought which ultimately lead to long winding debates. Although his writings were beyond criticism, Aadishankaracharya must have felt the inappropriate nature of reaction to Divine knowledge by the so-called Brahmins and Pundits of his times. He was constantly attacked for his observations, which could have been felt only through self-realization, which wasn't easily achievable in those times. This led to the inspiration to create something that would be so enlightening, so divine that there would be no scope for debates, fights and attacks. He discovered that this was possible only when he started describing the aspects of The Goddess. Thus he started describing the endless bounty of the Aadishakti, which is best accessible through Her Divine Breeze literally, the Soundarya Lahiri. Saundarya-Lahari, verse 9 Thou art diverting Thyself, in secrecy with Thy Lord, in the thousand-pettaled lotus [Sahasrara], having pierced through the Earth situated in the Mooladhara, the Water in the Manipura, the Fire abiding in the Swadisthana, the air in the heart [Anahat], the Ether above [Vishuddhi], and Manas between the eyebrows [Agnya]and thus broken through the entire Kula path [Sushumna nadi] Prabodhasudhakara, verse 164 He who is immersed in the ocean of Supreme Bliss is full within and without, like a pot immersed for a long time in a large deep cavity of the river Ganga. 8.

 Vivekachudamani, verses 69-70 The first step to liberation is the complete detachment from all perishable things, then follow calmness, self-control, forbearance, and the utter relinquishment of all work enjoined [rituals?] in the scriptures. Then comes hearing [from the Guru], reflection on that, and long, constant and unbroken meditation on the Truth for the muni [man of reflection]. After that the learned seeker attains the supreme nirvikalpa state and realizes the bliss of nirvana even in this life. SHLOKA IN SANSKRIT तनीयांसं पांसुं तव चरणपड्केरुहभवं विरिष्ठिस्सच्चिन्वन् विरचयति लोकानविकलम् । बहत्येनं शौरिः कथमपि सहप्रेण शिरसां हरस्संक्षुद्यैनं भजति भसितोद्भलनविधिम् ॥ २॥ Taneeyam sampamsum tava charana-pankeruha-bhavam Virinchi samchinvan virachayati lokan avikalam; Vahatyenam Shaurih katham api sahasrena shirasam Harah samksudy'ainam bhajati bhasito'ddoolana-vidhim. TRANSLATION: O Divine Mother! The creator, Shri Brahma created the whole universe (limitless and with out any imperfection) by gathering the minute particles of dust from your lotus feet. The sustainer, Shri Vishnu as Adishesa (the deity of serpents) supports this universe ( made out of that dust ) with His thousand hoods. And Hara (The Lord Shiva), the destroyer, crushing it into powder, applies these ashes all over His body (at the time of dissolution). 2. SELF REALIZATION IS THE DIVINE GIFT TO ALL अविद्यानामन्त-स्तिमिर-मिहिरद्वीपनगरी जडानां चैतन्य-स्तवक-मकरन्द-स्रूतिझरी । दरिद्राणां चिन्तामणिगुणनिका जन्मजलधौ निमग्नानां दंष्ट्रा मुररिपु-वराहस्य भवती ॥ ३॥ SHLOKA IN SANSKRIT: Avidyanam antah-timira-mihira-dveepa-nagari Jadanam chaitanya-stabaka-makaranda-sruti jhari Daridranam chinta-mani-gunanika janma-jaladhau Nimagnanam damstra mura-ripu-varahasya bhavati. 9.

 TRANSLATION: O Divine Mother! One who gets the Gift of Self Realization, gets rid of all the illusion ( Avidya means 'Not the vidya' the darkness or illusion- the ignorance within us). This Divine gift is a great Island City, where from takes place the luminous sunrise of spiritual illumination driving away the over-casting darkness of ignorance in the hearts of devotees. It forms the cluster of flower buds, from which gushes forth the nectar of intelligence, enlivening the dull- witted. It is a veritable necklace of wish-yielding gems for those who are suffering from poverty. And for those immersed in the ocean of Samsara (Worldly), it becomes their up-lifter like the Tusk of Vishnu (which raised the earth from submergence in Pralaya (destruction) when He incarnated as the Cosmic Boar). waters 3. THIS VERSE EXPRESSES THE SUPREMACY OF THE DEVI OVER ALL OTHER DEITIES: SHLOK IN SANSKRIT त्रयाणां देवानां त्रिगुणजनितानान्तव शिवे भवेत पूजा पूजा तव चरणयोर्या विरचिता । तथा हि त्वत्पादोद्धहनमणिपीठस्य निकटे स्थिता होते शश्चन मुकुलितकरोक्तंसमकुटाः ॥ २५॥ Trayanam devanam tri-guna-janitanam tava Sive Bhavet puja puja tava charanayor ya virachita3; Tatha hi tvat-pado'dvahana-mani-pithasya nikate Sthita hy'ete sasvan mukulita-karottamsa-makutah. TRANSLATION O Divine Mother! Three Deities, Shri Brahma, Vishnu & Shiva, who have their origin in thy three Gunas (Satwa, Raja & Tama) are worshipping at thy lotus feet all the time. They (three Deities) are there near to the manipeeta (the foot stool of diamonds - where the lotus feet rests) with the joined palms held above their diamond heads in salutation to the Divine Mother. 10

 4. DESCRIBES THE SURRENDER OFA YOGI SHLOK IN SANSKRIT जपो जल्प: शिल्पं सकलमपि मुद्राविरचना गतिः प्रादक्षिण्यक्रमणमशनाद्याहुतिविधिः प्रणामस्सवेशस्सुखमखिलमात्मार्पणदृशा सपर्यापर्यायस्तव भवतु यन्मे विलसितम् ॥ २७॥ Japo jalpah silpam sakalam apı mudra-viracana Gatih pradaksinya-kramanam asanady'ahuti-vidhih3; Pranamah samvesah sukham akilam atmarpana-drsa Saparya-paryayas tava bhavatu yan me vilasitam. TRANSLATION May everything that I do with the sense of self-dedication be offerings in Thy service -- my prattle, the utterance of Thy Mantra; the movements of my hand, the gestures and poses of Thy worship3B my walking, Thy circumambulation; my eating, fire-sacrifice to Thee; the stretching of the body in sleep and rest, prostration to Thee; and all my enjoyments, offerings made to Thee.

 The Magnetic Field of Everlasting Love We have often heard Shri Mataji saying that the presence of Sahaja Yogis exude an indefinable power. This power - magnetism, like the power of gravity, is a tangible force. A magnetic field is created every time a current is passed through an electric wire. The human nervous system also transmits scientifically measurable electrical impulses; in doing so it sets up its own magnetic field. As the energy- flow in the nervous system increases, it can be realized more clearly on its subtle level. This can be easily achieved when one's Kundalini clearly passes through every energy centre. The greater one achieves this the better he can control his life and the physical world around him. This helps him to control his spiritual destiny. power, Whatever one strongly desires, he attracts that to himself. When one sends out a strong desire, a ray of energy goes out from him towards the object of that desire, creating its own magnetic field, strong or weak according to the relative strength of his desire. But Shri Mataji has said that a strong desire means a pure desire. A bar of metal becomes magnetized when it is placed next to an already-magnetized piece of iron. Similarly, to acquire strong magnetism it is important to mix with people who already have the kind of magnetism that one wants to develop. That's why it is very important to be in good collectivity. Every kind of human activity manifests a magnetism of its own. For success in that activity, one has to develop the appropriate type of magnetism. Everything originates in the Infinite Spirit. Magnetism of every kind is born of the magnetic power of God's love. Divine love is the most powerful force in the universe. By the magnetic power of divine love, all things can be accomplished even that most seemingly impossible of all tasks, our salvation from delusion. What man, by his power, cannot accomplish, divine love accomplishes easily. And its task, once accomplished, is accomplished forever. By meditation one can tune himself to that subtlest ray. When one surrenders himself at the lotus feet of The Divine Mother, She makes him a channel of Her love, taking him to higher and higher levels of divine awareness until his love attains perfection in Her. We must remember that Her love always flows to us. The choice is left to us if by our love, we want to complete the circuit, thereby generating the magnetism that can draw to us the very consciousness of Infinity. 12

 Mata Khir Bhawani The Accessibility The Geography and the mythology One can travel right up to the pilgrim center from Srinagar city by motorable road or by boat through Vitasta The Holy state of Kashmir reminds us of Hazrat bal Shrine (the treasured holy hair of up to 'Shadipur' and from there the boat is Shri Mohammed Sahab) or the water element swayambhu of Shiva at Amarnath towed up to the temple through the canal. At times the caves or Shri Jesus pilgrims prefers to undertake yet difficult path by trekking from the city itself by who once resided in this Holy land (Ros Bal) besides, temples of, Jwalaji, Sharika and Adishakracharya. approaching through "Vichar nag' (It is like However, Shri Mata TH crossing through the sixth Chakra Khir Bha wani is another rare shrine which is believed to be 'Agnya').., it is the temple of Shri Adi Shakti r the believed as one cross this 'nag' he is able to discriminate between Kundalini Herself. the good and the evil The natural backdrop of this Divine land of Sahasrara is gifted with a (thoughts). Also, one has to cross through a place number of spring outlets called as the 'Nags' in called Tyangalbal (burning Charcoal Hillock), Kashmiri language. One of these 'nags 'is located that signifies, crossing this place burns all the near Ganderbal in the Tulamulla' or Tulla mulya materialistic desire in ones spiritual ascent. or Tullamnlanka village about 23 km. northeast Finally, on entrance one has to cross the 'Amarher' of Srinagar City. The entire area around the (Immortal stairs) that signifies the stairs to the village is marshy, The part of the land is covered kingdom of God with lush green scenario with wild fragrant flowering plants surrounded by shady Chinar, It is believed that during the Treta Yuga (times of Willows, Mulberry and Elm trees. Mata Khir shri Rama), a herd of boars, chased by hunters, Bhawani temple is located at latitude 34 Deg 13 entered the ashram of Ravana accidentally. The Legend min. North and longitude 74 Deg. 48 min. East Ravana, who was in deep meditation then was (6) 13 relie

 disturbed by the terrible noisy herd of the boars. It is believed that when Mother Shyama entered He turned furious and in his fit of anger thought Kashmir, She decided Her first halt in the of killing both the boars and the hunters. At this Manzgam village (still considered to be a holy moment Lord Shiva appeared and advised place) over the Pir Panjal range. The place being Ravana instead to meditate on Mother Goddess hilly did not suit Her abode as the accompanying without getting distracted. As a result Ravana 360 snakes with Her were also to be undergoes rigorous penance and is blessed with accommodated. So, Her Divine journey divine vision by the Devi and Devi continued in search of Her final abode. Later, compassionately desires to fulfill wishes of from Mazgam, Mother proceeded to a place Ravana by granting boon. It is said, Ravana, called Kulgam near Devsar. Though, the place cleverly prayed the Devi for the boon of Her was beautiful with the sylvan surrounding yet the abode in his kingdom itself (in the then Lanka) as scarcity and dearth of water rendered it Her permanent establishment, in order to be unsuitable. So, it is from here that Mother under the power of Her eternal protection. traveled through the eastern side of Martand Pleased with Ravana's devotion, Mother fulfilled Village and rested with the Divine transit halt at his wishes to stay eternally in his kingdom. Thus Her abode was placed in the northeast coast of The places like Anantnag, Raithan , Vatikapora, Lanka, in the spring called 'Ananta' (infested with Bandipora, Koti tirth (Baramulla) , Badarkali, snakes) as Goddess 'Shyama'. Initially, Ravana Chandigam and Tucker(Handwara) bears the worshipped Her with all his devotion. Lakutpora villagenear the hills of Aishmuqam. imprint of Her Divine tour . Mother Shyama Subsequently, he started leading a luxurious life practically vibrated the whole valley with Her and also initiated "Tamasic' offerings to the Holy Lotus Feet. Her Divine tour came to rest as Goddess. With such demonic acts coupled with She descended from the Sharda Temple (now in unholy act of kidnapping Shri Sita Mata, Goddess Pakistan-Occupied-Kashmir) to a place near Shyama turned very furious with Ravana. She Shadipore at the confluence of rivers Sind and cursed Ravana and also decided to forsake Vitasta with Her 360 accompanying snakes. Lanka. Finally, Her abode was settled with Her accompanying snakes around the village Later, when Shri Ram invaded Lanka to rescue Tullamula guarded by Goddess Sharda, Sharika Shri Sita Mata from the clutches of Ravana, it is and Jwala from three directions. said Shri Ram also visited the place and worshipped Goddess Shyama in Lanka. Pleased Goddess Shyama here at this place of Kashmir, with Shri Ram, Goddess Shyama expressed Her manifest Her form as "Maha Ragnya", desire that Her abode be shifted out of that place known later as Mata Khir Bhawani from Shyama popularly to the Himalayas. Shri Ram at once requested Shri (Khir is the preparation of Sweet from Rice and Hanuman to carry out the desired Divine task of milk condensed with cooking in fire to offer to the Mother. Thus, Shri Hanuman carried Mother Devi -Rice is the element of Laxmi tattwa) in Goddess along with 360 snakes on his shoulder to Sattwic form.-The Goddess of knowledge, the Himalayas under Her instruction to ' Sati prosperity and peace. The source of great Desh' or 'Satisar' in Kashmir, India. inspiration and dispeller of sorrows. 14

 It is believed in Kashmir that, She is Trigunatmika messages in the ancient times) appeared floating - She is Para, Parapara and Apara. She is believed in the 'nag'. As he recovers the 'Bhoj Patra' he to control the powers of Shri Brahma, Shri discovers verses in praise of the Mata Khir Vishnu, Shri Shiva and Shri Indra. She creates Bhawani in Sanskrit script on the 'Patra'. The with Her own will, preserves and destroys. She is the Roop Shakti for the pure minded devotees. She is the supreme power of the Universe. translation of the text reads as: "(I prostrate to the Supreme Goddess Maha Ragnya, who is lustrous, having twelve Suns around and seated on a lion throe, encircled by the serpents who are not Popular belief in Kashmir As the Legend goes, there was a visible to the mortal eyes but is realized by the learned Kashmiri Brahmin, Krishna Pandit, a great devotee of Devi. Mother appears in his There after a temple-the Holy abode of Mata Khir dream and directs him to physically establish Her Bhawani was constructed and worshipped in that abode towards the northeast direction in 'Nag'. The main mysterious nag is quite large and pious and Spiritualist (Realized Souls)". Tullamula village within the swampy area of the has been known as 'Nag bal'. The centre of the spring. Mother in his dreams instructs the Pandit 'nag' where the temple has been constructed is to follow a snake on his way that would guide called as the 'Bindu'. The 'nag' has irregular seven sides with apices called as Pada' (Feet) towards him to the exact location of Her Divine abode. Accordingly, it is said that the Pandit takes a boat East the Southern and the Northern sides are from Shadipore and from certain point, a snake longer than the Western side which has been appears in the water and he is guided to the exact called as 'Sher' (Head). location where the snake stands erect and later The present foundation of the Marble temple was disappears the boundaries of the exact location (As per Devi's destroyed in the 14" -15h Century. Maharana re-constructed on the ancient foundation that was in water. Krishna Pandit demarcates with a stick being helped by the Pratap Singh constructed the present temple in desire) neighboring devotees. This was how the abode of the 19th century. As per the record in the living Mata Khir Bhawani was discovered. memory, while, cleansing the nag, two ancient The place is believed to be surrounded by 360 ldols (Murties) was discovered which are now "Nags"(Springs). Each of them had deities in form Placed in the temple. One of them is of Mata Khir of snake. Most of them have either silted now or Bhawani and the other is that of Shri Bhuteshwar the Shiva. be people have forgotten them or may unaware of the location or may be are covered Based on the contemporary paintings, literary with thick plantation of Swampy environment. descriptions and iconographical elements The 'nagas' that still exists are the places of Goddess Mata Khir Bhawani is depicted and shown seated on full-blossomed thousand petalled worship as on date. It is a popular belief that when Krishna Pandit Lotus on a hexagonal altar, with four arms bearing along with other devotees were performing the vessel, sword, Lotus and Amrut (Divine Nectar) Puja at this 'nags' for the first time, a piece of 'Bhoi Container and surrounded by snakes. Her head is Patra' (the bark of holy tree used for writing beđecked with jeweled crown. She is also embellished with ornaments and a nag (snake) 15

 : Eight petalled lotus Ashtadhalam adorns Her neck. Her pair of Lotus eyes reflects 5. depicting five senses of action with mind, intellect and ego. the signs of purity. It is believed that the colour of the 'Nag' changes, Trivritam : Three circles(Three Lokas indicating harbinger of good or bad events to follow. 6. When the colour of the water in the spring changes to representing the Bhu...Bhuvah and Swaha). Pink, Milky white, Light Greem or Rosy Red is believed 7 to suggest good omen while, the shadows of Gray to the complete Chakra/Yantra and its parts Black is taken as inauspicious. Bhograham(Dewar): Three lines enclosing . representing the foundation or the base for the (Shri Mataji revealed once in an informal discussion worship. that the colour of the spring had transformed to "milky white" on Her Holy presence at that place. Later, villagers from neighborhood were excited and announced aloud that Devi had come). THE PUJA, THE RITUALS, AND TRADITION Traditionally, the Puja and collective prayers are offered on every Lunar Ashtami day (Eighth day It is believed that manifestation of the Goddess of the Lunar calendar). The Puja are offered had been evidenced in a number of occasions, in amidst Lights of lamps of earthenware. The form of bubbling in water shaping up through samagri (material of the Puja offerings) are a mix various irregular mystic symbols of Mata Khir of special herbs called Venah (Memtha sylvestris), Bhawani. These formations have been depicted as roses, Lotus end other fragrant flowers with rice "Yantra" or the "Chakras". The 'Yantra' is believed and Barley. Milk and Sugar Candies (Khand) are to be the revelations of Mata Khir Bhawani. It has also offered. The Bhog is prepared in form of Suji been interpreted and described by several Ki halwa(semolina), dry fruits and Khir(a special spiritual people. The one that is popularly condensed paste by cooking/boiling) made out of believed in that locality is as follows: the rice-milk -sugar with ghee, raisins, dates or The Yantra constitutes seven parts enclosed one coconuts pieces, which are additionally served. within the other embodying the Mother Goddess The Khir is served only in Terra cota plates (Tok). with Her Shaktis for worship in the tantra Shastra. Blowing of Conch shells and ringing of bells are Bindu : the centre representing the Shiv must during the Puja offerings. Shakti in one sheath. 1. The recitation of the Divine Hymns, chanting of :A triangle with its apex pointing the mantra mingled with melodious tunes of the down (The Bindu divides and transforms into Bhajans in praise of the Devi renders the whole three folds manifested sound of the Omkara...A. milieu with fragrance of Divinity. In fact the Trikona 2. vibrations spread afar. As a part of the puja protocol the devotees circumbulate (go around Shatkona : two triangles placed acrosS the temple premise) the temple 3 or 7 or 11 or 111 each other. One representing the Shiva and the times. The most significant day is the Zeth U. M. 3. other the Shakti. Ashtami, which falls in May-June every year. It is Vritam : Circle representing correlation of believed on this day Mata Khir Bhawani manifests Her powers. It is celebrated as an annual festival 4. individual with the Universe. 16

 with offering of mass prayers and Pujas through settles at Nag bal (Nag is the snake in Sanskrit) with Her 360 accompanying snakes being guarded by three powers from three directions. day and night. Sahaja Understanding (A Yogic Insight) Kundalini is the residual energy of Shri Adi But when you tunderstand what She has done- the Shakti in the form of Serpent Goddess lying first thing She does is to (in my book also I have written dormant within us in the base of the spinal chord down about it butIwould like to tell you) that Her first, in the Mooladhara. "Kundalini" derives its name We should say, manifestation is on the left hand side. from the word "Kundal" a term used to denote That is the Mahakali's manifestation. So She comes on "coiling form" in Sanskrit language the Mahakali's system, the left hand side and that is "Now first of all, you get your Realization, all right. where She created Shri Ganesha... (Shri Adi Shakti Now you must know that Kundalini itself is the Puja, Cabella, 26.06.1998). Mahakali Shakti because She's the primordial Shri Mataji reveals that India is the microscopic Mahakali Shakti is the primordial shakti within us" form of the Earth and Maharashtra is the (Mahakali Puja, France 12 Sept. 1990). triangular peninsular that holds the "It is a Next, the number 360 which says there were 360 Kundalini...in fact Shri Mataji also says.. snakes which otherwise if seen as degrees in special country created by Mother Earth. It was only a Mathematic connotation it makes a circle or sea, after the amrut -manthan, the Himalayas started 'coiling" and numerologically 360 makes pushing up till it reached a certain point called the (3+6%3D9). Therefore it may speak of a circle or Everest. It was created to shield India, the Kundalini of coiled form and /or speak of nine Chakras that the Universe. It was necessary to protect the we know of in Sahaja. Kundalini. It is the brain of the Virata. They had to you see within us there are seven Chakras for your fence some country to preserve the ancient culture. ascent and two above it. So all these nine Chakras are to Shri Ganesh had to be placed in India. That is why Ihad be crossed in this lifetime. That should be your destiny. to take my birth in this country, at the Tropic of (Navaratri Puja, 1988, Pune)." 'Ast Cancer." (Kathmandu Puja, At the Ashram, 30th Now, it is also observed that She is guarded by March 1989) three Goddess viz., Goddess Sharda, Goddess Again if we look into the temple we find two idols Sharika and Goddess Jwala. Could this not be the one is of Mata Khir Bhawani and the other is of three powers of Shri Adi Shakti...The Bhuteshwar Shiva...Interestingly, "Bhuteshwar" Mahalaxmi, Maha Swaraswati and Mahakali? is the other name of "God of the Spirits"...And He Interestingly, She was called as Shyama in Lanka. Shyama is one of the other names of Shri Mahakaali. So, if we see Kundalini Mata comes as is Shiva. . The Shero- wali (God resting on Lion) residing in the twelve Sun (12 petalled heart Chakra) of the Mahakali and then Shri Hanumana (the right Universe encircled by serpents!..It is of course aspect ) carries Her from Lanka to Srinagar.. and and indeed Shri Mataji, Who resides in the settles as Mata Khir Bhawani...Khir is supposed thousand petalled lotus in our Sahasrara and also to be a Mahalaxmi principle as believed. So She is Sherowali. continued to pg. 19 17

 EINSTEIN'S CENTENNIAL Albert Einstein Exactly a 100 Years ago Albert Einstein published his famous Theory of Relativity which changed the way scientists thought, forever. What better way to pay tribute to this great seeker who talked about the Torsion Area (Sahasrara) than celebrating the centenary of his publications. In 1905, he published five papers which converted his status from being a clerk in a patents office in Switzerland to being a Professor at the University of Burn. Albert Einstein was one of the well-known scientists, who proposed the very popular "Theory of Relativity". In his theory, he explains about the 'space and time' relationship. He says that in a 3- dimensional world, which consists of mainly space, physical quantities are relative. E.g... What is right side for one person may seem to be left for another when watched from a different direction, in a 3-Dimentional space? But when another dimension 'time' is also added to the three dimension of space (X, Y, Zaxis), physical phenomena are no longer relative instead become absolute. E.g. What we consider a table; one can recognize it as a table even when viewed from different directions. This is the fourth dimension according to Einstein where space-time is involved. Although Einstein thought about the elemental aspects of nature: gravity, light and perception of various phenomenon, his most significant contribution came from his suggestion of the "Torsion Area", alluding to the Sahasrara. Einstein felt that all the scientific knowledge he got is not through the manipulation of mind, but it came to him from the 'torsion area' on the top of his head. In Sahaja Yoga we say it as the 7" energy center or the Sahasrara. When one become thoughtless & feel that he is the part and parcel of the universe, one gets the Divine knowledge very spontaneously. This does not require any thinking process. Knowledge just comes in to the attention when it is one with the Divine. Many scientists who have discovered various theories have mentioned the presence of an unknown power behind their discoveries. This is the All-pervading power of Divine Love. By practicing Sahaja Yoga one can enter the fourth & fifth dimensions and that is when things become Wikimedia Commons: Photographer: Yousef Karsh, "Albert Einstein", gelatin silver print, 11 February 1948." This image has þeen released into the public domain by the copyright holder, its copyright has expired. See Rachel Hildebrand's short essay on what exactly went into these celebrated scientific papers: http://www.craigmont.org/einstein.htm 18

 absolute. In these higher dimensions, every thing is absolute and sucha state can be achieved through Sahaja Yoga when one's Kundalini (Divine energy) gets awakened within us. Quotes "It was, of course, a lie what you read about my religious convictions, a lie which is being systematically repeated. I do not believe in a personal God and I have never denied this but have expressed it clearly. If something is in me which can be called religious then it is the unbounded admiration for the structure of the world so far as our science can reveal it." "I believe Gandhi's views were the most enlightened of all the political men of our time. We should strive to do things in his spirit: not to use violence for fighting for our cause, but by non-participation of anything you believe is evil.* "Iwant to know God's thoughts; the rest are details. "Why is it And finally, Einstein never understood the effect of his innocent genius on people. He says: that nobody understands me, but everybody likes me?" Learn More: [Streaming Audio] National Pu lic Radio Archived Show: http://www.npLorg/templates/story/story.php?storyld 4504647 [Web] Public Broadcasting Service Media: Einstein's Big Idea Homepage: http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/einstein/ From a letter written in English, dated March 24, 1954. Wikipedia.org 5 Wikipedia.org Unverified Source: http://rescomp.stanford.edu/-cheshire/EinsteinQuotes.html 1. 2. continued from pg. 17 The other name of Shri Mataji is Maha Ragya (Shri Maha Ragyi She Who Is The Empress Of The Universe)and above all She is the Kundalini Mata. The most significant day observed is the Jesth Astami that falls in May- Junē every year for the. celebration and the Puja ...does it also have any significance with opening of the Sahasrara of the Universe on 5 May 1970 by Shri Mataji? Ora mere coincidence? Interestingly, if we see while approaching the temple, people knew in subtlety that to offer Darshan at Her Holy Lotus Feet one has to cross through tough terrain like "Vichar (Thought) nag" like the Agnya Chakra to attain the 'thoughtless awareness' state. Also, one needs to burn his inner ego while crossing through Tyangalbal (burning Charcoal Hillock) to attain 'Doubtless awareness' state. Finally, one qualifies for the God's Realization at Mata Khir Bhawani temple and receives Her Divine blessings. The significance of the Yantra or the Chakra as depicted in Tantra Shastra and believed in Kashmir associated with the Mata Khir Bhawani, is well illustrated in the verses of the Saundarya Lahiri. In Shakti Yantram, So Mata Khir Bhawani is indeed Kundalini Mata's abode in Kashmir. Interestingly, the hymn or the Aarti recital at Mata Khir Bhawani has tremendous vibrations and is sung in praise of the deities residing in our Seven Chakras...from Mooladhar to Sahasrara. 19

 Prophetic Visions of the Divine Feminine in modern Europe Continued from Last Issue (June 2005) Sophia in the Russian mystieal tradition Whilst the modern Russian Sophiological tradition has its origins in the introduction of the writings of Jakob Boehme and others of his tradition into Russia in the late eighteenth century; it was further developed in the late nineteenth century by the philosopher Vladimir Soloviev (1853-1900). Soloviev had three visions of Sophia, which he described in his poem Trisvidaniya (Three meetings), written towards the end of his life in 1898. His first vision of Sophia was in 1862 when he was nine His second vision was in London in 1875 during a sabbatical leave from his lecturership in years. religion at Moscow University. In the British Museum Reading Room he actively sought Sophia whilst 'mysterious forces' guided him in his wide-ranging reading in Hindu philosophy, Gnosticism, Hermetic writings, and Kabbalah. And eventually, in answer to a fervent prayer, he had his second vision of Sophia: And then one day it was toward autumn I said to her: 0, blossom of a deity! You're here, I sense it why haven't you reealed Yourself to my eyes since childhood years? And no sooner had I thought this prayer Than everything was filled with a golden azure, And before me she shine once more But only her face it alone. But Soloviev wanted more than just a face, at which point a voice inside him commanded 'Be in Egypt!' Immediately abandoning his studies he departed via Paris, through France and Italy, travelling by steamship to Cairo. Arriving penniless, he was mysteriously directed to Thebes. Captured and then released by Bedouins, he spent the night in the desert, awakening to the fragrant scent of roses and his third- and final - vision of Sophia: And in the purple of the heaven's splendor, With eyes filled with an azure fire, You looked like the first radiance Of a universal and creative day. What is, what was, and what will always be Asingle motionless look encompassed everything here... The sea and rivers showed dark blue beneath me As did the distant forest, and the heights of snowy mountains. Isaw everything, and everything was one thing only A single image of female beauty... The infinite fit within its dimensions: Before me, in me were you alone. 20

 O, radiant woman! In youIam not deceived: In the desert Isaw all of you... Those roses will not wither in my sould Wherever life's wave may speed. This third vision was to provide his philosophical and poetic inspiration for the rest of his life. Not only did Soloviev see himself as a devotee of Sophia, he also saw himself as a prophet. The tradition of the writer as a divinely inspired prophet, responsible for shaping the spiritual and moral destiny of the nation, was of central importance in Russian literature throughout the nineteenth century. Thus Soloviev can proclaim in one poem: Let it be known: today the Eternal Feminine In an incorruptible body is descending to Earth. In the unfading light of the new Goddess Heaven has become one with the depths. The Third Age Throughout Europe towards the end of the nineteenth century, and into the first half of the twentieth century, there arose a belief that the third of three ages was imminent, and that that age would be of the Holy Spirit, of the Mother, of the Divine Feminine. It is debatable to what extent this is based on the three status (Latin word for 'age') proposed by the twelth century Christian abbot, Joachim of Fiore (1135-1202), and this varies according to each writer. Based on a famous passage in Joachim's Liber Concordie, the Irish poet, Lionel Johnson (1867-1902) wrote his poem Vita Venturi Saeculi (1902) which concentrates, unusually for this genre, on the sweetness of the third age: Be glad with beauty, white with perfect grace, Sweet Age to come, whose face Dawns dimly in our prophesying eyes Eager with good surmise! ... Sweet Age to come, whose wings are of white fire, Deny not our desire; Okingdom of the Spirit, conquering all Take willing earth in Thrall! Let green woods wave thee welcome, and blue seas Laugh welcome, and each breeze Be sacred incense round thee: peace appear 21

 Through crystal atmosphere, Impassioned, perdurable, omnipotent3; Given by God, not lent, Foretaste of Heaven, ere heaven be all in all, Come to the vexed world's call;... NEWOCE Sweet Age to come, declare the doctrine clear; We wait thee now, wait here! Sweet Age to come, upon our ready ground Let lily and rose abound, With pure supremacy of fragrant state Sweetening this world of hate, Which does the wrongs, it knows not, and it knows; Plant thou thy lily and rose!* The Polish nationalist Count August Cieszkowski (1814-1894) used the notion of a forthcoming third age of the Holy Spirit in his campaign for a pan-Slavic homeland, and the abstract art pioneers Vassily Kandinsky and Franz Marcin their Blaue Reiter Almanac (1911) assert that Agreat era has begun: the spiritual "awakening", the increasing tendency to regain "lost balance", the inevitable necessity of spiritual plantings, the unfolding of the first blossom. We are standing at the threshold of one of the greatest epochs th at mankind has ever experienced, the epoch of great spirituality. The propheticnature of the third-age theory is best seen in the writings of the exiled Russians, Zinaida Gippius and her husband Dmitrii Merezhkovskii, who believed in a forthcoming period of time when the Third Testament would disclose itself to humanity. Thus Merezhkovskii wrote in Lermontov (1911), whilst still in Russia: Christianity separated the past eternity of the Father from the future eternity of the Son, the earthly truth from the heavenly truth. Will they not be united by that which comes after Christianity, the revelation of the Spirit Eternal Womanhood, Eternal Motherhood? Will not the Mother reconcile the Father and the Son? Later, from exile in France, he was to announce in the The Mystery of Three (1925): The Father has not saved the world, The Son has not saved it, The Mother shall save it; The Mother is the Holy Spirit. Towards the end of his life, living in Paris as warclouds gathered over Europe, Merezhkovskii was to write his final work (on the Italian poet Dante) published in 1939, in which he comments: The fearful knot of social inequality which especially in our times threatens to tighten into a noose of death and so strangle humanity, be untied only in the Third Testament in the Kingdom of the may 22

 Holy Ghost. As the war machine of the German Third Reich (perversely, also based on the third-age theory) steamrollered across Europe, both west and east, this was the darkest hour for the European devotees of the Divine Feminine, still clinging to their notion of the forthcoming golden age. In the immediate post-war period, when resources were scarce, and books had of necessity to be slim, the English academic and novelist, C.S.Lewis (1898-1963), published The Great Divorce (1946) which contains a well-known description of a female prophet and her disciples, which can be seen as a prophetic vision of the Divine Feminine. Whilst held in a Stalinist prison in the 1950s, the Russian dissident writer, Daniil Andreev (1906- 1959), had a series of visions of a future in which the Zventa-Sventana (Divine Feminine) would come to Earth, and through an organization known as the Rosa Mira (Rose of the World) would offer the possibility of redemption to humans. This is described in detail in his book of the same name. Andreev defines the 'Rose of the World' as The coming all-Christian church of the last centuries that will integrate in itself the churches of the past and will connect in a free union all religions of In this Light. to sense, the Rose of the World is inter-religious or pan-religious. Its main goal is many as save from the dangers of spiritual enslavement by the human souls as possible and to deliver them coming anti-God. Andreev identifies the global feminine essence as 'Zventa-Sventana' meaning "The lightest of the light, the holiest of the holy.' As conceived by Andreev, the Rose of the World, being a global religiou and social organization, is destined to overcome ous the contradiction between two primary tendencies ascetic spirituality which rejects the world and the so-called pagan tendency which extols the carnal world... Finally, the triumpth of the Rose of the World is not the striving of religious humanity towards the Eternally possible until Feminine [Vechno Zhenstvennoe] reveals a new, deeper meaning; until the breathing of the Zventa-Sventana has softened and lightened the extremely gloomy severity of masculinity, which up to now [has] completely dominated ethics, religion, and social life. Andreev clearly sees the feminine principle as essential for the future of humanity: We are entering the cycle of epochs when the feminine soul will become increasingly inspirers, sensible mothers, pure and broad, when more and more women will become deep and wise and visionary leaders. This will be the cycle of epochs when the feminine component of humanity willmanifest itself of masculine forces in a perfect harmony. Could this be a prophecy of Sahaja Yoga? with unprecedented strength, balancing the previous dominance This is a condensed version of a paper written by John Noyce for the M.A. in Religion and Theology at Monash University, Melbourne, Australia. The full version is available on request. (6) 23

 Shri Mataji alaji 3 house in nhindwara On 7 April 2005, Shri Mataji established H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmal Devi Sahaja Yoga Trust to manage all the work of Sahaja Yoga in India. She is the Chairperson of this National Trust and Sir C. P. Srivastava is the Vice Chairman. From the very inception, the National Trust placed the highest priority to the acquisition ofThe holy birth place of Shri Mataji (the Chhindwara House) for the International Sahaja collective and to build a Memorial. The task was entrusted to the Asset Management Committee of the National Trust. This holy task was accomplished on 14 July 2005. The property has been officially transferred in the name of H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga Trust and all legalities have been completed. A collective hawan and puja was held on the premises on 14 July, Following the instructions from Shri Mataji, sign boards declaring it as Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga World Ashram and the Holy Birthplace of Shri Mataji have already been put in place. पटम पूज्य श्री महाजी सिनतल देसी सहज योग सामतिक आञ्रमः The Indian collective leadership, represented by the National Trust, will now take up the holy and important task of building the World Sahaja Yoga Ashram and the most beautiful Memorial to our Mother on Her birthplace. 24

 A New Yuga, needs a new kind of Hero! 30 to be continue.. ||Thank you Mother||

 GOLDEN LION GOLDEN LION YUVA SHAKTI DANIEL JESUS "IDENTITY" PRESENTS: UNIVERSAL GOLDEN LION IS A GANA, A DIVINE WARRIOR WHO CAME ON EARTH TO HELP THE SAHAJA YOGUIS IN THEIR MISSION OF EMANCIPATION OF HUMANITY. FIGHTING AGAINST TERRIBLE DEMONS AND NEGATIVITIES, GOLDEN LION IS AN INSTRUMENT OF DEITIES IN THE BATTLE OF KALI YUGA. KNOW THE AMAZING ADVENTURES OF THIS SAHAJ SUPER HERO! విోరీ 00



----------------------

2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Yuvadirishti
Volume 6
Septembes
2005
Issue 3
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-1.txt 
 AWAAAWWWAKAHAHA
Index
Award Presented to Sir C. P. Srivastava
by President of Inida
1
Heart Chakra
SOUNDARYA LAHARI
The Magnetic Field of
Everlasting Love
12
Mata Khir Bhawani
13
18
Einstein's Centennial
Prophetic Visions of the
Divine Feminine in modern Europe
20
Shri Mataji' house in Chhinduana
24
ward
изе
MMMMTMMMMMTHM
AAAHAKAKAHAAAKAHAAAHAKATAEAAR
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Award Presented To
Sir C. P. Srivastava
by President Of India
At last the much awaited historic moment came
live on 1" October in the evening at 4:30 p.m.
in the
Rashtrapati Bhavan, (President House), New
Delhi on Saturday, when the prestigious award in
due recognition for his contribution in the field of
maritime exploration and Excellence in Public
Administration, Academics and Management was
awarded to retired LAS officer, Sir. C.P. Srivastava,
our beloved Papaji by the President of India, H.E.
A.P.J. Abdul Kalam.
Sir C.P. Srivastava has been designated as a Lal
Bahadur Shastri Fellow and his name inscribed on
the honours roll of the Lal Bahadur Shastri
Institute of Management, Delhi. The participants
in the Rasthrapati Bhavan award ceremony
included Prime Minister Dr.Manmohan Singh,
United Progressive Alliance Chairperson
Ms.Sonia Gandhi, Union Home Minister
Mr.Shivraj Patil, and the former Union Minister
and son of Lal Bahadur Shastri, Mr.Anil Shastri
along with other important dignitaries.
Mr. Shastri, who is also the chairman of the
institute, said: "The award honours people from whom the younger generation can draw
inspiration."
Sir C.P. Srivastava is the founding Chancellor Emeritus of the World Maritime University, Malmo,
Sweden . He has also been the chairman of the governing board of the IMO International Maritime
Law Institute, Malta , and chairman of the Government of India Committee on Maritime Education
and Training.
1.
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-3.txt 
 The Sahaja yogis present there at that gracious
moment fondly recollect that the presence of Our
Holy Mother gave the event a special quality and
auspiciousness and that She was pleased. After, Sir
C.P. was honoured with the prestigious award; he
was subsequently invited to deliver a speech. The
speech itself turned out to be historic in its own
essence as our Papaji, Sir C.P. Srivastava addressed
the gathering with a very powerful English diction
in praise of the service he rendered under the
principles and guidance of the erstwhile Prime
Minister of India, the late Mr. Lal Bahadur Shastri.
Concluding his speech, the eyewitness recollected that Sir spoke with all candid gesture and confided
that whatever position he held today at the age of 85, along with, all his achievements for which he is
being honoured today, owe its all due credit to the values he has held through the love he received
throughout his 58 years of married life and association with Shri Mataji and also the love that he
received from his daughters Kalpana and Sadhna. He also mentioned that Shri Mataji as his wife
"Nirmala", who had always been at his side as inspiration and that Her principles were all that Mr. Lal
Bahadur Shastri once prophesised as values in life and serving the cause of the humanity. She had
been in that path only, helping mankind to improve upon all social activities and make a better living.
He also added that he is now totally devoted and dedicated to this cause which our beloved Mother,
has taken up as the holy task of uplifting the humanity and transforming them to be persons with
values. Later he thanked the President and all the honourable members present there for the honour
conferred upon him.
2.
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Heart
Chakra
Imanga
Odicen
Center Heart
Deity: Shri Jagadamba
Gross (physical) level: Center of cardiac plexus, part of left plexus, sternum bone.
Manifestation (controls): Breathing, Heart, breasts
Qualities : Mother of the Universe, physical mother, sense of security, creation and nourishment of
antibodies.
Associated Day: Friday
No. of Petals: Twelve (12)
Associated Color: Purple
Associated Planet: Venus
Associated Gem: Ruby
Place on hand: Little fingers
Associated Element: Air
Associated Symbol: Flame
Causes of Catch/Obstruction:Fear, Fanaticism, fantasy, spiritualism.
Left Heart
Deity: Shri Shiva, The Spirit-Atma, (Shri Parvati)
Gross (physical) level: Heart organ, and left cardiac plexus.
Manifestation: Heartbeat (Anahat - sound that is without percussion).
Qualities: Existence, life, joy, after Realisation Attention-Truth Joy (sat chit ananda).
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Place on hand: Left little fingers
Causes of Catch / Obstruction : Extreme physical/mental activity, heartfelt bad relations (especially
mother 's), outside Attention, Hatha Yoga, drugs, no seeking, no faith in God, anti-God activities.
Right Heart
Deity: Shri Rama (Shri Sita)
Gross (physical) level:Cardiac plexus (right side)
Qualities : Dutiful life as father, husband, brother, Gracious, auspicious
boundaries maintained (Maryadas)
Place on hand: Right little finger
Causes of Catch / Obstruction : Father or fatherhood problems, emotional aggression, arrogant or
inconsiderate behavior, unlawful domination.
QUALITY
The Heart Chakra is the home of the Self, the Spirit, Atma all meaning the same thing. Time and again
Shri Mataji has stressed that "You are nothing but an eternal Spirit". In this way she is telling us that
we have to realise and become our Spirit, and leave behind the futility of the illusion we live in. We
start the process of becoming our Spirit after realisation, as we start to lose our false identifications
with our body, mind, and feelings. Only after this enlightenment can we take our Attention to our
Heart and cleanse it. The Spirit can only manifest when our heart is open and clean, at which point we
feel the eternal joy of the creation and the meaning and purpose of our place in it. We clean our heart
through our pure Desire, and through our Attention. Saying Affirmations such as "Iam the Spirit" are
effective in this process, butit must not be a mechanical action.
Love
Pure love, which enlightens us all, is the real quality of the Heart Chakra. In the unrealised state we
rarely love for love's sake. Because of our conditionings we confuse feelings of love with those of
possession, sex and selfishness. Pure love is detached, it gives without interest. Like the tree which
gives shade to one and all, it is without prejudice and motive. True love is the quality that emanates
from the Spirit and not from the body or mind. When we talk of loving someone, we should
understand the direction in which this love is flowing. Bodily attraction is physical. There are even
those who exercise seductive arts to ensnare a good "catch". We can see this in those who indulge in
excessively trendy fashions. These people are especially at risk in their relationships because they
relate not as two Spirits, but as two fashionable physical forms. This kind of physical attraction is not
true love because it comes from the mind, and mind does not love-it merely wants. When the want of
the mind is attained, then the novelty wears off. For instance a child is excited and attached to a new
toy, but after a few days as the novelty wears away, the excitement dies. The same occurs with
relationships which are based simply on physical attraction. The marriage is a spiritual union.
Without recognition of the Spirit marriage results in transitory relationships of the make and break
kind. This casual state in turn adversely affects the heart center and causes insecurity. Hence, instead
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-6.txt 
 of confidence between the husband and
wife, an undercurrent of fear runs
between them. Love is often mistakenly
taken as restricted to male and female. In
fact love is the flow of life in all
relationships, between children/ parents,
brothers/sisters, friends, old people, etc.
Where many people share and care, then
the whole society opens up its heart
centre. It becomes a collective society and
changes the world. This is the power of
love. Love is the principle behind all
creation, all vibrations. We say that God is
love and love is God, because in its depths
we cease to be. In true love there is no "I"
and "You", there is simply the merging in
the Spirit. In this state we experience true
human unity, the true oneness of life.
Hate and jealousy develop an anti-
current which flows against the cosmic
rhythm. Where there is love there is
growth, celebration, joy and evolution.
Security
A lot of problems arise from fear. If we
have self-confidence, we have strong
defenses which protect against base
desires and negative outside influences.
If we live in fear, then our natural immune
is weakened and we become vulnerable to allergies and disease. Our personality grows and
system
shines when our heart is strong, and we approach life with a will to win like a warrior. When we
weaken, we become trapped in the cage of fear, afraid to venture out and experience the joy and
wonders of the kaleidoscope of life. We attract to ourselves what we give out. If we have a constricted
heart, then we are likely to attract corresponding people and to perpetuate the problem. Hence it is
important to be strong and grounded so that we can nourish our relationships. Where a mother's love
has been denied in childhood, it is possible that a fulfilling relationship can bridge the gap. A strong
heart center is the basis for a healthy personality. Nourished with love, we emanate warmth and
happiness. Love is nature's way. Through love, the seed attracts nourishment fromn the soil and comes
to life. It is the love which becomes compassion which makes us reach out without thinking to help
mankind. It is a spontaneous act, not an intellectual decision.
5.
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Relationships
Our relationships with our parents have their place in the Heart Chakra. Our physical mother has her
place on the left heart, and our father has his place on the right heart. Once we realize that our parents
have this place within us, we don't try to run away from any problems in any way, we face up to our
responsibilities towards them. At all times we should treat them with the love and respect which is
their due. Parents should likewise raise their children in a pure life, which will encourage their
spiritual development. They should love them without attachment and fear, knowing that they are
the trustees of their children. If parents do not practice what they preach, they cannot set a proper
example to their offspring. Parents should be respectable, in order to be respected themselves. How
we get on with our spouse is also a matter of the heart. Where one partner dominates the other, or is
possessive, then the love is stifled and the relationship is disturbed. As the relationship flourishes and
gains in understanding, both husband and wife realize their equal status, their position as two wheels
on the same chariot. In situations where the female is unable to make her full contribution to the
household (for instance where the man thinks he is superior because of this physical advantage and
wage earning capability) she can develop a suppressed anger, which in itself can be directed towards
the children or develop into neuroses. The family unit is important to society, and the foundations of
this unit are respect, love and duty between the members- parents and children. If the family ideal
collapses then the society will soon follow. Money cannot buy emotional security, and a society which
respects old age as a kind of childhood where love and care are of paramount importance will have a
much more stable existence.
TRADITION
The seat of the Heart Chakra is located in the Brahmarandra at the crown of the head (in the
Sahasrara). This is where Shri Gauri (the Kundalini) in her form of Shri Parvati is united with Shri
Shiva. Shri Shiva presides as the witness in the left Heart Chakra, controlling our very existence.
GROSS PHYSICAL ASPECT
The heart is the pump of the body, hence any mental and physical excess strains this center and can
lead in advanced stages to a heart attack. Using the body as an instrument of athletic display fatigues
the heart center. In a similar way modern Hatha Yoga is a form of athleticism which has no correlation
to the Spirit, and this too can harm the center. The sages of old time developed certain exercises for
correcting the spinal problems caused by wrong living, thus aligning the body to its natural form in
preparation for the search for knowledge of the Spirit. This led to the development of Hatha Yoga
schools, and hence to the modern form of 'Yoga'. Unfortunately today Hatha Yoga is mistaken for
spirituality. People spend hours doing all kinds of asanas (positions). By standing on our heads (or
wearing white/saffron robes or being vegetarian or whatever) we are not going to know God. The
word Yoga means Union in Sanskrit, and the union is that of our Kundalini with the all pervading
God is realised when the Kundalini evolves through right living, deed, thought and
Divine
energy.
action.
If we treat our body like a gadget we become like a gadget. Excessive right side activity in such
pursuits as Hatha Yoga can dry out a person, and make his personality cold and without love.
6.
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Suffering is often misidentified
with purification. We are led to
believe that if something hurts it
must be good for us ('no pain, no
gain'), while anything that is nice
is evil. This numbs the left heart,
which is the seat of the Spirit. Both
self denial and self torture are
against the dignity of the Spirit.
CLEARING THE HEART
Clearing the Center Chakra:
Using the Elements: The use of a
candle around the heart area can
be very effective.
Exercise deep and relaxed slow breathing in and out for a while. Take a deep breath and hold it in for a
while, then release. Don'tstrain. Repeat a few times.
Affirmations: Mother, please make me a fearless person.
General Advice: Breathe in, hold the breath. Say to yourself 'Jagadamba' twelve times, then release the
breath. Give vibration to the front and back of the heart. Recite the 23rd Psalm from the Bible. Read the
Devi Mahatmyam. Use the candle treatment if the left Swadisthan Chakra is also catching.
Clearing the Left Heart Chakra:
Using the Elements: Candle treatment around the heart area.
Affirmations: Mother, I am the Spirit Mother, I am the Spirit, only the Spirit, I am not the ego, not this
body, not this emotion-Iam only the pure Spirit.
General Advice: Give vibrations to the left Heart Chakra Keep your Attention on the Atma residing in
the Heart. Where the heart catches due to overactivity of the right side, raise the left side 108 times, and
also use the vibrations by putting the left hand towards the photograph with the right hand pointing
upwards to the sky (or ceiling). The ether will dissolve the heat.
Clearing the Right Heart Chakra:
Using the Elements: Candle treatment around the heart area.
General Advice: Give vibrations to the Right Heart Chakra. Develop the boundaries of good conduct in
family life and in society (Maryadas). Don't take on too much responsibility, also don't be too under-
responsible. Develop the qualities and protectiveness of a father and husband. Correct any wrong
situations arising from your relationship as a father, husband, son or brother. Where the right heart
catch is of an overemotional nature, raise the right side (and lower the left) 108 times, and use the
vibrations to clear out by putting the left hand towards the photograph and the right hand on the
motherearth. This will release the left side problem which is causing the rightheart to catch.
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-9.txt 
 SOUNDARYA LAHARI
Shri Aadishankaracharya has
authored a number of
descriptive texts which extol the
various aspects of divinity. Shri
Mataji explained how he was
especially inspired to write the
Soundarya Lahiri, which
describe the glories of Mother.
In his descriptive writings and
debates with scholars,
Aadishankaracharya had
described Divinity like no one
had before. His composition, The
Vivekachudamani, created a
wave amongst various schools
of Vedic thought which ultimately lead to long winding debates. Although his writings were beyond
criticism, Aadishankaracharya must have felt the inappropriate nature of reaction to Divine
knowledge by the so-called Brahmins and Pundits of his times. He was constantly attacked for his
observations, which could have been felt only through self-realization, which wasn't easily achievable
in those times.
This led to the inspiration to create something that would be so enlightening, so divine that there
would be no scope for debates, fights and attacks. He discovered that this was possible only when he
started describing the aspects of The Goddess. Thus he started describing the endless bounty of the
Aadishakti, which is best accessible through Her Divine Breeze literally, the Soundarya Lahiri.
Saundarya-Lahari, verse 9
Thou art diverting Thyself, in secrecy with Thy Lord, in the thousand-pettaled lotus [Sahasrara],
having pierced through the Earth situated in the Mooladhara, the Water in the Manipura, the Fire
abiding in the Swadisthana, the air in the heart [Anahat], the Ether above [Vishuddhi], and Manas
between the eyebrows [Agnya]and thus broken through the entire Kula path [Sushumna nadi]
Prabodhasudhakara, verse 164
He who is immersed in the ocean of Supreme Bliss is full within and without, like a pot immersed
for a long time in a large deep cavity of the river Ganga.
8.
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Vivekachudamani, verses 69-70
The first step to liberation is the complete detachment from all perishable things, then follow
calmness, self-control, forbearance, and the utter relinquishment of all work enjoined [rituals?] in
the scriptures.
Then comes hearing [from the Guru], reflection on that, and long, constant and unbroken
meditation on the Truth for the muni [man of reflection]. After that the learned seeker attains the
supreme nirvikalpa state and realizes the bliss of nirvana even in this life.
SHLOKA IN SANSKRIT
तनीयांसं पांसुं तव चरणपड्केरुहभवं
विरिष्ठिस्सच्चिन्वन् विरचयति लोकानविकलम् ।
बहत्येनं शौरिः कथमपि सहप्रेण शिरसां
हरस्संक्षुद्यैनं भजति भसितोद्भलनविधिम् ॥ २॥
Taneeyam sampamsum tava charana-pankeruha-bhavam
Virinchi samchinvan virachayati lokan avikalam;
Vahatyenam Shaurih katham api sahasrena shirasam
Harah samksudy'ainam bhajati bhasito'ddoolana-vidhim.
TRANSLATION:
O Divine Mother! The creator, Shri Brahma created the whole universe (limitless and with out any
imperfection) by gathering the minute particles of dust from your lotus feet. The sustainer, Shri
Vishnu as Adishesa (the deity of serpents) supports this universe ( made out of that dust ) with
His thousand hoods. And Hara (The Lord Shiva), the destroyer, crushing it into powder, applies
these ashes all over His body (at the time of dissolution).
2. SELF REALIZATION IS THE DIVINE GIFT TO ALL
अविद्यानामन्त-स्तिमिर-मिहिरद्वीपनगरी
जडानां चैतन्य-स्तवक-मकरन्द-स्रूतिझरी ।
दरिद्राणां चिन्तामणिगुणनिका जन्मजलधौ
निमग्नानां दंष्ट्रा मुररिपु-वराहस्य भवती ॥ ३॥
SHLOKA IN SANSKRIT:
Avidyanam antah-timira-mihira-dveepa-nagari
Jadanam chaitanya-stabaka-makaranda-sruti jhari
Daridranam chinta-mani-gunanika janma-jaladhau
Nimagnanam damstra mura-ripu-varahasya bhavati.
9.
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-11.txt 
 TRANSLATION:
O Divine Mother! One who gets the Gift of Self
Realization, gets rid of all the illusion ( Avidya
means 'Not the vidya' the darkness or illusion-
the ignorance within us). This Divine gift is a
great Island City, where from takes place the
luminous sunrise of spiritual illumination
driving away the over-casting darkness of
ignorance in the hearts of devotees. It forms the
cluster of flower buds, from which gushes forth
the nectar of intelligence, enlivening the dull-
witted. It is a veritable necklace of wish-yielding
gems for those who are suffering from poverty.
And for those immersed in the ocean of Samsara
(Worldly), it becomes their up-lifter like the Tusk
of Vishnu (which raised the earth from
submergence in Pralaya (destruction)
when He incarnated as the Cosmic Boar).
waters
3. THIS VERSE EXPRESSES THE SUPREMACY
OF THE DEVI OVER ALL OTHER DEITIES:
SHLOK IN SANSKRIT
त्रयाणां देवानां त्रिगुणजनितानान्तव शिवे
भवेत पूजा पूजा तव चरणयोर्या विरचिता ।
तथा हि त्वत्पादोद्धहनमणिपीठस्य निकटे
स्थिता होते शश्चन मुकुलितकरोक्तंसमकुटाः ॥ २५॥
Trayanam devanam tri-guna-janitanam tava Sive
Bhavet puja puja tava charanayor ya virachita3;
Tatha hi tvat-pado'dvahana-mani-pithasya nikate
Sthita hy'ete sasvan mukulita-karottamsa-makutah.
TRANSLATION
O Divine Mother! Three Deities, Shri Brahma, Vishnu & Shiva, who have their origin in thy three
Gunas (Satwa, Raja & Tama) are worshipping at thy lotus feet all the time. They (three Deities) are
there near to the manipeeta (the foot stool of diamonds - where the lotus feet rests) with the joined
palms held above their diamond heads in salutation to the Divine Mother.
10
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-12.txt 
 4. DESCRIBES THE SURRENDER OFA YOGI
SHLOK IN SANSKRIT
जपो जल्प: शिल्पं सकलमपि मुद्राविरचना
गतिः प्रादक्षिण्यक्रमणमशनाद्याहुतिविधिः
प्रणामस्सवेशस्सुखमखिलमात्मार्पणदृशा
सपर्यापर्यायस्तव भवतु यन्मे विलसितम् ॥ २७॥
Japo jalpah silpam sakalam apı mudra-viracana
Gatih pradaksinya-kramanam asanady'ahuti-vidhih3;
Pranamah samvesah sukham akilam atmarpana-drsa
Saparya-paryayas tava bhavatu yan me vilasitam.
TRANSLATION
May everything that I do with the sense of self-dedication be offerings in Thy service -- my prattle,
the utterance of Thy Mantra; the movements of my hand, the gestures and poses of Thy worship3B
my walking, Thy circumambulation; my eating, fire-sacrifice to Thee; the stretching of the body in
sleep and rest, prostration to Thee; and all my enjoyments, offerings made to Thee.
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-13.txt 
 The Magnetic Field of Everlasting Love
We have often heard Shri Mataji saying that the presence
of Sahaja Yogis exude an indefinable power. This power -
magnetism, like the power of gravity, is a tangible force. A
magnetic field is created every time a current is passed
through an electric wire. The human nervous system also
transmits scientifically measurable electrical impulses; in
doing so it sets up its own magnetic field. As the energy-
flow in the nervous system increases, it can be realized
more clearly on its subtle level. This can be easily
achieved when one's Kundalini clearly passes through
every energy centre. The greater one achieves this
the better he can control his life and the physical world
around him. This helps him to control his spiritual
destiny.
power,
Whatever one strongly desires, he attracts that to himself.
When one sends out a strong desire, a ray of energy goes
out from him towards the object of that desire, creating its
own magnetic field, strong or weak according to the
relative strength of his desire. But Shri Mataji has said that
a strong desire means a pure desire.
A bar of metal becomes magnetized when it is placed next to an already-magnetized piece of iron.
Similarly, to acquire strong magnetism it is important to mix with people who already have the kind of
magnetism that one wants to develop. That's why it is very important to be in good collectivity. Every kind
of human activity manifests a magnetism of its own. For success in that activity, one has to develop the
appropriate type of magnetism.
Everything originates in the Infinite Spirit. Magnetism of every kind is born of the magnetic power of
God's love. Divine love is the most powerful force in the universe. By the magnetic power of divine love,
all things can be accomplished even that most seemingly impossible of all tasks, our salvation from
delusion.
What man, by his power, cannot accomplish, divine love accomplishes easily. And its task, once
accomplished, is accomplished forever. By meditation one can tune himself to that subtlest ray.
When one surrenders himself at the lotus feet of The Divine Mother, She makes him a channel of Her love,
taking him to higher and higher levels of divine awareness until his love attains perfection in Her. We must
remember that Her love always flows to us. The choice is left to us if by our love, we want to complete the
circuit, thereby generating the magnetism that can draw to us the very consciousness of Infinity.
12
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Mata Khir Bhawani
The Accessibility
The Geography and
the mythology
One can travel right up
to the pilgrim center
from Srinagar city by
motorable road or by
boat through Vitasta
The Holy state of
Kashmir reminds us of
Hazrat bal Shrine (the
treasured holy hair of
up to 'Shadipur' and
from there the boat is
Shri Mohammed
Sahab) or the water
element swayambhu
of Shiva at Amarnath
towed up to the
temple through the
canal. At times the
caves or Shri Jesus
pilgrims prefers to
undertake yet difficult
path by trekking from
the city itself by
who once resided in
this Holy land (Ros
Bal) besides, temples
of, Jwalaji, Sharika and
Adishakracharya.
approaching through
"Vichar nag' (It is like
However, Shri Mata
TH
crossing through the
sixth Chakra
Khir Bha wani is
another rare shrine
which is believed to be
'Agnya').., it is
the temple of Shri Adi
Shakti r the
believed as one cross
this 'nag' he is able to
discriminate between
Kundalini Herself.
the good and the evil
The natural backdrop
of this Divine land of Sahasrara is gifted with a (thoughts). Also, one has to cross through a place
number of spring outlets called as the 'Nags' in called Tyangalbal (burning Charcoal Hillock),
Kashmiri language. One of these 'nags 'is located that signifies, crossing this place burns all the
near Ganderbal in the Tulamulla' or Tulla mulya materialistic desire in ones spiritual ascent.
or Tullamnlanka village about 23 km. northeast Finally, on entrance one has to cross the 'Amarher'
of Srinagar City. The entire area around the (Immortal stairs) that signifies the stairs to the
village is marshy, The part of the land is covered kingdom of God
with lush green scenario with wild fragrant
flowering plants surrounded by shady Chinar, It is believed that during the Treta Yuga (times of
Willows, Mulberry and Elm trees. Mata Khir shri Rama), a herd of boars, chased by hunters,
Bhawani temple is located at latitude 34 Deg 13 entered the ashram of Ravana accidentally.
The Legend
min. North and longitude 74 Deg. 48 min. East
Ravana, who was in deep meditation then was
(6)
13
relie
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-15.txt 
 disturbed by the terrible noisy herd of the boars. It is believed that when Mother Shyama entered
He turned furious and in his fit of anger thought Kashmir, She decided Her first halt in the
of killing both the boars and the hunters. At this Manzgam village (still considered to be a holy
moment Lord Shiva appeared and advised place) over the Pir Panjal range. The place being
Ravana instead to meditate on Mother Goddess hilly did not suit Her abode as the accompanying
without getting distracted. As a result Ravana 360 snakes with Her were also to be
undergoes rigorous penance and is blessed with accommodated. So, Her Divine journey
divine vision by the Devi and Devi continued in search of Her final abode. Later,
compassionately desires to fulfill wishes of from Mazgam, Mother proceeded to a place
Ravana by granting boon. It is said, Ravana, called Kulgam near Devsar. Though, the place
cleverly prayed the Devi for the boon of Her was beautiful with the sylvan surrounding yet the
abode in his kingdom itself (in the then Lanka) as scarcity and dearth of water rendered it
Her permanent establishment, in order to be unsuitable. So, it is from here that Mother
under the power of Her eternal protection.
traveled through the eastern side of Martand
Pleased with Ravana's devotion, Mother fulfilled Village and rested with the Divine transit halt at
his wishes to stay eternally in his kingdom. Thus
Her abode was placed in the northeast coast of The places like Anantnag, Raithan , Vatikapora,
Lanka, in the spring called 'Ananta' (infested with Bandipora, Koti tirth (Baramulla) , Badarkali,
snakes) as Goddess 'Shyama'. Initially, Ravana Chandigam and Tucker(Handwara) bears the
worshipped Her with all his devotion.
Lakutpora villagenear the hills of Aishmuqam.
imprint of Her Divine tour . Mother Shyama
Subsequently, he started leading a luxurious life practically vibrated the whole valley with Her
and also initiated "Tamasic' offerings to the Holy Lotus Feet. Her Divine tour came to rest as
Goddess. With such demonic acts coupled with She descended from the Sharda Temple (now in
unholy act of kidnapping Shri Sita Mata, Goddess Pakistan-Occupied-Kashmir) to a place near
Shyama turned very furious with Ravana. She Shadipore at the confluence of rivers Sind and
cursed Ravana and also decided to forsake Vitasta with Her 360 accompanying snakes.
Lanka.
Finally, Her abode was settled with Her
accompanying snakes around the village
Later, when Shri Ram invaded Lanka to rescue Tullamula guarded by Goddess Sharda, Sharika
Shri Sita Mata from the clutches of Ravana, it is and Jwala from three directions.
said Shri Ram also visited the place and
worshipped Goddess Shyama in Lanka. Pleased Goddess Shyama here at this place of Kashmir,
with Shri Ram, Goddess Shyama expressed Her manifest Her form as "Maha Ragnya",
desire that Her abode be shifted out of that place known later as Mata Khir Bhawani from Shyama
popularly
to the Himalayas. Shri Ram at once requested Shri (Khir is the preparation of Sweet from Rice and
Hanuman to carry out the desired Divine task of milk condensed with cooking in fire to offer to
the Mother. Thus, Shri Hanuman carried Mother Devi -Rice is the element of Laxmi tattwa) in
Goddess along with 360 snakes on his shoulder to Sattwic form.-The Goddess of knowledge,
the Himalayas under Her instruction to ' Sati prosperity and peace. The source of great
Desh' or 'Satisar' in Kashmir, India.
inspiration and dispeller of sorrows.
14
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-16.txt 
 It is believed in Kashmir that, She is Trigunatmika messages in the ancient times) appeared floating
- She is Para, Parapara and Apara. She is believed in the 'nag'. As he recovers the 'Bhoj Patra' he
to control the powers of Shri Brahma, Shri discovers verses in praise of the Mata Khir
Vishnu, Shri Shiva and Shri Indra. She creates Bhawani in Sanskrit script on the 'Patra'. The
with Her own will, preserves and destroys. She is
the Roop Shakti for the pure minded devotees.
She is the supreme power of the Universe.
translation of the text reads as:
"(I prostrate to the Supreme Goddess Maha Ragnya,
who is lustrous, having twelve Suns around and seated
on a lion throe, encircled by the serpents who are not
Popular belief in Kashmir
As the Legend goes, there was a visible to the mortal eyes but is realized by the
learned Kashmiri Brahmin, Krishna Pandit, a
great devotee of Devi. Mother appears in his There after a temple-the Holy abode of Mata Khir
dream and directs him to physically establish Her Bhawani was constructed and worshipped in that
abode towards the northeast direction in 'Nag'. The main mysterious nag is quite large and
pious and
Spiritualist (Realized Souls)".
Tullamula village within the swampy area of the has been known as 'Nag bal'. The centre of the
spring. Mother in his dreams instructs the Pandit 'nag' where the temple has been constructed is
to follow a snake on his way that would guide called as the 'Bindu'. The 'nag' has irregular seven
sides with apices called as Pada' (Feet) towards
him to the exact location of Her Divine abode.
Accordingly, it is said that the Pandit takes a boat East the Southern and the Northern sides are
from Shadipore and from certain point, a snake longer than the Western side which has been
appears in the water and he is guided to the exact called as 'Sher' (Head).
location where the snake stands erect and later The present foundation of the Marble temple was
disappears
the boundaries of the exact location (As per Devi's destroyed in the 14" -15h Century. Maharana
re-constructed on the ancient foundation that was
in water. Krishna Pandit demarcates
with a stick being helped by the Pratap Singh constructed the present temple in
desire)
neighboring devotees. This was how the abode of the 19th century. As per the record in the living
Mata Khir Bhawani was discovered.
memory, while, cleansing the nag, two ancient
The place is believed to be surrounded by 360 ldols (Murties) was discovered which are now
"Nags"(Springs). Each of them had deities in form Placed in the temple. One of them is of Mata Khir
of snake. Most of them have either silted now or Bhawani and the other is that of Shri Bhuteshwar
the
Shiva.
be
people have forgotten them or may
unaware of the location or may be are covered Based on the contemporary paintings, literary
with thick plantation of Swampy environment. descriptions and iconographical elements
The 'nagas' that still exists are the places of Goddess Mata Khir Bhawani is depicted and
shown seated on full-blossomed thousand petalled
worship as on date.
It is a popular belief that when Krishna Pandit Lotus on a hexagonal altar, with four arms bearing
along with other devotees were performing the vessel, sword, Lotus and Amrut (Divine Nectar)
Puja at this 'nags' for the first time, a piece of 'Bhoi Container and surrounded by snakes. Her head is
Patra' (the bark of holy tree used for writing beđecked with jeweled crown. She is also
embellished with ornaments and a nag (snake)
15
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-17.txt 
 : Eight petalled lotus
Ashtadhalam
adorns Her neck. Her pair of Lotus eyes reflects 5.
depicting five senses of action with mind, intellect
and ego.
the signs of purity.
It is believed that the colour of the 'Nag' changes,
Trivritam : Three circles(Three Lokas
indicating harbinger of good or bad events to follow. 6.
When the colour of the water in the spring changes to representing the Bhu...Bhuvah and Swaha).
Pink, Milky white, Light Greem or Rosy Red is believed 7
to suggest good omen while, the shadows of Gray to the complete Chakra/Yantra and its parts
Black is taken as inauspicious.
Bhograham(Dewar): Three lines enclosing
.
representing the foundation or the base for the
(Shri Mataji revealed once in an informal discussion worship.
that the colour of the spring had transformed to "milky
white" on Her Holy presence at that place. Later,
villagers from neighborhood were excited and
announced aloud that Devi had come).
THE PUJA, THE RITUALS, AND
TRADITION
Traditionally, the Puja and collective prayers are
offered on every Lunar Ashtami day (Eighth day
It is believed that manifestation of the Goddess of the Lunar calendar). The Puja are offered
had been evidenced in a number of occasions, in amidst Lights of lamps of earthenware. The
form of bubbling in water shaping up through samagri (material of the Puja offerings) are a mix
various irregular mystic symbols of Mata Khir of special herbs called Venah (Memtha sylvestris),
Bhawani. These formations have been depicted as roses, Lotus end other fragrant flowers with rice
"Yantra" or the "Chakras". The 'Yantra' is believed and Barley. Milk and Sugar Candies (Khand) are
to be the revelations of Mata Khir Bhawani. It has also offered. The Bhog is prepared in form of Suji
been interpreted and described by several Ki halwa(semolina), dry fruits and Khir(a special
spiritual people. The one that is popularly condensed paste by cooking/boiling) made out of
believed in that locality is as follows:
the rice-milk -sugar with ghee, raisins, dates or
The Yantra constitutes seven parts enclosed one coconuts pieces, which are additionally served.
within the other embodying the Mother Goddess The Khir is served only in Terra cota plates (Tok).
with Her Shaktis for worship in the tantra Shastra. Blowing of Conch shells and ringing of bells are
Bindu : the centre representing the Shiv must during the Puja offerings.
Shakti in one sheath.
1.
The recitation of the Divine Hymns, chanting of
:A triangle with its apex pointing the mantra mingled with melodious tunes of the
down (The Bindu divides and transforms into Bhajans in praise of the Devi renders the whole
three folds manifested sound of the Omkara...A. milieu with fragrance of Divinity. In fact the
Trikona
2.
vibrations spread afar. As a part of the puja
protocol the devotees circumbulate (go around
Shatkona : two triangles placed acrosS the temple premise) the temple 3 or 7 or 11 or 111
each other. One representing the Shiva and the times. The most significant day is the Zeth
U. M.
3.
other the Shakti.
Ashtami, which falls in May-June every year.
It is
Vritam : Circle representing correlation of believed on this day Mata Khir Bhawani manifests
Her powers. It is celebrated as an annual festival
4.
individual with the Universe.
16
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-18.txt 
 with offering of mass prayers and Pujas through settles at Nag bal (Nag is the snake in Sanskrit)
with Her 360 accompanying snakes being
guarded by three powers from three directions.
day and night.
Sahaja Understanding (A Yogic Insight)
Kundalini is the residual energy of Shri Adi But when you tunderstand what She has done- the
Shakti in the form of Serpent Goddess lying first thing She does is to (in my book also I have written
dormant within us in the base of the spinal chord down about it butIwould like to tell you) that Her first,
in the Mooladhara. "Kundalini" derives its name We should say, manifestation is on the left hand side.
from the word "Kundal" a term used to denote That is the Mahakali's manifestation. So She comes on
"coiling form" in Sanskrit language
the Mahakali's system, the left hand side and that is
"Now first of all, you get your Realization, all right. where She created Shri Ganesha... (Shri Adi Shakti
Now you must know that Kundalini itself is the Puja, Cabella, 26.06.1998).
Mahakali Shakti because She's the primordial Shri Mataji reveals that India is the microscopic
Mahakali Shakti is the primordial shakti within us" form of the Earth and Maharashtra is the
(Mahakali Puja, France 12 Sept. 1990).
triangular peninsular that holds the
"It is a
Next, the number 360 which says there were 360 Kundalini...in fact Shri Mataji also says..
snakes which otherwise if seen as degrees in special country created by Mother Earth. It was only a
Mathematic connotation it makes a circle or sea, after the amrut -manthan, the Himalayas started
'coiling" and numerologically 360 makes pushing up till it reached a certain point called the
(3+6%3D9). Therefore it may speak of a circle or Everest. It was created to shield India, the Kundalini of
coiled form and /or speak of nine Chakras that the Universe. It was necessary to protect the
we know of in Sahaja.
Kundalini. It is the brain of the Virata. They had to
you see within us there are seven Chakras for your fence some country to preserve the ancient culture.
ascent and two above it. So all these nine Chakras are to Shri Ganesh had to be placed in India. That is why Ihad
be crossed in this lifetime. That should be your destiny. to take my birth in this country, at the Tropic of
(Navaratri Puja, 1988, Pune)."
'Ast
Cancer." (Kathmandu Puja, At the Ashram, 30th
Now, it is also observed that She is guarded by March 1989)
three Goddess viz., Goddess Sharda, Goddess Again if we look into the temple we find two idols
Sharika and Goddess Jwala. Could this not be the one is of Mata Khir Bhawani and the other is of
three powers of Shri Adi Shakti...The Bhuteshwar Shiva...Interestingly, "Bhuteshwar"
Mahalaxmi, Maha Swaraswati and Mahakali?
is the other name of "God of the Spirits"...And He
Interestingly, She was called as Shyama in Lanka.
Shyama is one of the other names of Shri
Mahakaali. So, if we see Kundalini Mata comes as
is Shiva.
. The Shero- wali (God resting on Lion) residing
in the twelve Sun (12 petalled heart Chakra) of the
Mahakali and then Shri Hanumana (the right Universe encircled by serpents!..It is of course
aspect ) carries Her from Lanka to Srinagar.. and and indeed Shri Mataji, Who resides in the
settles as Mata Khir Bhawani...Khir is supposed thousand petalled lotus in our Sahasrara and also
to be a Mahalaxmi principle as believed. So She is Sherowali.
continued to pg. 19
17
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-19.txt 
 EINSTEIN'S
CENTENNIAL
Albert Einstein
Exactly a 100 Years ago Albert Einstein published his famous Theory of Relativity which changed the
way scientists thought, forever. What better way to pay tribute to this great seeker who talked about
the Torsion Area (Sahasrara) than celebrating the centenary of his publications. In 1905, he published
five papers which converted his status from being a clerk in a patents office in Switzerland to being a
Professor at the University of Burn.
Albert Einstein was one of the well-known scientists, who proposed the very popular "Theory of
Relativity". In his theory, he explains about the 'space and time' relationship. He says that in a 3-
dimensional world, which consists of mainly space, physical quantities are relative. E.g... What is
right side for one person may seem to be left for another when watched from a different direction, in a
3-Dimentional space? But when another dimension 'time' is also added to the three dimension of
space (X, Y, Zaxis), physical phenomena are no longer relative instead become absolute. E.g. What we
consider a table; one can recognize it as a table even when viewed from different directions. This is the
fourth dimension according to Einstein where space-time is involved.
Although Einstein thought about the elemental aspects of nature: gravity, light and perception of
various phenomenon, his most significant contribution came from his suggestion of the "Torsion
Area", alluding to the Sahasrara.
Einstein felt that all the scientific knowledge he got is not through the manipulation of mind, but it
came to him from the 'torsion area' on the top of his head. In Sahaja Yoga we say it as the 7" energy
center or the Sahasrara. When one become thoughtless & feel that he is the part and parcel of the
universe, one gets the Divine knowledge very spontaneously. This does not require any thinking
process. Knowledge just comes in to the attention when it is one with the Divine. Many scientists who
have discovered various theories have mentioned the presence of an unknown power behind their
discoveries. This is the All-pervading power of Divine Love.
By practicing Sahaja Yoga one can enter the fourth & fifth dimensions and that is when things become
Wikimedia Commons: Photographer: Yousef Karsh, "Albert Einstein", gelatin silver print, 11 February 1948." This image has
þeen released into the public domain by the copyright holder, its copyright has expired.
See Rachel Hildebrand's short essay on what exactly went into these celebrated scientific papers:
http://www.craigmont.org/einstein.htm
18
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-20.txt 
 absolute. In these higher dimensions, every thing is absolute and sucha state can be achieved through
Sahaja Yoga when one's Kundalini (Divine energy) gets awakened within us.
Quotes
"It was, of course, a lie what you read about my religious convictions, a lie which is being systematically
repeated. I do not believe in a personal God and I have never denied this but have expressed it clearly. If
something is in me which can be called religious then it is the unbounded admiration for the structure of the
world so far as our science can reveal it."
"I believe Gandhi's views were the most enlightened of all the political men of our time. We should strive to do
things in his spirit: not to use violence for fighting for our cause, but by non-participation of anything you
believe is evil.*
"Iwant to know God's thoughts; the rest are details.
"Why is it
And finally, Einstein never understood the effect of his innocent genius on people. He says:
that nobody understands me, but everybody likes me?"
Learn More:
[Streaming Audio] National Pu lic Radio Archived Show:
http://www.npLorg/templates/story/story.php?storyld 4504647
[Web] Public Broadcasting Service Media: Einstein's Big Idea Homepage:
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/einstein/
From a letter written in English, dated March 24, 1954. Wikipedia.org
5 Wikipedia.org
Unverified Source: http://rescomp.stanford.edu/-cheshire/EinsteinQuotes.html
1.
2.
continued from pg. 17
The other name of Shri Mataji is Maha Ragya (Shri Maha Ragyi She Who Is The Empress Of The
Universe)and above all She is the Kundalini Mata.
The most significant day observed is the Jesth Astami that falls in May- Junē every year for the.
celebration and the Puja ...does it also have any significance with opening of the Sahasrara of the
Universe on 5 May 1970 by Shri Mataji? Ora mere coincidence?
Interestingly, if we see while approaching the temple, people knew in subtlety that to offer Darshan at
Her Holy Lotus Feet one has to cross through tough terrain like "Vichar (Thought) nag" like the Agnya
Chakra to attain the 'thoughtless awareness' state. Also, one needs to burn his inner ego while
crossing through Tyangalbal (burning Charcoal Hillock) to attain 'Doubtless awareness' state. Finally,
one qualifies for the God's Realization at Mata Khir Bhawani temple and receives Her Divine
blessings.
The significance of the Yantra or the Chakra as depicted in Tantra Shastra and believed in Kashmir
associated with the Mata Khir Bhawani, is well illustrated in the verses of the Saundarya Lahiri.
In Shakti Yantram,
So Mata Khir Bhawani is indeed Kundalini Mata's abode in Kashmir. Interestingly, the hymn or the
Aarti recital at Mata Khir Bhawani has tremendous vibrations and is sung in praise of the deities
residing in our Seven Chakras...from Mooladhar to Sahasrara.
19
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Prophetic Visions of the Divine Feminine in modern Europe
Continued from Last Issue (June 2005)
Sophia in the Russian mystieal tradition
Whilst the modern Russian Sophiological tradition has its origins in the introduction of the writings of
Jakob Boehme and others of his tradition into Russia in the late eighteenth century; it was further
developed in the late nineteenth century by the philosopher Vladimir Soloviev (1853-1900).
Soloviev had three visions of Sophia, which he described in his poem Trisvidaniya (Three meetings),
written towards the end of his life in 1898. His first vision of Sophia was in 1862 when he was nine
His second vision was in London in 1875 during a sabbatical leave from his lecturership in
years.
religion at Moscow University. In the British Museum Reading Room he actively sought Sophia
whilst 'mysterious forces' guided him in his wide-ranging reading in Hindu philosophy, Gnosticism,
Hermetic writings, and Kabbalah. And eventually, in answer to a fervent prayer, he had his second
vision of Sophia:
And then one day it was toward autumn
I said to her: 0, blossom of a deity!
You're here, I sense it why haven't you reealed
Yourself to my eyes since childhood years?
And no sooner had I thought this prayer
Than everything was filled with a golden azure,
And before me she shine once more
But only her face it alone.
But Soloviev wanted more than just a face, at which point a voice inside him commanded 'Be in
Egypt!' Immediately abandoning his studies he departed via Paris, through France and Italy,
travelling by steamship to Cairo. Arriving penniless, he was mysteriously directed to Thebes.
Captured and then released by Bedouins, he spent the night in the desert, awakening to the fragrant
scent of roses and his third- and final - vision of Sophia:
And in the purple of the heaven's splendor,
With eyes filled with an azure fire,
You looked like the first radiance
Of a universal and creative day.
What is, what was, and what will always be
Asingle motionless look encompassed everything here...
The sea and rivers showed dark blue beneath me
As did the distant forest, and the heights of snowy mountains.
Isaw everything, and everything was one thing only
A single image of female beauty...
The infinite fit within its dimensions:
Before me, in me were you alone.
20
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-22.txt 
 O, radiant woman! In youIam not deceived:
In the desert Isaw all of you...
Those roses will not wither in my sould
Wherever life's wave may speed.
This third vision was to provide his philosophical
and poetic inspiration for the rest of his life.
Not only did Soloviev see himself as a devotee of
Sophia, he also saw himself as a prophet. The
tradition of the writer as a divinely inspired
prophet, responsible for shaping the spiritual and
moral destiny of the nation, was of central
importance in Russian literature throughout the
nineteenth century. Thus Soloviev can proclaim in
one poem:
Let it be known: today the Eternal Feminine
In an incorruptible body is descending to Earth.
In the unfading light of the new Goddess
Heaven has become one with the depths.
The Third Age
Throughout Europe towards the end of the nineteenth century, and into the first half of the twentieth
century, there arose a belief that the third of three ages was imminent, and that that age would be of the
Holy Spirit, of the Mother, of the Divine Feminine. It is debatable to what extent this is based on the
three status (Latin word for 'age') proposed by the twelth century Christian abbot, Joachim of Fiore
(1135-1202), and this varies according to each writer.
Based on a famous passage in Joachim's Liber Concordie, the Irish poet, Lionel Johnson (1867-1902)
wrote his poem Vita Venturi Saeculi (1902) which concentrates, unusually for this genre, on the
sweetness of the third age:
Be glad with beauty, white with perfect grace,
Sweet Age to come, whose face
Dawns dimly in our prophesying eyes
Eager with good surmise! ...
Sweet Age to come, whose wings are of white fire,
Deny not our desire;
Okingdom of the Spirit, conquering all
Take willing earth in Thrall!
Let green woods wave thee welcome, and blue seas
Laugh welcome, and each breeze
Be sacred incense round thee: peace appear
21
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Through crystal atmosphere,
Impassioned, perdurable, omnipotent3;
Given by God, not lent,
Foretaste of Heaven, ere heaven be all in all,
Come to the vexed world's call;...
NEWOCE
Sweet Age to come, declare the doctrine clear;
We wait thee now, wait here!
Sweet Age to come, upon our ready ground
Let lily and rose abound,
With pure supremacy of fragrant state
Sweetening this world of hate,
Which does the wrongs, it knows not, and it knows;
Plant thou thy lily and rose!*
The Polish nationalist Count August Cieszkowski (1814-1894) used the notion of a forthcoming third
age of the Holy Spirit in his campaign for a pan-Slavic homeland, and the abstract art pioneers Vassily
Kandinsky and Franz Marcin their Blaue Reiter Almanac (1911) assert that
Agreat era has begun: the spiritual "awakening", the increasing tendency
to regain "lost balance", the inevitable necessity of spiritual plantings, the unfolding of the
first blossom. We are standing at the threshold of one of the greatest epochs th at mankind has ever
experienced, the epoch of great spirituality.
The propheticnature of the third-age theory is best seen in the writings of the exiled Russians, Zinaida
Gippius and her husband Dmitrii Merezhkovskii, who believed in a forthcoming period of time when
the Third Testament would disclose itself to humanity. Thus Merezhkovskii wrote in Lermontov
(1911), whilst still in Russia:
Christianity separated the past eternity of the Father from the future
eternity of the Son, the earthly truth from the heavenly truth. Will they
not be united by that which comes after Christianity, the revelation of the
Spirit Eternal Womanhood, Eternal Motherhood? Will not the Mother
reconcile the Father and the Son?
Later, from exile in France, he was to announce in the The Mystery of Three (1925):
The Father has not saved the world,
The Son has not saved it,
The Mother shall save it;
The Mother is the Holy Spirit.
Towards the end of his life, living in Paris as warclouds gathered over Europe, Merezhkovskii was to
write his final work (on the Italian poet Dante) published in 1939, in which he comments:
The fearful knot of social inequality which especially in our times
threatens to tighten into a noose of death and so strangle humanity,
be untied only in the Third Testament in the Kingdom of the
may
22
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Holy Ghost.
As the war machine of the German Third Reich (perversely, also based on the third-age theory)
steamrollered across Europe, both west and east, this was the darkest hour for the European devotees
of the Divine Feminine, still clinging to their notion of the forthcoming golden age. In the immediate
post-war period, when resources were scarce, and books had of necessity to be slim, the English
academic and novelist, C.S.Lewis (1898-1963), published The Great Divorce (1946) which contains a
well-known description of a female prophet and her disciples, which can be seen as a prophetic
vision of the Divine Feminine.
Whilst held in a Stalinist prison in the 1950s, the Russian dissident writer, Daniil Andreev (1906-
1959), had a series of visions of a future in which the Zventa-Sventana (Divine Feminine) would come
to Earth, and through an organization known as the Rosa Mira (Rose of the World) would offer the
possibility of redemption to humans. This is described in detail in his book of the same name.
Andreev defines the 'Rose of the World' as
The coming all-Christian church of the last centuries that will integrate in
itself the churches of the past and will connect in a free union all religions of
In this
Light.
to
sense, the Rose of the World is inter-religious or pan-religious. Its main goal is
many
as
save
from the dangers of spiritual enslavement by the
human souls as possible and to deliver them
coming anti-God.
Andreev identifies the global feminine essence as 'Zventa-Sventana' meaning "The lightest of the
light, the holiest of the holy.' As conceived by Andreev, the Rose of the World, being a global religiou
and social organization, is destined to overcome
ous
the contradiction between two primary tendencies ascetic spirituality
which rejects the world and the so-called pagan tendency which extols
the carnal world... Finally, the triumpth of the Rose of the World is not
the striving of religious humanity towards the Eternally
possible until
Feminine [Vechno Zhenstvennoe] reveals a new, deeper meaning;
until the breathing of the Zventa-Sventana has softened and lightened
the extremely gloomy severity of masculinity, which up to now [has]
completely dominated ethics, religion, and social life.
Andreev clearly sees the feminine principle as essential for the future of humanity:
We are entering the cycle of epochs when the feminine soul will become
increasingly
inspirers, sensible mothers,
pure and broad, when more and more women will become deep
and wise and visionary leaders. This will be the cycle of epochs when the feminine component of
humanity willmanifest itself
of masculine forces in a perfect harmony.
Could this be a prophecy of Sahaja Yoga?
with unprecedented strength, balancing the previous dominance
This is a condensed version of a paper written by John Noyce for the M.A. in Religion and Theology at Monash
University, Melbourne, Australia. The full version is available on request.
(6)
23
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Shri Mataji
alaji 3 house in
nhindwara
On 7 April 2005, Shri
Mataji established H. H.
Shri Mataji Nirmal Devi
Sahaja Yoga Trust to
manage all the work of
Sahaja Yoga in India. She is
the Chairperson of this
National Trust and Sir C. P.
Srivastava is the Vice
Chairman.
From the very inception, the National Trust placed the highest priority to the acquisition ofThe holy birth
place of Shri Mataji (the Chhindwara House) for the International Sahaja collective and to build a Memorial.
The task was entrusted to the Asset Management Committee of the National Trust.
This holy task was accomplished on 14 July 2005. The property has been officially transferred in the name of
H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga Trust and all legalities have been completed. A collective hawan
and puja was held on the premises on 14 July,
Following the instructions from Shri Mataji, sign
boards declaring it as Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Sahaja Yoga World Ashram and the Holy
Birthplace of Shri Mataji have already been put in
place.
पटम पूज्य श्री महाजी सिनतल देसी
सहज योग सामतिक आञ्रमः
The Indian collective leadership, represented
by the National Trust, will now take up the
holy and important task of building the World
Sahaja Yoga Ashram and the most beautiful
Memorial to our Mother on Her birthplace.
24
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-26.txt 
 A
New Yuga,
needs a
new kind of
Hero!
30
to be continue..
||Thank you Mother||
 2005_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-27.txt 
 GOLDEN
LION
GOLDEN
LION
YUVA SHAKTI
DANIEL JESUS
"IDENTITY"
PRESENTS:
UNIVERSAL
GOLDEN LION IS A
GANA, A DIVINE
WARRIOR WHO CAME
ON EARTH TO HELP THE
SAHAJA YOGUIS IN
THEIR MISSION OF
EMANCIPATION OF
HUMANITY.
FIGHTING AGAINST
TERRIBLE DEMONS AND
NEGATIVITIES, GOLDEN
LION IS AN
INSTRUMENT OF
DEITIES IN THE BATTLE
OF KALI YUGA.
KNOW THE AMAZING
ADVENTURES OF THIS
SAHAJ SUPER HERO!
విోరీ
00
