Divine Cool Breeze The 00 July - August, 2005

 NIRMALA NIVERSAL PURE RELIG In This Issue:- Sahasrara Chakra 4 Feb 1983 (Delhi) 1. 20 Advice of Shri Mataji 2. 23 The Answer, My Friends, is blowing in the wind 3. 26 Mithya A letter of Shri Mataji 5-5-75 4. 30 Sahaja Yoga and Physical cure 35 Memories of our Divine Mother 6. The Divine Mother Says 46 3. DHARMA VISHWA 5. 7.

 TH E C o OL BR EE ZE BR E E ZE CO O L DIVI NE Published by Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. Infosys House, Plot No. 8, Chandragupt Housing Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 029 Printed at Amarnath Press (P) Ltd. WHS 2/50, Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi - 15 Ph. :25268673 Please Send Your Suggestions and Subscription to:- Shri G.L.Aggarwal Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 222, Desh Bandhu Apartments Kalkaji, New Dehi-110019 Tel. No.:011-26422054, 26216654 And Your Sahaja Experiences, Articles, Miracle Photographs etc. to: Shri O.P. Chandna G-11-(463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110034

 SAHASRARA CHAKRA Hanuman Road, New Delhi. 4th Feb., 1983 it penetrates through six Chakras, enters Today, I will be telling you about the last centre of Sahasrara. So this last into the limbic area, and enlightens all the seven Pithas in the brain, which are placed centre, the Sahasrara, is contained in the limbic area of the brain. Our head is like along the mid-line of the limbic area. So a coconut. The coconut has the hair, and we start from the back, is placed here, at the back, is the Mooladhara Chakra, then a hard nut and then a black covering around it is the Swadisthan, then is the and inside is white shell of coconut and Nabhi, then the Heart, then the Vishuddhi inside is the space, the water. In the same and then the Agya. So, all these six centres way, our brain is made. That's why coconut is called as "Shreephal". are combining to make the seventh centre. It is the fruit of the power, that is, Shree. Shree power is This is very important point which we should know. Now, the Shree Chakra is the right side power and the left side power right side working & Lalita Chakra is left is the Lalita power. So we have two side working. So, when the Kundalini does chakras - left side, here, is the Lalita and not rise then we do with our right side our the right side, here, is the Shree Chakra. These two chakras are working out the physical and mental activities. So, our brain is doing right side activity and that's right side Mahasaraswati's power and left why our brain is like 'Shreephal'. side Mahakali's power. Now, the central power is the Kundalini that has to rise and Sahasrara is, actually is, the penetrate through different Chakras, enter assemblage of the six Chakras and is a into the limbic area and enlighten the seven hollow space, on the sides of which there Pithas seats of these seven Chakras. So,

 July - August, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze THE through your brain. That's why it is called are one thousand Nadis (NERVES). And as 'Satya-Khand', means you start seeing when the light penetrates into the limbic area, then the enlightenment of these the truth perceived by your brain because so far whatever you see through your brain, Nadis take place and you can see them is not the truth. What you see, is just the as flames, very gentle flames buning and these flames have all the seven colours outer side, say, you can see the colours. that you see in the VIBGYOR. But the last You can see the different aesthetics of the one, ultimately becomes again integrated colours. You can see the quality of the and it is a crystal clear flame. All these thing. But you cannot say whether this seven lights ultimately become crystal carpet has been used by some saint. You clear. cannot say whether this is made by a devil So, you have Sahasrara with one or a divine person. You cannot say that this gentleman is he a good person or he thousand petals, as they call it, but if you cut the brain in a transverse section or is an evil person. You cannot say if this Deity has come out of the mother Earth or horizontal section, you will be able to see that all these nerves are built like this along not. Also, you cannot say about any person, the limbic area, all of them are like the who is your relation, whether he is a good relation or a bad relation or what sort of a petals and if you cut it like this, (Vertically) you will find that there are many nerves in person he is, whether he goes to wrong people or to the right people, whether he every bundle of nerves. So, when it is has connections with wrong side or with enlightened, you can see Sahasrara as a good side. Here, good means Divine. So burning bundle of flames. actually you do not know anything about It is very deep subject. So, when the divinity with your mind. Nothing it is impossible for you to judge a person about enlightenment of the Kundalini takes place in the brain then the truth is perceived his divinity unless and until the Kundalini

 July - August, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze reaches at least this part, which is the called as 'Niranand'. Niranand! The 'Ni' limbic area. You cannot make out whether means nothing else but Anand (Joy). Niranand ! Also surprising, my name is a person is real or not, whether a Guru is Neera - also, in my family I am called as real or not. Because divinity cannot be perceived through your brain, unless & Neera. And Neera' also means Mary, Marium. Because it means marine. Neera until this light of your spirit shines, into it. is water. 'Neer' means water in Sanskrit Now, the Spirit is expressed in the language. It's called 'Niranand' in the heart, is reflected in the heart. The centre brain. of the Spirit, we can say, is in the heart. And, this stage ultimately unfolds. But actually, the seat of Spirit is above here above the head and that is the Spirit of First what you know is the Satya, is the what we call of the God Almighty, say Truth what is this another gentleman whom you callI Parvardigar, you call him suffering from, that you see on your fingers. Sadashiva or you call Him the Rahim, you First you see your fingers. First you see call him by many names which are said your fingers. With your attention, you know about the Lord who is God Almighty what Chakras, what fingers are catching Niranjan, they call Him Nirankar, every with your attention. Then with your brain you can depict what centres it is catching. sorts of words which start with 'Nir', 'Nihi'. Now, at every centre in the body you Because, if you say this finger, that does not mean it is Vishuddhi Chakra. But your receive a different type of joy. Every centre brain can say that it is Vishuddhi. And that has a different type of joy. And, there are depicts it that this fellow is suffering from names for every type of joy you receive at the troubles of the Vishuddhi Chakra. But every centre when the Kundalini rises. But when the Kundalini comes into the still it is rational. Because, you see what Sahasrara, then the joy you receive is finger it catches and then you say. But

 July - August, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze person "Have you got the problem, here?" when the Satyakhand or the Sahasrara, He says, "Yes', Then, you helieve in Me and unfolds itself more, you don't have to think then you believe, that this is the Vishuddhi about it, you just say it. Then there is no Chakra, which is showing, is true. This is difference Chitta between your the logical conclusion, in a way, that you (ATTENTION) and your Sat (Truth). The have experimented, you are seeing and enlightened Chitta (ATTENTION) and the still doubting whether Mother says is true enlightened brain become one. There is or not. And then, you are sure, "Yes, it is no problem at all for such person. There so, we have seen that this is Vishuddhi is no need to see, on the fingers no need to say anything on the fingers and then Chakra." So, the truth becomes logically acceptable to this brain. But still, there is depict it through the brain which you have the brain working out on its gross level. learnt in Sahaja Yoga, that if you find In the second stage, as I told you, where something wrong here, it means Agya - you believe, you know for definite that this that is not necessary! You just say, Agya. means Vishuddhi Chakra, no doubt about And you just say it and it is there. it. Then we say that 'Nirvikalpa' has started, when there is no doubt about Me or Sahaja First it is Then, it unfolds more. integrated with, as I said, Chitta Yoga. But then, the new unfolding starts (Attention). Then when it gets absolutely within you. For that; one has to do integrated with the Spirit, then whatever meditation. In humility, one has to do meditation. And then also, for this new you say, is the truth. You just say, it is so. Chitta That is how, this brain unfolds into 3 new dimension, when your dimensions. First, it depicts the truth (ATTENTION) itself becomes merged into through logical conclusions. Because, I your brain or into the enlightened brain, for that, one has to, very honestly and humbly have told you that if this finger is catching surrender to Sahaja Yoga. then it is Vishuddhi. And then, you ask the

 July August, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze: Now, what do we do when we get ladder as I've said. That is one of the snakes. We think that what's the need to our vibrations? We have different-different reactions. Some people do not even do meditation, I have no time, I have this understand the value of vibrations. Some thing, that thing'. You do not progress. people try to learn what it means. And The other point which is very gross. some people, suddenly think, 'O, now they are realised souls, they can, go on giving Also, there are some very gross people in realizations, this, that'. They go on a ride Sahaja Yoga who enter into it. Doesn't of a ego-trip. When they go on a ego-trip, matter. But first thing you must know 'you have to be honest, very' honest in Sahaja they find that they have failed and they have then to come back, from the very Yoga'. The honesty is like - I have seen beginning they start. It is like the game of people. If we have a dinner, say for a Snake & Ladder. So, reaction to marriage party, they will just crawl into it vibrations should be very humble, without having any self- respect, without receptive reaction. having any understanding as to, who is going to pay for all these things? They will Now, on the gross level, because as bring all their family, come down and sit I have told you that the brain is the one down. There are people who avoid paying which holds the Father in it. So, if we money which should be paid for Sahaja Yoga. Supposing they are eating food or commit any sins against the Father, then they are traveling or they are coming from this unfoldment in the brain takes some time. So, we start reading books. And abroad, they have to pay money for their though people have told that first see the traveling for their food. And sometimes, you know I have to pay lot of money. Doesn't vibrations and then read the books, still we say, 'O' what's wrong, we should read matter, I don't mind. But it's not good for other books' You go down on snake and you. The main thing is that it's not good

 The Divine Cool Breeze July - August, 2005 8. Some people have a habit of saving for you. So, how you behave towards Sahaja Yoga as far as money is money at the cost of Sahaja Yoga. Some have a habit of making money at the cost concerned, is also very important, though of Sahaja Yoga. Some people have the it looks gross. But it can give a big trouble in the unfoldment because of the Nabhi habit of not giving the due amount- and like that. It's something like cheating. catching-and, as you know, if the Nabhi They all go ut of the Sahaja Yoga in no catches it can spread upto the whole of void; and if the void is catching, Ekadasha time. They may be looking like great leaders in the beginning but they go out is placed here which the Rudra, just like that and many a times people tell destructive forces, built-in. me 'why don't you keep a proper account' So, before comi ng to Sahaja Yoga, and all that. But in Sahaja Yoga, I'm not supposed to keep any accounts or it was alright, you were doing all kinds of anything. Because, my accountants are things and you would have smoothly gone to hell without any difficulty. It is very easy Sahaja Yogis. If you try to play tricks with Sahaja Yoga, immediately you are to go to hell. You can take two running jumps and go to hell. The rest of it you pushed out; in your awareness, in your Nabhi chakra you never had - you may should see. But going to hell is the easiest make thousand' of rupees here, but you thing. For that, you don'thave to work hard will lose thousands of rupees, You might or do anything about it. But, when you are get into troubles. You will have any kind ascending, when you are rising, then it is little difficult. You have to be careful that of a problem that I cannot tell and then you will say how did I get this problem? you should not falter, you should not fall and So Nabhi Chakra if you are not honest in that you are ascending. So, you have to your seeking. Honesty of seeking not only be alert about yourself that you are not means 'I want to seek'. It also means what falling into the same habits which you had.

 July-August, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze You have to put the full heart- that is your behaviour is, towards yourself and the main thing. Like, people they come towards others. You have to be honest to to Sahaja Yoga and they are murmuring yourself, that you sit down for meditation, behind, "This could have been like that, that try to improve your Antar-yoga, try to make your Thoughtless Awareness, this feeling could have been like that", all those things. All such people also are, what Christ calls of thoughtlessness, wider and wider. Try to achieve that state where you really feel as, 'murmuring souls'. He said that, be thoughtless. So the honesty pays and you careful about these murmuring souls those who go on murmuring behind and rise higher and higher, deeper and deeper into your own being. First you depend taking advantage as if they are trying to upon Me that, "after all, Mother is going to save others. All such people also, can do everything. When I went to Mother my suffer a lot. Because, they are doing a Sahasrara opened out. This thing double game. And such a double game, happened, then this thing happened." But is very dangerous when you are what about you doing something that helps treacherous to that kingdom, you are you to open your Sahasrara? So, opening punished. But in the God's kingdom, it's so blissful, absolutely blissful, complete of the Sahasrara is very important. blessings are poured on, absolutely, with Now, surprisingly, it is so placed that everything - health, wealth, mental, Sahasrara has got the Brahmarandhra at emotional-all kinds of prosperity you can the level where there is, I mean, at the get in Sahaja Yoga, no doubt. But when point, where there is the Heart-Chakra. you are so much blessed, you are also So we must know that Brahmarandhra is forgiven and forgiven, and forgiven, and directly connected to your heart. If it is not there's a long rope given to you to hang done from the heart, superficially done yourself. But you really hang fully. It's not Sahaja Yoga, you can not go very high. half way.

 The Divine Cool Breeze 10 July-August, 2005 So, those people, who think, they care. And He is so loving that description of his compassion can not can be dishonest with Sahaja, Yoga have to be very careful; please don't do it. If be given in words but can be only felt and understood. you don't like to be in Sahaja Yoga, you better go away, it is better; from your point of view and from our point of view also. Now, the problem is, people who are their of dishonest because Because, in case you are dishonest, you are background, sometimes, because of their are trying to play tricks and games, and education, because of their upbringing or you suffer and you look funny and strange; may be because they are cowards. But then people will say, that what's wrong with there is also, another thing that can make Sahaja Yoga? So we will unnecessarily you dishonest- is yoür 'Poorva janmas' suffer. Because, we cannot show you in (PREVIOUS LIVES) and that's how you the mirror, that this man has been very very So, it will take your birth and your Kundalini is made disloyal. We cannot show that! like that. bring a bad name to us-first of all. And second, you will be harmed, by this kind But after realisation, those people of a thing. If you are harmed, then also we will have a bad name that how could who are of a great valour and great it happen. But if you are honest about strength ascend so fast that all the Sahaja Yoga and about your seeking, problems of the stars, all the problems of your Nakashatras (BIRTH STARS) and all you don't know how much God looks that, Constellations everything disappears after you! Anybody who tries to do any and you become a Sahaja yogi means a harm to you will be very badly harmed and removed from your path. God newly born-absolutely a different personality; it has nothing to do from where protects you out and out and he looks you have come. Like an egg becoming a after you with 'complete' attention and

 The Divine Cool Breeze July-August, 2005 ten things and one is Virata Vishnu, beautiful bird. because also in the stomach we have got So, this Kundalini, when it arrives 10 Guru Sthanas (PLACES) and one that here, the first hurdle the Kundalini has, to of Vishnu. So the seeking is also wrong. enter into Sahasrara, is 'Ekadasha Rudra'. These are 11 Shaktis, 11 as well as these 10 Gurus are out. Then you develop this Ekadasha- Rudra. When destroying Shaktis placed here. Five on this thing is set-in within you, as l've said, this side, five on the other side and one in one on this side and one on that side. So. the centre. These are obstructions within us, built by two types of sins we commit. If those people who have bowed to wrong we bow our heads to wrong type of gurus type of people develop a temperament or and submit ourselves to their vicious ways, a kind of a personality which is very vulnerable for incurable diseases like then we develop Rudra-problems on the right hand side-these five go out. If you cancer and all that. You may develop have bowed-because I've never bowed cancer or any such thing-those who have to anybody wrong, to someone who is a bowed to the wrong types of people. wrong type of person and who is anti-God, Now, those who think, "I'm better than then the problem comes on this side of anybody else. I don't care for God, I don't the thing, on the right side, If you have the want God, I have nothing to do"-all such sense that 'I can look after myself, I am my people develop a left side Ekadasha. And own guru, who can teach me, I don't want left side Ekadasha is extremely dangerous to listen to anybody and I don't believe in God, who is God, Ijust don't care for God, too. Because, such people develop the problems of the right side-heart attacks, all such feelings, if you have, then, your right side doesn't catch, but the left side physically I am saying, and all other problems of the right side. So, one of the catches. Because right side moves this greatest hurdles of Kundalini entering into side and the left side this side. So these

 The Divine Cool Breeze 12 July August, 2005 Sahasrara is this Ekadasha Rudra, which very difficult to convince anyone that comes from Void. And which covers the whatever they are doing has been wrong "Medha' (is the plate of the brain). And and they should come to right path. that is how it can not enter into the limbic So a star come to play its part with Pluto, and this star is the one which has brought area. Even those who have been to wrong gurus, if they have reached the right cancer disease because, Pluto is the one, conclusion and surrender themselves to that cures cancer, or all such diseases which are incurable. So, those people who Sahaja Yoga, accepting their mistakes and saying that I'm my own Guru', they can just go head long into wrong path, suffer be cured. And those, who have been from funny type of heart troubles, speaking that l'm above all, I don't believe insomnia, palpitations, vomiting, in God, who is God, I don't believe in any giddiness, all sort of, we can say irrelevant talking. It is a very serious thing to go to a prophets or anything - anything against God or prophets is the same - anti God wrong guru and bow to him. Sahasrara personality who talks like that develops the becomes a closed area for such a person. problem, gets alright if he humbles down The persons who are against Sahaja himself and accepts 'Sahaja Yoga as the Yoga, have a very strong Sahasrara, like a nut, in the sense that it is such a strong only way of entering into the super- consciousness'. shell that you can not just break it-the strong shell, like a thick nut. Even if you want to use a hammer, you cannot break Thave seen people who have been Tantrikas, are being saved. I have seen it. people who have done all kinds of wrong Today the time has come, that you things have been saved. Those people, have to recognize Sahaja Yoga; you have who were members of very funny, strange organizations, have been saved. But it is to. You did not recognize any saint any

 The Divine Cool Breeze July-August, 2005 13 I said, "you have to recognize prophets, any one, any incarnation. But catching?" Sahaja Yoga. Just ask Shiva"., And when today, the condition is that, you have to recognize one. If you don't recognize it, he asked the questions to Shiva, then only your Sahasrara can not be opened the vibrations started flowing. So, because, this is the time when the Sahasrara takes charge that it makes s you Sahasrara was opened and you have to recognize and also, it convinces you, it proves to you. And by this proving even if have your realisation. It is very important thing that you 'have' to recognize Sahaja you are not recognizing then you cannot Yoga. There are many people who say get your realisation. that 'Mother, why to believe in Sahaja Yoga But those who recognize also, this way, we can just call you just 'Mother' you could be my 'Mother' Alright, doesn't recognize partly- they take liberties, they matter. But you cannot get your realisation. behave in a funny manner-without And, even if you get it, you cannot retain it. understanding that who is this 'Person' who You have to recognize; RECOGNITION is here? I've seen many a times, I'm is the only worship when you want to talking, people are just putting their hands know God in Sahaja Yoga. AlIl the other up, raising Kundalini; they are just talking, Ganas, Devatas, Deities, Shaktis are chit chatting-I'm surprised. Because, if one in unison in Sahaja Yoga. And, you have recognized, then you should know anyone who does not recognize Sahaja whom you are facing. Because, it is not Yoga, they just are not bothered about you, for My good; I'm not going to lose anything. what sort of a person you are. For But only you, in your ascent have not example, a man who worships Shiva, he recognized. That shows that you have not comes to me, and, I find his heart is yet recognized. catching-Surprising! He says. "Mother, worship Shiva, how is it, my heart is And the way some people

 14 The Divine Cool Breeze July August, 2005 monopolise Me also, is absolutely come back on me. "No, no, Mother, see, There's no need to it's not so. I'm not. That's not so." Why wrong. should I tell, you are catching? You have 'nobody' Me, monopolise can monopolise Me. There are some to cleanse yourself with full honesty. But first thing is to 'recognise' with full humility people who say that "Mother must have misunderstood". I never mis- and understanding. Once you have understand; there is no question. Or, recognized, gradually you will do everything that has to be done-you 'know', what is some people try to tell me, 'Do this, do to be done. that'- that also is not necessary. 'Try to open yourself to this protocol which is very Now the essence of Sahasrara is important in Sahaja Yoga, which lhave told integration. In Sahasrara all the Chakras for this first time- today, that you must TRY are there, so all the Deities get integrated. TO RECOGNISE IN A FULL WAY. And, And, you can feel their integration. That if you do not recognize, I'm sorry, I cannot means, when you get your Kundalini in give you the realisation which will sustain Sahasrara, your mental, emotional, and - and, it may start but it may not sustain. your spiritual-everything 'being' becomes So, this is the simplest way of one. Your physical being also merges with achieving your higher thing is by it. Then you have no problems, as to. "Yes, Ilove Mother But l'm sorry, I have to steal recognizing gradually, by recognizing "Yes, I know, I recognise this money." gradually. It is very difficult to tell anybody Mother, yes, I know She is great but I can't if something is wrong with that person- helpI have to tell Her lies" or "I have to do impossible. After Sahaja Yoga, I can tell this wrong thing, because after all, I cannot you, this Chakra is catching, that Chakra is catching. But also because you know help it." There is no compromise with Me. what does that Chakra mean, you can It has to be completely integrated. Your

 July - August; 2005 15 The Divine Cool Breeze Mother, I want many people to come up in Dharma should be corrected. You can not do anything wrong and then say. "I'm the boat. But don't try to jump back by doing all dishonest things. Sahaja Yogi". YOU CAN NOT. So, this is what it is - simple, that But for this, the strength comes from you are integrated. By integration, you get within. Your Spirit strengthens you. You the power to do what you understand, and must just put in your will power, that "Yes, Let my Spirit act". And then, you start you have power to feel happy with what you acting according to the Spirit, Once you understand. So, you come to a stage start acting according to the Spirit, where you develop this 'Niranand. And, you find you have no slavery of this 'Niranand' you develop when you are anything. You become 'Samartha', absolutely the Spirit. In 'Niranand' state means equal to your meaning; there's no duality left is Advaita, Sam+Artha; also, 'Samartha' means (WITHOUT DUALITY), Is one personality. powerful personality. So, you develop That is, you are completely integrated and that powerful personality which has the joy is not anymore dented - It's complete. It hasn't got a happiness and a no temptations, which has 'no' wrong ideas, which has 'no' catches, 'no' sorrow aspect, but is just Joy. The Joy is not that you laugh loud, the Joy is not problems. that you are always smiling. No. Is the 'Swarthi' (SELFISH) people trying to stillness, the quietitude within yourself, the peace of your being, of play tricks are really harming themselves, not Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja Yoga is going your Spirit, that asserts itself into to be established. Even if there are ten vibrations which you feel, that when people in the boat, God is not bothered. It you feel that peace, you feel like light is only My botheration as a Mother. As a of the sun, the whole rays of that

 16 The Divine Cool Breeze July - August, 2005 Now, let this truth take its roots within beauty spreading. yourself through your Sahasrara. And once, this truth becomes absolutely the But first of all we are cowed down by our own personal, selfish, stupid ideas. light that guides you, the light that nourishes you, the light that enlightens you THROW THEM AWAY. We have them, because, we were insecure, because we and gives you a personality that has the light, then only you should know that your have wrong ideas, throw them away. Just Sahasrara is completely enlightened by stand along one with God. And, you will find all these fears were useless. Our your Spirit. Your face should be such that cleansing is very important, and that people should know that there's a cleansing comes only when you really personality standing before you who is practice the cleansing as told in Sahaja Light'. This is how the Sahasrara is to be Yoga looked after. The Sahasrara is the blessing of the For looking after Sahasrara it is heavens, I should say. It has worked out important that you should try to cover your so well. It is very difficult to break the head during winter time. It is better to cover Sahasrara And when I really broke it. I did your head during winter time so that there's no freezing in the brain because the brain not know that it would be that successful. First, I thought it is still premature because is also made of 'Medha', means fat, so it there are many "Rakshasas (DEMONS) should not be frozen. Moreover, you should still on the street, selling their goods; and not take too much heat on your brain. To there are many fanatics who are calling keep your brain alright, you should not sit in the sun all the time as some of the themselves by the so-called religions they are following not the real religion of the Westemers do. Then, your brain melts and Atma. But, gradually it has taken its roots. you become a crazy persun-is a sign that

 The Divine Cool Breeze July August, 2005 17 a person is going out for madness is gets absolutely overburdened. Now if you tell somebody, this is your mantra; alright" something which I have told you many a times that do not take too much heat on it is to be used till you get rid of your Chakra, finished. Suppose, some screw your head. Even if you are sitting in the is to be put here; alright; what you do ? sun, keep your head covered. Covering You put the screw to get fixity, you do not of the head is very important. But the go on screwing even when it is fixed. Are covering the head should be done you going to screw it more and more so occasionally, not all the time because if that the whole thing gets spoiled? It is you just put a very heavy band around your better, that you use wisdom. And for this head, then the circulation becomes poor and you may have trouble with bad wisdom, we must know that Shri Ganesha or Jesus Christ who are placed on both circulation. So, it is an occasional opening the sides. Here is Mahayanesha(Back)3B of the head to the sun and to the moon, here is Jesus (Front) both of them help you occasionally. Otherwise, you will sit in the to correct your vision, understanding and moon and land up in the lunatic asylum. give you wisdom. So, the wisdom lies not Anything I tell you, you must know that in Sahaja Yoga, we have not to go to in sticking onto something. Sahaja Yogis are not stuck-up people. If they are stuck anything 'Ati' (EXTREME). Even sitting in the water, some people will sit for 3 up, they are not progressing. You are not to get stuck up with ideas and stuck up hours. I've never said so. Only for ten with people. You have to be all the time minutes you have to sit, but that with full heart. If I tell them anything, they will go on moving and in movement, it does not mean that you should fall somewhere and people doing it for 4 hours; there is no need. Do think that 'O', we are (learning) such a lot, it for ten minutes. Give your body different- because we are falling down." You have different types of treatment not all the time the same thing. The body gets bored or to ascend, not fall.

 July August, 2005 18 The Divine Cool Breeze So, when you are achieving your Spirit. And, if you could really do it, something in Sahaja Yoga, first of all you genuinely, and honestly not worry too much should see that your health should be about your money, and your family and alright. Your kind should be normal. You other mundane things; just don't worry should be a normal person. If you are still about it, you don't have to worry; just give barking at people, then know there is it a bandhan. If it does not work out, something wrong with you. Or if you sink, doesn't work out, finished. What's that sulking and still tantrumish and if you are wrong? If works out, well and good. Not still in a bad mood, then think you are not that your desire is important, but Thy Will Be Done'. yet a Sahaja Yogi. You can judge yourself. First you say, Thy Will Be If you are free like a bird then it's alright. Done'- it is so surprising that your wills But that doesn't mean that on the road you change, your desires change and what start signing like a bird and jumping on a ever you say, is done. But when this also tree. You see, any analogy I give to a comes up, people develop an ego, so be stupid man, he can behave ina very stupid careful. It's all done by the Shakti and not way. But to a wise man, he discreetly uses by you, by your Atma' (SPIRIT) and not by it for a proper purpose. So, one has to you. You have to be the 'Atma' (SPIRIT) understand, Sahaja Yoga is known by the and once you become the 'Atma'. You discretion- discreet persons. become 'Akami', (BEYOND GOOD AND BAD DEEDS), where you don't know that Now, what happens actually that you you are doing, it just works out, you don't get stuck with one thing, that is your 'Atma' feel, you are not aware. (SPIRIT) and the whole your being floats like a 'Patang' (KITE) does, or a kite that I wish, after all these lectures, most floats, goes all over the places, everything of your Chakras must have been opened. but you are stuck to only one thing, that is But this is all my work. You have also to

 July - August, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze 19 do some homework. And, you håve also ascend very fast. But you people who are to work and see for yourself. Be alert. Try rising higher should try to rise higher without being aware of it – that's very to face yourself in the mirror and see for yourself. How far honest you have been? important, those who think that others are How far clean you have been? How higher than them are also sadly mistaken, much friendly you are in collectivity- because that's not so. Because, it is the which is a very important point in whole that is rising. Nobody should feel in Sahaja Yoga. If you are not collective, that way inferior or in anyway low or feel if you are funny, if you are strange, if insulted that somebody thinks him low. Let you cannot communicate with others, somebody think, what does it matter, there's something wrong. And then Divine does not think so. So, all these little you should face yourself as you are - little things you should be careful about, and try to correct you. Because, you and otherwise, very easy in this Krita yuga separate you from yourself like I to achieve the ultimatu goal of Atma Sakshatkar (SELF REALISATION). separate my Sari from myself and try to clean it. In the same way, you I think today I have told you quite a separate you from yourself and try to lot about Sahasrara. clean it. This is the way how Sahaja Yogis are going to ascend. When the Sahaja Yogis will ascend, the rest of the thing also will ascend. Many Sahaja Yogis of this May god Bless you Nirmala Yoga kind will impress so many people that they will also ascend. So, the whole thing can

 ADVICE Of Her Holiness Shri Mataji 1. It is nothing but love which expands, reality. Whatever I speak, because I gives you vibrations, again reverts am That, it is Pranava. My every talk, back, goes in parabolas, like that everything, is mantra going out. which you call a pradakshina (Circumambulation of Shakti). What 5. Do not have Sahaja Yogis for is Shakti? Shakti is Paraboli. business partnership. 2. lam old woman of thousands of Do not use Sahaja Yoga for making 6. years. So, I know everything. money. You have to be generous people. You have to be honest. Be 3. Many people think ego is horrid. Ego satisfied in your heart. you must have. You have not to fight with your ego. Only thing is that your 7. You have to lead a chaste life. See ego should become one with that of chaste things. Your priorities will God, that's all. It's a very simple thing change, your friends will change. You if you just become one with God. will not like dirty jokes. You have to Everything is so simple. It is a very be decent people. ME simple thing, but you cannot do it. So Iam here. 8. Don't be misers at all. All miserly 4. My photograph is the photograph of people are against Sahaja Yoga and,

 21 The Divine Cool Breeze July August, 2005 occasions I have seen, people push if miserly people come, I give them others or shout at others even in my troubles. If you are miserly, you get lots of trouble. presence. Particularly, when you shout at the children, I feel pain in 9. Don't be too talkative also. If you my heart. At least Sahaja Yogis should have deep love for each talkative and become too other. When you know that you are troublesome, I can stop your talking. the children of the same Mother, why If you don't talk at all, that is also not do you look down upon some people? good. That means, don't go to Are you perfect? Are there no faults extremes. in you? We only talk of the universal 10. Magnanimity of mind is very pleasing love. If you have no love for each other and it attracts others. This amongst you, then in which mankind will it be seen? All I want to tell you is magnanimity lies within human being to clean your minds of venomous and is awakened by Kundalini. But how can those people have this joy of thoughts that you have for other Sahaja Yogis. spontaneity who are living in artificial atmosphere? Although Kundalini If a Sahaja Yogi visits your town, invite has been awakened and She has him, look after him, as if he is your pierced Brahmarandhra yet heart brother. His happiness will purify your must be pierced. But some homes. I cannot understand how Sahaja Yogis have hearts like there can be groups among the stones, absolutely devoid of love; they use sarcastic words while Sahaja Yogis, because every moment your condition is improving or going talking to others and want to down. Know that making such groups show that they are great. On many

 disciplined and brought up in proper is disastrous. Look at the good atmosphere of love. Realised children qualities of others and enjoy their love. cannot tolerate negativity. They flight Don't worry about their bad qualities. with it. Leave them for me. You will realize in meditation that this is the only way of 12. I do everything in collective opening the fountains of bliss. consciousness. IfI cure one pe son, 11. Sahaja yogi parents have great many such cases become alright automatically. responsibility towards their realized children. They have to be protected, (Nirmala Yoga)

 THE ANSWER, MY FRIENDS, IS BLOWING IN THE WIND. Dec. that is, respectively, Shri Ganesha's How can we follow up a visit of Shri Mataji? day and the day of the full moon to flow in All the Sahaja Yogis have raised this the stream of auspiciousness. question... and many have felt the answer. It is amazing to witness Sahaja Yoga Our collectivity directed the establish itself and spread all over the maximum of attention and desire towards world! It is wonderfull reaching as many seekers as possible and being able to bring them to our Holy It was hardly one year ago, in 1981, that Shri Mataji gave Her first public Mother's Lotus Feet. While last April. during the second coming of Shri Mataji programme in Rome. At this time, about 250 to 300 people got their realization. to Rome, our collective attention was concentrated on Her arrival, this time we But, as it is Sahaja Yoga which chooses aimed at the seekers aid enjoyed very those who are entitled to carry on the Plan much doing all the practical work. For of God, the Almighty, only the few who had a great desire to become Sahaja Yogis advertising the programmes we distributed over thousand leaflets, we have worked it out. It is in this spirit that printed 351 medium size posters and 151 we decided to commemorate Shri Matai's most precious gift in organizing two public large size posters with Shri Mataji's programmes. We wanted to introduce photograph. They were put all over Rome Sahaja Yoga and illustrate its concrete and the town was once again vibrated. The first programme followed the usual application to everyday life. pattern: a general introduction, a video tape show and collective realization. For Two special days were chosen for the second evening, just before the tape the meetings. The 30h Nov. and the 1st

 24 July - August, 2005 The Divine Coo Breeze we were the warriors of Her celestial army, we gave a short resume of what was said equipped with sword and shield, love and the day before, a technical explanation wisdom, engaged in the battle against the and two Sahaja Yogis spoke about their anti God forces. own experience. To thank the Divine Mother for the Just before leaving Vienna Shri Mother had said: "I am definitely coming attention She gave us we performed a puja the next Sunday. We gathered together at to Rome and She kept Her promise, not 8.00 p.m., got up at 2.00 a.m. and read with her physical presence but through the powerful flow of vibrations. The shower of the "Devi Mahatmyam" to celebrate to Great Goddess; again, the vibrations were blessings from the Adi Shakti rained upon us as tremendous vibrations that gave so strong and cool, again the answer was realization to more than fifty people. All blowing in the wind to tell us our puja was the Sahaja Yogis were standing at the accepted. It was the best sign from the back, in a compact row, similar to Shri glorious spouse of Sri Sadashiva that the Spirit was pleased with Her small small Shiva's arrows ready to be shot, and were collectively raising the Kundalini of a children. public which proved to be sensitive and We felt the immense, boundless, attentive. All of us Sahaja Yogis have the unlimited Divine Organisation arıd Power feeling that some among the new realized brothers and sisters are of a very high behind us. This intimate relationship to the quality, and they were eagerly waiting for All was, for instance, expressed in the secret complicity of Shri Indra and Shri the follow up! Really, the Divine Strategist Vayu whom we invoked and prayed as rain who constantly has been supporting and was threatening the day we were to put the guiding us, ever present in our minds, hearts and souls, fully enlightened us as if posters. Well, they took away the blanket

 25 July - August, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze action at the Feet of the Great Mother of of clouds, letting through blue sky and sunshine. Shri Hanuman, as usual, took the Universe, as stated by Shri Krishna care of hundred details and encouraged when He told Arjuna: "Give thy mind to me, and give me thy heart, and thy sacrifice and us with many auspicious signs. The extent of His friendliness cannot be described adoration. This is my Word of promise: thou shalt in truth come to me, for thou art here. dear to me." In truth, we must declare that the whole work has been done by the only and Once again we thank our most true Thinker, Planner and Doer who has worshiped Shri Mother, and, with Her inspired us all the time, by Shri Mataji special permission, we will dedicate to Her the "Thanks Giving Puja". Nirmala Devi. Rome, Dec. '82 Thus, at this particular time of our life Flavia, Guido, Pedro we realize the highest privilege of being chosen by GOD Himself to accomplish His (Nirmala Yoga) work, and the importance of doing it in a very detached way leaving the fruits of

 MITHYA Translation of H. H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi's letter Written in Marathi on the occasion of Sahasrara Day Celebration on 5.5.1975 is so great that gems of persons are Dear Damle, available for my work. Many blessings, Received your letter. It is a very good sign If you understand that although my to feel a pull on Sahasrara, because only physical being is here I am all over, it through Sahasrara endless rays are should also be realized that even this body poured in man's heart and new doors of is an unreal (Mithya) appearance. It is inner being are opened. But before this difficult to come to this stage but if grace descends in, there should be a pull gradually unreal is discerned, the truth will in Sahasrara. We understand the pull of be established effortlessly and waves of heart which is also silent, but lop-sided, great bliss will envelope your being. I am that is emotional. But pull of Sahasrara explaining, in this letter, what is unreal becomes all-round. There, man is in (Mithya). It should be read out to all and integrated state, in that Dharma assimilated by all. (righteousness) and awareness implore for chaitanya (Divine Consciousness) that Unreal starts soon after the birth in is God's love. This happens this world. Our name, village, country, spontaneously. Although it is the skill of horoscope, forecasts, many such things your Kundalini, your personality should get attached to you or others attach them strengthen the Kundalini. You earned that to you. Once Brahmarandhra is closed, quality in previous lives and hence this life many types of illusory ideas become a part

 27 July - August, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze False thoughts like ' it is controls and mortifications you insist on of your mind. mine or they are mine.' Identify with practicing effectively, all of them add to the outside objects! Besides, man-made limitations on your Chitta (attention). As bindings such as "My body should be such there is no way for liberation. healthy and beautiful" are inculcated. Then unreal relationships like, 'he is my father, But all unreal does not fall off with the Self-Realization. It can be broken off he is my brother, she is my mother', are on your head. As ego develops, foolish gradually. If, with firm conviction, you deny idea, such as, 'l am rich, I am poor, I am from your heart all that is unreal (Mithya), helpless, or I belong to high family etc. you will have the realization of the Self come in your head. Many officials and (Atman) in its pure form. Thereafter it is politicians become egoists (Donkeys). established within you. Albeit, the same Then, there are anger, hatred, mortal human Chitta is drenched in that which is Mother nature of love, truth, having separation, forbearance, sorrow, attachment under the cover of love and no beginning and end, verily the Shiva. temptations in the guise of social status. Human Chitta is meant for realizing that Man with great affection keeps clinging to reality. This Chitta must become one with Only that Chitta, which this unreal way of life. If you think of getting that Atman. progresses renouncing all unreal (Mithya), rid of all these, and make efforts what you get is illusory knowledge, because the breaks all known and unknown bindings attention (Chitta) moves along Pingla and becomes verily the Self. Channel, and then you are involved in Siddhis (Powers) and other temptations. Atma is never disturbed or A vision of Kundalini and Chakras is also destroyed. Only human attention (Chitta), illusory because there is no gain from it, in pursuit of desires, leaves its inner path. on the contrary it is hamful. Whatever self- This is Maya (the illusion). She has been

 28 The Divine Cool Braeze July August, 2005 intentionally created. Without her the are many instances to prove it. Then, in attention (Chitta) would not have whatever you do, your Chitta (attention) developed. You should not be afraid of remains in oneness with the Self. All bindings of sin (Pap) and merit (Punya) are Maya and should recognize her so that She will illuminate your path. Cloud hides snapped. Distinctions like worldly and the sun as also makes it seen. In the same non-worldly vanish, because that wicked way once the Maya is identified she darkness, which has created all the moves aside and the sun is seen. The discriminations, ends. Everything becomes auspicious in the light of true sun is always there but what is the purpose of cloud? Because of cloud you have an knowledge, whether it is the destruction done by Shri Krishna or the Cross of Shri urge to see the sun which shines for a moment and again hides somewhere. It Jesus. gives strength and courage to your sight to see the sun. Man has been created All this will not be understood by explaining. Just showing the path will not with such great efforts. Only one step of his feet and all is successful. But, still it is help. The path will be known only after not becoming possible. Hence, I have walking on it. come as your Mother. WhenIget your letters I fix the targets. Write your problems to me in letters. After some time even that will not be It is best to discuss only Sahaja Yoga even necessary. But, for the present all should amongst each other. Attention (Chitta) write their own experiences and progress. When I come, we will see how many should always be kept going deeper and of deeper within, Forget outside as much Virata's channels (Nadis) you have as possible. Have confidence that awakened. It appears, this work will come everything about it is taken care of. There up in the case of holy land of India, and

 Many blessings and infinite love to all. when fully developed, it will spread in all countries and directions. Ever Yours-Your Mother When Sahasrara day was -Nirmala celebrated in London today, i.e. 5th May, I (Nirmala Yoga invited only about 20-25 people and decided further course of action.

 Sahaja Yoga and Physical Cure (I) R.D.KULKARNI As all Sahaja Yogis know, people are ambitious and have tendency to dominate over others whereas left-sided sympathetic nervous system and seven Chakras govern physical and mental people are submissive and aggressive health of human beings. The left towards themselves. sympathetic nervous system i.e. Ida channel controls the emotional aspects of Ida Channel begins in Mooladhara and terminates in limbic area while Pingla human nature, attitude of delving in the past, desires etc. Ida channel is the moon channel starts from right Swadisthan and terminates in limbic area (Sahasrara). In channel and with Pingla Nadi it maintains the balance of heat and cold in the day-to-day activities both the channels are constitution. The right sympathetic nervous constantly used and as a consequence system i.e. Pingla Nadi is responsible for their terminal points are inflated like physical side of the human nature. It keeps balloons into Super-ego and Ego the balance of heat and cold with Ida Nadi respectively. Super-ego is Sub-conscious in the constitution. Excessive use of one and ego is Supra-conscious. By accepting conditioning the super-ego gets side causes imbalance in the system. inflated and we move towards the sub- conscious and by rejecting conditionings Too much of sleep, thinking of the past, lethargic nature result into over Ego is inflated and we move towards activity of left side and correspondingly Supra-conscious. If, movement in either right side remains unused. Over-working of these two directions is excessive the of physical and mental faculties lead to collective sub-conscious or supra- imbalance, in that right side is over active conscious may be entered. It is in these and left side is less used. Right-sided regions that unsatisfied dead-spirits

 31 July-August, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze reside and the result may be a less pumping and slow blood circulation. possession. Of course some Tantrikas Over-active heart leads to excess pumping of heart and fast blood circulation. Most enter these areas in order to capture dead spirits and use them for their own of the diseases of left side originate from collective sub-conscious i.e.cancer, virus purposes. infection, multiple sorosis, meningitis, On the physical level these Parkinson's disease, arthritis, imbalances cause many diseases. It has rheumatism, slip-disc, Spondylitis, been known for some time to medical Tuber-culosis, Asthma, Anemia, Sciatica, Polio, Öste-myetitis, muscular dystrophy, science that people with over activity of Paralysis. By and large patients of the the Pingla Channel (type A characters in diseases caused by left side do not suffer their terminology) are more likely to suffer from heart attack. In Sahaja Yoga we from fever. Similarly diseases of right side involve high fever. In these cases left side know the explanation; over-activity of the Pingla Nadi drains the Ida Nadi especially should be raised and grace of God be added into right side. the left heart and a heart attack is the result. Generally speaking over-activity of the Patients of left-side diseases should organs for example high blood pressure, raise their right side and add grace of God right hot liver (right Nabhi and into their left side. They should also put Swadisthan). Over-activity of left their left hand towards the photo of Her sympathetic results into lethargic liver, Holiness Mataji and right hand kept away lethargic heart, thus slowing down their functions. It can also result into low blood- or kept raised so that back side of the palm faces the photo. It is disastrous to pressure. Heart-attacks can also originate turn the palm of raised hand towards the from over-activity of left sympathetic in which case the heart is lethargicand hence photo. Similarly those having the problems

 32 July - August, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze of right side should put their right hand which are to be destroyed. As Her Holiness Mataji says, "Of what use they towards the photo and raise left as stated are? I am not here to give the realization earlier or keep it away to chickens". Our diet has much to do with the Not-with-standing all that has been balance of sympathetic nervous system said it is not always necessary that over- and has to be suitably changed in order activity of particular side would lead to the to correct the imbalance. Malnutrition can be the cause of many left side ailments. diseases related to that side alone. Over- Hence those patients having lethargic activity of right side may, as a reaction, trigger collective sub-consciousness and organs should take protein-rich food and s cause the diseases of left side like cancer. even non-vegetarian food and les Hence those who are on the extremes in carbohydrate. Right sided people (having over-active system) should avoid proteins this regard, say excess physical and and non vegetarian food and should take mental activity, are vulnerable to the diseases of left side owing to too much of more carbohydrates and vegetarian food. While on the subject of diet, it is imperative brain work, brain gets tired and causes diseases. to warn the protagonists of vegetarianism on philanthropic grounds, that intellectual Left side diseases can be caused compassion on animals does more harm to themselves than any good to the by Badhas also. These people should put left hand towards the photo and raise right animals. Compassion should emanate hand as described above. Shoe-beating from the Sprit and only that compassion (Kripa) works which comes from the heart. one's own name is also an effective treatment. It is necessary for these people The intellectual mercy is useless. Know to invoke Shri Ganesha and establish Him which animals are to be preserved and

 July- August, 2005 33 The Divine Cool Breeze on their Mooladhara by inner purification, Chakra. For treatment, palm of opposite hand should be placed on affected Chakra innocence etc. Devotion to Shri Mataji is and that hand should be stretched out of utmost importance as Shri Ganesha will be pleased only if She is pleased. towards the photo. Foot-soaking in Luke- warm water with salt added in it is Infiuence of bad Gurus also creates left side problems in which case left extremely useful and brings about quick In the worst cases, lime-chili Swadisthan and complete left void and left relief. treatment becomes necessary, depending Agnaya are affected. They should place upon the judgment of Sahaja Yogi, who is right hand on stomach and stretch left hand towards the photo and pray "Mother, helping the patient. It is however please make me my own Guru". As suggested that once cause of the disease is attributed to a "Badha" one should mother has said that it is our sprit that is our Guru and hence once the Sprit is straight away recommend lime-chili awakened one becomes one's Guru. treatment and the patient should also take to self-treatment as suggested earlier. Problems of left side or right side It is well known that human being is affect the Chakras and that ultimately made of five Elements viz. leads to the damages to the organs which Earth, Fire, are governed by the affected Chakra. Water, Air and Ether. Besides, two more elements govern psychosomatic system Further, concerned deity of the Chakra recedes from it once the Chakra is which are mind and intellect. Relation of affected. Hence, the deity is invoked in the Chakra and Element and some of the the name of Her Holiness Shri Mataji by diseases is given below:- saying the Mantra for that particular

 34 July - August, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze ELEMENT DEITY CHAKRA - Earth Sh. Ganesha Muladhar Chakra Earth Sh. Gauri & Sh. Kundalini Muladhar -Earth on left Swadisthan Sh.Saraswati Sh. Brahamadeva -Fire on right -Water Sh. Vishnu Sh. Lakshmi Manipur Sh. Shiva- Parvati Left Heart -Air Sh. Jagadamba Centre Heart Sh. Ram & Sita Right Heart -Ether Sh. Krishna & Radha Visshuddhi Sh. Jesus & Mary -Fire Agnya All five elements HER HOLINESS MATAJI- Sahasrar -Mind and ellect Atma is on top as Sadashiva.

 MEMORIES VI OF OUR DIVINE MOTHER AN ORAL HISTORY OF SAHAJA YOGA If you keep it within yourself, Any time you open that area of your memory All the beauty will start falling on you. You know the shlokas which say (Paramchaitanaya) is settled within us like Knowledge. She's settled within us as Memory. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI

 36 July-August, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze And I saw Her coming out of the car and walking one or two steps. And after that I got lost. I don't remember anything. And then I saw Her on the stage. It was like moonlight, watching Her. Nirmal Gupta To be living in this time and to have experienced all this is very difficult to imagine sometimes. I wonder why I was chosen and why I was so lucky enough to have been there in Her presence. It's all these little experiences, which stay with vou for the rest of your life. You can't ignore them. Sharon Vincent It dawned on me that what She had been telling about the future of Sahaja Yoga has come to be, that there will be so many of us, that we will not even be able to catch a glimpse of Her. Michael Petrunia It is completely overwhelming that God loves us so much. Helen Manassey

 Introduction There are many, many stories and memories of our Divine Mother, which have not yet been recorded on video, audio or set to paper - but yet have been experienced and treasured by thousands of Her children. From this ocean of memories - until now only held in trust by each of us, as our individual experience-some few sweet stories have now been collected in this volume. This book is our history-incomplete fragmentary and as vulnerable as memories are. This is our living history- a history of that culture that we call Sahaja Yoga. It chronicles the growth of our limited awareness of our Mother, Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. It records our discovery of ourselves. And it celebrates our relationship with each of our brothers and sisters, whose every experience is also our own, Thank you, Shri Mataji, for allowing us to collect these beautiful remembrances of your care and love, of the laughter and gentle correction, of actually being with You and experiencing first hand Your Incarnation. From the simple way You lift a teacup, we can learn so much. Thank you for the warmth and simplicity and all the many ways in which you shower Your Love. And thank you for the great play of Shri Mahamaya that makes seekers love and trust You, often without yet understanding the Truth that You are. The heart of this book is to remind us of the magic of Sahaja Yoga. The spirit of this book is to help future brothers and sisters to know a small part of the beauty and glory of Shri Mataji as a loving, caring Mother whose wonderful power of divine love dispels all our uncertainties. Sift now through the words that we found when we tried to remember. What follows is our collective memories, our story together...

 IT BEGAN IN INDIA You are fortunate you saw me Shri Mataji used to stay at Jeevan Jyot (in 1970) and was known as Nirmala Srivastava. I asked some girls where did Nirmala Srivastava stay ? When I went up, I saw Shri Mataji. She opened the door and said, "Are you looking for Me?" She held me by hand and took me inside very politely and asked to sit on the cot. "Where are you coming from?". I am coming from Dhulia and I have heard your name and came lam waiting for the delivery looking for you." "I am about to start this work and right now of my daughter, Kalpana. Once l am through with that, I will call you. Please leave your name and address before you leave and within a month I shall call you." We all went from Bombay to Bordi in train with Shri Mataji. We were all together. Mother would talk to all of us. We would follow Her wherever She went. I would never leave Mother, as I wanted to see what Mother did. I would follow Her and do as She directed, without any question. We all were in some school for the stay at night and after dinner we all moved up in our rooms. "Look at Raolbai from Dhulia. She always has Her attention on what I am huna. doing and not like others who are busy wastina their attention on trifle matter." She used to call me Rajkunwar. After dinner She would start giving Realisation to people. She asked me to keep my hands under Her Lotus Feet. (Mr.) Modi used to understand everything. I personally never understood anything, as for me what She said was it. If She said I was

 39 July-August, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze realised now, for me I was that. She worked on my back like this (raising of the Kundalini). Then Mother looked very lovingly and sang a beautiful song, "Par Brahma Parmeshwar". She sang so beautifully. That face was so joyous, so loving, happy. And like this, She gave realisation to four or five people till midnight. Next day She used to sit alone and call each one individually to give Self Realisation. CIW While returning back in the train, She asked us whether we had thoughts or not? I would say politely that I don't know what's happening. Then Mother asked us to put our hands in front of Her and whether we felt cool vibrations. Again I would reply innocently that I do not feel anything. "Raolbai, you are from Dhulia and I want you to come to my house tomorrow. All of you who felt vibration must meditate every morning and evening, so as to go deep and feel the vibrations." I used to stay with my daughter in a one room apartment and at around 4 aml was awakened naturally and I was shocked to see Mataji in front of me in same position as when She gave Self Realisation in Bordi. When next day I met Shri Mataji, She asked me, "Do you get thoughts by putting attention on Me?" said, "No." Mataji told me that I have attained my thoughtless state. "What did you see in the morning?" "Mother, I saw you in meditating pose." "For all people whom I gave Self Realisation yesterday, I was meditating in the

 40 The Divine Cool Breeze July August, 2005 morning for them. As you all are new and do not understand, you are fortunate that you saw Me. RAOLBAI She was very happy to be hearing my name I got my Realization on the fourteenth of April 1972 in a place called-it was big apartment called Jeevan Jyot. It was owned by Shipping Corporation of India and since Sir CP was the chairman of the shipping corporation, Shri Mataji used to receive people in Her house every day in '72, before going to America. I would relate the first experience of meditation. I was told to sit quiet for some time and with closing my eyes. I might have closed for fifteen minutes, but I thought maybeI had closed for about two hours. Anyway, so then they said I got my Realization and then we were supposed to go to Shri Mataji. And she was in a white sari, just sitting with Her legs in front. "You can either go and put your head under Her feet - which were resting horizontally to the ground with a support under Her Feet- or you can go towards Her hand. "When my turn came, I was near Her hand and She put some Amla Oil-oil in India, you get-on my head. And She asked me how do I feel? I said, "Very fine." She asked me my name and She was very happy to be hearing my name. Anyway, so this was it. Audhut Pai His search for God led us I got my first Realization on 12th August 1973. The credit for this Realization goes to my eldest brother, Maruti, who had a yearning for getting Realization for a number of

 41 July - August, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze years. His search for God led us to meet Mataji. On a fine day of 12h August, we read an article written by one Marathi newspaper editor about Shri Mataji and Sahaja Yoga and that led us to approach him in his office. We went to see him and he explained how things had happened to him. He told us to visit Bharatiya Vidya Bhawan on that same day. We left his place and went to Bharatiya Vidya Bhawan about three o'clock and, to our surprise, nobody was there to tell us what Sahaja Yoga is. We came out of the hall and telephoned back to his office, asking, where do we find Mataji?" He said, "Oh, this is not the time. You must come after six or Seven in the evening. On the very same day in the evening we again went to Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, where Mataji was giving Realisation to a very few people, ten or fifteen people. We both of us sat there and, this being a very early stage of Sahaja, Mataji was Herself working hard to give Realisation and raising our Kundalini. To my great surprise, when She touched my fontanelle, on my head, there was a flash and I saw- so called - at that time I was not knowing it was the Agnaya chakra - a Christ crucified. It was for five or six seconds, just a flash. Imyself wondered why-I myself being a Hindu and a great hater of Christianity-should get a vision of a crucified Christ. But I didn t speak anything at that time. I started enjoying it, I just closed my eyes and Mother said, "You got Realisation at the very first sitting." Niranjan Mavinkurve Slowly it settled Shri Mataji opened the Sahasrara at Nargol in 1970. I am not one of the initial

 42 The Divine Cool Breeze July August, 2005 eleven disciples, out of which hardly one or two are living now. I was one of the second batch, so to say in 1973. In those days we had programmes every day. We used to meet every day at Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan in the evening and then slowly it spread. And then we used to have in Pune, one Mr. Rajwade, at his place Mataji gave Realisation to many people. Mr. Rajwade was a staunch Brahmin and was against all these things and refused to come. He allowed a discourse at his residence. He was sitting down in his room. And after half an hour or so he came trembling in front of Mother and said, "I never realised you are the Devi." And then he got his realisation in 1973. And later on he was a strong supporter and he spread Sahaja Yoga in Pune. Pune, being full of Brahmins, intellectual people, they opposed this tooth and nail initially. But slowly it settled. Niranjan Mavinkurve You can't take the vibrations: Early days in India and after a puja, Mother used to call a few of us to suck the vibrations, rub Her Feet very hard and take the vibrations, as She lay down. And She I really can't bear it because you can't take them." And after used to say, "It's too much. the puja, it is tremendous for her. Shailaja Glover

 43 July-August, 2005 The Divine Col Breeze She taught us how to do so many things. There used to be a special training programme and during the Navaratri days We, used to reach on the terrace of Mother's building. Mother would come there and give us lecture and further training. We used to leave there at four o'clock in the morning, till 0630 in the morning. Around twenty four, twenty five people would be gathering at seven and we would come down to Her flat on the first floor, take some breakfast, tea and disperse. At that time nobody was allowed to tape record any of Her discourses. She Said, "No, you must grasp it orally, no use of tape recorder." Shri Mataji used to let us give Realisation in those days. We used to put our leg at the Mooladhara and start giving Realisation, so that the Kundalini would rise, ascending. And we used to give Realisation to so many people. I had not given Realisation to more than fifteen or twenty people because at that time the methods were not so much developed. Mataji Herself was doing great research. And now that it is at the stroke of a second and we can say it is at internet speed that Sahaja Yoga is spreading. But initially it took a long time to get Realisation. She had to Herself go out and give Realisation. She taught us how to do so many things, like balancing of the both sides and raising the Kundalini. Putting a bandhan came a little later. At that time, there was no bandhan. At that time a lot of Badhas were coming away. Then she realised that it would be a good idea to put a bandhan. So it was sort of an evolutionary development and now it is a full-fledged system and people don't have to do much. Just sitting before the photograph also, one could get Realisation.

 44 July-August, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze Initially we did not raise the Kundalini like now and that too came later. She stressed that too much stress should not be given to the bandhan. It so happened that every person used to do a bandhan without realizing its implication or its importance. People started criticizing and so She said don't do it in open places, only when you are in a hall or something, do it. People used to go in the trains and do this and other used to think, "These are mad people, doing this. Maybe they are doing some sort of a magic type of thing." Foot soaking and other treatment came later. Actually we used to go to the sea with Mataji, foot soaking in the sea. And that is how Ganapatipule came in because you know there is the sea and it is very clean sea. Before that we used to go to Bordi. We went many times to Bordi. Nargol is very near from there. When we were at Bordi, the sea was there. But of course, not everybody lives near the sea, so the alternative was footbath soaking. And then there was the shoe-beating, which She showed us. In Bombay people don't do it much now. What happened was that whenever Mother says something, people do too much of it. So Mother later said to the Bombay people, "You must put more attention on dhyana, (meditation) and the shoe-beating is a more external method- so more attention on dhyana." Niranjan Mavinkurve This is Nirmal Vidya She would explain how we have to remain in the collectivity and behave as Sahaja

 45 July - August, 2005 The Divine Cool Breeze Yogis. She always gave and is giving importance to meditation. She made all of us meditate and one by one put attention on all the chakras. This Mooladhara and then you go upwards and so on. "This is Nirmal Vidya and nobody has taught Me all this, nor have I read any book, "She would say. "I have meditated on each chakra and discovered the secrets of each one, like Mooladhara, what it looks like, what are qualities and so on. Every night I would mediate for eight hours. I have worked hard for all of you and now you have to work hard and mediated in the morning. I would work eight hours on every chakra. I would request you people to work for one hour on every chakra for eight days and then move on. Like every morning, meditate for one hour on Mooladhara for eight days and then move on to Śwadisthan and so on. Then you all will learn the secrets and Shakti of all the chakras." RAOL BAI

 The Divine Mother says After realization you all had lots of knowledge about Kundalini and Sahaja Yoga but without Bhakti you cannot achieve the balance. You have to get lost in Bhakti. Bhakti enriches your feelings. Try to feel the other Sahaja Yogis without criticizing them. I am enjoying your beings, the beauty and glory that you are. I wish you all could do that and feel like a drop in the ocean itself. Bhakti will dissolve your angularities and impediments in the collective oneness. O my children, you are really born out of my Sahasrara. l conceived you in my heart and gave you the new birth through the Brahmarandhra. The Ganges of my love has carried you into the realm of collective consciousness. This love is too great for my human body. It nourishes you, soothes you and gives you security. Gradually it opens your awareness to bliss and joy. But this love also corrects you and prunes you. It guides you and direct you. It reveals itself in the form of true knowledge. It absorbs your shocks and settles you like a guiding leaf on the hard surface of truth. It strengthens you to fulfill your aspirations of reaching spiritual heights. (Nirmala Yoga)

 క ్టక



----------------------

2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
The
00
July - August, 2005
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 NIRMALA
NIVERSAL PURE RELIG
In This Issue:-
Sahasrara Chakra 4 Feb 1983 (Delhi)
1.
20
Advice of Shri Mataji
2.
23
The Answer, My Friends, is blowing in the wind
3.
26
Mithya A letter of Shri Mataji 5-5-75
4.
30
Sahaja Yoga and Physical cure
35
Memories of our Divine Mother
6.
The Divine Mother Says
46
3.
DHARMA
VISHWA
5.
7.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 TH E
C o OL BR EE ZE
BR E
E ZE
CO O L
DIVI NE
Published by
Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
Infosys House, Plot No. 8,
Chandragupt Housing Society,
Paud Road, Kothrud,
Pune-411 029
Printed at
Amarnath Press (P) Ltd.
WHS 2/50, Kirti Nagar Indl. Area, New Delhi - 15
Ph. :25268673
Please Send Your Suggestions and Subscription to:-
Shri G.L.Aggarwal
Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
222, Desh Bandhu Apartments
Kalkaji, New Dehi-110019
Tel. No.:011-26422054, 26216654
And Your Sahaja Experiences, Articles, Miracle Photographs etc. to:
Shri O.P. Chandna
G-11-(463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110034
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 SAHASRARA CHAKRA
Hanuman Road, New Delhi.
4th Feb., 1983
it penetrates through six Chakras, enters
Today, I will be telling you about the
last centre of Sahasrara. So this last into the limbic area, and enlightens all the
seven Pithas in the brain, which are placed
centre, the Sahasrara, is contained in the
limbic area of the brain. Our head is like
along the mid-line of the limbic area. So
a coconut. The coconut has the hair, and
we start from the back, is placed here, at
the back, is the Mooladhara Chakra,
then a hard nut and then a black covering
around it is the Swadisthan, then is the
and inside is white shell of coconut and
Nabhi, then the Heart, then the Vishuddhi
inside is the space, the water. In the same
and then the Agya. So, all these six centres
way, our brain is made. That's why coconut
is called as "Shreephal".
are combining to make the seventh centre.
It is the fruit of
the power, that is, Shree. Shree power is This is very important point which we
should know. Now, the Shree Chakra is
the right side power and the left side power
right side working & Lalita Chakra is left
is the Lalita power. So we have two
side working. So, when the Kundalini does
chakras - left side, here, is the Lalita and
not rise then we do with our right side our
the right side, here, is the Shree Chakra.
These two chakras are working out the physical and mental activities. So, our
brain is doing right side activity and that's
right side Mahasaraswati's power and left
why our brain is like 'Shreephal'.
side Mahakali's power. Now, the central
power is the Kundalini that has to rise and
Sahasrara is, actually is, the
penetrate through different Chakras, enter
assemblage of the six Chakras and is a
into the limbic area and enlighten the seven
hollow space, on the sides of which there
Pithas seats of these seven Chakras. So,
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 July - August, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
THE
through your brain. That's why it is called
are one thousand Nadis (NERVES). And
as 'Satya-Khand', means you start seeing
when the light penetrates into the limbic
area, then the enlightenment of these the truth perceived by your brain because
so far whatever you see through your brain,
Nadis take place and you can see them
is not the truth. What you see, is just the
as flames, very gentle flames buning and
these flames have all the seven colours
outer side, say, you can see the colours.
that you see in the VIBGYOR. But the last
You can see the different aesthetics of the
one, ultimately becomes again integrated
colours. You can see the quality of the
and it is a crystal clear flame. All these
thing. But you cannot say whether this
seven lights ultimately become crystal carpet has been used by some saint. You
clear.
cannot say whether this is made by a devil
So, you have Sahasrara with one
or a divine person. You cannot say that
this gentleman is he a good person or he
thousand petals, as they call it, but if you
cut the brain in a transverse section or is an evil person. You cannot say if this
Deity has come out of the mother Earth or
horizontal section, you will be able to see
that all these nerves are built like this along
not. Also, you cannot say about any person,
the limbic area, all of them are like the
who is your relation, whether he is a good
relation or a bad relation or what sort of a
petals and if you cut it like this, (Vertically)
you will find that there are many nerves in
person he is, whether he goes to wrong
people or to the right people, whether he
every bundle of nerves. So, when it is
has connections with wrong side or with
enlightened, you can see Sahasrara as a
good side. Here, good means Divine. So
burning bundle of flames.
actually you do not know anything about
It is very deep subject. So, when the
divinity with your mind. Nothing
it is
impossible for you to judge a person about
enlightenment of the Kundalini takes place
in the brain then the truth is perceived his divinity unless and until the Kundalini
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 July - August, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
reaches at least this part, which is the called as 'Niranand'. Niranand! The 'Ni'
limbic area. You cannot make out whether means nothing else but Anand (Joy).
Niranand ! Also surprising, my name is
a person is real or not, whether a Guru is
Neera - also, in my family I am called as
real or not. Because divinity cannot be
perceived through your brain, unless & Neera. And Neera' also means Mary,
Marium. Because it means marine. Neera
until this light of your spirit shines, into it.
is water. 'Neer' means water in Sanskrit
Now, the Spirit is expressed in the language. It's called 'Niranand' in the
heart, is reflected in the heart. The centre
brain.
of the Spirit, we can say, is in the heart.
And, this stage ultimately unfolds.
But actually, the seat of Spirit is above here
above the head and that is the Spirit of
First what you know is the Satya, is the
what we call of the God Almighty, say Truth
what is this another gentleman
whom you callI Parvardigar, you call him
suffering from, that you see on your fingers.
Sadashiva or you call Him the Rahim, you
First you see your fingers. First you see
call him by many names which are said
your fingers. With your attention, you
know
about the Lord who is God Almighty what Chakras, what fingers are catching
Niranjan, they call Him Nirankar, every with your attention. Then with your brain
you can depict what centres it is catching.
sorts of words which start with 'Nir', 'Nihi'.
Now, at every centre in the body you Because, if you say this finger, that does
not mean it is Vishuddhi Chakra. But your
receive a different type of joy. Every centre
brain can say that it is Vishuddhi. And that
has a different type of joy. And, there are
depicts it that this fellow is suffering from
names for every type of joy you receive at
the troubles of the Vishuddhi Chakra. But
every centre when the Kundalini rises. But
when the Kundalini comes into the still it is rational. Because, you see what
Sahasrara, then the joy you receive is finger it catches and then you say. But
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 July - August, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
person "Have you got the problem, here?"
when the Satyakhand or the Sahasrara,
He says, "Yes', Then, you helieve in Me and
unfolds itself more, you don't have to think
then you believe, that this is the Vishuddhi
about it, you just say it. Then there is no
Chakra, which is showing, is true. This is
difference
Chitta
between
your
the logical conclusion, in a way, that you
(ATTENTION) and your Sat (Truth). The
have experimented, you are seeing and
enlightened Chitta (ATTENTION) and the
still doubting whether Mother says is true
enlightened brain become one. There is
or not. And then, you are sure, "Yes, it is
no problem at all for such person. There
so, we have seen that this is Vishuddhi
is no need to see, on the fingers no need
to say anything on the fingers and then
Chakra." So, the truth becomes logically
acceptable to this brain. But still, there is
depict it through the brain which you have
the brain working out on its gross level.
learnt in Sahaja Yoga, that if you find
In the second stage, as I told you, where
something wrong here, it means Agya -
you believe, you know for definite that this
that is not necessary! You just say, Agya.
means Vishuddhi Chakra, no doubt about
And you just say it and it is there.
it. Then we say that 'Nirvikalpa' has started,
when there is no doubt about Me or Sahaja
First it is
Then, it unfolds more.
integrated with, as I said, Chitta Yoga. But then, the new unfolding starts
(Attention). Then when it gets absolutely within you. For that; one has to do
integrated with the Spirit, then whatever meditation. In humility, one has to do
meditation. And then also, for this new
you say, is the truth. You just say, it is so.
Chitta
That is how, this brain unfolds into 3 new
dimension,
when
your
dimensions. First, it depicts the truth (ATTENTION) itself becomes merged into
through logical conclusions. Because, I your brain or into the enlightened brain, for
that, one has to, very honestly and humbly
have told you that if this finger is catching
surrender to Sahaja Yoga.
then it is Vishuddhi. And then, you ask the
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 July August, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze:
Now, what do we do when we get ladder as I've said. That is one of the
snakes. We think that what's the need to
our vibrations? We have different-different
reactions. Some people do not even do meditation, I have no time, I have this
understand the value of vibrations. Some
thing, that thing'. You do not progress.
people try to learn what it means. And
The other point which is very gross.
some people, suddenly think, 'O, now they
are realised souls, they can, go on giving
Also, there are some very gross people in
realizations, this, that'. They go on a ride Sahaja Yoga who enter into it. Doesn't
of a ego-trip. When they go on a ego-trip,
matter. But first thing you must know 'you
have to be honest, very' honest in Sahaja
they find that they have failed and they have
then to come back, from the very Yoga'. The honesty is like - I have seen
beginning they start. It is like the game of people. If we have a dinner, say for a
Snake & Ladder. So, reaction to marriage party, they will just crawl into it
vibrations should be very humble, without having any self- respect, without
receptive reaction.
having any understanding as to, who is
going to pay for all these things? They will
Now, on the gross level, because as
bring all their family, come down and sit
I have told you that the brain is the one
down. There are people who avoid paying
which holds the Father in it. So, if we
money which should be paid for Sahaja
Yoga. Supposing they are eating food or
commit any sins against the Father, then
they are traveling or they are coming from
this unfoldment in the brain takes some
time. So, we start reading books. And
abroad, they have to pay money for their
though people have told that first see the
traveling for their food. And sometimes, you
know I have to pay lot of money. Doesn't
vibrations and then read the books, still
we say, 'O' what's wrong, we should read
matter, I don't mind. But it's not good for
other books' You go down on snake and
you. The main thing is that it's not good
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July - August, 2005
8.
Some people have a habit of saving
for you. So, how you behave towards
Sahaja Yoga as far as money is money at the cost of Sahaja Yoga. Some
have a habit of making money at the cost
concerned, is also very important, though
of Sahaja Yoga. Some people have the
it looks gross. But it can give a big trouble
in the unfoldment because of the Nabhi
habit of not giving the due amount- and
like that. It's something like cheating.
catching-and, as you know, if the Nabhi
They all go ut of the Sahaja Yoga in no
catches it can spread upto the whole of
void; and if the void is catching, Ekadasha time. They may be looking like great
leaders in the beginning but they go out
is placed
here
which
the
Rudra,
just like that and many a times people tell
destructive forces, built-in.
me 'why don't you keep a proper account'
So, before comi ng to Sahaja Yoga, and all that. But in Sahaja Yoga, I'm not
supposed to keep any accounts or
it was alright, you were doing all kinds of
anything. Because, my accountants are
things and you would have smoothly gone
to hell without any difficulty. It is very easy
Sahaja Yogis. If you try to play tricks with
Sahaja Yoga, immediately you are
to go to hell. You can take two running
jumps and go to hell. The rest of it you
pushed out; in your awareness, in your
Nabhi chakra you never had - you may
should see. But going to hell is the easiest
make thousand' of rupees here, but you
thing. For that, you don'thave to work hard
will lose thousands of rupees, You might
or do anything about it. But, when you are
get into troubles. You will have any kind
ascending, when you are rising, then it is
little difficult. You have to be careful that of a problem that I cannot tell and then
you will say how did I get this problem?
you should not falter, you should not fall and
So Nabhi Chakra if you are not honest in
that you are ascending. So, you have to
your seeking. Honesty of seeking not only
be alert about yourself that you are not
means 'I want to seek'. It also means what
falling into the same habits which you had.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 July-August, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
You have to put the full heart- that is
your behaviour is, towards yourself and
the main thing. Like, people they come
towards others. You have to be honest to
to Sahaja Yoga and they are murmuring
yourself, that you sit down for meditation,
behind, "This could have been like that, that
try to improve your Antar-yoga, try to make
your Thoughtless Awareness, this feeling
could have been like that", all those things.
All such people also are, what Christ calls
of thoughtlessness, wider and wider. Try
to achieve that state where you really feel as, 'murmuring souls'. He said that, be
thoughtless. So the honesty pays and you careful about these murmuring souls
those who go on murmuring behind and
rise higher and higher, deeper and deeper
into your own being. First you depend
taking advantage as if they are trying to
upon Me that, "after all, Mother is going to
save others. All such people also, can
do everything. When I went to Mother my
suffer a lot. Because, they are doing a
Sahasrara opened out. This thing double game. And such a double game,
happened, then this thing happened." But is very dangerous when you are
what about you doing something that helps
treacherous to that kingdom, you are
you to open your Sahasrara? So, opening
punished. But in the God's kingdom, it's
so blissful, absolutely blissful, complete
of the Sahasrara is very important.
blessings are poured on, absolutely, with
Now, surprisingly, it is so placed that
everything - health, wealth, mental,
Sahasrara has got the Brahmarandhra at
emotional-all kinds of prosperity you can
the level where there is, I mean, at the get in Sahaja Yoga, no doubt. But when
point, where there is the Heart-Chakra.
you are so much blessed, you are also
So we must know that Brahmarandhra is
forgiven and forgiven, and forgiven, and
directly connected to your heart. If it is not
there's a long rope given to you to hang
done from the heart, superficially done yourself. But you really hang fully. It's not
Sahaja Yoga, you can not go very high.
half way.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
10
July-August, 2005
So, those people, who think, they care. And He is so loving that
description of his compassion can not
can be dishonest with Sahaja, Yoga have
to be very careful; please don't do it. If
be given in words but can be only felt
and understood.
you don't like to be in Sahaja Yoga, you
better go away, it is better; from your point
of view and from our point of view also.
Now, the problem is, people who are
their
of
dishonest
because
Because, in case you are dishonest, you
are
background, sometimes, because of their
are trying to play tricks and games, and
education, because of their upbringing or
you suffer and you look funny and strange;
may be because they are cowards. But
then people will say, that what's wrong with
there is also, another thing that can make
Sahaja Yoga? So we will unnecessarily
you dishonest- is yoür 'Poorva janmas'
suffer. Because, we cannot show you in
(PREVIOUS LIVES) and that's how you
the mirror, that this man has been very very
So, it will
take your birth and your Kundalini is made
disloyal. We cannot show that!
like that.
bring a bad name to us-first of all. And
second, you will be harmed, by this kind
But after realisation, those people
of a thing. If you are harmed, then also
we will have a bad name that how could who are of a great valour and great
it happen. But if you are honest about strength ascend so fast that all the
Sahaja Yoga and about your seeking,
problems of the stars, all the problems of
your Nakashatras (BIRTH STARS) and all
you don't know how much God looks
that, Constellations everything disappears
after you! Anybody who tries to do any
and you become a Sahaja yogi means a
harm to you will be very badly harmed
and removed from your path. God newly born-absolutely a different
personality; it has nothing to do from where
protects you out and out and he looks
you have come. Like an egg becoming a
after you with 'complete' attention and
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July-August, 2005
ten things and one is Virata Vishnu,
beautiful bird.
because also in the stomach we have got
So, this Kundalini, when it arrives
10 Guru Sthanas (PLACES) and one that
here, the first hurdle the Kundalini has, to
of Vishnu. So the seeking is also wrong.
enter into Sahasrara, is 'Ekadasha
Rudra'. These are 11 Shaktis, 11 as well as these 10 Gurus are out. Then
you develop this Ekadasha- Rudra. When
destroying Shaktis placed here. Five on
this thing is set-in within you, as l've said,
this side, five on the other side and one in
one on this side and one on that side. So.
the centre. These are obstructions within
us, built by two types of sins we commit. If those people who have bowed to wrong
we bow our heads to wrong type of gurus type of people develop a temperament or
and submit ourselves to their vicious ways, a kind of a personality which is very
vulnerable for incurable diseases like
then we develop Rudra-problems on the
right hand side-these five go out. If you cancer and all that. You may develop
have bowed-because I've never bowed cancer or any such thing-those who have
to anybody wrong, to someone who is a bowed to the wrong types of people.
wrong type of person and who is anti-God,
Now, those who think, "I'm better than
then the problem comes on this side of
anybody else. I don't care for God, I don't
the thing, on the right side, If you have the
want God, I have nothing to do"-all such
sense that 'I can look after myself, I am my
people develop a left side Ekadasha. And
own guru, who can teach me, I don't want
left side Ekadasha is extremely dangerous
to listen to anybody and I don't believe in
God, who is God, Ijust don't care for God, too. Because, such people develop the
problems of the right side-heart attacks,
all such feelings, if you have, then, your right
side doesn't catch, but the left side physically I am saying, and all other
problems of the right side. So, one of the
catches. Because right side moves this
greatest hurdles of Kundalini entering into
side and the left side this side. So these
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
12
July August, 2005
Sahasrara is this Ekadasha Rudra, which very difficult to convince anyone that
comes from Void. And which covers the
whatever they are doing has been wrong
"Medha' (is the plate of the brain). And
and they should come to right path.
that is how it can not enter into the limbic So a star come to play its part with Pluto,
and this star is the one which has brought
area. Even those who have been to wrong
gurus, if they have reached the right cancer disease because, Pluto is the one,
conclusion and surrender themselves to that cures cancer, or all such diseases
which are incurable. So, those people who
Sahaja Yoga, accepting their mistakes
and saying that I'm my own Guru', they can
just go head long into wrong path, suffer
be cured. And those, who have been from funny type of heart troubles,
speaking that l'm above all, I don't believe
insomnia,
palpitations,
vomiting,
in God, who is God, I don't believe in any
giddiness, all sort of, we can say irrelevant
talking. It is a very serious thing to go to a
prophets or anything - anything against
God or prophets is the same - anti God
wrong guru and bow to him. Sahasrara
personality who talks like that develops the
becomes a closed area for such a person.
problem, gets alright if he humbles down The persons who are against Sahaja
himself and accepts 'Sahaja Yoga as the
Yoga, have a very strong Sahasrara, like
a nut, in the sense that it is such a strong
only way of entering into the super-
consciousness'.
shell that you can not just break it-the
strong shell, like a thick nut. Even if you
want to use a hammer, you cannot break
Thave seen people who have been
Tantrikas, are being saved. I have seen
it.
people who have done all kinds of wrong
Today the time has come, that you
things have been saved. Those people,
have to recognize Sahaja Yoga; you have
who were members of very funny, strange
organizations, have been saved. But it is
to. You did not recognize any saint any
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July-August, 2005
13
I said, "you have to recognize
prophets, any one, any incarnation. But
catching?"
Sahaja Yoga. Just ask Shiva"., And when
today, the condition is that, you have to
recognize one. If you don't recognize it,
he asked the questions to Shiva, then only
your Sahasrara can not be opened the vibrations started flowing. So,
because, this is the time when the Sahasrara takes charge that it makes
s you
Sahasrara was opened and you have to recognize and also, it convinces you, it
proves to you. And by this proving even if
have your realisation. It is very important
thing that you 'have' to recognize Sahaja
you are not recognizing then you cannot
Yoga. There are many people who say
get your realisation.
that 'Mother, why to believe in Sahaja Yoga
But those who recognize also,
this way, we can just call you just 'Mother'
you could be my 'Mother' Alright, doesn't
recognize partly- they take liberties, they
matter. But you cannot get your realisation.
behave in a funny manner-without
And, even if you get it, you cannot retain it.
understanding that who is this 'Person' who
You have to recognize; RECOGNITION is here? I've seen many a times, I'm
is the only worship when you want to
talking, people are just putting their hands
know God in Sahaja Yoga. AlIl the other
up, raising Kundalini; they are just talking,
Ganas, Devatas, Deities, Shaktis are
chit chatting-I'm surprised. Because, if
one in unison in Sahaja Yoga.
And,
you have recognized, then you should know
anyone who does not recognize Sahaja
whom you are facing. Because, it is not
Yoga, they just are not bothered about you,
for My good; I'm not going to lose anything.
what sort of a person you are.
For But only you, in your ascent have not
example, a man who worships Shiva, he
recognized. That shows that you have not
comes to me, and, I find his heart is yet recognized.
catching-Surprising! He says. "Mother,
worship Shiva, how is it, my heart is
And the way some people
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 14
The Divine Cool Breeze
July August, 2005
monopolise Me also, is absolutely come back on me. "No, no, Mother, see,
There's no need to it's not so. I'm not. That's not so." Why
wrong.
should I tell, you are catching? You have
'nobody'
Me,
monopolise
can
monopolise Me. There are some to cleanse yourself with full honesty. But
first thing is to 'recognise' with full humility
people who say that "Mother must
have misunderstood". I never mis- and understanding. Once you have
understand; there is no question. Or,
recognized, gradually you will do everything
that has to be done-you 'know', what is
some people try to tell me, 'Do this, do
to be done.
that'- that also is not necessary. 'Try to
open yourself to this protocol which is very
Now the essence of Sahasrara is
important in Sahaja Yoga, which lhave told
integration. In Sahasrara all the Chakras
for this first time- today, that you must TRY
are there, so all the Deities get integrated.
TO RECOGNISE IN A FULL WAY. And,
And, you can feel their integration. That
if you do not recognize, I'm sorry, I cannot
means, when you get your Kundalini in
give you the realisation which will sustain
Sahasrara, your mental, emotional, and
- and, it may start but it may not sustain.
your spiritual-everything 'being' becomes
So, this is the simplest way of
one. Your physical being also merges with
achieving your higher thing is by it. Then you have no problems, as to. "Yes,
Ilove Mother But l'm sorry, I have to steal
recognizing gradually, by recognizing
"Yes, I know, I recognise
this money."
gradually. It is very difficult to tell anybody
Mother, yes, I know She is great but I can't
if something is wrong with that person-
helpI have to tell Her lies" or "I have to do
impossible. After Sahaja Yoga, I can tell
this wrong thing, because after all, I cannot
you, this Chakra is catching, that Chakra
is catching. But also because you know
help it." There is no compromise with Me.
what does that Chakra mean, you can It has to be completely integrated. Your
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 July - August; 2005
15
The Divine Cool Breeze
Mother, I want many people to come up in
Dharma should be corrected. You can not
do anything wrong and then say. "I'm the boat. But don't try to jump back by
doing all dishonest things.
Sahaja Yogi". YOU CAN NOT.
So, this is what it is - simple, that
But for this, the strength comes from
you are integrated. By integration, you get
within. Your Spirit strengthens you. You
the power to do what you understand, and
must just put in your will power, that "Yes,
Let my Spirit act". And then, you start you have power to feel happy with what you
acting according to the Spirit, Once you understand. So, you come to a stage
start acting according to the Spirit, where you develop this 'Niranand. And,
you find you have no slavery of this 'Niranand' you develop when you are
anything. You become 'Samartha', absolutely the Spirit. In 'Niranand' state
means equal to your meaning; there's no duality left is Advaita,
Sam+Artha; also, 'Samartha' means (WITHOUT DUALITY), Is one personality.
powerful personality. So, you develop
That is, you are completely integrated and
that powerful personality which has the joy is not anymore dented - It's
complete. It hasn't got a happiness and a
no temptations, which has 'no' wrong
ideas, which has 'no' catches, 'no' sorrow aspect, but is just Joy. The Joy is
not that you laugh loud, the Joy is not
problems.
that you are always smiling. No. Is the
'Swarthi' (SELFISH) people trying to stillness, the quietitude within
yourself, the peace of your being, of
play tricks are really harming themselves,
not Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja Yoga is going your Spirit, that asserts itself into
to be established. Even if there are ten
vibrations which you feel, that when
people in the boat, God is not bothered. It
you feel that peace, you feel like light
is only My botheration as a Mother. As a of the sun, the whole rays of that
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 16
The Divine Cool Breeze
July - August, 2005
Now, let this truth take its roots within
beauty spreading.
yourself through your Sahasrara. And
once, this truth becomes absolutely the
But first of all we are cowed down
by our own personal, selfish, stupid ideas. light that guides you, the light that
nourishes you, the light that enlightens you
THROW THEM AWAY. We have them,
because, we were insecure, because we
and gives you a personality that has the
light, then only you should know that your
have wrong ideas, throw them away. Just
Sahasrara is completely enlightened by
stand along one with God. And, you will
find all these fears were useless. Our your Spirit. Your face should be such that
cleansing is very important, and that people should know that there's a
cleansing comes only when you really personality standing before you who is
practice the cleansing as told in Sahaja
Light'. This is how the Sahasrara is to be
Yoga
looked after.
The Sahasrara is the blessing of the
For looking after Sahasrara it is
heavens, I should say. It has worked out
important that you should try to cover your
so well. It is very difficult to break the
head during winter time. It is better to cover
Sahasrara And when I really broke it. I did
your head during winter time so that there's
no freezing in the brain because the brain
not know that it would be that successful.
First, I thought it is still premature because
is also made of 'Medha', means fat, so it
there are many "Rakshasas (DEMONS)
should not be frozen. Moreover, you should
still on the street, selling their goods; and
not take too much heat on your brain. To
there are many fanatics who are calling
keep your brain alright, you should not sit
in the sun all the time as some of the
themselves by the so-called religions they
are following not the real religion of the
Westemers do. Then, your brain melts and
Atma. But, gradually it has taken its roots.
you become a crazy persun-is a sign that
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July August, 2005
17
a person is going out for madness is gets absolutely overburdened. Now if you
tell somebody, this is your mantra; alright"
something which I have told you many a
times that do not take too much heat on it is to be used till you get rid of your
Chakra, finished. Suppose, some screw
your head. Even if you are sitting in the
is to be put here; alright; what you do ?
sun, keep your head covered. Covering
You put the screw to get fixity, you do not
of the head is very important. But the
go on screwing even when it is fixed. Are
covering the head should be done
you going to screw it more and more so
occasionally, not all the time because if
that the whole thing gets spoiled? It is
you just put a very heavy band around your
better, that you use wisdom. And for this
head, then the circulation becomes poor
and you may have trouble with bad wisdom, we must know that Shri Ganesha
or Jesus Christ who are placed on both
circulation. So, it is an occasional opening
the sides. Here is Mahayanesha(Back)3B
of the head to the sun and to the moon,
here is Jesus (Front) both of them help you
occasionally. Otherwise, you will sit in the
to correct your vision, understanding and
moon and land up in the lunatic asylum.
give you wisdom. So, the wisdom lies not
Anything I tell you, you must know that in
Sahaja Yoga, we have not to go to in sticking onto something. Sahaja Yogis
are not stuck-up people. If they are stuck
anything 'Ati' (EXTREME). Even sitting
in the water, some people will sit for 3
up, they are not progressing. You are not
to get stuck up with ideas and stuck up
hours. I've never said so. Only for ten
with people. You have to be all the time
minutes you have to sit, but that with full
heart. If I tell them anything, they will go on
moving and in movement, it does not mean
that you should fall somewhere and people
doing it for 4 hours; there is no need. Do
think that 'O', we are (learning) such a lot,
it for ten minutes. Give your body different-
because we are falling down." You have
different types of treatment not all the time
the same thing. The body gets bored or
to ascend, not fall.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-19.txt 
 July August, 2005
18
The Divine Cool Breeze
So, when you are achieving
your Spirit. And, if you could really do it,
something in Sahaja Yoga, first of all you
genuinely, and honestly not worry too much
should see that your health should be about your money, and your family and
alright. Your kind should be normal. You other mundane things; just don't worry
should be a normal person. If you are still
about it, you don't have to worry; just give
barking at people, then know there is it a bandhan. If it does not work out,
something wrong with you. Or if you sink,
doesn't work out, finished. What's that
sulking and still tantrumish and if you are
wrong? If works out, well and good. Not
still in a bad mood, then think you are not
that your desire is important, but Thy Will
Be Done'.
yet a Sahaja Yogi. You can judge yourself.
First you say, Thy Will Be
If you are free like a bird then it's alright.
Done'- it is so surprising that your wills
But that doesn't mean that on the road you
change, your desires change and what
start signing like a bird and jumping on a
ever you say, is done. But when this also
tree. You see, any analogy I give to a
comes up, people develop an ego, so be
stupid man, he can behave ina very stupid
careful. It's all done by the Shakti and not
way. But to a wise man, he discreetly uses
by you, by your Atma' (SPIRIT) and not by
it for a proper purpose. So, one has to
you. You have to be the 'Atma' (SPIRIT)
understand, Sahaja Yoga is known by the
and once you become the 'Atma'. You
discretion- discreet persons.
become 'Akami', (BEYOND GOOD AND
BAD DEEDS), where you don't know that
Now, what happens actually that you
you are doing, it just works out, you don't
get stuck with one thing, that is your 'Atma'
feel, you are not aware.
(SPIRIT) and the whole your being floats
like a 'Patang' (KITE) does, or a kite that
I wish, after all these lectures, most
floats, goes all over the places, everything
of your Chakras must have been opened.
but you are stuck to only one thing, that is
But this is all my work. You have also to
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 July - August, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
19
do some homework. And, you håve also
ascend very fast. But you people who are
to work and see for yourself. Be alert. Try rising higher should try to rise higher
without being aware of it – that's very
to face yourself in the mirror and see for
yourself. How far honest you have been?
important, those who think that others are
How far clean you have been? How higher than them are also sadly mistaken,
much friendly you are in collectivity-
because that's not so. Because, it is the
which is a very important point in whole that is rising. Nobody should feel in
Sahaja Yoga. If you are not collective,
that way inferior or in anyway low or feel
if you are funny, if you are strange, if
insulted that somebody thinks him low. Let
you cannot communicate with others, somebody think, what does it matter,
there's something wrong. And then
Divine does not think so. So, all these little
you should face yourself as you are - little things you should be careful about,
and try to correct you. Because, you
and otherwise, very easy in this Krita
yuga
separate you from yourself like I to achieve the ultimatu goal of Atma
Sakshatkar (SELF REALISATION).
separate my Sari from myself and try
to clean it. In the same way, you
I think today I have told you quite a
separate you from yourself and try to
lot about Sahasrara.
clean it. This is the way how Sahaja Yogis
are going to ascend. When the Sahaja
Yogis will ascend, the rest of the thing also
will ascend. Many Sahaja Yogis of this
May god Bless you
Nirmala Yoga
kind will impress so many people that they
will also ascend. So, the whole thing can
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 ADVICE
Of
Her Holiness Shri Mataji
1. It is nothing but love which expands,
reality. Whatever I speak, because I
gives you vibrations, again reverts
am That, it is Pranava. My every talk,
back, goes in parabolas, like that
everything, is mantra going out.
which you call a pradakshina
(Circumambulation of Shakti). What 5. Do not have Sahaja Yogis for
is Shakti? Shakti is Paraboli.
business partnership.
2. lam old woman of thousands of
Do not use Sahaja Yoga for making
6.
years. So, I know everything.
money. You have to be generous
people. You have to be honest. Be
3. Many people think ego is horrid. Ego
satisfied in your heart.
you must have. You have not to fight
with your ego. Only thing is that your
7.
You have to lead a chaste life. See
ego should become one with that of
chaste things. Your priorities will
God, that's all. It's a very simple thing
change, your friends will change. You
if you just become one with God.
will not like dirty jokes. You have to
Everything is so simple. It is a very
be decent people.
ME
simple thing, but you cannot do it. So
Iam here.
8. Don't be misers at all. All miserly
4. My photograph is the photograph of
people are against Sahaja Yoga and,
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-22.txt 
 21
The Divine Cool Breeze
July August, 2005
occasions I have seen, people push
if miserly people come, I give them
others or shout at others even in my
troubles. If you are miserly, you get
lots of trouble.
presence. Particularly, when you
shout at the children, I feel pain in
9. Don't be too talkative also. If you
my heart. At least Sahaja Yogis
should have deep love for each
talkative
and
become too
other. When you know that you are
troublesome, I can stop your talking.
the children of the same Mother, why
If you don't talk at all, that is also not
do you look down upon some people?
good. That means, don't go to
Are you perfect? Are there no faults
extremes.
in you? We only talk of the universal
10. Magnanimity of mind is very pleasing
love. If you have no love for each other
and it attracts others. This
amongst you, then in which mankind
will it be seen? All I want to tell you is
magnanimity lies within human being
to clean your minds of venomous
and is awakened by Kundalini. But
how can those people have this joy of
thoughts that you have for other
Sahaja Yogis.
spontaneity who are living in artificial
atmosphere? Although Kundalini
If a Sahaja Yogi visits your town, invite
has been awakened and She has
him, look after him, as if he is your
pierced Brahmarandhra yet heart
brother. His happiness will purify your
must be pierced. But some
homes. I cannot understand how
Sahaja Yogis have hearts like
there can be groups among the
stones, absolutely devoid of love;
they use sarcastic words while
Sahaja Yogis, because every moment
your condition is improving or going
talking to others and want to
down. Know that making such groups
show that they are great. On many
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-23.txt 
 disciplined and brought up in proper
is disastrous. Look at the good
atmosphere of love. Realised children
qualities of others and enjoy their love.
cannot tolerate negativity. They flight
Don't worry about their bad qualities.
with it.
Leave them for me. You will realize in
meditation that this is the only way of
12. I do everything in collective
opening the fountains of bliss.
consciousness. IfI cure one pe son,
11. Sahaja yogi parents have great
many such cases become alright
automatically.
responsibility towards their realized
children. They have to be protected,
(Nirmala Yoga)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-24.txt 
 THE ANSWER, MY FRIENDS, IS BLOWING IN THE WIND.
Dec. that is, respectively, Shri Ganesha's
How can we follow up a visit of Shri Mataji?
day and the day of the full moon to flow in
All the Sahaja Yogis have raised this
the stream of auspiciousness.
question... and many have felt the answer.
It is amazing to witness Sahaja Yoga
Our collectivity directed the
establish itself and spread all over the
maximum of attention and desire towards
world! It is wonderfull
reaching as many seekers as possible
and being able to bring them to our Holy
It was hardly one year ago, in 1981,
that Shri Mataji gave Her first public Mother's Lotus Feet. While last April.
during the second coming of Shri Mataji
programme in Rome. At this time, about
250 to 300 people got their realization. to Rome, our collective attention was
concentrated on Her arrival, this time we
But, as it is Sahaja Yoga which chooses
aimed at the seekers aid enjoyed very
those who are entitled to carry on the Plan
much doing all the practical work. For
of God, the Almighty, only the few who had
a great desire to become Sahaja Yogis advertising the programmes we
distributed over thousand leaflets, we
have worked it out. It is in this spirit that
printed 351 medium size posters and 151
we decided to commemorate Shri Matai's
most precious gift in organizing two public large size posters with Shri Mataji's
programmes. We wanted to introduce photograph. They were put all over Rome
Sahaja Yoga and illustrate its concrete and the town was once again vibrated.
The first programme followed the usual
application to everyday life.
pattern: a general introduction, a video
tape show and collective realization. For
Two special days were chosen for
the second evening, just before the tape
the meetings. The 30h Nov. and the 1st
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-25.txt 
 24
July - August, 2005
The Divine Coo Breeze
we were the warriors of Her celestial army,
we gave a short resume of what was said
equipped with sword and shield, love and
the day before, a technical explanation
wisdom, engaged in the battle against the
and two Sahaja Yogis spoke about their
anti God forces.
own experience.
To thank the Divine Mother for the
Just before leaving Vienna Shri
Mother had said: "I am definitely coming
attention She gave us we performed a puja
the next Sunday. We gathered together at
to Rome and She kept Her promise, not
8.00 p.m., got up at 2.00 a.m. and read
with her physical presence but through the
powerful flow of vibrations. The shower of the "Devi Mahatmyam" to celebrate to
Great Goddess; again, the vibrations were
blessings from the Adi Shakti rained upon
us as tremendous vibrations that gave
so strong and cool, again the answer was
realization to more than fifty people. All
blowing in the wind to tell us our puja was
the Sahaja Yogis were standing at the accepted. It was the best sign from the
back, in a compact row, similar to Shri glorious spouse of Sri Sadashiva that the
Spirit was pleased with Her small small
Shiva's arrows ready to be shot, and were
collectively raising the Kundalini of a children.
public which proved to be sensitive and
We felt the immense, boundless,
attentive. All of us Sahaja Yogis have the
unlimited Divine Organisation arıd Power
feeling that some among the new realized
brothers and sisters are of a very high behind us. This intimate relationship to the
quality, and they were eagerly waiting for All was, for instance, expressed in the
secret complicity of Shri Indra and Shri
the follow up! Really, the Divine Strategist
Vayu whom we invoked and prayed as rain
who constantly has been supporting and
was threatening the day we were to put the
guiding us, ever present in our minds,
hearts and souls, fully enlightened us as if
posters. Well, they took away the blanket
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-26.txt 
 25
July - August, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
action at the Feet of the Great Mother of
of clouds, letting through blue sky and
sunshine. Shri Hanuman, as usual, took the Universe, as stated by Shri Krishna
care of hundred details and encouraged
when He told Arjuna: "Give thy mind to me,
and give me thy heart, and thy sacrifice and
us with many auspicious signs. The extent
of His friendliness cannot be described
adoration. This is my Word of promise:
thou shalt in truth come to me, for thou art
here.
dear to me."
In truth, we must declare that the
whole work has been done by the only and
Once again we thank our most
true Thinker, Planner and Doer who has worshiped Shri Mother, and, with Her
inspired us all the time, by Shri Mataji special permission, we will dedicate to
Her the "Thanks Giving Puja".
Nirmala Devi.
Rome, Dec. '82
Thus, at this particular time of our life
Flavia, Guido, Pedro
we realize the highest privilege of being
chosen by GOD Himself to accomplish His
(Nirmala Yoga)
work, and the importance of doing it in a
very detached way leaving the fruits of
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-27.txt 
 MITHYA
Translation of H. H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi's letter Written in Marathi on the
occasion of Sahasrara Day Celebration on 5.5.1975
is so great that gems of persons are
Dear Damle,
available for my work.
Many blessings,
Received your letter. It is a very good sign
If you understand that although my
to feel a pull on Sahasrara, because only
physical being is here I am all over, it
through Sahasrara endless rays are
should also be realized that even this body
poured in man's heart and new doors of
is an unreal (Mithya) appearance. It is
inner being are opened. But before this difficult to come to this stage but if
grace descends in, there should be a pull
gradually unreal is discerned, the truth will
in Sahasrara. We understand the pull of
be established effortlessly and waves of
heart which is also silent, but lop-sided,
great bliss will envelope your being. I am
that is emotional. But pull of Sahasrara
explaining, in this letter, what is unreal
becomes all-round. There, man is in
(Mithya). It should be read out to all and
integrated state, in that Dharma
assimilated by all.
(righteousness) and awareness implore
for chaitanya (Divine Consciousness) that
Unreal starts soon after the birth in
is God's love.
This happens
this world. Our name, village, country,
spontaneously. Although it is the skill of
horoscope, forecasts, many such things
your Kundalini, your personality should
get attached to you or others attach them
strengthen the Kundalini. You earned that
to you. Once Brahmarandhra is closed,
quality in previous lives and hence this life
many types of illusory ideas become a part
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-28.txt 
 27
July - August, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
False thoughts like ' it is controls and mortifications you insist on
of your mind.
mine or they are mine.' Identify with practicing effectively, all of them add to the
outside objects! Besides, man-made limitations on your Chitta (attention). As
bindings such as "My body should be such there is no way for liberation.
healthy and beautiful" are inculcated. Then
unreal relationships like, 'he is my father,
But all unreal does not fall off with the
Self-Realization. It can be broken off
he is my brother, she is my mother', are
on your head. As ego develops, foolish
gradually. If, with firm conviction, you deny
idea, such as, 'l am rich, I am poor, I am
from your heart all that is unreal (Mithya),
helpless, or I belong to high family etc. you will have the realization of the Self
come in your head. Many officials and
(Atman) in its pure form. Thereafter it is
politicians become egoists (Donkeys). established within you. Albeit, the same
Then, there are anger, hatred, mortal human Chitta is drenched in that
which is Mother nature of love, truth, having
separation,
forbearance,
sorrow,
attachment under the cover of love and no beginning and end, verily the Shiva.
temptations in the guise of social status.
Human Chitta is meant for realizing that
Man with great affection keeps clinging to
reality. This Chitta must become one with
Only that Chitta, which
this unreal way of life. If you think of getting
that Atman.
progresses renouncing all unreal (Mithya),
rid of all these, and make efforts what you
get is illusory knowledge, because the breaks all known and unknown bindings
attention (Chitta) moves along Pingla and becomes verily the Self.
Channel, and then you are involved in
Siddhis (Powers) and other temptations.
Atma is never disturbed or
A vision of Kundalini and Chakras is also
destroyed. Only human attention (Chitta),
illusory because there is no gain from it,
in pursuit of desires, leaves its inner path.
on the contrary it is hamful. Whatever self-
This is Maya (the illusion). She has been
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-29.txt 
 28
The Divine Cool Braeze
July August, 2005
intentionally created. Without her the are many instances to prove it. Then, in
attention (Chitta) would not have whatever you do, your Chitta (attention)
developed. You should not be afraid of remains in oneness with the Self. All
bindings of sin (Pap) and merit (Punya) are
Maya and should recognize her so that
She will illuminate your path. Cloud hides snapped. Distinctions like worldly and
the sun as also makes it seen. In the same
non-worldly vanish, because that wicked
way once the Maya is identified she darkness, which has created all the
moves aside and the sun is seen. The
discriminations, ends. Everything
becomes auspicious in the light of true
sun is always there but what is the purpose
of cloud? Because of cloud you have an
knowledge, whether it is the destruction
done by Shri Krishna or the Cross of Shri
urge to see the sun which shines for a
moment and again hides somewhere. It Jesus.
gives strength and courage to your sight
to see the sun. Man has been created
All this will not be understood by
explaining. Just showing the path will not
with such great efforts. Only one step of
his feet and all is successful. But, still it is help. The path will be known only after
not becoming possible. Hence, I have
walking on it.
come as your Mother.
WhenIget your letters I fix the targets.
Write your problems to me in letters. After some time even that will not be
It is best to discuss only Sahaja Yoga even
necessary. But, for the present all should
amongst each other. Attention (Chitta) write their own experiences and progress.
When I come, we will see how many
should always be kept going deeper and
of
deeper within, Forget outside as much Virata's channels (Nadis) you have
as possible. Have confidence that awakened. It appears, this work will come
everything about it is taken care of. There up in the case of holy land of India, and
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Many blessings and infinite love to all.
when fully developed, it will spread in all
countries and directions.
Ever Yours-Your Mother
When Sahasrara day was
-Nirmala
celebrated in London today, i.e. 5th May, I
(Nirmala Yoga
invited only about 20-25 people and
decided further course of action.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Sahaja Yoga and Physical Cure (I)
R.D.KULKARNI
As all Sahaja Yogis know, people are ambitious and have tendency
to dominate over others whereas left-sided
sympathetic nervous system and seven
Chakras govern physical and mental people are submissive and aggressive
health of human beings. The left towards themselves.
sympathetic nervous system i.e. Ida
channel controls the emotional aspects of
Ida Channel begins in Mooladhara
and terminates in limbic area while Pingla
human nature, attitude of delving in the
past, desires etc. Ida channel is the moon
channel starts from right Swadisthan and
terminates in limbic area (Sahasrara). In
channel and with Pingla Nadi it maintains
the balance of heat and cold in the day-to-day activities both the channels are
constitution. The right sympathetic nervous constantly used and as a consequence
system i.e. Pingla Nadi is responsible for their terminal points are inflated like
physical side of the human nature. It keeps
balloons into Super-ego and Ego
the balance of heat and cold with Ida Nadi
respectively. Super-ego is Sub-conscious
in the constitution. Excessive use of one
and ego is Supra-conscious.
By
accepting conditioning the super-ego gets
side causes imbalance in the system.
inflated and we move towards the sub-
conscious and by rejecting conditionings
Too much of sleep, thinking of the
past, lethargic nature result into over
Ego is inflated and we move towards
activity of left side and correspondingly
Supra-conscious. If, movement in either
right side remains unused. Over-working
of these two directions is excessive the
of physical and mental faculties lead to
collective sub-conscious or supra-
imbalance, in that right side is over active
conscious may be entered. It is in these
and left side is less used. Right-sided regions that unsatisfied dead-spirits
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-32.txt 
 31
July-August, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
reside and the result may be a less pumping and slow blood circulation.
possession. Of course some Tantrikas Over-active heart leads to excess pumping
of heart and fast blood circulation. Most
enter these areas in order to capture dead
spirits and use them for their own of the diseases of left side originate from
collective sub-conscious i.e.cancer, virus
purposes.
infection, multiple sorosis, meningitis,
On the physical level these Parkinson's disease, arthritis,
imbalances cause many diseases. It has rheumatism, slip-disc, Spondylitis,
been known for some time to medical Tuber-culosis, Asthma, Anemia, Sciatica,
Polio, Öste-myetitis, muscular dystrophy,
science that people with over activity of
Paralysis. By and large patients of the
the Pingla Channel (type A characters in
diseases caused by left side do not suffer
their terminology) are more likely to suffer
from heart attack. In Sahaja Yoga we from fever. Similarly diseases of right side
involve high fever. In these cases left side
know the explanation; over-activity of the
Pingla Nadi drains the Ida Nadi especially should be raised and grace of God be
added into right side.
the left heart and a heart attack is the result.
Generally speaking over-activity of the
Patients of left-side diseases should
organs for example high blood pressure,
raise their right side and add grace of God
right
hot liver (right Nabhi and
into their left side. They should also put
Swadisthan).
Over-activity of left
their left hand towards the photo of Her
sympathetic results into lethargic liver,
Holiness Mataji and right hand kept away
lethargic heart, thus slowing down their
functions. It can also result into low blood- or kept raised so that back side of the
palm faces the photo. It is disastrous to
pressure. Heart-attacks can also originate
turn the palm of raised hand towards the
from over-activity of left sympathetic in
which case the heart is lethargicand hence
photo. Similarly those having the problems
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-33.txt 
 32
July - August, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
of right side should put their right hand which are to be destroyed. As Her
Holiness Mataji says, "Of what use they
towards the photo and raise left as stated
are? I am not here to give the realization
earlier or keep it away
to chickens".
Our diet has much to do with the
Not-with-standing all that has been
balance of sympathetic nervous system
said it is not always necessary that over-
and has to be suitably changed in order
activity of particular side would lead to the
to correct the imbalance. Malnutrition can
be the cause of many left side ailments. diseases related to that side alone. Over-
Hence those patients having lethargic activity of right side may, as a reaction,
trigger collective sub-consciousness and
organs should take protein-rich food and
s cause the diseases of left side like cancer.
even non-vegetarian food and les
Hence those who are on the extremes in
carbohydrate. Right sided people (having
over-active system) should avoid proteins this regard, say excess physical and
and non vegetarian food and should take mental activity, are vulnerable to the
diseases of left side owing to too much of
more carbohydrates and vegetarian food.
While on the subject of diet, it is imperative
brain work, brain gets tired and causes
diseases.
to warn the protagonists of vegetarianism
on philanthropic grounds, that intellectual
Left side diseases can be caused
compassion on animals does more harm
to themselves than any good to the by Badhas also. These people should put
left hand towards the photo and raise right
animals. Compassion should emanate
hand as described above. Shoe-beating
from the Sprit and only that compassion
(Kripa) works which comes from the heart. one's own name is also an effective
treatment. It is necessary for these people
The intellectual mercy is useless. Know
to invoke Shri Ganesha and establish Him
which animals are to be preserved and
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-34.txt 
 July- August, 2005
33
The Divine Cool Breeze
on their Mooladhara by inner purification,
Chakra. For treatment, palm of opposite
hand should be placed on affected Chakra
innocence etc. Devotion to Shri Mataji is
and that hand should be stretched out
of utmost importance as Shri Ganesha will
be pleased only if She is pleased. towards the photo. Foot-soaking in Luke-
warm water with salt added in it is
Infiuence of bad Gurus also creates left
side problems in which case left extremely useful and brings about quick
In the worst cases, lime-chili
Swadisthan and complete left void and left
relief.
treatment becomes necessary, depending
Agnaya are affected. They should place
upon the judgment of Sahaja Yogi, who is
right hand on stomach and stretch left hand
towards the photo and pray "Mother, helping the patient. It is however
please make me my own Guru". As suggested that once cause of the disease
is attributed to a "Badha" one should
mother has said that it is our sprit that is
our Guru and hence once the Sprit is straight away recommend lime-chili
awakened one becomes one's Guru.
treatment and the patient should also take
to self-treatment as suggested earlier.
Problems of left side or right side
It is well known that human being is
affect the Chakras and that ultimately
made of five Elements viz.
leads to the damages to the organs which
Earth, Fire,
are governed by the affected Chakra. Water, Air and Ether. Besides, two more
elements govern psychosomatic system
Further, concerned deity of the Chakra
recedes from it once the Chakra is which are mind and intellect. Relation of
affected. Hence, the deity is invoked in
the Chakra and Element and some of the
the name of Her Holiness Shri Mataji by
diseases is given below:-
saying the Mantra for that particular
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-35.txt 
 34
July - August, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
ELEMENT
DEITY
CHAKRA
- Earth
Sh. Ganesha
Muladhar Chakra
Earth
Sh. Gauri & Sh. Kundalini
Muladhar
-Earth on left
Swadisthan
Sh.Saraswati Sh. Brahamadeva
-Fire on right
-Water
Sh. Vishnu Sh. Lakshmi
Manipur
Sh. Shiva- Parvati
Left Heart
-Air
Sh. Jagadamba
Centre Heart
Sh. Ram & Sita
Right Heart
-Ether
Sh. Krishna & Radha
Visshuddhi
Sh. Jesus & Mary
-Fire
Agnya
All five elements
HER HOLINESS MATAJI-
Sahasrar
-Mind and ellect
Atma is on top as Sadashiva.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-36.txt 
 MEMORIES
VI
OF OUR DIVINE MOTHER
AN ORAL HISTORY OF SAHAJA YOGA
If you keep it within yourself,
Any time you open that area of your memory
All the beauty will start falling on you.
You know the shlokas which say
(Paramchaitanaya) is settled within us like Knowledge.
She's settled within us as Memory.
SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-37.txt 
 36
July-August, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
And I saw Her coming out of the car and walking one or two steps. And after that
I got lost. I don't remember anything. And then I saw Her on the stage. It was like
moonlight, watching Her.
Nirmal Gupta
To be living in this time and to have experienced all this is very difficult to imagine
sometimes. I wonder why I was chosen and why I was so lucky enough to have been
there in Her presence. It's all these little experiences, which stay with vou for the rest of
your life. You can't ignore them.
Sharon Vincent
It dawned on me that what She had been telling about the future of Sahaja Yoga
has come to be, that there will be so many of us, that we will not even be able to catch
a glimpse of Her.
Michael Petrunia
It is completely overwhelming that God loves us so much.
Helen Manassey
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-38.txt 
 Introduction
There are many, many stories and memories of our Divine Mother, which have
not yet been recorded on video, audio or set to paper - but yet have been experienced
and treasured by thousands of Her children.
From this ocean of memories - until now only held in trust by each of us, as our
individual experience-some few sweet stories have now been collected in this volume.
This book is our history-incomplete fragmentary and as vulnerable as memories
are. This is our living history-
a history of that culture that we call Sahaja Yoga. It
chronicles the growth of our limited awareness of our Mother, Her Holiness Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi. It records our discovery of ourselves. And it celebrates our relationship
with each of our brothers and sisters, whose every experience is also our own,
Thank you, Shri Mataji, for allowing us to collect these beautiful remembrances of
your care and love, of the laughter and gentle correction, of actually being with You and
experiencing first hand Your Incarnation. From the simple way You lift a teacup, we
can learn so much.
Thank you for the warmth and simplicity and all the many ways in which you shower
Your Love. And thank you for the great play of Shri Mahamaya that makes seekers
love and trust You, often without yet understanding the Truth that You are.
The heart of this book is to remind us of the magic of Sahaja Yoga. The spirit of
this book is to help future brothers and sisters to know a small part of the beauty and
glory of Shri Mataji as a loving, caring Mother whose wonderful power of divine love
dispels all our uncertainties.
Sift now through the words that we found when we tried to remember. What follows
is our collective memories, our story together...
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-39.txt 
 IT BEGAN IN INDIA
You are fortunate you saw me
Shri Mataji used to stay at Jeevan Jyot (in 1970) and was known as Nirmala
Srivastava. I asked some girls where did Nirmala Srivastava stay ? When I went up, I
saw Shri Mataji. She opened the door and said, "Are you looking for Me?" She held
me by hand and took me inside very politely and asked to sit on the cot. "Where are
you coming from?". I am coming from Dhulia and I have heard your name and came
lam waiting for the delivery
looking for you." "I am about to start this work and right now
of my daughter, Kalpana. Once l am through with that, I will call you. Please leave your
name and address before you leave and within a month I shall call you."
We all went from Bombay to Bordi in train with Shri Mataji. We were all together.
Mother would talk to all of us. We would follow Her wherever She went. I would never
leave Mother, as I wanted to see what Mother did. I would follow Her and do as She
directed, without any question.
We all were in some school for the stay at night and after dinner we all moved up
in our rooms. "Look at Raolbai from Dhulia. She always has Her attention on what I am
huna.
doing and not like others who are busy wastina their attention on trifle matter." She
used to call me Rajkunwar.
After dinner She would start giving Realisation to people. She asked me to
keep my hands under Her Lotus Feet. (Mr.) Modi used to understand everything. I
personally never understood anything, as for me what She said was it. If She said I was
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-40.txt 
 39
July-August, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
realised now, for me I was that.
She worked on my back like this (raising of the Kundalini). Then Mother looked
very lovingly and sang a beautiful song, "Par Brahma Parmeshwar". She sang so
beautifully. That face was so joyous, so loving, happy. And like this, She gave realisation
to four or five people till midnight. Next day She used to sit alone and call each one
individually to give Self Realisation.
CIW
While returning back in the train, She asked us whether we had thoughts or not?
I would say politely that I don't know what's happening. Then Mother asked us to put
our hands in front of Her and whether we felt cool vibrations. Again I would reply innocently
that I do not feel anything. "Raolbai, you are from Dhulia and I want you to come to my
house tomorrow. All of you who felt vibration must meditate every morning and evening,
so as to go deep and feel the vibrations."
I used to stay with my daughter in a one room apartment and at around 4 aml
was awakened naturally and I was shocked to see Mataji in front of me in same position
as when She gave Self Realisation in Bordi.
When next day I met Shri Mataji, She asked me, "Do you get thoughts by putting
attention on Me?"
said, "No." Mataji told me that I have attained my thoughtless state. "What did
you see in the morning?"
"Mother, I saw you in meditating pose."
"For all people whom I gave Self Realisation yesterday, I was meditating in the
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-41.txt 
 40
The Divine Cool Breeze
July August, 2005
morning for them. As you all are new and do not understand, you are fortunate that you
saw Me.
RAOLBAI
She was very happy to be hearing my name
I got my Realization on the fourteenth of April 1972 in a place called-it was big
apartment called Jeevan Jyot. It was owned by Shipping Corporation of India and
since Sir CP was the chairman of the shipping corporation, Shri Mataji used to receive
people in Her house every day in '72, before going to America.
I would relate the first experience of meditation. I was told to sit quiet for some
time and with closing my eyes. I might have closed for fifteen minutes, but I thought
maybeI had closed for about two hours. Anyway, so then they said I got my Realization
and then we were supposed to go to Shri Mataji. And she was in a white sari, just
sitting with Her legs in front. "You can either go and put your head under Her feet -
which were resting horizontally to the ground with a support under Her Feet- or you
can go towards Her hand. "When my turn came, I was near Her hand and She put
some Amla Oil-oil in India, you get-on my head. And She asked me how do I feel?
I said, "Very fine." She asked me my name and She was very happy to be hearing my
name. Anyway, so this was it.
Audhut Pai
His search for God led us
I got my first Realization on 12th August 1973. The credit for this Realization goes
to my eldest brother, Maruti, who had a yearning for getting Realization for a number of
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-42.txt 
 41
July - August, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
years. His search for God led us to meet Mataji.
On a fine day of 12h August, we read an article written by one Marathi newspaper
editor about Shri Mataji and Sahaja Yoga and that led us to approach him in his office.
We went to see him and he explained how things had happened to him. He told us to
visit Bharatiya Vidya Bhawan on that same day. We left his place and went to Bharatiya
Vidya Bhawan about three o'clock and, to our surprise, nobody was there to tell us
what Sahaja Yoga is. We came out of the hall and telephoned back to his office, asking,
where do we find Mataji?" He said, "Oh, this is not the time. You must come after six or
Seven in the evening.
On the very same day in the evening we again went to Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan,
where Mataji was giving Realisation to a very few people, ten or fifteen people. We
both of us sat there and, this being a very early stage of Sahaja, Mataji was Herself
working hard to give Realisation and raising our Kundalini. To my great surprise, when
She touched my fontanelle, on my head, there was a flash and I saw- so called - at
that time I was not knowing it was the Agnaya chakra - a Christ crucified. It was for five
or six seconds, just a flash. Imyself wondered why-I myself being a Hindu and a great
hater of Christianity-should get a vision of a crucified Christ. But I didn t speak anything
at that time. I started enjoying it, I just closed my eyes and Mother said, "You got
Realisation at the very first sitting."
Niranjan Mavinkurve
Slowly it settled
Shri Mataji opened the Sahasrara at Nargol in 1970. I am not one of the initial
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-43.txt 
 42
The Divine Cool Breeze
July August, 2005
eleven disciples, out of which hardly one or two are living now. I was one of the second
batch, so to say in 1973.
In those days we had programmes every day. We used to meet every day at
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan in the evening and then slowly it spread.
And then we used to have in Pune, one Mr. Rajwade, at his place Mataji gave
Realisation to many people. Mr. Rajwade was a staunch Brahmin and was against all
these things and refused to come. He allowed a discourse at his residence. He was
sitting down in his room. And after half an hour or so he came trembling in front of
Mother and said, "I never realised you are the Devi." And then he got his realisation in
1973.
And later on he was a strong supporter and he spread Sahaja Yoga in Pune.
Pune, being full of Brahmins, intellectual people, they opposed this tooth and nail initially.
But slowly it settled.
Niranjan Mavinkurve
You can't take the vibrations:
Early days in India and after a puja, Mother used to call a few of us to suck the
vibrations, rub Her Feet very hard and take the vibrations, as She lay down. And She
I really can't bear it because you can't take them." And after
used to say, "It's too much.
the puja, it is tremendous for her.
Shailaja Glover
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-44.txt 
 43
July-August, 2005
The Divine Col Breeze
She taught us how to do so many things.
There used to be a special training programme and during the Navaratri days
We,
used to reach on the terrace of Mother's building. Mother would come there and
give us lecture and further training. We used to leave there at four o'clock in the morning,
till 0630 in the morning. Around twenty four, twenty five people would be gathering at
seven and we would come down to Her flat on the first floor, take some breakfast, tea
and disperse. At that time nobody was allowed to tape record any of Her discourses.
She Said, "No, you must grasp it orally, no use of tape recorder."
Shri Mataji used to let us give Realisation in those days. We used to put our leg
at the Mooladhara and start giving Realisation, so that the Kundalini would rise,
ascending. And we used to give Realisation to so many people. I had not given
Realisation to more than fifteen or twenty people because at that time the methods
were not so much developed. Mataji Herself was doing great research. And now that
it is at the stroke of a second and we can say it is at internet speed that Sahaja Yoga is
spreading. But initially it took a long time to get Realisation. She had to Herself go out
and give Realisation. She taught us how to do so many things, like balancing of the
both sides and raising the Kundalini.
Putting a bandhan came a little later. At that time, there was no bandhan. At that
time a lot of Badhas were coming away. Then she realised that it would be a good
idea to put a bandhan. So it was sort of an evolutionary development and now it is a
full-fledged system and people don't have to do much. Just sitting before the photograph
also, one could get Realisation.
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-45.txt 
 44
July-August, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
Initially we did not raise the Kundalini like now and that too came later. She
stressed that too much stress should not be given to the bandhan. It so happened that
every person used to do a bandhan without realizing its implication or its importance.
People started criticizing and so She said don't do it in open places, only when you
are in a hall or something, do it. People used to go in the trains and do this and other
used to think, "These are mad people, doing this. Maybe they are doing some sort of
a magic type of thing."
Foot soaking and other treatment came later. Actually we used to go to the sea
with Mataji, foot soaking in the sea. And that is how Ganapatipule came in because
you know there is the sea and it is very clean sea. Before that we used to go to Bordi.
We went
many times to Bordi. Nargol is very near from there. When we were at Bordi,
the sea was there. But of course, not everybody lives near the sea, so the alternative
was footbath soaking.
And then there was the shoe-beating, which She showed us. In Bombay people don't
do it much now. What happened was that whenever Mother says something, people
do too much of it. So Mother later said to the Bombay people, "You must put more
attention on dhyana, (meditation) and the shoe-beating is a more external method-
so more attention on dhyana."
Niranjan Mavinkurve
This is Nirmal Vidya
She would explain how we have to remain in the collectivity and behave as Sahaja
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-46.txt 
 45
July - August, 2005
The Divine Cool Breeze
Yogis. She always gave and is giving importance to meditation. She made all of us
meditate and one by one put attention on all the chakras. This Mooladhara and then
you go upwards and so on. "This is Nirmal Vidya and nobody has taught Me all this,
nor have I read any book, "She would say. "I have meditated on each chakra and
discovered the secrets of each one, like Mooladhara, what it looks like, what
are qualities and so on. Every night I would mediate for eight hours. I have
worked hard for all of you and now you have to work hard and mediated in the
morning. I would work eight hours on every chakra. I would request you people
to work for one hour on every chakra for eight days and then move on. Like
every morning, meditate for one hour on Mooladhara for eight days and then
move on to Śwadisthan and so on. Then you all will learn the secrets and
Shakti of all the chakras."
RAOL BAI
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-47.txt 
 The Divine Mother says
After realization you all had lots of knowledge about Kundalini and Sahaja Yoga
but without Bhakti you cannot achieve the balance. You have to get lost in Bhakti. Bhakti
enriches your feelings.
Try to feel the other Sahaja Yogis without criticizing them. I am enjoying your
beings, the beauty and glory that you are. I wish you all could do that and feel like a
drop in the ocean itself. Bhakti will dissolve your angularities and impediments in the
collective oneness.
O my children, you are really born out of my Sahasrara. l conceived you in my
heart and gave you the new birth through the Brahmarandhra. The Ganges of my love
has carried you into the realm of collective consciousness.
This love is too great for my human body. It nourishes you, soothes you and gives
you security. Gradually it opens your awareness to bliss and joy. But this love also
corrects you and prunes you. It guides you and direct you. It reveals itself in the form of
true knowledge. It absorbs your shocks and settles you like a guiding leaf on the hard
surface of truth. It strengthens you to fulfill your aspirations of reaching spiritual heights.
(Nirmala Yoga)
 2005_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-49.txt 
 క
్టక
