The Divine Cool Breeze May-June 2006

 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE May-June 2006 NIRMALA IN THIS ISSUE PURE RELIG An Appeal To Sahaja yogis 3 Sir C.P. Srivastav Addresses Architects 20-1-2006 Shri Krishna Puja Celebrations - (USA) 26-28 August, 2005 6. Rakhi Celebration - (2005) 7 Nine Nights Of Navratri At Gurgaon Oct. 2005 9. Sir C.P's Speech - Navratri Puja 15 Oct-2005 (Excerpt) 10 Navratri Puja - 16 Oct.-2005 Gurgaon (A Report) 13 Ekadash Rudra Puja - New York, 17 Sept. 1983 16 From Nirmala Yoga-1983 :- Place Of Money In Sahaj Yoga - 8.6.1983 22 i- The Beginnings (Viena) - 5.6.1983 23 ii- 26 Mother Dear Mother ili- An Experience - May-1982 28 iv- 30 Sahaja Of Physics, Part- I (7.7.1983) V- Installation Of Shri Ganesha 33 vi- Mother's Love (A Poem) 34 vii- Mother's Advice To Sahaja Mothers 35 ix- The Memories Of The Divine Mother 38 DHARMA VAHSIA UNIVERSA

 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZzE Published by Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 108, Chandragupt Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411029 Printed by Krishna Printer & Designer Tri Nagar, Delhi-35 Mob.: 9868545679 For Subscription Please Write to: Shri G.L. Agrawal Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 222, Desh Bandhu Apartments Kalkaji, New Delhi-110019 Tel.No.: 011-26422054, 26216654 Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles, Miracle Photographs etc. to: Shri O.P. Chandna G-11 (463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110 034

 Sir CP Srivastava addresses the Burwood builders, architects and decorators (20, Jaпиary-2006) Tonight members of the Sydney collective associated with the renovations of the Burwood relaxing and is in the best health he has seen for sometime, it is all quite remarkable. Nothing pleases us more than to see Her so well and at Ashram gathered to meet with Sir CP who wished to thank them for all that has been done peace. in preparing their home. What began as a small Sir CP then explained to us that since he gathering began to swell as architects, builders, has been here an idea has come to him which engineers, artists, interior designers and an amy he would like to share with us, the artistry and of labourers assembled in the former meditation room which is now serving as their extended dedication of the work here has led him to explore an idea he would like us all to living room. contemplate. Sir CP entered the room and you could feel Recently the arrangements surrounding the a sense of excitement, joy, and bliss. Although final acquisition of the house where Shri Mataji those associated with the building were present, took Her birth at Chindwara has been finalised it felt as if all the collective were there. and this spiritually unique and significant home isnowin Sahaja hands. The first and immediate task is to stablise, strengthen, and reinforce the Sir CP began while speaking of the family's experiences within their home said that sometimes words are incapable of expressing home to ensure its long term viability. Then the home should be restored to its former glory experiences and what has been achieved, well it was like being in heaven on earth, the Yogis have done a remarkable joband in such a short within the keeping of the original design and vision. Perhaps the internal configuration may accommodate a meditation space, or perhaps space of time. It is miraculous, they have worked so hard, it is all the power of love and ameditation facility could be added adjacent to the building. She is the source of that love, it is only because of the love of Our Mother that all things are The vision that Sir CP proposed is that the possible. Chindwara home will become one of the sites Sir CP then said that the good news is that which will become a focus for Yogis dedication to their Mother; that at least once in a Yogis since Our Mother's arrival She has been resting,

 Issue:5 & 6-2006 The Divine Cool Breeze place befitting the elevated purpose of facilitating the Yogis undertaking this pilgrimage, a place of worship, introspection, meditation, further exploring Our Mother's teachings while coming to gether in collectivity, peace and lifetime they may visit the birthplace of their Mother, a Sahaja pilgrimage and to accommodate the Yogis a large multipurpose Ashram complex capable of accommodating many Yogis be undertaken by the world Sahaja collective and be constructed. harmony. Over the next few days we will tran- scribe Sir CP's talk so the Sahaja collective can see this great vision realise through Sir CP's own words. Sufficient land to construct a bilding of this scale may need to be founda few kilometers from the Chindwara birth place to allow space enough for the project. Sincerely Chris The great task laid before all Sahaja Yogis is to propose a design of an Ashram asa (on behalf of the Australian Council) (Internet Version)

 Shri Krishna Puja Celebrations (A report from the amazing weekend) Shri Krishna Puja, 2005 Parsippany, New Jersev. USA, 26-28 August We came from all over the world to worship our Holy Mother as Lord Shri Krishna. The atmosphere in the hotel, with approx. 1,000 Sahaja Yogis in attendance, was soft and kind. Friends old and new had small gifts for each other. The integration of the complete Vishuddhi felt like a grand celebration, as North, South and Central American yogis met and embraced. The events ofthe weekend-the morning meditations, the queues for the meals-were all the best experiences we had ever had. We settled into a feeling of complete contentment and well- being. Yuva Shakti who had stayed up all night each night enjoying the friendship of other Yu a Shakti, singing and playing traditional games, felt like the rest of us, on the top of the world. Love and regards On behalfof Singapore Collective Vikas

 Rakhi Celebrations asked about each artist as they came forward with their humble offerings. Later, prasad was offered, Shri Mataji vibrated it and then tasted a piece. These 54 minutes of pure, concentrated bliss showed us a possible future style of "being with" Shri Mataji-our Mother seated in Her own house and the world transported to Her feet Saturday afternoon featured the rakhi ceremony. The ballroom filled with movement, colour and love as sisters sought out dear brothers to tie with the sacred thread of purity and devotion. Shri Krishna Himself choreographed a circle of brothers who danced around a circle of sisters while musicians played on the stage. via remote boradcast. The Friday and Saturday entertainment evenings brought together talents young and old from around the world. The Saturday night entertainment program was delightful. The night was young and so was our first performer : Shraddha Joshi, four years of age, sang a stanza of Vande Mataram. With her sweet voice and The marriage announcements took place Saturday evening. Ourapplause was thunderous as each shy yogi and shy yogini sat side-by- Sside on the stage. Feeling their surrender and devotion, tears welled up in some of our eyes. The Puja began Sunday eveing as the room filled with the bhajan, Namami Shri Ganaraja Dayal and we prayed that Shri Ganesha would be seated and grant us permission to do His Mother's puja. Then we sang Hey Nirmala Ma, Sitting in the Heart of the Universe, and Ranga empeccable pronounciation, our hearts melted. Ashish Pradhan, the moderator of the Entertainment program, asked all the yogis to stand in honourofthe song. The next performer, Shaswati Chipdey, not yet 10 years old, showed incredible power and range as she sang "The colours of the Wind" from the movie Pocahontas. A few minutes later, we watched Bal Krishna gather his friends to reach, via a human pyramid, a pot of butter which hung from the ceiling of the ballroom. When the contents were spilled and then thrown into the delighted audience, the butter was in fact small chocolates. DeJhini. At 9:45 p.m. it was announced that Shri Mataji had arrived at the Hotel and was in Her room, taking tea and receiving the baskets of Lakshmi gifts. We sang Hey Adi Ma Hey Antima - "Oh Etenal Mother, You have given us whatever we desired" and Jogawa. During Jogawa Shri Mataji entered the ballroom, and the beginning of Her playful and astounding Rasa Leela became evident. Twenty years earlier, She would move so quickly through airport lounges that we had to jog to keep up. This puja, Shri Mataji, even in a wheelchair, was on the stage before the Yuva Shakti could get the curtain pulled across the front of the stage. The highlight was on Saturday night when, through the power of the Virata and communication, a live entertainment program was web-casted from Shri Mataji's living room to the Hotel ballroom and to rest of world. There was deep silence and tears of joy as yogis were able to be in presence of Shri Mataji on this night of enjoyment. During the event Shri Mataji We sang our welcome-Swagata Agata

 - 2006 Issue: 5 & 6 8 The Divine Cool Breeze began to sing, and we filled the ballroom with Apani Panaha Me Hame Rakhana - "Always keep us in the shade of Your compassion." The air filled with the words and melodies of Vrindavani Venu. Amazing Grace, and Hey Givinda Hey Gopala. Swagatam. Then a chorus sang "God Bless America" Eduardo formally welcomed Adi Shakti Shri Mataji from "Your loving children from the three Americas" After performing Ganesha puja and Devi puja, Shri Krishna Puja followed.. Asa flute and staff were offered, we sang, "Krishna Govinda." Then there was Aarti, the three great mantras, and we collectively did pranam to the deity seated before us. At 11:38 p.m. Shri Mataji returned. There was a huge applause as Yogis got so thrilled to see Shri Mataji again. After we stood in silence to greet Her., we resumed singing "Hey Govinda Hey Gopala." Among the beautiful gifts there were several peacocks, from China, South Africa and Austria. The decorations were removed, and our dear Holy Mother sat before us. She permitted Her children to express their gratitude and an international gift was presented, followed by other gifts from yogis from all the continents. 11.00 p.m. came and went, and still Our Mother sat with us. The attention in the ballroom was at Sahasrara, silent. It was very emotional when two representatives of the Lakota Nation, from the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota, presented their gifts. Speaking for the world collective, Eduardo said, as the evening drew to a close, "We thank You for Your love and patience," and we all offered pranam to Our Holy Mother. Then sang Vrindavani Venu to Her. At 8 minutes past midnight, the curtain was drawn, and Shri Mataji left the ballroom to return to Her house. We sat for a full fifteen minutes in complete silence. We had all entered a pure witness state, absorbing the vibrations. Sometime around three in the morning, after all the prasad, gifts, and dancing, the Shri Krishna Puja ended with the three great mantras and a silent meditation. At 11:12 p.m. it was announced that there would be a short break, and "SHRI MATAJI WILL BE COMING BACK." There was one minute of profound silence, and then the musicians (Internet Version)

 Nine Nights of Navaratri at Palam Vihar Gurgaon (Oct. - 2005) Dear Brothers and Sisters Shri Mataji has blessed us all by accepting our worship and offering on the occassion of Navaratri. Please enjoy the pictures below from the various days during Navaratri. Shri Mataji vibrated the Water and Barley for the camp office at upcoming Navaratri Puja site. Shri Mataji very kindly blessed us by accepting the Garland, Sweets and a small Puja Saree. She looked very happy and gave her blessing for all Her children. Jai Shri Mataji Gurgaon Collectivity Shri Mataji has blessed us all by accepting our worship and offering on the occassion of Navaratri Given below are a couple of photographs of Her Lotus Feet: Day Nine Day Six Musical Evenings with Shri Mataji-14th and 15th October, Gurgaon Two musical evenings were held in the Divine presence of H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi on the 14th and 15th Oct. 2005 at Palam Vihar, Gurgaon. The program started at 10:00 pm on the 14th, with bhajans sung by the Yuva Shakti working at Palam Vihar and after that there was a program from Nirmal Sangeet Sarita. On the 15th, the program started around 10:30 p.m. There was a flute recital by the renowned flutist Pandit Rajendra Prasanna followed by Sufi bhajans sung by yogis. Jai Shri Mataji Gurgaon Collectivity & SITA Team (Internet Version)

 Excerpt from the speech of Sir. CP (Papaji) in his address to Sahaja Yogis on the eve of Navratri Puja (15th October, 2005 Gurgaon, India) And for me it's a wonderful opportunity to be with you here today, and I thank you for allowing me to say a few words. sometime, some problems with Her may arise. But I want to assure you, each one of you and all of you that the best possible care has been taken and will continue to be taken. She has Let me first tell you that before coming here, I took the permission of your holy Mother to be with you here this evening, because I seldom leave Her aside. She was happy to grant me Her been seen by the best doctors in India, In Italy, in UK and in America. And Her treatment is being supervised by team of Sajaha Yogi doctors, one of them is always available round the clock. So, all the possible arrangement has been made and I am delighted to be able to tell you that today She is much better than what She was two years ago. the permission. She asked me to convey love and blessings for you all. She also told me to inform you that She will be here in person tomorrow eveing for the Puja. I know that all of you would have been deeply concerned about Her health. I do not know why the almighty has decided to incarnate on this earth in Human Fom. But that is Almighty's decision. One year ago She decided that She has already for 30 to 35 years done Her best to create the message of Sahaja Yoga and to spread it. As you know She has travelled all over the world by plane, by helicopter, by train, by bus, on foot, in bullock carts and She has And incarnations who come in human form are subject to usual human infirmities. She is an incarnation, but She is the same and therefore,

 Issue: 5 & 6- 2006 11 The Divine Cool Breeze sent from here to the world? been all over the world, cities and villages etc. and She has created a world wide fraternity of Şahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis. She felt that after She crossed the age of 80, it was the time Now dear Sahaja Yogis, Sahaja Yoginis, there is a task before us, and the task is to preserve her message of Sahaja Yoga. That message is contained in numerous audio cassettes, video cassettes and so on. And the first responsibility which we all have in all parts of the world is to make sure that what ever She has said, where ever She has said, all that should be preserved in such a form that it becomes the lasting wealth in Sahaja Yoga. And that is the effort which is being made in all parts of the world. for Her to sit back and ask Her children that yourselves to take over the responsibility of spreading Sahaja Yoga further. You don't have to create Sahaja Yoga. She has done it. But, the message has to be spread and She came to the conclusion that while, She will be sitting there and She will be the source of inspiration, the Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis should take up the responsibility for spreading Her message throughout the world. And therefore, She decided that this responsibility should be performed collectively, not by individual leaders, but by a collective group every where, all over the world in every country in every city. So collective leadership is Her wish and Her desire. And in effect collective leadership means that all of you sitting here are involved in that process. The whole Sahaja collectivity has now been given the responsibility of spreading Her message of Sahaja Yoga. Following Her desire of collective leadership, She has created a World Council and She has created collective leadership in number of countries and that movement is on. And now, individual leaders will be replaced by collective leaders. And they are performing the task in a very very joyous and combined manner. In India also new Trust have been established for the same kind of work namely for the collective Leadership. And I am happy to be able to tell you that trust has started working. And already thre is one very big achievement which...That is Nirmala Devi in Chhindwara, that house has been acquired by the Trust and it will become the permanent shrine for Sahaja Yogis all over the world. That shrine will be renovated in order I want to make one proposal before you. I want to make a submission. I hope you will agree with me, I have no doubt you would, as far as Sahaja Yoga is concerned, there is only One Creator...Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi.. And there is only one Leader that is Shrimati Mataji Nirmala Devi. ... the birthplace of Shri Mataji to ensure its permanence. And the Trust proposes to have another building where visiting Sahaja Yogis both from India and from foreign countries could go to stay, when they go to pay their homage to that shrine. And the land is proposed to be acquired soon, where a building will be constructed, so that any of you or any And Irequest you, if you agree to endorse ny words when I say that, "She is today the sole leader in Sahaja Yoga and She will always.. always remain the sole leader in Saakar or Nirakaar form". Do I take it that you all agree and you would like this message to be

 12 Issue: 5 & 6- 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze the idea of oneness and there must be love. She went on to say something very beautiful and She said that "the love of a Sahaja Yogi for a Sahaja Yogi has to be or is purer than other from any parts of India or the world can go there. It will now become really one of the most holy places or perhaps the most holy place for all Sahaja Yogis of the world. the love of a mother for her child". We will go on all together, and I invite you all, each one of you to join in that effort to propagate individually, group wise, collective wise the message of Sahaja Yoga which your Mother has given to you. I beg of you to bear these words in your mind, in your heart and to practice them. How beautiful would the world be if you all loved each other the same way in the pure fom without the slightest consideration for the colour of the skin or the language you speak or whateverelse. That is what Sahaja Yoga means and thatis what Sahaja Yoga world family should Before Iconclude, I want to invite your attention to two other facts. The first is, that before She stopped making speeches, She made two of be. them in Cabella. In one of them She said "all Sahaja Yogis are one, and the same. There I is no one larger, on one smaller, no one bigger. Every person, every Sahaja Yogi if he is a Sahaja Yogi or she is a Sahaja Yogini is equal". And that is what I want you to feel within yourselves. You are all equal to each other. There is no one superior and no one inferior. A I want to close now. But, I want to close after, thanking you all for giving this chance to speak here. All can assure you is, you Mother will be looked after most humbly and respectfully by me and all other who are with Her as if you all are present. Your eyes are there and you'll see that everyone does the very best to look after... She looks after Herself. But we are there Sahaja Yogi is an ideal person. to serve Her and that is our first duty. As far as IamconcernedI am living only for that purpose. I am 85 years now. very old already. but, I don't want to go, because I want to look after Her. Thank you very much. And the other thing She said was "Sahaja Yogis must love each other". They should make no distinction between a person speaking one language or professing some other language or religion whatever. Because, once you are a Sahaja Yogi, you are a Sahaja Yogi. That was (Internet Version)

 Navaratri Puja, Gurgaon, India 16 Oct.-2005 (A Report) be worthy of being present in Your Holy presence to ofer our Pujas at Your Holy Lotus Feet. Dear Brothers and Sisters, We are happy to announce with a deep sense of gratitude to our beloved Mother Shri Mataji on 16th October, we the world collective were blessed to offer our Sakshat Puja at Her Holy Lotus Feet in Her Holy presence in Gurgaon Stadium, Delhi., India. Shri Mataji blessed us and accepted the Puja. The Puja started at seven thirty in the evening with the Three Mahamantras. Then the Italian composed Audio visual on theme of "tour of love and compassion with Mother" was on display. It was simply remarkable and breathtaking. The events and clippings are bouquet of excerpts from the Italian tour of Shri Mataji with Her children. The flow of love and Compassion with expression of Mother, leaves one with nothing, but a sense of oneness. Probably, it enhances the expression of the Left heart, where She resides. There was simplicity in the Stage decoration. The backdrop had an expression of the just divine abode of Shri Durga Mata with face of Shri Mataji in Her Shri Durga Form holding various weapons as Mahishasur Mardini. Mother we are grateful to You as Your advent on earth at this period of time has washed our sins and vices from heart and helped us to ascend and recognise Your true Form. You are verily the Mother of Mothers in us. Please continue showering Your blessings upon us to It seemed that divinity played all means to dissolve the collective spirit into fountain of love springing from the never-ending reservoir of compassion from Mother through the gathering of twenty thousand collectivity across the globe.

 Issue: 5 & 6- 2006 14 The Divine Cool Breeze Swagatam. Hum saba karte Swagatam. She looked radiant as ever. Her face shining like a It was as if the heart of the Virata was expressing, quite evident from is' decoration in the stadium with beautiful expressive lightings to its fragrance and the soft chiling grass, accentuated with the presence of Shri Chandrama (Moon) Sakshat along with us in that starry night. Yet, the soft but thick and beautiful carpets laid on the Mother earth in three fourth of the capacity of the stadium on the other hand gave warmth to the rest. It was a milieu that we witnessed as never before. thousand Suns. We stood for long even after the welcome. It was quite a moment when the prayer was read in Hindi followed by English while we stood in silence. It was a plain and simple prayer, powerful as never pronounced, with deeper resolutions and vows to the Shri Adi Shakti in her Shri Mahakali Form. To seek salvage from the demonic attacks in her Mahishasur Mardini The blessings were tangibly felt as if it were melting down upon us through the chill of the vibrations on one hand and the chilly moonlight on the other. Form. Pleasing the Devi and praying to become Her effective instrument with our dedication to the cause to spreading Her message to the farthest comer ofthe Earth in Her Shri Adi Shakti Form. We continued standing in silence, while the announcement for singing the prayer song.. Binati Suniye Adi Shakti Meri (Kindly listen to Finally, came yet another shower of vibrations through the bhajans rendered by the musical choir. A series of popular bhajans in praise of the Devi was rendered. At quarter to ten the beating the drums and lighting of the fire crackers announced the Holy arrival of our Mother. It was indeed a breathtaking moment after such a imploding video show, the added flavor of the explosion of the fire crackers high up in the sky were only an added flavor that sent the myriad sparkles of splintery lights spring out in form of vibrations. our prayers O Adi Shakti)... "Mother Please accept our Navaratri Puja and Prayers at Your Holy Lotus Feet". It seemed we stood for ages and at last there was a gesture for sitting down. At ten in the night, the little Ganeshas came up in queue to offer flowers at Her Holy Lotus Feet with Hemja Sutam Bhaje... Thereafter, at quarter past ten the Shringar started with Shri Jagadamba Ayi Re Meri Nirmala Ma..Jago Savera Aya Hai and concluded by Vishwa Vandita Nirmala Mata.... Shringar was So were the excitement and the welcome heart beats within us, to see Mother after such a long spell. As the fountain of light sparkles sprayed high up in air and dissolved into thin ether, the yearning to receive Mother within increased as the love inside our heart dissolved like icing, paving her seat within our Spirit. complete at forty past ten. We witnessed Shri Durga in Her Shri Mataji form resplendent with her armours and Devi Roop. Following was the Arti that was sung at eleven by all the National Leaders. It was a spectacular event as Mother complacently sat on the throne looking deep into us. We sang in joy Swagat Agat The moon overhead bears the witness to this amazing meditative moment and the outpour of the blessing that was emanating from Shri

 Issue: 5 & 6 - 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze 15 Mataji on this night of sixteenth. Our beloved Mother looked radiant..radiant and radiant as Mataji left behind a trail of virbrations for Her children to enjoy. ever and was keenly and poignantly looking deep into the Spirit of the collective. The vibrations were not confined at this state only, Mahaprasad were served in an unique fashion. There were two surprise gifts awaiting for the yogis who attended the Puja. Two booklets were compiled as gift and distributed to the 15 thousand Yogis attending the Puja that night. One compilation was entitled "Navratri Puja" covering the Devi Kavach and the other "Praise to Devi". While the other one wasa rare It was after a long spell that we were fortunate enough to witness Mother spending long spell to receive the series of intenational gifts. Mother seemed very pleased and even was seen commenting on some yogis who brought gifts. As the time matured the Devi looked more and more radiant and full of compassion towards Her children. compilation that treasures the CV of Sir CP (Chandrika Prasad Srivastava, KCMG, IAS Suddenly the video display on the LCD screen(Retd). froze, and the stage curtains were drawn to announce the time for departure of our Holy Shri Mataji, we are grateful to you for Your Holy Mother. There was a silence. The heart and eyes blessings of the evening and accepting our were probably eager, or may be were yearning collective prayer to accept the Puja at Your Holy to prolong the Holy darshan which came to a Lotus Feet. We bow to You again and again. close in an hour episode. But the traits of Sitting in the Heart of the Universe, we know vibrations were like jets. With the gradual Your love is flowing through us, Shri Mataji we humming notes of Shri Mataji.Mataji. Your love you. face shines like thousand Suns... broke the Jai Shri Mataji India (Internet Version) silence and the stillness of the night and Shri

 Ekadash Rudra Puja New York City, 17 th September - 1983 Pravachan Of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi So today is a day, according to the Indian calendar, called as Parivartini Ekadashi. Now, today is the 11th day of the moon. 11th day is Ekadsha. Also, in Sahaja Yoga you know about Ekadasha Rudra, which is here (forehead), which will ultimately destroy all those things which are not required anymore. That is Ekadasha here, that is the 11th. But today is a special day, Where we are going to use the power of Ekadasha to do the transformation. It is not for destruction but the power called "Samhara Shakti" by which he kills people. So before killing them and finishing them off, in the compassion of your Mother, we have to first try to transform them. If they cannot be transformed then its alright, then let Ekadasha take over. So these 11 very great destructive powers will be used by the Kalki, the One who is going to manifest on a white horse. Before that, today is a very great day that these powers we are going to use for transformation. for transformation. Now how can destructive powers be used for transformation? First of all, when people know that there are destructive powers manifesting, they start fearing. They get afraid. That we'll be destroyed, so we must take to God. That's one of the ways. Secondly, if a person comes to know about any destructive disease like cancer, he wants to find out a method. And there is no method available on a human level. So then he thinks of God and wants to come nearer to God. The fear brings him closer to God. He depends on God more than on his rationality, than on his ego, or superego. And he wants to depend on God's powers to cure him or to save him from this destruction. Because he is now on the brink of destruction, as soon as cancer is set in he knows that there's no end to it and he has to be destroyed. So, this is another way people take to transformation, change their attitudes, change their value systems. Is such a day to be here in New York where we use the destructive powers for the transformation of the universe. So it's a very great day today that we are going to transform people by the manifestation of the Ekadasha's powers. And they are 11 placed over your forehead here and you know how they work out. So that these 10 come out of the destructive powers of the Void. Void has got 10 destructive powers also. Out of those 10 the destructive part settles down here. So when a person is on his destruction, say for example a cancer has set in, then you might feel a throb, here at the apex of your Void, the throb. And it doesn't logically mean that if there'sa throb there's a cancer, but if there's a cancer there'll be a throb in here going on. That means the force of life is trying to push it. But the obstruction there starts accumulation on both sides and in the centre is the centre of Vishuddhi, of the Virata. Shri Krishna has become the Virata, the Great Primordial Being. I've known of many husbands and wives who got cancer and their counterparts became very mild, gentle, kindly, romantic. They tried to give all the love, all the protection, all the good things th So this is the 11 power of destruction. He has

 Issue: 5 & 6- 2006 17 The Divine Cool Breeze very collective person also you might get a blob here. So you might get all the thing filled up with your ego, superego and this Virata centre again blown up in a way that a person develops a face like a monster sometimes! This portion becomes too big, thick, jutting out. There's a character I've seen like that, I think it is Frankenstein or someone, Is it? Frankenstein; to a person who is going to die now of Ekadasha. So a kind of a transforming temperament starts coming in a man that he sees that a person with whom he has lived all his life is now going to be no more. So a kind of beautiful feeling towards the person, of giving whatever you have beautiful within you, starts, And that's how people develop a new kind of personality which was never apparent before. So all harshness drops out. And all the sweetness starts pouring in. So the compassion in a man is awakened by which he gets yes, that has come from the Unconscious; Frankenstein character. Is all this is swollen up, jutting out, and this place like that. That's really the one that happens to human bcings when he becomes a devil himself. transformed. Many people who lost their relations, kith and kin, become much more gentle, kinder, because Ekadasha has expressed its awe. And also another kind ofa fear comes into the mind of So this is how the Ekadasha works within us, to destroy our negativity within us, In India, so many people fast on this day, for atonement, on Il day is very common : "You must do Ekadashi". All the Hindus and all these people do Ekadashi. That is, the 11" day they don't eat anything at all. But you shouldn't do it after the Advent of your Mother, because, I'm the Ekadasha Myself! So why should you do it now when I've corme? It was done when I was not here, just to call me, so now I'm back here, you need not do this anymore, the penance of Ekadesha. But you have to be careful. the people, "that tomorrow this can happen to me also! SoImust do something about it." So at this time Sahaja Yoga helps them a lot. They come to Sahaja Yoga because such an emergency is created within themselves and thLs they are thrust for their transfomation to Sahaja Yoga th But there's another subtler way that this destructive force helps: by destroyîng ail that is negative within us. Because unless and until that negative is destroyed within us, we cannot become people who can enter into the kingdom of God. We have our ego, we have our super ego and both can be represented here. When you have your ego very much great ego, then you'll find a big blob-like ego coming out on left side, a very big one, here. Or if you have a super-ego you can see another big thingjutting out on the brain on the right side. So on both the sides you might get both the things if both the sympathetic are overactive. If you are not a Now Ekadasha comes, as I told you, from the Void. So firstly, it comes when you accept someone as your guru, say, who are false, who are anti-God, anti-Christ. So you developakind ofa thickness on right side, it is the person who you are worshipping as a guru, respecting as a guru; who is a guru to you who is not really a guru, so you develop a superego which shows on this (right) side, this part. Now the other side of'it shows when a person says "I'm my own guru, I'm practising my own meditation. I've nothing to do with anybody's

 Issue: 5 & 6 -2006 18 The Divine Cool Breeze guidance, I'm quite alright as I am" - Such a person develops the left half. So you have (left) half developed because of that, and this half developed because of the superego that you get from these false and fake gurus. Now what happens sometimes that when you get involved into this kind of superego behaviour, at that time, it so happens that you might take over from there and start using it for your ego. That's the worst time for it. At that time what you do is to act like the devils yourself. And once you start doing that, your Ekadasha is completely finished. And then I don't think it's easy to get rid of it. It's very difficult. Like if it is one-sided it's much easier. is used, in some fruits nothing is used, a very little growth comes out as fruit and becomes a fruit while the flowers are there. So in us also whatever becomes Spirit, remains. The rest drops out. And that is what it is when we call it the Ekadasha which brings forth the transformation. And one has to understand we have to drop out many things. Some people I've seen they say : "What's wrong? I'm smoking, still my vibrations are there". Some say, "What's wrong? I'm drinking, still my vibrations are there. I'm going to this guru, still my vibrations are there, I'm having the same type oflicentious life, still my vibrations are there." But suddenly they stop, and you find you're out of the bounds. You're thrown OUT completely. But you do not feel how you're thrown out. Gradually you find, like a tangent you go out. And so one has to be careful about it. So within us lies a force which is centrifugal and a force that is centripetal. So Ekadsha's force is centrfugal, by which you are thrown out. Sahaja Yoga doesn't fall onto anybody's feet. Doesn't request anyone, doesn't flatter апyone. If yoои want to be there you have to be postively there and if you don't want to be there it throws you much faster than what you want. That's the trouble with Sahaja Yoga is and this is the loophole of the Sahaja Yoga which I have to tell as a Mother that it's very anxious to throw you out. I'll tell you when Christine-just now she told me -got engaged to Micheal, half of them were thrown out. So today is the day which is called as the Ekadashi which is going to bring the transformation. When you are transformed, so many things are automatically destroyed within you. As you can see very clearly that all your misidentifications drop out. Themisidentification that Tm an American, I am a Christian or I am a Jew,I'm this,l'am That- all these false misidentifications drop out and you become a naked human being; first of all you are a Human Being. And then a super human being, without the ego, without the ego. So your ego is destroyed, your superego is destroyed, your conditionings are destroyed and all your false ideas about knowledge are destroyed. So what you s oti remains and emerges out is the reality. Now see when a flower becomes the fruit, everything practically drops out of the flower, we can say. Like the calyx is dropped out, then the petals are dropped out and then the epicalyx is there, that is also dropped out. But what remains is the seed, actually if you see. Around the seed all these things developed and the fruit remains, the rest of it drops out. In some fruits some part Because they had a conception that you must have a romance before marriage. Without a romance, if you have a marriage, then there should be no marriage. I don't know on what

 19 Issue: 5 & 6-2006 The Divine Cool Breeze beleamed from them as far as that is concemed. We can learn many other things, for example we can learn how to operate a camera. But to operate a marriage is better you learn from Indians. They have a very solid system of marriage. First of all the way they are trained from childhood how to make a marriage successful, sucha lot of importance is given. Then without the horoscope we'll not marry, without the auspicious day they won't marry. Everything they work out in such details so that the marriage cannot fizzle out. Moreover it is worked in stich a collective way. conception it is based. But if you have the romance before the marriage, what's the fun of having the marriage? I mean it's like -if you have to give somebody a present, you hide it, you see; keep it to that date, and give the surprise to the children! In the same way if you have the romance already done, what's the marriage? What's the celebration for? It's absolutely illogical. There is no romance in such cases. Actually you have seen that after the romance, the marriage and then the divorce. It's always like that. Because you become stale, and you find that the romance you had before marriage was something, a fantastic fantasy that has dropped out, and now after marriage there is nothing left to enjoy, so you are fed up and next month you are now in the divorce court. But the marriages that skip this without the romance kept all reserve for a particular day. Just for that day when you are going to have the real romance, and real feeling of oneness, everything. In India it's a very big thing, you see, the first night of the married people. And that's why your marriages are lost. For example, supposing my husband wants to trouble me. Say for example. So the sister of my husband will take him to task. Everybody can interfere if they try to do anything against the marriage. Everyone in the family will be after the person who tries to break the marriage. And so everyone knows that I'll be left high and dry, you see, if I have a divorce. Nobody has place in the society. But in England when we went first we were shocked! They had no shame about this, they said, "I'm already divorced thrice and this is the fourth woman I'm living with." So shocking for us. Oh God! To us a divorce means worse than leprosis! "Why are you divorced? What's the problem? How can you be divorced? Such an auspicious thing is the marriage! How can you do it, is such a big fall!" And that's how it works out. And in no You know -Iwould say I'm an old woman of 60 years, my husband is 63 years and you can see how romantic he is still. You see the romance never finishes. Because it startson the auspicious day with the sanction of the collectivity, everybody taking interest in that romance. It is such a big thing to be married, all the people enjoying the marriage, and enjoying. So now this kind of thing when happens to the people who are western people think romance is very important. But I don't think one can learn anything from the marriage system of the western people. Because all their marriage systems absolutely dwindle down. There is nothing to way we are less than you people as marriage because we can produce much more children than you. And children only want to be born in India not anywhere else. You'd be surprised. That's the problem we are facing. Our populationproblem comes from the point

 Issue: 5 & 6 -2006 20 The Divine Cool Breeze that the marriages are so successful, the people are so peaceful that children hate to be born in nightmares of New York. Naturally, because you don't know where will be the mother tomorrow, where will be the father. Now we are blamed for a high rate of fertility, but what to do? Children don't listen, they don't want to go to all such places where there's no stabiity for them to exist Especially the realised children, ifthey are of a very high quality, they do; Imean, they have to be like devils to get into this thing so they may try. Or maybe real devils- to take advantage of it. But normally, people who want peace in life, who want joy in life, and want the love of their parents, want to be bom in India. And that's why recently we find that India is growing so fastin population that we don't know what to do. So this marriage system came in, which shocked them because they couldn't understand, there has to be a romance, and this would sort of give an idea of postponed nature, orsomething bragging, or something big so that it may go wrong. When they say touch wood, this is the wood. You say touch, there. So we are quite conscious of this force building within us. And now we have to be conscious that this force is going to transform the universE. So today we are going to pray that this force has to transfornm America through its capacity to frighten people so that they come to Sahaja Yoga. Because when things have reached this stage of ego, then when people say "What's wrong?"-Like in England when I started talking first, they said this is Victorian wornan, out of date, absolutely useless. I said alright, I don't say anything. But you'll have such diseases that you'll have to comne back. That was the time they pass the law that homosexuality should be allowed, permissiveness shouldbeallowed, and all these things should be allowed. Eund that. And now you have A.I.D.S. You have AIDS now here already operating. Now the AIDS has given the fear of Ekadasha. Now have it! What's wrong! What about that? So this awe and this fear is very important. Is an extremely important thing that you must have the awe and the fear that GodisAlmighty, andwe are nothing before him. Here we have to remember that Now the more understanding of Ekadasha that should be there that we should not allow it to he built within us in any way, because these are self-destroying things. It starts with doubting. When you start doubting Sahaja Yoga, the build-up starts. And the doubting starts building up throughout the "medha" - is the plate here, you see. And it can become a big plate here. Like today I saw that lady saying touch wood, you see touch wood mean this wood. Touch wood means there should be no wood in here any more, you see. we are part and parcel of that God, and that we have to awaken ourselves to the consciousness that He is the Whole and we have become one with the whole. That's how we are going to overcome our Ekadasha. Or you can say touch stone. If you say something like bragging you can say no, no, touch wood. I am not menning that. People are quite conscious, unconsciously they say, but they are quite consoious not to say something that So today I bless you all with the power of Ekadasha which is going to transform. May God bless you all, in your work whichyou are trying

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 5 & 6 - 2006 21 to do for the good of Americans. It is a responsibility to save America. You know it is the Vishuddhi chakra and all the responsibility of Sahaja Yoga rests on Vishuddhi chakra. So how important it is that this transformation is to take place. Unless and until the transformation comes in, you will see it will not work out. You cannot talk to people, you cannot communicate with them. So you must pray that transformation process must start, must trigger, and must gallop, and must go on spreading like wildfire. This should be your prayer today. May God bless you.

 Place of Money in Sahaja Yoga our Mother is divine, means, is the Lakshmi, the source of all well being, is the Power of God Almighty. Then why should we question? Shri Mataji has many times said that God does not understand money. This means the money is human invention, an artifice, a means of tricking reality. What are Sahaja Yogis to do with such poisonous stuff? Does it mean we should get rid of it as quickly as possible? Or give it to someone else (our Guru perhaps)? Or pretend we haven't got any with us? What to do, is the problem. Still some people will have hankering, that the money should go to a similar purpose to the one for which it was collected. For them, money was to be used in a particular way. It was to reach a particular audience with which they are identified. But suppose our Mother wants the money to pay for something else? What is wrong? Many people feel that the sensible thing to do with money is to live a normal life and spend only what is spare for Sahaja Yoga. They also feel that what is spent should be, at least partly, ünder their control and approval. Having parted with it, they still do not want to let go. These basic assumptions must be challenged. One thing we must understand. If we are petty about money and its use, we will remain petty- hearted people. Not only our Nabhi chakra will remain closed but our heart also will be tight like a stone. The whole creation has to glorify the Lord. Not just our little puddle. Like the frog in the well who thought he had found the ocean, we croak our songs of joy, little realizing that our voice is echoing in a deep pit which we have dug ourselves. Let us climb up and up until we can see over the edge of our own prejudices. And then we may not mind so much helping the one who goes from well to well, lowering a light downona long rope to illuminate the little wicks that are trapped at the bottom. We may even want to help in the process. Money is incidental to life. It is not the measure of life's value, nor is it the means of enhancing that value. This should be understood. By itself money cannot buy God. Love can, but money cannot. Love has not monetary value, it has no buying power, but definitely it can turn God's heart. Therefore money should be regarded as incidental to our purposes. If God does not want to filfull our proposes our money will not get used to way we want, but God may indicate another use. Why should we get upset? This parable may help us to understand the purpose of money in Sahaja Yoga. It is to be spentinorder to increase the light level. Whether the light is in Spain or Peru, makes no difference to the ultimate purpose, which is to light all the wicks. Wherever the wicks are readiest, is the easiest to light more. Wherever the darkness is thickest, is the most urgent to light lamps which can enlighten others. Time is short. So let us not be pet about money. Wake up Albion, arise. Let us suppose we have given money for a big advertisement about Shri Mataji's lecture tour, but the advertiser refuses to display it. Still the tour is a success. As far as God is concerned, we have paid and He delivers the goods. "Yoga Kshema Vahamyaham': the well being of the saints is assured-we have seen the proof. Then the question remains, what to do with the money that was collected and not spent? Who decides? As far as Sahaja Yogis are concerned, the one who decides is our Mother. Why? Maybe people should decide for themselves. But one thing is certain, is that according to vibrations Jai Shri Mataji Gavin Brown 8-6-1983 (Nirmala Yoga-1983)

 THE BEGINNINGS I got my realisation around the 15th August 1975, in Hurst Green, Sussex, in the very house of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. The period following this tuming point in my life can be said to have been most intense, no doubts, but pretty precarious also. I had to leave the shores of fair Albion to go back into boring daily life where, somehow, negativity was waiting for me.. and I did not know then, how to deal with the multiplicity of its subtle and less subtle form. IfI managed to swim through these troubled waters and survived as a yogi, it is, of course, thanks to the ever watchful Grace of the one who had given me my realization. But, more precisely, I can hint here at two devices which proved to be useful in enabling me to stick to Reality. One could be called "charting back one's path towards Self-realisation." The second "fixing the pole of the tent."" charkas, when doubts and fears rain from stormy ego cum super-ego, it helps to consciously call to memory the helping hand of the Unconscious, the gentle way in which it led us towards its mostelusive, mosteffective incamated form, Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. Here is an example from my own story. I met Rajesh Shah at Berkeley University, California, in June 1975. He spoke, although carefully, about Sahaja Yoga and soon left for London while I went back with a friend and a trailer van for a tour of the Arizona and Utah deserts. Quite a few things happened during this travel, many signals were sent. For example, wheneverI would fix my tent Iwould find the Venus star facing the opening. When I arrived on the Grand Canyon the sky was overcast. I sat on the ridge of the Canyon and prayed God that I should have a rainbow. Within ten minutes Charting the path towards Self-realisation. We are all seekers. As such we are looked after. The Divine-or, in more secular terms, the Unconscious-has been working on us as a the sky opened, stream of golden light flew in, down to the Colorado river, and set on fire the walls of the Canyon. While some green clouds were still rolling over my head, I was black magnet mass does on iron dust; our movement given the most beautiful of all rainbows, shaped like a horseshoe, stretching its colours from one side to the other of the Canyon. It was just too much, I felt the Universe was a house and I was the heir of this household. I did not feel lonely and lost anymore and, with tears in the eyes, I was just overwhelmed with love and gratitude. Fortunately there weren't any tourists around for they would have wondered at the towards Self-realisation expresses the impact ofits gravitational pull. The Unconscious wants us to reach Self-realisation (nirvichara smadhi). It paves our way towards it. Thus it carefully engineers moments and circumstances, it calls, it stages happenings and sends signals to the Atma, often long before we meet Shri Mataji. The Atma, the Self which is Truth- Consciouslyness- Joy is all what we want to be and Self-realisation is the first encounter with capital Reality, an encounter which has been discretely but lovingly prepared by the Unconscious itself. After Self-realization, when negativity tries to settle back into the half'cleared sight of a kind of drunken boy, hugging and kissing all the trees on his way. Idid not know that, by then, Rajesh had met Shri Mataji in London and had spoken about

 24 Issue: 5 & 6 - 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze me, that is, I did not know that I had already entered Her omnipotent, omiscient attention. I did not know either, by the way, that the shape of the horseshoe or "bandhan" is the symbol of the Adi Shakti. But I felt : I heárd a call, I felt a great, great, termendous love, Her Love upon doubts as to howIcould possibly be so deeply transformed through Sahaja Yoga and how could this yoga transform the world. I was drifting away. The 25 September 1975 Shri Mataji was gracious enough to send me a letter in which She very clearly exposed my inconsistency, how precarious my position was and what I should do to muster positivity within myself instead of siding withnegativity. I take here the liberty of quoting a few lines of this extraordinary letter which saved my (spiritual) life for the second me. Rajesh and I met again in Berkeley. He showed me a picture of Shri Mataji. A few days later, in U.K., at the appointed time, I found myself standing in the hall of Shri Mataji's house, ready for "my first encounter of the Atma kind" time: Needless to say, later on, in moments of confusion, the recollection of these signals comforted my still vacillating faith in Sahaja Yoga. Each of us who know to search his memory has a provision of such signals before his realization, before meeting Shri Mataji or, simply, before meeting Sahaja Yogis. There need not be rainbowevery time. But it's love all "Now the time has come to tell you that Sahaja Yoga cannot work unless and until you completely surrender to "Me" means no more questioning. This "Me" means Mataji Nirmala Devi who resides on the "Sahasrara" of the Virata' This is the absolute truth whether you like it the time. or not, whether your ego and super ego accept it or not. I am sorry I have to confess it." Fixing the pole of the tent When I left England I was eager to share the good news with others who I thought to be seekers. So, I briefed one of my friends who had much more experience of these things than myself as he had tried so many gurus in India and elsewhere. He was keeping the pictures of If I take upon myself to publish these sacred lines which were not meant for the public it is because of their overridirg significance: "Gregoire ! You perhaps do not realize that all the Deities who reside in you and who the various special masters he had met, stones they had given him and also a sort of mental decoding system whereby he could find out who was a genuine master and who wasn't. Despite this background however or, rather, because of it, he failed to grasp the point of Sahaja Yoga passed on to me a few of his exotic-esoteric bhoots and got me quite confused. I then wrote a letter to Shri Mataji in which I expressed are controlled in your Sahasrara are not at all interested in people who are not completely surrendered to Me. I do not know how to convince them. They only look after those who take my name and accept that I am the Adi Shakti. This is the only way you can progress. What can I do? Even the people who are cured by me have to keep

 Issue: 5 & 6-2006 25 he Divine Cool Breeze the protocol otherwise the Deities sleep and they go back to their previous position." questions and worries in my mind instantly vanished, even those pertaining to Sahaja Yoga. The words of Shri Mataji had fixed the pole of the tent, the tent of Sahaja Yoga to protect me from the bad weather of Kali Yuga; the pole upon which the edifice of my yoga had to rely, on which my confidence in Destiny and Self could be built up. 1 dawned upoп тe that thе answer to one single question was providing answers to all other questions. And this question was : "Who is Shri Mataji?" The answer to it makes the difference between mystieal and castles and Reality; between salvation and doom for all of us. In it lies the key to the process of collective emanicipation. Since the reception of this letter my only goal has been and still is to further penetrate the mystery of Shri Mataji's incarnation on this earth, to bring my consciousness closer to Her city. So far I have not said this to anyone because I thought there was no need. Those who were wise realized it and those who are foolish have lost their chance in Sahaja Yoga." I was stunned! I somehow realized at once what these lines were meant to carry. I saw clearly that if this assertion of Shri Mataji's real identity was not true the whole of Sahaja Yoga would fall apart. If this assertion was true the seekers of the whole world could be saved, I too. The golden Age would start. What was the matter with me? Yes, I had felt the vibrations coming from Shri Mataji, I had felt, inside, how She had opened ny Sahasrara, I had seen Kundalini pulsating, I had registered her under Shri Mataji's movenments fingers...What more proofs did I want? What was this nonsense in my head, why would't I recognize Her? This island city, vibrating with multicolored tongues of fire, we all carry it as the thousand-petalled lotus floating in the limbic area of our brain. It's gate is narrow, no doubt, but Shri Mataji had given me the password. The statement of Shri Mataji helped me tremendously, helped me, that is, to recognize. Realising its truth became the only relevant question, and all the other Vienna, 5.6.1983 Gregoire (Nirmala Yoga-83)

 Mother Dear Mother (A letter written to Shri Mata ji from Australia,reproduced at her advice) So he saw a ray of light. Quietly he slipped inside the church hall when nobody was there and began his show of juggling before the statue of Mother Mary. At last he was on his own again, completely in his elements. Reverent and immaculate as if playing in front of a royal audience, he proceeded step by step in this game of finest balance and exquisite timing. He threw the balls one by one, with gay abandon, then with equal deftness he ticked them off in the air as if they were bound by an invisible chain. He made infinite pattems in the empty space, his body twisting and turning in rhythm with the balls weaving kaleidoscopic variety, his trained hands questing in the vaccum for the balls dancing in the air, his face swathed in streaming sweat, but illumined in an ethereal glow-the juggler was doing 'Aarti'. Years back I had read a lovely story by Anatole France, if I am not wrong-in which the central figure was an unassuming juggler in the brotherhood ofachurch's clergy who exhibited a consuming desire to please Mother Mary. All around him in the brotherhood were men of merit. Some were in the choir with melodious voices, singing the divine stains in praise of Mother. Some had the Midas' touch with which they used to create paintings which could please the Lord. Some were accomplished craftsmen who with infinite patience and skill would carve out miniatures of Mother or tableaux of the Lord's life. There were still others who distinguished themselves, either by their oratorial acumen, scriptural erudition or writing ability. Amidst this galaxy of luminaries, this humble juggler felt awakward, embarrassed and even, in a way, guilty. Guilty, that when others had great personal attributes to fall back on to please Mother, he had none. He was the odd-man out among a crowd of chosen people, or so he felt. But they found out one day. The whole brotherhood broke into the hall while he was thus engaged. He froze with fear and hung his head low. As one of the members began to reprimand him for his almost blasphemous behaviour in front of Mother, the statue of Mary came alive-witha benign smile, She descended from the pedestal and, then with the sleeve of Her apron began lovingly wiping the sweat from the juggler's face. The priests knelt down in awe and reverence. His anguish was great and genuine. His buming desire to please Mother ultimately led him to a very touching but unorthodox solution. It was the classic case of a simple mind having a simple solution. He argued within himself that all prayers, all worshippings were in its essence the expression ofone's heartfelt love, devotion, and gratitude for the Mother. By the same token, a man who was sculpting a statue of Mary with a master's finesse, or writing lyrics in Her praise or piping the noblest songs for the Divine Mother, was in fact worshipping Her in his own way. To the Mother, it hardly mattered who worshipped in which way or who knew what mantras or not. What actually mattered was sincerity and devotion. When I came into Sahaja Yoga I faced the same dilemma as the juggler. In fact my predicament was much more. The juggler was a blessed man because of his child-like innocence whereas in my case, my upbringing and the social compulsions had taken a heavy toll of this Godly attribute. All around me I saw Sahaja Yogis of caliber, each one of them much advanced than I am, all of them blessed sons of Mother. It

 27 Issue: 5 & 6 -2006 The Divine Cool Breeze was a mixed crowd of myriad personalities- distinguished men of public life, Yogis of high attainments, scholars of scriptures, instrumentalists of divine inspiration, singers of great distinction and organizers of exceptional print and a book or two, I had thought no end of myself. So now my ego was taking me for a ride, prompting me to take a short cut to the kingdom of God! (No wonder my Agnya Chakra is not clearing). abilities. Another phase of frustration, another round of gloom. Now Imust go back to nature. I thought to seek freshness from the morning dew, naturalness from the rippling river, stead- fastness from the sun-flower, piety from the pelican, innocence from the children and bounty from Mother Earth. That would give me the depth of vision and insight so necessary to be able to write about Her. For, write I must to In the presence of this gathering, I also felt lost and awkward. Suddenly I realized that the qualities I had so assiduously cultivated for success in society have come to nothing in the face of a greater reality. I have to unlearn many things, and re-learn a lot. To begin with, I have to learn again to walk straight on a straight path, without manoeuvering, without affectation in a simple, nomal way. prove me, to prove my worth, that would be my puja, my humble service to Mother. That was easier said than done. That called for innocence, devotion and total surrender- qualities. I had thrown to the winds way back in life in my teens and out ofit, like the proverbial Negro who threw the pearl away which was richer than his whole tribe. Today Ihave to walk back in time through the mazes and dark alleys to retrieve them, if I can. They are not on sale or show. Once you lose them, you lose them, perhaps forever. Not required- an inner voice assured me. Just then I remembered Milton's On his Blindness' Light had gone out from his eyes much before the potentialities of the man were exhausted. Introspective by nature, Milton had suffered for days together in the belief that he might be brought to book for having failed to utilize his talent in the service of God. Then in a moment of inspiration, realization had dawned on him that God does not need anyman's service-he has his angels for that. But they also serve Him who only stand and wait. SoI had may share of anguish like the juggler. Moments, agonizing moments, ticked by. Then Ihad a flash, a brainwave, like a silver-lining in the encircling gloom- I would write about Mother. That would be my way of pleasing Her, worshipping Her, providing my worth. SoI got the message-a message to bridle my presumption and curb my ego. Now I am at peace with myselfand the world, I do not want to write any more. I am happy to stand and wait for command, if any, from my Mother, Clever, too clever! I had been clever with life3B now I wanted to be with Mother also! It was trick of my ego. Having seen a few articles in Dear Mother. (Nirmala Yoga-1983)

 An Experience In fact there was a great air ofexcitement in the whole room, and it kept mounting as gradually people arrived, an introductory talk was given and we sat waiting for Shri Mataji's arrival. The excitement built up more and more until.. suddenly everyone was hurrying to their feet, turning to the back of the hall and.. what presence, what joy, what absolute authority filled the roomi as Shri Mataji stepped into it. Almost a year ago, in May 1982, I started to notice beautiful photographs of an Indian lady all over Brighton. In Passing I read: "She unites the essence of all religions Awakens the dormant spiritual energy within us all. The Promised Enlightenment Is Now a Fact." As she spoke everything inside me said, "Yes", "Ofcourse, "Exactly", and at last someone who hits the nail on the head, who speaks the truth, nothingmore nothing less. I felt it just had to be the truth. The combination of this ultimate claim with the picture of Shri Mataji really spoke to my heart. Eventually one day I stopped at one. poster and feeling rather embarrassed in the middle of the busy street, I noted down the time and place. When it was time to meditate I was sure that everyone but me would get their realization, yet although I'd never heard of it before, I knew that it was the one thing that I really wanted. I went quite early to the Programme, which was in the Royal Pavilion, a famous building built in imitation Indian style. Aslarived Inoticed quite dignified people around the entrance. The room where the meeting was to be held was incredible. There were huge windows, chandeliers and the walls were decorated with pictures of bright coloured birds and flowers. I was impressed. Afterthe collective meditation people came and worked on me standing behind me. I felt very tense and a bit nervous about what they were doing behind my back. I was trying too hard, but then without me doing anything, 1 suddenly felt as if a lid was lifting inside my stomach and the joy rushed through and I burst into smiles and laughter. I realized, "there is someone who loves us. God is taking care of everything. It's not our responsibility." What a weight lifted off me! It seemed like such a long time since I had laughed, but now laughter kept on bubbling up inside of me. All at once I saw the joke. However I took my seat near the back, ready to escape if necessary and looked around at the other people. It seemed a bit strange to see so many people sitting with their hand palm upwards on their knees but they seemed somehow nice and friendly. I didn't realize that they were Sahaja Yogis but I could'nt help feeling that I was surrounded by happy, healthy, clean and cheerfully dressed people. Istayed in the hall till the last minute watching Shri Mother and listening. I did'nt want to go away. When I finally did leave to go home through the Saturday night streets, full of crowds of rowdy durnks, I clearly saw what a hell surrounds us, but I was no longer afraid. I sank down in my chair. My body was aching all over and I felt scruffy and undignified in my jeans and short hair. I was quite surprised to be there actually. I'd never been to anything like this before. I was nervous but definitely excited. The next afternoon they had invited me to go to a Sahaj Yogini's house to see a video of Shri Mataji. Everyone was in the garden. It was a

 Issue: 5 & 6- 2006 29 The Divine Cool Breeze Since then I have really been spoiled. I went to Shri Mother's Programme in Vienna, was offered the chance to work for Gregoire de Kalbermatten as nanny for his two beautiful children Machinder Nath and Niranjana. I have learnt so much and had so many questions answered that I have at last almost stopped asking any. It has been great to meet the European Sahaja Yogis and the new people who have joined Sahaja Yoga in Vienna. Ireally don't know how to thank our Mother for all Her lovely sunny day and the light shone green through the tarpaulin roof covering us. There were paper streamers of all colours decorating the rout and the center pole. By the wall, next to a flower bed was a chair upon which Shri Mataji had been sitting during Her stay and where that very moming a puja had been celebrated. Although at that timeI knewnothing of such things, I definitely felt the silence and the joy-'the' joy. A crowd of happy smiling people. How often do we see that in the West? In Sahaja Yoga we may start to take it for granted, but for me it was really heaven. I felt so much love flowing. Somehow you could really feel at home, as if you had found all your long lost friends again. At last people who were on your wavelength. blessings! As a person who came to Sahaja Yoga from the street without ever having heard anything about it before I'd like to say how thankful I am to Our Mother for such great brothers and sisters who helped me with so much love over the stony path back to normalcy and beyond. After realization it becomes so easy to see the games which others play. We can so much more easily criticize and judge other Sahaja Yogis for not yet being what they should be. We can lose the perspective and start taking the blessings for granted. Not quite two months later I went up to London for Guru Puja. I was stunned to see the Nightingales lane Ashram, that smart way people were dressed, the women in their beautiful silk saris, the video, all the different nationalities represented there, and of course the most important thing, the way the people were. I was amazed. While l'd been plodding along the weary track of ego here were people who had been working on trying to improve themselves, not just with words but really doing it. All the Sahaj Yogis seemed so great to me. Therefore I pray to Shri Mataji that we may learn to love each other more and more to see only the best in each other and to help that to grow; that we may become truly one collective being enlivened by our enjoyment of ourselves and of each other and thus worthy to represent Our Holy Mother to the world, who is the embodiment of that love itself.Who is Sakshat Shri Jagadamba ,Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi, Namoh Namah. Ihave no word to describe the Puja itselfexcept to say that I felt overawed and it was a great privilege to be there, It was such a powerful experience. I found it hard to believe that all this was happening, in the heart of London. How come I'd never heard about it before? Why wasn't it in all the papers? Why was'nt it on the television news? Even nowit sometimes seems incredible. Margret May -1982 (Nirmala Yoga- 1983)

 The Sahaja of Physics (Part I) (7.7.1983) INTRODUCTION laws. It was all very satisfying for the intellect: Seen as a yoga of knowledge (Jnana Yoga), Sahaja Yoga is known to us as the Knowledge of integration. It should thus be possible to integrate through its scope the various fields of the human knowledge, to grasp these fields in their essential principles of tattwas, to understand how these principles relate to each other and to God. This synthesis with the higher spiritual plane is conceivable because Sahaja Yoga is above all "Nimala Vidya", that is the science of the living, the science of the immaculate working of the Adi Shakti. The time is ripe for the integration of all previous knowledge in a higher synthesis: many people who are not yogis have already started working on it. For instance, in his book The Tao of Physics the Austrian physicist, Fritjof Capra, attempted to show that the Eastern mystical tradition and the Western new physics were describing the world in strikingly similar patterns. It is quite reasonable to expect that Sahaja Yogis who are scientists will be able to go quite far in this direction of enquiry once that they have grasped the principles of Sahaja Yoga. Evena layman like myselfcan play a bit further with Dr. capra's correct intuition because the knowledge granted to us by Shri Mataji has opened fascinating horizons! matter was matter, God its creator was something else, somewhere else, removed from the field of science's confident observations and from man's enquiry. That is why the French physicist and mathematician Laplace could tell Napoleon that he did not need God as an hypothesis to explain the Universe, Relativity theory and Quantum theory have shattered these beautiful certainties of the 18th and 19thcenturies and, with Albert Einstein, have laid the foundations of a Sahaja Physics, that is a physics which embraces the Universe as a vibrating, organic Unity, where, so to say, the shape of God can be guessed. How? Modern physics shows at work in the matter patterns of phenomena that can be found again through Sahaja Yoga in the more subtle, higher spiritual plane. These patterns within the physical world are, so to say, projections which reveal something about the archetypical patterns of the causal, spiritual reality. And thus God is no longer in the eye of the scientist, an hypothetical primordial cause. His ways, His play (leela) unfolds itselfeven in the very laws of matter. It is, this time all very satisfying for the intellect, and for the heart. As non physicists and, therefore, with due apologies for superficiality, let us pursue in this article some such analogies between the science-revealed physical Universe and the Sahaja revealed spiritual reality. Classical physics had found its most elaborate expression in Newton's mechanical model of the Universe. In this deteministic model, matter was made of solid stuff or substance evolving within the three dimensional space of Eucledian geometry. Masses and motions, material particles and the forces between them were governed by clear, mathematical, immutable THE PARABLE OF THE SUBATOMIC MATTER Let us make a quick plunge in the strange underworld of the infinitely small to find out what

 Issue: 5 & 6-2006 31 The Divine Cool Breeze Before the havan and the puja ceremonies Shri Mataji spoke beautifully about the relationship between the formed and the formless aspect of God. For instance, She sasys, a chakra is both is the nature of the subatomic units of matter, or, in other words, to find out what stuff is matter made of? formed and formless. Its formed dimension is the deity presiding over the chakra; its formless dimension the energy it emits. Hence both are one and the same thing. Like the subatomic particle the chakra is at the same time formed and formless, position and wave, identity and energy. Furthermore, in spiritual life also The Uncertainty principle seems to apply and the devotee is caught in its limitations. Indeed he And here is the first surprise! Matter is full of tricks; these units are very abstract entities and have nothing to do with the solid objects of classical physics or with our every day perception of matter. Depending on how we look at them, these subatomic units appear as particles, that is, as entities confined to an extremely small volume, or as waves, stretched out through larger portions of space. This dual picture provides us with an unexpected concept ofthe reality of matter. Its smallest components identified by atomic physics are, so to say, "identitiy" as particles and "engery" as waves. But according to Heisenberg's famous "uncertainty principle" these two aspects can never be perceived simultaneously. Either the observer focus on the location of the particle and he loses sights of its wave like momentum; or he measures the momentum but loses the particle's position. That is, from the experimenter's standpoint, the subatomic unit is identity or energy. The particle perception and the wave perception, as Niels Bohr saw it, are complementary. Both are needed and both provide only a partial description of the same atomic reality. Quantum theory reveals a basic elusiveness in the very substratum of the Universe. either usually focuses on the identity of a personal God (Jesus, Vishnu, Shiva) and his consciousness loses tracks of the all pervading cosmic manifestation of Divinity outside of this very form; or he focuses on the abstract, undifferentiated aspect of the Divine (Buddhism, Taoism, Advaita Vedantism, forms of Islam) but his heart cannot find the bliss at the Lotus Feet of the identified, recognized Beloved one. The perception of the formed identity drives away the perception of the formless Energy, and vice versa. As the physicists say, we can't get at the same time location and momentum. For a Sahaja Yogi the question becomes a very practical one. He feels the relationship to the Formed when he has the darshan (physical presence) of Shri Mataji. He feels the working of the formless when he feels the vibrations and the consequent mutations in awareness. Yet the full identity of these two aspects, although perhaps understood by the mind, is not fully realized. Indeed it is one thing to rationally grasp Without going any further in our exploration let us make an attempt at reading, in this finding, the parable of one very important aspect of spiritual reality which was the subject of Shri Mataji's enlightening speech, on the 18th June, 1983 in Paris. this truth that the two aspects are one - and here I could refer in passing to Hegel's central paradigm in the phenomenology of Spirit:

 Issue: 5 & 6 - 2006 32 The Divine Cool Breeze Mataji through the manas Shakti of his Ida nadi and more the vibrations through the Prana Shakti of his Pingala Nadi. But a day will come, by the grace of sakshat Kundalini, when a Sahaja Yogi will be able to perceive at or above the Sahasrara level, in Nirvikalpa or beyond. Then many things change: these two shaktis flow into each other, all the deities of the Sahasrara are Identity (Brahman, ultimate Reality) Is The Identity(Oneness) between the Identity(the formed) And The Non- Identity(the Formless), - but it is another thing to experience this truth as a state of one's own consciousness. The dilemma is not without importance : If I do not realize the Person of Shri Mataji within the formless energy of vibrations I will pine and feel separated from Her when I am not physically with Her, I won't be so aware of Her PREM (Divine Love) upon me. If I do not realize the formless energy within the person of Shri Mataji I will constantly forget the true magnitude of Her personality, the perception of Her divinity will escape my awareness and I will behave with Her as if She were a human being. In other words, we could say, perhaps, that the Uncertainty principle is one aspect of Maya, embodied as a law of nuclear physics as well as a inherent limit of the human psyche. Can it be overcome? In physics, no; in Sahaja Yoga, yes. integrated within the formless and the attention has reached the seat of the Atma at the center of the Brahamarandhra. At this highest stage the Yogi becomes what he perceives. Instead of saying "Twamewa Sakshat Shri Mataji" he says"Aham Sakshat Shri Mataji" While saying "you are" the distinction between the yogi and Shri Mataji prevents him to perceive Her formed and formless aspects in one integrated act ofconsciousness; while saying "Iam" he has no difficulties, from the inside to experiment these two dimensions; this is probably the state of "God realization".One has to become him in order to know her. The author of these lines, for instance, certainly doesn't see himself entitled to say, "Aham Bhavani". He knows fully well that he is not at that level. But in Sahaja Yoga even the most crazy hopes are allowed. And we know Her generosity ! The greatness of the blessings that the Great Goddess wants to bestow upon us challenges the sheer capacity of imagination. The key to this answer is to be found in the words "from the observer's stand-point". Depending upon his standpoint, the physicist can measure the location or the momentum of a particle but not both at the same time. It is not in his power to alter his experimental standpoint in a way which would enable him to do so. While the Sahaja Yogi, through slow but steady growth, can alter his epistemological standpoint. How? Gregoire Vienna 7.7.1983 (Nirmala Yoga-1983) It is of course Shri Kundalini who is the magical doer. We could say, may be, that the Sahaja Yogi, at the level of Nirvichara Sammadhi, perceives more the localized darshan of Shri

 Installation Of Shri Ganesha the entire army of Shri Shiva to protect His Mother's protocol. Why should the children disobey when they know that whatever Shri Mataji says is for their benefit? Often Sahaja Yogis say, "but Mother why don't we do it the other way." Are we to teach the Adi Shakti who has created the universe? But She is Maha Maya so She plays with one's ego and consents to one's wishes and suggestions. Organizers of Sahaja centre have to be very careful about giving suggestions to Shri Mataji or interpreting Her instructions because they are too close to Maha Maya and can easily fall into it. The importance attached to the work often throws the veil of Maya. We forget that She is Maha Saraswati; the source of all arts and planning. Her instructions are from the supreme view point, whereas one's intellect is limited to 3- dimentional and hence cannot realize its total implications. In one's obedience one remains connected to the mains and the vibrations keep flowing. In disobedience or censorship the work snaps, the vibrations cease. Without vibrations there cannot be Sahaja Yogi thus Shri Ganesh gets upset with the organizers, thus the growth of Sahaja Yoga suffers a set back. Hence it is sometimes better to be a nobody, than a big busy body. A dispute among the organizers reflects a decline in their vibrations. The organizers should then withdraw for a while and ask the collective body of Sahaja Yogis to decide the issue through vibrations, then it comes under the attention of Shri Mataji. She works it out. When the decision is based on conditioning She does not work it out. The establishment of Shri Ganesh marks the advent of Sahaja. Shri Ganesh is the son of Adi Shakti Shri Mataji. She bestows upon Him great powers when She sits him on the earth as its guardian. Shri Ganesh symbolizes the love of His Mother hence Sahaja Yoga is to be spread through love. As the guardian of the earth Shri Ganesh has the special power of gravity which maintains our balance. In our body His Chakra is placed outside the spine where the body is sewn together and this forms our foundation. Any disturbance in the foundation reflects in the Chakra. It is therefore important that the foundation should be strong and well grounded. With the spreading of Sahaja Yoga, many Sahaja countries will spring all over the world. However their efficiency depends on the strength of this foundation which is Shri Ganesh. If the foundation is weak, the negative forces can easily attack, and render us ineffective, the instruments of Shri Mataji's love. If Shri Ganesh is strongly entrenched then no-one dare attack. Thus the inner weakness attracts the outside negativity. Shri Ganesh is the protector of the Devi's protocol. Ifwe seek His protecticn then we have to be very careful of the protocol of Shri Mataji. When we are not careful there, He is angry and if He withdraws then we become vulnerable to the attack of the negative forces. The most important aspect of the protocol is absolute obedience and surrender to Shri Mataji. Shri Ganesh does not know any other authority except His Mother. He is so devoted to Her that He does not even know His father- There Shri Mataji does talk about Her time yet we should not trespass it with Mundane Matters, like personal finances or family problems. Though She may graciously listen to everyone is a story about how even Shri Shiva Himself could not enter Parvati's abode because Shri Ganesh guarded the door-way. He destroyed

 Issue: 5 & 6 - 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze 34 for a while, yet She has already taught us the method of dealing with them ourselves. If 'Mother's Love' O! my beloved Mother! anyone tries to dominate Her attention or divert it into Mundane matters, the deity gets annoyed with these people. If a deity is upset, then He plays games with our ego. We should always be mindful of Her time and that Her attention is not brought down from the collective level. When inter-personal problems arise among Sahaja Yogis, it causes great pain to Shri Mataji to have to witness Her children quarrelling. The senior Sahaja Yogis should resolve the issue among themselves as far as possible. Sometimes we go on complaining to Shri Mataji but we forget that She is all knowing and in complaining too much we only reveal our own weaknesses. When I go out for work, Iget heat of the world. When I come back home, Your Love cools me down. Your love dissolves all that I gather, Your love refreshes me. When I get injury outside, When I come to you, I get healing touch of your love. The world though full of miseries, Your love makes it peaceful. There is no place in the world to hide, When I come to you, you cопсeal me in your depth, You make me forget all the pangs and sufferings There is no better place than your Lotus feet, The purest quality is innocence. This is the purity of our vibrations. Shri Mataji is pleased with this innocence, hence always be truthful to Her. Where I find my sole refuge Never use devious means or conduct talks to I pray not only for me, But for the whole world. cover some folly. She forgives all folly committed in innocence. To extend your soothing Love to all To fill the whole Universe with your Infinite joy.that you are That who is infinite joy, Love, peace and beauty To maintain the balance of the universe Shri Mataji bestows wisdom on Shri Ganesha. Wisdom is not intellect. Wisdom is bom when our intelligence is connected with the Spirit. Through wisdom our discretionary power develops. In the absence of any precedence regarding protocol, wisdom guides us, infact we must observe the protocol spontaenously. Is going to make the whole creation manifested With His real nature, the eternal kappiness. Aum Amen (Jai Shri Mata JI) (Nirmala Yoga-1983) With the grace of Shri Mataji we have come a long way. Shri Ganesh is being established all around the world. By being always mindful of the protocol the deities are pleased and we can also have ourselves the exercise offalling in and out of Maha Maya constantly. Yogi Mahajan (Nirmala Yoga-1983)

 Advice Given to Sahaja Mothers by Shri Mata Ji "To be a mother - it's a most responsible position, that ofa mother, it is even more responsible than that of a king - to be a Mother"- Shri Mataji Becoming the mother of a realized soul presented most of us with practical questions which before Sahaja Yoga would probably not have occurred to us. Here in London, Sahaja Yoginis were specially blessed to have our Holy Mother to advise us. Knowing how thirsty we were for these tips and guidelines, we have collected together all the points Shri Mataji has told to individuals; as far as we are aware, experience, almost all vibrational problems that the babies and children have is that of the parents- "It is very special responsibility, that of having children." Shri Mataji has also advised the reading of books about mother and childcare in order to educate ourselves in the absence of sensible all the information given below was meant as general advice and does not relate specifically to individual cases-we hope it may prove useful parental advice, which in a society such as India would be available- the Grandmother playing an important role. Another point which Shri Mataji has mentioned on several occasions is the way in India that the whole society trains the attention of the child- by continually pointing the attention to the correct things. to you. During conversations with Sahaja Yogini mothers, Shri Mataji has told us that in the Western society, the children are born with our ego and superego - this is the reason they are often born with little or no hair - in India, Shri Mataji tells us, the babies are always born with hair. Once the child has all its needs seen to, ie. THE PRACTICALADVICE During Pregnancy It is very important that the mother's mental and spiritual health is kept clean and full of postivity. changed nappy, feed, he should'nt be picked upall the time as this encourages ego to develop. Shri Mataji has strongly advised us to feed on a regular basis from the beginning and to establish a flexible routine for the children - it has been stressed that to a reasonable degree they should adapt to our life style and should not begin to rule us! "Whatever's going on in the mind will affect the child-the mind has to be happy-you cannot be with artificiality or fantasy." On the physical side, if the mother is fit and healthy and the pregnancy is normal, Shri Mataji has advised a daily walk in the park or country throughout the entire pregnancy. This, Shri Matjai explains, will help towards an easier labour. (This advice would indicate that if the Swadhishthan Chakra is in good condition, this will also help). Shri Mataji has also explained that God can protect the children from most harmful vibrations, but cannot protect them from the vibrations of the parents therefore it is important that the parents cleanse themselves as much as possible from our practical

 Issue: 5 & 6-2006 36 The Divine Cool Breeze Mother's Diet After the birth The mother and baby should stay inside for forty days. Contact with non-Sahaja Yogis should be minimal during this period. Sugar and boiled water can be given to the baby from birth onwards. If your baby suffers from wind problems,your own diet is very important while breastfeeding, to help reduce this build up of gases no rice should be taken3; a) b) root vegetables and all things growing below the ground should not be eaten; Treatment for colic : It seems that many of our babies have experienced problems with wind and colic. Shri Mataji gave us much advice on how to treat and prevent this: no white flour or any produce made from white flour; c) milk should be taken with something like cereal, never on it own; e) avoid cold drinks; ) d) (a) Ajwain treatment : foment ajwain by (i) chewing it yourself; or (ii) warming it in a dry pan. Place this on baby's navel with a warmed nappy over the top, holding it in place. also omit all generally well-known wind- producing food, e.g. beans, spices Good foods to eat are : semolina, almonds (sugared or plain), an Indian sweet called Rasgullah (sweet, white balls in sugar syrup). (b) The mother should also chew ajwain quite a good handful several times a day. Another good way of taking ajwain is in a drink that Shri Mataji has shown us how to prepare: Use seven fennel seeds and 2 ajwain seeds with cracked block gugar (sugar candy) - make sure it is quite sweet (ordinary sugar can be used). Use this as babys drinking water, and the mother may also take it, (in severe cases, Sahaja yogis have found that increasing the amount of ajwain seeds can help). Bathing When bathing the baby, we should keep them warm. If the weather is cold, they should not be bathed so often, Shri Mataji says it is not so necessary-but daily oil massage is. Baby should be oil massaged everyday as it is very good for the chakras. Use oil such as olive, almond, mustard-not the proprietary baby oils, as they do not contain vitamins. Do not use olive (c) When the baby is older, i.e. approximately one to two months, Gripe water can be given say, twice a day - but it must be boiled first. oil on the hair, as this turns white. Massage with the oil towards the sahasrara on the head, as if to 'fill' the Sahasrara with oil. (d) Other preventative measures : ) The baby should be properly winded, even if he falls asleep. (i) When taking the wind out of the baby the hands should be moved in a downward direction from the neck to the base of the spine. Do not pick baby up under the arms as this can damage his shoulders and be very painful for him. Brushing the hair should be done even if their isn't very much, Brush it from the front to the

 Issue: 5 & 6-2006 37 The Divine Cool Breeze back on top of the head and upwards towards the Sahasrara at the back and sides. This is to open the Sahasrara and encourage growth of the hair. natural fibers such as wood. Plastic toys do not have good vibrations and should be avoided. Shri Mataji has commented that it is better for the children to have fewer toys of better quality than lot of inferior ones. Clothing Shri Mataji has strongly impressed upon us the importance of the children wearing 100% natural fibers, and that only pure cotton should be wom next to their skin. Woolen cloth should be over this in the colder climates or part of the year. Most important is that the small indentation in the collar bone is covered up-this helps to prevent them catching colds. 'Cherub' wool vests are good for putting over cotton ones. Weaning Babies to be weaned at six months fully weaned approximately ten months. All foods should be natural, no packaged or artificial ones to be given. Shri Mataji advises that the first weaning foods should be rice mashed up with sugar and milk. Do not start babies off on curd (yourhurt). Silk is not a good fabric for babies. Regarding nappies: use 100% cotton onlyas they are much better for vibrations. However, in situations like seminars where washing facilities are very poor, we may use the disposable ones as a temporary Feeding bottle should preferably be made of glass. Vaccinations Shri Mataji has advised us to get the children vaccinated against the childhood diseases, as this helps strengthen them against the negativity. measure. To allow a good flow of vibrations, two piece outfits are preferable to one-piece ones, and garments should end at the ankle. In cold weather, make sure the nabhi chakra is well covered, and keep head and feet covered. Girls should be dressed like girls, in dresses or Punjabi suits, and boys should be dressed like boys. Meditation Shri Mataji has recommended that children should mediate with us in the early morning from being young babies. "One has to remember that motherhood is very important - it is the Mother who created this universe, the Father was just a witness." Shri Mataji Toys Regarding toys, these should be also made of (Nirmala Yoga-1983)

 The Memories of the Divine Mother new for me to see, how they regarded Her. We went through the whole thing ofHer taking Her socks off so that they could get to Her Feet as THE FIRST PUBLIC PROGRAMS Like learning to ride a bike When Shri Mataji came back to England in 1976, after we had first met Her in '75, we didn't have public programs. We just had these meetings at Gavin and Jane [Brown]'s house. At one stage She called me and said that she had to go to an Indian ladies' meeting somewhere in West London. And She wanted me to come and talk about Sahaja Yoga. We'd never done anything like that before and I was absolutely terrified. I was twenty-one. She took me on the tube and all the way there on the tube She schooled me as to what I was going to say and what was going to happen and how it would be. "It'll be all right." I just could'nt believe this. And we walked from the tube. I well. They understood about touching Her Feet momentarily, whereas we had jsut been told, "Put your hands under Her Feet to get the vibrations." So it was again a new experience to see that whole thing. And then She got me to sit in front of all these ladies and She sat just a little way from me and She fed me lines to say. Then someone translated them. After about ten minutes it was like learning to ride a bike. She sort of gave me a final push and I was off and She did'nt have to prompt me any more because suddenly here were people who actually wanted to know about Shri Mataji. It didn't matter that they didn't understand me and they had to wait to have it translated and perhaps would never do it again. It was this incredible surge of feeling that I could tell people about Mother and it was my first experience of talking to people. And the way in which She literally hand-led me along that path was incredible. And I did'nt want to mean-can you imagine all this? -going on the tube with Mother. We got to this place and the Indian Ladies were very respectful of Mother, which was something

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 5 & 6-2006 39 When I first came to Sahaj, I went to a meeting [the first meeting held at Caxton Hall] at which there were about half a dozen very sick looking people sitting on the stage and Shri Mataji was stop. They, kind of, had to haul me off. "Well, thank you very much. Come and have some tea" or something. And we went back by tube. Maureen Rossi sitting in the middle of them and there was an English guy, rather scruffily dressed, standing and talking. I was in the audience of about thirty people and I had gone because the advertisement said "Your divine birthright" and "no money will be taken" which rang true for something spiritual. I thought I would check it It was like Sahaja Yoga just changed gear That was literally a complete sea change. It was like Sahaja Yoga just changed gear. Up to that time it had just been a smail group of people going around to different houses with Mother. Then She announced that She would like to have a public program and we were all mystified. We were quite frightened and did'nt know what would happen. We put a big advert in "Time Out" [magazine]and we hired a room in Caxton hall [in Lodon] and we went there. We didn't know if anyone would turn up. out before I went to India to find my guru. I sat listening to the Englishman's talk, which became extremely boring and I thought, "I can't sit here any longer and I am going to leave." As always, I had sat near the door so I could make a quick exit. Just as this thought came to my mind and the energy flowed to my legs to stand up, Mataji signalled to this guy, who was Pat Anslow boring me to death, and asked him to stop talking. Then She got up and started talking. It was everything that I had expected, at least The program started around October 1977 in Caxton Hall, formal programs, which we had on Monday. In those days, if I remember very well, Ithink the first advertisements were in Time Out. And at the same time, we had posters, which we put up on shops and on shop windows. A lot of the seekers actually came from the Time Otadvertisement verbally and mentally. When we were supposed to feel the vibrations, Idid'nt feel anyting at all, but I did feel something happen in my heart when Shri Mataji said, "All I am here for is to give you love." I felt this distinct churning in my chest, which was the only experience I had that day. Djamel Metouri Bala Kanaysоп In the end about two hundred people came. Mother made us sit on the stage with Her in a row, which was extremely embarrassing. Gavin [Brown gave a talk and then Mother gave a talk and we ali sat there desperately trying to look all evolved and spiritual. It was actually very painful because we felt huge things going on in the chakras incredible pains and movements. I remember sitting there and trying to sort of keep a pleasant look on my face and being in agony. Most of the seekers, virtually ninety percent of the seekers who came in those days, were from other movements, false gurus of all kinds. In fact, we used to work almost exclusively on people who had been to other false gurus, some on drugs as well.Alot of them,if they were more hippyish,of course, they had done drugs.. Mostly they had either been in drugs or they had been to false gurus. She used to work on Pat Anslow

 40 Issue: 5 & 6 - 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze them individually and She gave them so much love. She really worked very hard. Just barefooted students Now what I actually remember most is the fact Sahaja Yoga was not at all what it is today. It was so informal as well. First, we did'nt have any programs which were with a lot of people. We used to go and meet at Gavin [Brown]'s place on a Sunday afternoon. Mother used to come by train to Victoria Station and then She Djamel Metouri And then bang! It worked out. Everything had changed. Suddenly Mother was down among the audience, worked on everyone. The whole hall felt like one family. And then the whole thing changed. We had seventy people coming to the ashram, to see Mother for long weekends. would come by taxi. We didn't have this. One of the things I find, when you look at Sahaja Yogis today, now they all have cars. They all go and organize their programs. They all have money. They have all kinds of means. They have a lot more facilities than we had at the time. Pat Anslow Shri Mataji came down and looked at all of us and She looked at me. I was sitting at the back, as I said, ready to make a rapid exit. She said something to me in Hindi from a distance and I thought, "Well, you know, if She is a guru, how .come she doesn't know that I can't speak Hindi?" And then She told one of the older yogis I remember when we were staying at Finchley, in the ashram, we started organizing meetings at Caxton Hall, but we never did anything like today, which means we didn't have all the facilities like having cars and vans and things like that. We were barefooted students. We used to actaully take a picture of Mother and take anything we could take-candles and incense and so on-and we went by bus. And I remember in the early days, even Mother coming by train to London from Oxted, where that was with Her that I had "got it" and, of course, I felt nothing. And then Shri Mataji came up to me, stood right in front of me, put Her hand over my head and said, "You've got it. You've got it!" And I replied, "No, I don't feel anything at all." Now, there was a person sitting on my right, who started saying, "Oh vow, I feel it. I feel it!" And I thought, "You know, this is just auto- She lived. And then She would take a taxi. And Ieven remember her coming by tube to come to the program at Gavin's. It seems that we have come a long way. A lot of Sahaja Yogis don't realize that their suggestion." And then the person on my left started saying, "Oh, I feel the cool breeze." standard of living has risen so much. They don't Meanwhile, I felt absolutely no breeze at all. I was quite disappointed. And, of course, You know, it started with very little means, with Mother was insisting that I'd "got it." So, for a the very little that the Sahaja Yogis that were sceptical aerospace engineer, just out of college, Yogis used everything they had in their hands to that wasn't very helpful. realize that Sahaja Yoga never started like this. there at the time had. And, in fact, the Sahaja help Sahaja Yoga. Bala Kanayson Djamel Metouri

 Issue: 5 & 6- 2006 41 The Divine Cool Breeze This Sahaja Yoga's really good When I first came to my first meeting, they said, "Sit down, you'll gain this experience." And they told me what chakras I was catching on. I was catching on left heart, and they said, "Something to do with your mother." So afterwards I thought, "Ah, yes" because l'd left home and I wasn't contacting my mother a lot and I was doing plastering andI had a pain in my left heart. I thought it was something to do with overworking because I used to get home and just collapse, so tired. So I thought, "Okay, I need to contact my parents more often." So I went to see mny mother. I though I'd see her anyway, but afterwards I discovered because she was worried about me, I was getting the pain in my chest. And as soon as I went round there and said, "I'm all right. Everything's fine," it fizzled. It was like someone had hit me in the left Heart. It was really painful. So when I had gone round to see her - "I'm all right," this and that, she stopped worrying. That pain went away. So I thought, "Wow, this Sahaja Yoga's really good." And When I left the meeting my whole body felt light. Iskipped all the way home. I felt, "vow! I've found it. these very small posters we used to put in the shops because we thought if Mother vibrated them there would be a greater chance that they would attract seekers at the time. But we didn't have these large posters. We didn't have all these fancy things. We were very smallish. And Mother used to get down off the stage and would go round the hall working on people. She would talk to people. She would hug people. She knew what everybody's problem was and She would talk to people in a very personal way, trying to resolve their problems in a very personal way, including their health problems, their family problems. In the early days Her attention was very much on the seekers who were lost, lost following other false gurus. And Mother used to blast all these false gurus whenever She spoke. She doesn't perhaps do it so much today because things have changed, but in those days She could see that so many seekers were lost. And, of course, many of the talks in Caxton Hall were about blasting all these horrible gurus who were just torturing the seekers. Djamel Metouri Powerful stuff Mondays, whenever She was in London, Shri Mataji used to hold public introductory programs at Caxton Hall [from October 1977 to May 1983] near Her flat in Victoria. Mother Derek Ferguson We were very smallish Iremember Maureen [Rossi] giving me a poster which Mother had put vibrated kumkum on and it was for Caxton Hall, the earliest Caxton Hall program. Mother just put kumkum over the photograph. And Maureen gave me one ofthem. would give a talk, then give Realization and would then work on the new people. Of course, later on this was how we all learnt how to work on people, as we would walk round the hall with Shri Mataji and sometimes She would have Gail Pottinger us work on people, asking us to feel their vibrations and either showing us what to do or ask us what we would do. Yes, She took a whole pile of photographs and She rubbed kumkum on the pictures so that

 42 Issue: 5 & 6- 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze type young people were seated respectfully on rows of chairs, facing Mother, with their hands out, palms upward. Shri Mataji indicated for us to go and sit near Her on the rostrum. She told us to close oureyes and to put our hands, palms upward, out to Her. Then She asked those seated around to watch and see if our eyelids flickered. Mine did and somebody pointed it out. When She turned to me and inquired about my fluttery eyelids, I told Her that I occasionally suffered from tension, although I felt so peaceful there. She said, "Oh, my poor child" and got me to remove the giraffe-hair bracelet that I was wearing. The fluttering stopped. She told us to stop thinking. It was very easy. I felt wonderful. She turned to me a couple of times, saying to the others, "Look, she's beautiful." I looked around me and everyone was radiant with innocent, open faces. Shri Mataji seemed to work on each and everybody. She was the nucleus, calling out to everyone of us whilst we worked, "How is she?" or "Where is he catching?" "Has she got it?" We were all taking vibrations from Her, whilst we worked and meanwhile She would be personally working on someone else - and often giving a talk at the same time. Sometimes She would sit When Shri Mataji Herself worked on new people, She would say the mantras differently-not "Aum twameva sakshat Shri Mahakali" or whichever deity She was. invoking, but She would say, "Aham sakshat Mahakali." That means, "I am Mahakali." Powerful stuff! Linda Willliams She was creating the collective I attended my first Caxton Hall program in the early summer of 1978. In those days, Mother held programs every Monday near St. James Park in Victoria, London. Even outside Caxton Hall and across the road there was this sensation of tranquillity. There were three of us, we were late and Shri Mataji had already begun of program. Caxton Hall seemed unusually beautiful that sunny evening. I felt like a child. There wasa small lecture room with shoes, sandals and chappals piled up outside. Inside Shri Mataji was seated on an armchair, upona slightly raised rostrum in front of the window. She had Her left hand upon the Sahasrara of ayoung woman who sat on the floor with her back towards Shri Mataji, slightly to Her left. There were two or three other young people sitting on the rostrum around Her Feet. My first impression was of a large, confident personality, full of warmth and humour, completely different to the silent, little Madonna I had expected. Her hair was loose about Her shoulders, Her ams seemed huge and powerful. I noticed Her gap-toothed smile. As we entered, She broke off from'the talk She was giving to greet us, calling out a jovial "Hello. Come, come. Are you new?" A small international group ofalternative- someone down in front of Her and then ask everybody, "How is he? Which chakra is blocked?" She was creating the collective. Marilyn Leate We were just so joyful We used to go to Caxton Hall from Brighton every Monday and we'd come back and because there was nothing written into that single sheet that was on the chair, we'd say, "Did you hear this?" and "Did you hear that?" Just so exciting- "Did you hear that Ganesha is Christ?"

 43 Issue: 5 & 6 -2006 The Divine Cool Breeze It would be such a contrast, we'd be laughing and everything, singing on the train. We were just so, so joyful, weren't we? We noticed it so much. attention on everyone, all at the same time, and always gave to each person what they needed. This incident produced such a comforting feeling in me that Shri Mataji knew what was happening inside of me and that She would Pamela Bromley always protect me if I let Her. I heard from behind me Shri Mataji's voice The amazing thing at Caxton Hall is Mother used to get off the stage and actually walk and work behind people. I've actually been there when Mother's actually got off the stage and actually gone to work on people, sitting down Felicity Payment She worked tirelessly on people Towards the end of each Caxton Hall meeting, She would take a lighted candle and stare through it, with Her eyes wide, looking towards certain individuals who had Agnya problems. As a bhoot got blasted, She would call, "Ha! there, Gail Pottinger Better now." Shri Mataji always made sure that everyone got their Realization by moving around the room, working personally on each new individual. One time, after She had given Realization, I was still sitting in meditation when my mind began to fill with dark thoughts. Without realizing it, I was becoming increasingly overwhelmed by the anxious and troubled feelings they were producing. Suddenly, through this dark fog, I heard from behind me Shri Mataji's voice calling me, "Felicity!" Ijumped up somewhat startled and guilty I always felt guilty- and turned around to see Shri Mataji two rows behind me busily working on some new seeker. I moved closer and waited expectantly. Then She looked across at me and said, with great love and compassion, as if willing me to understand, "Don't you knowIhave more power in My little finger than all the power in the whole world put together?" And the dark fog went away. She People brought limes and chillies to Her and She would vibrate them, either by a gentle touch or bandhan inside the bag. She worked tirelessly on people, often using Her Feet, as well as Her hands. She made chopping movements in the air to destroy negativity. Individuals would stand with one hand towards Her and the other out of nearby window. She recommended Tate and Lyle white cane sugar or Sainsbury's for the liverish and She would vibrate it for them. She spoke a lot about the liver-how it was the seat of our attention, emphasizing how badly Western diets and alcohol, medicines and too much thinking and too much chocolate ruin the liver. In those days, we were not discouraged from raising our kundalinis and putting on a bandhan in Her presence whenever we felt like it. We used to raise our kundalini with our two pulled me out of it. Whatever She was doing, She always knew exactly where everyone was at and what everyone was experiencing. She had Her hands parallel, rather than the right circling the left. Marilyn Leate

 44 Issue: 5 & 6- 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze She had to work on me and it was a real lesson. It didn't matter what state the people were in, you didn't take it as a personal sort of thing. So not only were we supposedly helping Mother, She would then have to sort us out afterwards. It was just like being an apprentice. You were allowed to have a little go and then She would have to put it all right afterwards, rebuild the whole apparatus afterwards. It was just like being an apprentice After the Caxton Hall meetings She would have us back to Her flat in Ashley Gardens. It was almost like a debrief. We would go, "Phwah! What a night!" And there would be food. Ifany new person was astute enough, they would come with us. They would say, "Where are you all going?" We're going back to Shri Mataji's place." "Oh, right." And you would know it would be right because they would have the awareness to kind of come. I mean, Mother would'nt let them in otherwise. Maureen Rossi After meetings at Caxton Hall, She used to try and bring back as many Sahaja Yogis to Her flat and bring back some of the other new Maureen Rossi seekers to work on them. She always had One of the things we used to dread-and we people in Her flat in those days, always had were only a few Sahaja Yogis- we used to dread all these programs because what happens is we used to have programs at Caxton Hall and then people used to come back to Gavin's place for follow-ups, where Mother could actually work on them individually and give them more individual attention. And one of the things we used to dread were the catches, you know, as people that She worked on. She always showed Her concern and She treated everyone equally, whether they were seekers or not. From the moment they came to Her, She felt like a duty to work on them. She would give them all the love, but She always, of course, favoured those who had a thought for the collective, for the whole. Soon as we got into the meetings you know,often I had a headache.After a while,when we had experience when you actually worked on someone you knew from which false gurus they came from, according to the catches. From the catches you actually felt, you start to get experience. Djamel Metouri We all trooped up there and were given cups of coffee. She continued to work on people. She just gave and gave. She asked me to put my hand on Her left Swadhisthan and put my other hand out. I felt an Djamel Metouri incredible force going through me and my arm shook slightly. Mother looked at me and said, "Powerful, isn't it?" After this particular one, Mohter said to me, "What on Earth have you been doing?" And I said, "Oh, just working on these people, Mother." "You don't get involved in it!" And then Marilyn Leate

 11E Science deals with only a very little portion, I will also tell you which part * of this power deals with our physical being and out of which how much a scientist knows. You will be surprised that if knowledge is an Ocean, the scientist knows only a dissolved in the Ocean. But a drop cannot by its own effort become the Ocean; the Ocean has to dissolve the drop." drop, And to know the Ocean, the drop is to be (H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi, Feb. 1979)



----------------------

2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The
Divine Cool Breeze
May-June 2006
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-2.txt 
 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
May-June 2006
NIRMALA
IN THIS ISSUE
PURE RELIG
An Appeal To Sahaja yogis
3
Sir C.P. Srivastav Addresses Architects
20-1-2006
Shri Krishna Puja Celebrations - (USA) 26-28 August, 2005
6.
Rakhi Celebration - (2005)
7
Nine Nights Of Navratri At Gurgaon
Oct. 2005
9.
Sir C.P's Speech - Navratri Puja 15 Oct-2005 (Excerpt)
10
Navratri Puja - 16 Oct.-2005 Gurgaon (A Report)
13
Ekadash Rudra Puja - New York, 17 Sept. 1983
16
From Nirmala Yoga-1983 :-
Place Of Money In Sahaj Yoga - 8.6.1983
22
i-
The Beginnings (Viena) - 5.6.1983
23
ii-
26
Mother Dear Mother
ili-
An Experience - May-1982
28
iv-
30
Sahaja Of Physics, Part- I (7.7.1983)
V-
Installation Of Shri Ganesha
33
vi-
Mother's Love (A Poem)
34
vii-
Mother's Advice To Sahaja Mothers
35
ix-
The Memories Of The Divine Mother
38
DHARMA
VAHSIA
UNIVERSA
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-3.txt 
 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZzE
Published by
Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 108, Chandragupt Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411029
Printed by
Krishna Printer & Designer
Tri Nagar, Delhi-35
Mob.: 9868545679
For Subscription Please Write to:
Shri G.L. Agrawal
Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
222, Desh Bandhu Apartments
Kalkaji, New Delhi-110019
Tel.No.: 011-26422054, 26216654
Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles, Miracle Photographs etc. to:
Shri O.P. Chandna
G-11 (463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110 034
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Sir CP Srivastava addresses the Burwood
builders, architects and decorators
(20, Jaпиary-2006)
Tonight members of the Sydney collective
associated with the renovations of the Burwood
relaxing and is in the best health he has seen for
sometime, it is all quite remarkable. Nothing
pleases us more than to see Her so well and at
Ashram gathered to meet with Sir CP who
wished to thank them for all that has been done
peace.
in preparing their home. What began as a small
Sir CP then explained to us that since he
gathering began to swell as architects, builders,
has been here an idea has come to him which
engineers, artists, interior designers and an amy
he would like to share with us, the artistry and
of labourers assembled in the former meditation
room which is now serving as their extended
dedication of the work here has led him to
explore an idea he would like us all to
living room.
contemplate.
Sir CP entered the room and you could feel
Recently the arrangements surrounding the
a sense of excitement, joy, and bliss. Although
final acquisition of the house where Shri Mataji
those associated with the building were present,
took Her birth at Chindwara has been finalised
it felt as if all the collective were there.
and this spiritually unique and significant home
isnowin Sahaja hands. The first and immediate
task is to stablise, strengthen, and reinforce the
Sir CP began while speaking of the family's
experiences within their home said that
sometimes words are incapable of expressing
home to ensure its long term viability. Then the
home should be restored to its former glory
experiences and what has been achieved, well
it was like being in heaven on earth, the Yogis
have done a remarkable joband in such a short
within the keeping of the original design and
vision. Perhaps the internal configuration may
accommodate a meditation space, or perhaps
space of time. It is miraculous, they have
worked so hard, it is all the power of love and
ameditation facility could be added adjacent
to the building.
She is the source of that love, it is only because
of the love of Our Mother that all things are
The vision that Sir CP proposed is that the
possible.
Chindwara home will become one of the sites
Sir CP then said that the good news is that
which will become a focus for Yogis dedication
to their Mother; that at least once in a Yogis
since Our Mother's arrival She has been resting,
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Issue:5 & 6-2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
place befitting the elevated purpose of
facilitating the Yogis undertaking this pilgrimage,
a place of worship, introspection, meditation,
further exploring Our Mother's teachings while
coming to gether in collectivity, peace and
lifetime they may visit the birthplace of their
Mother, a Sahaja pilgrimage and to
accommodate the Yogis a large multipurpose
Ashram complex capable of accommodating
many Yogis be undertaken by the world Sahaja
collective and be constructed.
harmony.
Over the next few days we will tran-
scribe Sir CP's talk so the Sahaja collective
can see this great vision realise through Sir CP's
own words.
Sufficient land to construct a bilding of
this scale may need to be founda few kilometers
from the Chindwara birth place to allow space
enough for the project.
Sincerely
Chris
The great task laid before all Sahaja
Yogis is to propose a design of an Ashram asa
(on behalf of the Australian Council)
(Internet Version)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Shri Krishna Puja Celebrations
(A report from the amazing weekend)
Shri Krishna Puja, 2005 Parsippany, New Jersev. USA, 26-28 August
We came from all over the world to worship our Holy Mother as Lord Shri Krishna. The
atmosphere in the hotel, with approx. 1,000 Sahaja Yogis in attendance, was soft and kind. Friends
old and new had small gifts for each other. The integration of the complete Vishuddhi felt like a
grand celebration, as North, South and Central American yogis met and embraced.
The events ofthe weekend-the morning meditations, the queues for the meals-were all
the best experiences we had ever had. We settled into a feeling of complete contentment and well-
being. Yuva Shakti who had stayed up all night each night enjoying the friendship of other Yu a
Shakti, singing and playing traditional games, felt like the rest of us, on the top of the world.
Love and regards
On behalfof Singapore Collective
Vikas
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Rakhi Celebrations
asked about each artist as they came forward
with their humble offerings. Later, prasad was
offered, Shri Mataji vibrated it and then tasted
a piece. These 54 minutes of pure, concentrated
bliss showed us a possible future style of "being
with" Shri Mataji-our Mother seated in Her own
house and the world transported to Her feet
Saturday afternoon featured the rakhi ceremony.
The ballroom filled with movement, colour and
love as sisters sought out dear brothers to tie
with the sacred thread of purity and devotion.
Shri Krishna Himself choreographed a circle of
brothers who danced around a circle of sisters
while musicians played on the stage.
via remote boradcast.
The Friday and Saturday entertainment evenings
brought together talents young and old from
around the world. The Saturday night
entertainment program was delightful. The night
was young and so was our first performer :
Shraddha Joshi, four years of age, sang a stanza
of Vande Mataram. With her sweet voice and
The marriage announcements took place
Saturday evening. Ourapplause was thunderous
as each shy yogi and shy yogini sat side-by-
Sside on the stage. Feeling their surrender and
devotion, tears welled up in some of our eyes.
The Puja began Sunday eveing as the room filled
with the bhajan, Namami Shri Ganaraja Dayal
and we prayed that Shri Ganesha would be
seated and grant us permission to do His
Mother's puja. Then we sang Hey Nirmala Ma,
Sitting in the Heart of the Universe, and Ranga
empeccable pronounciation, our hearts melted.
Ashish Pradhan, the moderator of the
Entertainment program, asked all the yogis to
stand in honourofthe song. The next performer,
Shaswati Chipdey, not yet 10 years old, showed
incredible power and range as she sang "The
colours of the Wind" from the movie
Pocahontas. A few minutes later, we watched
Bal Krishna gather his friends to reach, via a
human pyramid, a pot of butter which hung from
the ceiling of the ballroom. When the contents
were spilled and then thrown into the delighted
audience, the butter was in fact small chocolates.
DeJhini.
At 9:45 p.m. it was announced that Shri Mataji
had arrived at the Hotel and was in Her room,
taking tea and receiving the baskets of Lakshmi
gifts. We sang Hey Adi Ma Hey Antima - "Oh
Etenal Mother, You have given us whatever we
desired" and Jogawa. During Jogawa Shri
Mataji entered the ballroom, and the beginning
of Her playful and astounding Rasa Leela
became evident. Twenty years earlier, She
would move so quickly through airport lounges
that we had to jog to keep up. This puja, Shri
Mataji, even in a wheelchair, was on the stage
before the Yuva Shakti could get the curtain
pulled across the front of the stage.
The highlight was on Saturday night when,
through the power of the Virata and
communication, a live entertainment program
was web-casted from Shri Mataji's living room
to the Hotel ballroom and to rest of world. There
was deep silence and tears of joy as yogis were
able to be in presence of Shri Mataji on this
night of enjoyment. During the event Shri Mataji
We sang our welcome-Swagata Agata
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-8.txt 
 - 2006
Issue: 5 & 6
8
The Divine Cool Breeze
began to sing, and we filled the ballroom with
Apani Panaha Me Hame Rakhana - "Always
keep us in the shade of Your compassion." The
air filled with the words and melodies of
Vrindavani Venu. Amazing Grace, and Hey
Givinda Hey Gopala.
Swagatam. Then a chorus sang "God Bless
America" Eduardo formally welcomed Adi
Shakti Shri Mataji from "Your loving children
from the three Americas"
After performing Ganesha puja and Devi puja,
Shri Krishna Puja followed.. Asa flute and staff
were offered, we sang, "Krishna Govinda."
Then there was Aarti, the three great mantras,
and we collectively did pranam to the deity
seated before us.
At 11:38 p.m. Shri Mataji returned. There was
a huge applause as Yogis got so thrilled to see
Shri Mataji again. After we stood in silence to
greet Her., we resumed singing "Hey Govinda
Hey Gopala." Among the beautiful gifts there
were several peacocks, from China, South
Africa and Austria.
The decorations were removed, and our dear
Holy Mother sat before us. She permitted Her
children to express their gratitude and an
international gift was presented, followed by
other gifts from yogis from all the continents.
11.00 p.m. came and went, and still Our Mother
sat with us. The attention in the ballroom was at
Sahasrara, silent. It was very emotional when
two representatives of the Lakota Nation, from
the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota,
presented their gifts.
Speaking for the world collective, Eduardo said,
as the evening drew to a close, "We thank You
for Your love and patience," and we all offered
pranam to Our Holy Mother. Then sang
Vrindavani Venu to Her. At 8 minutes past
midnight, the curtain was drawn, and Shri Mataji
left the ballroom to return to Her house.
We sat for a full fifteen minutes in complete
silence. We had all entered a pure witness state,
absorbing the vibrations. Sometime around three
in the morning, after all the prasad, gifts, and
dancing, the Shri Krishna Puja ended with the
three great mantras and a silent meditation.
At 11:12 p.m. it was announced that there would
be a short break, and "SHRI MATAJI WILL
BE COMING BACK." There was one minute
of profound silence, and then the musicians
(Internet Version)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Nine Nights of Navaratri at Palam Vihar
Gurgaon (Oct. - 2005)
Dear Brothers and Sisters
Shri Mataji has blessed us all by accepting our worship and offering on the occassion of Navaratri.
Please enjoy the pictures below from the various days during Navaratri.
Shri Mataji vibrated the Water and Barley
for the camp office at upcoming Navaratri
Puja site. Shri Mataji very kindly blessed
us by accepting the Garland, Sweets and a
small Puja Saree. She looked very happy
and gave her blessing for all Her children.
Jai Shri Mataji
Gurgaon Collectivity
Shri Mataji has blessed us all by accepting our worship and offering on the occassion of Navaratri
Given below are a couple of photographs of Her Lotus Feet:
Day Nine
Day Six
Musical Evenings with Shri Mataji-14th and 15th October, Gurgaon
Two musical evenings were held in the Divine presence of H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi on the
14th and 15th Oct. 2005 at Palam Vihar, Gurgaon. The program started at 10:00 pm on the 14th,
with bhajans sung by the Yuva Shakti working at Palam Vihar and after that there was a program
from Nirmal Sangeet Sarita.
On the 15th, the program started around 10:30 p.m. There was a flute recital by the renowned
flutist Pandit Rajendra Prasanna followed by Sufi bhajans sung by yogis.
Jai Shri Mataji
Gurgaon Collectivity & SITA Team
(Internet Version)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Excerpt from the speech of Sir. CP (Papaji) in his address
to Sahaja Yogis on the eve of Navratri Puja
(15th October, 2005 Gurgaon, India)
And for me it's a wonderful opportunity to be
with you here today, and I thank you for allowing
me to say a few words.
sometime, some problems with Her may arise.
But I want to assure you, each one of you and
all of you that the best possible care has been
taken and will continue to be taken. She has
Let me first tell you that before coming here, I
took the permission of your holy Mother to be
with you here this evening, because I seldom
leave Her aside. She was happy to grant me
Her
been seen by the best doctors in India, In Italy,
in UK and in America. And Her treatment is
being supervised by team of Sajaha Yogi
doctors, one of them is always available round
the clock. So, all the possible arrangement has
been made and I am delighted to be able to tell
you that today She is much better than what
She was two years ago.
the permission. She asked me to convey
love and blessings for you all. She also told me
to inform you that She will be here in person
tomorrow eveing for the Puja. I know that all
of you would have been deeply concerned
about Her health. I do not know why the
almighty has decided to incarnate on this earth
in Human Fom. But that is Almighty's decision.
One year ago She decided that She has
already for 30 to 35 years done Her best to
create the message of Sahaja Yoga and to
spread it. As you know She has travelled all
over the world by plane, by helicopter, by train,
by bus, on foot, in bullock carts and She has
And incarnations who come in human form are
subject to usual human infirmities. She is an
incarnation, but She is the same and therefore,
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Issue: 5 & 6- 2006
11
The Divine Cool Breeze
sent from here to the world?
been all over the world, cities and villages etc.
and She has created a world wide fraternity of
Şahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis. She felt that
after She crossed the age of 80, it was the time
Now dear Sahaja Yogis, Sahaja Yoginis, there
is a task before us, and the task is to preserve
her message of Sahaja Yoga. That message is
contained in numerous audio cassettes, video
cassettes and so on. And the first responsibility
which we all have in all parts of the world is to
make sure that what ever She has said, where
ever She has said, all that should be preserved
in such a form that it becomes the lasting wealth
in Sahaja Yoga. And that is the effort which is
being made in all parts of the world.
for Her to sit back and ask Her children that
yourselves to take over the responsibility of
spreading Sahaja Yoga further. You don't have
to create Sahaja Yoga. She has done it. But,
the message has to be spread and She came to
the conclusion that while, She will be sitting there
and She will be the source of inspiration, the
Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis should take
up the responsibility for spreading Her message
throughout the world. And therefore, She
decided that this responsibility should be
performed collectively, not by individual leaders,
but by a collective group every where, all over
the world in every country in every city. So
collective leadership is Her wish and Her desire.
And in effect collective leadership means that
all of you sitting here are involved in that process.
The whole Sahaja collectivity has now been
given the responsibility of spreading Her
message of Sahaja Yoga.
Following Her desire of collective leadership,
She has created a World Council and She has
created collective leadership in number of
countries and that movement is on. And now,
individual leaders will be replaced by collective
leaders. And they are performing the task in a
very very joyous and combined manner.
In India also new Trust have been established
for the same kind of work namely for the
collective Leadership. And I am happy to be
able to tell you that trust has started working.
And already thre is one very big achievement
which...That is
Nirmala Devi in Chhindwara, that house has
been acquired by the Trust and it will become
the permanent shrine for Sahaja Yogis all over
the world. That shrine will be renovated in order
I want to make one proposal before you. I want
to make a submission. I hope you will agree
with me, I have no doubt you would, as far as
Sahaja Yoga is concerned, there is only One
Creator...Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi.. And
there is only one Leader that is Shrimati
Mataji Nirmala Devi.
... the birthplace of Shri Mataji
to ensure its permanence. And the Trust
proposes to have another building where visiting
Sahaja Yogis both from India and from foreign
countries could go to stay, when they go to pay
their homage to that shrine. And the land is
proposed to be acquired soon, where a building
will be constructed, so that any of you or any
And Irequest you, if you agree to endorse ny
words when I say that, "She is today the sole
leader in Sahaja Yoga and She will always..
always remain the sole leader in Saakar
or Nirakaar form". Do I take it that you all
agree and you would like this message to be
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-12.txt 
 12
Issue: 5 & 6- 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
the idea of oneness and there must be love.
She went on to say something very beautiful
and She said that "the love of a Sahaja Yogi
for a Sahaja Yogi has to be or is purer than
other from any parts of India or the world can
go there. It will now become really one of the
most holy places or perhaps the most holy place
for all Sahaja Yogis of the world.
the love of a mother for her child".
We will go on all together, and I invite you all,
each one of you to join in that effort to propagate
individually, group wise, collective wise the
message of Sahaja Yoga which your Mother has
given to you.
I beg of you to bear these words in your mind,
in your heart and to practice them. How
beautiful would the world be if you all loved
each other the same way in the pure fom
without the slightest consideration for the colour
of the skin or the language you speak or
whateverelse. That is what Sahaja Yoga means
and thatis what Sahaja Yoga world family should
Before Iconclude, I want to invite your attention
to two other facts. The first is, that before She
stopped making speeches, She made two of
be.
them in Cabella. In one of them She said "all
Sahaja Yogis are one, and the same. There
I
is no one larger, on one smaller, no one
bigger. Every person, every Sahaja Yogi if
he is a Sahaja Yogi or she is a Sahaja Yogini
is equal". And that is what I want you to feel
within yourselves. You are all equal to each other.
There is no one superior and no one inferior. A
I want to close now. But, I want to close after,
thanking you all for giving this chance to speak
here. All can assure you is, you Mother will
be looked after most humbly and respectfully
by me and all other who are with Her as if you
all are present. Your eyes are there and you'll
see that everyone does the very best to look
after... She looks after Herself. But we are there
Sahaja Yogi is an ideal person.
to serve Her and that is our first duty. As far as
IamconcernedI am living only for that purpose.
I am 85 years now. very old already. but, I
don't want to go, because I want to look after
Her. Thank you very much.
And the other thing She said was "Sahaja Yogis
must love each other". They should make no
distinction between a person speaking one
language or professing some other language or
religion whatever. Because, once you are a
Sahaja Yogi, you are a Sahaja Yogi. That was
(Internet Version)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Navaratri Puja, Gurgaon, India
16 Oct.-2005 (A Report)
be worthy of being present in Your Holy
presence to ofer our Pujas at Your Holy Lotus
Feet.
Dear Brothers and Sisters,
We are happy to announce with a deep sense
of gratitude to our beloved Mother Shri Mataji
on 16th October, we the world collective were
blessed to offer our Sakshat Puja at Her Holy
Lotus Feet in Her Holy presence in Gurgaon
Stadium, Delhi., India. Shri Mataji blessed us
and accepted the Puja.
The Puja started at seven thirty in the evening
with the Three Mahamantras. Then the Italian
composed Audio visual on theme of "tour of
love and compassion with Mother" was on
display. It was simply remarkable and
breathtaking. The events and clippings are
bouquet of excerpts from the Italian tour of
Shri Mataji with Her children. The flow of love
and Compassion with expression of Mother,
leaves one with nothing, but a sense of oneness.
Probably, it enhances the expression of the Left
heart, where She resides.
There was simplicity in the Stage decoration.
The backdrop had an expression of the just
divine abode of Shri Durga Mata with face of
Shri Mataji in Her Shri Durga Form holding
various weapons as Mahishasur Mardini.
Mother we are grateful to You as Your advent
on earth at this period of time has washed our
sins and vices from heart and helped us to
ascend and recognise Your true Form. You are
verily the Mother of Mothers in us. Please
continue showering Your blessings upon us to
It seemed that divinity played all means to
dissolve the collective spirit into fountain of love
springing from the never-ending reservoir of
compassion from Mother through the gathering
of twenty thousand collectivity across the globe.
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Issue: 5 & 6- 2006
14
The Divine Cool Breeze
Swagatam. Hum saba karte Swagatam. She
looked radiant as ever. Her face shining like a
It was as if the heart of the Virata was
expressing, quite evident from is' decoration in
the stadium with beautiful expressive lightings
to its fragrance and the soft chiling grass,
accentuated with the presence of Shri
Chandrama (Moon) Sakshat along with us in
that starry night. Yet, the soft but thick and
beautiful carpets laid on the Mother earth in
three fourth of the capacity of the stadium on
the other hand gave warmth to the rest. It was
a milieu that we witnessed as never before.
thousand Suns.
We stood for long even after the welcome. It
was quite a moment when the prayer was read
in Hindi followed by English while we stood in
silence. It was a plain and simple prayer,
powerful as never pronounced, with deeper
resolutions and vows to the Shri Adi Shakti in
her Shri Mahakali Form. To seek salvage from
the demonic attacks in her Mahishasur Mardini
The blessings were tangibly felt as if it were
melting down upon us through the chill of the
vibrations on one hand and the chilly moonlight
on the other.
Form. Pleasing the Devi and praying to become
Her effective instrument with our dedication to
the cause to spreading Her message to the
farthest comer ofthe Earth in Her Shri Adi Shakti
Form. We continued standing in silence, while
the announcement for singing the prayer song..
Binati Suniye Adi Shakti Meri (Kindly listen to
Finally, came yet another shower of vibrations
through the bhajans rendered by the musical
choir. A series of popular bhajans in praise of
the Devi was rendered. At quarter to ten the
beating the drums and lighting of the fire
crackers announced the Holy arrival of our
Mother. It was indeed a breathtaking moment
after such a imploding video show, the added
flavor of the explosion of the fire crackers high
up in the sky were only an added flavor that
sent the myriad sparkles of splintery lights spring
out in form of vibrations.
our prayers O Adi Shakti)... "Mother Please
accept our Navaratri Puja and Prayers at Your
Holy Lotus Feet". It seemed we stood for ages
and at last there was a gesture for sitting down.
At ten in the night, the little Ganeshas came up
in queue to offer flowers at Her Holy Lotus Feet
with Hemja Sutam Bhaje... Thereafter, at
quarter past ten the Shringar started with Shri
Jagadamba Ayi Re Meri Nirmala Ma..Jago
Savera Aya Hai and concluded by Vishwa
Vandita Nirmala Mata.... Shringar was
So were the excitement and the welcome heart
beats within us, to see Mother after such a long
spell. As the fountain of light sparkles sprayed
high up in air and dissolved into thin ether, the
yearning to receive Mother within increased as
the love inside our heart dissolved like icing,
paving her seat within our Spirit.
complete at forty past ten. We witnessed Shri
Durga in Her Shri Mataji form resplendent with
her armours and Devi Roop. Following was the
Arti that was sung at eleven by all the National
Leaders.
It was a spectacular event as Mother
complacently sat on the throne looking deep
into us. We sang in joy Swagat Agat
The moon overhead bears the witness to this
amazing meditative moment and the outpour
of the blessing that was emanating from Shri
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Issue: 5 & 6 - 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
15
Mataji on this night of sixteenth. Our beloved
Mother looked radiant..radiant and radiant as
Mataji left behind a trail of virbrations for Her
children to enjoy.
ever and was keenly and poignantly looking
deep into the Spirit of the collective.
The vibrations were not confined at this state
only, Mahaprasad were served in an unique
fashion. There were two surprise gifts awaiting
for the yogis who attended the Puja. Two
booklets were compiled as gift and distributed
to the 15 thousand Yogis attending the Puja that
night. One compilation was entitled "Navratri
Puja" covering the Devi Kavach and the other
"Praise to Devi". While the other one wasa rare
It was after a long spell that we were fortunate
enough to witness Mother spending long spell
to receive the series of intenational gifts. Mother
seemed very pleased and even was seen
commenting on some yogis who brought gifts.
As the time matured the Devi looked more and
more radiant and full of compassion towards
Her children.
compilation that treasures the CV of Sir CP
(Chandrika Prasad Srivastava, KCMG, IAS
Suddenly the video display on the LCD screen(Retd).
froze, and the stage curtains were drawn to
announce the time for departure of our Holy Shri Mataji, we are grateful to you for Your Holy
Mother. There was a silence. The heart and eyes blessings of the evening and accepting our
were probably eager, or may be were yearning collective prayer to accept the Puja at Your Holy
to prolong the Holy darshan which came to a Lotus Feet. We bow to You again and again.
close in an hour episode. But the traits of Sitting in the Heart of the Universe, we know
vibrations were like jets. With the gradual Your love is flowing through us, Shri Mataji we
humming notes of Shri Mataji.Mataji. Your love you.
face shines like thousand Suns... broke the
Jai Shri Mataji
India
(Internet Version)
silence and the stillness of the night and Shri
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Ekadash Rudra Puja
New York City, 17 th September - 1983
Pravachan Of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
So today is a day, according to the Indian
calendar, called as Parivartini Ekadashi. Now,
today is the 11th day of the moon. 11th day is
Ekadsha. Also, in Sahaja Yoga you know about
Ekadasha Rudra, which is here (forehead),
which will ultimately destroy all those things
which are not required anymore. That is
Ekadasha here, that is the 11th. But today is a
special day, Where we are going to use the
power of Ekadasha to do the
transformation. It is not for destruction but
the power called "Samhara Shakti" by which
he kills people. So before killing them and
finishing them off, in the compassion of your
Mother, we have to first try to transform them.
If they cannot be transformed then its alright,
then let Ekadasha take over. So these 11 very
great destructive powers will be used by the
Kalki, the One who is going to manifest on a
white horse. Before that, today is a very great
day that these powers we are going to use for
transformation.
for transformation.
Now how can destructive powers be used for
transformation? First of all, when people know
that there are destructive powers manifesting,
they start fearing. They get afraid. That we'll be
destroyed, so we must take to God. That's one
of the ways. Secondly, if a person comes to
know about any destructive disease like cancer,
he wants to find out a method. And there is no
method available on a human level. So then he
thinks of God and wants to come nearer to God.
The fear brings him closer to God. He depends
on God more than on his rationality, than on his
ego, or superego. And he wants to depend on
God's powers to cure him or to save him from
this destruction. Because he is now on the brink
of destruction, as soon as cancer is set in he
knows that there's no end to it and he has to be
destroyed. So, this is another way people take
to transformation, change their attitudes, change
their value systems.
Is such a day to be here in New York where
we use the destructive powers for the
transformation of the universe. So it's a very
great day today that we are going to transform
people by the manifestation of the Ekadasha's
powers. And they are 11 placed over your
forehead here and you know how they work
out. So that these 10 come out of the destructive
powers of the Void. Void has got 10 destructive
powers also. Out of those 10 the destructive
part settles down here. So when a person is on
his destruction, say for example a cancer has
set in, then you might feel a throb, here at the
apex of your Void, the throb. And it doesn't
logically mean that if there'sa throb there's a
cancer, but if there's a cancer there'll be a throb
in here going on. That means the force of life is
trying to push it. But the obstruction there starts
accumulation on both sides and in the centre is
the centre of Vishuddhi, of the Virata. Shri
Krishna has become the Virata, the Great
Primordial Being.
I've known of many husbands and wives who
got cancer and their counterparts became very
mild, gentle, kindly, romantic. They tried to give
all the love, all the protection, all the good things
th
So this is the 11
power of destruction. He has
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Issue: 5 & 6- 2006
17
The Divine Cool Breeze
very collective person also you might get a blob
here. So you might get all the thing filled up with
your ego, superego and this Virata centre again
blown up in a way that a person develops a
face like a monster sometimes! This portion
becomes too big, thick, jutting out. There's a
character I've seen like that, I think it is
Frankenstein or someone, Is it? Frankenstein;
to a person who is going to die now of
Ekadasha. So a kind of a transforming
temperament starts coming in a man that he sees
that a person with whom he has lived all his life
is now going to be no more. So a kind of
beautiful feeling towards the person, of giving
whatever you have beautiful within you, starts,
And that's how people develop a new kind of
personality which was never apparent before.
So all harshness drops out. And all the
sweetness starts pouring in. So the compassion
in a man is awakened by which he gets
yes, that has come from the Unconscious;
Frankenstein character. Is all this is swollen up,
jutting out, and this place like that. That's really
the one that happens to human bcings when he
becomes a devil himself.
transformed.
Many people who lost their relations, kith and
kin, become much more gentle, kinder, because
Ekadasha has expressed its awe. And also
another kind ofa fear comes into the mind of
So this is how the Ekadasha works within us,
to destroy our negativity within us, In India, so
many people fast on this day, for atonement, on
Il day is very common : "You must do
Ekadashi". All the Hindus and all these people
do Ekadashi. That is, the 11" day they don't
eat anything at all. But you shouldn't do it after
the Advent of your Mother, because, I'm the
Ekadasha Myself! So why should you do it now
when I've corme? It was done when I was not
here, just to call me, so now I'm back here, you
need not do this anymore, the penance of
Ekadesha. But you have to be careful.
the people, "that tomorrow this can happen to
me also! SoImust do something about it." So
at this time Sahaja Yoga helps them a lot. They
come to Sahaja Yoga because such an
emergency is created within themselves and thLs
they are thrust for their transfomation to Sahaja
Yoga
th
But there's another subtler way that this
destructive force helps: by destroyîng ail that is
negative within us. Because unless and until that
negative is destroyed within us, we cannot
become people who can enter into the kingdom
of God. We have our ego, we have our super
ego and both can be represented here. When
you have your ego very much great ego, then
you'll find a big blob-like ego coming out on left
side, a very big one, here. Or if you have a
super-ego you can see another big thingjutting
out on the brain on the right side. So on both
the sides you might get both the things if both
the sympathetic are overactive. If you are not a
Now Ekadasha comes, as I told you, from
the Void. So firstly, it comes when you
accept someone as your guru, say, who are
false, who are anti-God, anti-Christ. So you
developakind ofa thickness on right side, it is
the person who you are worshipping as a guru,
respecting as a guru; who is a guru to you who
is not really a guru, so you develop a superego
which shows on this (right) side, this part. Now
the other side of'it shows when a person says
"I'm my own guru, I'm practising my own
meditation. I've nothing to do with anybody's
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Issue: 5 & 6 -2006
18
The Divine Cool Breeze
guidance, I'm quite alright as I am" - Such a
person develops the left half. So you have (left)
half developed because of that, and this half
developed because of the superego that you
get from these false and fake gurus. Now what
happens sometimes that when you get involved
into this kind of superego behaviour, at that time,
it so happens that you might take over from there
and start using it for your ego. That's the worst
time for it. At that time what you do is to act
like the devils yourself. And once you start doing
that, your Ekadasha is completely finished. And
then I don't think it's easy to get rid of it. It's
very difficult. Like if it is one-sided it's much
easier.
is used, in some fruits nothing is used, a very
little growth comes out as fruit and becomes a
fruit while the flowers are there. So in us also
whatever becomes Spirit, remains. The rest
drops out. And that is what it is when we call it
the Ekadasha which brings forth the
transformation. And one has to understand we
have to drop out many things.
Some people I've seen they say : "What's
wrong? I'm smoking, still my vibrations are
there". Some say, "What's wrong? I'm drinking,
still my vibrations are there. I'm going to this
guru, still my vibrations are there, I'm having
the same type oflicentious life, still my vibrations
are there." But suddenly they stop, and you find
you're out of the bounds. You're thrown OUT
completely. But you do not feel how you're
thrown out. Gradually you find, like a tangent
you go out. And so one has to be careful about
it. So within us lies a force which is centrifugal
and a force that is centripetal. So Ekadsha's
force is centrfugal, by which you are thrown
out. Sahaja Yoga doesn't fall onto anybody's
feet. Doesn't request anyone, doesn't flatter
апyone. If yoои want to be there you have
to be postively there and if you don't want
to be there it throws you much faster than
what you want. That's the trouble with
Sahaja Yoga is and this is the loophole of
the Sahaja Yoga which I have to tell
as a Mother that it's very anxious to throw
you out. I'll tell you when Christine-just now
she told me -got engaged to Micheal, half of
them were thrown out.
So today is the day which is called as the
Ekadashi which is going to bring the
transformation. When you are transformed, so
many things are automatically destroyed within
you. As you can see very clearly that all your
misidentifications drop out. Themisidentification
that Tm an American, I am a Christian or I am a
Jew,I'm this,l'am That- all these false
misidentifications drop out and you become a
naked human being; first of all you are a Human
Being. And then a super human being, without
the ego, without the ego. So your ego is
destroyed, your superego is destroyed, your
conditionings are destroyed and all your false
ideas about knowledge are destroyed. So what
you
s oti
remains and emerges out is the reality. Now see
when a flower becomes the fruit, everything
practically drops out of the flower, we can say.
Like the calyx is dropped out, then the petals
are dropped out and then the epicalyx is there,
that is also dropped out. But what remains is
the seed, actually if you see. Around the seed
all these things developed and the fruit remains,
the rest of it drops out. In some fruits some part
Because they had a conception that you must
have a romance before marriage. Without a
romance, if you have a marriage, then there
should be no marriage. I don't know on what
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-19.txt 
 19
Issue: 5 & 6-2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
beleamed from them as far as that is concemed.
We can learn many other things, for example
we can learn how to operate a camera. But to
operate a marriage is better you learn from
Indians. They have a very solid system of
marriage. First of all the way they are trained
from childhood how to make a marriage
successful, sucha lot of importance is given.
Then without the horoscope we'll not marry,
without the auspicious day they won't marry.
Everything they work out in such details so that
the marriage cannot fizzle out. Moreover it is
worked in stich a collective way.
conception it is based. But if you have the
romance before the marriage, what's the fun of
having the marriage? I mean it's like -if you
have to give somebody a present, you hide it,
you see; keep it to that date, and give the surprise
to the children! In the same way if you have the
romance already done, what's the marriage?
What's the celebration for? It's absolutely
illogical. There is no romance in such cases.
Actually you have seen that after the romance,
the marriage and then the divorce. It's always
like that. Because you become stale, and you
find that the romance you had before marriage
was something, a fantastic fantasy that has
dropped out, and now after marriage there is
nothing left to enjoy, so you are fed up and next
month you are now in the divorce court. But
the marriages that skip this without the romance
kept all reserve for a particular day. Just for
that day when you are going to have the real
romance, and real feeling of oneness, everything.
In India it's a very big thing, you see, the first
night of the married people. And that's why your
marriages are lost.
For example, supposing my husband wants to
trouble me. Say for example. So the sister of
my husband will take him to task. Everybody
can interfere if they try to do anything against
the marriage. Everyone in the family will be after
the person who tries to break the marriage. And
so everyone knows that I'll be left high and dry,
you see, if I have a divorce. Nobody has place
in the society. But in England when we went
first we were shocked! They had no shame
about this, they said, "I'm already divorced
thrice and this is the fourth woman I'm living
with." So shocking for us. Oh God! To us a
divorce means worse than leprosis! "Why are
you divorced? What's the problem? How can
you be divorced? Such an auspicious thing is
the marriage! How can you do it, is such a big
fall!" And that's how it works out. And in no
You know -Iwould say I'm an old woman of
60 years, my husband is 63 years and you can
see how romantic he is still. You see the romance
never finishes. Because it startson the auspicious
day with the sanction of the collectivity,
everybody taking interest in that romance. It is
such a big thing to be married, all the people
enjoying the marriage, and enjoying. So now
this kind of thing when happens to the people
who are western people think romance is very
important. But I don't think one can learn
anything from the marriage system of the western
people. Because all their marriage systems
absolutely dwindle down. There is nothing to
way we are less than you people as marriage
because we can produce much more children
than you. And children only want to be born in
India not anywhere else. You'd be surprised.
That's the problem we are facing.
Our populationproblem comes from the point
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Issue: 5 & 6 -2006
20
The Divine Cool Breeze
that the marriages are so successful, the people
are so peaceful that children hate to be born in
nightmares of New York. Naturally, because
you don't know where will be the mother
tomorrow, where will be the father. Now we
are blamed for a high rate of fertility, but what
to do? Children don't listen, they don't want to
go to all such places where there's no stabiity
for them to exist Especially the realised children,
ifthey are of a very high quality, they do; Imean,
they have to be like devils to get into this thing
so they may try. Or maybe real devils- to take
advantage of it. But normally, people who want
peace in life, who want joy in life, and want the
love of their parents, want to be bom in India.
And that's why recently we find that India is
growing so fastin population that we don't know
what to do. So this marriage system came in,
which shocked them because they couldn't
understand, there has to be a romance, and this
would sort of give an idea of postponed nature,
orsomething bragging, or something big so that
it may go wrong. When they say touch wood,
this is the wood. You say touch, there.
So we are quite conscious of this force building
within us. And now we have to be conscious
that this force is going to transform the universE.
So today we are going to pray that this force
has to transfornm America through its capacity
to frighten people so that they come to Sahaja
Yoga. Because when things have reached this
stage of ego, then when people say "What's
wrong?"-Like in England when I started talking
first, they said this is Victorian wornan, out of
date, absolutely useless. I said alright, I don't
say anything. But you'll have such diseases that
you'll have to comne back. That was the time
they pass the law that homosexuality should be
allowed, permissiveness shouldbeallowed, and
all these things should be allowed.
Eund that.
And now you have A.I.D.S. You have AIDS
now here already operating. Now the AIDS has
given the fear of Ekadasha. Now have it!
What's wrong! What about that? So this awe
and this fear is very important. Is an extremely
important thing that you must have the awe and
the fear that GodisAlmighty, andwe are nothing
before him. Here we have to remember that
Now the more understanding of Ekadasha that
should be there that we should not allow it
to he built within us in any way, because
these are self-destroying things. It starts
with doubting. When you start doubting
Sahaja Yoga, the build-up starts. And the
doubting starts building up throughout the
"medha" - is the plate here, you see. And it can
become a big plate here. Like today I saw that
lady saying touch wood, you see touch wood
mean this wood. Touch wood means there
should be no wood in here any more, you see.
we are part and parcel of that God, and that
we have to awaken ourselves to the
consciousness that He is the Whole and we have
become one with the whole. That's how we are
going to overcome our Ekadasha.
Or you can say touch stone. If you say
something like bragging you can say no, no,
touch wood. I am not menning that. People are
quite conscious, unconsciously they say, but they
are quite consoious not to say something that
So today I bless you all with the power of
Ekadasha which is going to transform. May God
bless you all, in your work whichyou are trying
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-21.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 5 & 6 - 2006
21
to do for the good of Americans. It is a
responsibility to save America. You know it is
the Vishuddhi chakra and all the responsibility
of Sahaja Yoga rests on Vishuddhi chakra. So
how important it is that this transformation is to
take place. Unless and until the transformation
comes in, you will see it will not work out. You
cannot talk to people, you cannot communicate
with them. So you must pray that
transformation process must start, must trigger,
and must gallop, and must go on spreading like
wildfire. This should be your prayer today.
May God bless you.
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Place of Money in Sahaja Yoga
our Mother is divine, means, is the Lakshmi,
the source of all well being, is the Power of God
Almighty. Then why should we question?
Shri Mataji has many times said that God does
not understand money. This means the money
is human invention, an artifice, a means of
tricking reality. What are Sahaja Yogis to do
with such poisonous stuff? Does it mean we
should get rid of it as quickly as possible? Or
give it to someone else (our Guru perhaps)? Or
pretend we haven't got any with us? What to
do, is the problem.
Still some people will have hankering, that the
money should go to a similar purpose to the
one for which it was collected. For them, money
was to be used in a particular way. It was to
reach a particular audience with which they are
identified. But suppose our Mother wants the
money to pay for something else? What is
wrong?
Many people feel that the sensible thing to do
with money is to live a normal life and spend
only what is spare for Sahaja Yoga. They also
feel that what is spent should be, at least partly,
ünder their control and approval. Having parted
with it, they still do not want to let go. These
basic assumptions must be challenged.
One thing we must understand. If we are petty
about money and its use, we will remain petty-
hearted people. Not only our Nabhi chakra will
remain closed but our heart also will be tight
like a stone. The whole creation has to glorify
the Lord. Not just our little puddle. Like the
frog in the well who thought he had found the
ocean, we croak our songs of joy, little realizing
that our voice is echoing in a deep pit which we
have dug ourselves. Let us climb up and up until
we can see over the edge of our own
prejudices. And then we may not mind so much
helping the one who goes from well to well,
lowering a light downona long rope to illuminate
the little wicks that are trapped at the bottom.
We may even want to help in the process.
Money is incidental to life. It is not the measure
of life's value, nor is it the means of enhancing
that value. This should be understood. By itself
money cannot buy God. Love can, but money
cannot. Love has not monetary value, it has no
buying power, but definitely it can turn God's
heart. Therefore money should be regarded as
incidental to our purposes. If God does not want
to filfull our proposes our money will not get
used to way we want, but God may indicate
another use. Why should we get upset?
This parable may help us to understand the
purpose of money in Sahaja Yoga. It is to be
spentinorder to increase the light level. Whether
the light is in Spain or Peru, makes no difference
to the ultimate purpose, which is to light all the
wicks. Wherever the wicks are readiest, is the
easiest to light more. Wherever the darkness is
thickest, is the most urgent to light lamps which
can enlighten others. Time is short. So let us not
be pet about money. Wake up Albion, arise.
Let us suppose we have given money for a big
advertisement about Shri Mataji's lecture tour,
but the advertiser refuses to display it. Still the
tour is a success. As far as God is concerned,
we have paid and He delivers the goods. "Yoga
Kshema Vahamyaham': the well being of the
saints is assured-we have seen the proof. Then
the question remains, what to do with the money
that was collected and not spent? Who decides?
As far as Sahaja Yogis are concerned, the one
who decides is our Mother. Why? Maybe
people should decide for themselves. But one
thing is certain, is that according to vibrations
Jai Shri Mataji
Gavin Brown 8-6-1983
(Nirmala Yoga-1983)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-23.txt 
 THE BEGINNINGS
I got my realisation around the 15th August
1975, in Hurst Green, Sussex, in the very house
of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. The period
following this tuming point in my life can be said
to have been most intense, no doubts, but pretty
precarious also. I had to leave the shores of fair
Albion to go back into boring daily life where,
somehow, negativity was waiting for me.. and
I did not know then, how to deal with the
multiplicity of its subtle and less subtle form. IfI
managed to swim through these troubled waters
and survived as a yogi, it is, of course, thanks
to the ever watchful Grace of the one who had
given me my realization. But, more precisely, I
can hint here at two devices which proved to
be useful in enabling me to stick to Reality. One
could be called "charting back one's path
towards Self-realisation." The second
"fixing the pole of the tent.""
charkas, when doubts and fears rain from stormy
ego cum super-ego, it helps to consciously call
to memory the helping hand of the Unconscious,
the gentle way in which it led us towards its
mostelusive, mosteffective incamated form, Shri
Mataji Nirmala Devi.
Here is an example from my own story.
I met Rajesh Shah at Berkeley University,
California, in June 1975. He spoke, although
carefully, about Sahaja Yoga and soon left for
London while I went back with a friend and a
trailer van for a tour of the Arizona and Utah
deserts. Quite a few things happened during this
travel, many signals were sent. For example,
wheneverI would fix my tent Iwould find the
Venus star facing the opening. When I arrived
on the Grand Canyon the sky was overcast. I
sat on the ridge of the Canyon and prayed God
that I should have a rainbow. Within ten minutes
Charting the path towards Self-realisation.
We are all seekers. As such we are looked after.
The Divine-or, in more secular terms, the
Unconscious-has been working on us as a
the sky opened, stream of golden light flew in,
down to the Colorado river, and set on fire the
walls of the Canyon. While some green
clouds were still rolling over my head, I was
black
magnet mass does on iron dust; our movement
given the most beautiful of all rainbows, shaped
like a horseshoe, stretching its colours from one
side to the other of the Canyon. It was just too
much, I felt the Universe was a house and I
was the heir of this household. I did not feel
lonely and lost anymore and, with tears in the
eyes, I was just overwhelmed with love and
gratitude. Fortunately there weren't any tourists
around for they would have wondered at the
towards Self-realisation expresses the impact
ofits gravitational pull. The Unconscious wants
us to reach Self-realisation (nirvichara smadhi).
It paves our way towards it. Thus it carefully
engineers moments and circumstances, it calls,
it stages happenings and sends signals to the
Atma, often long before we meet Shri Mataji.
The Atma, the Self which is Truth-
Consciouslyness- Joy is all what we want to be
and Self-realisation is the first encounter with
capital Reality, an encounter which has been
discretely but lovingly prepared by the
Unconscious itself. After Self-realization, when
negativity tries to settle back into the half'cleared
sight of a kind of drunken boy, hugging and
kissing all the trees on his way.
Idid not know that, by then, Rajesh had met
Shri Mataji in London and had spoken about
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-24.txt 
 24
Issue: 5 & 6 - 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
me, that is, I did not know that I had already
entered Her omnipotent, omiscient attention. I
did not know either, by the way, that the shape
of the horseshoe or "bandhan" is the symbol of
the Adi Shakti. But I felt : I heárd a call, I felt a
great, great, termendous love, Her Love upon
doubts as to howIcould possibly be so deeply
transformed through Sahaja Yoga and how
could this yoga transform the world. I was
drifting away.
The 25 September 1975 Shri Mataji was
gracious enough to send me a letter in which
She very clearly exposed my inconsistency, how
precarious my position was and what I should
do to muster positivity within myself instead of
siding withnegativity. I take here the liberty of
quoting a few lines of this extraordinary letter
which saved my (spiritual) life for the second
me.
Rajesh and I met again in Berkeley. He showed
me a picture of Shri Mataji. A few days later, in
U.K., at the appointed time, I found myself
standing in the hall of Shri Mataji's house, ready
for "my first encounter of the Atma kind"
time:
Needless to say, later on, in moments of
confusion, the recollection of these signals
comforted my still vacillating faith in Sahaja
Yoga. Each of us who know to search his
memory has a provision of such signals before
his realization, before meeting Shri Mataji or,
simply, before meeting Sahaja Yogis. There
need not be rainbowevery time. But it's love all
"Now the time has come to tell you that
Sahaja Yoga cannot work unless and
until you completely surrender to "Me"
means no more questioning. This "Me"
means Mataji Nirmala Devi who resides
on the "Sahasrara" of the Virata' This
is the absolute truth whether you like it
the time.
or not, whether your ego and super ego
accept it or not. I am sorry I have to
confess it."
Fixing the pole of the tent
When I left England I was eager to share the
good news with others who I thought to be
seekers. So, I briefed one of my friends who
had much more experience of these things than
myself as he had tried so many gurus in India
and elsewhere. He was keeping the pictures of
If I take upon myself to publish these sacred
lines which were not meant for the public it is
because of their overridirg significance:
"Gregoire ! You perhaps do not realize that
all the Deities who reside in you and who
the various special masters he had met, stones
they had given him and also a sort of mental
decoding system whereby he could find out who
was a genuine master and who wasn't. Despite
this background however or, rather, because
of it, he failed to grasp the point of Sahaja Yoga
passed on to me a few of his exotic-esoteric
bhoots and got me quite confused. I then wrote
a letter to Shri Mataji in which I expressed
are controlled in your Sahasrara are not
at all interested in people who are not
completely surrendered to Me. I do not
know how to convince them. They only look
after those who take my name and accept
that I am the Adi Shakti. This is the only
way you can progress. What can I do? Even
the people who are cured by me have to keep
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Issue: 5 & 6-2006
25
he Divine Cool Breeze
the protocol otherwise the Deities sleep and
they go back to their previous position."
questions and worries in my mind instantly
vanished, even those pertaining to Sahaja
Yoga. The words of Shri Mataji had fixed
the pole of the tent, the tent of Sahaja Yoga
to protect me from the bad weather of Kali
Yuga; the pole upon which the edifice of
my yoga had to rely, on which my
confidence in Destiny and Self could be
built up. 1 dawned upoп тe that thе
answer to one single question was
providing answers to all other questions.
And this question was : "Who is Shri
Mataji?" The answer to it makes the
difference between mystieal and castles and
Reality; between salvation and doom for
all of us. In it lies the key to the process of
collective emanicipation. Since the
reception of this letter my only goal has
been and still is to further penetrate the
mystery of Shri Mataji's incarnation on this
earth, to bring my consciousness closer to
Her city.
So far I have not said this to anyone because I
thought there was no need. Those who were
wise realized it and those who are foolish have
lost their chance in Sahaja Yoga."
I was stunned! I somehow realized at once
what these lines were meant to carry. I saw
clearly that if this assertion of Shri Mataji's
real identity was not true the whole of
Sahaja Yoga would fall apart. If this
assertion was true the seekers of the whole
world could be saved, I too. The golden Age
would start. What was the matter with me?
Yes, I had felt the vibrations coming from
Shri Mataji, I had felt, inside, how She had
opened ny Sahasrara, I had seen
Kundalini pulsating, I had registered her
under Shri Mataji's
movenments
fingers...What more proofs did I want?
What was this nonsense in my head, why
would't I recognize Her?
This island city, vibrating with
multicolored tongues of fire, we all carry
it as the thousand-petalled lotus floating
in the limbic area of our brain. It's gate is
narrow, no doubt, but Shri Mataji had
given me the password.
The statement of Shri Mataji helped me
tremendously, helped me, that is, to
recognize. Realising its truth became the
only relevant question, and all the other
Vienna, 5.6.1983
Gregoire
(Nirmala Yoga-83)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Mother Dear Mother
(A letter written to Shri Mata ji from Australia,reproduced at her advice)
So he saw a ray of light. Quietly he slipped
inside the church hall when nobody was there
and began his show of juggling before the statue
of Mother Mary. At last he was on his own
again, completely in his elements. Reverent and
immaculate as if playing in front of a royal
audience, he proceeded step by step in this
game of finest balance and exquisite timing. He
threw the balls one by one, with gay abandon,
then with equal deftness he ticked them off in
the air as if they were bound by an invisible
chain. He made infinite pattems in the empty
space, his body twisting and turning in rhythm
with the balls weaving kaleidoscopic variety, his
trained hands questing in the vaccum for the
balls dancing in the air, his face swathed in
streaming sweat, but illumined in an ethereal
glow-the juggler was doing 'Aarti'.
Years back I had read a lovely story by Anatole
France, if I am not wrong-in which the central
figure was an unassuming juggler in the
brotherhood ofachurch's clergy who exhibited
a consuming desire to please Mother Mary. All
around him in the brotherhood were men of
merit. Some were in the choir with melodious
voices, singing the divine stains in praise of
Mother. Some had the Midas' touch with which
they used to create paintings which could please
the Lord. Some were accomplished craftsmen
who with infinite patience and skill would carve
out miniatures of Mother or tableaux of the
Lord's life. There were still others who
distinguished themselves, either by their oratorial
acumen, scriptural erudition or writing ability.
Amidst this galaxy of luminaries, this humble
juggler felt awakward, embarrassed and even,
in a way, guilty. Guilty, that when others had
great personal attributes to fall back on to please
Mother, he had none. He was the odd-man out
among a crowd of chosen people, or so he felt.
But they found out one day. The whole
brotherhood broke into the hall while he was
thus engaged. He froze with fear and hung his
head low. As one of the members began to
reprimand him for his almost blasphemous
behaviour in front of Mother, the statue of Mary
came alive-witha benign smile, She descended
from the pedestal and, then with the sleeve of
Her apron began lovingly wiping the sweat from
the juggler's face. The priests knelt down in awe
and reverence.
His anguish was great and genuine. His buming
desire to please Mother ultimately led him to a
very touching but unorthodox solution. It was
the classic case of a simple mind having a simple
solution. He argued within himself that all
prayers, all worshippings were in its essence
the expression ofone's heartfelt love, devotion,
and gratitude for the Mother. By the same token,
a man who was sculpting a statue of Mary with
a master's finesse, or writing lyrics in Her praise
or piping the noblest songs for the Divine
Mother, was in fact worshipping Her in his own
way. To the Mother, it hardly mattered who
worshipped in which way or who knew what
mantras or not. What actually mattered was
sincerity and devotion.
When I came into Sahaja Yoga I faced the same
dilemma as the juggler. In fact my predicament
was much more. The juggler was a blessed man
because of his child-like innocence whereas in
my case, my upbringing and the social
compulsions had taken a heavy toll of this Godly
attribute. All around me I saw Sahaja Yogis of
caliber, each one of them much advanced than
I am, all of them blessed sons of Mother. It
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-27.txt 
 27
Issue: 5 & 6 -2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
was a mixed crowd of myriad personalities-
distinguished men of public life, Yogis of high
attainments, scholars of scriptures,
instrumentalists of divine inspiration, singers of
great distinction and organizers of exceptional
print and a book or two, I had thought no end
of myself. So now my ego was taking me for a
ride, prompting me to take a short cut to the
kingdom of God! (No wonder my Agnya
Chakra is not clearing).
abilities.
Another phase of frustration, another round of
gloom. Now Imust go back to nature. I thought
to seek freshness from the morning dew,
naturalness from the rippling river, stead-
fastness from the sun-flower, piety from the
pelican, innocence from the children and bounty
from Mother Earth. That would give me the
depth of vision and insight so necessary to be
able to write about Her. For, write I must to
In the presence of this gathering, I also felt lost
and awkward. Suddenly I realized that the
qualities I had so assiduously cultivated for
success in society have come to nothing in the
face of a greater reality. I have to unlearn many
things, and re-learn a lot. To begin with, I have
to learn again to walk straight on a straight path,
without manoeuvering, without affectation in a
simple, nomal way.
prove me, to prove my worth, that would be
my puja, my humble service to Mother.
That was easier said than done. That called for
innocence, devotion and total surrender-
qualities. I had thrown to the winds way back
in life in my teens and out ofit, like the proverbial
Negro who threw the pearl away which was
richer than his whole tribe. Today Ihave to walk
back in time through the mazes and dark alleys
to retrieve them, if I can. They are not on sale
or show. Once you lose them, you lose them,
perhaps forever.
Not required- an inner voice assured me. Just
then I remembered Milton's On his Blindness'
Light had gone out from his eyes much before
the potentialities of the man were exhausted.
Introspective by nature, Milton had suffered for
days together in the belief that he might be
brought to book for having failed to utilize his
talent in the service of God. Then in a moment
of inspiration, realization had dawned on him
that God does not need anyman's service-he
has his angels for that. But they also serve
Him who only stand and wait.
SoI had may share of anguish like the juggler.
Moments, agonizing moments, ticked by. Then
Ihad a flash, a brainwave, like a silver-lining in
the encircling gloom- I would write about
Mother. That would be my way of pleasing Her,
worshipping Her, providing my worth.
SoI got the message-a message to bridle my
presumption and curb my ego. Now I am at
peace with myselfand the world, I do not want
to write any more. I am happy to stand and
wait for command, if any, from my Mother,
Clever, too clever! I had been clever with life3B
now I wanted to be with Mother also! It was
trick of my ego. Having seen a few articles in
Dear Mother.
(Nirmala Yoga-1983)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-28.txt 
 An Experience
In fact there was a great air ofexcitement in the
whole room, and it kept mounting as gradually
people arrived, an introductory talk was given
and we sat waiting for Shri Mataji's arrival. The
excitement built up more and more until..
suddenly everyone was hurrying to their feet,
turning to the back of the hall and.. what
presence, what joy, what absolute authority filled
the roomi as Shri Mataji stepped into it.
Almost a year ago, in May 1982, I started to
notice beautiful photographs of an Indian lady
all over Brighton. In Passing I read:
"She unites the essence of all religions
Awakens the dormant spiritual energy
within us all.
The Promised Enlightenment Is Now a
Fact."
As she spoke everything inside me said, "Yes",
"Ofcourse, "Exactly", and at last someone who
hits the nail on the head, who speaks the truth,
nothingmore nothing less.
I felt it just had to be the truth. The
combination of this ultimate claim with the
picture of Shri Mataji really spoke to my
heart. Eventually one day I stopped at one.
poster and feeling rather embarrassed in
the middle of the busy street, I noted down
the time and place.
When it was time to meditate I was sure that
everyone but me would get their realization, yet
although I'd never heard of it before, I knew
that it was the one thing that I really wanted.
I went quite early to the Programme, which was
in the Royal Pavilion, a famous building built in
imitation Indian style. Aslarived Inoticed quite
dignified people around the entrance. The room
where the meeting was to be held was
incredible. There were huge windows,
chandeliers and the walls were decorated with
pictures of bright coloured birds and flowers. I
was impressed.
Afterthe collective meditation people came and
worked on me standing behind me. I felt very
tense and a bit nervous about what they were
doing behind my back. I was trying too hard,
but then without me doing anything, 1 suddenly
felt as if a lid was lifting inside my stomach and
the joy rushed through and I burst into smiles
and laughter. I realized, "there is someone who
loves us. God is taking care of everything. It's
not our responsibility." What a weight lifted off
me! It seemed like such a long time since I had
laughed, but now laughter kept on bubbling up
inside of me. All at once I saw the joke.
However I took my seat near the back, ready
to escape if necessary and looked around at
the other people. It seemed a bit strange to see
so many people sitting with their hand palm
upwards on their knees but they seemed
somehow nice and friendly. I didn't realize that
they were Sahaja Yogis but I could'nt help
feeling that I was surrounded by happy, healthy,
clean and cheerfully dressed people.
Istayed in the hall till the last minute watching
Shri Mother and listening. I did'nt want to go
away. When I finally did leave to go home
through the Saturday night streets, full of crowds
of rowdy durnks, I clearly saw what a hell
surrounds us, but I was no longer afraid.
I sank down in my chair. My body was aching
all over and I felt scruffy and undignified in
my
jeans and short hair. I was quite surprised to be
there actually. I'd never been to anything like
this before. I was nervous but definitely excited.
The next afternoon they had invited me to go to
a Sahaj Yogini's house to see a video of Shri
Mataji. Everyone was in the garden. It was a
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-29.txt 
 Issue: 5 & 6- 2006
29
The Divine Cool Breeze
Since then I have really been spoiled. I went to
Shri Mother's Programme in Vienna, was
offered the chance to work for Gregoire de
Kalbermatten as nanny for his two beautiful
children Machinder Nath and Niranjana. I have
learnt so much and had so many questions
answered that I have at last almost stopped
asking any. It has been great to meet the
European Sahaja Yogis and the new people who
have joined Sahaja Yoga in Vienna. Ireally don't
know how to thank our Mother for all Her
lovely sunny day and the light shone green
through the tarpaulin roof covering us. There
were paper streamers of all colours decorating
the rout and the center pole. By the wall, next
to a flower bed was a chair upon which Shri
Mataji had been sitting during Her stay and
where that very moming a puja had been
celebrated. Although at that timeI knewnothing
of such things, I definitely felt the silence and
the joy-'the' joy.
A crowd of happy smiling people. How often
do we see that in the West? In Sahaja Yoga we
may start to take it for granted, but for me it
was really heaven. I felt so much love flowing.
Somehow you could really feel at home, as if
you had found all your long lost friends again.
At last people who were on your wavelength.
blessings!
As a person who came to Sahaja Yoga from
the street without ever having heard anything
about it before I'd like to say how thankful I am
to Our Mother for such great brothers and
sisters who helped me with so much love over
the stony path back to normalcy and beyond.
After realization it becomes so easy to see the
games which others play. We can so much
more easily criticize and judge other Sahaja
Yogis for not yet being what they should be.
We can lose the perspective and start taking
the blessings for granted.
Not quite two months later I went up to London
for Guru Puja. I was stunned to see the
Nightingales lane Ashram, that smart way
people were dressed, the women in their
beautiful silk saris, the video, all the different
nationalities represented there, and of course
the most important thing, the way the people
were. I was amazed. While l'd been plodding
along the weary track of ego here were people
who had been working on trying to improve
themselves, not just with words but really doing
it. All the Sahaj Yogis seemed so great to me.
Therefore I pray to Shri Mataji that we may
learn to love each other more and more to see
only the best in each other and to help that to
grow; that we may become truly one collective
being enlivened by our enjoyment of ourselves
and of each other and thus worthy to represent
Our Holy Mother to the world, who is the
embodiment of that love itself.Who is Sakshat
Shri Jagadamba ,Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti
Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi, Namoh Namah.
Ihave no word to describe the Puja itselfexcept
to say that I felt overawed and it was a great
privilege to be there, It was such a powerful
experience.
I found it hard to believe that all this was
happening, in the heart of London. How come
I'd never heard about it before? Why wasn't it
in all the papers? Why was'nt it on the television
news? Even nowit sometimes seems incredible.
Margret
May -1982
(Nirmala Yoga- 1983)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-30.txt 
 The Sahaja of Physics (Part I)
(7.7.1983)
INTRODUCTION
laws. It was all very satisfying for the intellect:
Seen as a yoga of knowledge (Jnana Yoga),
Sahaja Yoga is known to us as the Knowledge
of integration. It should thus be possible to
integrate through its scope the various fields of
the human knowledge, to grasp these fields in
their essential principles of tattwas, to
understand how these principles relate to each
other and to God. This synthesis with the higher
spiritual plane is conceivable because Sahaja
Yoga is above all "Nimala Vidya", that is the
science of the living, the science of the
immaculate working of the Adi Shakti. The time
is ripe for the integration of all previous
knowledge in a higher synthesis: many people
who are not yogis have already started working
on it. For instance, in his book The Tao of
Physics the Austrian physicist, Fritjof Capra,
attempted to show that the Eastern mystical
tradition and the Western new physics were
describing the world in strikingly similar patterns.
It is quite reasonable to expect that Sahaja
Yogis who are scientists will be able to go quite
far in this direction of enquiry once that they
have grasped the principles of Sahaja Yoga.
Evena layman like myselfcan play a bit further
with Dr. capra's correct intuition because the
knowledge granted to us by Shri Mataji has
opened fascinating horizons!
matter was matter, God its creator was
something else, somewhere else, removed from
the field of science's confident observations and
from man's enquiry. That is why the French
physicist and mathematician Laplace could tell
Napoleon that he did not need God as an
hypothesis to explain the Universe,
Relativity theory and Quantum theory have
shattered these beautiful certainties of the 18th
and 19thcenturies and, with Albert Einstein, have
laid the foundations of a Sahaja Physics, that is
a physics which embraces the Universe as a
vibrating, organic Unity, where, so to say, the
shape of God can be guessed. How? Modern
physics shows at work in the matter patterns of
phenomena that can be found again through
Sahaja Yoga in the more subtle, higher spiritual
plane. These patterns within the physical world
are, so to say, projections which reveal
something about the archetypical patterns of the
causal, spiritual reality. And thus God is no
longer in the eye of the scientist, an hypothetical
primordial cause. His ways, His play (leela)
unfolds itselfeven in the very laws of matter. It
is, this time all very satisfying for the intellect,
and for the heart. As non physicists and,
therefore, with due apologies for superficiality,
let us pursue in this article some such analogies
between the science-revealed physical Universe
and the Sahaja revealed spiritual reality.
Classical physics had found its most elaborate
expression in Newton's mechanical model of
the Universe. In this deteministic model, matter
was made of solid stuff or substance evolving
within the three dimensional space of Eucledian
geometry. Masses and motions, material
particles and the forces between them were
governed by clear, mathematical, immutable
THE PARABLE OF THE SUBATOMIC
MATTER
Let us make a quick plunge in the strange
underworld of the infinitely small to find out what
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Issue: 5 & 6-2006
31
The Divine Cool Breeze
Before the havan and the puja ceremonies Shri
Mataji spoke beautifully about the relationship
between the formed and the formless aspect of
God. For instance, She sasys, a chakra is both
is the nature of the subatomic units of matter,
or, in other words, to find out what stuff is matter
made of?
formed and formless. Its formed dimension is
the deity presiding over the chakra; its formless
dimension the energy it emits. Hence both are
one and the same thing. Like the subatomic
particle the chakra is at the same time formed
and formless, position and wave, identity and
energy. Furthermore, in spiritual life also The
Uncertainty principle seems to apply and the
devotee is caught in its limitations. Indeed he
And here is the first surprise! Matter is full of
tricks; these units are very abstract entities and
have nothing to do with the solid objects of
classical physics or with our every day
perception of matter. Depending on how we
look at them, these subatomic units appear as
particles, that is, as entities confined to an
extremely small volume, or as waves, stretched
out through larger portions of space. This dual
picture provides us with an unexpected concept
ofthe reality of matter. Its smallest components
identified by atomic physics are, so to say,
"identitiy" as particles and "engery" as waves.
But according to Heisenberg's famous
"uncertainty principle" these two aspects can
never be perceived simultaneously. Either the
observer focus on the location of the particle
and he loses sights of its wave like momentum;
or he measures the momentum but loses the
particle's position. That is, from the
experimenter's standpoint, the subatomic unit
is identity or energy. The particle perception and
the wave perception, as Niels Bohr saw it, are
complementary. Both are needed and both
provide only a partial description of the same
atomic reality. Quantum theory reveals a basic
elusiveness in the very substratum of the
Universe.
either usually focuses on the identity of a
personal God (Jesus, Vishnu, Shiva) and his
consciousness loses tracks of the all pervading
cosmic manifestation of Divinity outside of this
very form; or he focuses on the abstract,
undifferentiated aspect of the Divine (Buddhism,
Taoism, Advaita Vedantism, forms of Islam) but
his heart cannot find the bliss at the Lotus Feet
of the identified, recognized Beloved one. The
perception of the formed identity drives away
the perception of the formless Energy, and vice
versa. As the physicists say, we can't get at the
same time location and momentum.
For a Sahaja Yogi the question becomes a very
practical one. He feels the relationship to the
Formed when he has the darshan (physical
presence) of Shri Mataji. He feels the working
of the formless when he feels the vibrations and
the consequent mutations in awareness. Yet the
full identity of these two aspects, although
perhaps understood by the mind, is not fully
realized. Indeed it is one thing to rationally grasp
Without going any further in our exploration let
us make an attempt at reading, in this finding,
the parable of one very important aspect of
spiritual reality which was the subject of Shri
Mataji's enlightening speech, on the 18th June,
1983 in Paris.
this truth that the two aspects are one - and
here I could refer in passing to Hegel's central
paradigm in the phenomenology of Spirit:
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-32.txt 
 Issue: 5 & 6 - 2006
32
The Divine Cool Breeze
Mataji through the manas Shakti of his Ida nadi
and more the vibrations through the Prana Shakti
of his Pingala Nadi. But a day will come, by the
grace of sakshat Kundalini, when a Sahaja Yogi
will be able to perceive at or above the
Sahasrara level, in Nirvikalpa or beyond. Then
many things change: these two shaktis flow into
each other, all the deities of the Sahasrara are
Identity (Brahman, ultimate Reality) Is
The Identity(Oneness) between the
Identity(the formed) And The Non-
Identity(the Formless), - but it is another thing
to experience this truth as a state of one's own
consciousness. The dilemma is not without
importance : If I do not realize the Person of
Shri Mataji within the formless energy of
vibrations I will pine and feel separated
from Her when I am not physically with
Her, I won't be so aware of Her PREM
(Divine Love) upon me. If I do not realize
the formless energy within the person of
Shri Mataji I will constantly forget the true
magnitude of Her personality, the
perception of Her divinity will escape my
awareness and I will behave with Her as if
She were a human being. In other words,
we could say, perhaps, that the Uncertainty
principle is one aspect of Maya, embodied as a
law of nuclear physics as well as a inherent limit
of the human psyche. Can it be overcome? In
physics, no; in Sahaja Yoga, yes.
integrated within the formless and the attention
has reached the seat of the Atma at the center
of the Brahamarandhra. At this highest stage
the Yogi becomes what he perceives. Instead
of saying "Twamewa Sakshat Shri Mataji"
he says"Aham Sakshat Shri Mataji" While
saying "you are" the distinction between the yogi
and Shri Mataji prevents him to perceive Her
formed and formless aspects in one integrated
act ofconsciousness; while saying "Iam" he has
no difficulties, from the inside to experiment
these two dimensions; this is probably the state
of "God realization".One has to become him
in order to know her.
The author of these lines, for instance, certainly
doesn't see himself entitled to say, "Aham
Bhavani". He knows fully well that he is not at
that level. But in Sahaja Yoga even the most
crazy hopes are allowed. And we know Her
generosity ! The greatness of the blessings that
the Great Goddess wants to bestow upon us
challenges the sheer capacity of imagination.
The key to this answer is to be found in the
words "from the observer's stand-point".
Depending upon his standpoint, the physicist can
measure the location or the momentum of a
particle but not both at the same time. It is not
in his power to alter his experimental standpoint
in a way which would enable him to do so.
While the Sahaja Yogi, through slow but steady
growth, can alter his epistemological standpoint.
How?
Gregoire
Vienna 7.7.1983
(Nirmala Yoga-1983)
It is of course Shri Kundalini who is the magical
doer. We could say, may be, that the Sahaja
Yogi, at the level of Nirvichara Sammadhi,
perceives more the localized darshan of Shri
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Installation Of Shri Ganesha
the entire army of Shri Shiva to protect His
Mother's protocol. Why should the children
disobey when they know that whatever Shri
Mataji says is for their benefit? Often Sahaja
Yogis say, "but Mother why don't we do it the
other way." Are we to teach the Adi Shakti who
has created the universe? But She is Maha Maya
so She plays with one's ego and consents to
one's wishes and suggestions. Organizers of
Sahaja centre have to be very careful about
giving suggestions to Shri Mataji or interpreting
Her instructions because they are too close to
Maha Maya and can easily fall into it. The
importance attached to the work often throws
the veil of Maya. We forget that She is Maha
Saraswati; the source of all arts and planning.
Her instructions are from the supreme view
point, whereas one's intellect is limited to 3-
dimentional and hence cannot realize its total
implications. In one's obedience one remains
connected to the mains and the vibrations keep
flowing. In disobedience or censorship the work
snaps, the vibrations cease. Without vibrations
there cannot be Sahaja Yogi thus Shri Ganesh
gets upset with the organizers, thus the growth
of Sahaja Yoga suffers a set back. Hence it is
sometimes better to be a nobody, than a big
busy body. A dispute among the organizers
reflects a decline in their vibrations. The
organizers should then withdraw for a while and
ask the collective body of Sahaja Yogis to decide
the issue through vibrations, then it comes under
the attention of Shri Mataji. She works it out.
When the decision is based on conditioning She
does not work it out.
The establishment of Shri Ganesh marks the
advent of Sahaja. Shri Ganesh is the son of Adi
Shakti Shri Mataji. She bestows upon Him great
powers when She sits him on the earth as its
guardian.
Shri Ganesh symbolizes the love of His Mother
hence Sahaja Yoga is to be spread through love.
As the guardian of the earth Shri Ganesh has
the special power of gravity which maintains our
balance. In our body His Chakra is placed
outside the spine where the body is sewn
together and this forms our foundation. Any
disturbance in the foundation reflects in the
Chakra. It is therefore important that the
foundation should be strong and well grounded.
With the spreading of Sahaja Yoga, many Sahaja
countries will spring all over the world. However
their efficiency depends on the strength of this
foundation which is Shri Ganesh. If the
foundation is weak, the negative forces can easily
attack, and render us ineffective, the instruments
of Shri Mataji's love. If Shri Ganesh is strongly
entrenched then no-one dare attack. Thus the
inner weakness attracts the outside negativity.
Shri Ganesh is the protector of the Devi's
protocol. Ifwe seek His protecticn then we have
to be very careful of the protocol of Shri Mataji.
When we are not careful there, He is angry and
if He withdraws then we become vulnerable to
the attack of the negative forces. The most
important aspect of the protocol is absolute
obedience and surrender to Shri Mataji. Shri
Ganesh does not know any other authority
except His Mother. He is so devoted to Her
that He does not even know His father- There
Shri Mataji does talk about Her time yet we
should not trespass it with Mundane Matters,
like personal finances or family problems.
Though She may graciously listen to everyone
is a story about how even Shri Shiva Himself
could not enter Parvati's abode because Shri
Ganesh guarded the door-way. He destroyed
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Issue: 5 & 6 - 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
34
for a while, yet She has already taught us the
method of dealing with them ourselves. If
'Mother's Love'
O! my beloved Mother!
anyone tries to dominate Her attention or divert
it into Mundane matters, the deity gets annoyed
with these people. If a deity is upset, then He
plays games with our ego. We should always
be mindful of Her time and that Her attention is
not brought down from the collective level.
When inter-personal problems arise among
Sahaja Yogis, it causes great pain to Shri Mataji
to have to witness Her children quarrelling. The
senior Sahaja Yogis should resolve the issue
among themselves as far as possible. Sometimes
we go on complaining to Shri Mataji but we
forget that She is all knowing and in complaining
too much we only reveal our own weaknesses.
When I go out for work,
Iget heat of the world.
When I come back home,
Your Love cools me down.
Your love dissolves all that I gather,
Your love refreshes me.
When I get injury outside,
When I come to you,
I get healing touch of your love.
The world though full of miseries,
Your love makes it peaceful.
There is no place in the world to hide,
When I come to you, you cопсeal me in your
depth,
You make me forget all the pangs and
sufferings
There is no better place than your Lotus feet,
The purest quality is innocence. This is the purity
of our vibrations. Shri Mataji is pleased with
this innocence, hence always be truthful to Her.
Where I find my sole refuge
Never use devious means or conduct talks to
I pray not only for me,
But for the whole world.
cover some folly. She forgives all folly
committed in innocence.
To extend your soothing Love to all
To fill the whole Universe with your
Infinite joy.that you are
That who is infinite joy, Love, peace and
beauty
To maintain the balance of the universe Shri
Mataji bestows wisdom on Shri Ganesha.
Wisdom is not intellect. Wisdom is bom when
our intelligence is connected with the Spirit.
Through wisdom our discretionary power
develops. In the absence of any precedence
regarding protocol, wisdom guides us, infact we
must observe the protocol spontaenously.
Is going to make the whole creation
manifested
With His real nature, the eternal kappiness.
Aum Amen
(Jai Shri Mata JI)
(Nirmala Yoga-1983)
With the grace of Shri Mataji we have come a
long way. Shri Ganesh is being established all
around the world. By being always mindful of
the protocol the deities are pleased and we can
also have ourselves the exercise offalling in and
out of Maha Maya constantly.
Yogi Mahajan
(Nirmala Yoga-1983)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-35.txt 
 Advice Given to Sahaja Mothers by Shri Mata Ji
"To be a mother - it's a most responsible position, that ofa mother, it is even more
responsible than that of a king - to be a Mother"- Shri Mataji
Becoming the mother of a realized soul
presented most of us with practical questions
which before Sahaja Yoga would probably not
have occurred to us. Here in London, Sahaja
Yoginis were specially blessed to have our Holy
Mother to advise us. Knowing how thirsty we
were for these tips and guidelines, we have
collected together all the points Shri Mataji has
told to individuals; as far as we are aware,
experience, almost all vibrational problems that
the babies and children have is that of the
parents-
"It is very special responsibility, that of having
children."
Shri Mataji has also advised the reading of
books about mother and childcare in order to
educate ourselves in the absence of sensible
all
the information given below was meant as
general advice and does not relate specifically
to individual cases-we hope it may prove useful
parental advice, which in a society such as India
would be available- the Grandmother playing
an important role.
Another point which Shri Mataji has mentioned
on several occasions is the way in India that the
whole society trains the attention of the child-
by continually pointing the attention to the
correct things.
to you.
During conversations with Sahaja Yogini
mothers, Shri Mataji has told us that in the
Western society, the children are born with our
ego and superego - this is the reason they are
often born with little or no hair - in India, Shri
Mataji tells us, the babies are always born with
hair. Once the child has all its needs seen to, ie.
THE PRACTICALADVICE
During Pregnancy
It is very important that the mother's mental and
spiritual health is kept clean and full of postivity.
changed nappy, feed, he should'nt be picked
upall the time as this encourages ego to develop.
Shri Mataji has strongly advised us to feed on a
regular basis from the beginning and to establish
a flexible routine for the children - it has been
stressed that to a reasonable degree they should
adapt to our life style and should not begin to
rule us!
"Whatever's going on in the mind will affect the
child-the mind has to be happy-you cannot be
with artificiality or fantasy."
On the physical side, if the mother is fit and
healthy and the pregnancy is normal, Shri Mataji
has advised a daily walk in the park or country
throughout the entire pregnancy. This, Shri
Matjai explains, will help towards an easier
labour. (This advice would indicate that if the
Swadhishthan Chakra is in good condition, this
will also help).
Shri Mataji has also explained that God can
protect the children from most harmful
vibrations, but cannot protect them from the
vibrations of the parents therefore it is
important that the parents cleanse themselves
as much as possible from our practical
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-36.txt 
 Issue: 5 & 6-2006
36
The Divine Cool Breeze
Mother's Diet
After the birth
The mother and baby should stay inside for forty
days. Contact with non-Sahaja Yogis should be
minimal during this period.
Sugar and boiled water can be given to the baby
from birth onwards.
If your baby suffers from wind problems,your
own diet is very important while breastfeeding,
to help reduce this build up of gases
no rice should be taken3;
a)
b) root vegetables and all things growing below
the ground should not be eaten;
Treatment for colic : It seems that many of
our babies have experienced problems with
wind and colic. Shri Mataji gave us much advice
on how to treat and prevent this:
no white flour or any produce made from
white flour;
c)
milk should be taken with something like
cereal, never on it own;
e) avoid cold drinks;
)
d)
(a) Ajwain treatment : foment ajwain by (i)
chewing it yourself; or (ii) warming it in a dry
pan. Place this on baby's navel with a warmed
nappy over the top, holding it in place.
also omit all generally well-known wind-
producing food, e.g. beans, spices
Good foods to eat are : semolina, almonds
(sugared or plain), an Indian sweet called
Rasgullah (sweet, white balls in sugar syrup).
(b) The mother should also chew ajwain
quite a good handful several times a day.
Another good way of taking ajwain is in a drink
that Shri Mataji has shown us how to prepare:
Use seven fennel seeds and 2 ajwain seeds with
cracked block gugar (sugar candy) - make sure
it is quite sweet (ordinary sugar can be used).
Use this as babys drinking water, and the mother
may also take it, (in severe cases, Sahaja yogis
have found that increasing the amount of ajwain
seeds can help).
Bathing
When bathing the baby, we should keep them
warm. If the weather is cold, they should not
be bathed so often, Shri Mataji says it is not so
necessary-but daily oil massage is.
Baby should be oil massaged everyday as it is
very good for the chakras. Use oil such as olive,
almond, mustard-not the proprietary baby oils,
as they do not contain vitamins. Do not use olive
(c) When the baby is older, i.e. approximately
one to two months, Gripe water can be given
say, twice a day - but it must be boiled first.
oil on the hair, as this turns white. Massage with
the oil towards the sahasrara on the head, as if
to 'fill' the Sahasrara with oil.
(d) Other preventative measures :
) The baby should be properly winded, even
if he falls asleep.
(i) When taking the wind out of the baby the
hands should be moved in a downward
direction from the neck to the base of the spine.
Do not pick baby up under the arms as this can
damage his shoulders and be very painful for
him.
Brushing the hair should be done even if their
isn't very much, Brush it from the front to the
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-37.txt 
 Issue: 5 & 6-2006 37
The Divine Cool Breeze
back on top of the head and upwards towards
the Sahasrara at the back and sides. This is to
open the Sahasrara and encourage growth of
the hair.
natural fibers such as wood. Plastic toys do not
have good vibrations and should be avoided.
Shri Mataji has commented that it is better for
the children to have fewer toys of better quality
than lot of inferior ones.
Clothing
Shri Mataji has strongly impressed upon us the
importance of the children wearing 100%
natural fibers, and that only pure cotton should
be wom next to their skin. Woolen cloth should
be over this in the colder climates or part of the
year. Most important is that the small indentation
in the collar bone is covered up-this helps to
prevent them catching colds. 'Cherub' wool
vests are good for putting over cotton ones.
Weaning
Babies to be weaned at six months fully
weaned approximately ten months. All foods
should be natural, no packaged or artificial ones
to be given. Shri Mataji advises that the first
weaning foods should be rice mashed up with
sugar and milk. Do not start babies off on curd
(yourhurt).
Silk is not a good fabric for babies. Regarding
nappies: use 100% cotton onlyas they are much
better for vibrations. However, in situations like
seminars where washing facilities are very poor,
we may use the disposable ones as a temporary
Feeding bottle should preferably be made of
glass.
Vaccinations
Shri Mataji has advised us to get the children
vaccinated against the childhood diseases, as
this helps strengthen them against the negativity.
measure.
To allow a good flow of vibrations, two piece
outfits are preferable to one-piece ones, and
garments should end at the ankle. In cold
weather, make sure the nabhi chakra is well
covered, and keep head and feet covered. Girls
should be dressed like girls, in dresses or
Punjabi suits, and boys should be dressed like
boys.
Meditation
Shri Mataji has recommended that children
should mediate with us in the early morning
from being young babies.
"One has to remember that motherhood is
very important - it is the Mother who
created this universe, the Father was just
a witness." Shri Mataji
Toys
Regarding toys, these should be also made of
(Nirmala Yoga-1983)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-38.txt 
 The Memories of the Divine Mother
new for me to see, how they regarded Her. We
went through the whole thing ofHer taking Her
socks off so that they could get to Her Feet as
THE FIRST PUBLIC PROGRAMS
Like learning to ride a bike
When Shri Mataji came back to England in
1976, after we had first met Her in '75, we didn't
have public programs. We just had these
meetings at Gavin and Jane [Brown]'s house.
At one stage She called me and said that she
had to go to an Indian ladies' meeting
somewhere in West London. And She wanted
me to come and talk about Sahaja Yoga. We'd
never done anything like that before and I was
absolutely terrified. I was twenty-one. She took
me on the tube and all the way there on the
tube She schooled me as to what I was going
to say and what was going to happen and how
it would be. "It'll be all right." I just could'nt
believe this. And we walked from the tube. I
well. They understood about touching Her Feet
momentarily, whereas we had jsut been told,
"Put your hands under Her Feet to get the
vibrations." So it was again a new experience
to see that whole thing. And then She got me to
sit in front of all these ladies and She sat just a
little way from me and She fed me lines to say.
Then someone translated them. After about ten
minutes it was like learning to ride a bike. She
sort of gave me a final push and I was off and
She did'nt have to prompt me any more because
suddenly here were people who actually wanted
to know about Shri Mataji. It didn't matter that
they didn't understand me and they had to wait
to have it translated and perhaps would never
do it again. It was this incredible surge of feeling
that I could tell people about Mother and it was
my first experience of talking to people. And
the way in which She literally hand-led me along
that path was incredible. And I did'nt want to
mean-can you imagine all this? -going on the
tube with Mother.
We got to this place and the Indian Ladies were
very respectful of Mother, which was something
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-39.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 5 & 6-2006 39
When I first came to Sahaj, I went to a meeting
[the first meeting held at Caxton Hall] at which
there were about half a dozen very sick looking
people sitting on the stage and Shri Mataji was
stop. They, kind of, had to haul me off. "Well,
thank you very much. Come and have some
tea" or something. And we went back by tube.
Maureen Rossi
sitting in the middle of them and there was an
English guy, rather scruffily dressed, standing
and talking. I was in the audience of about thirty
people and I had gone because the
advertisement said "Your divine birthright" and
"no money will be taken" which rang true for
something spiritual. I thought I would check it
It was like Sahaja Yoga just changed gear
That was literally a complete sea change. It was
like Sahaja Yoga just changed gear. Up to that
time it had just been a smail group of people
going around to different houses with Mother.
Then She announced that She would like to have
a public program and we were all mystified. We
were quite frightened and did'nt know what
would happen. We put a big advert in "Time
Out" [magazine]and we hired a room in Caxton
hall [in Lodon] and we went there. We didn't
know if anyone would turn up.
out before I went to India to find my guru.
I sat listening to the Englishman's talk, which
became extremely boring and I thought, "I can't
sit here any longer and I am going to leave."
As always, I had sat near the door so I could
make a quick exit. Just as this thought came to
my mind and the energy flowed to my legs to
stand up, Mataji signalled to this guy, who was
Pat Anslow
boring me to death, and asked him to stop
talking. Then She got up and started talking. It
was everything that I had expected, at least
The program started around October 1977 in
Caxton Hall, formal programs, which we had
on Monday. In those days, if I remember very
well, Ithink the first advertisements were in Time
Out. And at the same time, we had posters,
which we put up on shops and on shop
windows. A lot of the seekers actually came
from the Time Otadvertisement
verbally and mentally.
When we were supposed to feel the vibrations,
Idid'nt feel anyting at all, but I did feel something
happen in my heart when Shri Mataji said, "All
I am here for is to give you love." I felt this
distinct churning in my chest, which was the only
experience I had that day.
Djamel Metouri
Bala Kanaysоп
In the end about two hundred people came.
Mother made us sit on the stage with Her in a
row, which was extremely embarrassing. Gavin
[Brown gave a talk and then Mother gave a
talk and we ali sat there desperately trying to
look all evolved and spiritual. It was actually
very painful because we felt huge things going
on in the chakras incredible pains and
movements. I remember sitting there and trying
to sort of keep a pleasant look on my face and
being in agony.
Most of the seekers, virtually ninety percent of
the seekers who came in those days, were from
other movements, false gurus of all kinds. In
fact, we used to work almost exclusively on
people who had been to other false gurus, some
on drugs as well.Alot of them,if they were more
hippyish,of course, they had done drugs..
Mostly they had either been in drugs or they
had been to false gurus. She used to work on
Pat Anslow
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-40.txt 
 40
Issue: 5 & 6 - 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
them individually and She gave them so much
love. She really worked very hard.
Just barefooted students
Now what I actually remember most is the fact
Sahaja Yoga was not at all what it is today. It
was so informal as well. First, we did'nt have
any programs which were with a lot of people.
We used to go and meet at Gavin [Brown]'s
place on a Sunday afternoon. Mother used to
come by train to Victoria Station and then She
Djamel Metouri
And then bang! It worked out. Everything had
changed. Suddenly Mother was down among
the audience, worked on everyone. The whole
hall felt like one family. And then the whole thing
changed. We had seventy people coming to the
ashram, to see Mother for long weekends.
would come by taxi.
We didn't have this. One of the things I find,
when you look at Sahaja Yogis today, now they
all have cars. They all go and organize their
programs. They all have money. They have all
kinds of means. They have a lot more facilities
than we had at the time.
Pat Anslow
Shri Mataji came down and looked at all of us
and She looked at me. I was sitting at the back,
as I said, ready to make a rapid exit. She said
something to me in Hindi from a distance and I
thought, "Well, you know, if She is a guru, how
.come she doesn't know that I can't speak
Hindi?" And then She told one of the older yogis
I remember when we were staying at
Finchley, in the ashram, we started organizing
meetings at Caxton Hall, but we never did
anything like today, which means we didn't have
all the facilities like having cars and vans and
things like that. We were barefooted students.
We used to actaully take a picture of Mother
and take anything we could take-candles and
incense and so on-and we went by bus. And I
remember in the early days, even Mother
coming by train to London from Oxted, where
that was with Her that I had "got it" and, of
course, I felt nothing. And then Shri Mataji came
up to me, stood right in front of me, put Her
hand over my head and said, "You've got it.
You've got it!" And I replied, "No, I don't feel
anything at all."
Now, there was a person sitting on my right,
who started saying, "Oh vow, I feel it. I feel it!"
And I thought, "You know, this is just auto-
She lived. And then She would take a taxi. And
Ieven remember her coming by tube to come
to the program at Gavin's.
It seems that we have come a long way. A
lot of Sahaja Yogis don't realize that their
suggestion." And then the person on my left
started saying, "Oh, I feel the cool breeze." standard of living has risen so much. They don't
Meanwhile, I felt absolutely no breeze at all.
I was quite disappointed. And, of course, You know, it started with very little means, with
Mother was insisting that I'd "got it." So, for a the very little that the Sahaja Yogis that were
sceptical aerospace engineer, just out of college, Yogis used everything they had in their hands to
that wasn't very helpful.
realize that Sahaja Yoga never started like this.
there at the time had. And, in fact, the Sahaja
help Sahaja Yoga.
Bala Kanayson
Djamel Metouri
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-41.txt 
 Issue: 5 & 6- 2006
41
The Divine Cool Breeze
This Sahaja Yoga's really good
When I first came to my first meeting, they said,
"Sit down, you'll gain this experience." And they
told me what chakras I was catching on. I was
catching on left heart, and they said, "Something
to do with your mother." So afterwards I
thought, "Ah, yes" because l'd left home and I
wasn't contacting my mother a lot and I was
doing plastering andI had a pain in my left heart.
I thought it was something to do with
overworking because I used to get home and
just collapse, so tired. So I thought, "Okay, I
need to contact my parents more often." So I
went to see mny mother. I though I'd see her
anyway, but afterwards I discovered because
she was worried about me, I was getting the
pain in my chest. And as soon as I went round
there and said, "I'm all right. Everything's fine,"
it fizzled. It was like someone had hit me in the
left Heart. It was really painful. So when I had
gone round to see her - "I'm all right," this and
that, she stopped worrying. That pain went
away. So I thought, "Wow, this Sahaja Yoga's
really good."
And When I left the meeting my whole body
felt light. Iskipped all the way home. I felt, "vow!
I've found it.
these very small posters we used to put in the
shops because we thought if Mother vibrated
them there would be a greater chance that they
would attract seekers at the time. But we didn't
have these large posters. We didn't have all these
fancy things. We were very smallish. And
Mother used to get down off the stage and
would go round the hall working on people. She
would talk to people. She would hug people.
She knew what everybody's problem was and
She would talk to people in a very personal
way, trying to resolve their problems in a very
personal way, including their health problems,
their family problems.
In the early days Her attention was very
much on the seekers who were lost, lost
following other false gurus. And Mother used
to blast all these false gurus whenever She
spoke. She doesn't perhaps do it so much today
because things have changed, but in those days
She could see that so many seekers were lost.
And, of course, many of the talks in Caxton
Hall were about blasting all these horrible gurus
who were just torturing the seekers.
Djamel Metouri
Powerful stuff
Mondays, whenever She was in London, Shri
Mataji used to hold public introductory
programs at Caxton Hall [from October 1977
to May 1983] near Her flat in Victoria. Mother
Derek Ferguson
We were very smallish
Iremember Maureen [Rossi] giving me a poster
which Mother had put vibrated kumkum on and
it was for Caxton Hall, the earliest Caxton Hall
program. Mother just put kumkum over the
photograph. And Maureen gave me one ofthem.
would give a talk, then give Realization and
would then work on the new people. Of course,
later on this was how we all learnt how to work
on people, as we would walk round the hall
with Shri Mataji and sometimes She would have
Gail Pottinger
us work on people, asking us to feel their
vibrations and either showing us what to do or
ask us what we would do.
Yes, She took a whole pile of photographs and
She rubbed kumkum on the pictures so that
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-42.txt 
 42
Issue: 5 & 6- 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
type young people were seated respectfully on
rows of chairs, facing Mother, with their hands
out, palms upward. Shri Mataji indicated for us
to go and sit near Her on the rostrum. She told
us to close oureyes and to put our hands, palms
upward, out to Her. Then She asked those
seated around to watch and see if our eyelids
flickered. Mine did and somebody pointed it
out. When She turned to me and inquired about
my fluttery eyelids, I told Her that I occasionally
suffered from tension, although I felt so peaceful
there. She said, "Oh, my poor child" and got
me to remove the giraffe-hair bracelet that I was
wearing. The fluttering stopped.
She told us to stop thinking. It was very
easy. I felt wonderful. She turned to me a couple
of times, saying to the others, "Look, she's
beautiful." I looked around me and everyone
was radiant with innocent, open faces. Shri
Mataji seemed to work on each and everybody.
She was the nucleus, calling out to everyone
of us whilst we worked, "How is she?" or
"Where is he catching?" "Has she got it?" We
were all taking vibrations from Her, whilst we
worked and meanwhile She would be personally
working on someone else - and often giving a
talk at the same time. Sometimes She would sit
When Shri Mataji Herself worked on
new people, She would say the mantras
differently-not "Aum twameva sakshat Shri
Mahakali" or whichever deity She was.
invoking, but She would say, "Aham
sakshat Mahakali." That means, "I am
Mahakali." Powerful stuff!
Linda Willliams
She was creating the collective
I attended my first Caxton Hall program in the
early summer of 1978. In those days, Mother
held programs every Monday near St. James
Park in Victoria, London. Even outside Caxton
Hall and across the road there was this sensation
of tranquillity. There were three of us, we were
late and Shri Mataji had already begun of
program.
Caxton Hall seemed unusually beautiful that
sunny evening. I felt like a child. There wasa
small lecture room with shoes, sandals and
chappals piled up outside. Inside Shri Mataji
was seated on an armchair, upona slightly raised
rostrum in front of the window. She had Her
left hand upon the Sahasrara of ayoung woman
who sat on the floor with her back towards Shri
Mataji, slightly to Her left. There were two or
three other young people sitting on the rostrum
around Her Feet.
My first impression was of a large, confident
personality, full of warmth and humour,
completely different to the silent, little Madonna
I had expected. Her hair was loose about Her
shoulders, Her ams seemed huge and powerful.
I noticed Her gap-toothed smile.
As we entered, She broke off from'the talk
She was giving to greet us, calling out a jovial
"Hello. Come, come. Are you new?"
A small international group ofalternative-
someone down in front of Her and then ask
everybody, "How is he? Which chakra is
blocked?"
She was creating the collective.
Marilyn Leate
We were just so joyful
We used to go to Caxton Hall from Brighton
every Monday and we'd come back and
because there was nothing written into that single
sheet that was on the chair, we'd say, "Did you
hear this?" and "Did you hear that?" Just so
exciting- "Did you hear that Ganesha is Christ?"
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-43.txt 
 43
Issue: 5 & 6 -2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
It would be such a contrast, we'd be laughing
and everything, singing on the train. We were
just so, so joyful, weren't we? We noticed it so
much.
attention on everyone, all at the same time, and
always gave to each person what they needed.
This incident produced such a comforting
feeling in me that Shri Mataji knew what was
happening inside of me and that She would
Pamela Bromley
always protect me if I let Her.
I heard from behind me Shri Mataji's voice
The amazing thing at Caxton Hall is Mother
used to get off the stage and actually walk and
work behind people. I've actually been there
when Mother's actually got off the stage and
actually gone to work on people, sitting down
Felicity Payment
She worked tirelessly on people
Towards the end of each Caxton Hall meeting,
She would take a lighted candle and stare
through it, with Her eyes wide, looking towards
certain individuals who had Agnya problems.
As a bhoot got blasted, She would call, "Ha!
there,
Gail Pottinger
Better now."
Shri Mataji always made sure that everyone got
their Realization by moving around the room,
working personally on each new individual.
One time, after She had given Realization,
I was still sitting in meditation when my mind
began to fill with dark thoughts. Without realizing
it, I was becoming increasingly overwhelmed
by the anxious and troubled feelings they were
producing. Suddenly, through this dark fog, I
heard from behind me Shri Mataji's voice calling
me, "Felicity!" Ijumped up somewhat startled
and guilty I always felt guilty- and turned
around to see Shri Mataji two rows behind me
busily working on some new seeker. I moved
closer and waited expectantly. Then She looked
across at me and said, with great love and
compassion, as if willing me to understand,
"Don't you knowIhave more power in My little
finger than all the power in the whole world put
together?" And the dark fog went away. She
People brought limes and chillies to Her and
She would vibrate them, either by a gentle touch
or bandhan inside the bag. She worked
tirelessly on people, often using Her Feet, as
well as Her hands. She made chopping
movements in the air to destroy negativity.
Individuals would stand with one hand towards
Her and the other out of nearby window. She
recommended Tate and Lyle white cane sugar
or Sainsbury's for the liverish and She would
vibrate it for them. She spoke a lot about the
liver-how it was the seat of our attention,
emphasizing how badly Western diets and
alcohol, medicines and too much thinking and
too much chocolate ruin the liver.
In those days, we were not discouraged
from raising our kundalinis and putting on a
bandhan in Her presence whenever we felt like
it. We used to raise our kundalini with our two
pulled me out of it.
Whatever She was doing, She always knew
exactly where everyone was at and what
everyone was experiencing. She had Her
hands parallel, rather than the right circling the
left.
Marilyn Leate
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-44.txt 
 44
Issue: 5 & 6- 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
She had to work on me and it was a real lesson.
It didn't matter what state the people were in,
you didn't take it as a personal sort of thing. So
not only were we supposedly helping Mother,
She would then have to sort us out afterwards.
It was just like being an apprentice. You were
allowed to have a little go and then She would
have to put it all right afterwards, rebuild the
whole apparatus afterwards.
It was just like being an apprentice
After the Caxton Hall meetings She would have
us back to Her flat in Ashley Gardens. It was
almost like a debrief. We would go, "Phwah!
What a night!" And there would be food. Ifany
new person was astute enough, they would
come with us. They would say, "Where are you
all going?" We're going back to Shri Mataji's
place." "Oh, right." And you would know it
would be right because they would have the
awareness to kind of come. I mean, Mother
would'nt let them in otherwise.
Maureen Rossi
After meetings at Caxton Hall, She used to try
and bring back as many Sahaja Yogis to Her
flat and bring back some of the other new
Maureen Rossi
seekers to work on them. She always had
One of the things we used to dread-and we
people in Her flat in those days, always had
were only a few Sahaja Yogis- we used to dread
all these programs because what happens is we
used to have programs at Caxton Hall and then
people used to come back to Gavin's place for
follow-ups, where Mother could actually work
on them individually and give them more
individual attention. And one of the things we
used to dread were the catches, you know, as
people that She worked on. She always
showed Her concern and She treated everyone
equally, whether they were seekers or not. From
the moment they came to Her, She felt like a
duty to work on them. She would give them all
the love, but She always, of course, favoured
those who had a thought for the collective, for
the whole.
Soon as we got into the meetings you know,often
I had a headache.After a while,when we had
experience when you actually worked on
someone you knew from which false gurus they
came from, according to the catches. From the
catches you actually felt, you start to get
experience.
Djamel Metouri
We all trooped up there and were given
cups of coffee. She continued to work on
people. She just gave and gave. She asked
me to put my hand on Her left Swadhisthan
and put my other hand out. I felt an
Djamel Metouri
incredible force going through me and my
arm shook slightly. Mother looked at me
and said, "Powerful, isn't it?"
After this particular one, Mohter said to me,
"What on Earth have you been doing?" And I
said, "Oh, just working on these people,
Mother." "You don't get involved in it!" And then
Marilyn Leate
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-46.txt 
 11E
Science deals with only a very little portion, I will also tell you which part
* of this power deals with our physical being and out of which how much a
scientist knows. You will be surprised that if knowledge is an Ocean, the
scientist knows only a
dissolved in the Ocean. But a drop cannot by its own effort become the
Ocean; the Ocean has to dissolve the drop."
drop, And to know the Ocean, the drop is to be
(H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi, Feb. 1979)
