29 Vol 7 December 2006 Issue 4 Yuvadrishti

 YUVADRISHTI Published by Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 8, Chandragupta Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 029 Printed by Shrada Printary Pune Please send your experiences, Suggestions, Articles etc., to: Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 8, chandragupta Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 029

 INDEX Significance of Diwali 1. Nirmal Vani - Having the Collecticive spirit 2. हमारी प०पू0 श्रीमाताजी 3. 4. Snakes and Ladders 5. Tomb of Moses 10 6. Divine Secrets of Carbon Atom 12 7. A Poem by RN Tagore 13 8. Find the Names 14 15 9. सहज गीता 16 10. Shri Bhairavnath 11. Self Realization in Andhra Pradesh 18 12. Mother's Recipe 20 13. Mother Explain's 21 14. सहज मन्दिर की मर्यादा एक नाटक 23

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006 Significance of Diwali This Article is a collection of all the stories related to five days of Deepawali Celebration As well as at the same time what our Adishakti Mother has told us about these days. Om Twameva Sakshat Shri Mahalakshmi Sakshat Shri Adishakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyei Namo Namah Diwali, a festival of worship of Goddess Lakshmi, is celebrated by the Indians throughout the world in a joyous mood with great zeal and enthusiasm. It is a festival of lights, crackers, cleanliness, sweets, lots of shopping, happiness, togetherness and almost one week's holiday. The celebrations are for five continuous days one after should say, homage to her... “ “...So it's very important that on this day, we call it the Dhanteras (the thirteenth day), you have to buy something for your wife and you have to give her something as a present. At 05.20 another, each day with a new philosophy. It is not limited to just one-day celebration like many other Indian festivals but it is a unique one: for it brings a series of festivals and holidays with itself. Like most of the Indian festivals Diwali too has its origin in Indian Mythology and there are very interesting historical stories about it. least you should buy a little pot, or something, that can be used in the kitchen to show your respect to her. In the families where mother is not respected, children become History of Five Days of Diwali Celebrations extremely troublesome and the whole of their family - also The first day of this festival begins with 'Dhan Trayodashi or 'Dhanteras'. After Dhanvantari Trayodashi, the second day of Diwali is 'Narak Chaturdashi , which is popular as 'Chhoti Diwali'. The third day of Diwali, which is commonly suffers". Narak Chaturdashi (Day 2) One famous story behind the celebrations of Diwali is about the demon king Narakasura who was the ruler of Pragjyotishpur, a province to the South of Nepal. During a war he defeated Lord Indra and snatched away the called 'Badi Diwali is the main day of celebrations of the festival of Diwali, commemorating the day when Shri Rama returned to Ayodhya after His 14years of exile. The fourth day of Diwali is devoted to 'Govardhan Pooja' magnificent earrings of Mother Goddess Aditi who was not only the ruler of Suraloka (the world of Devas) but also a relative of Lord Krishna's wife, Satyabhama. Narakasur also imprisoned sixteen thousand daughters of Gods and (worship of Lord Govardhan Parvat). The fifth day of the Diwali is 'Bhai Dooj', the time to honour the brother-sister relationship. Dhanteras (Day 1) saints in his harem. With the support of Lord Krishna Satyabhama defeated Narakasura and released all the women from his harem and also restored the magnificent earrings of Mother GoddessAditi. Legends have it that Lord Dhanvantari who is the physician of the Gods and an incarnation of Lord Vishnu came out of the ocean that “...Then the second day is the one where this horrible was churned by the Gods and the demons. On the day of Dhanteras. Rakshasa called as Narakasura was killed. Always all killing is done with the power of the Shakti... He was a very Lord Dhanvantari appeared with Ayurvedic for the welfare of the treacherous cunning man and it was impossible to kill him. But then, somehow or other, with the advent of a mankind. special power, that this Narakasura was killed... They say that when he was killed, the door of hell was closed. So “...Firstly, in Diwali, the first day we buy something for the family. You can buy may be some people should take their baths early in the morning. But I am of the opinion that day, if the door is open, better not take bath. Be in your beds till this fellow is put fully into cooking utensil, could be an ornament for the wife or something like that because that is the day of housewife and that day is to be celebrated as the housewife's, I 'Narak'. You should not bother about him. Narak means hell, and from the hell they extracted him and killed him..."

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006 Diwali (Day 3) "Now in that Lakshmi Puja is this that you worship the The most famous legend behind the celebrations of Diwali is about the prince of Lakshmi herself. It doesn't mean "money" not at all. To worship money is wrong. But what it means that Lakshmi is the money which is with us or whatever prosperity with Her should be very carefully spent because She is very mobile and the money can slip out. On the contrary you Ayodhya Nagri, Lord Shri Rama. The story goes like the king of Lanka, Ravan kidnaped Ram Chandra's wife, Sita from the jungle where they were staying should not be at all miserly. Miserly people Lakshmi is not happy. But if you want to spend, you must spend it in the right way otherwise the money is spent in the wrong way." as per the instructions of “... Now when the Lakshmi was created - must be knowing King Dashratha, father of out of the churning of the sea She came out - She had four hands. One hand was to give. She is generous. She Ram Chandra. Then Ram Chandra attacked Lanka gives: like this She gives. And with one hand She blesses. These are Her two hands. One is to give and to bless the and killed Ravan and released Sita from person. Very important it is that when you give to somebody something, you forget about it and you bless that person. Not only you give money, but also you bless that person. The other two hands have got two lotuses of pink color. Pink is the color of love and a person who has imprisonm ent. He returned to Ayodhyaa with his wife Sita and younger brother Lakshamana after fourteen years of exile. Since it was a night of no moon so people of Ayodhyaa decorated their homes as well as the city of Ayodhyaa by lighting diyas(oil lamps) all over, in order to welcome their beloved prince Shri Rama and his wife Shri Sita. It was the money should have a house, which is full of love. Any guest who comes in the house should be respected. He should be treated just like God... “ day of 'Kartik Amavasyaa' when they also celebrated the "... So this is what is the meaning of the lotus - "is a house full of love". Like a beetle, which has got even thorns, victory of Shri Ram over the King of Lanka, Ravana. Shri Rama who is divine while Ravana represents the evil. when it comes to the lotus, the lotus open out and the beetle goes inside and Therefore, Diwali is considered a festival, which establishes the victory of divine over evil. Further, lighting of diyas (oil lamps), also symbolises the victory of light sleeps very nicely an d comfortably over darkness. "...The last one is the best where they have the meeting of Shri Rama and his brother Bharat... But when they came even the beetle, back to their own capital in Ayodhya, there was a big jubilation and Bharat, His brother, He was very much undisturbed. That is how one attached to His brother and he ruled that country with the should treat if Paduka, they say is the a kind of sandalwood chappals they use, of his brother. He put it on the throne and ruled. So that is how the Bharat Milan i.e the meeting of Bharat with Shri Rama - is celebrated and that was the time. He have you money... “ ...But the best is, She is just standing on the lotus. That means, no was crowned also as the king. So it is long time back i.e. pressure on anyone. She exists on Her own, no pressure. She doesn't put any pressure on anyone. Just on Her own She stands and all Her weight and all balanced on Her thousands of years back, this thing has happened. That jubilation is very significant: that the right king gets his own throne and He rules and all the injustice and all kind of own dignity. This is the way a Lakshmi should be..." atrocities he has gone through has to be completely finished from his life. And that's why Diwali is important...' Govardhan Puja (Day 4) ...So the last day they worship the Goddess Lakshmi because, it is Her blessings that brought forth all these beautiful meetings. And that's why they worship Her "Lakshmi" as such." "Govardhan' is a small hillock situated in 'Braj', near Mathura. The legends in 'Vishnu Puraan' have it that the people of Gokul used to worship and offer prayers to Lord 3

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006 History of Sikh Community's Diwali Indra for the rains because they believed that it was He who sent rains for their welfare. But Lord Krishna told In the Sikh community Diwali celebrations have special importance as for them it is popular as the day when their them that it was Mount Govardhan (Govardhan Parvat) sixth Guru, Guru Har Govindji came back from the and not Lord Indra who caused captivity of the fort of Gwalior city. The people lighted lamps in the way to Shri Harmandhir Sahib, which is rains therefore they should worship the former and not the known by the name of 'The Golden Temple', in order to latter. People did the same and it honour and to welcome their beloved Guru. made Lord Indra so furious that the people of Gokul had to face History of Jain Community's Diwali very heavy rains as a result of his anger. Then Lord Krishna For the Jain community also the festival of Diwali has special significance. It is the day when the famous Jain prophet Shri Mahaveer (who was an incarnation of Shri came forward to ensure their security and after performing worship and offering prayers to Mount Govardhan lifted it as an umbrella on the little finger Bhairavnath), the founder of Jainism attained 'Nirvana'. Therefore the people of Jain community celebrate the festival of Diwali in remembrance of Lord Mahavira of his right hand so that everyone could take shelter under it. After this event, Lord Krishna was also known as Giridhari or Govardhan-dhari. Bhai Dooj (Day 5) The legends have that Lord Yamraj, the God of Death, visited his sister Yamuna on the 'Shukla Paksha Dwitiya' day in the Hindu month of 'Kartik'. When Yamraj reached Yamuna's home she welcomed Him by performing his aarti, applying 'Tilak' on His forehead and by putting a garland around his neck. Yamuna also cooked varieties of dishes "When you become one with the Spirit all your problems will be solved. A realized person never talks in first person. He becomes separate from himself, leaving aside his desires, his materialistic ideas." and prepared lots of sweets for her brother and offered all those to him. Lord Yamraj ate all those delicious dishes and when he was finished he showered blessings on Yamuna and gave her a boon as a gift that if a brother visits his sister on this day he would be blessed with health and wealth. This is why this day of Bhai-Dooj is also known by the name of 'Yam-Dwitiya'. Thus it has become a tradition that on the day of Bhai-Dooj brothers visit their sisters' home and offer them gifts. Sisters also make various dishes for their brothers and also give gifts to them. 4

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006 "Nirmal Vani" Some priceless jewels on selected topics, extracted from the treasure trove of our Mother's eternal words of wisdom, have been strung into exquisite necklace called "Nirmal Vani". This issue, lets focus on mother's advice on how to establish the eternal child within us. Having the Collective Spirit What is the importance of collective in Sahaja Yoga? Does it only mean going to Pujas, Seminars, Centers, leaf separates off, it dies - we have to stick onto the tree. If we cannot be collective, or enjoy collectivity, then there is something wrong with us. Avoid criticising each other. We must come to the Collective; otherwise there is the possibility of getting lost. You are not alone... you are all friends to each other... and the greatest friend you have is the Divine Power which is looking after you... and doing everything for you. If you have that kind of a relaxed beautiful alertness within you, you are going to enjoy life...you are going to enjoy Sahaja Yoga... and you are going to get many many more people in Sahaja Yoga. Before Sahaja Yoga you could have only one friend or at the most two... three meant a crowd... cannot have three persons as your friends... but in Sahaja Yoga we are all friends... pure friendship, friendship of a very beautiful nature... that you enjoy the joy of another person... in vibrations you do. This is how... I have to tell you that we have to be friends... we have to share... enjoy other Sahaja yogis house only? Do we belong to one center or a city or a state or a country or the whole world? What does Shri Mataji means when She says we have to sharing...there's no seriousness about it - how can you be serious with your friends... just relaxed, enjoying each others company... even if you have to argue, argue... be collective and that we are universal beings? From Mother's talks lets us go on the journey of discovering the collective feeling within ourselves: doesn't matter... even if you have a different view it's The Importance of Being Collective alright... but you should not try to impose yourself on your friend... nor your friend should try to impose... But try to understand each other. That's how we are going to learn Today is the day to make a big determination... that you will start enjoying your collective spirit... which was opened on 5th May 1970...everything for the collectivity... then the enjoyment will be maximum... you will never feel that you have sacrificed anything. But still you are more identified with your own enjoyments... and your own ideas of enjoyment... you still do not enjoy that collective spirit... you still like in companionship in such a lot from each other. பார் company with each other... you enjoy it more like people who are not in Sahaja Yoga...very low grade... just want to take advantage... and have a nice time...and all that... that type of people are not going to make much mark for us. You all must be connected to God individually... so that you are all connected among yourselves. Only in collectivity maturity starts - it is a living process. If we are not collective we will disappear one day. It is like a tree, where everything belonging to that tree grows - if a You cannot have friendship between men and women... 5

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006 Sahaja Yogis... you must attend the programs, when there is a collective Aarti... or Puja... or Meditation. When you collect together...something happens to you... if you you cannot - it's absolutely absurd; A brother and a sister are never friends. We are cells in the Mother's body - Mother has awakened us. If we are sick, then Mother is sick. sit at home, and do something...nothing works out much.... Because it is a collective phenomena. How to become Collective ? The Joy of Being Universal Beings We are all collective... we have to know everything among each other.….and we have to live like one family, all over the world. Once you develop that kind of a love for everyone, then you will be surprised, you have become a great personality - that means... the drop becomes the ocean. Now you are not facing the Mother... you are sitting with the Mother facing the whole world... so the whole attitude will change. The attitude should be...what can I give... how can I give... what is my mistake in giving... I have to be more alert... where is my attention... what am I doing, what is my responsibility. You must desire that you should be pure... pure desire... that you should be the Spirit. Then your responsibility to Sahaja Yoga... what is your responsibility to Sahaja Yoga... which is the work of God that has started... and you... are my hands. First of all your attitude has to be alright in Sahaja Yoga I see that people who don't have good attitudes can never progress...doesn't matter if your vibrations are bad... doesn't matter... they'll be alright... so you should see how much collective you are... how much you help each other... how much you are kind to each other...this is very important to introspect and find out.. more than anything Every one of you is worth the whole Universe... if you want to rise to that height...to that magnitude... it is within you to prosper. else. References: The tongue is first of all.. for saying things which are sweet and beautiful... let us find out what sweet things we Bordi, 1977 Sahastrara Day, Dollis Hill, 1980 How to know where you are - Chelsham Road, 1980 New Age - Plaw Hatch Seminar, 1980 Mahakali Puja & Mahalakshmi Puja, are going to say to people... not expressing 'our' views, like 'I like it.. I like that' or 'l want that', but on the contrary... 'do you like this'... ''would you enjoy this'... so the language should be directed towards others...showing interest and concern. Lonavala/Kolapur, 1982 Niraananda, Vienna Ashram, 1985 Vishnumaya Puja, Brompton Square, 1985 Raksha Bandhan - Hampstead, 1986 Sahastrara Puja, Australia, 1987 Mahakali Puja,Germany, 1987 Importance of friendship - France, 1989 Navaratri Puja - Switzerland, 1990 Vancouver, Canada, 1990 Richmond Park talk, Richmond, 1995 Mahalakshmi Puja, Moscow, 1996 You have to be the whole; you have to be in the centre. Tell your mind 'be humble'... and all this relativity will go away, that you have to be unique, that you are some higher soul or something - all that is nonsense. So, nevercriticize your brothers and sisters... if you have to criticize, criticize yourself. Best is to criticize yourself, and see for yourself what's wrong with you that you cannot fit into the collective. In India it is said that if someone's pin is in your house, you should look after it for eternity... but if 'your diamond' is lost with somebody, you should never ask for it... it is not good manners. What is more valuable, is not the diamond... it is the relationship. The best way to strengthen yourself is... to be together as

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006 हमारी प०पू० श्रीमाताजी एक बार एक स्विस जरनलिस्ट ने प०पू0 श्री माता जी से कौन है ?" कोई सूफी संत, या कोई उपचारक, कोई दार्शनिव या फिर ईश्वर और इंसान के बीच का कोई संवाहक ?"श्री माता जी हंसी और बोली, "मेरी अपने बारे में कोई धारणा या विचार नही परन्तु इसी तरह की कोई बात है । कोई किसी एक को किसी एक वर्ग में नहीं रख सकते | किसी को परिभाषित करने का मतलब है उसकी सीमा तय करना । जैसे कि मैं एक गृहस्थ हूँ पत्नी हूँ परन्तु यदि मैं अपनी पहचान तय कर दैं तो इससे मैं अपने को सीमित कर लेती हूँ | करना बेहतर है कि "आप पूछा , जलता है, परन्तु अग्नि तब नहीं जल पायेगी जब बारिश हो रही हो । है । जब श्रीमाताजी उनके घर हाँलैंड पधारी थी । श्रीमाताजी 1992 की गर्मियों में हॉलैड पधारीं । जैसे 'रेचल रूइग्रोक' वो किस्सा बताती ही वें हवाई जहाज से बाहर उतरी एकदम बरसात शुरू हो गई । बारिश | इतनी ज्यादा थी कि ड्राईवर कार को मुशिकल से चला पा रहा था । जैसे ही वें हमारे धर पघारी, बारिश एकदम ऐसे रूक गई जैसे किसी ने नल बंद कर दिया हो | श्री माता जी कार से जैसे उतरी सारा आकाश बिजली की चमक से भर गया, बारिश नहीं हो रही थी | वे रास्ते पर चल ये "जो मैं नहीं हूँ तो बचता है वो मैं हूँ । (it would be better to say what I am not, and what is left is what I am) रहीं थी और लगातार बिजली गर्जना करते हुए चमक रही थी | हमने उनकी आरती की हर परम पूज्य श्री माता जी आधुनिक युग में अवतरण हैं और सहजयोग के माध्यम से मानव समाज को आत्मसाक्षात्कार दे रही हैं | प0पू0 श्रीमाताजी सम्मुख और यहाँ तक उनके फोटो मात्र के सामने मनुष्य की कुण्डलिनी सहज ही जागृत हो जाती है । भारत के अनुसूचित गाँवों से लेकर लंदन, अमेरिका, रोम, ऑस्ट्रेलिया और अनेकानेक देशों में श्रीमाताजी यात्रा करके लाखों लोगों को आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्रदान कर रही हैं । श्री बार जब आरती की थाली उनके मस्तक तक जाती, जोरदार गर्जना के साथ बिजली चमकती । फिर श्रीमाताजी अंदर आयी और मैने उनको माला समर्पित की | जैसे ही उनके गले में माला पहनाई एकाएक बारिश फिर शुरू हो गई जैसे फिर किसी ने नल खोल दिया हो | श्रीमाताजी कहाँ - ये हुआ ना आदिशक्ति का स्वागत!! श्रीमाताजी के भीतर अतिमानवीय शक्तियाँ विद्यमान है अगर वो चाहें, ये शक्तियाँ कार्यान्वित होती है । ऐलीयनॉर, दुईलियो कारटोसी ओर जियोवानी अलबानसी ने ये कुछ घटनाएँ वर्षित की हैं । ब्राम्पटन स्कबॉयर लंदन में कुछ लोग श्री माता जी के घर आने वाले थे | काफी लोग फरनीचर यहाँ से वहाँ हटा कर लगा रहे थे । श्री माता जी ने इटली इन कुछ मजबूत जबानी का उनका ठोस लकडी का बना पलंग हटाने को कहा | वे लोग उसको हटाने के पूरा जोर लगा रहे थे , परन्तु वो एक इंच भी नही हिल पा रहा था । सब अपने छुटने पर बैठ कर पंलग के पाये को जोर से धक्का लगा रहे थे | पर पलंग हिल नहीं पा रहा था । तभी श्री माता जी आई पंलग एकदम जैसे उड़ता हुआ सा खिसक कर दीवार के पास एकदम सही दिशा में स्थिर हो गया । सबसे मूंह से निकला 'आह' । श्री माता जी हंसी और बोली, ठीक है, आखिर कार मैं आदिशक्ति हूँ, मेरे लिए ये साधारण है । सभी उनके सामने नतमस्तक हो गए । इसी तरह वहाँ एक बेहद भारी अल्मारी को भी उन्होने अपनी ऊंगली से छू भर के प0पू0 माता जी का जन्म 1923, 21 मार्च्च के दिन बारह बजे दोपहर को मध्यभारत स्थित "छिन्दवाड़ा" नामक स्थान पर हुआ । मुस्कुराती, कान्तीमय बालिका की ओर विस्मय से देखते हुए दादी माँ ने कहा," ये निष्कलंका है। अतः श्रीमाताजी को नाम दिया गया 'निर्मला' अर्थात् 'निष्पाप' । कि सम्भवतः कोई भी नश्वर प्राणी उनके बहुआयामी 'दिव्य रूप' को नहीं जो जान सकता । एक साधारण मनुष्य कुछ इतना आश्चर्यजनक है कि उसी को समझ पाना उसके भौतिक चक्षु के लिए संभव नहीं । श्रीमाताजी के साक्षात् संर्पक में सहजयोगियों को होने वाले आलौकिक अनुभवों की संक्षिप्त चर्चा हम इस लेख में कर रहे हैं। एक दीपक सूर्य के प्रकाश को कैसे प्रतिबिम्बित कर सकता है या एक नश्वर मनुष्य अपने सृष्टा के सौन्दर्य का कैसे वर्णन कर सकता है, परन्तु ये चेष्टा है परमात्मा के परम आंनद में सभी के ओतप्रोत होने की मेहमान धर आता है तो उसकी आरती की जाती है । ये कोई भी विवाहित स्त्री करती है और उसके एक थाली तैयार की जाती जिसमें घी का दिया दख सकता है वा ही - | आगे खिसका दिया था । 7 ए/जि ত

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006 श्री माता जी ने बताया है कि हर देश विराट की कुण्डलिनी के एक |Invitation for Self Realization विशेष चक्र को दर्शाता है और हर देश में कुण्डलिनी का हर आयाम स्वरूप विद्यमान है | यहाँ लंदन में बहने वाली ' थेम्स' नदी के बारे में एक किस्सा प्रस्तुत है । - by ShriMataji 1982 में श्री माता जी सप्ताहांत सेमिनार के खत्म होने पर कुछ सहजयोगियों के साथ चेलटनहैंम इंग्लैड में शविन इसपिंग (सात धारा) गई । उन्होंने अपने जूते उतार दिये और नीचे उतरी जहाँ पत्थरों के बीच में थोड़ा पानी था । वहाँ पानी की सात धाराएं एक बड़ी चट्टान के नीचे से आ रही थी | वो पानी ज्यादा बह नहीं रहा था और वहाँ चारो तरफ मक्खियाँ थी सभी ने अपने पाँच पानी में डाले पर पानी बहुत ठंडा था | तब जब श्री माता जी ने अपना पॉव डाला तो पानी बहना शुरू हो गया और सारी मक्खियाँ उड़ गई और सारा वातावरण बहुत संदर हो | "What are you searching? Why are you aimlessly and गया | जैसे ही श्री माता जी ने पॉव पानी में डाला पानी का स्तर ऊपर हो गया | श्री माता जी ने बताया कि "थेम्स' नदी इंग्लैंड की कुण्डालना | for in power, the joy that disappeared in the words of listlessly running about? The joy that you have searched in material gains, the joy that you are looking है | उन्होने बताया कि ' थेम्स' का अभिप्राय 'तमसा' से है, मतलब बांया | books-the so-called knowledge-is all lost in yourself, भाग और लदन चंद्रमा का शहर है । मतलब लना और चंद्रमा का सबंध | and you are still searching and seeking! You can pay attention to everything outside, yourself! You are lost in बायें भाग से होता है श्री माता जी ने कहा अब ये नदी इंग्लैंड को स्वच्छ your thoughts, like babes in the wood! But there is great करेगी और 'थेम्स' चैतन्यमयी हो गई | पहले ये नदी बहुत ही प्रदूषित | hope that you can rise into the Heaven of "thoughtless" थी पर उसके बाद वो काफी स्वच्छ नदी हो गई । परम पूज्य श्री माता जी के श्री चरणों में कोटी-कोटी नमन awareness, which we call Self-realization." "I invite you to this feast of Divine Bliss, which is pouring around you, even in this Kaliyuga, in these God-forsaken modern times. I hope you will come and Who knew that god would be waiting | enjoy the spiritual experience of the Life Eternal." (Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi) Walking on the way there was hay. Which I tried to ignore, I went in a turmoil to know it , But it was just a stone in my way, This made me go left some times right away from my way. Bess buzzed when I was a rose. Trying to take my happiness away. I jittered a bit so as to move them away, But it was just a testing part of the day. So I smiled and said hey Let them say Inside the lamp when I was a light, Winds tried to jitter me in dark nights, I fought till the whole night, And got submerged in enlightened suns light of the day. I cryied, when all went away, I had an unfortunate delay, but who knew that god would be waiting for so long,just for me with his people in his boat, to take me away in the morning dawn from one heaven to another heavenly place!!! (This letter was written by Shri Mataji in 1972 during Her first trip to America to give public programs.) 8

 Snakes and Ladders (For a Sahaja Yogi) Yuvadrishti Dec20l6 91 92 93 94 95 97 96 You Become 99 100 Yogi/Yogini 81 82 84 88 87186 90 72 8 77 7 79 80 Roving Oving Eye 63 64 65 68 Judging other Relations& 52 ! 1 34 53 55 57 on Shri Mataji 42 41 with 48 Sahaja yog 38 15 46 47 3231 33 34 35 36 39 40 23 2 21 24 Daily Foot soaking & Bhandhan 36 28 30 29 11 12 13 16 18 49 20 9 10 6 Your Journey 4 STARTS Snakes & Lader Game For Yuvashakti ...They go on a ride of a ego-trip. When they go on a ride of a ego-trip, then they find that they've failed and they've to come back, from the very beginning they start. It's like the game of Snake & Ladder... ...And though people have told that first see the vibrations and then read the books, still we say, "O, what's wrong, we should read other books." You go down again, Snake and Ladder, as I said. That is one of the snakes. We think that, "What's the need to do meditation, I've no time, I have this thing, that thing." You do not progress.... Talk about Sahastrara, February 4, 1983 9. Attachment with erialistic things Meditating & Excell in their Studies Wearing Dignified , Auspisious & Chaste Dress sanajy & children. 15 Catch Arguing Helping Elder Sahajyogi seeking Importance Elder Spreading Sahajayoga & Inspring others to do so Doubt

 The Tomb of Moses Yuvadrishti Dec 2006 Shri Moses' Final Journey around 600 years ago great the valley of the Jhelum opens out into the broad plan of Kashmiri saint Hazrat Makhdoom was traveling in the Lake Wular was once called Behatpur, which is now called Bandipur in the region of Tehsil Sopore, 80 kilometres north of Srinagar, the capital of Kashmir. region near Srinagar along with his close disciple Baba Dawood Khaki. On reaching Bandipore which was then called Bethpoer, he said, 'I find smell (vibrations) of the Only approximately 18 kilometers northeast of Bandipur lies the small village of Hasba or Hasbal. This is referred to as Hesbon in the Bible (Deuteronomy 4, 46), and is presence of some prophet nearby.' Then he climbed to the village Buth, reached near the rivulet and told Khaki, 'Yes, it has to be somewhere here (Near Nebu Bal)." mentioned in connection with Bethpeor and Pisga. On the cliffs of Pisga (now: Pishnag), north of Bandipur and only 1.5 kilometres northeast of the village Aham-Sharif, there is a spring famous for the healing quality of its waters. In Finally he reached a tomb which had east-west orientation similar to Jewish tombs (Muslim tombs are of North-south orientation). It is also common local knowledge that the villages near the tomb had never suffered from famine or natural disasters. Which Prophet's tomb is it? Hazbal Auth Wattu The Bible mentions five geographic places that pinpoint the location of Moses' tomb. But misled by false knowledge his followers kept on searching for his tomb in biblical regions of west Asia and thus later added into the Pishga Moab Mount Nebo bible: "but no man knoweth of his sepulcher (tomb) unto AhamshH TOMB OF MOSES this day,". But through enlightened knowledge that Shri Mataji has blessed us with, we know that the promised VAral-Ma land of bible which Shri Moses saw before he died is the Bandipur present day Kashmir, where even Shri Jesus spent his early life and after resurrection. This is also confirmed by the biblical verse which states clearly precisely where the Bible, the valley and the plains of Mowu are called the Moses is buried in Kashmir. " And Moses went up from the plains of Moab unto the mountain of Nebo, to the top of Pisgah, that is over against Jericho... And the Lord said unto him, This is the land...So Moses plains of Moab, ideal pasture land, about five kilometres northwest of Mount Nebo. Mount Nebo is a single mountain in the range of Abarim and is always mentioned in context of Beth-peor. All five the servant of the Lord died there in the land of Moab, according to the names are to be found within close proximity to one word of the Lord. And he buried him in another. Mount Nebo, also called Baal Nebu or Niltoop, offers a splendid view of Bandipur and the entire a valley in the land of Moab, over against Beth-peor: but no man knoweth of his sepulchre unto this highlands of Kashmir. All the five named landmarks are thus to be found in one well-defined location. day." Everything fits in: near the plains of Moab, near the top of Pisga, on the mountain of Nebo, across from Beth-peor [all in line with the Biblical account], and from this place one has a splendid view of a fresh and blossoming land, forever green, in which 'milk and honey' flow, a true Thus the Bible names five landmarks in relation to Moses' burial site: The Plains of Moab; Mount Nebo (in the Abarim mountains); The Peak of (Mount) Pisgah; Beth-peor and Heshbon. If it is possible to find the places mention in the Moses by Michelangelo paradise. texts, the true location of the Promised Land should also Above a small hamlet of Buth directly beneath Mount become clear. Nebo, there is an area that resembles an unfenced garden that contains a small cabin like shrine. This The literal meaning of Bet-peor is 'place that opens out', as might refer to a valley that opens on to a plain. The river modest hut serves as the tomb of an Islamic saint, Sang Bibi, a female recluse, and two of her followers. To one Jhelum in the north of Kashmir is called "Behat" in side, in the shadow of the little wooden building, lies an Persian, and the small town of Bandipur at the point where unprepossessing stone column that rises about a metre 10

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006 What Is Tension... from the ground and is almost completely covered by grass: this is the tombstone of Moses. The keeper of this, the Wali Risih, states that the Rishis have been caretakers of that tomb for over 2700 years. "In these modern times we have something called tensions. It was never there before. People never talked of any tensions. Now every body says, "I am in Also in this area, as in other parts of Kashmir, there are tension, you give me a tension". What is this tension? This is because of my advent. numerous places with biblical names. There are four Maqam-i-Musa, the place of (rest) of Moses in Kashmir and there may be many others. One is near Auth Wattu The limbic area wants to know about me. As Sahaja Yoga is expanding the Kundalini is trying to rise in other people because you people have become the channels. Wherever you go you generate vibrations and these vibrations give a challenge to the Kundalini or a message in various people and it rises. It may not rise up to the Sahasrara or may rise and fall back due to lack of recognition. So every time they do something the kundalini comes up and gives them a pressure because their Sahasrara is not open. It is a closed door. Because of the closed door it gives them a kind of pressure in the head, which they don't understand and they call it a tension. Actually the Kundalini is trying to push out itself but it cannot. Those who get their realization but do not make the Sahasrara alright face the same tensions." (Eight paths) in Handwara Tehsil. This place is also known as Ayat Maula, the Sign of God. Moses came to the valley from this direction and prayed at this spot for forty days. The second is at the junction of the two rivers Jhelum and Sindh (Not Indus) near Shadipur. It is sometimes known as Kohna-i-Musa, 'Cornerstone of Moses'. The third is at Pisgah and the fourth is near Bandipur. To South of Srinagar, at Bijbihara, a place on the banks of the river is still referred to as "Moses' Bath", where there is miraculous stone called Sang-i-Musa (Stone of Moses) or Ka-Ka-Bal (Stone of Ka Ka). The Ladakhis call Moses Ka Ka. The Pathans call an elderly or saintly person Ka Ka. According to legend , the stone about 70 kilograms in weight is supposed to rise by itself and remain suspended at about one meter off the ground if eleven people touch it with one finger while chanting the name 'Ka-ka, ka-ka'. Sahasrara Day Puja - Sorrento 6th May 1989 The stone rises only when 11 persons do this and not any other number. The reasons for this is out of twelve tribes of Israel one (Levi) h ad been disinherited. When the remaining eleven tribes are symbolically represented before the stone of Moses, The Stone atop Shri Moses Tomb in Kashmir it would lift itself. So the tomb of Moses is on Nebu baal (Mount Nebu). From this place Behatpoor (Bandipur), Sin Betour (second Mount Sinai) are visible. Hashba, Pisgah and Maqam-i-Musa, the Place of Moses, are within a short distance from it. The discovery of the tomb's location in Kashmir shows that India, the sacred land of the Kundalini, was revered and was a coveted destination for the realized souls of the past. "It is the land of Saints, this holy land of Bharat; O Divine Mother please bless this land and remove all afflictions from here" 11

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006 Divine Secrets of Carbon Atom Carbon (symbol 'C', atomic number - 6, atomic mass - 12) Nabhi center. It has been a is a very special element of all the known elements. It occurs in all organic life and is in fact basis of life itself. Chemically, Carbon is tetravalent, that is, it has four spontaneous process so far. Nowadays because of advancement of atomic theory, the scientists valencies similar to the four describe the structure of an atom Negative electron petals of Mooladhara Chakra. It is a very fascinating element with very special properties. Carbon is able to be present in through a model called the charge cloud model/quantum mechanical model/orbital model. So the model uses an overlapping cloud like structure that represents the highly likely occurrence of the electrons, also called "probability clouds". different forms in nature and one of its forms is the hardest In the case of the carbon atom the electrons occupy four naturally occurring substance (diamond) and other one is the softest substances (graphite) tear drop shaped clouds in a tetrahedron-like arrangement. These clouds represent the areas in which the electrons spend most of their time. Recently a number of researchers have suggested that even within these clouds exist specific zones that the electrons favored. Positive nucleus known. Moreover, carbon has the highest melting point of all elements. This element also has the interesting chemical These areas form a spiral around the surface of each of property of being able to bond with itself (called as Catenation) and also attracts a wide variety of other elements to bond with it thus forming nearly TEN MILLION known compounds, while the rest 115 elements are known to form around 50,000+ compounds. Many the tear drop shaped clouds. The specialties of Carbon atom make it an element that has been specially chosen by the divine to work out life. And this aspect was elaborated by Shri Mataji when She revealed that the Carbon atom contains universal divine thousands of these are vital to the process of life. In fact, there are more known carbon-containing compounds symbols representing Shri Ganesha and His Incarnation, Shri Jesus. On basis of this revelation, scientists studied than all the compounds of the other chemical elements combined. This resembles quality of the magnetism which is a blessing of Shri Ganesh. the structure of the spiral waves surrounding the Carbon nucleus. They were not much astonished when they viewed the three-dimensional model Shri Mataji has said that God (and not Law of Chance) from different angles which created Carbon atom so that He could use the carbon revealed its secrets for the first atom to make other compounds which form the basis of time to mankind's naked eye. life. Carbon comes from Ganesha on the left side. Thus On viewing from the left Carbon is also associated with the Mooladhara chakra, towards right side, a 3-D which represents the stage when life itself started, the origin of living being. Mother Omkara or Aum symbol was very clearly visible. From the other side the Omkara took the shape of a 2D Swastika. More special secrets were yet to be revealed. Looking from below upwards a symbol of Alpha and Omega came forth, the symbol and representation of Shri Jesus who had said, "I am the Alpha and Omega". Earth created the carbon and through the effect of electricity, carbon got attached to hydrogen and oxygen and so produced amino acids and so Prana started which ultimately Thus the humble Carbon atom stands witness to the produced the mind and the brain universality of the Divine aspect in the whole creation. All the living matter is made of carbon and thus all of us living beings contain these divine symbols of Om, Swastika, and Alpha & Omega is in each cell of our bodies. and when we become realized, becomes the Pranava. Evolution thus took place from the carbon stage and amoeba stage through the fish and reptile stages, to the present day at Sahasrara and it is still going on. Carbon was the instrument for igniting the living process in matter, which was followed by the different incarnations of the 12

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006 A Poem by RN Tagore I thought that my voyage had come to its end at the last limit of my power, that the path before me was closed, that provisions were exhausted and the time come to take shelter in a silent obscurity. Let only that little be left of my will whereby I may feel thee on every side and come to thee in everything and offer to thee my love every moment. Let only that little be left of me But I find that thy will knows no end in me And when old words die out on the tongue, whereby I may never hide thee. Let only that little of my fetters be left whereby I am bound with thy will and thy purpose is carried out in life new melodies break forth from the heart; and where the old tracks are lost, my and that is the fetter of thy love. new country is revealed with its wonders. That I want thee, only thee let my heart repeat without end. All desires that distract me, day and night, are false and empty to the core. Where the mind is without fear and the head is held high; Where knowledge is free; Where the world has not been broken up into fragments by narrow domestic walls; Where words come out from the depth of truth; Where tireless striving stretches its arms towards perfection; Shri Mataji's Precious Advice Truth is love. Sahaja yoga talks only of God's love. When we love someone we have to know each and every detail about the other person.We have to develop the dynamic of love and manifest it in each one's daily life. Where the clear stream of reason has not lost its way into the dreary desert sand of dead habit; Where the mind is led forward by thee into ever-widening thought and action. Into that heaven of freedom, my Father, let my country awake. This is my prayer to thee, my lord strike, strike at the root of penury in my heart. Introspection is not a mental activity. When we are in the state of thoughtless awarness automatically we are in introspecetion. We become the witness for burselves. Give me the strength lightly to bear my joys and sorrows. Give me the strength to make my love fruitful in service. During the meditation, listening to music is al right as long as we have no reaction to the music. There should be enough light for us to see the picture of mother ; too strong or complete darkness is not good. Give me the strength never to disown the poor or bend my knees before insolent might. Give me the strength to raise my mind high above daily trifles. And give me the strength to surrender my strength to thy will with love. To spread Sahaj Yoga is everyone's responsibility ; it is not just the leader's responsibility. 13

 Sahajayoga Yuvashakti Quiz- BrainTease Find the Names... F2 8. TO 6. 12 "ТЗ 14 5 " Across: Down: 4. Indian freedom fighter, often referred to as Shaheed; While in jail wrote a book "Why I am an Atheist" 1. Swiss Psychologist who talked about the collective consciousness; Also referred to divine child, primordial mother among archetypes who communicate from this 5. Indian Freedom fighter, who resigned from Indian area with individual consciousness Civil Service despite his fourth ranking to partcipate in independence movement and is immortalised for forming the Azad Hind government in exile 2. The Bard of Avon, the most quoted writer in literature of the English speaking world who wrote about the futility of human endeavours in his works 6. He was a German monk, priest, professor, theologian, and church reformer who started the new 3. The king who unified whole of Maharashtra, whose only message for the future was "Swadharma Jagawa" meaning You awaken your Spirit. movement of Protestants. 10. He led the turkish national movement to independence and became its first president. His far reaching reforms sought to create Turkey as a secular, 7. The Indian poet who wrote about ganapatipule, where people from all over the world shall collect to modern and democratic state. His name means Father become Mahamanav Turk. 8. The Indian prime minister known for his honesty, 13. An English Poet, best known for his series, The humility and soft-spoken nature who showed his strength of will and made India win a war. Chronicles of Narnia, who described his vision of the procession of Shri Mataji 9. Greatest physicist of modern science; who gave 14. He led American Revolutionary war and was credit to the torsion area for his discoveries which in America's first President; Is often referred to as the Nirmal knowledge means Paramchaitanya. Father of the United States 11. He was the father of Labor Right movement and 15. The Warrior Yogi & King of Mewar, who took a vowed to sleep on floor till he could free his homeland from the Mughals. (Answers on page : 24) warned people of the ills of capitalism through his book Das Kapital 12. An American president who abolished slavery. 14 Page no 14

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006 सहज गीता गीता भारतीय संस्कृति का आधार भूत स्तम्भ है । श्री कृष्ण ने बहुत ही संक्षेप में जीवन का सार तत्व अर्जुन को बताया | अर्जुन महान योद्वा था परन्तु अपने गुरूओ व परिवार के श्रेष्ठ व वृद्वजनो को देखकर उसका मन आत्मग्लानि से भर गया । क्योंकि वह जानता था कि अवश्य ही लोग उनके हाथो यह तो सभी जानते है कि सहजयोग मे आने के बाद हमारे सोचने की दिशा ही बदल जाती है और श्री माता जी की कपा से जीवन के रहस्य अलग ही गहराई से समझ आने लगते है । कुछ मारे जाएंगे । जिनकी गोद मे बचपन में कभी खेला करता था, उन पर वार करना उसे अनुचित लग रहा था । यदि एक साधारण मनुष्य अनुसार सोचा जाए तो उसका मोह में पडना स्वाभाविक था । परन्तु महाभारत का युद्वतो धर्मयुद्व था, यहाँ तो बुराई, क्रूरता और अर्धम का सामना अर्जुन को करना था । जो अधर्म का साथ दे रहा था वह | कृष्ण ने अर्जुन को युद्व करने के किए महाभारत के युद्वमें श्री प्रेरित किया । पाण्डव और कौरव एक ही के थे और उनमें युद्व का मुख्य कारण कौरवो के बड़े भाई दुर्योधन की राज्य पाने की महत्वकांक्षा थी । पाण्डवो व कौरवो के क्रमशः पिता थें युद्ध कुल के पाण्डु व धृतराष्ट्, धृतराष्ट्र बडा भाई था, मगर अंघा होने के कारण उसे राज्य सिंहासन नही मिला । यही ईर्ष्या धृतराष्ट्र ने जाने अनजाने में अपने पुत्रो के मन में भर दी । पाण्डु की मुत्यु के बाद राजसिंहासन पाण्डवो मे बड़े भाई युधिष्ठिर को मिला । दुर्योधन ने अपने मामा शकुनि के साथ पाण्डवो को जुए में हराकर उनका राज्य हड़पने की चाल चली और इसमें वे सफल भी हो गये । पाण्डवो को 14 वर्ष उसका संगा संबन्धी होते हुए भी शत्रु ही था । अर्जुन ने श्री कृष्ण से कहा " हे कृष्ण मुझे न तो विनय का, ना मान सम्मान का और न ही राज्य का सुख चाहिए | ऐसे राज्य सुख से या ऐसे भोगविलासों से और ऐसे जीवन से भी क्या लाभ है | अगर तीनों लोको का राज्य भी मुझे मिल जाए तो भी नैं इन्हें मारना चाहुगा । भोगने इन सभी को मारकर राज्य सुख कोई प्रयोजन मुझे समझ नही आता । यदि कौरवो को मै मारता हूँ, तो भी जीव हत्या का का पाप तो मेरे सिर लगेगा ही, तो इन दुष्टो को मारकर मै पाप का भागी बनूँ । अर्जुन योद्वा होने के साथ-साथ ज्ञानी भी था । पाप पुण्य का विचार जब उसके मन में आया तो उसे वनवास व एक वर्ष अज्ञातवास काटना पड़ा । वापिस आ कर राज्य माँगने पर जब उन्हे राज्य वापिस नही मिला तो अंततः कोरवो और पाण्डवो मे यूद्ध हुआ नाम से जानते है । | जिसे "महाभारत का यूद्व" के के नाम से ही यु्ध आत्मग्लानि होने लगी । उसे लगा किइस लोक में राज्य को जीतकर सु,ख भोग भी लेगा तो दुसरे लोक में ( मृत्यु के बाद ) या दूसरे जन्म में इन पापो का फल भी भोगना पडेगा । इससे तो अच्छा है कि मैं युद्ध न करू और बिना राज्य के जीवन व्यतीत के समय दोनो सेनाए आमने सामने खड़ी थी , युद्ध अर्जुन के सारथी श्री कृष्ण थे । अर्जुन ने उनसे रथ को दोनो सेनाओ के मध्य ले जाने की प्रार्थना की । शत्रु पक्ष मे अपने गुरूओ और बन्धु बान्धवो को देखकर अर्जुन ने अपने अस्त्र - शस्त्र फेंक दिए । अर्जुन बोले " हे कृष्ण युद्क्ेत्र मे अपने स्वजन समुदाय को देखकर मेरा शरीर शिथिल हो रहा है, मुख सुख रहा है एवं भय के कारण रोगंटे खड़े हो गये है , शरीर काँप रहा है | मन भ्रमित हो रहा है त्वचा जल रही है, हाथ से गाण्डीव (धनुष) गिर करलू अर्जुन पूरी तरह से माया में फंस गया, वह मोह के वशीभूत होकर भलाई बुराई को नही समझ पा रहा था । अकर्मण्यता अर्थात कर्म न करके पाप और पूण्य से बचना चाह रहा था। 2. है। परन्तु युद्ध ना करना अधर्म से न लड़ना, अतः उसे मोह को त्याग कर युद्वकरना चाहिए था । ( क्रमशः ) रहा है ।" 15 ए/जि এ ত

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006 Devai Namoh Namah Om Twameva Sakshat SHRI BHAIRAVNATH Sakshat Shri Adishakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyei Namo Namah Shri Bhairavanath is the deity who represents the terrible Vishnu were aspect of God Shiva. The name Bhairava means fearsome. But He causes fear to the negative tendencies of the yogis. He is the Lord of the Ida Nadi and represents involved in a fight for supremacy. As the fight took a furious the pure desire of Shri Adishakti, before whom the kleshas (obstacles) and conditionings of human beings crumble. For the yogis He is very soft and beautiful. Shri Bhairavanath represents one of the destroying power of the Ekadesha Rudras. Shri Bhairavanath is recognized shape, all the deities went to Lord Shiva and He took the form of a huge Lingam and stood between as Saint Michael in the Christian tradition, who is same as both of them like a St. George, the Guardian angel of England. He incarnated on earth as Shri Mahavira, as Shri Hussein and then as pole. Lord Vishnu took the form of a Shri William Blake. boar and went downwards to find the base. Shri Brahma took the form of a swan and flew to find the top of the pole. Shri Vishnu went deep in patal but was unable to find the As Shri Mahavira, He clearly told people about hell and how to avoid it. In His incarnation as Shri William Blake, root or the beginning point of the pole. He came back totally disappointed. Shri Brahma using a Ketki flower as He talked about Divine in an open, fearless manner. Shri Blake used symbolic language in His works which at times is blatant and sometimes gentle, like a sword to cut witness came back with an assertion that He had seen the end of the pole. Vishnu believed and touched His feet. Seeing this fraud, Shri Shiva got upset and appeared in front of them in His full form. He was angry and created Shri Bhairava to punish Brahma, who took away through the blind beliefs of a lost society and announce to them the divine advent. He talks about building of New Jerusalem in England. Brahma's fifth head. As per mythology Shri Bhairava aspect took form during the event of Daksha yagna. Shri Sati, daughter of Daksha, The existence of Shri Bhairava is that of a chiranjivi i.e an eternal being. Chiranjeevis are the deities who are Niranjanas, like Shri Bhairava and Shri Hanumana and they exist and are waiting just for a call from yogis to protect them. Shri Bhairava has a dog as his divine could not bear to hear Her husband, Shri Shiva insulted and offered Herself to the sacrificial pyre. Shri Shiva then destroyed the yagna and killed Daksha vehicle. by beheading him. He He is the greatest disciple of Shri Mahakali. He always then carried His has a light in His hand to make the yogis see that there is wife's corpse on nothing negative in their Ida Nadi. He is the One who runs up and down the Left channel morning till evening and especially in the night, working very hard, to kill the horrible rakshasas who afflict the yogis. He also guards His shoulders and started His destructive Tandava nritya. Since this would eventually destroy all cremation grounds in order to protect humans from the creation, Shri Vishnu used His Sudarshan Chakra to cut spirits living there. As per Christian tradition, St Michael is the archangel who defeats and chastises Satan and his Sati's body into pieces, which then fell all around. These spots where body parts fell are now known as Shakti helpers. Peethas. Shri Shiva then took the form of Shri Bhairava and is said to be guarding each of these Shakti peethas. Shri Bhairavanath along with Shri Hanumana helps those people who are depressed or who become left-sided and Also the other story is that once Lord Brahma and Lord always think negative or about problems. The way to clear 16

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006 Shri Bhairava's 21 names or aspects are: such a negative temperament is to take Shri Bhairava's name while sitting with the left hand towards the photograph and right hand on the Mother Earth. Shri Bhairava gives us the light in the dark times and destroys all the bhoots, bhootish ideas, funny ideas about The Lord who is very fierce Shri Maha Bhairava:- and formidable. Shri Vatuka Bhairava:- The fierce Lord who appears attachments and depressiveness. as a boy. He has a strong relationship with Shri Ganesha because Shri Siddha Bhairava:- The Lord of all success and Shri Ganesha is at the Mooladhara and Shri Bhairava fulfillment. moves on the left side and goes to the right side. So all kinds of conditionings, all kinds of habits can be Shri Kankala Bhairava:- The Lord who is garlanded with conquered through the help of Bhairavanath. human bones. If Shri Bhairavanath sees any person who has a hot temper because of ego then He plays tricks on that person to cool him down. He organises everything under His own Shri Kala Bhairava:- The Dark hued emanation of Lord Shiva. Shri Kalagni Bhairava:- Lord Shiva as the final conflagration of the world. control with the help of ganas & with the help of Shri Ganesha and Shri Hanumana, to cool down the temperament of yogis, to give them balance and to show the stupidity of anger. Ida Nadi is the nadi of moon and has a cooling nature. So the work of Shri Bhairavanath is to cool us down. Shri Yogini Bhairava:- The Lord who blesses with Divine Union. Shri Shakti Bhairava:- The Lord who is Creative Power. The Lord of Divine Bliss. In Nepal there is a very huge Bhairavanath statue which is a Swayambhu. As the people are more left-sided in Nepal, they are afraid of Shri Bhairavanath. And so it is a local Shri Ananda Bhairava Shri Martanda Bhairava:-The Lord of Sun. custom that if anybody has done a wrong deed for e.g stealing, then he is taken in front of Bhairavanath and His light is burnt and then he is asked to confess what wrong he has done. So Shri Bhairavanath protects the people Shri Gaura Bhairava:- The Lord of Absolute Purity. The Lord who appears as a Shri Bala Bhairava:- child. from doing wrong things or sly things like thieving. He also Shri Batu Bhairava:- The Lord who has the form of a exposes people who think they can get secretly do bad deeds and get away with them. It is He who has exposed so many horrible false gurus. youth. Shri Shamashana Bhairava:-The Lord of the Cremation ground. The essence of Shri Bhairavanath is that He drives away all negativities and bad feelings so that the yogis have a Shri Pura Bhairava:- The Ancient Lord. sense to laugh, to enjoy and to have fun. Shri Taruna Bhairava:- The Lord who is ever youthful. Shri Paramananda Bhairava:- The Lord who is the Highest Bliss. Shri Surananda Bhairava:- The Lord who is the Bliss of the Gods. Shri Gyanananda Bhairava:-The Lord who is the Bliss of Knowledge. Shri Uttamananda Bhairava:-The Lord who is the Supreme Joy. Shri Amritananda Bhairava:-The Lord who is the Nectar of immortal Joy. 17

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006 in Andhra Self Realisation in Andhra Pradesh This is to share the joy and & bliss of spreading Sahaja whole village was enjoying the Divine Bliss in this Yoga during when the whole country was celebrating the 'Independence Day' on August 15th 2006. En- masse Self Realization programs were conducted in almost all cities in Andhra Pradesh and marked the day 15th August 2006 evening. Some of the delighted news we have received from few other districts: as 'Self Realization Day'. Thousands of truth seekers all over the state took the gift of Self Realization during this Rajamundry: There is small village called 'Kooru Konda' Near Rajahmundry. On 15th August, Sahaja Yogis from Rajahmundry time. One Week Sahaja Tour to spread the message of Love & Peace in City conducted a Publi c Self Realization programs through the freedom campaign began on 13th August as a Mobile van with yuvashakti volunteers appeared in the city & towns nearby started distributing pamphlets all over, attracted the wide audience of the public. This was continued for 7 days from 13th till 19th August. Program in 'Kooru Konda' and 30 people are blessed with their Self Relization. On 16th Aug, near On 16th & 17th of August, two En-masse realization a temple in Rajahmundry a mobile stall is kept and more than 100 people were blessed with their Self Relization. On the same day they programs were conducted where more than 400 truth seekers took Self Realization. Both the days programs were started with music bhajans by Yuvashakti and ended with Vande Mataram paying respect to the great country of “Bharath Bhoomi". More than 40,000 pamphlets were also had a program in some apartments for the first time and 70 seekers got their Self Relization. distributed in almost all the resident areas in and outskirts Rajole : Rajole collective had conducted a public program in a village called 'Katrendu Padu' near Rajole and 70 of of Hyderabad. There were two mobile teams with more than 15 volunteers participated all the 7 days in this the villagers got their Self Relization. program. It was a tremendous experience for the volunteers who participated in this, as they Kakinada: On 15th they have arranged Mobile stall and guided people for the Public program. Kakinada collective is blessed with a public program on 16th Aug; 120 people took their Self Relization in this program. could cover more number of people with in a Bhimavaram: By the blessings of our Divine mother, Bhimavaram Collective witnessed two public programs in small duration of time every two villages named 'Adavikolanu and Sungavruksham' and a program in 'Sri Chantanaya Junior collage. More than 3500 people were blessed with their Self Relization altogether!! day. I t w as a spontaneous decision to go to “Kishtapur" village as a Sahaja Yogi was invited to hoist the flag during the Independence Day. A Undrajvaram: Undrajvaram Collective witnessed a public program in Kakarraparru on 16th Aug. More than 100 villagers were blessed with their Self Relization. team of yuvashakti brothers also traveled along with him to this village situated around 200 kms from Hyderabad. In this village there are more than 200 families. All the Kurnnol: Self Realization programs were conducted in more than 13 colleges on 15th & 16th of August in Kurnool villagers, around 400, gathered to watch the video of Shri Mataji. A projector and battery operated mike system worked beautifully at this place as every one meditated up on the documentary on Shri Mataji in local language. The and nearly 7,000 students took Self Realizations!!Apublic program conducted at Nandikodkur saw more than 500 took their Self Realization. Also there was a program at 18

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006 UNICEF campus at Orvacle Mandal. Nearly 1,000 Pochampally. During training program for un employed youth, 83 participants took Self Realization. These people are going to wok with MNC's as security guards. In another public program in Nalgonda town nearly 80 participants took their Self Realization!! On 19th & 20th Self Realization programs were conducted in more than 6 colleges and nearly about 5,000 students took Self Realization!! people attended the program and took Self Realization. Colony wise program is initiated to spread Sahaja Yoga in Nalgonda: At Mandal head quarters, Mulunugode, a training program was organized on 22nd August for rural un employed youth in which 100 members participated and took Self Realisation. A Self Realization program every colony. was conducted at 'Shri Ramanda Theertha Rural institute' Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. You are requested to tick in blocks given below for the magazines you would like to subscribe for the Year 2007. Outstation Rs. 225/- 2. Chaitanya Lahiri Marathi 1. Chaitanya Lahiri Hindi Rs. 300/- Local (for Pune) Rs.200/- 4. Yuvadrishti 3. Divine Cool Breeze Rs. 300/- Rs. 120/- Please provide the full Postal address for mailing the magazines. (PLEASE FILL IN BLOCK LETTERS ONLY) Name Address For Office use only: Issued Receipt No Amount Rs. Date By way of Cash/ Cheque/ Demand Draft No. Drawn on Dated Please send the above form duly filled along with the Cheque/DD to the following Address: Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd., No. 8 , Chandragupta Housing Society, Paud Road, Kothrud , Pune-4110 38 Tel : 020-25286537, Fax : 020-25286722 19

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006 Mother's Recipe One of the form of SHRI Adishakti is "SHRI ANNAPOORNA". This section contains some of the recipes told by our Beloved Mother Moong ki Daal (for 4 people) Ingredients 1 cup moong daal `4 tablespoon ghee '½tablespoon asafetida (hing) °3-4 bay leaves '1 onion finely chopped `2.5cm ginger, finely chopped `2 cloves of garlic, finely chopped 1 teaspoon cumin seeds (jeera) `1 whole green or red chilli, cut into 2-4 pieces `Fresh coriander, finely chopped Preparation 1) Boil the daal until it is soft, cooked and mushy. It should be thick and not too liquid. 2) Heat the ghee in a pan. When it is hot, add cumin seeds. Let it splutter. 3) Add hing, bay leaves, ginger garlic and onion one after another. Fry for 2-3 min. 4) Add green chilli and fry for another 2 min. 5) Add moong daal (already cooked). 6) Add salt and let everything boil for 5 min. 7) Before serving, add fresh ghee or butter and garnish with fresh coriander. 5)Add onions and salt and mix well. 6) Fry the okra on low heat until its colour changes and it becomes soft, say for 15 min. 6) When it is ready garnish with fresh coriander. Vegetable Okra (Lady's finger) (for 2 people) Ingredients Kachimbir (salad for 15 people) `250gm Okra '1 tablespoon mustard oil `2 cloves of garlic (finely cut) '1 green chilli cut into small pieces ½teaspoon turmeric (haldi) 2 big onions finely cut into cubes `Salt to taste Ingredients `1kg. natural yoghurt 1 green chilli '125ml sweet condensed milk '3 cloves of garlic mashed '5 tablespoon honey `4 big onions cut in cubes `6 big tomatoes cut in small pieces *3 teaspoon of any fruit jam '2 bunch of coriander leaves, cut *Salt to taste 'Fresh coriander finely chopped Preparation 1) Wash the lady fingers, dry them completely with a towel and cut the extremities off. Preparation 2) In a pan, heat the oil. Once the oil is hot, put the green chilli and garlic. Fry for a while. Mix everything into a bowl, and serve with any meat curry or nan. This type of salad is good when you want to finish 3) Add turmeric and okra on the top. Fry for a while until the stickiness is gone. all the rest in the house. 20 JIPEZE

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006 Mother Explain's Few Questions Answered by Shri Mataji Question: Why to Recognize Sahaja Yoga and Shri of Sahaja Yoga. Recognize is the only worship when you want to know God in Sahaja Yoga. All other Ganas, Devatas, Deities, Shaktis are one, in unison is Sahaja Mataji ? Answer: Time has come that you have to recognize Yoga Sahaja Yoga. So, those people who just go headlong into wrong path suffer from funny type of heart troubles, palpitations, insomnia, vomiting, giddiness, all sorts of, we can say, irrelevant talking. And anyone who does not recognize Sahaja Yoga, they are just not bothered about you, what sort of a person you are. So, Sahasrara takes charge that it makes you recognize, It is very serious thing to go to a wrong and bow to him. Sahasrara becomes a closed area for such a person. it convinces you, it proves to you that if you are not recognizing Sahaja Yoga you cannot get your realization. But those who recognize, also recognize partly, they take liberties; behave in a funny manner, without understanding that who is this 'Person' who is here. I've seen may a times, I'm talking, people are just putting their hand up, raising Kundalini, they are just talking, chit- chatting l'm surprised. The person who are against Sahaja yoga have a very strong Sahasrara, like a nut, in the sense that it is such a strong shell that you just cannot break it the strong shell, like a thick nut even if you want to use hammer, you cannot break it Today the time has come that you have to recognize Sahaja Yoga; you have to. And if you don't recognize, I'm sorry, I cannot give you the realization, which will sustain- and it may start, but it will You did not recognize any not sustain". saint, any Question: What is Introspection and how to do it? prophets, anyone, any incarnation, but today, the Answer: 1. Introspection should not be confused with self analysis condition is that Morning mediation is the time for introspection 2. you have to recognize one. If you do recognize it, your 3. What does the state of my subtle system tell me about not what is strong in me and what is weak? 4. Aml predominantly a right-sided person or a left- sided person? Or am I a 'pendulum' who oscillates from one Sahasrara can not be opened because this is side to the other? time when the 5. What are the problems that keep occurring in my life? Sahasrara was opened and you have to have your 6. If my best friends and family were speaking honestly about my faults, what would they say that needs realization. It is correction? very important thing that, that you have recognize Sahaja Yoga. 7. Witnessing oneself while in thoughtless awareness is a good way you introspect. There are so many people who say, 'MOTHER, WHY TO BELIEVE IN SAHAJA YOGA THIS WAY? WE CAN JUST 8. Go through the 7 chakras and say the mantras for each part of each chakra and witness the state of each, and ask CALL YOU MOTHER, YOU COULD BE MY MOTHER' yourself if you have the qualities of that. Alright, doesn't matter, but you can't get you realization and, even if you get it, you cannot retain it. You have to recognize; RECOGNIZE is the only worship 21

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006 possessed. A person who takes to drugs and is an alcoholic to the last word, but is a good soul and is still Question: What is Collective consciousness and how is it happened? seeking God, such a person can see Me, in a different form. He can see Me past, he can be very much enamored by Me. He would know who I was. People think Answer: "Some people may think, that by realization you must achieve something as Adi Shankaracharya did, but this is n ot that the past is greater than the present, always, because the past has been much greater than today, though I have possible. With some it may be, never given realization to anyone previously. He, therefore, gets enamored when he sees things like that. This happens to the people who are in the supra but with everyone it is not possible. Your first stage conscious level if they move out to the left hand side i.e., into the past. Those who move out to the right hand side can see Me as light. They see all the five elements; they see Me as waterfall or as an Iceberg. They start seeing the 'Tanmatra' namely the casual essence of the elements. It is Nirvichar. You beco m e Thoughtlessly Aware. That may help them to get convinced, because such a person get convinced about Me and such a person is much more happens when Kundalini rises convinced than you are. There are good many tantrikas who know who I was. They are afraid of Me and they talk above t he Agnya Chakra meaning enters about Me. There was an ordinary maidservant who came to My programme and she got into a trance and started speaking Sanskrit and she described Me completely in into the limbic area, when your attention just touches 'Sat' point. The reality separates fifteen 'Shlokas' .She said this first time although I had never said anything about Myself. This is how it started. from 'Mithya'. You become two personalities. At that state you start separating -like putting lime in the milk when it starts separating into curd and water. In the same way the So at this stage, I would not like to leave your Kundalini, because you can cure people and curative can be done with your Kundalini even when it is in the Limbic area. I am very anxious always that it should come out of Brahmarandra. At that stage you start getting the beginning of reality starts. This is the state when you can say that the Kundalini has awakened only. We must understand the different stages, as it happens. I am giving you a very detailed picture but normally the Kundalini shoots off to 'Sahastrar' in most of the people. In some people it does not. It takes time. It is either lost into the Swadhishthana or the Nabhi. It does not go much higher. vibrations; but at this stage you are just a 'chita' only and you just touch the 'sat' point. Your attention is only charmed by the Spirit. Only the attention part as I told you is like a flicker or light in a gas lamp, and Kundalini is like a gas which touches the Spirit and the light of the Spirit 'Anhata Chakra' arrests it or it may not even rise at all. But in case it crosses this 'Door' of 'Agnya Chakra' then you get into 'thoughtless Awareness' .With this thoughtless awareness you get certain powers. Supposing for example, you become Governor, you get certain powers of Governor. Similarly you attain certain powers. But at spreads in the central nervous system. 'Chit' part, the outer core the (Chitta' means the attention part. At that stage the Kundalini opens the Brahmarandra when you feel the vibrations from your hand and you can feel another person also; because you become 'collectively conscious'. Collectively conscious again out of Sachita- Anand that you just touch the 'Chita' part. Thus you start feeling the Chit of your Chitta becoming the Chitta of the collective consciousness means that you drop into the ocean of Satchit Ananda in which you only feel the collective consciousness. That means you can feel this stage to leave the Kundalini is not proper, because the Kundalini can start moving" to this side or that side and thus can go to the supra conscious or to the collective subconscious. The' Siddhis' are mostly available at this stage. Not minor Siddhis ,but higher Siddhis, e.g., if the Kundalini moves to the supra conscious one gets the Siddhi of predicting the future. If the Kundalini has moved to the' collective subconscious, they can start seeing another person's Kundalini." things in the past. A person like that, when he comes to Me, can see who I was in My previous life. I do not have to convince him. This is the same thing as anybody who is 22

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006 सहज मन्दिर की मर्यादा एक नाटक (सेंटर के बीच में पहुँचते हैं, भजन चल रहे हैं, पत्नी पीछे बैठ जाती है, पति आगे जा कर मिठाई का डब्बा पोलीथिन समेत दृश्य 1 पति टीवी देखते हुए: अरे आज इतनी जल्दी खाना क्यों बना रही हो? (पति भारत-पाकिस्तान का क्रिकेट मैच बहुत श्रीमाताजी के सामने रखता हैए वहीं बैठ जाता है और बन्धन लेता हैं पीछे मड कर दो.तीन लोगो को जय श्रीमाताजी ही उत्तेजित होते हुए देख रहा है और श्रीमाताजी से भारत को जिताने के लिए प्रार्थना कर रहा है) पत्नीः मैं रात के खाने की अभी से तैयारी कर रहीं हूँ, कहता हैं) (एक सहज योगी का मोबाईल बजता है, पहले नम्बर देखता है, फिर वहीं बात शुरु कर देता है किसी के कहने पर उठ सेंटर जाना है ना आज, नहीं तो आरती के बाद भागने की जल्दी रहती हैं और सेंटर खत्म होने के बाद ध्यान नहीं कर पाते हैं कर बाहर चला जाता है) (भजन समाप्त हो जाते हैं और सबको आगे खिसकने के लिए आप भी तैयार हो जाइए, अपने कपड़े प्रेस कर लीजिए. (पति उठ कर जाता है और फिर छक्के की आवज सुन कर वापिस आ जाता है और वहीं, बैठ जाता हैं) पत्नीः अरे क्या हुआ, आप तैयार होने नहीं गए अभी तक? पतिः बस ये आखिरी ओवर हैं (मैच समाप्त हो जाता है) पत्नीः अब तो मैच खत्म हो गया, तैयार हो जाइए भी कहा गया) (सेन्टर मे पीछे की तरफ बच्चे खेल रहे हैं और बीच बीच में उनके शोर की आवाज भी आ रही हैं उनके आने जाने के कारण एक सहज योगिनी बार बार अपने पर्स को सम्भाल रही हैं) (सेंटर खत्म होते ही पीछे 4.5 सहज योगिनी समूह बना कर बैठ जाती हैं और बातें करने लगती हैं) सहज योगिनी 1: जय श्रीमाताजी, और आज खाने में क्या पतिः मैं तैयार होने जा रहा हूँ तब तक तुम एक कप चाय बना दो, चाय पीकर चलेगें पत्नीः अरे उसका समय कहाँ है, पहले बोल देते तो अब तक बनाया है? सहज योगिनी 2: अरे अभी कहाँ, अभी तो जाकर बनाना हैं तैयार भी हो जाती 5ण्45 तो यहीं बज गए हैं, आपको तो पता 8रू30 तो यहीं हो गए हैं, घर जल्दी जाना हैं है हमें सेंटर समय पर पहुँचना चाहिएए श्रीमाताजी सभी गणों के साथ निराकार रुप में वहाँ आती हैं, हमें उनसे पहले सहज योगिनी 2: (उठते हुए) अरे तुम्हारे जवचे तो बहुत सुन्दर हैं कहाँ से लिए? अगली बार कमेपहद लेती हैं गाँव की सहजयोगिनी: जय श्रीमाताजी, आजकल मेरा ध्यान पहुँचना चाहिए पतिः अच्छा बाबा जाता हूँ तैयार होनें मेरा लाकेट कहाँ है?प्रेस कहाँ रखा है?कपड़े अभी तक प्रेस क्यों नहीं हुए ? पत्नीः मैं तो कब से कह रही हूँ, तैयार हो लिजिए, आपको मैच अपइतंजपवदे दे दीजिएं देखने से फुरसत से ना हट पाने की शू-बीटिंग करनां (जल्दी-जल्दी प्रेस करते हैं और तैयार होकर बाहर निकल जाते हैं, बाहर आने के बाद) पत्नीः आपने बन्धन ले लिया? पतिः नहीं जल्दी -जल्दी में भूल गयां पत्नीः आप तो जानते ही हैं कि घर से बाहर निकलने से पहले (सभी सहजयोगिनी बहनें चली जाती हैं, पत्नी गाँव वाली को अच्छे से नहीं लग पा रहा है, आपमें से कोई मुझे सहज योगिनी 2: अरे मैं तो जा रही हूँ, मुझे तो खाना भी बनाना हैं (जाती है) सहज योगिनी 1: मुझे तो देना ही नहीं आता हैं। सहज योगिनी 3: मेरी स्थिति ही ठीक नहीं चल रही है, नाभी हो तब तो कोई काम हो? आप अपने टीवी चक्र पकड़ा हुआ है पत्नीः सहज योगिनी 3: हफ्ते मे 1-2 बार कर ही लेती हैूँ आप जल-किया तो करती ही होंगी? हमें बन्धन लेना चाहिएं (अन्दर जाकर फटाफट बन्धन लेता है) पत्नीः जल्दी में बन्धन क्यों ले रहे हैं, शान्ति से कुण्डलिनी माँ पर चित्त डालते उन्हें ऊपर उठाना चाहिए और हर चक्र अपइतंजपवदे देती है) (सटर खत्म होने के बाद 4-5 सहजयोगी समूह बना कर बैठते हैं और बातें करने लगते हैं) सहज योगी 1: आज ध्यान कैसा हुआ? सहज योगी 2: क्या बताऊँ, मेरे बगल वाले का आज्ञा चक्र हुए पर चित्त डालते हुए बन्धन लेना चाहिएं दृश्य 2 पकड़ा हुआ था, मेरा तो अभी तक सिर दर्द कर रहा हैं 23 ए/जि ত এ

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006 सहज योगी 1: हमें मन्दिर हमेशा समय से आना चाहिएं सहज योगी 3: अपना चित्त वहाँ ले जाओ, श्रीमाताजी सब ठीक कर देगीं सहज योगी 4 : नहीं हमारे चित्त में अभी इतनी स्थिरता नहीं हैं 2: हमें मन्दिर में कार्यक्रम शुरु होने से पहले या बाद में फालतू हमें अपना हाथ उस चक्र पर ले जा कर घुमाना चाहिए, हमारे हाथों के द्वारा ही परम चैतन्य कार्य करता हैं (सेंटर में बहुत शोर हो रहा है, प्रसाद की लाईन में भी सबको जल्दी हैं 1- 2 लोग ही ध्यान कर रहे है बाकि सबको या तो जाने की जल्दी हैं या बातें कर रहे हैं) बातें करने की बजाए अपइतंजपवदे मगबींदहम करनी चाहिएं 3: हमें मन्दिर में अपना मोबाईल फोन बन्द करना चाहिए और अपना सम्पूर्ण ध्यान श्रीमाताजी पर केन्द्रित करना चाहिएं 4: हमें मन्दिर देर से आने पर चित्त से बन्धन लेना चाहिएं तभी एकाएक लाईट चली जाती है, अँधेरा छा जाता है और एक आवाज गूँजती हैं ये क्या हो रहा है, क्या ये सहज मन्दिर है?आप को क्या 5: हमें अपने बच्चों को भी ध्यान मे बैठना सिखाना चाहिएं 6: हमें दूसरों के दोषों व चक्रों को देखने की बजाए , अपने लगता है आप को कोई देख नहीं रहा है? श्रीमाताजी के साथ हम सभी गण सहज मन्दिर में ध्यान के समय हमेशा उपस्थित अन्दर के दोषों को देखकर उन पर कार्य करना चाहिएं रहते हैं और प्रत्येक व्यक्ति पर नजर रखते हैं लेकिन हमने 7: सभी सहज योगी साथ मेंः हमें मन्दिर में सहज जो आज देखा उससे हम प्रसन्न नहीं हैं और श्रीमाताजी को प्तवजवबवस और मरयादा का पालन करना चाहिएं भी तकलीफ हुई हैं निश्चय ही, श्रीमाताजी ने ये स्वप्न में भी नहीं सोचा था कि उनके बच्चों, उनके सहज योगियों का व्यवहार इतना उथला होगा वे तो हमेशा ही चाहती है कि हम 8: सभी सहज योगी साथ में जयकारा लगाते हैंए ष्बोलो आदिशक्ति श्रीमाताजी श्री निर्मला देवी की जयं गहराई में उतरें, अपने आप को देखें, अपने दोषों को देखें, न कि दूसरों कें वे चाहती हैं कि हम दूसरों के लिए एक आदर्श बनें, जैसे हमारी माँ हैं आप ही अपनी आत्मा से पूछिए, जो Answers for Page No 14 कुछ भी अभी यहाँ पर हुआ उससे श्रीमाताजी कितनी खुश Across हुईं होगी?हमें अपने दृदय में स्थित सहज मन्दिर की मर्यादा का पालन करने से पहले, इस मन्दिर की मरयादा का पालन 4. BHAGATSINGH, 5. SUBHASHCHANDRABOSE, 6. MARTINLUTHER, 10. ATATURK, 13. CSLEWIS, 14. WASHINGTON, 15. करना पड़ेगा, नहीं तो हमारा उत्थान रुका रहेगा अगर आप मानते हैं कि आप से कोई गलती हुई है और उसे सुधारना चाहते हैं, तो आगे आकर श्रीमाताजी से क्षमा माँगते हुए अपनी RANAPRATAP गलती स्वीकार करें Down (यह सुनकर सभी सहज योगियों को अपनी गलती का आभास होता है और वे अपने हृदय में यह प्रण लेते हुए कि TAGORE, 8. LALBAHADUR, 9. EINSTEIN, 1. JUNG, 2. SHAKESPEARE, 3. SHIVAJI, 7. KARLMARX, 12. LINCOLN आगे से वे ऐसा नहीं करेंगे, एक एक कर के आगे आते हैं और अपनी गलती स्वीकार करते हैं) 11. 24 ए/जि ত

 Youth viewpoint 10



----------------------

2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 29
Vol 7
December
2006
Issue 4
Yuvadrishti
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-1.txt 
 YUVADRISHTI
Published by
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 8, Chandragupta Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 029
Printed by
Shrada Printary
Pune
Please send your experiences, Suggestions, Articles etc., to:
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 8, chandragupta Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 029
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 INDEX
Significance of Diwali
1.
Nirmal Vani - Having the
Collecticive spirit
2.
हमारी प०पू0 श्रीमाताजी
3.
4. Snakes and Ladders
5. Tomb of Moses
10
6. Divine Secrets of Carbon Atom
12
7. A Poem by RN Tagore
13
8. Find the Names
14
15
9. सहज गीता
16
10. Shri Bhairavnath
11. Self Realization in Andhra Pradesh
18
12. Mother's Recipe
20
13. Mother Explain's
21
14. सहज मन्दिर की मर्यादा
एक नाटक
23
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006
Significance of Diwali
This Article is a collection of all the stories related to five days of Deepawali Celebration
As well as at the same time what our Adishakti Mother has told us about these days.
Om Twameva Sakshat
Shri Mahalakshmi
Sakshat Shri Adishakti Mataji
Shri Nirmala Devyei Namo Namah
Diwali, a festival of worship of Goddess Lakshmi, is
celebrated by the Indians throughout the world in a joyous
mood with great zeal and enthusiasm. It is a festival of
lights, crackers, cleanliness, sweets, lots of shopping,
happiness, togetherness and almost one week's holiday.
The celebrations are for five continuous days one after
should say, homage to her... “
“...So it's very important that
on this day, we call it the
Dhanteras (the thirteenth
day), you have to buy
something for your wife and
you have to give her
something as a present. At
05.20
another, each day with a new philosophy. It is not limited to
just one-day celebration like many other Indian festivals
but it is a unique one: for it brings a series of festivals and
holidays with itself. Like most of the Indian festivals Diwali
too has its origin in Indian Mythology and there are very
interesting historical stories about it.
least you should buy a little
pot, or something, that can be
used in the kitchen to show
your respect to her. In the
families where mother is not respected, children become
History of Five Days of Diwali Celebrations
extremely troublesome and the whole of their family - also
The first day of this festival begins with 'Dhan Trayodashi
or 'Dhanteras'. After Dhanvantari Trayodashi, the second
day of Diwali is 'Narak Chaturdashi , which is popular as
'Chhoti Diwali'. The third day of Diwali, which is commonly
suffers".
Narak Chaturdashi (Day 2)
One famous story behind the celebrations of Diwali is
about the demon king Narakasura who was the ruler of
Pragjyotishpur, a province to the South of Nepal. During a
war he defeated Lord Indra and snatched away the
called 'Badi Diwali is the main day of celebrations of the
festival of Diwali, commemorating the day when Shri
Rama returned to Ayodhya after His 14years of exile. The
fourth day of Diwali is devoted to 'Govardhan Pooja'
magnificent earrings of Mother Goddess Aditi who was
not only the ruler of Suraloka (the world of Devas) but also
a relative of Lord Krishna's wife, Satyabhama. Narakasur
also imprisoned sixteen thousand daughters of Gods and
(worship of Lord Govardhan Parvat). The fifth day of the
Diwali is 'Bhai Dooj', the time to honour the brother-sister
relationship.
Dhanteras (Day 1)
saints in his harem. With the support of Lord Krishna
Satyabhama defeated Narakasura and released all the
women from his harem and also restored the magnificent
earrings of Mother GoddessAditi.
Legends have it that Lord
Dhanvantari who is the physician of
the Gods and an incarnation of Lord
Vishnu came out of the ocean that
“...Then the second day is the one where this horrible
was churned by the Gods and the
demons. On the day of Dhanteras.
Rakshasa called as Narakasura was killed. Always all
killing is done with the power of the Shakti... He was a very
Lord Dhanvantari appeared with
Ayurvedic for the welfare of the
treacherous cunning man and it was impossible to kill
him. But then, somehow or other, with the advent of a
mankind.
special power, that this Narakasura was killed... They say
that when he was killed, the door of hell was closed. So
“...Firstly, in Diwali, the first day we
buy something for the family. You can buy may be some
people should take their baths early in the morning. But I
am of the opinion that day, if the door is open, better not
take bath. Be in your beds till this fellow is put fully into
cooking utensil, could be an ornament for the wife or
something like that because that is the day of housewife
and that day is to be celebrated as the housewife's, I
'Narak'. You should not bother about him. Narak means
hell, and from the hell they extracted him and killed him..."
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006
Diwali (Day 3)
"Now in that Lakshmi Puja is this that you worship the
The most famous legend behind the celebrations of Diwali
is about the prince of
Lakshmi herself. It doesn't mean "money" not at all. To
worship money is wrong. But what it means that Lakshmi
is the money which is with us or whatever prosperity with
Her should be very carefully spent because She is very
mobile and the money can slip out. On the contrary you
Ayodhya Nagri, Lord Shri
Rama. The story goes like
the king of Lanka, Ravan
kidnaped Ram Chandra's
wife, Sita from the jungle
where they were staying
should not be at all miserly. Miserly people Lakshmi is not
happy. But if you want to spend, you must spend it in the
right way otherwise the money is spent in the wrong way."
as per the instructions of
“... Now when the Lakshmi was created - must be knowing
King Dashratha, father of
out of the churning of the sea She came out - She had four
hands. One hand was to give. She is generous. She
Ram Chandra. Then Ram
Chandra attacked Lanka
gives: like this She gives. And with one hand She blesses.
These are Her two hands. One is to give and to bless the
and killed Ravan and
released Sita from
person. Very important it is that when you give to
somebody something, you forget about it and you bless
that person. Not only you give money, but also you bless
that person. The other two hands have got two lotuses of
pink color. Pink is the color of love and a person who has
imprisonm ent. He
returned to Ayodhyaa with his wife Sita and younger
brother Lakshamana after fourteen years of exile.
Since it was a night of no moon so people of Ayodhyaa
decorated their homes as well as the city of Ayodhyaa by
lighting diyas(oil lamps) all over, in order to welcome their
beloved prince Shri Rama and his wife Shri Sita. It was the
money should have a house, which is full of love. Any
guest who comes in the house should be respected. He
should be treated just like God... “
day of 'Kartik Amavasyaa' when they also celebrated the
"... So this is what is the meaning of the lotus - "is a house
full of love". Like a beetle, which has got even thorns,
victory of Shri Ram over the King of Lanka, Ravana. Shri
Rama who is divine while Ravana represents the evil.
when it comes to the lotus, the lotus open out and the
beetle goes
inside and
Therefore, Diwali is considered a festival, which
establishes the victory of divine over evil. Further, lighting
of diyas (oil lamps), also symbolises the victory of light
sleeps very
nicely an d
comfortably
over darkness.
"...The last one is the best where they have the meeting of
Shri Rama and his brother Bharat... But when they came
even the beetle,
back to their own capital in Ayodhya, there was a big
jubilation and Bharat, His brother, He was very much
undisturbed.
That is how one
attached to His brother and he ruled that country with the
should treat if
Paduka, they say is the a kind of sandalwood chappals
they use, of his brother. He put it on the throne and ruled.
So that is how the Bharat Milan i.e the meeting of Bharat
with Shri Rama - is celebrated and that was the time. He
have
you
money...
“ ...But the best
is, She is just standing on the lotus. That means, no
was crowned also as the king. So it is long time back i.e.
pressure on anyone. She exists on Her own, no pressure.
She doesn't put any pressure on anyone. Just on Her own
She stands and all Her weight and all balanced on Her
thousands of years back, this thing has happened. That
jubilation is very significant: that the right king gets his own
throne and He rules and all the injustice and all kind of
own dignity. This is the way a Lakshmi should be..."
atrocities he has gone through has to be completely
finished from his life. And that's why Diwali is important...'
Govardhan Puja (Day 4)
...So the last day they worship the Goddess Lakshmi
because, it is Her blessings that brought forth all these
beautiful meetings. And that's why they worship Her
"Lakshmi" as such."
"Govardhan' is a small hillock situated in 'Braj', near
Mathura. The legends in 'Vishnu Puraan' have it that the
people of Gokul used to worship and offer prayers to Lord
3
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006
History of Sikh Community's Diwali
Indra for the rains because they believed that it was He
who sent rains for their welfare. But Lord Krishna told
In the Sikh community Diwali celebrations have special
importance as for them it is popular as the day when their
them that it was Mount
Govardhan (Govardhan Parvat)
sixth Guru, Guru Har Govindji came back from the
and not Lord Indra who caused
captivity of the fort of Gwalior city. The people lighted
lamps in the way to Shri Harmandhir Sahib, which is
rains therefore they should
worship the former and not the
known by the name of 'The Golden Temple', in order to
latter. People did the same and it
honour and to welcome their beloved Guru.
made Lord Indra so furious that
the people of Gokul had to face
History of Jain Community's Diwali
very heavy rains as a result of
his anger. Then Lord Krishna
For the Jain community also the festival of Diwali has
special significance. It is the day when the famous Jain
prophet Shri Mahaveer (who was an incarnation of Shri
came forward to ensure their
security and after performing
worship and offering prayers to
Mount Govardhan lifted it as an umbrella on the little finger
Bhairavnath), the founder of Jainism attained 'Nirvana'.
Therefore the people of Jain community celebrate the
festival of Diwali in remembrance of Lord Mahavira
of his right hand so that everyone could take shelter
under it. After this event, Lord Krishna was also known as
Giridhari or Govardhan-dhari.
Bhai Dooj (Day 5)
The legends have that Lord Yamraj, the God of Death,
visited his sister Yamuna on the 'Shukla Paksha Dwitiya'
day in the Hindu month of 'Kartik'. When Yamraj reached
Yamuna's home she welcomed Him by performing his
aarti, applying 'Tilak' on
His forehead and by
putting a garland around
his neck. Yamuna also
cooked varieties of dishes
"When you become one with
the Spirit all your problems will be
solved. A realized person never
talks in first person. He becomes
separate from himself, leaving
aside his desires, his materialistic
ideas."
and prepared lots of
sweets for her brother and
offered all those to him.
Lord Yamraj ate all those
delicious dishes and
when he was finished he
showered blessings on
Yamuna and gave her a boon as a gift that if a brother
visits his sister on this day he would be blessed with health
and wealth. This is why this day of Bhai-Dooj is also
known by the name of 'Yam-Dwitiya'. Thus it has become
a tradition that on the day of Bhai-Dooj brothers visit their
sisters' home and offer them gifts. Sisters also make
various dishes for their brothers and also give gifts to
them.
4
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006
"Nirmal Vani"
Some priceless jewels on selected topics, extracted from the treasure trove of our Mother's
eternal words of wisdom, have been strung into exquisite necklace called "Nirmal Vani".
This issue, lets focus on mother's advice on how to establish the eternal child within us.
Having the Collective Spirit
What is the importance of collective in Sahaja Yoga?
Does it only mean going to Pujas, Seminars, Centers,
leaf separates off, it dies - we have to stick onto the tree. If
we cannot be collective, or enjoy collectivity, then there is
something wrong with us. Avoid criticising each other. We
must come to the Collective; otherwise there is the
possibility of getting lost.
You are not alone... you are all friends to each other...
and the greatest friend you have is the Divine Power
which is looking after you... and doing everything for you.
If you have that kind of a relaxed beautiful alertness within
you, you are going to enjoy life...you are going to enjoy
Sahaja Yoga... and you are going to get many many more
people in Sahaja Yoga.
Before Sahaja Yoga you could have only one friend or at
the most two... three meant a crowd... cannot have three
persons as your friends... but in Sahaja Yoga we are all
friends... pure friendship, friendship of a very beautiful
nature... that you enjoy the joy of another person... in
vibrations you do. This is how... I have to tell you that we
have to be friends... we have to share... enjoy
other Sahaja yogis house only? Do we belong to one
center or a city or a state or a country or the whole world?
What does Shri Mataji means when She says we have to
sharing...there's no seriousness about it - how can you be
serious with your friends... just relaxed, enjoying each
others company... even if you have to argue, argue...
be collective and that we are universal beings? From
Mother's talks lets us go on the journey of discovering the
collective feeling within ourselves:
doesn't matter... even if you have a different view it's
The Importance of Being Collective
alright... but you should not try to impose yourself on your
friend... nor your friend should try to impose... But try to
understand each other. That's how we are going to learn
Today is the day to make a big determination... that you
will start enjoying your collective spirit... which was
opened on 5th May 1970...everything for the
collectivity... then the enjoyment will be maximum... you
will never feel that you have sacrificed anything. But still
you are more identified with your own enjoyments... and
your own ideas of enjoyment... you still do not enjoy that
collective spirit... you still like in companionship in
such a lot from each other.
பார்
company with each other... you enjoy it more like people
who are not in Sahaja Yoga...very low grade... just want
to take advantage... and have a nice time...and all that...
that type of people are not going to make much mark for
us. You all must be connected to God individually... so
that you are all connected among yourselves.
Only in collectivity maturity starts - it is a living process. If
we are not collective we will disappear one day. It is like a
tree, where everything belonging to that tree grows - if a
You cannot have friendship between men and women...
5
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006
Sahaja Yogis... you must attend the programs, when
there is a collective Aarti... or Puja... or Meditation. When
you collect together...something happens to you... if you
you cannot - it's absolutely absurd; A brother and a sister
are never friends.
We are cells in the Mother's body - Mother has awakened
us. If we are sick, then Mother is sick.
sit at home, and do something...nothing works out
much.... Because it is a collective phenomena.
How to become Collective ?
The Joy of Being Universal Beings
We are all collective... we have to know everything
among each other.….and we have to live like one family, all
over the world. Once you develop that kind of a love for
everyone, then you will be surprised, you have become a
great personality - that means... the drop becomes the
ocean.
Now you are not facing the Mother... you are sitting with
the Mother facing the whole world... so the whole attitude
will change. The attitude should be...what can I give...
how can I give... what is my mistake in giving... I have to
be more alert... where is my attention... what am I doing,
what is my responsibility. You must desire that you should
be pure... pure desire... that you should be the Spirit.
Then your responsibility to Sahaja Yoga... what is your
responsibility to Sahaja Yoga... which is the work of God
that has started... and you... are my hands.
First of all your attitude has to be alright in Sahaja Yoga I
see that people who don't have good attitudes can never
progress...doesn't matter if your vibrations are bad...
doesn't matter... they'll be alright... so you should see
how much collective you are... how much you help each
other... how much you are kind to each other...this is very
important to introspect and find out.. more than anything
Every one of you is worth the whole Universe... if you
want to rise to that height...to that magnitude... it is within
you to prosper.
else.
References:
The tongue is first of all.. for saying things which are
sweet and beautiful... let us find out what sweet things we
Bordi, 1977
Sahastrara Day, Dollis Hill, 1980
How to know where you are - Chelsham Road, 1980
New Age - Plaw Hatch Seminar, 1980
Mahakali Puja & Mahalakshmi Puja,
are going to say to people... not expressing 'our' views,
like 'I like it.. I like that' or 'l want that', but on the
contrary... 'do you like this'... ''would you enjoy this'... so
the language should be directed towards
others...showing interest and concern.
Lonavala/Kolapur, 1982
Niraananda, Vienna Ashram, 1985
Vishnumaya Puja, Brompton Square, 1985
Raksha Bandhan - Hampstead, 1986
Sahastrara Puja, Australia, 1987
Mahakali Puja,Germany, 1987
Importance of friendship - France, 1989
Navaratri Puja - Switzerland, 1990
Vancouver, Canada, 1990
Richmond Park talk, Richmond, 1995
Mahalakshmi Puja, Moscow, 1996
You have to be the whole; you have to be in the centre. Tell
your mind 'be humble'... and all this relativity will go away,
that you have to be unique, that you are some higher soul
or something - all that is nonsense. So, nevercriticize your
brothers and sisters... if you have to criticize, criticize
yourself. Best is to criticize yourself, and see for yourself
what's wrong with you that you cannot fit into the
collective. In India it is said that if someone's pin is in your
house, you should look after it for eternity... but if 'your
diamond' is lost with somebody, you should never ask for
it... it is not good manners. What is more valuable, is not
the diamond... it is the relationship.
The best way to strengthen yourself is... to be together as
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006
हमारी प०पू० श्रीमाताजी
एक बार एक स्विस जरनलिस्ट ने प०पू0 श्री माता जी से
कौन है ?" कोई सूफी संत, या कोई उपचारक, कोई दार्शनिव या फिर
ईश्वर और इंसान के बीच का कोई संवाहक ?"श्री माता जी हंसी और
बोली, "मेरी अपने बारे में कोई धारणा या विचार नही परन्तु इसी तरह
की कोई बात है । कोई किसी एक को किसी एक वर्ग में नहीं रख सकते
| किसी को परिभाषित करने का मतलब है उसकी सीमा तय करना ।
जैसे कि मैं एक गृहस्थ हूँ पत्नी हूँ परन्तु यदि मैं अपनी पहचान तय कर
दैं तो इससे मैं अपने को सीमित कर लेती हूँ | करना बेहतर है कि
"आप
पूछा ,
जलता है, परन्तु अग्नि तब नहीं जल पायेगी जब बारिश हो रही हो ।
है । जब श्रीमाताजी उनके घर
हाँलैंड पधारी थी । श्रीमाताजी 1992 की गर्मियों में हॉलैड पधारीं । जैसे
'रेचल रूइग्रोक' वो किस्सा बताती
ही वें हवाई जहाज से बाहर उतरी एकदम बरसात शुरू हो गई । बारिश
|
इतनी ज्यादा थी कि ड्राईवर कार को मुशिकल से चला पा रहा था ।
जैसे ही वें हमारे धर पघारी, बारिश एकदम ऐसे रूक गई जैसे किसी ने
नल बंद कर दिया हो | श्री माता जी कार से जैसे उतरी सारा आकाश
बिजली की चमक से भर गया, बारिश नहीं हो रही थी | वे रास्ते पर चल
ये
"जो मैं नहीं हूँ तो बचता है वो मैं हूँ । (it would be better to say
what I am not, and what is left is what I
am)
रहीं थी और लगातार बिजली गर्जना करते हुए
चमक रही थी | हमने उनकी आरती की हर
परम पूज्य श्री माता जी आधुनिक युग में
अवतरण हैं और सहजयोग के माध्यम से मानव
समाज को आत्मसाक्षात्कार दे रही हैं | प0पू0
श्रीमाताजी सम्मुख और यहाँ तक उनके फोटो
मात्र के सामने मनुष्य की कुण्डलिनी सहज ही
जागृत हो जाती है । भारत के अनुसूचित गाँवों
से लेकर लंदन, अमेरिका, रोम, ऑस्ट्रेलिया और
अनेकानेक देशों में श्रीमाताजी यात्रा करके
लाखों लोगों को आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्रदान कर
रही हैं ।
श्री
बार जब आरती की थाली उनके मस्तक तक
जाती, जोरदार गर्जना के साथ बिजली
चमकती । फिर श्रीमाताजी अंदर आयी और
मैने उनको माला समर्पित की | जैसे ही उनके
गले में माला पहनाई एकाएक बारिश फिर शुरू
हो गई जैसे फिर किसी ने नल खोल दिया हो
| श्रीमाताजी कहाँ - ये हुआ ना आदिशक्ति
का स्वागत!!
श्रीमाताजी के भीतर अतिमानवीय शक्तियाँ
विद्यमान है अगर वो चाहें, ये शक्तियाँ
कार्यान्वित होती है । ऐलीयनॉर, दुईलियो
कारटोसी ओर जियोवानी अलबानसी ने ये
कुछ घटनाएँ वर्षित की हैं । ब्राम्पटन स्कबॉयर
लंदन में कुछ लोग श्री माता जी के घर आने
वाले थे | काफी लोग फरनीचर यहाँ से वहाँ
हटा कर लगा रहे थे । श्री माता जी ने इटली इन कुछ मजबूत
जबानी का उनका ठोस लकडी का बना पलंग हटाने को कहा | वे लोग
उसको हटाने के पूरा जोर लगा रहे थे , परन्तु वो एक इंच भी नही हिल
पा रहा था । सब अपने छुटने पर बैठ कर पंलग के पाये को जोर से
धक्का लगा रहे थे | पर पलंग हिल नहीं पा रहा था । तभी श्री माता जी
आई पंलग एकदम जैसे उड़ता हुआ सा खिसक कर दीवार के पास
एकदम सही दिशा में स्थिर हो गया । सबसे मूंह से निकला 'आह' । श्री
माता जी हंसी और बोली, ठीक है, आखिर कार मैं आदिशक्ति हूँ, मेरे
लिए ये साधारण है । सभी उनके सामने नतमस्तक हो गए । इसी तरह
वहाँ एक बेहद भारी अल्मारी को भी उन्होने अपनी ऊंगली से छू भर के
प0पू0 माता जी का जन्म 1923, 21 मार्च्च के
दिन बारह बजे दोपहर को मध्यभारत स्थित
"छिन्दवाड़ा" नामक स्थान पर हुआ ।
मुस्कुराती, कान्तीमय बालिका की ओर विस्मय
से देखते हुए दादी माँ ने कहा," ये निष्कलंका
है। अतः श्रीमाताजी को नाम दिया गया 'निर्मला' अर्थात् 'निष्पाप' ।
कि
सम्भवतः कोई भी नश्वर प्राणी उनके बहुआयामी 'दिव्य रूप' को नहीं
जो
जान सकता । एक साधारण मनुष्य कुछ
इतना आश्चर्यजनक है कि उसी को समझ पाना उसके भौतिक चक्षु के
लिए संभव नहीं । श्रीमाताजी के साक्षात् संर्पक में सहजयोगियों को होने
वाले आलौकिक अनुभवों की संक्षिप्त चर्चा हम इस लेख में कर रहे हैं।
एक दीपक सूर्य के प्रकाश को कैसे प्रतिबिम्बित कर सकता है या एक
नश्वर मनुष्य अपने सृष्टा के सौन्दर्य का कैसे वर्णन कर सकता है, परन्तु
ये चेष्टा है परमात्मा के परम आंनद में सभी के ओतप्रोत होने की मेहमान
धर आता है तो उसकी आरती की जाती है । ये कोई भी विवाहित स्त्री
करती है और उसके एक थाली तैयार की जाती जिसमें घी का दिया
दख सकता है वा ही
-
|
आगे खिसका दिया था ।
7
ए/जि
ত
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006
श्री माता जी ने बताया है कि हर देश विराट की कुण्डलिनी के एक |Invitation for Self Realization
विशेष चक्र को दर्शाता है और हर देश में कुण्डलिनी का हर आयाम
स्वरूप विद्यमान है | यहाँ लंदन में बहने वाली ' थेम्स' नदी के बारे में
एक किस्सा प्रस्तुत है ।
- by ShriMataji
1982 में श्री माता जी सप्ताहांत सेमिनार के खत्म होने पर कुछ
सहजयोगियों के साथ चेलटनहैंम इंग्लैड में शविन इसपिंग (सात धारा)
गई । उन्होंने अपने जूते उतार दिये और नीचे उतरी जहाँ पत्थरों के
बीच में थोड़ा पानी था । वहाँ पानी की सात धाराएं एक बड़ी चट्टान के
नीचे से आ रही थी | वो पानी ज्यादा बह नहीं रहा था और वहाँ चारो
तरफ मक्खियाँ थी सभी ने अपने पाँच पानी में डाले पर पानी बहुत ठंडा
था | तब जब श्री माता जी ने अपना पॉव डाला तो पानी बहना शुरू हो
गया और सारी मक्खियाँ उड़ गई और सारा वातावरण बहुत संदर हो | "What are you searching? Why are you aimlessly and
गया | जैसे ही श्री माता जी ने पॉव पानी में डाला पानी का स्तर ऊपर
हो गया | श्री माता जी ने बताया कि "थेम्स' नदी इंग्लैंड की कुण्डालना | for in power, the joy that disappeared in the words of
listlessly running about? The joy that you have
searched in material gains, the joy that you are looking
है | उन्होने बताया कि ' थेम्स' का अभिप्राय 'तमसा' से है, मतलब बांया | books-the so-called knowledge-is all lost in yourself,
भाग और लदन चंद्रमा का शहर है । मतलब लना और चंद्रमा का सबंध | and you are still searching and seeking! You can pay
attention to everything outside, yourself! You are lost in
बायें भाग से होता है श्री माता जी ने कहा अब ये नदी इंग्लैंड को स्वच्छ
your thoughts, like babes in the wood! But there is great
करेगी और 'थेम्स' चैतन्यमयी हो गई | पहले ये नदी बहुत ही प्रदूषित | hope that you can rise into the Heaven of "thoughtless"
थी पर उसके बाद वो काफी स्वच्छ नदी हो गई ।
परम पूज्य श्री माता जी के श्री चरणों में कोटी-कोटी नमन
awareness, which we call Self-realization."
"I invite you to this feast of Divine Bliss, which is
pouring around you, even in this Kaliyuga, in these
God-forsaken modern times. I hope you will come and
Who knew that god would be waiting
|
enjoy the spiritual experience of the Life Eternal."
(Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi)
Walking on the way there was hay.
Which I tried to ignore,
I went in a turmoil to know it ,
But it was just a stone in my way,
This made me go left some times right away from my
way. Bess buzzed when I was a rose.
Trying to take my happiness away.
I jittered a bit so as to move them away,
But it was just a testing part of the day.
So I smiled and said hey Let them say
Inside the lamp when I was a light,
Winds tried to jitter me in dark nights,
I fought till the whole night,
And got submerged in enlightened
suns light of the day.
I cryied, when all went away,
I had an unfortunate delay,
but who knew that god would be waiting
for so long,just for me with his people in his boat,
to take me away in the morning dawn from one heaven
to another heavenly place!!!
(This letter was written by Shri Mataji in 1972 during
Her first trip to America to give public programs.)
8
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Snakes and Ladders
(For a Sahaja Yogi)
Yuvadrishti Dec20l6
91
92
93
94
95
97 96
You Become
99
100
Yogi/Yogini
81
82
84
88 87186
90
72
8 77
7
79
80
Roving
Oving Eye
63
64
65
68 Judging other
Relations&
52 ! 1
34
53
55
57
on Shri Mataji
42 41
with
48
Sahaja yog
38
15
46
47
3231
33
34
35
36
39
40
23 2 21
24
Daily Foot soaking & Bhandhan
36
28
30
29
11
12
13
16
18
49
20
9 10
6
Your Journey
4
STARTS
Snakes & Lader Game For Yuvashakti
...They go on a ride of a ego-trip. When they go on a ride of a ego-trip, then they find that they've failed and they've
to come back, from the very beginning they start. It's like the game of Snake & Ladder...
...And though people have told that first see the vibrations and then read the books, still we say, "O, what's wrong,
we should read other books." You go down again, Snake and Ladder, as I said. That is one of the snakes. We think
that, "What's the need to do meditation, I've no time, I have this thing, that thing." You do not progress....
Talk about Sahastrara, February 4, 1983
9.
Attachment with
erialistic things
Meditating & Excell in their Studies
Wearing Dignified , Auspisious & Chaste Dress
sanajy
& children.
15
Catch
Arguing
Helping Elder Sahajyogi
seeking Importance
Elder
Spreading Sahajayoga & Inspring others to do so
Doubt
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 The Tomb of Moses
Yuvadrishti Dec 2006
Shri Moses' Final Journey around 600 years ago great
the valley of the Jhelum opens out into the broad plan of
Kashmiri saint Hazrat Makhdoom was traveling in the
Lake Wular was once called Behatpur, which is now
called Bandipur in the region of Tehsil Sopore, 80
kilometres north of Srinagar, the capital of Kashmir.
region near Srinagar along with his close disciple Baba
Dawood Khaki. On reaching Bandipore which was then
called Bethpoer, he said, 'I find smell (vibrations) of the
Only approximately 18 kilometers northeast of Bandipur
lies the small village of Hasba or Hasbal. This is referred
to as Hesbon in the Bible (Deuteronomy 4, 46), and is
presence of some prophet nearby.' Then he climbed to the
village Buth, reached near the rivulet and told Khaki, 'Yes,
it has to be somewhere here (Near Nebu Bal)."
mentioned in connection with Bethpeor and Pisga. On the
cliffs of Pisga (now: Pishnag), north of Bandipur and only
1.5 kilometres northeast of the village Aham-Sharif, there
is a spring famous for the healing quality of its waters. In
Finally he reached a tomb which had east-west orientation
similar to Jewish tombs (Muslim tombs are of North-south
orientation). It is also common local knowledge that the
villages near the tomb had never suffered from famine or
natural disasters. Which Prophet's tomb is it?
Hazbal
Auth Wattu
The Bible mentions five geographic places that pinpoint
the location of Moses' tomb. But misled by false
knowledge his followers kept on searching for his tomb in
biblical regions of west Asia and thus later added into the
Pishga
Moab
Mount Nebo
bible: "but no man knoweth of his sepulcher (tomb) unto
AhamshH
TOMB OF MOSES
this day,". But through enlightened knowledge that Shri
Mataji has blessed us with, we know that the promised
VAral-Ma
land of bible which Shri Moses saw before he died is the
Bandipur
present day Kashmir, where even Shri Jesus spent his
early life and after resurrection. This is also confirmed by
the biblical verse which states clearly precisely where
the Bible, the valley and the plains of Mowu are called the
Moses is buried in Kashmir. " And Moses went up from the
plains of Moab unto the mountain of Nebo, to the top of
Pisgah, that is over against Jericho... And the Lord said
unto him, This is the land...So Moses
plains of Moab, ideal pasture land, about five kilometres
northwest of Mount Nebo.
Mount Nebo is a single mountain in the range of Abarim
and is always mentioned in context of Beth-peor. All five
the servant of the Lord died there in
the land of Moab, according to the
names are to be found within close proximity to one
word of the Lord. And he buried him in
another. Mount Nebo, also called Baal Nebu or Niltoop,
offers a splendid view of Bandipur and the entire
a valley in the land of Moab, over
against Beth-peor: but no man
knoweth of his sepulchre unto this
highlands of Kashmir. All the five named landmarks are
thus to be found in one well-defined location.
day."
Everything fits in: near the plains of Moab, near the top of
Pisga, on the mountain of Nebo, across from Beth-peor
[all in line with the Biblical account], and from this place
one has a splendid view of a fresh and blossoming land,
forever green, in which 'milk and honey' flow, a true
Thus the Bible names five landmarks
in relation to Moses' burial site: The
Plains of Moab; Mount Nebo (in the
Abarim mountains); The Peak of
(Mount) Pisgah; Beth-peor and
Heshbon. If it is possible to find the places mention in the
Moses by
Michelangelo
paradise.
texts, the true location of the Promised Land should also
Above a small hamlet of Buth directly beneath Mount
become clear.
Nebo, there is an area that resembles an unfenced
garden that contains a small cabin like shrine. This
The literal meaning of Bet-peor is 'place that opens out', as
might refer to a valley that opens on to a plain. The river
modest hut serves as the tomb of an Islamic saint, Sang
Bibi, a female recluse, and two of her followers. To one
Jhelum in the north of Kashmir is called "Behat" in
side, in the shadow of the little wooden building, lies an
Persian, and the small town of Bandipur at the point where
unprepossessing stone column that rises about a metre
10
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006
What Is Tension...
from the ground and is almost completely covered by
grass: this is the tombstone of Moses. The keeper of this,
the Wali Risih, states that the Rishis have been caretakers
of that tomb for over 2700 years.
"In these modern times we have something called
tensions. It was never there before. People never
talked of any tensions. Now every body says, "I am in
Also in this area, as in other parts of Kashmir, there are
tension, you give me a tension". What is this tension?
This is because of my advent.
numerous places with biblical names. There are four
Maqam-i-Musa, the place of (rest) of Moses in Kashmir
and there may be many others. One is near Auth Wattu
The limbic area wants to know about me. As Sahaja
Yoga is expanding the Kundalini is trying to rise in
other people because you people have become the
channels. Wherever you go you generate vibrations
and these vibrations give a challenge to the Kundalini
or a message in various people and it rises. It may not
rise up to the Sahasrara or may rise and fall back due
to lack of recognition. So every time they do
something the kundalini comes up and gives them a
pressure because their Sahasrara is not open. It is a
closed door. Because of the closed door it gives them
a kind of pressure in the head, which they don't
understand and they call it a tension. Actually the
Kundalini is trying to push out itself but it cannot.
Those who get their realization but do not make the
Sahasrara alright face the same tensions."
(Eight paths) in Handwara Tehsil. This place is also known
as Ayat Maula, the Sign of God. Moses came to the valley
from this direction and prayed at this spot for forty days.
The second is at the junction of the two rivers Jhelum and
Sindh (Not Indus) near Shadipur. It is sometimes known
as Kohna-i-Musa, 'Cornerstone of Moses'. The third is at
Pisgah and the fourth is near Bandipur. To South of
Srinagar, at Bijbihara, a place on the banks of the river is
still referred to as "Moses' Bath", where there is
miraculous stone called Sang-i-Musa (Stone of Moses) or
Ka-Ka-Bal (Stone of Ka Ka). The Ladakhis call Moses Ka
Ka. The Pathans call an elderly or saintly person Ka Ka.
According to legend , the stone about 70 kilograms in
weight is supposed to rise by itself and remain suspended
at about one meter off the ground if eleven people touch it
with one finger while chanting the name 'Ka-ka, ka-ka'.
Sahasrara Day Puja - Sorrento 6th May 1989
The stone rises only when
11 persons do this and not
any other number. The
reasons for this is out of
twelve tribes of Israel one
(Levi) h ad been
disinherited. When the
remaining eleven tribes are
symbolically represented
before the stone of Moses,
The Stone atop Shri Moses
Tomb in Kashmir
it would lift itself.
So the tomb of Moses is on Nebu baal (Mount Nebu).
From this place Behatpoor (Bandipur), Sin Betour
(second Mount Sinai) are visible. Hashba, Pisgah and
Maqam-i-Musa, the Place of Moses, are within a short
distance from it. The discovery of the tomb's location in
Kashmir shows that India, the sacred land of the
Kundalini, was revered and was a coveted destination for
the realized souls of the past.
"It is the land of Saints, this holy land of Bharat; O Divine
Mother please bless this land and remove all afflictions
from here"
11
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006
Divine Secrets of Carbon Atom
Carbon (symbol 'C', atomic number - 6, atomic mass - 12)
Nabhi center. It has been a
is a very special element of all the known elements. It
occurs in all organic life and is in fact basis of life itself.
Chemically, Carbon is tetravalent, that is, it has four
spontaneous process so far.
Nowadays because of advancement
of atomic theory, the scientists
valencies similar to the four
describe the structure of an atom
Negative
electron
petals of Mooladhara Chakra.
It is a very fascinating element
with very special properties.
Carbon is able to be present in
through a model called the charge
cloud model/quantum mechanical model/orbital model.
So the model uses an overlapping cloud like structure that
represents the highly likely occurrence of the electrons,
also called "probability clouds".
different forms in nature and
one of its forms is the hardest
In the case of the carbon atom the electrons occupy four
naturally occurring substance
(diamond) and other one is the
softest substances (graphite)
tear drop shaped clouds in a tetrahedron-like
arrangement. These clouds represent the areas in which
the electrons spend most of their time. Recently a number
of researchers have suggested that even within these
clouds exist specific zones that the electrons favored.
Positive
nucleus
known. Moreover, carbon has
the highest melting point of all
elements. This element also has the interesting chemical
These areas form a spiral around the surface of each of
property of being able to bond with itself (called as
Catenation) and also attracts a wide variety of other
elements to bond with it thus forming nearly TEN
MILLION known compounds, while the rest 115 elements
are known to form around 50,000+ compounds. Many
the tear drop shaped clouds.
The specialties of Carbon atom make it an element that
has been specially chosen by the divine to work out life.
And this aspect was elaborated by Shri Mataji when She
revealed that the Carbon atom contains universal divine
thousands of these are vital to the process of life. In fact,
there are more known carbon-containing compounds
symbols representing Shri Ganesha and His Incarnation,
Shri Jesus. On basis of this revelation, scientists studied
than all the compounds of the other chemical elements
combined. This resembles quality of the magnetism
which is a blessing of Shri Ganesh.
the structure of the spiral waves surrounding the Carbon
nucleus. They were not much
astonished when they viewed
the three-dimensional model
Shri Mataji has said that God (and not Law of Chance)
from different angles which
created Carbon atom so that He could use the carbon
revealed its secrets for the first
atom to make other compounds which form the basis of
time to mankind's naked eye.
life. Carbon comes from Ganesha on the left side. Thus
On viewing from the left
Carbon is also associated with the Mooladhara chakra,
towards right side, a 3-D
which represents the stage when life itself started, the
origin of living being. Mother
Omkara or Aum symbol was
very clearly visible. From the other side the Omkara took
the shape of a 2D Swastika. More special secrets were
yet to be revealed. Looking from below upwards a symbol
of Alpha and Omega came forth, the symbol and
representation of Shri Jesus who had said, "I am the Alpha
and Omega".
Earth created the carbon and
through the effect of electricity,
carbon got attached to hydrogen
and oxygen and so produced
amino acids and so Prana
started which ultimately
Thus the humble Carbon atom stands witness to the
produced the mind and the brain
universality of the Divine aspect in the whole creation. All
the living matter is made of carbon and thus all of us living
beings contain these divine symbols of Om, Swastika,
and Alpha & Omega is in each cell of our bodies.
and when we become realized, becomes the Pranava.
Evolution thus took place from the carbon stage and
amoeba stage through the fish and reptile stages, to the
present day at Sahasrara and it is still going on. Carbon
was the instrument for igniting the living process in matter,
which was followed by the different incarnations of the
12
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006
A Poem by RN Tagore
I thought that my voyage
had come to its end at the last limit of my power,
that the path before me was closed,
that provisions were exhausted and the time come
to take shelter in a silent obscurity.
Let only that little be left of my will
whereby I may feel thee on every side
and come to thee in everything
and offer to thee my love every moment.
Let only that little be left of me
But I find that thy will knows no end in me
And when old words die out on the tongue,
whereby I may never hide thee.
Let only that little of my fetters be left
whereby I am bound with thy will
and thy purpose is carried out in life
new melodies break forth from the heart;
and where the old tracks are lost,
my
and that is the fetter of thy love.
new country is revealed with its wonders.
That I want thee, only thee
let my heart repeat without end.
All desires that distract me, day and night,
are false and empty to the core.
Where the mind is without fear
and the head is held high;
Where knowledge is free;
Where the world has not been broken up
into fragments by narrow domestic walls;
Where words come out from the depth of truth;
Where tireless striving stretches its arms towards
perfection;
Shri Mataji's Precious Advice
Truth is love.
Sahaja yoga talks only of God's love. When
we love someone we have to know each
and every detail about the other person.We
have to develop the dynamic of love and
manifest it in each one's daily life.
Where the clear stream of reason has not lost its
way into the dreary desert sand of dead habit;
Where the mind is led forward by thee
into ever-widening thought and action.
Into that heaven of freedom, my Father,
let my country awake.
This is my prayer to thee, my lord
strike, strike at the root of penury in my heart.
Introspection is not a mental activity.
When we are in the state of thoughtless
awarness automatically we are in
introspecetion. We become the witness for
burselves.
Give me the strength
lightly to bear my joys and sorrows.
Give me the strength
to make my love fruitful in service.
During the meditation, listening to music is al
right as long as we have no reaction to the
music. There should be enough light for us to
see the picture of mother ; too strong or
complete darkness is not good.
Give me the strength
never to disown the poor or bend my knees before
insolent might.
Give me the strength
to raise my mind high above daily trifles.
And give me the strength
to surrender my strength to thy will with love.
To spread Sahaj Yoga is everyone's
responsibility ; it is not just the leader's
responsibility.
13
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Sahajayoga Yuvashakti
Quiz- BrainTease
Find the Names...
F2
8.
TO
6.
12
"ТЗ
14
5
"
Across:
Down:
4. Indian freedom fighter, often referred to as Shaheed;
While in jail wrote a book "Why I am an Atheist"
1. Swiss Psychologist who talked about the collective
consciousness; Also referred to divine child, primordial
mother among archetypes who communicate from this
5. Indian Freedom fighter, who resigned from Indian
area with individual consciousness
Civil Service despite his fourth ranking to partcipate in
independence movement and is immortalised for
forming the Azad Hind government in exile
2. The Bard of Avon, the most quoted writer in literature
of the English speaking world who wrote about the
futility of human endeavours in his works
6. He was a German monk, priest, professor,
theologian, and church reformer who started the new
3. The king who unified whole of Maharashtra, whose
only message for the future was "Swadharma Jagawa"
meaning You awaken your Spirit.
movement of Protestants.
10. He led the turkish national movement to
independence and became its first president. His far
reaching reforms sought to create Turkey as a secular,
7. The Indian poet who wrote about ganapatipule,
where people from all over the world shall collect to
modern and democratic state. His name means Father
become Mahamanav
Turk.
8. The Indian prime minister known for his honesty,
13. An English Poet, best known for his series, The
humility and soft-spoken nature who showed his
strength of will and made India win a war.
Chronicles of Narnia, who described his vision of the
procession of Shri Mataji
9. Greatest physicist of modern science; who gave
14. He led American Revolutionary war and was
credit to the torsion area for his discoveries which in
America's first President; Is often referred to as the
Nirmal knowledge means Paramchaitanya.
Father of the United States
11. He was the father of Labor Right movement and
15. The Warrior Yogi & King of Mewar, who took a
vowed to sleep on floor till he could free his homeland
from the Mughals.
(Answers on page : 24)
warned people of the ills of capitalism through his book
Das Kapital
12. An American president who abolished slavery.
14
Page no 14
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006
सहज गीता
गीता भारतीय संस्कृति का आधार भूत स्तम्भ है । श्री कृष्ण ने बहुत ही संक्षेप में जीवन का सार तत्व अर्जुन को बताया |
अर्जुन महान योद्वा था परन्तु अपने गुरूओ व परिवार के श्रेष्ठ व
वृद्वजनो को देखकर उसका मन आत्मग्लानि से भर गया ।
क्योंकि वह जानता था कि अवश्य ही लोग उनके हाथो
यह तो सभी जानते है कि सहजयोग मे आने के बाद हमारे
सोचने की दिशा ही बदल जाती है और श्री माता जी की कपा
से जीवन के रहस्य अलग ही गहराई से समझ आने लगते है ।
कुछ
मारे जाएंगे । जिनकी गोद मे बचपन में कभी खेला करता था,
उन पर वार करना उसे अनुचित लग रहा था । यदि एक
साधारण मनुष्य अनुसार सोचा जाए तो उसका मोह में पडना
स्वाभाविक था । परन्तु महाभारत का युद्वतो धर्मयुद्व था, यहाँ तो
बुराई, क्रूरता और अर्धम का सामना अर्जुन को
करना था । जो अधर्म का साथ दे रहा था वह
|
कृष्ण ने अर्जुन को युद्व करने के किए
महाभारत के युद्वमें श्री
प्रेरित किया । पाण्डव और कौरव एक ही के थे और उनमें
युद्व का मुख्य कारण कौरवो के बड़े भाई दुर्योधन की राज्य पाने
की महत्वकांक्षा थी ।
पाण्डवो व कौरवो के क्रमशः पिता थें
युद्ध
कुल
के
पाण्डु व धृतराष्ट्,
धृतराष्ट्र बडा भाई था, मगर अंघा होने के
कारण उसे राज्य सिंहासन नही मिला ।
यही ईर्ष्या धृतराष्ट्र ने जाने अनजाने में
अपने पुत्रो के मन में भर दी । पाण्डु की
मुत्यु के बाद राजसिंहासन पाण्डवो मे बड़े
भाई युधिष्ठिर को मिला ।
दुर्योधन ने अपने मामा शकुनि के
साथ पाण्डवो को जुए में हराकर उनका
राज्य हड़पने की चाल चली और इसमें वे
सफल भी हो गये । पाण्डवो को 14 वर्ष
उसका संगा संबन्धी होते हुए भी शत्रु ही था ।
अर्जुन ने श्री कृष्ण से कहा " हे कृष्ण मुझे न
तो विनय का, ना मान सम्मान का और न ही
राज्य का सुख चाहिए | ऐसे राज्य सुख से या
ऐसे भोगविलासों से और ऐसे जीवन से भी
क्या लाभ है | अगर तीनों लोको का राज्य भी
मुझे मिल जाए तो भी नैं इन्हें मारना चाहुगा ।
भोगने
इन सभी को मारकर राज्य
सुख
कोई प्रयोजन मुझे समझ नही आता । यदि
कौरवो को मै मारता हूँ, तो भी जीव हत्या का
का
पाप तो मेरे सिर लगेगा ही, तो इन दुष्टो को मारकर मै पाप का
भागी बनूँ ।
अर्जुन योद्वा होने के साथ-साथ ज्ञानी भी था । पाप पुण्य का
विचार जब उसके मन में आया तो उसे
वनवास व एक वर्ष अज्ञातवास काटना पड़ा । वापिस आ कर
राज्य माँगने पर जब उन्हे राज्य वापिस नही मिला तो अंततः
कोरवो और पाण्डवो मे यूद्ध हुआ
नाम से जानते है ।
|
जिसे "महाभारत का यूद्व" के
के
नाम से ही
यु्ध
आत्मग्लानि होने लगी । उसे लगा किइस लोक में राज्य को
जीतकर सु,ख भोग भी लेगा तो दुसरे लोक में ( मृत्यु के बाद )
या दूसरे जन्म में इन पापो का फल भी भोगना पडेगा । इससे
तो अच्छा है कि मैं युद्ध न करू और बिना राज्य के जीवन व्यतीत
के समय दोनो सेनाए आमने सामने खड़ी थी ,
युद्ध
अर्जुन के सारथी श्री कृष्ण थे । अर्जुन ने उनसे रथ को दोनो
सेनाओ के मध्य ले जाने की प्रार्थना की । शत्रु पक्ष मे अपने
गुरूओ और बन्धु बान्धवो को देखकर अर्जुन ने अपने अस्त्र
- शस्त्र फेंक दिए ।
अर्जुन बोले " हे कृष्ण युद्क्ेत्र मे अपने स्वजन समुदाय
को देखकर मेरा शरीर शिथिल हो रहा है, मुख सुख रहा है एवं
भय के कारण रोगंटे खड़े हो गये है , शरीर काँप रहा है | मन
भ्रमित हो रहा है त्वचा जल रही है, हाथ से गाण्डीव (धनुष) गिर
करलू
अर्जुन पूरी तरह से माया में फंस गया, वह मोह के वशीभूत
होकर भलाई बुराई को नही समझ पा रहा था । अकर्मण्यता
अर्थात कर्म न करके पाप और पूण्य से बचना चाह रहा था।
2.
है।
परन्तु युद्ध ना करना अधर्म से न लड़ना, अतः उसे मोह को त्याग
कर युद्वकरना चाहिए था ।
( क्रमशः )
रहा है ।"
15
ए/जि
এ
ত
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006
Devai Namoh Namah
Om Twameva Sakshat
SHRI BHAIRAVNATH
Sakshat Shri Adishakti Mataji
Shri Nirmala Devyei Namo Namah
Shri Bhairavanath is the deity who represents the terrible
Vishnu were
aspect of God Shiva. The name Bhairava means
fearsome. But He causes fear to the negative tendencies
of the yogis. He is the Lord of the Ida Nadi and represents
involved in a fight for
supremacy. As the
fight took a furious
the pure desire of Shri Adishakti, before whom the kleshas
(obstacles) and conditionings of human beings crumble.
For the yogis He is very soft and beautiful. Shri
Bhairavanath represents one of the destroying power of
the Ekadesha Rudras. Shri Bhairavanath is recognized
shape, all the deities
went to Lord Shiva
and He took the form
of a huge Lingam
and stood between
as Saint Michael in the Christian tradition, who is same as
both of them like a
St. George, the Guardian angel of England. He incarnated
on earth as Shri Mahavira, as Shri Hussein and then as
pole. Lord Vishnu
took the form of a
Shri William Blake.
boar and went downwards to find the base. Shri Brahma
took the form of a swan and flew to find the top of the pole.
Shri Vishnu went deep in patal but was unable to find the
As Shri Mahavira, He clearly told people about hell and
how to avoid it. In His incarnation as Shri William Blake,
root or the beginning point of the pole. He came back
totally disappointed. Shri Brahma using a Ketki flower as
He talked about Divine in an open, fearless manner. Shri
Blake used symbolic language in His works which at times
is blatant and sometimes gentle, like a sword to cut
witness came back with an assertion that He had seen the
end of the pole. Vishnu believed and touched His feet.
Seeing this fraud, Shri Shiva got upset and appeared in
front of them in His full form. He was angry and created
Shri Bhairava to punish Brahma, who took away
through the blind beliefs of a lost society and announce to
them the divine advent. He talks about building of New
Jerusalem in England.
Brahma's fifth head.
As per mythology Shri Bhairava aspect took form during
the event of Daksha yagna. Shri Sati, daughter of Daksha,
The existence of Shri Bhairava is that of a chiranjivi i.e an
eternal being. Chiranjeevis are the deities who are
Niranjanas, like Shri Bhairava and Shri Hanumana and
they exist and are waiting just for a call from yogis to
protect them. Shri Bhairava has a dog as his divine
could not bear to hear Her husband, Shri Shiva insulted
and offered Herself to the sacrificial pyre. Shri Shiva then
destroyed the
yagna and killed
Daksha
vehicle.
by
beheading him. He
He is the greatest disciple of Shri Mahakali. He always
then carried His
has a light in His hand to make the yogis see that there is
wife's corpse on
nothing negative in their Ida Nadi. He is the One who runs
up and down the Left channel morning till evening and
especially in the night, working very hard, to kill the
horrible rakshasas who afflict the yogis. He also guards
His shoulders and
started His
destructive
Tandava nritya. Since this would eventually destroy all
cremation grounds in order to protect humans from the
creation, Shri Vishnu used His Sudarshan Chakra to cut
spirits living there. As per Christian tradition, St Michael is
the archangel who defeats and chastises Satan and his
Sati's body into pieces, which then fell all around. These
spots where body parts fell are now known as Shakti
helpers.
Peethas. Shri Shiva then took the form of Shri Bhairava
and is said to be guarding each of these Shakti peethas.
Shri Bhairavanath along with Shri Hanumana helps those
people who are depressed or who become left-sided and
Also the other story is that once Lord Brahma and Lord
always think negative or about problems. The way to clear
16
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006
Shri Bhairava's 21 names or aspects are:
such a negative temperament is to take Shri Bhairava's
name while sitting with the left hand towards the
photograph and right hand on the Mother Earth. Shri
Bhairava gives us the light in the dark times and destroys
all the bhoots, bhootish ideas, funny ideas about
The Lord who is very fierce
Shri Maha Bhairava:-
and formidable.
Shri Vatuka Bhairava:- The fierce Lord who appears
attachments and depressiveness.
as a boy.
He has a strong relationship with Shri Ganesha because
Shri Siddha Bhairava:- The Lord of all success and
Shri Ganesha is at the Mooladhara and Shri Bhairava
fulfillment.
moves on the left side and goes to the right side. So all
kinds of conditionings, all kinds of habits can be
Shri Kankala Bhairava:- The Lord who is garlanded with
conquered through the help of Bhairavanath.
human bones.
If Shri Bhairavanath sees any person who has a hot
temper because of ego then He plays tricks on that person
to cool him down. He organises everything under His own
Shri Kala Bhairava:-
The Dark hued emanation of
Lord Shiva.
Shri Kalagni Bhairava:- Lord Shiva as the final
conflagration of the world.
control with the help of ganas & with the help of Shri
Ganesha and Shri Hanumana, to cool down the
temperament of yogis, to give them balance and to show
the stupidity of anger. Ida Nadi is the nadi of moon and has
a cooling nature. So the work of Shri Bhairavanath is to
cool us down.
Shri Yogini Bhairava:-
The Lord who blesses with
Divine Union.
Shri Shakti Bhairava:-
The Lord who is Creative
Power.
The Lord of Divine Bliss.
In Nepal there is a very huge Bhairavanath statue which is
a Swayambhu. As the people are more left-sided in Nepal,
they are afraid of Shri Bhairavanath. And so it is a local
Shri Ananda Bhairava
Shri Martanda Bhairava:-The Lord of Sun.
custom that if anybody has done a wrong deed for e.g
stealing, then he is taken in front of Bhairavanath and His
light is burnt and then he is asked to confess what wrong
he has done. So Shri Bhairavanath protects the people
Shri Gaura Bhairava:- The Lord of Absolute Purity.
The Lord who appears as a
Shri Bala Bhairava:-
child.
from doing wrong things or sly things like thieving. He also
Shri Batu Bhairava:-
The Lord who has the form of a
exposes people who think they can get secretly do bad
deeds and get away with them. It is He who has exposed
so many horrible false gurus.
youth.
Shri Shamashana Bhairava:-The Lord of the
Cremation ground.
The essence of Shri Bhairavanath is that He drives away
all negativities and bad feelings so that the yogis have a
Shri Pura Bhairava:-
The Ancient Lord.
sense to laugh, to enjoy and to have fun.
Shri Taruna Bhairava:- The Lord who is ever youthful.
Shri Paramananda Bhairava:-
The Lord who is the
Highest Bliss.
Shri Surananda Bhairava:- The Lord who is the
Bliss of the Gods.
Shri Gyanananda Bhairava:-The Lord who is the
Bliss of Knowledge.
Shri Uttamananda Bhairava:-The Lord who is the
Supreme Joy.
Shri Amritananda Bhairava:-The Lord who is the
Nectar of immortal Joy.
17
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006
in Andhra
Self Realisation in Andhra Pradesh
This is to share the joy and & bliss of spreading Sahaja
whole village was enjoying the Divine Bliss in this
Yoga during when the whole country was celebrating the
'Independence Day' on August 15th 2006. En- masse Self
Realization programs were conducted in almost all cities
in Andhra Pradesh and marked the day 15th August 2006
evening.
Some of the delighted news we have received from
few other districts:
as 'Self Realization Day'. Thousands of truth seekers all
over the state took the gift of Self Realization during this
Rajamundry:
There is small village called 'Kooru Konda' Near
Rajahmundry. On 15th August, Sahaja Yogis from
Rajahmundry
time.
One Week Sahaja Tour to spread the message of Love
& Peace in City
conducted a
Publi c
Self Realization programs through the freedom campaign
began on 13th August as a Mobile van with yuvashakti
volunteers appeared in the city & towns nearby started
distributing pamphlets all over, attracted the wide
audience of the public. This was continued for 7 days from
13th till 19th August.
Program in
'Kooru Konda'
and 30 people
are blessed
with their Self
Relization. On
16th Aug, near
On 16th & 17th of August, two En-masse realization
a temple in
Rajahmundry
a mobile stall is kept and more than 100 people were
blessed with their Self Relization. On the same day they
programs were conducted where more than 400 truth
seekers took Self Realization. Both the days programs
were started with music bhajans by Yuvashakti and ended
with Vande Mataram paying respect to the great country
of “Bharath Bhoomi". More than 40,000 pamphlets were
also had a program in some apartments for the first time
and 70 seekers got their Self Relization.
distributed in almost all the resident areas in and outskirts
Rajole : Rajole collective had conducted a public program
in a village called 'Katrendu Padu' near Rajole and 70 of
of Hyderabad. There were two mobile teams with more
than 15 volunteers participated all the 7 days in this
the villagers got their Self Relization.
program.
It was a tremendous experience for the volunteers who
participated in
this, as they
Kakinada: On 15th they have arranged Mobile stall and
guided people for the Public program. Kakinada collective
is blessed with a public program on 16th Aug; 120 people
took their Self Relization in this program.
could cover
more number of
people with in a
Bhimavaram: By the blessings of our Divine mother,
Bhimavaram Collective witnessed two public programs in
small duration
of time every
two villages named 'Adavikolanu and Sungavruksham'
and a program in 'Sri Chantanaya Junior collage. More
than 3500 people were blessed with their Self Relization
altogether!!
day.
I t
w as a
spontaneous
decision to go to “Kishtapur" village as a Sahaja Yogi was
invited to hoist the flag during the Independence Day. A
Undrajvaram: Undrajvaram Collective witnessed a public
program in Kakarraparru on 16th Aug. More than 100
villagers were blessed with their Self Relization.
team of yuvashakti brothers also traveled along with him
to this village situated around 200 kms from Hyderabad.
In this village there are more than 200 families. All the
Kurnnol: Self Realization programs were conducted in
more than 13 colleges on 15th & 16th of August in Kurnool
villagers, around 400, gathered to watch the video of Shri
Mataji. A projector and battery operated mike system
worked beautifully at this place as every one meditated up
on the documentary on Shri Mataji in local language. The
and nearly 7,000 students took Self Realizations!!Apublic
program conducted at Nandikodkur saw more than 500
took their Self Realization. Also there was a program at
18
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006
UNICEF campus at Orvacle Mandal. Nearly 1,000
Pochampally. During training program for un employed
youth, 83 participants took Self Realization. These people
are going to wok with MNC's as security guards. In
another public program in Nalgonda town nearly 80
participants took their Self Realization!! On 19th & 20th
Self Realization programs were conducted in more than 6
colleges and nearly about 5,000 students took Self
Realization!!
people attended the program and took Self Realization.
Colony wise program is initiated to spread Sahaja Yoga in
Nalgonda: At Mandal head quarters, Mulunugode, a
training program was organized on 22nd August for rural
un employed youth in which 100 members participated
and took Self Realisation. A Self Realization program
every colony.
was conducted at 'Shri Ramanda Theertha Rural institute'
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
You are requested to tick in blocks given below for the magazines you would like to subscribe for the Year 2007.
Outstation Rs. 225/-
2. Chaitanya Lahiri Marathi
1. Chaitanya Lahiri Hindi
Rs. 300/-
Local (for Pune) Rs.200/-
4. Yuvadrishti
3. Divine Cool Breeze
Rs. 300/-
Rs. 120/-
Please provide the full Postal address for mailing the magazines. (PLEASE FILL IN BLOCK LETTERS ONLY)
Name
Address
For Office use only: Issued Receipt No
Amount Rs.
Date
By way of Cash/ Cheque/ Demand Draft No.
Drawn on
Dated
Please send the above form duly filled along with the Cheque/DD to the following Address:
Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd.,
No. 8 , Chandragupta Housing Society,
Paud Road, Kothrud ,
Pune-4110 38
Tel : 020-25286537, Fax : 020-25286722
19
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006
Mother's Recipe
One of the form of SHRI Adishakti is "SHRI ANNAPOORNA". This section
contains some of the recipes told by our Beloved Mother
Moong ki Daal (for 4 people)
Ingredients
1 cup moong daal
`4 tablespoon ghee
'½tablespoon asafetida (hing)
°3-4 bay leaves
'1 onion finely chopped
`2.5cm ginger, finely chopped
`2 cloves of garlic, finely chopped
1 teaspoon cumin seeds (jeera)
`1 whole green or red chilli, cut into 2-4 pieces
`Fresh coriander, finely chopped
Preparation
1) Boil the daal until it is soft, cooked and mushy. It
should be thick and not too liquid.
2) Heat the ghee in a pan. When it is hot, add cumin
seeds. Let it splutter.
3) Add hing, bay leaves, ginger garlic and onion one
after another. Fry for 2-3 min.
4) Add green chilli and fry for another 2 min.
5) Add moong daal (already cooked).
6) Add salt and let everything boil for 5 min.
7) Before serving, add fresh ghee or butter and
garnish with fresh coriander.
5)Add onions and salt and mix well.
6) Fry the okra on low heat until its colour changes
and it becomes soft, say for 15 min.
6) When it is ready garnish with fresh coriander.
Vegetable Okra (Lady's finger) (for 2 people)
Ingredients
Kachimbir (salad for 15 people)
`250gm Okra
'1 tablespoon mustard oil
`2 cloves of garlic (finely cut)
'1 green chilli cut into small pieces
½teaspoon turmeric (haldi)
2 big onions finely cut into cubes
`Salt to taste
Ingredients
`1kg. natural yoghurt
1 green chilli
'125ml sweet condensed milk
'3 cloves of garlic mashed
'5 tablespoon honey
`4 big onions cut in cubes
`6 big tomatoes cut in small pieces
*3 teaspoon of any fruit jam
'2 bunch of coriander leaves, cut
*Salt to taste
'Fresh coriander finely chopped
Preparation
1) Wash the lady fingers, dry them completely
with a towel and cut the extremities off.
Preparation
2) In a pan, heat the oil. Once the oil is hot, put the
green chilli and garlic. Fry for a while.
Mix everything into a bowl, and serve with any meat curry
or nan. This type of salad is good when you want to finish
3) Add turmeric and okra on the top. Fry for a
while until the stickiness is gone.
all the rest in the house.
20
JIPEZE
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006
Mother Explain's
Few Questions Answered by Shri Mataji
Question: Why to Recognize Sahaja Yoga and Shri
of Sahaja Yoga. Recognize is the only worship when you
want to know God in Sahaja Yoga. All other Ganas,
Devatas, Deities, Shaktis are one, in unison is Sahaja
Mataji ?
Answer: Time has come that you have to recognize Yoga
Sahaja Yoga. So, those people who just go headlong into
wrong path suffer from funny type of heart troubles,
palpitations, insomnia, vomiting, giddiness, all sorts of,
we can say, irrelevant talking.
And anyone who does not recognize Sahaja Yoga, they
are just not bothered about you, what sort of a person you
are.
So, Sahasrara takes charge that it makes you recognize,
It is very serious thing to go to a wrong and bow to him.
Sahasrara becomes a closed area for such a person.
it convinces you, it proves to you that if you are not
recognizing Sahaja Yoga you cannot get your realization.
But those who recognize, also recognize partly, they take
liberties; behave in a funny manner, without
understanding that who is this 'Person' who is here. I've
seen may a times, I'm talking, people are just putting their
hand up, raising Kundalini, they are just talking, chit-
chatting l'm surprised.
The person who are against Sahaja yoga have a very
strong Sahasrara, like a nut, in the sense that it is such a
strong shell that you just cannot break it the strong shell,
like a thick nut even if you want to use hammer, you
cannot break it
Today the time has come that you have to recognize
Sahaja Yoga; you have to.
And if you don't recognize, I'm sorry, I cannot give you the
realization, which will sustain- and it may start, but it will
You did not
recognize any
not sustain".
saint,
any
Question: What is Introspection and how to do it?
prophets, anyone,
any incarnation,
but today, the
Answer:
1. Introspection should not be confused with self analysis
condition is that
Morning mediation is the time for introspection
2.
you have to
recognize one. If
you do
recognize it, your
3. What does the state of my subtle system tell me about
not
what is strong in me and what is weak?
4. Aml predominantly a right-sided person or a left- sided
person? Or am I a 'pendulum' who oscillates from one
Sahasrara can not
be opened
because this is
side to the other?
time when the
5. What are the problems that keep occurring in my life?
Sahasrara was
opened and you
have to have your
6. If my best friends and family were speaking honestly
about my faults, what would they say that needs
realization. It is
correction?
very important
thing that, that you have recognize Sahaja Yoga.
7. Witnessing oneself while in thoughtless awareness is
a good way you introspect.
There are so many people who say, 'MOTHER, WHY TO
BELIEVE IN SAHAJA YOGA THIS WAY? WE CAN JUST
8. Go through the 7 chakras and say the mantras for each
part of each chakra and witness the state of each, and ask
CALL YOU MOTHER, YOU COULD BE MY MOTHER'
yourself if you have the qualities of that.
Alright, doesn't matter, but you can't get you realization
and, even if you get it, you cannot retain it.
You have to recognize; RECOGNIZE is the only worship
21
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006
possessed. A person who takes to drugs and is an
alcoholic to the last word, but is a good soul and is still
Question: What is Collective consciousness and how is it
happened?
seeking God, such a person can see Me, in a different
form. He can see Me past, he can be very much
enamored by Me. He would know who I was. People think
Answer: "Some people may think, that by realization you
must achieve something as Adi Shankaracharya did, but
this is n ot
that the past is greater than the present, always, because
the past has been much greater than today, though I have
possible. With
some it may be,
never given realization to anyone previously. He,
therefore, gets enamored when he sees things like that.
This happens to the people who are in the supra
but
with
everyone it is
not possible.
Your first stage
conscious level if they move out to the left hand side i.e.,
into the past. Those who move out to the right hand side
can see Me as light. They see all the five elements; they
see Me as waterfall or as an Iceberg. They start seeing the
'Tanmatra' namely the casual essence of the elements. It
is Nirvichar. You
beco m e
Thoughtlessly
Aware. That
may help them to get convinced, because such a person
get convinced about Me and such a person is much more
happens when
Kundalini rises
convinced than you are. There are good many tantrikas
who know who I was. They are afraid of Me and they talk
above t he
Agnya Chakra
meaning enters
about Me. There was an ordinary maidservant who came
to My programme and she got into a trance and started
speaking Sanskrit and she described Me completely in
into the limbic
area, when your
attention just touches 'Sat' point. The reality separates
fifteen 'Shlokas' .She said this first time although I had
never said anything about Myself. This is how it started.
from 'Mithya'. You become two personalities. At that state
you start separating -like putting lime in the milk when it
starts separating into curd and water. In the same way the
So at this stage, I would not like to leave your Kundalini,
because you can cure people and curative can be done
with your Kundalini even when it is in the Limbic area. I am
very anxious always that it should come out of
Brahmarandra. At that stage you start getting the
beginning of reality starts. This is the state when you can
say that the Kundalini has awakened only. We must
understand the different stages, as it happens. I am giving
you a very detailed picture but normally the Kundalini
shoots off to 'Sahastrar' in most of the people. In some
people it does not. It takes time. It is either lost into the
Swadhishthana or the Nabhi. It does not go much higher.
vibrations; but at this stage you are just a 'chita' only and
you just touch the 'sat' point. Your attention is only
charmed by the Spirit. Only the attention part as I told you
is like a flicker or light in a gas lamp, and Kundalini is like a
gas which touches the Spirit and the light of the Spirit
'Anhata Chakra' arrests it or it may not even rise at all. But
in case it crosses this 'Door' of 'Agnya Chakra' then you
get into 'thoughtless Awareness' .With this thoughtless
awareness you get certain powers. Supposing for
example, you become Governor, you get certain powers
of Governor. Similarly you attain certain powers. But at
spreads in the central nervous system. 'Chit' part, the
outer core the (Chitta' means the attention part. At that
stage the Kundalini opens the Brahmarandra when you
feel the vibrations from your hand and you can feel
another person also; because you become 'collectively
conscious'. Collectively conscious again out of Sachita-
Anand that you just touch the 'Chita' part. Thus you start
feeling the Chit of your Chitta becoming the Chitta of the
collective consciousness means that you drop into the
ocean of Satchit Ananda in which you only feel the
collective consciousness. That means you can feel
this stage to leave the Kundalini is not proper, because the
Kundalini can start moving" to this side or that side and
thus can go to the supra conscious or to the collective
subconscious. The' Siddhis' are mostly available at this
stage. Not minor Siddhis ,but higher Siddhis, e.g., if the
Kundalini moves to the supra conscious one gets the
Siddhi of predicting the future. If the Kundalini has moved
to the' collective subconscious, they can start seeing
another person's Kundalini."
things in the past. A person like that, when he comes to
Me, can see who I was in My previous life. I do not have to
convince him. This is the same thing as anybody who is
22
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006
सहज मन्दिर की मर्यादा
एक नाटक
(सेंटर के बीच में पहुँचते हैं, भजन चल रहे हैं, पत्नी पीछे बैठ
जाती है, पति आगे जा कर मिठाई का डब्बा पोलीथिन समेत
दृश्य 1
पति टीवी देखते हुए: अरे आज इतनी जल्दी खाना क्यों बना
रही हो?
(पति भारत-पाकिस्तान का क्रिकेट मैच बहुत
श्रीमाताजी के सामने रखता हैए वहीं बैठ जाता है और बन्धन
लेता हैं पीछे मड कर दो.तीन लोगो को जय श्रीमाताजी
ही उत्तेजित
होते हुए देख रहा है और श्रीमाताजी से भारत को जिताने के
लिए प्रार्थना कर रहा है)
पत्नीः मैं रात के खाने की अभी से तैयारी कर रहीं हूँ,
कहता हैं)
(एक सहज योगी का मोबाईल बजता है, पहले नम्बर देखता
है, फिर वहीं बात शुरु कर देता है किसी के कहने पर उठ
सेंटर
जाना है ना आज, नहीं तो आरती के बाद भागने की जल्दी
रहती हैं और सेंटर खत्म होने के बाद ध्यान नहीं कर पाते हैं
कर बाहर चला जाता है)
(भजन समाप्त हो जाते हैं और सबको आगे खिसकने के लिए
आप भी तैयार हो जाइए, अपने कपड़े प्रेस कर लीजिए.
(पति उठ कर जाता है और फिर छक्के की आवज सुन कर
वापिस आ जाता है और वहीं, बैठ जाता हैं)
पत्नीः अरे क्या हुआ, आप तैयार होने नहीं गए अभी तक?
पतिः बस ये आखिरी ओवर हैं
(मैच समाप्त हो जाता है)
पत्नीः अब तो मैच खत्म हो गया, तैयार हो जाइए
भी कहा गया)
(सेन्टर मे पीछे की तरफ बच्चे खेल रहे हैं और बीच बीच में
उनके शोर की आवाज भी आ रही हैं उनके आने जाने के
कारण एक सहज योगिनी बार बार अपने पर्स को सम्भाल रही
हैं)
(सेंटर खत्म होते ही पीछे 4.5 सहज योगिनी समूह बना कर
बैठ जाती हैं और बातें करने लगती हैं)
सहज योगिनी 1: जय श्रीमाताजी, और आज खाने में क्या
पतिः मैं तैयार होने जा रहा हूँ तब तक तुम एक कप चाय बना
दो, चाय पीकर चलेगें
पत्नीः अरे उसका समय कहाँ है, पहले बोल देते तो अब तक
बनाया है?
सहज योगिनी 2: अरे अभी कहाँ, अभी तो जाकर बनाना हैं
तैयार भी हो जाती 5ण्45 तो यहीं बज गए हैं, आपको तो पता
8रू30 तो यहीं हो गए हैं, घर जल्दी जाना हैं
है हमें सेंटर समय पर पहुँचना चाहिएए श्रीमाताजी सभी गणों
के साथ निराकार रुप में वहाँ आती हैं, हमें उनसे पहले
सहज योगिनी 2: (उठते हुए) अरे तुम्हारे जवचे तो बहुत
सुन्दर हैं कहाँ से लिए? अगली बार कमेपहद लेती हैं
गाँव की सहजयोगिनी: जय श्रीमाताजी, आजकल मेरा ध्यान
पहुँचना चाहिए
पतिः अच्छा बाबा जाता हूँ तैयार होनें मेरा लाकेट कहाँ है?प्रेस
कहाँ रखा है?कपड़े अभी तक प्रेस क्यों नहीं हुए ?
पत्नीः मैं तो कब से कह रही हूँ, तैयार हो लिजिए, आपको मैच अपइतंजपवदे दे दीजिएं
देखने से फुरसत
से ना हट पाने की शू-बीटिंग करनां
(जल्दी-जल्दी प्रेस करते हैं और तैयार होकर बाहर निकल
जाते हैं, बाहर आने के बाद)
पत्नीः आपने बन्धन ले लिया?
पतिः नहीं जल्दी -जल्दी में भूल गयां
पत्नीः आप तो जानते ही हैं कि घर से बाहर निकलने से पहले (सभी सहजयोगिनी बहनें चली जाती हैं, पत्नी गाँव वाली को
अच्छे से नहीं लग पा रहा है, आपमें से कोई मुझे
सहज योगिनी 2: अरे मैं तो जा रही हूँ, मुझे तो खाना भी
बनाना हैं (जाती है)
सहज योगिनी 1: मुझे तो देना ही नहीं आता हैं।
सहज योगिनी 3: मेरी स्थिति ही ठीक नहीं चल रही है, नाभी
हो तब तो कोई काम हो? आप अपने टीवी
चक्र पकड़ा हुआ है
पत्नीः
सहज योगिनी 3: हफ्ते मे 1-2 बार कर ही लेती हैूँ
आप जल-किया तो करती ही होंगी?
हमें बन्धन लेना चाहिएं
(अन्दर जाकर फटाफट बन्धन लेता है)
पत्नीः जल्दी में बन्धन क्यों ले रहे हैं, शान्ति से कुण्डलिनी माँ
पर चित्त डालते उन्हें ऊपर उठाना चाहिए और हर चक्र
अपइतंजपवदे देती है)
(सटर खत्म होने के बाद 4-5 सहजयोगी समूह बना कर
बैठते हैं और बातें करने लगते हैं)
सहज योगी 1: आज ध्यान कैसा हुआ?
सहज योगी 2: क्या बताऊँ, मेरे बगल वाले का आज्ञा चक्र
हुए
पर चित्त डालते हुए बन्धन लेना चाहिएं
दृश्य 2
पकड़ा हुआ था, मेरा तो अभी तक सिर दर्द कर रहा हैं
23
ए/जि
ত
এ
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2006
सहज योगी
1: हमें मन्दिर हमेशा समय से आना चाहिएं
सहज योगी 3: अपना चित्त वहाँ ले जाओ, श्रीमाताजी सब
ठीक कर देगीं
सहज योगी 4 : नहीं हमारे चित्त में अभी इतनी स्थिरता नहीं हैं
2: हमें मन्दिर में कार्यक्रम शुरु होने से पहले या बाद में
फालतू
हमें अपना हाथ उस चक्र पर ले जा कर घुमाना चाहिए, हमारे
हाथों के द्वारा ही परम चैतन्य कार्य करता हैं
(सेंटर में बहुत शोर हो रहा है, प्रसाद की लाईन में भी सबको
जल्दी हैं 1- 2 लोग ही ध्यान कर रहे है बाकि सबको या तो
जाने की जल्दी हैं या बातें कर रहे हैं)
बातें करने की बजाए अपइतंजपवदे मगबींदहम करनी चाहिएं
3: हमें मन्दिर में अपना मोबाईल फोन बन्द करना चाहिए और
अपना सम्पूर्ण ध्यान श्रीमाताजी पर केन्द्रित करना चाहिएं
4: हमें मन्दिर देर से आने पर चित्त से बन्धन लेना चाहिएं
तभी एकाएक लाईट चली जाती है, अँधेरा छा जाता है और
एक आवाज गूँजती हैं
ये क्या हो रहा है, क्या ये सहज मन्दिर है?आप को क्या
5: हमें अपने बच्चों को भी ध्यान मे बैठना सिखाना चाहिएं
6: हमें दूसरों के दोषों व चक्रों को देखने की बजाए , अपने
लगता है आप को कोई देख नहीं रहा है? श्रीमाताजी के साथ
हम सभी गण सहज मन्दिर में ध्यान के समय हमेशा उपस्थित
अन्दर के दोषों को देखकर उन पर कार्य करना चाहिएं
रहते हैं और प्रत्येक व्यक्ति पर नजर रखते हैं लेकिन हमने
7: सभी सहज योगी साथ मेंः हमें मन्दिर में सहज
जो आज देखा उससे हम प्रसन्न नहीं हैं और श्रीमाताजी को
प्तवजवबवस और मरयादा का पालन करना चाहिएं
भी तकलीफ हुई हैं निश्चय ही, श्रीमाताजी ने ये स्वप्न में भी
नहीं सोचा था कि उनके बच्चों, उनके सहज योगियों का
व्यवहार इतना उथला होगा वे तो हमेशा ही चाहती है कि हम
8: सभी सहज योगी साथ में जयकारा लगाते हैंए ष्बोलो
आदिशक्ति श्रीमाताजी श्री निर्मला देवी की जयं
गहराई में उतरें, अपने आप को देखें, अपने दोषों को देखें, न
कि दूसरों कें वे चाहती हैं कि हम दूसरों के लिए एक आदर्श
बनें, जैसे हमारी माँ हैं आप ही अपनी आत्मा से पूछिए, जो
Answers for Page No 14
कुछ भी अभी यहाँ पर हुआ उससे श्रीमाताजी कितनी
खुश
Across
हुईं होगी?हमें अपने दृदय में स्थित सहज मन्दिर की मर्यादा
का पालन करने से पहले, इस मन्दिर की मरयादा का पालन
4. BHAGATSINGH, 5. SUBHASHCHANDRABOSE,
6. MARTINLUTHER, 10. ATATURK,
13. CSLEWIS, 14. WASHINGTON, 15.
करना पड़ेगा, नहीं तो हमारा उत्थान रुका रहेगा अगर आप
मानते हैं कि आप से कोई गलती हुई है और उसे सुधारना
चाहते हैं, तो आगे आकर श्रीमाताजी से क्षमा माँगते हुए अपनी
RANAPRATAP
गलती स्वीकार करें
Down
(यह सुनकर सभी सहज योगियों को अपनी गलती का
आभास होता है और वे अपने हृदय में यह प्रण लेते हुए कि TAGORE, 8. LALBAHADUR, 9. EINSTEIN,
1. JUNG, 2. SHAKESPEARE, 3.
SHIVAJI, 7.
KARLMARX, 12. LINCOLN
आगे से वे ऐसा नहीं करेंगे, एक एक कर के आगे आते हैं और
अपनी गलती स्वीकार करते हैं)
11.
24
ए/जि
ত
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Youth viewpoint
10
