Divine Cool Breeze The 1Vin July- August, 2006

 ***

 NA NIRMALA DHARA NIVERSAL PURE RELIGIO IN THIS ISSUE 1. Chhindwara Project- An Appeal 2. Shri Mataji's 59th wedding Anniversery Celeberations Australia- 7.4.2006 3. The Amazing Discovery of William Blake's Grave 4. Willam Blake's Birthday Celebrations, Pravachan of ShriMataji - 28th Nov.1985 5. Sydeny Town Hall Public Programme, Sir C.P. Srivastawa's Speech 6th February 2006 6. 10 th Anniversary Celebrations of Mumbai Hospital- 19th February 2006 7. A patient's Testimony - IS Y Health Center 8. Yogeshwar Puja-London-15.8. 1982 VISHWA

 T HE D IVINE CooL BREEZE Published by Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 8, Chandragupt Housing Society Paud Road Kothrud, Pune-411 029 Phone:020-25285232 Printed at Partha Sarthi Press A-27, Meera Bagh Ph.:25268673,9810452981,42334321 For Subscription Please Write To: Shri G.L.Aggarwal Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 222, Desh Bandhu Apartments Kalkaji, New Dehi-110019 Tel. No.:011-26216654 Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles,Miracle Photographs etc. to: ShriO.P. Chandna N-463(G-11), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110034 Tel. No. 011-55356811

 H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI SAHAJA YOGA TRUST Shri Mataji's Holy Birthplace: Chhindwara Project AN APPEAL form. Jai Shri Mataji 2. Construction of a Meditation Hall in the As announced earlier, with the courtyard of the SHRINE and some additional structures to manage the flow of Blessings of Our Divine Mother, the holy Birthplace of our Mother at Chhindwara, the visitors, house a souvenir stall and Holiest Shrine for all Sahaja Yogis and necessary facilities3; Yoginis, was acquired by H.H. SHRI MATAJI 3. Acquisition of a large plot of land ( of up NIRMALA DEVI SAHAJA YOGA TRUST, to 16,000 square meters) in close proximity India, on 14 th July 2005. All legal formalities to the Shrine for the construction of an fot the acquisition of the House have been International Ashram; and, completed. Regular weekly meditation 4. Design, planning and construction of the sessions are being held at the Birthplace International Ashram with residential and a hawan and pujas have also been accommodation and other facilities for organized. A steady stream of Sahaja Yogis visiting Sahaja Yogis/ Yoginis from all over and Yoginis is already visiting the Birthplace and this is likely to increase in coming the world. The Ashram will also include necessary facilities for holding cultural months and years. The next phase of the events, organizing national and international seminars and housing a library on spiritual project is now being launched. This consists of four main components: and philosophical texts and multi-media 1. Renovation and reinforcement of the material. These facilities will be of the existing building structure of the Birthplace with a view to ensuring its perpetuity as a highest, internationally comparable quality. The International Ashram will be located in Shrine. a beautiful natural setting to provide a A conservation architect from the Indian tranquil and peaceful environment. As National Trust for Culture and Heritage has approved by H.H. SHRI MATAJI, this Ashram been commissioned to reinforce and will be named as " H.H. SHRI MATAJI renovate the Birthplace while maintaining NIRMALA DEVI SAHAJA YOGA WORLD the Birthplace in its original facade and

 July- Aug., 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze completing this holy project will bring us all ASHRAM". even closer together in realizing our Holy A project team headed by Shri Dinesh Rai, Mother's VISION of one global family Trustee, H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi wedded to universally accepted eternal Sahaja Yoga Trust, and comprising Sahaja ethical values in our lives. Yogis and Yoginis from India and other On this momentous occasion we appeal countries, is already working under the to all Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis to guidance of Sir C.P. to actualize this project. Some initial work has also been started to support this historic project by making financial contributions. We also appeal to essential repairs and carry out all our brothers and sisters to inform us of maintenance. Architects and structural other contributions they may like to make engineers have been engaged for drawing in kind, skills and in any other manner up comprehensive plans for the restoration towards the realization of this historic and renovation of the Birthplace. Some sites have also been identilied for acquiring the project. Ail state coordinators are requested to forward this appeal to city centers and requisite land for the proposed International encourage the entire collective to contribute Ashram. suitably for this Divine Cause. As we all well understand, this is a historic An independent and specifically dedicated undertaking. The Birthplace of our Holy bank account has been established in New Mother is the most exalted and holiest place Delhi for receiving contributions for the for all of us. The Birthplace Shrine, when project from Indian Sahaja Yogis and Yoginis and they have been so advised. completed, will become the place of supreme pilgrimage for all of us and for the coming generations of Sahaja Yogis and Contributions from Sahaja Yogis and Yoginis in all other.countries, which will necessarily Yoginis. Therefore, it is our bounden and be in foreign currencies, can be received sacred duty and responsibility to develop by the National Trust in India only with the the Shrine, acquire the land for the International Ashram and ensure its early prior approval in each case from the concerned Government of India authorities. completion. The work has to be undertaken In this context, the following procedure is with all our commitment and love in accordance with the highest traditions of suggested: Sahaja values as taught to us by our Mother, the Guru of Gurus, the Satguru. i. In each country, the National Trust or Committee or Coordinator may open a new We must recognize that undertaking and

 The Divine Cool Breeze July - Aug., 2006 - H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga Trust Chhindwara Account Name of the Bank Account for the Chhindwara Project; Bank Account i. Sahaja Yogis and Yoginis may be invited to send their contributions to the National Name of the Bank - UTI Bank Trust or Committee or Coordinator;B il. Each such contribution may be K-12 Green Park Main, New Branch Delhi 110016, India acknowledged and deposited into the aforesaid Bank Account; 015010100265263 Account Number iv. After a suitable period of time, the National Trust or Committee or Coordinator A complete list of all contributors and the may inform the Executive Secretary of the amounts contributed by each of them may Indian national Trust of the amount so also be forwarded to the Executive collected for remittance to India%B Secretary of the National Trust in India. It is V. The Executive Secretary will then obtain proposed to maintain a permanent record the requisite Government of India approval at the Chhindwara Shrine of all contributions received for this Holy project. for the proposed remittance and convey JAI SHRI MATAJI the same to the concerned National Trust or Committee or Coordinator; and, Rajiv Kumar vi. The requisite remittance may thereafter Executive Secretary be made to the following Bank Account:

 News about 59th Anniversary Celebrations (7.4.2006) Australia Dear Sahaj Brothers and Sisters, On Friday April 7, Shri Mataji and Sir C.P celebrated their 59th Wedding Anniversary. Shri Mataji and Sir C.P received many emails from the world collective to commemorate this Auspicious event. Our Divine Mother has blessed us by personally acknowledging these Congratulatory messages with a Letter Text from Shri Mataji's Letter- Australian Sahaj collective celebrated our 59th wedding Anniversary on 7th April with immense love. It was an extremely moving and enjoyable occasion. Many messages, full of overwhelming affection and good wishes, were received from my beloved Sahaja children from all over the world. I wish to convey to each one of them my fondest love and blessings. C.P is deeply moved and conveys his abiding and profound gratitude to all of you. (Signed Nirmala Srivastava) SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI 8th April 2006 (Internet Version)

 Trie Amazing Discovery of William Blake's Grave (London) A CAUSE FOR WORLDWIDE CELEBRATION By Shri Mataji's Grace, Sahaja Yogis recognise William Blake as an incarnation of Shri Bhairava, the Archangel who continuously works on our left side. As we know, William Blake took his birth in England in the year 1757, and produced dazzling volumes of Divine Art that continue to attract, inspire and transform people all over the world. When he departed from this earth in 1827, William Blake's body was burried at a cemetery called Bunhil Fields, situated in central London. In the year 1965, tragic developments bom of ignorance took place: the humble stone that marked the location of his grave was removed, along with almost all the other tombstones in this area. The authorities in London had devised a plarn to convert this part of the cemetery into a sort of park, which was soon carried out. Following this process, the location of William Blake's grave was lost. No one, including eminent international Blake scholars, the ' Blake Society' based in London, or the authorities coutd point to the location of the grave anymore. The memorial stone that can be seen at Bunhill Fields today. Placed in an arbitrary location, the stone reads ' Nearby Lies the Remains of William Blake' When Luis and Carol, a Sahaja Yogi couple from West London, first visited Bunhill Fields, they knew much the same as most Sahaja Yogis about William Blake. They were surprised

 July - Aug., 206 The Divine Cool Breeze to see that the actual location of the grave had been lost and forgotten and instead stone that reads 'Nearby Lies the Remains of William Blake' had been erected. Inspired by a strong feeling of Vibrations the couple decided to try and locate the real location of the Divine Poet's grave, and set about a long and detailed program of research and investigation to find out the truth. Eventually, with some Divine help, they did indeed re-discover the actual location of William Blake's grave! Their official discovery was the result of a year's scientific and academic research, which they begun immediately after their first visit. These results have been gratefully acknowledged by the London authorities, the 'Blake Society', and leading Blake scholars, with some people even calling them up to express their gratitude. What these scholars did not know was that the couple's scientific research had actually simply confirmed a discovery they had already made. Within minutes of that first visit, the vibrations had taken them straight to that same spot, from where a tremendous fragrance of roses emanated. (The actual location of William Blake's grave, scientifically proven by Sahaja Yogis) The London authorities dealing with the cemetery grounds invited the couple to join a series of official talks. At this time, support from around 50 London Sahaja Yogis played

 The Divine Cool Breeze July Aug., 2006 a significant role in demonstrating the importance given to William Blake. Subsequently, the possibility of placing an appropriate monument on the exact location of William Blake's Grave was made an item on the official agenda! As talks progressed, the authorities advised Luis and Carol set up an independent organisation, in order to gather support for their request for a suitable monument on the exact location of William Blake's Grave. Thus, with encouragement from the UK Committee, the Friends of Willim Blake Group was set up, to petition for this important cause. William Blake's Grave The next important round of official talks concerning the fate of Bunhill Fields is set for June, 2006. UK Sahaja Yogis are busy preparing a Friends of William Blake Group Website, where Sahaja Yogis all over the world will be able to register as members, and add their support to the petition for an appropriate monument at the exact location of William Blake's grave. As soon as this website is ready, the FWBG will send out an appeal to Sahaja Yogis, who already recognise the importance of this Divine Personality. By Shri Mataji's Grace, together we have the chance to demonstrate the tremendous amount of love and admiration that exists for Willim Blake, and the importance of having a suitably impressive memorial. The FWBG will present our collective petition to the London authorities. For a more detailed version of the story of the amazing discovery of William Blake's grave, please write to Luis and Carol Garrido: luisgarrido 108 @hotmail. com Jai Shri Mataji (Internet Version)

 William Blake's Birthday Celebrations Hammersmith Town HalI,London 28th Nov. 1985 Public Talk of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi It is such an honour for all of us to how tormented he must have been in his pay this homage to the great poet printer life time to live with such people who have and a prophet that was William Blake. no sense of divine. He must have cried in When I first came to England they had the wildrness, he must have wept, he could been telling me that England is a place of not have been accepted. It's impossible, scholarship and you can see lots of such lower level minds cannot accept museums and exhibitions; and suddenly I something that's sublime and great; and told the Sahaja Yogis that I would like to go my heart bled with pain. Oh God why did and see the Tate gallery for William Blake's he take his birth in a place like this to paintings. They were surprised because I torment himself, to torture himself saying seldom go to any one of them, especially somthing which cannot be accepted ? But the libraries, and the books. And when I that's not so. went there I saw this great poet, this great I knew who he was, what he was personality, pouring out his heart with such doing, why he was here. We do not know concern, with such honesty, with such about him much because from the books understanding and perception of the divine, you cannot understand who he could have to the people of England to understand the been. He was an incarnation of great powers of divinity. But to my surprise Bhairavanath, that's whom we call the St there were some funny people, they had. Michael or St George who is, as you know, brought some magnifying glasses and they the saint angel of England. That's why he were looking at the drawings, and they were had to incarnate and forgive. This was his watching the private parts of people! I said, role, to talk about divine in an open fearless look at the wretched, absolutely base manner. He had to use symbolic language. people, who cannot see the sublime, the He had to use. It's not difficult to understand highest, which he wanted to paint; and they him at all if you are a realised soul. You'll were taking photographs. I was surprised read to it sometimes laughing, sometimes the way people reacted, and then I realised weeping, enjoying the whole drama that he

 July - Aug., 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze 11 has tried to explain. When I read him l'm who would go round and be extremely gentle to people, and nice to them amazed at his sense of humour, how he superficially, only the mannerism of it, but openly comes out with such remarks! I feel he is like Markandeya, in India, or Kabir he would be so gentle with the people who are lowiy. He created divinity out of Dass, in India, who slashed the whole fishermen who were ordinary people, society with their sword all the time, to see uneducated, absolutely we can say people that they are brought to the proper shape, without fear, but so gentle. If you read the who were one of the lowest in the strata of society. He picked them up and made them song of Thel, it's so gentle, and all of them divine. He didn't go to the ministers and who were him perhaps, or are the same the prime ministers and the governors. He style, extremely open, straightforward, we did not. When you see all the great people can say even blatant and extremely gentle. The vision of Christ that he has described who are supposed to be looking after the is the one which he sees through his own religion part of it, they are busy only with enlightened eyes; and he sees that the governors, and they are only busy with the kings and the queens who must go and vision is completely distorted, is the bow to them. They are politically activated opposite of what Christ was. I also felt the same way. I took my birth in a Protestant people. How can a divine person get into this mess of politics which human beings Christians family. I was shocked the way have created ? We don't understand it the Christians were. I, 'said are these the because we try to rationalise everything, Christians?' Now the point he brings forth and, thank God, he is the one who talked is very clear-cut. You can understand that in the mannerisms if you are gentle, "I' m aganist rationality and all the intellectual ideas of putting down Christ to the mere sorry, I' m afraid, I doubt", just look at that, level of a human being, because he was it's very commonly used, this language, he himself divine and he could understand says that Christ was not a gentleman of Christ. He used to get depression that kind. I also say I' m not seeking election, I'm not here to please you, but l' m here to sometimes, and he had problems of make you please yourself, to enjoy yourself, money, problems of convincing his brother to have your wealth enjoyed, manifested. and sister, every body trying to make him feel uneasy. That is how he also put the vision of Christ Such a fine soul came on this earth before you that he was not a gentleman

 The Divine Cool Breeze 12: July Aug, 2006 who describes a deity who is above to talk of Jerusalem. What did he mean by Jerusalem? What is Jerusalem? We go to everything, a puritanical deity. But he Jerusalem tor pilgrimage, why? Because describes a divine humanity. Also he describes the Christ who came on this Christ was born there! England will become Jerusalem when Christ wili be born here. earth for the emancipation of human beings, not to tell them don't do this and don't do But how many of English people today care for the spirit ? English language itself is that. That was all right at the time of such a funny one, that we use the word 'spirit for drinking, the 'spirit' that you call Moses in the beginning of it, the code of it. And he calls it a moral Christianity, meaning alcohol, spirit for the dead souls which hang around many more here, and 'spirit" immoral it must be, because if you force for the Atman, the spirit. When he came somone into something and pass such on this earth the industrial revolution had laws and regulations at this time, modern not taken its respite. People were still times, it's going to be impossible for human beings to follow, and they'll fall into some entering into those mills as he calls them, other traps. Strict rules of arıything imposed and he saw the scribes, how they were behaving and he saw the whole myth of on people who are not realised soul can He does not know that all religions push them into some sort of problems. religion. were doing the same They can become criminals, they can nonsense everywhere, not only Christianity. You go to become violent as a reaction, and we see any other country and see every religion is the reaction to their acting, and the the same style of a nonsense which is hypocrisy of the whole thing is exposed. Like in India, or anywhere else, they will opposite of what the prophets told them, of what the incarnations told them, of what ali say you should not be attached to money, the great sages told them. This is not only about Christianity, but still nobody can give the money to the church, to the temple, to the mosque, to all the people to enjoy it. forgive it because Christianity has a special The kind of life people ied in those days in fervour, has a special role, has a special the name of God was no model for anyone and that's how poets like him were born meaning. That's what he's trying to fight, also saying that Moses came on this earth again and again. I would say that in Lebanon to lay down the code of conduct, morality, a great poet like Kahalil Gibran was bom and also he describes Milton as a person and then in India we had so many such

 13 The Divine Cool Breeze July Aug., 2006 people, pampering their ego, pampering poets who just lashed the society and their greed. All these things if you can do lashed all these ideas of the intellectuals, the ideas of the religions, the ones who you can very nicely befool them and they feel very happy and nice that, " oh, what a were trying to conquer, because there was book it is". As we have had great writers no genuineness, there was no sincerity. If also in this country, I would say you are honest people, you really mean it, Shakespeare was a great-evolved soul, but then let us face it and see for ourselves the deterioration you see later on with what we have to achieve. So that is how he came as a poet, people like Hemingway and all those a remarkable poet the way he rhymes it coming up. I don't know how after Somerset Maugham, suddenly these horrible and the sense of humour that he has, the Hemingway people are coming up, and way he unfolds the beauty of words as any people buying their books like hot cakes! We have lost all our moorings, we poet should do. In Sanskrit it is said " Sat na kavya, na, kavya". Poetry is full of the have lost all our roots, but one thing good 'sat'. The 'sat' means the essences, the has happened out of this reading. The way explosion of essences through words. If it of Freud, making him Christ, all that has could be done, then the magic of it is called led to problems and people are now as poetry and that's what you find in Blake, realising. Now realising that's why the such a great poet. Poetry is only great when prophecy was there, that's why he was a it talks of the Divine. When it talks of the prophet. He warned people of what is going baser things, it takes you to the baser to happen. But who is bothered ? He was things. The other day I heard one Australian treated as an insane personality. If you go to the lunatic asylum everybody will think poet and I was amazed at his bathroom that you are insane. That's the way lunatics singing, it was horrible. How can you call it poetry ? He sings of baser things of life, which take you to the baser things and look at a sane personality. His wisdom was condemned. People thought that he was getting all these hallucínations, " he's talking pleasures; but he has very clearly said, if out of his hat", because they have no brains you can understand him, has said what to understand, they have no enlightenment, are these books for? This is to collect they have no preception. That's why they money out of them. Now how do you collect treated him that way. money ? By playing on the weaknesses of

 The Divine Cool Breeze 14 July-Aug, 2006 reach man without forgiveness? He cannot Now he's dead, of course they are selling his books making big money, selling reach man if he listens to Moses, can He? He cannot. If He has to come to human his plates, what he painted. But when he beings He has to forgive; and that's why in fived nobody bothered, and now they can Sahaja Yoga in the beginning you must use him the way they like. I met some very forgive everyone, you forgive yourself, don't feel guilty. funny people here, in this respect, the way they have shown great interest in Blake, in Now in Christianity just the opposite saying that he says that a naked woman is the best. I said, where? How could he say has been done, let's face it, and know for yourself that you have to go, confess to such a thing? He was innocent! Now we do not understand what is innocence in the priest. The priest also gets mad with your confession, you're already mad. What the West, Just like Markandeya describing his Mother, her breast and everything, like is there to confess in the ocean of forgiveness? It just dissolves. What a a child. A child doesn't see sex in the naked body, he does not see; and the beauty of message Christ gave us! It's the greatest a woman he describes. That means all weapon that we have got, is to forgive others and to forgive ourselves, because woman are walking nude everywhere? God forgives us; and this is the message Now, are you exciting the innocence of that we have to know, that we have to people or are you exciting the baser qualities? We have to be natural. Are you forgive ourselves. Instead of that, for all that we do wrong or that we try to do against natural? All these perversions and all these our spirit, we feel guilty. And moreover if diversifications have become because man the teachings are such that you better feel guilty all the time, what we are doing is to does not have a simple mind, he's a crooked person. This crookery has to go feel guilty and to catch up on this chakra, from the mind. That is important, but ifI the left Visshudhi. To such an extent that in say that I am not doing my job here, I know for definite that is not the way it is going to the West wherever I go, I tell them, first of all you just say one mantra, " Mother I am not guilty". Take it out of you. work out. That's why Christ is the one who said "forgive, forgive them" otherwise how Who are you to feel guilty when God can God meet man? With this crookery, loves you so much? He has made you the with all this kind of cunning, how can God epitome if evolution, you are at the highest

 July - Aug., 2006 15 The Divine Cool Breeze They didn't know they were sinning, and point, why should you judge yourself and this is one of the things that Blake brought feel guilty? Is he not capable of forgiving forth for us, to show that Christ was a you, have you no faith in his ocean of loye? person who brought a new message over But this is the basis of the mistakes that Moses. Of course Moses was needed at are committed in the name of Christ. I'm the time when Jews had to come out. That teilling to the priest now, who is a priest was the time they needed it, and they here, coming from theological college: can brought these Shariat laws. It was Moses you learn about divinity in the theological who started it, but Muslims are following college? Did Christ go to any theological them, Now, when today we are in this college? How did he get it? How did he twentieth century sitting down here, we get the knowledge? Through enlightenment. have to see what is the prophecy of this Enlightenment has to be there. The way great man, William Blake. Can you imagine he has clearly stated everything, nobody his birthday was in this month ? Guru liked him because of vested interest. Nanak had birthday in this month. Everybody has vested interest, nobody is Mohammed Sahib's birthday is in this sincere, honest. And they want to exploit month, all these great people were born in others to make money. You cannot make this month. Now this month also we money in the name of God! It is a sin. celebrated the Diwali. Such a great month Such people can never enter into the is this one. And in this month those who kingdom of God. That's why Christ has said are born have to be great people in the "you will be calling me,Christ, Christ, I will whole understanding of Blake. I find a single not recognise you". That's a fact. So if you have to be a truthful person, lonely man ploughing this land with the seeds of wisdom, and we have just to reap just a truthful person, do not feel guilty about it. He is the one who planted it, water made it. Do not feel you have committed sin. There's a little story in India that one ready by Shakespeare you can say. We have had many great poets here. missionary came to a village in India. Villagers in India are very simple, you know, Wordsworth is another one who really is enchanting and beautiful .1 think they are not so sophisticated, So when he Wordsworth must have seen the feat of was going they praised him a lot and said, William Blake and he said better describe "Sir we are so thankful to you that you have the nature, forget about human beings, he told what is sin and that we are sinners".

 16 The Divine Cool Breeze July-Aug., 2006 he has described at every chakra we must have thought of it, thinking it to be an created a devil and put them in the library, incorrigible land where you can not sow and that's why I'm against the books very anything. much myseif. But why did he become a But whatever it is, what Blake has done is to give you a new vision, and a printer? It's very important to know, and new idea, because in the West Christ had why he wrote so much about printing? You see the media today, the media, that,s the been shrunk to the position of someone devil he described. The media is the one who is just a human being. And now when has ruined you completely, believe me. Just you hear the way people describe him, I'm to make money out of you, playing upon amazed. From where did they get this your weaknesses, making your children vision? Have they got eyes or are they blind to talk like this about him? And ! hear the and you weaker and weaker, the society bishop talking like that, or your archbishops completely being destroyed, systematically. This is the media he wanted to hit. That's talking like that. Have they no fear of God? why he took his birth and became a printer. He could have been anything else. No poet What's going to happen to this country if you talk about Christ like that? And you are was a printer, in England or anywhere else. going to have now pictures and films It was Blake who became that. The reason showing him to be an unrighteous personality, showing his mother naked, no was he wanted to show that this media is respect. Even Blake, I don't know if you the one, and let him cut it at its root. But have noticed, he paints human beings as you know, evil grows whether you like naked, all right, but not Gods. Christ he it or not, and today's media we can not understand to what extent it has destroyed never painted. He never paints them that us, our roots, our faith, all our sublime and way, the respect. While we the great intellectuals of modren times are trying all righteous visions! 1 know that I myself was asked by these tricks just to bring forth the wrath of your television people, and all that, to come God upon ourselves. The second point about him was down and talk to them. I'm amazed the that he was a printer. We should think why way people told me that an Anglo-Saxon brain, God knows who made that brain, did he become a printer.Why Blake took to can not understand anything that can be printing? He has described himself the Hell done without money. I said you first take where the books were created, and how

 17 July - Aug, 2005 The Divine Coal Breeze your realisation otherwise I'm not coming write Jerusalem and I think aiter fourteen to your programs or to your television. years also, if I could really feel satisfied That's the triumphant pride of Christ yor that I've been able to do some justice to can see in his crucifixion. He didn't care. him, in this Jerusalem that he wanted to build, I' Il be very much grateful to you all. He could have gone, fallen at the feet as our politicians do, morning till evening But that's not so. It's a very disappointing moving from one place to another. He would thing. People don't want to listen to anything, they want to listen to something that they like, that you have to play on their have gone to the scribes and the Pharisees and said, "oh please forgive, I will serve you all my life, I'll sell everything". He would weaknesses all the time, tell them that whatever wrong you are doing is a good not accept. That pride. He went with that triumphant pride on the cross. But what thing, go ahead. does it show, what does it show? That we Now the compassion and the love of the stupid crucify that great personality and Christ can work out miracles, no doubt it today are we not again curcifying him? can work out because he came for us. That's why I say that he was a great The whole universe was created for us. It prophet, because he made prophecies, that is for us to receive all the blessings of the if you do not take the right path, if you do divine. It is we who are going to become not take to the higher seeking all these the spirit, as he said, "you are to be born things will show. Now we have to again". But the conditioning or the subtle understand because it concerns us. This conditionings of the surroundings and the is what is happening to us, to us, to our atmosphere, the history and all that, is so children to our families, to our society, to much embedded in us that we don't realise our country. Let us face it and understand and are not aware that we have to look that compassion of God can fail in such a upward. Blake's life was another crucifixion horrible lazy heart, which doesn't have any I feel. When I read him tears fall understanding of the spirit. continuously sometimes. What a son of a Sahaja Yoga came on this earth long great father! Who said Christ was not time back, much before I came on this bothered about his parents? He ran away earth, and today it has come to England. from the house at the age of twelve years. We should say I came here twelve years THE That means all the boys are now running back. It took fourteen years for Blake to from their houses at twelve years, taking

 July - Aug., 2006 18 The Divine Cool Breeze What do we get ? We can't love our to drugs? That's the best way we can pay children, we kill our children, we ill-treat homage to him, by running away from the them. You are sitting in the heart of the houses, taking to drugs, because Christ ran away from the house at the age of universe, this is the heart of the universe, and what do you have to give to the world ? The spirit. The spirit resides in twelve years! And he said this is my Father's business, that's what he writes. What do I care for the parents ? That does your heart, and that's why Blake said that England has to become Jerusalem because it is the heart. That means spirit not mean that you should not respect your parents, but it means that I am at a I have a higher seeking, has to come in the attention of the universe higher seeking, I have to go in another otherwise things won't work out. But from where is it going to come ? The spirit, direction. You have lived in this direction, where is it going to be awakened ? It is whatever it is you have balanced your life, but I have to ascend. This is the message going to be awakened in the human beings. he has tried to put forward before you, very And where are those human beings ? In the heart. Where are they living ? And those clearly, that it is so obvious, so clear-cut. Whenever he says fight it, whenever he is who are living here are already lethargic. The heart is lethargic, it cannot pump so compassionate, whenever he is so anything out of it. First it was over pumping, gentle, whenever he is so modest, the inner line is one, that achieve your ascent, trying to impress the whole world, and now after the impression it is in depression. achieve your higher being, become that. He has prepared ground for us here This heart has to awaken to make the whole world a spiritual being. Do we in England, as you know. As I told you many times, England is realise our responsibility ? Do we understand this ? What is the role we have a very important part of the universe, which I don't know how many Englishmen realise. It is the heart of the universe, it is small but to play as a spiritual being ? You have to play a role as a spiritual being now, but we are not. We are busy with all other so important, but what do we get from the heart, what do we have in the heart ? nonsensical things but with the spirit. I've Racialism! If Christ comes here you'll throw him out because he is not English, laboured for twelve years, as I said, and think I'll have to stay here for two years or do you believe that he was English ? more. Fourteen years, and then only

 July-Aug., 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze 19 agnostic. Agnostic? Then they asked him, maybe, I hope so, Jerusalem will start "then what are you doing here"? He said, "I showing it's risen in this country. You can m doing my job as you are doing your job". do it. You are the only ones who can do it, He's agnostic, he doesn't know anything nobody else. You are entitled to that. about Holy Ghost. What is Holy Ghost? God has chosen you to be born here, William Blake has said it resides within with a purpose, but you can't talk to anyone you.' Why don't we find out where does it about religion, they don't discuss religion. reside? Why not we go out of the way to What religion? Religion which contains al find out. Bible cannot contain Christ, the the religions of the world, religion which is whole universe cannot contain Christ. Let the inner balance, the tranquillity within you us go out and find out what others have to which gives you the ascent. But we don't discuss it. This is out of etiquette. We can say about it. We are very insular self- discuss all the drunkards and all the pubs opiniated great people sitting here in complete lethargy. We have no time, we don't think anybody to be considered about it. Let us go and see. of the world but we cannot discuss such a horrible thing like religion, which is so • innate and within ourselves. You cannot What is the Holy Ghost is very have anything in the newspaper about it, but he has described all the fake gurus simple. Holy Ghost is the kundalini if you and all the satanic people. It's such a use logic, not rationality. Logic is different. strong description of all these and you see If you use your logic you will see that we have a trinity, holy trinity. We have God them and thousands follow these nonsensical people, pay them money, almighty, all right, and we have the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Have you heard of any become beggars, but they don't want to father having a son without the mother ? come to reality. Why, I ask myself ? Why is it happening like this? No use going to Then who is the Holy Ghost ? It's the Primordial Mother. Automatically you come any extremes. Here is someone who has given you to that conclusion. But mother should not such a lot of explanation. Holy Ghost, he be mentioned ? That's why Blake has said about the daughters of Albion, beacause says, "and Holy Ghost a vacuum". You ask he knew the way women were suppressed anyone, I was surprised when it was asked in a very sophisticated way. In Sanskrit we to some very big bishop, what do you think of Holy Ghost. He says ah I'm say: "Yatra narya pujyante tatra ramante

 The Divine Cool Breeze July - Aug.. 2006 20 devata", Where the women are worshipped, forgiveness for the cunning, what is the there remains the domain of the deities, forgiveness for the crooked, what is the forgiveness for Satan? Discrimination is where they are worshipped. And they are needed when we talk of forgiveness. to be worshipful, not the hariots and the brothels and the women who walk nude Forgiveness is for the people who think they have committed sins. It's only in thinking and show off their nudity to excite the baser self, but the ones who are worshipful. you commit sins. Otherwise you do not. Where they reside, reside the Gods. So Look at a dog, look at a tiger, look at all these people. If tiger has to eat the cow it eats. Does it commit any sin ? It does not these women were suppressed, and suppressed to such an extent that they did not want to talk about God as a woman, know about the sin: "I didn't know what this sin is", he will say that "I didn't know it was anywhere. So Holy Ghost is something abstract, a dove. All right it's a dove, then a sin, you see, I just ate it". But what is the sin ? Just to condemn someone all the what ? What do we do with the dove ? time: "You are the sinners, you did this sin, Why is it so important that we should have blessings from the dove, nobody you did that sin". Human beings are the temple of God. With what prayer, love, explains ? It's a mystery! We have to live with the mystery. Everything is a mystery. affection and delicacy they are created ? The banking is a mystery here, but where For what ? These lotuses have been does the money go is also a mystery. It brought out of the Maya of illusion, for what ? To be condemned, to be trampled, has something to do with the mafia, that's to be ill-treated in this way, that too in the also a mystery. Then the Masonic people are organising the Switzerland bank, is also name of God ? a mystery. Everything mysterious and Lotuses are created to be offered to hidden and kept out, "oh that's not to be the Gods, with the fragrance to illuminate said, this is just overseas banking, oh good, the whole world. They are the poetic genius very good name" It's overseas banking, it of the lord, as he has described, while we is this, it is that and we carry on with this look at human beings as something to be exploited, to be suppressed, to be hypocrisy, we carry on with all the false notions, "oh, that's all right, that's all right, oppressed! And so, as he says, there are that's part of it". two types of people, and he has given horrible names to them who try to oppress This is not forgiveness. What is the

 July - Aug., 2006 21 The Divine Cool Breeze criticism I read they said he was not the people, who try to devour the people. acceptable because he went too far, same And he says that the religion now has with me. People don't accept me because become the compromising thing between the two, while the innocent suffer, while I go too far. I must try to please them. Am I seeking your vote that I should try to piease the simple suffer, while the seekers suffer, while the good suffer. That's a fact. you ? I have to tell you the truth whether you like it or not. I want you to accept it Let us all of us join together now because that's what I am here for. I'm here and get our realisation, become the spirit. for that, that you accept the truth and get It's the easiest thing to do because the it. l'll do my level best. I can make food for Holy Ghost, which is the Kundalini, is within you, I can give good food to you, I can give you. In the triangular bone she resides and she can be awakened, while they may say you presents, I can do whatever a mother can do for her children. But when it doesn't that why didn't he talk about Kundalini ? work out she has to shout, sometimes she Whatever he talked, who listenend to has to say things clearly, because you have him ? Whatever he said who tried to to get it. Now you cannot force it on people, understand ? Till today I don't find many this is the biggest problem. You cannot people have understood him. Whatever he force self-realisation onto people. You manifested, who bothered to know about cannot do it with force. Say if supposing it ? And if he had talked of something more it would have been obscure. And he says, Russians tell me, they are very much interested about Sahaja Yoga no doubt, but "I don't care for the idiots for whom my if they tell that you come to our government sayings are obscure". He says clearly. He and give them realisation, I cannot. I cannot has used only thrice the word 'idiot' and do it. You are to be free people. When you many times 'stupid', and so many times are free, then you are a beggar ? See the the 'fools'. Above all of that, to me all of them wages of freedom we are paying. Nobody is free, in Europe if you go I have to take are God's own children. I know how he out all these ornaments, which I'm was angry, I know why he was angry, and I also understand him, that he thought that supposed to wear beause of my family. I have to go there without a purse. I have to before Sahaja Yoga coming here, let me tie my purse inside here, fit something, give them a thump, let me open them with otherwise they rob it. Nothing is safe. So a big blow so they are ready. But in his

 July Aug, 2006 22 The Divino Cooi Breeze this kind of a freedom which leads to and don't have that, you cannot do it. You do not have that power of the spirit. violence, to butchery, actually the way we Most of the incarnations who came have butchered our children, butchered our before Christ didn't realise this point, that eiders, the way we insulted every one of human beings are not enlightened, they them, all that goes hand in hand with freedom. This is no freedom. This is don't have the power of the spirit with them. Christ realised it, and he said it openly, absolutely unleashed abandonment of the brutal self within us. "you are to be born again". Not only that but he said, "first of all forgive". He talked So whether you go to Russia or to Europe, Sahaja Yoga is in a problem, of forgiveness, so that they settle down, that they are not paranoid, that they are Whether you go the left or to the right I just don't understand where not upset. Let them be settled down in will it prosper.Where freedom is used with peace and in compassion, and then awaken their Kundalini, and then give them wisdom, with respect. If you cannot respect realisation. So then you have the power, the freedom of others you do not have the then there is no temptation, nothing like freedom at all, you have never known the that. Will you tempt Christ with anything ? freedom, you have never enjoyed the freedom. So the freedom of human beings You cannot. In the same way you do not get enslaved to any temptations. You rise has to be respected, and when this freedom is respected, then only you can get your in your own beauty and glory, and your own strength and power. You don't have to realisation, and then only you can enter into get something to end. This is what is self- higher freedom, into complete liberty that Blake has described. There are seekers, realisation. so many seekers in this country, and so Sahaja Yoga came to London twelve years back, when I came. I'm not an many are lost, so many are lost. There have been people who are saved by Sahaja immigrant for your information, at all. I just Yoga who have been taking drugs. came by chance, I should say, or by God's Overnight they get it. Overnight how ? It's ordained programming. My husband got a mechanism within you. God has built that, elected to this job out of a hundred and that power of the spirit when it enlightens thirty four nations, you see, he was you. It just becomes so powerful you give elected. We came here just because he up. But beforehand if I say don't have this was elected, not even appointed, but

 23 The Divine Cool Breeze July - Aug., 2006 tell them about this great knowledge we elected four times elected, and had in that country, and everything unanimously. He is a senior, most senior subsided. Secretary General, so we had to come This knowledge is not meant for here, and that's how I'm here. Otherwise I India, is not meant for any particular place, may not have ever come to England to it's meant for the whole world, as your teach Sahaja Yoga. With Blake one feels knowledge of sciences. All the knowledge compelled to try, and try and try to establish of the tree is meant for the whole world, Jerusalem, whatever maybe the case, which you gave it to us, or you gave it to whatever maybe the disappointment, all the eastern countries. All people accept whatever maybe the disgust, doesn't matter, it. What's the harm in accepting the one has to do it. He had such faith in the knowledge which comes to you for your England's soil that we have to build the Jerusalem, but first every one of you who benevolence ? Only because it is from the eastern side you feel so insecure about it. are here must get your realisation and From where did Christ come ? He came humble down before your realisation. You from America ? 1 think he must have run are not to be arrogant with it. away! Despite that I must say among all He said Christ was not humble of them, British are the most matured. But before human beings, but before God he we run after Americans, we run after was, before his Father he was. In the same French, we run after everyone not being way you have to be humble before your aware of ourselves, what we are. spirit, and before your self-realisation, and We are wisdom, we are the people you have to get to the higher state. It's who represent the heart of the universe, surprising that in India we had all this and time has taken, from him to this time, knowledge all these years, but we were that we have matured now. I hope we have supposed to be Heathens, or what else they called us, we were supposed to be matured enough to understand that there has to be a breakthrough. When they slaves. Nobody wanted to know anything about it. The knowledge of the roots existed published my handbills, you see, somehow and our intellectuals also never bothered, it so happened that my face has come out quite black in that. I said forget it, nobody they always followed Oxford and will come to our program if you show such Cambridge traditions. With this Oxbridge business we never got through people to a black face. They'll say, "oh somebody

 24 The Divine Cool Breeze July - Aug., 2006 "Beware of the doomsday, you give the coming from Africa is trying to teach us what is Jerusalem", so they had to redo it. money, we'll save you, give you a certificate that at the doomsday you'll stand with a to show that I'm not that black. What certificate, you'll be saved". First they will difference does it make this skin deep go down in the doomsday. colour ? The colour comes from the heart, This is for every religion. People have the beauty comes from the heart, the exuberance of the heart expresses that used it for very baser things, making money, creating political ideas. I can't understand how can diamonds be thrown into dirt like this, and covered with that, beauty on your being. And the beauty of the truth is that it acts, it works, it just doesn't decorate itself. It doesn't try to take and the fragrance turned into filth. It is to the ways and methods of luring people, acts. Whether you like it or not it beyond me. The powers of human beings but acts. Let us work it out, it's simple. sometimes supersede that of God. You can see the way they can change the forms, Instead of going into intellectual feats and going in the direction of finite they can change beauty, they can change everything that is reality into something understanding through your brains, let us go to the infinite. That's only possible when nonsensical and stupid. And they live with it. They don't want to know about it, they you get to your spirit, which is infinite, which creats a collective consciousness within enjoy it, "we are very happy people, what's you, which creates, I say, which means wrong ?" knowledge. But knowledge does not mean What a waste, one feels, of this creation. With what aspirations and visions what you know through your brain, but what you know through your central nervous these human beings were created on this earth. And then what should we do to make system, that you can feel it, that you can feel the chakras of everyone on your them understand what they are, to make fingertips. Mohammed Sahib has said, "at them aware with that perception, with that the time of resurrection your hands will vision of the Divine that they are. Sometimes I also cry in the wilderness and speak", but look at the Muslims, they never share some of the pathos of all these poets talk of the resurrection, whereas most of the Koran is nothing but resurrection. who came on this earth and suffered and suffered and suffered. I hope today with all They talk of the doomsday because they have to make money by frightening people: this anguish, that whatever l'm telling you

 July -Aug., 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze 25 you'll try to see that sincerity is the only he said the samething, which he said in way you can understand yourself. No books, nothing, no conditioning, no denying, nothing can convince you but the sincerity here, jungles I think. And that is also England, after twelve thousand years, because at that time I don't know what was wasted. How much could Christ talk about to know the spirit which is within you; and Kundalini ? He talked about Holy Ghost. this sincerity I call it as the 'pure desire'. If you have that pure desire which is the power But why stick on to that ? Now I've come to talk to you, better take your realisation. of your Kundalini you will get your When he came they talked of Moses, when realisation now, just now, you should. Moses came they talked of Abraham. What That's all is needed, the pure desire to be the spirit, nothing more than that. But about the present ? I am with you. Why not have your realisation. All religions when it is awakened, then it is to be looked after. That's very important. It has to be were built that you get your realisation, looked after, it has to be kept burning, it to give you the balance, to give you has to be manoeuvred and kept at a point that property by which you ascend. Like when you have an aeroplane you fix it up. that you start growing more and more. I need not tell you all about Sahaja In the same way they wanted to fix you up. But religions went astray, they make people Yoga, it's going to be too much for you. But how Blake has worked for us, so many crooked, the things they fixed! Wrong bolts poets have done this job, and now the new into wrong places, the whole aeroplane is in a tattered condition, if you fly you'll fal great poets are coming to finish us off, to please the media, to make money, befool down. Better give up all these ideas. But us, using Kundalini is such a great force, it comforts, flowery sentences, taking us to hell directly. Beware pleasing words, it cures you, it builds up all your centres of them. Beware, save your children and slowly moves upward. And when you from them, save the whole community. get realisation it goes back and attends to all these problems that you have... The whole of England has to be saved because if the heart dies the whole universe This celebration of William Blake's birthday will die. May God bless you all. organised by Sahaja Yogis at the Extract from questions and answers: Hammersmith Town Hall, London, 28th .....Markandeya, who was in India twelve November 1985, included an exhibition thousand years back, incarnated here as about Sahaja Yoga and William Blake. (Available in CD format) William Blake. Twelve thousand years back

 Sydeny Town Hall Public Programme Sir C.P Srivastava's Speech 6th February, 2006 Honoured and distinguished guests, are. That you should find time to be with us to celebrate an occasion, which is Ladies and gentlemen, Mr. Chris kyriacou, twenty-five years of Sahaja Yoga, shows the national Co-ordinator of Sahaja Yoga in your keen interest in spirituality, in ethics Australia, All members of the National and a good life. So I bow down to you again, Council for the advancement of Sahaja and thank you very very much for the great Yoga. honour you have done Shri Maraji Nirmala Ladies and gentlemen, Devi and myself, by being here to-day. Very, very kind things have been said about me. They're very kind. Please do not believe all that has been said. But what has been said about my wife is entirely true, and I'l come back to that a little later. First of all, I would like to tell you how wonderful the Sahaja Yogis of Australia are. You know, only a few weeks ago they invited Is and she accepted the invitation, and within a period of about six weeks they all got together to transform a residence here into an ashram, and you have to see to believe what they have done. They have converted it into a little heaven on earth for their beloved Goddess and Mother. They're There are moments when it becomes so devoted, so true, so pure that I bow difficult to express yourself, and this is one down to them and each one of them, and such moment. I would like first of all to say how very convey my feelings of most abiding very grateful I am to all of you who are here to-day. I know how preoccupied you gratitude for the wonderful work they have done, for their marvellous hospitality, for

 27 2006 July - Aug. The Divine Cool Breeze their extreme kindness. They are my the world, trying to convey a message, a message of love, of togetherness. Believe me, she has travelled by plane, by beloved people, and I call them angels. They are truly angles. helicopter, by car, by bus, by bullock cart Well, Ladies and gentlemen, I would and on foot. She has gone to villages, to like also to express my profound gratitude cities, and she has gone to many, many to Honourable Mr. Gough Whitlam, former Prime Minister of Australia. I had the honour places in all the five continents, and she has done so out of a tremendous of being received by him. I regard him as conviction within her that this world needs one of the most visionary leaders of our a new message. If the worid has to live, time, desperately needed by the world to- has to survive, then something new has day. I thank him for very kind words about to be communicated to humankind. And our visit here. And I extend the same with that belief in her, single-handed for gratitued to Honourable Kim Beazley, Leader of the Opposition in Australia%3; many years, she went around; gradually Honourable Morris Lemma, Premier of Sahaja Yogis came along; what they saw, the worth of what she was saying, and NSW; Honourable Alan Carpenter, Premier , to-day she has followers in eighty, ninty of Western Australia; Honourable Kate Ellis, Countries. Wherever I go there are Sahaja Member for Adelaide, South Australia; Ms. Yogis, Sahaja Yoginis, beloved children Jule du Varrens, Director of the Institute of of hers, and what a wonderful thing she Communication Ethics;Mr. Peter Debnan, has created I What is it? How do I see NSW Leader of the Opposition; and Lord it, as her husband? Well then, I must Mayor, Clover Moore, city of Sydney. To all of them, our profound and deepest gratitude say, for her to have been doing all this meant she has been away from me for for the very kind words in which they have a long, long time, but I knew that she welcomed us here. Ladies and gentlemen, I now come was doing something wonderful work for to what I wanted to mention to you. This is the world, and so it was. Now her message as I see it is too important a gathering for me to miss the occasion, and I want to say what lies simple, straight, and she says: all men and woman and children of the world are in my heart. But first I must tell you, this the creation of one Almighty. Some people lady who is sitting here, my wife, for thirty- say: " My God is Almighty", other say: five years she has been running around

 July - Aug., 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze 28 "My God is Almighty". By definition, you given to ethics, morality, everything that is can't have more than one Almighty. If you good. That is what it is, that's what your have two of them, neither of them will be destiny is. But if you want to be in Almighty! So it's as simple as that, and communion, you can be in communion. Now, ladies and gentlemen, the point somtimes people don't really see that. But I want to make to you is my own point. My she says: "First thing is, remember that point is, I have worked for India as a civil there is only one Almighty, and that is the servant, and I have also had the privilege Almighty power of Divine love." And then of working for the United Nations, as she says: " All persons who are here on this earth have been created by that Secretary General of the International Maritime Organisation; and believe me, Almighty." Whether they are white or brown, ladies and gentlemen, I tried to implement or blue or yellow; whether they live in Africa her ideas in my working at the United of Australia or India or wherever, they're all her children,are children of that Almighty Nations level. You know the United Nations means many, many countries; countries of power. But if that is so, why not live together different growth of development, with happily, peacefully? Why feel divided? Why different capability and so on and so forth, feel one against the other? Now it's one and they all come together to work together: thing to believe, and she believes in that. it's not an easy task. I was in the maritime world, and when I was elected Secretary General, I was the first from a developing She herself was born in a Christan family, I was born in a Hindu family, but we both believe in one Almighty power, one human country. All my predecessors had been family, and that's how we are together. Now Europeans, and people were surprised this is the message she has conveyed, that someone from the developing world and she has conveyed this to many should come. The maritime scene at that audiences, saying: You are the creation of time was dominated by the Western world, that Almighty, you are in His or Her image, and the Organisation was known as a "rich and there is in you a concealed power man's club". And here was me: how could I be Secretary General of a rich man's club, which she can perhaps help to awaken. And when that is awakened, called kundalini, poor me? What a task it was! then you are in communion with your I said: " Well, I have been elected so Creator. And you'll have a beautiful life then, I must apply her message. "Her message

 The Divine Cool Breeze July-Aug., 2006 29 was: everyone is the same, everyone is not impossible dream. It is something which is achievable. But the world needs this equal. So I made it a point to make every member state of the Organisation an equal message, her message, the message of love. And why I'm involved in to speak to member. They were not at that time equal. you here, because I sincerely believe from The rich countries who had shipping, they my heart that in Australia there's something were dominating, for they had maritime unique. It's not just to praise or flatter you, no. I would not say that if I didn't believe it. expertise, many of the deveioping countries had not joined, and the problem was, how to make it a proper world organisation. So But I believe it because I find in Australia with that message in my heart I set about, the best of Occident, of the Westem values. I'm a great admirer of Western values. I'm went round, mentioned first to developed countries that it was in their interest to get a proud Indian, I am proud of my heritage, but I am also a great admirer of the British the developing world in. They accepted that. It's to their great credit that they came along, people. They were rulers in India, well that's different, but whenever you go to live in helping the developing countries to build up their own maritime expertise, to join the U.K you find they're full of values, of ethics, of rule of Law, of decency. Now I find all of those values which I admire, here in organisation. Very soon they all came, and to-day it is one of the finest agencies, because it has the support of every Australia among Australians,but there's member state of the world, every country. something more, something more that you may not know, you may not see even, but Now that is a premisé on which I want to I see, as a visitor; and that is a certain present an appeal to you, and the appeal is this: measure of Oriental dignity, humility, The world, if you read newspapers, if kindness, courtesy, and that combined creates a wonderful nation. Now here you you see, if you hear news, is in trouble. have people coming from different countries, People are propagating hatred for each different origins. They' re all living together other. There's voilence in the world. What for? Why? Who will gain from that? If we happily as Australians. This is her ideal, and that ideal I see in the political life of are children of the same Almighty power, Australia. So I said: "Well, if I get a chance why can't we live together? Why must we talk about differences? Why can't we talk to speak about her message, why not like she does of our togetherness? And it's here?"

 30 The Divine Cool Breeze July-Aug., 2006 has to be conquered, not by force. Force won't work. You have to use force in certain So my appeal to you is this: she has done her job. She has for thirty-five years situations, I'm not saying you cannot ever been running around. She has done her job, created Sahaja Yoga in eighty, ninety use it, but the only way for the people of the world to come together, is to come countries, and she has created beautiful things. Well I'll relate to you just one together on the basis of her philosophy, which is again based on ancient Indian incident. philosophy: one Almighty, one human family, Some time ago we were in London, all to get together regardless of their colour of skin, regardless of their language, they and one evening about twenty-five of her disciples were sitting round talking to her, all come together. Now if this is a message and I was sitting by her side, looking round and seeing, and I began to wonder. In that which you accept, then it must be propagated. But if this message is not given, gathering, (and believe me, ladies and if people don't come to that conclusion, they gentlemen, it's God's truth), there were continue to believe that they are different, A people who came from different countries, versus B, B versus C, there's no end to different walks of life, different colours of trouble, and we have such means of skin and different religions. Now one of them destruction in this world that the world is was a Catholic, one was a Protestant, one threatened, the world is threatened to-day, was a Jew, one was a Muslim, one was a the existence of the world. Let us not make Sikh, several were Hindus, but do you think light of that. It's a very, very difficult situation. they ever even remembered who they were But there's a saving for that. The saving is: before they came to Sahaja Yoga? No. let us all come together. And if you in They were all sitting there as Sahaja Yogis, Australia can accept first of all the sincerity citizens of the world, the beloved children of Shri Mataji. She had forgotten it. no of what I am saying, and then make it a mission of yours also, as she has made a difference. All together, from the heart. Now, that kind of thing has happened, and I wanted to appeal to you, to beg of mission of hers, then this visit will have been successful. This ia all that I wanted to mention to you to help this world. I assure you, the you. I know you have been here a long world is in trouble. Do you not see every time. I don't want to take up too much of evening what's happening? People wanting your time, but if the good things have been to kill, terrorism, this, that and the rest. That

 July - Aug., 2006 31 The Divine Cool Breeze I said: " Do I see what I see? I see a young said about me, I want to thank them very I can say is, they are nothing man sitting there. What's this?" much. But all She said: " Yes, yes, yes! There's more than a reflection of what she has nothing wrong with that. You know I had given to me. My heart has been converted gone to London, Piccadilly Circus, and there by her. And before I close l'll tell you one I saw a young man lying uncared for, sick, story of how I got converted. I'm a civil so I stepped out of the car and went to servant, I don't ever believe in things unless him. I said: What's the matter?' He said: I'm totally convinced. So when she said, "We're living in London without any care. thirty-five years ago: "I'm going to launch a Sol said: " Would you like to be taken care movement, I'm going to change people, "I off?' So he said: "Yes." I said: 'Ok, get up, said: "Change people?" and I laughed. I and come and sit in my car and come said: "Do you really believe you can change people?" That's how I began, a sceptic. home." She brought him home, and when he But something happened and that changed came home he had to be cleaned and me, and the story is very nice. washed. He didn't have any clothes except When I was elected to this office in mine. Ok, so he was there, sitting in that London, Secretary General, I went and took fashion, and I loved her for that even more. up a residence, and she was with me, 1 I praised her. I said: "Wonderful that you took a residence just outside London, so I did it!" And then, you see, we began to give used to commute by train, and one evening treatment to him. He was a young when I came back from office I pushed the Sahaja man, and after every week he began to bell, the door opened, I went in, and I went to the drawing-room as we call it, or living- change. He became flowered out. He had become addicted to drugs: drugs went room of my house, and saw a young man, a young white gentleman sitting there reading a newspaper. And when I entered, away, drinks went away and he flowered out into a beautiful, handsome young man, he looked at me as if I was an intruder. I a new person. I said: " If this can happen said: "I didn't know that anyone was to to one, why not everyone?" So that converted me, and I became a Sahaja Yogi. come here. " And what baffled me even That's how it was. more was that he was wearing my kurta Well, Ladies and gentlemen, I won't and pyjamas! I said: " Something gone wrong with my head." So I went to my wife. take any more of your time. I want to

 32 July Aug., 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze Yoga, they can be further enhanced, and .conclude by once again thanking you, from Australia maybe another message expressing my profound and abiding gratitude to you for the time that you have, goes to the wider world: we're all children of the same Almighty God, one God. Let's your precious time that you have given to live together, let's love each other, let's be us; but believe me, it fills my heart with a brothers and sisters. Why have quarrel, feeling of abiding gratitude, and if you will why fight? Why not live together? That is kindly consider my message well, it's not the only way the world can live and survive my message, it's her message, I'm merely and live happily. a carrier of that message. then maybe the efforts of those who are promoting Sahaja Thank you all, ladies and gentlemen.

 International Sahaja Yoga Research & Health Centre 10th Anniversary Celeberations Mumbai- 19th February 2006 The International Sahaja Yoga Research and Health Centre surrounded research & Health Centre (Vashi hospital) by Deities, Shri Shiva and Parvati on its celebrated its 10th Anniversary (19th roof, Shri Ganesha dancing near by, Shri February 2006). Exactly a decade back Vishnu flying over it on Shri Garuda. and on this auspicious day on the 19 th of Shri Mataji in the fore front looking aside at February 1996 our Beloved Mother H.H. the stone writtin # A Gift of Love to Shri Mataji blessed and inaugurated this Humanity" which stands in the entry hall. Research project as a Gift of the Humanity. Later, in the evening at 6: 00 pm the Locality of this Centre although is in CBD, programme started with an introductory Belapur, Navi Mumbai but, popularly came speech delivered by Dr. Sandeep Rai. Dr. to be known as named "Vashi Hospital" by Rai recalled the memory down the lane of the yogis worldwide. this last decade since the Centre was A lot of enthusiasm was seen in the blessed by Her Holy Lotus feet in 1996. Yogis and Yoginis in the Centre waiting for The speech was very inspiring with this day since long.With tremendous love punches of subtle touch of humour as he and devotion, the dedicated Yogis & Yoginis narrated the ups and downs of this Health Centre, since its inception from conceiving decorated the whole campus very aesthetically. Traditional Indian 'Rangolis' this as a mere project to the rising up to were made to welcome the Divine Mother this day. It was Shri Mataji Herself Who in Her Nirakar form. Trustees of the Health desired a Centre to be gifted to the Centre, a few special invitees and 300- humanity, where people would be cured 400 yogis were invited to share the joy of using only Sahaja Yoga techniques. But the occasion. Pt. (Dr.) Arun Apte, when She had asked (late) Professor U.C. Smt.Surekha Apte and Pt. Subramanium Rai to come down to Bombay from Delhi rendered Divine music dear to Mother to open the centre, She felt Dr. was a bit Kundalini. A large fabric tapestry was reluctant to come to Bombay, as he had displayed on a big theatre screen: it built up all the contacts in Delhi and well represented the International Sahaja Yoga established there. So, later Shri Mataji

 34 July-Aug., 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze asked Professor Rai's son instead, Dr. And that is how Professor UC Rai finally came to Bombay with Mrs. Rai to Sandeep Rai to meet Her. She advised him start running the nascent International that he should open this Centre using only Sahaja Yoga Research & Health Centre and Sahaja techniques, to which Dr. Sandeep finally settle here in the service of humanity recalled that he humbly submitted to Shri as Shri Mataji always desired. It was a Mataji that he needed adequate equipments divine desire and that was how it got to open and run the hospital. So Shri Mataji enacted. said "Yes, equipment you have already!- Later, Dr. Sandeep Rai requested You take My picture and that's all some of the key workers to address the equipment you need! Immediately, Dr. gathering. Concluding the address to the Sandeep wondered, "Shri Mataji, I can collectivity, Dr Sandeep Rai thanked his hardly feel the vibrations, how can I mother Mrs. Lily Rai who had been the Shri Mataji people?" cure compassionately comforted him saying. "You just have to sit behind the everloving Gruhalakshmi and had been taking care of all those coming to the Health Centre since last 10 years! patient facing My photograph, and pray Just before the Puja which started at to Me "Mataji please cure that person" 6.30pm, the collectivity, there was yet and if he wants to be cured he"ll be another exciting event that took place. The cured!" collectivity was privileged to witness the At once responding to this strong event of the historical moment of the statement Dr. Sandeep candidly confided in Shri Mataji that for this honour, it would inauguration Ceremony of 19th February be better that if his father does the job. 1996 through screening of a rare video of that day. The inauguration ceremony was "But, Shri Mataji enquired, "Would he come to Bombay?" "Yes, Shri Mataji, I can work followed by Mother's speech in Marathi, in it out with him" "Sure?" "Definitely Shri which Mother explained that how this place became the most conducive and Mataji, we can all move here, I cannot come here and leave my parents behind in Deihi." appropriate for building up süch a Centre. She also explained that how subtly a left "So that's very fine, you have him Vishuddhi catch could be worked out using come and he will manage the Centre, he's the right person for that." (Laughters in the audience) a candle. The vibrations were extremely

 July- Aug., 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze 35 to Mrs. Madhur Rai. The entire collectivity powerful, as if Mother Herself was there in Her Sakar form to accept this Puja and rejoiced sharing the prasad and tales of the miracles of the evening's grace till late blessing Her children as tremendous love flowed. The meditation was very deep, so night. much so that some patients got instantly All those who were blessed to be there that day will recall the beautiful cured! After offering Aarti to the Devi, the meditation and heartfelt joy that was environment was so joyous and full with vibrations that kundalini had a spontaneous collectively felt during all that day after this wonderful Puja; Shri Mataji, kindly accept response through expression of dance in our heartfelt thanks for the wonderful joy before Shri Mataji's Altar with the bhajans like ' Jago he Jagdambe' amongst others evening and the Puja that You blessed us to enjoy and take home the vibrations of sung. Later a huge Cake was also offered this International Sahaja Yoga Health and to the Mother in Her Nirakar form on behalf Research Centre of CBD, Belapur, Navi of the grateful patients who received the Mumbai, India! Jai Shri Mataji! magical healing through Mother's Love in Sahaja- and a present for the Health Centre Gauvin Didier

 A Patient's Testimony (The 10 th Anniversary Puja of ISY Health Centre as I lived it.) I would like to share with you a personal that day as it was really becoming difficult to experience that happened here in Vashi bear I took the aspirin and various pain killers Health Centre on 19th February 2006- the given to me... but hardly got any relief from day of the Intermational Sahaja Yoga Research these.. Friday night I went to see Dr. Madhur and Health Centre. This is no unique story Rai- I came to believe may be I had a real as many of us heard some other miraculous physical infection in my body, or something cures that day- I shall mention another one misplaced in the spine (?) and I wanted an at the end of this message but as this is my X-Ray done by a normal hospital.. she gave personal story I cannot doubt that this is me permission to go to the nearby MGM hundred (and eight) percent true. hospital to be examined there.. But as soon After two weeks of normal cleansing in as I arrived in there I realized that these the Centre I was to leave the previous 'normal' doctors would not see nor Thursday (16/02) when 'something' happened understand anything to my sickness. asking I fell sick that day. The terrible pain in where are the pains, if I could bend -no- move the back- all the left side. The evening before my left side-painful-etc.. actually I would have I was normal and walking up, all that pain...I to give them the reasons or causes of this strongly felt it was a vibratory 'workout, but sufferings when it was what I was actually the negativity had become a physical pain looking for... could they possibly understand which would prevent me to bend, walk, stand what I was feeling about myself i.e. some up normally etc.... I had the body of 90 years subtle negativity and had become a physical old or plus- without exaggeration. pain? And I did not go there just to be given Just to lie down on the bed was painful, some pain killers which effciency to be conceived about. So I left without much and it was not the least comfortable aspect of this experience.. My doctor would give relief- both physical and mental- realizing that only Shri Dhanvantari could provide me the full camphor treatment, and I actually could feel some improvment during the treatment, real relief and cure I needed- surely I had to but then some time after the pain would put a better attention on Shri Mataji Herself. steadily come back- slowly but surely... I never Saturday early morning I woke up again in pain- some Indian brothers gave me a took pain killers in my life; but the evening of

 July-Aug, 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze myself dancing along with the others- completely forgetting that I was not supposed good massage- and- it helped... but again the pain would come back along the day Would I be able to attend the puja next day to even just walk normally... The pain had gone... All vanished... I just could not believe everybody was so eagerly expecting? it. was a dream that I had, one or two hours So the day after, Sunday 19/02 10 th ago? Or was I dreaming now? No, there was Anniversary of the inaugration of the ISY no doubt; I could shake and dance there was Health Centre by H.H. Shri Mataji and day of no hint of the former pain. I respectfully the puja after attending the collective bowed down at Shri Mataji's Lotus Feet in meditation, l enjoyed the beautiful performance given by Pt. Arun & Surekha my heart. There was light everywhere and joy on Apte then Pt. Subramaniam in the our hearts and on very rhythmical songs after afternoon.Just behind them was a real big the puja one could feel the unity of the spirit picture of Shri Mataji covering the whole back bounding all of us. on the stage Shri Mataji wall of the Meditation hall which had been was like smiling watching us enjoying. put for the occasion. The powerful vibrations AsI mentioned earlier that was not the during the rendering of the bhajans glued only instant curing that was recorded that everybody in the hall- we felt as if it was puja already.. After such a treat we all got ready day: A Finish yogini felt drenched in waves of vibrations at the end of the puja. they were for the evening puja and I carried this body to coming from above through her whole body a bench on the lawn in front of the big scene, as waves of love and bliss... all her bad stuff praying Shri Mataji for cure; when in his vanished too.. And many more felt the same. speeh Dr. Sandeep Rai quoted Shri Mataji Thank you again Shri Mataji for all your %23 saying "and those who want to be cured will bounties and the beautiful blessings you be cured" it some how "clicked" deep inside. "Do I want to be cured? Of course I miraculously shower upon uS Ya Devi Sarva Bhuteshu, Bhranti do, Shri Mataji!" during puja the attention was Namastasyai, Ruprena Samsthta, good; we were easily carried to be in Namastasyai Namastasyai namo namaha..! Sahasrara. Jai Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devai What happened during this puja I don't exactly know is that at the end of it I found Namoh Namaha! Govind D. (Africa)

 YOGESHWARA LORD KRISHNA PUJA LONDON, 15.8. 1982 (Pravachan of H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) sprouting of the new life of the new Today is a great day for all of us to age starts. Bur still what is the speciality, be jubiliant that the primordial being Himself incarnated on this earth as Shri Krishna. the greatness of Yogeshwara? Because He is Ishwara for you. He is the Ishwara of all So many aspects of His being have been the Yogis and what is His capacity, what described in so many of my lectures to is His nature that for Him everything is a you all; but the greatest and greatest of all play- "Leela" ? the aspects of this primordial being was For Shri Ram it was not a play. For that He was the Yogeshwara. He was the Him life was a platform on which he had to H God of Yoga- Yogeshwara, He was the demonstrate how to lead a very dharmic Lord of our Union with the Divine. Without life as "Maryada Purushottama". Bur Shri His permission and without His sanction Krishna came up to show, that He is the. we cannot be Sahaja Yogis. He was "Leeladhara"- the one who plays the Leela, Yogeshwara and a real Yogi is a person the play. who gets this Yogeshwara awakened within The whole thing is a play, the whole him. The word "Yoga" that we understand universe is a play. All that is created by Adi is the union of our attention with the Divine. Shakti, all these three gunas is nothing but But still we do not realize the implications- a play. And that is what He manifested in what does it mean? What should have His own incarnation. But still what is happened to us? Yogeshwara? "Leeladhara" is the one for whom this whole universe is a play, that Of course, you get powers. As soon as you become the spirit, you get powers. He is at the axis, and for the whole One of the powers you get is of "collective periphery is nothing but a play. Because everything is false, except for your spirit consciousness", that is also the gift of Shri Krishna and that you start feeling the collectivity. Your ego and superego are everything ia false. It's all a joke going on, you can say, a drama going on, sucked in, so you get rid of your karmas nothing so serious, Spirit is the only and your conditionings and a new

 July- Aug., 2006 39 The Divine Cool Breeze truth within us, the rest is all untruth. your sister, your brother- you see these are dharmas, like "stridharma"- a woman's There cannot be many types of "truth". In job Sanskrit language there is only truth or Then we can say also there is untruth, 'Satya' or 'Asatya', there are no ten "rashtra dharma". Today is the day of India's words for truth. freedom. So we have rashtra dharma, we So when this happens, when this are patriotic people. Patriotism to your own great happening takes place within you, country is rashtra dharma. Then you have when you become one with the spirit you got "samaj dharma", that is duty towards get powers, without even your maturity your society, is samaj dharma. Then you reaching that stage, your understanding have got "pati dharma", that is husbands reaching that stage and your heart opening duties, wives duties. Everybodies' duties are out. You get the powers, all right, to begin with. So that you have faith with open called as dharmas because this is what you have to do. You are duty bound, they understanding. If you have faith with form your dharmas. But He said, " give experience of it- so it starts on. When you up all these dharmas, give up all the start using your powers you see it is manifesting, you are sometimes amazed, how you raise kundalini of people, how you duties, just surrender yourself fully to Me" Because you have become now the fie them up, how you give them realization, collective being, now you have become one how you cure peoplel You are amazed, with Him, now He looks after your dharmas, how it has happened! So we can say it is He looks after your relationships, He all built within you, which has started manifesting. But there is so much more glances them, He purifies them, so you just surrender yourself to Him fully. He said it to Shri Arjuna only, not to everyone. He that has still to manifest, which has to establish and make you grow. didn't say to everyone, they didn't deserve it. Or He didn't think it proper to say to One of the very important point is the Yogeshwara and that point we must them, but I think you are proper people to know. So I'm telling you that forget every understand that unless and until you follow the path of Yogeshwara, you cannot other duty to every other thing but do your establish yourself fully. So Krishna has said duty to your collective being, to your that: 'Sarva dharmanam Pritajya mamekam sharnam vraja.' You give up all your collectivity. But He is Yogeshwara. That's the relationships, dharma is relationship; like

 40 The Divine Cool Breeze July Aug., 2006 sin can be attached. He married because main point. And to do duty to Him first and He had to marry His five principles or the foremost thing is you to develop that purity five elements. So He made them into of a Yogeshwara. For him sublimation was women and married them, He had to marry not needed, He was sublime. He was the 16,000women because He had to have source of sublimation. He did not need 16,000powers and He had to channelize sublimations from the baser instincts of them through some bodies. So they came human beings. He did not need anything to as women. To Him it was not a reiationship do, to be done to Himself to raise Himself of a wife, but a pure relationship. To Him out of the maya as they call it. Specially in sex had no existence at all. He was beyond the West, as you know, we have created a it. So no question of temptations and hell for ourselves, a real hell. All kinds of perversions; it is out of question. perverted ideas are within us. For the The story is that once. His five wives Yogeshwara this is nothing but maya, wanted to go and pray to some saint who absolutely filth, it never comes into Him that had become a great saint. But he stayed such things are possible. They are across the river, so they wanted to go and shocking. On his birthday I would say if today is warship him and they found a very good time when they could go and see him. So His birthday and if He was born as He was when they went near the river they said it at that time, He would have gone back is in spate, we cannot cross it, it's not the immediately. He would have said, no sorry, time that you can cross it. So they felt it I've nothing to do, I've had enough. And was very inauspicious, if they did not go and that was such an auspicious time. They wanted to go at that time and worship that too, If He had met the Western culture, He would have been shocked, oh God, no, nothing doing. I'm not coming here. Despite this guru. the times when He was born, where there So they went to Krishna and said: was dharma, there were people who "Now, how can we cross, the river is in understood what was right, what was spate?" He said: "Really? Doesn't matter. wrong, when none of these nonsensical. You go and tell the river- that is the river things were there, He came as Tapi, they were crossing- he said go and Yogeshwara, pure. tell the river that if we have a husband who The story about Him is that one day is Shri Krishna, who is "Yogeshwara", that His wives wanted to go. To Him what was means who never indulges into any sex wives? Nothing, just look at it. To Him no

 41 July - Aug, 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze that means if I have eaten all the food you've activity. Yogeshwara means a person who given me, but I've not enjoyed it, I've not indulged into it, then let the river subside." never indulges into any sex relationships. Then they went and told the river, I mean That's not possible. One cannot think of they could not believe it because they had such a thing, means though He indulges, He never indulges, though He was in fed him, that: "Whatever food we offered to him, if it, still He was not there. Like a lotus. If He has not indulged into any such action, he has not eaten any food, then you subside". And the river subside! it was only possible for Him- nobody else. So the moral of the whole thing is That's why He is an incarnation, He is not that your ideal in this respect, is Shri a human being. Only incarnations can do Krishna. Not that you think you are the ideal it. If some human being starts saying that of the rest. This is the big mistake Sahaja I'm Shri Krishna, so I am doing this andI Yogis do.They think imrnediately they have am doing that- you see, there are very become now Shri Krishna. Or they think bombastic ones, you must have heard they have become something greater or about them. They do not become, is only that there is an ideal that they have imbibed an incarnation can do it. That means within themselves. It is not so. Yogeshwara is the one who had incarnated. There is one thing one has to know, So they went and told the river: "If He that that is the ideal you have to reach. And is the Yogeshwara, then please you subside". And she went down. So they went your eyes should be towards that ideal and to the other side, did the puja to the guru the movements should be towards that. Before that, if you fall into any such things and they came back. Again the river was in like perversions and nonsensical sexual spate, and they could not cross. So they went to the guru. You see, the sign of a good guru or a real guru, is an incarnated things and all that, you must know that you are falling down very badly. It's a possession that is working on you. That's an ideal- they guru, and they said: " See we cannot cross, the river is in spate "So then he said: are incarnations. You are not incarnations, "Really, how did you come?" They said: nor can you become incarnations. But they are the light, which are enlightening your Shri Krishna asked us, that if I am the path, on which you are walking. They are Yogeshwara, it will go down, you ask the question. So he said: "All right, now you go taking you to the realm where they are the and ask the question, that if I, the mukta, kings and they are the Lords.

 42 The Divine Cool Breeze July Aug., 2006 This ia a big problem here. It's the biggest He is the Ishwara- He is your Ishwara. You are not Ishwaras. But you are at least problem we have, Now corruption is something you can the Yogis. we have to be the yogis first, avoid. Because if you are not corrupt, it is then He is our Ishwara, now otherwise He doesn't want to rule you. So what we have all right, you can be. But immorality is such to do, is to become the Yogis first. And one of the signs of a yogi is, that he is in his sex life extremely pure. Absolute purity must a thing that, if you live in an immoral world, it has an effect on everyone. For example, a moral woman is walking on the road and there is a man full of lust and all that looking exist and after some time, one should get at her. In any way she looses her chastity. beyond. Your relationships with other She doesn't mean to attract him or people, whether it is your sister or a brother anything, she doesn't want to loose her or any other woman or any other man, chastity, but the way he is looking at her, there should be complete purity, And this is extremely important. you see, though her simple methods are Now in the countries like India, people there, she may be responsible in a distant way to ruin his chastity, his morality. Even are extremely corrupt, very corrupt, a little child, who is a simple, innocent child extremely corrupt. You can give them 5 when there is a dirty man with dirty eyes, rupees and you can buy anybody there. It's really corrupt, moneywise. But people are not so immoral, they know it is immorality, he can have very dirty feelings for the child. So, though of course that person himself is dirty and all that, we cannot say the child I mean they know, if they do immoral thing they know it is not moral. is not affected. But in a way, that becomes In the West the immorality has an object, a sort of a . as you call it, a thing which makes another person even become a general rule. For them the word morality should vanish now, I mean there lower than what he is. Even an ordianary picture which has doesn't exist anything like morality. Do nothing to do in this place there, and funny everything whatever you like, people don't thing, can give some dirty feelings. Because these days I have seen so many symbols think of immorality. They don't want to talk of it, it is Victorian. And if somebody says that one should be moral, they start thinking have started, which to my eye I don't even see when there is anything wrong in it, he is a hypocrite. They cannot think that there can be any connection between that to my eye I can't see because I'm too human being and morality in a genuine way. innocent, my eyes can't see there is

 43 The Divine Cool Breeze July Aug., 2008 wears yellow. anything wrong, but if somebody, who is He himself came, made Him into man an expert on these things, will immediately and married Him to Radha. Then again He say, oh look at this! I mean really it is became a child, jusi to appear to be a child. impossible to understand, how the human Somebody may appear to be a child. To mind has really woven the yarns all around some of you, I appear to you to be a sixteen and made these patterns to ruin themselves year old girl as you say, but I'm not. I may and ruin others. be according to some sixty years of age, To worship Yogeshwara, we must but I'm not. My age is eternal. I can't say know that our relationships with everyone in this world have to be pure. He played what age is Mine. It could be two years old or it could be absolutely ageless, it could lots of things in His lite-time. The time when He came, the whole life country was be anything. So in His whole life, whatever He did, absolutely drowned into fanatic ideas about He did with purity of understanding. So religion. If Freud was there, he would have said, oh this is all nonsense. What's wrong? Radhaji was married to Him first. And afterwards when He came as a child, when Go ahead. krishna did not do that. He He was a child, He did all kinds of pranks wanted to break all the nonsensical shackles of traditions and shackles of false and things, was not sitting like this and seriously telling about things, but with a little bit here and there, He tried to improve their fanaticism. But He did it in a very beautiful manner keeping the relationships absolutely chakras and raise their kundalinis. Of pure. course, realization was not possible in a Now people ask questions, Mother, game, You cannot do it. Supposing I just was He married to Radha? He is eternally play about with you, you cannot get your married to Her, doesn't matter. But He realization because at the Sahasrara stage actually performed the marriage, just the you have to completely recognize. day He was born. He was brought by His It has to be a "game of serenity". Of father across the river and put down on the bank of the river, when Shri course, you can just raise your hands and give realization to them. But you have to Brahmadeva himself came on this earth. bring them to a serene level. You just sit That's why He wears a yellow thing, always, and you say, alright you just play about, it as a blessing from Brahmadeva to cover would be all finished. You have to sit down His lower part, lower than the waist with a and meditate, you have to do it. So one cloth. That's the sign that's why He always

 44 July Aug, 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze have that purity to understand relationship could not say that all the time if you are with a mother. I mean,imagine! It is such a playing, if you are just singing songs.or if clear cut background of this man which you are in a very happy mood, a mirthiul shows, how wrong he must have been. mood, then it's the end of Sahaja Yoga. It's Because what was in him, such filth, such not so, It's a serious matter. So He did not give them realization, dirt, that he could not even look at his mother but He reduced the ténsion on their minds clearly. Must have been all mud in his eyes or I don't know what he must have been, to of this so called dharma and its shackels of fanaticism and He made it loose and He see things like that. You are shaking with my vibrations wanted them to understand that dharma is already. NoW when we think of him as not going to enslave. You have to rise above Yogeshwara, that means we are Yogis and the dharma and become dharma itself. But He is our Ishwara. Ishwara is to be praised- Yogeshwara is to be worshipped with pure .- you have to praise, you have to praise heart. In this atmosphere it is difficult, 1 Him for his quality as Yogeshwara because know. You just go out and you see a horrid He is your Ishwara. So you have to praise thing there. You open any page of the Him. Now what praise can we give Him. magazine, there is another horrid thing. Today He is born. What should we do on Anywhere at the advertising. I turn another such a great occasion when He is born? page and I find a discotheque nonsense We have to decide that He is our Ishwara going on there. What can you do, You just He is the Ishwara aspect and if He is our cannot help it. All this is all, I mean, if you Ishwara, then we have to cleanse our look at it, how gross, dirty, filthy the whole attitude towards sex, towards the gross way thing is! To add to problems, psychologists of life that we have developed. You just have come forward. They themselves are shun it and throw it away. Absolutely. There affected by their methods and everything, cannot be any compromise in that. they are so possessed and their sense Otherwise you cannot be a yogi, you cannot about morality is absolutely in complete be a yogi. You may become very powerful, confusion, no doubt about it. You know Frued, what happened to maybe for the time being because I play with you. You get ideas that you are very him? He was having relations with his powerful and all that. But that's not true. mother. He could not even understand, I As My name is Nirmala, as My name mean imagine what an adharmi he must is purity, you have to be pure yogis. Nobody be, horrible wretched fellow, he did not even

 July-Aug. 2006 45 The Divine Cool Breeze run from man to woman and man to man says you should not marry, nobody says and then to all donkeys and do all those you should not have proper sex things. It is impossible that you could be a relationships with you wives, that's not true. yogi with all these dirty ideas. And then you But that's one thing people may avoid and cannot mature, even a normal person will spoil it. But the other thing which is the not mature. In India a person who is about most important is, your attention to be pure of sex attractions. Any kind. Your attention 40 years, he becomes a mature father. You leave any giris with him, anybody with him, should never go to anything like that. You it will not even get into his head that there see, to Me, i mean I'm now supposed to something could exist between them.Once be an old lady. I don't see things which you are married it should not. I mean I have normally people see. This is something seen my two sons-in law, they never get surprising. You see, I see something andI these ideas in their heads. So try to put don't know what's happening and usally they laugh at me, in the house, they don't understand, how I didn't see the point. But your attention into proper things because your Ishwara is Yogeshwara. I don't understand these jokes because the Now the other side of Shri Krishna people do not know. It's a play, all right. But He is Samhara-shakti. He is the power of attention never goes into these dirty things. never goes into these things. I can't see till somebody tells me that this is this. They destruction. It's very good He comes with everything to protect us. But He also has have to explain it ten times. So all these sophisticated methods got Sudarshan chakra. Sudarshan, "su" means auspicious, "darshan" is vision. He of nonsense and the filth and the dirt that we are accumulating here, please wash off your hands of that. That is one thing which will not be tolerated in Sahaja Yoga, gives us auspicious visions, you see. You try tricks with Him, that goes round your neck and then you have auspicious to every Sahaja Yogi I must tell. Itself sex cannot be enjoyed, if you live like this. You darshans of yourself, that you are hanging in the air somewhere. So Shri Krishna's method on one cannot. You don't enjoy sex at all in this side is that He is a "Leelamai", He ia country. None of them. compassionate, He stands by His bhaktas, Only in a country, where people are He comes on this earth to revive your innocent, you can enjoy. If you were dharma. if the dharma goes down, He enjoying, you would not run from one woman to another woman, you would not

 The Divine Cool Breeze July-Aug., 2006 46 comes to uplift it. "Yada yadahi dharmasya"- Ishwara. That is we have to have Him as wherever there is the decline of dharma. our ideal. With the understanding that today Bur dharma doesn't mean only corruption, is the day- in the night about 120'clock, it doesn't mean only honesty and now it must be about 120'clock in India dishonesty, basically it means Mooladhara. also, about that, so it matches- He was That is the beginning of the end. born at this time in the night, because it And He comes to- "sansthapnarthaya"- was real night symbolically, under horible again to establish into the holy stale.Again, circumstances He came. At a time Hien, when His own birth was very dangerously He comes on this earth to raise human beings to that level. This is what he does. placed. He was saved and then in His very So if we are Sahaja Yogis, we are part and childhood He killed rakshasas. But all this He did because He was an incanation. parcel of His being. We are instrumented into His working. So we have to establish Nobody is asking you to go and kill dharma, but the one, who has no dharma rakshasas. within himself, what dharmas is he going In Sahaja Yoga did I ask you to go to establish anywhere. He has come on and kill some rakshasas? On the contrary this earth to establish the dharma in its I'm just saying keep yourself protected. holy aspect. Not like Roman Catholic There was a rakshasin who came, her church or another Pentacostal church or name was Putana and she wanted to put these Hindu religious activities or these poison through her breast and she took Hindu termples or the Islamic state. But the child and started nursing. He was a dharma in its pure state we have to littie baby. And when He started sucking establish. But if there is no dharma within her breast, she came out in her true form us, how are we going to establish? and she died. So He comes on this earth every time Of course, He was after all, He was to establish dharma at Vishnu level, but at an incarnation. Can anyone of us do that? Shri Krishna level, He comes I mean the Sahaja Yogis. Then as a child as Yogeshwara. This is the point many people He was very mischievous. He ate some have not even thought of.For Vishnu they clay, I think whether He ate or not, His did not say Yogeshwara, that is He is the mother doubted, she got very angry and Ishwara of Yogis, as Ganesha is the she said: "Open your mouth, I would like to Ishwara of the Ganas. You see, Ganpati see, did you eat that? And He opened the looks after the Ganas, and He is our mouth- she saw a complete universe

 The Divine Cool Breeze July Aug., 2006 what is His basic nature, it is innocence. moving in His throat- because this is Vishuddi chakra. She saw because she He is going to judge you on your innocence. could see, she had powers to see. Not If you are a superego you can say, Oh I got possessed by a bhoot, you see and the bhoot did this. So he will say: "Alright you everybody can see that. Those who have powers can see. We don't even have the go to the bhoot ior the certificate not to powers as much an she had to see the me.". And what were you coing, you were universe. witnessing it like Shri Krishna. With all these So one has to understand that first as Sahaja Yogis we get the powers things happening, I get a big promise much before we have passed really the sometimes, that, "Mother alright, now we are not going to quarrel, there are not going test of Sahaja Yogis. Just the other way to be any problems, you rest assured, we'll round it is in the university. They will all live in harmony". And suddenly I find first give you the degree, the certificate that somebody is fighting for a bathroom and then you will get a job, maybe you don't get a job also. Here you get the or for a soap or something like that. That's job first of all, you get all the powers not for a Sahaja Yogi to behave. First of all you have to be a satisfied you are paid for, but the degree is still person, a person of great dignitiy and Yogi, next day I find him coming out with forbearing, otherwise what are you going to bear? " I love him very much, but he not sure. Anybody walks about as Sahaja something else. There are certified Sahaja Yogis, I have seen. They become should not have taken my towel." For small, small things if you go on insisting, be sure afterwards certified something else, God knows how. So this is the thing of you are not a yogi as yet. If you are fighting for things, then you are not a Sahaja Yogi at all. Nothing of these things matters, I Sahaja Yoga that you can become a Sahaja Yogi even without having the real certificate, It's definitely so. And the certificate is given, never say anything about anything, do 1? That I must have this, I must have that, as you know, by Lord Jesus Christ. He doesn't care. He doesn't give certificate how did you prepare this, though it is easily. That's why He is very, very strict. sometimes really wrong and unprotocolish. I never say, why did you bring these He is not going to give in. He is extremely bananas, they are no good, I'm not going strict as far as the Sahaja Yogis are concerned. He is not going to give you to eat, Did I say so? I mean, even the certificates, He is going to judge you. And flowers you use may not be auspicious, I

 The Diyine Cool Breeze July-Aug, 20O6 48 important because you have to be innocent. know certain flowers should not be used for puja. But l'm not opening my mouth. If Purity must be brought in. Last time on 1 have to tell you, I just tell you because this great dav we had 16 marriages. They you have to know it for your own good, not came out well, most of them. Not all, but most of them were very good and I am for my good. So, on a day like this, which is a day really very happy that such good couples of great joy to all the world and happiness, came on that day. It was very auspicious. And marriage gives you a sense of purity. you should know one thing, that when Christ And that's why our marriage is important in was borm in a very humble place, but when Krishna was born, He was born in the most Sahaja Yoga. But that's not the last word, horrifying circumstances. It is the same in like this is not a hunting ground for the case of Sahaja Yogis today. It's a thing everyone, I'm finding you this husband or of great joy and jubilation, no doubt, that I'm finding you that husband. That must be stopped completely. Leave it to Sahaja. He came and gave us His Vishuddhi power, You are not to search out your wives in but we must understand that we are born in a very precarious time. I have been saying Sahaja Yoga, no, not at all, nor husbands. Leave it. If you have done this so many times. There is not only one Kansa there. So many are there. There is something like that, then you will be a big fight going on, in that you people are harmed. Don't do any searching or any thing. here incharge. You are the ones employed A time will come, when you will find that I by God, you are the ones, who have been will myself tell you to marry this person, given this great work, you have powers. Like Shri Krishna, when He was crossing, people who just take out people and try as a child was put in a basket and the courting. That's not needed in Sahaja father was carrying the child in the basket Yoga, no courting is needed. You see and when His feet touched the river we have gof so many cases, where the Yamuna, the river went down. Because she marriage was decided like that, they married, they are very happily married. Then was in spate, she went down. In the same way, you too have all are there people who had courting, this these powers. Krishna has given you all thing, selections, nominations and elections the powers. Though they will be really known and everything and after that you find within 2 days they are out for divorce. In Sahaja to you, when only Lord Jesus Christ accepts you as Sahaja Yogis. And that's Yoga it is spontaneous and instantaneous.

 July -Aug., 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze 49 You don't have to do all these things, with everywhere, looking out, oh this is that, this one that one, then discard. It has to come all these celebrations what have you achieved? It's just spontaneous. So you you specially. And all great things happen to don't have to worry. You don't have to suddenly always: The more delibrations think. You don't have to say, that " Oh you will have, the worse it will be. So don't form ideas, don't plan about it, it Mother, I have to find a girl for..." You will happen, it is not so important. That will give you a lot of purity. Your ego don't! Leave it to me, it's my headache. But once you are married in Sahaja will be perfect. Yoga, you must know what it means. And I know of someone, whom nobody both of you must work it out properly wanted to marry. And when I suggested and if it is for the good of everyone, it should be good for everyone. someone, who agreed with great difficulty, she said, I don't want to marry. It's funny. This is what it is. And I would say that on this day, let us take one vow: To It is very funny the way our ego is working decide that we will be worshipping out. Because when we are looking at another person for marriage or anything, Yogeshwara. You have to worship Him. we are not thinking of Yogeshwara. We don't think that it is Yogeshwara, who Means our relationships about these things have to be cleaned. We should not get will do everything for us, we are involved with this, nothing is important. It's thinking, we have to do it. So we go just like having your food or to be with your ahead and spoil our attention wife- the need of the body. But you don't completely. " Sarva dharmanam pritajya mamekam sharnam vraja." In this part of eat on the roads, do you? You don't eat from the dirty plates, do you? You want to have a clean plate. You want to have a your decisian, if you can leave it to God, it will be better. I tell you, if you can do that, plate, which you have used yourself, your own plate, that should be clean. If you could you have crossed your ego half way through. At least 50% of ego is used in have a cleaner plate, you would like to have, this. In the West specially, In India this if you can get a silver plate, you would like. A golden plate is even better. In the same question doesn't arise much. Because the way, we should also have a very pure parents can't decide here, nobody can decide, you have to decide yourself. It's a understanding that it is the need of the body, big responsibilty and a big thing for you. So 50% of your ego problem will be finished. the body which can be very subtle. So let us not just go on shopping for it

 50 July-Aug, 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze it's all right. But to get in, also is difficult I tell you, once you just give up this because He is always throwing you out. responsibility of choosing a bride or a bridegroom for yourself. Just forget it. Such a waste of energy, I tell you. Shri Krishna has said, that "You will be the...", to Jesus, He said, "You will be the" When I see people, young people, doing al these things I wish they could understand Adhara", the support of the universe". Means the innocence is the support. If that the value of their lives, the esteem of their innocence is not established in you, then Shri Krishna cannot help you. He is lives. Their Ishwara is Shri Krishna, He is helpless then. Because you don't become not Ishwara of everyone. Only of yogis. a yogi and so He is not your Ishwara any Anybody else who tries to say "Hare Rama, more. When we say, Mother the Agnya Hare krishna" will get throat cancer. So He Chakra is here and He is here, all right, is only available to you, He is only your When you cross your Agnya Chakra that Ishwara. He manifests only for you. He is means He is sitting here and the Virata is your own. He won't act for any Dick, Tom sitting here So unless and untill you pass and Harry. Maybe you might be a prime your Agnya Chakra properly, you can't get minister, you may be a queen or king, it to Virata. And Yogeshwara is the Virata. makes no difference to Him. To Him only a That is the aspect we have to worship, we yogi, only a yogi can call Himn. Only a yogi have to worship! can ask for His help. He is not bothered Worshipping doesn't mean that you about anybody else. And if a yogi If a recommends, then only He can look after become that person. You worship Me, you don't become Me. What does happen, someone. Otherwise He will not bother when you worship? You surrender all that,it is not liked by Me, in the fire, in the water, about him. So He is actually your own king. who is always there, looking after you, When outside, in the elements you throw them you call Him, He comes with all His powers away. And you bring to Me your heart. That is what is worshipping. In the same way to support you. But you have to be a yogi. If you are not a yogi, which is of course we have to worship the aspect of Shri certified by Lord Jesus Christ, then Krishna has nothing to do with you. Krishna in me, which is Yogeshwara. I am So before the entry to Shri Krishna, Yogeshwara. Things do not come into My head at all, I don't see things like that.I though He is not the one who is going to don't know what this temptation is, what judge your innocence, in the door stands attraction is, I just don't understand. On Lord Jesus Christ. When you get in, then

 The Divine Cool Breeze July - Aug, 2006 51 the contrary these things repel me, repel your eyes at all. But the eyes, which are innocent, receive nothing, they just give. absolutely, I vomit. Even to hear these They just give. Innocence is very things, I don't want to open My ears, My ears become deaf. I can't hear this, I can't penetrating, very purifying, very soothing and very beautiful. We have to become beautiful people. understand any dirty jokes. have no brain for this, My brains refuse to understand. I Today I said all these things because I'm sometimes disturbed the way people become a dumb person, absolutely, deaf and dumb. People have written books and don't understand that purity of sex life is so books on these things, I don't know what important to Sahaja Yoga, specially in the they must be writing. What is that to write West. People don't understand. For Indians things? So today we have to know that our this lecture has no meaning, they will think, why Mother is wasting Her energy so much. personal life has to be extremely clean. We Because they don't understand. But to Me face ourselves every moment and find out within ourselves, are we really worshipping it is very important here. Whatever I have Yogeshwara within ourselves who resides seen and heard and see all around. I think today's message should be of Yogeshwara. within us: Let us develop that purity. Then Let us worship Yogeshwara today with our innocence will be established in our eyes. We will be innocent, the eyes will speak of heart. When you worship Me today, it should innocence. What is the use of having eyes be the worship of Yogeshwara and nothing which are all the time shifting, you don't else. know where they are going, wobbly eyes, May God bless you. you see, like this, like this. You can't trust

 %3D



----------------------

2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
The
1Vin
July- August, 2006
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-1.txt 
 ***
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 NA NIRMALA DHARA
NIVERSAL PURE RELIGIO
IN THIS ISSUE
1. Chhindwara Project- An Appeal
2. Shri Mataji's 59th wedding Anniversery Celeberations Australia- 7.4.2006
3. The Amazing Discovery of William Blake's Grave
4. Willam Blake's Birthday Celebrations, Pravachan of ShriMataji - 28th Nov.1985
5. Sydeny Town Hall Public Programme, Sir C.P. Srivastawa's Speech 6th February
2006
6. 10 th Anniversary Celebrations of Mumbai Hospital- 19th February 2006
7. A patient's Testimony - IS Y Health Center
8. Yogeshwar Puja-London-15.8. 1982
VISHWA
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 T HE D IVINE
CooL
BREEZE
Published by
Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 8, Chandragupt Housing Society
Paud Road
Kothrud, Pune-411 029
Phone:020-25285232
Printed at
Partha Sarthi Press
A-27, Meera Bagh
Ph.:25268673,9810452981,42334321
For Subscription Please Write To:
Shri G.L.Aggarwal
Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
222, Desh Bandhu Apartments
Kalkaji, New Dehi-110019
Tel. No.:011-26216654
Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles,Miracle Photographs etc. to:
ShriO.P. Chandna
N-463(G-11), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110034
Tel. No. 011-55356811
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
SAHAJA YOGA TRUST
Shri Mataji's Holy Birthplace: Chhindwara Project
AN APPEAL
form.
Jai Shri Mataji
2. Construction of a Meditation Hall in the
As announced earlier, with the
courtyard of the SHRINE and some
additional structures to manage the flow of
Blessings of Our Divine Mother, the holy
Birthplace of our Mother at Chhindwara, the
visitors, house a souvenir stall and
Holiest Shrine for all Sahaja Yogis and
necessary facilities3;
Yoginis, was acquired by H.H. SHRI MATAJI
3. Acquisition of a large plot of land ( of up
NIRMALA DEVI SAHAJA YOGA TRUST,
to 16,000 square meters) in close proximity
India, on 14 th July 2005. All legal formalities
to the Shrine for the construction of an
fot the acquisition of the House have been
International Ashram; and,
completed. Regular weekly meditation
4. Design, planning and construction of the
sessions are being held at the Birthplace
International Ashram with residential
and a hawan and pujas have also been
accommodation and other facilities for
organized. A steady stream of Sahaja Yogis
visiting Sahaja Yogis/ Yoginis from all over
and Yoginis is already visiting the Birthplace
and this is likely to increase in coming
the world. The Ashram will also include
necessary facilities for holding cultural
months and years. The next phase of the
events, organizing national and international
seminars and housing a library on spiritual
project is now being launched. This
consists of four main components:
and philosophical texts and multi-media
1. Renovation and reinforcement of the
material. These facilities will be of the
existing building structure of the Birthplace
with a view to ensuring its perpetuity as a
highest, internationally comparable quality.
The International Ashram will be located in
Shrine.
a beautiful natural setting to provide a
A conservation architect from the Indian
tranquil and peaceful environment. As
National Trust for Culture and Heritage has
approved by H.H. SHRI MATAJI, this Ashram
been commissioned to reinforce and
will be named as " H.H. SHRI MATAJI
renovate the Birthplace while maintaining
NIRMALA DEVI SAHAJA YOGA WORLD
the Birthplace in its original facade and
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 July- Aug., 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
completing this holy project will bring us all
ASHRAM".
even closer together in realizing our Holy
A project team headed by Shri Dinesh Rai,
Mother's VISION of one global family
Trustee, H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
wedded to universally accepted eternal
Sahaja Yoga Trust, and comprising Sahaja
ethical values in our lives.
Yogis and Yoginis from India and other
On this momentous occasion we appeal
countries, is already working under the
to all Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis to
guidance of Sir C.P. to actualize this project.
Some initial work has also been started to
support this historic project by making
financial contributions. We also appeal to
essential repairs and
carry out
all our brothers and sisters to inform us of
maintenance. Architects and structural
other contributions they may like to make
engineers have been engaged for drawing
in kind, skills and in any other manner
up comprehensive plans for the restoration
towards the realization of this historic
and renovation of the Birthplace. Some sites
have also been identilied for acquiring the
project. Ail state coordinators are requested
to forward this appeal to city centers and
requisite land for the proposed International
encourage the entire collective to contribute
Ashram.
suitably for this Divine Cause.
As we all well understand, this is a historic
An independent and specifically dedicated
undertaking. The Birthplace of our Holy
bank account has been established in New
Mother is the most exalted and holiest place
Delhi for receiving contributions for the
for all of us. The Birthplace Shrine, when
project from Indian Sahaja Yogis and
Yoginis and they have been so advised.
completed, will become the place of
supreme pilgrimage for all of us and for
the coming generations of Sahaja Yogis and
Contributions from Sahaja Yogis and Yoginis
in all other.countries, which will necessarily
Yoginis. Therefore, it is our bounden and
be in foreign currencies, can be received
sacred duty and responsibility to develop
by the National Trust in India only with the
the Shrine, acquire the land for the
International Ashram and ensure its early prior approval in each case from the
concerned Government of India authorities.
completion. The work has to be undertaken
In this context, the following procedure is
with all our commitment and love in
accordance with the highest traditions of
suggested:
Sahaja values as taught to us by our
Mother, the Guru of Gurus, the Satguru.
i. In each country, the National Trust or
Committee or Coordinator may open a new
We must recognize that undertaking and
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July - Aug., 2006
- H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Sahaja Yoga Trust
Chhindwara Account
Name of the
Bank Account for the Chhindwara Project;
Bank Account
i. Sahaja Yogis and Yoginis may be invited
to send their contributions to the National
Name of the Bank - UTI Bank
Trust or Committee or Coordinator;B
il. Each such contribution may be
K-12 Green Park Main, New
Branch
Delhi 110016, India
acknowledged and deposited into the
aforesaid Bank Account;
015010100265263
Account Number
iv. After a suitable period of time, the
National Trust or Committee or Coordinator
A complete list of all contributors and the
may inform the Executive Secretary of the
amounts contributed by each of them may
Indian national Trust of the amount so
also be forwarded to the Executive
collected for remittance to India%B
Secretary of the National Trust in India. It is
V. The Executive Secretary will then obtain
proposed to maintain a permanent record
the requisite Government of India approval
at the Chhindwara Shrine of all
contributions received for this Holy project.
for the proposed remittance and convey
JAI SHRI MATAJI
the same to the concerned National Trust
or Committee or Coordinator; and,
Rajiv Kumar
vi. The requisite remittance may thereafter
Executive Secretary
be made to the following Bank Account:
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 News about 59th Anniversary Celebrations
(7.4.2006) Australia
Dear Sahaj Brothers and Sisters,
On Friday April 7, Shri Mataji and Sir C.P celebrated their 59th Wedding Anniversary. Shri
Mataji and Sir C.P received many emails from the world collective to commemorate this
Auspicious event. Our Divine Mother has blessed us by personally acknowledging these
Congratulatory messages with a Letter
Text from Shri Mataji's Letter-
Australian Sahaj collective celebrated our 59th wedding Anniversary on 7th April
with immense love. It was an extremely moving and enjoyable occasion. Many messages,
full of overwhelming affection and good wishes, were received from my beloved Sahaja
children from all over the world. I wish to convey to each one of them my fondest love
and blessings. C.P is deeply moved and conveys his abiding and profound gratitude to
all of you.
(Signed Nirmala Srivastava)
SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
8th April 2006
(Internet Version)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Trie Amazing Discovery of William Blake's Grave
(London)
A CAUSE FOR WORLDWIDE CELEBRATION
By Shri Mataji's Grace, Sahaja Yogis recognise William Blake as an incarnation of Shri
Bhairava, the Archangel who continuously works on our left side. As we know, William
Blake took his birth in England in the year 1757, and produced dazzling volumes of Divine
Art that continue to attract, inspire and transform people all over the world.
When he departed from this earth in 1827, William Blake's body was burried at a cemetery
called Bunhil Fields, situated in central London. In the year 1965, tragic developments
bom of ignorance took place: the humble stone that marked the location of his grave was
removed, along with almost all the other tombstones in this area. The authorities in
London had devised a plarn to convert this part of the cemetery into a sort of park, which
was soon carried out. Following this process, the location of William Blake's grave was
lost. No one, including eminent international Blake scholars, the ' Blake Society' based in
London, or the authorities coutd point to the location of the grave anymore.
The memorial stone that can be seen at Bunhill Fields today. Placed in an arbitrary
location, the stone reads ' Nearby Lies the Remains of William Blake'
When Luis and Carol, a Sahaja Yogi couple from West London, first visited Bunhill Fields,
they knew much the same as most Sahaja Yogis about William Blake. They were surprised
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 July - Aug., 206
The Divine Cool Breeze
to see that the actual location of the grave had been lost and forgotten and instead
stone that reads 'Nearby Lies the Remains of William Blake' had been erected. Inspired
by a strong feeling of Vibrations the couple decided to try and locate the real location of
the Divine Poet's grave, and set about a long and detailed program of research and
investigation to find out the truth.
Eventually, with some Divine help, they did indeed re-discover the actual location of
William Blake's grave! Their official discovery was the result of a year's scientific and
academic research, which they begun immediately after their first visit. These results
have been gratefully acknowledged by the London authorities, the 'Blake Society', and
leading Blake scholars, with some people even calling them up to express their gratitude.
What these scholars did not know was that the couple's scientific research had actually
simply confirmed a discovery they had already made. Within minutes of that first visit, the
vibrations had taken them straight to that same spot, from where a tremendous fragrance
of roses emanated.
(The actual location of William Blake's grave,
scientifically proven by Sahaja Yogis)
The London authorities dealing with the cemetery grounds invited the couple to join a
series of official talks. At this time, support from around 50 London Sahaja Yogis played
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July Aug., 2006
a significant role in demonstrating the importance given to William Blake. Subsequently,
the possibility of placing an appropriate monument on the exact location of William
Blake's Grave was made an item on the official agenda!
As talks progressed, the authorities advised Luis and Carol set up an
independent organisation, in order to gather support for their request for a suitable
monument on the exact location of William Blake's Grave. Thus, with encouragement
from the UK Committee, the Friends of Willim Blake Group was set up, to petition
for this important cause.
William Blake's Grave
The next important round of official talks concerning the fate of Bunhill Fields
is set for June, 2006. UK Sahaja Yogis are busy preparing a Friends of William
Blake Group Website, where Sahaja Yogis all over the world will be able to register
as members, and add their support to the petition for an appropriate monument
at the exact location of William Blake's grave. As soon as this website is ready,
the FWBG will send out an appeal to Sahaja Yogis, who already recognise the
importance of this Divine Personality. By Shri Mataji's Grace, together we have the
chance to demonstrate the tremendous amount of love and admiration that exists for
Willim Blake, and the importance of having a suitably impressive memorial. The
FWBG will present our collective petition to the London authorities.
For a more detailed version of the story of the amazing discovery of William Blake's
grave, please write to Luis and Carol Garrido: luisgarrido 108 @hotmail. com
Jai Shri Mataji
(Internet Version)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 William Blake's Birthday Celebrations
Hammersmith Town HalI,London 28th Nov. 1985
Public Talk of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
It is such an honour for all of us to
how tormented he must have been in his
pay this homage to the great poet printer
life time to live with such people who have
and a prophet that was William Blake.
no sense of divine. He must have cried in
When I first came to England they had
the wildrness, he must have wept, he could
been telling me that England is a place of
not have been accepted. It's impossible,
scholarship and you can see lots of
such lower level minds cannot accept
museums and exhibitions; and suddenly I
something that's sublime and great; and
told the Sahaja Yogis that I would like to go
my heart bled with pain. Oh God why did
and see the Tate gallery for William Blake's
he take his birth in a place like this to
paintings. They were surprised because I
torment himself, to torture himself saying
seldom go to any one of them, especially
somthing which cannot be accepted ? But
the libraries, and the books. And when I
that's not so.
went there I saw this great poet, this great
I knew who he was, what he was
personality, pouring out his heart with such
doing, why he was here. We do not know
concern, with such honesty, with such
about him much because from the books
understanding and perception of the divine,
you cannot understand who he could have
to the people of England to understand the
been. He
was an incarnation of
great powers of divinity. But to my surprise
Bhairavanath, that's whom we call the St
there were some funny people, they had.
Michael or St George who is, as you know,
brought some magnifying glasses and they
the saint angel of England. That's why he
were looking at the drawings, and they were
had to incarnate and forgive. This was his
watching the private parts of people! I said,
role, to talk about divine in an open fearless
look at the wretched, absolutely base
manner. He had to use symbolic language.
people, who cannot see the sublime, the
He had to use. It's not difficult to understand
highest, which he wanted to paint; and they
him at all if you are a realised soul. You'll
were taking photographs. I was surprised
read to it sometimes laughing, sometimes
the way people reacted, and then I realised
weeping, enjoying the whole drama that he
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 July - Aug., 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
11
has tried to explain. When I read him l'm
who would go round and be extremely
gentle to people, and nice to them
amazed at his sense of humour, how he
superficially, only the mannerism of it, but
openly comes out with such remarks! I feel
he is like Markandeya, in India, or Kabir
he would be so gentle with the people who
are lowiy. He created divinity out of
Dass, in India, who slashed the whole
fishermen who were ordinary people,
society with their sword all the time, to see
uneducated, absolutely we can say people
that they are brought to the proper shape,
without fear, but so gentle. If you read the
who were one of the lowest in the strata of
society. He picked them up and made them
song of Thel, it's so gentle, and all of them
divine. He didn't go to the ministers and
who were him perhaps, or are the same
the prime ministers and the governors. He
style, extremely open, straightforward, we
did not. When you see all the great people
can say even blatant and extremely gentle.
The vision of Christ that he has described
who are supposed to be looking after the
is the one which he sees through his own
religion part of it, they are busy only with
enlightened eyes; and he sees that the
governors, and they are only busy with the
kings and the queens who must go and
vision is completely distorted, is the
bow to them. They are politically activated
opposite of what Christ was. I also felt the
same way. I took my birth in a Protestant
people. How can a divine person get into
this mess of politics which human beings
Christians family. I was shocked the way
have created ? We don't understand it
the Christians were. I, 'said are these the
because we try to rationalise everything,
Christians?' Now the point he brings forth
and, thank God, he is the one who talked
is very clear-cut. You can understand that
in the mannerisms if you are gentle, "I' m
aganist rationality and all the intellectual
ideas of putting down Christ to the mere
sorry, I' m afraid, I doubt", just look at that,
level of a human being, because he was
it's very commonly used, this language, he
himself divine and he could understand
says that Christ was not a gentleman of
Christ. He used to get depression
that kind. I also say I' m not seeking election,
I'm not here to please you, but l' m here to
sometimes, and he had problems of
make you please yourself, to enjoy yourself,
money, problems of convincing his brother
to have your wealth enjoyed, manifested.
and sister, every body trying to make him
feel uneasy.
That is how he also put the vision of Christ
Such a fine soul came on this earth
before you that he was not a gentleman
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
12:
July Aug, 2006
who describes a deity who is above
to talk of Jerusalem. What did he mean by
Jerusalem? What is Jerusalem? We go to
everything, a puritanical deity. But he
Jerusalem tor pilgrimage, why? Because
describes a divine humanity. Also he
describes the Christ who came on this
Christ was born there! England will become
Jerusalem when Christ wili be born here.
earth for the emancipation of human beings,
not to tell them don't do this and don't do
But how many of English people today care
for the spirit ? English language itself is
that.
That was all right at the time of
such a funny one, that we use the word
'spirit for drinking, the 'spirit' that you call
Moses in the beginning of it, the code of it.
And he calls it a moral Christianity, meaning
alcohol, spirit for the dead souls which
hang around many more here, and 'spirit" immoral it must be, because if you force
for the Atman, the spirit. When he came
somone into something and pass such
on this earth the industrial revolution had
laws and regulations at this time, modern
not taken its respite. People were still
times, it's going to be impossible for human
beings to follow, and they'll fall into some
entering into those mills as he calls them,
other traps. Strict rules of arıything imposed
and he saw the scribes, how they were
behaving and he saw the whole myth of
on people who are not realised soul can
He does not know that all religions
push them into some sort of problems.
religion.
were doing the same
They can become criminals, they can
nonsense
everywhere, not only Christianity. You go to
become violent as a reaction, and we see
any other country and see every religion is
the reaction to their acting, and the
the same style of a nonsense which is
hypocrisy of the whole thing is exposed.
Like in India, or anywhere else, they will
opposite of what the prophets told them, of
what the incarnations told them, of what ali
say you should not be attached to money,
the great sages told them. This is not only
about Christianity, but still nobody can
give the money to the church, to the temple,
to the mosque, to all the people to enjoy it.
forgive it because Christianity has a special
The kind of life people ied in those days in
fervour, has a special role, has a special
the name of God was no model for anyone
and that's how poets like him were born
meaning. That's what he's trying to fight,
also saying that Moses came on this earth
again and again. I would say that in Lebanon
to lay down the code of conduct, morality,
a great poet like Kahalil Gibran was bom
and also he describes Milton as a person
and then in India we had so many such
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 13
The Divine Cool Breeze
July Aug., 2006
people, pampering their ego, pampering
poets who just lashed the society and
their greed. All these things if you can do
lashed all these ideas of the intellectuals,
the ideas of the religions, the ones who
you can very nicely befool them and they
feel very happy and nice that, " oh, what a
were trying to conquer, because there was
book it is". As we have had great writers
no genuineness, there was no sincerity. If
also in this country,
I would say
you are honest people, you really mean it,
Shakespeare was a great-evolved soul, but
then let us face it and see for ourselves
the deterioration you see later on with
what we have to achieve.
So that is how he came as a poet,
people like Hemingway and all those
a remarkable poet the way he rhymes it
coming up. I don't know how after Somerset
Maugham, suddenly these horrible
and the sense of humour that he has, the
Hemingway people are coming up, and
way he unfolds the beauty of words as any
people buying their books like hot cakes!
We have lost all our moorings, we
poet should do. In Sanskrit it is said " Sat
na kavya, na, kavya". Poetry is full of the
have lost all our roots, but one thing good
'sat'. The 'sat' means the essences, the
has happened out of this reading. The way
explosion of essences through words. If it
of Freud, making him Christ, all that has
could be done, then the magic of it is called
led to problems and people are now
as poetry and that's what you find in Blake,
realising. Now realising that's why the
such a great poet. Poetry is only great when
prophecy was there, that's why he was a
it talks of the Divine. When it talks of the
prophet. He warned people of what is going
baser things, it takes you to the baser
to happen. But who is bothered ? He was
things.
The other day I heard one Australian
treated as an insane personality. If you go
to the lunatic asylum everybody will think
poet and I was amazed at his bathroom
that you are insane. That's the way lunatics
singing, it was horrible. How can you call it
poetry ? He sings of baser things of life,
which take you to the baser things and
look at a sane personality. His wisdom was
condemned. People thought that he was
getting all these hallucínations, " he's talking
pleasures; but he has very clearly said, if
out of his hat", because they have no brains
you can understand him, has said what
to understand, they have no enlightenment,
are these books for? This is to collect
they have no preception. That's why they
money out of them. Now how do you collect
treated him that way.
money ? By playing on the weaknesses of
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
14
July-Aug, 2006
reach man without forgiveness? He cannot
Now he's dead, of course they are
selling his books making big money, selling
reach man if he listens to Moses, can He?
He cannot. If He has to come to human
his plates, what he painted. But when he
beings He has to forgive; and that's why in
fived nobody bothered, and now they can
Sahaja Yoga in the beginning you must
use him the way they like. I met some very
forgive everyone, you forgive yourself, don't
feel guilty.
funny people here, in this respect, the way
they have shown great interest in Blake, in
Now in Christianity just the opposite
saying that he says that a naked woman is
the best. I said, where? How could he say
has been done, let's face it, and know for
yourself that you have to go, confess to
such a thing? He was innocent! Now we
do not understand what is innocence in
the priest. The priest also gets mad with
your confession, you're already mad. What
the West, Just like Markandeya describing
his Mother, her breast and everything, like
is there to confess in the ocean of
forgiveness? It just dissolves. What a
a child. A child doesn't see sex in the naked
body, he does not see; and the beauty of
message Christ gave us! It's the greatest
a woman he describes. That means all
weapon that we have got, is to forgive
others and to forgive ourselves, because
woman are walking nude everywhere?
God forgives us; and this is the message
Now, are you exciting the innocence of
that we have to know, that we have to
people or are you exciting the baser
qualities? We have to be natural. Are you
forgive ourselves. Instead of that, for all that
we do wrong or that we try to do against
natural?
All these perversions and all these
our spirit, we feel guilty. And moreover if
diversifications have become because man
the teachings are such that you better feel
guilty all the time, what we are doing is to
does not have a simple mind, he's a
crooked person. This crookery has to go
feel guilty and to catch up on this chakra,
from the mind. That is important, but ifI
the left Visshudhi. To such an extent that in
say that I am not doing my job here, I know
for definite that is not the way it is going to
the West wherever I go, I tell them, first of
all you just say one mantra, " Mother I am
not guilty". Take it out of you.
work out. That's why Christ is the one who
said "forgive, forgive them" otherwise how
Who are you to feel guilty when God
can God meet man? With this crookery,
loves you so much? He has made you the
with all this kind of cunning, how can God
epitome if evolution, you are at the highest
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 July - Aug., 2006
15
The Divine Cool Breeze
They didn't know they were sinning, and
point, why should you judge yourself and
this is one of the things that Blake brought
feel guilty? Is he not capable of forgiving
forth for us, to show that Christ was a
you, have you no faith in his ocean of loye?
person who brought a new message over
But this is the basis of the mistakes that
Moses. Of course Moses was needed at
are committed in the name of Christ. I'm
the time when Jews had to come out. That
teilling to the priest now, who is a priest
was the time they needed it, and they
here, coming from theological college: can
brought these Shariat laws. It was Moses
you learn about divinity in the theological
who started it, but Muslims are following
college? Did Christ go to any theological
them, Now, when today we are in this
college? How did he get it? How did he
twentieth century sitting down here, we
get the knowledge? Through enlightenment.
have to see what is the prophecy of this
Enlightenment has to be there. The way
great man, William Blake. Can you imagine
he has clearly stated everything, nobody
his birthday was in this month ? Guru
liked him because of vested interest.
Nanak had birthday in this month.
Everybody has vested interest, nobody is
Mohammed Sahib's birthday is in this
sincere, honest. And they want to exploit
month, all these great people were born in
others to make money. You cannot make
this month. Now this month also we
money in the name of God! It is a sin.
celebrated the Diwali. Such a great month
Such people can never enter into the
is this one. And in this month those who
kingdom of God. That's why Christ has said
are born have to be great people in the
"you will be calling me,Christ, Christ, I will
whole understanding of Blake. I find a single
not recognise you". That's a fact.
So if you have to be a truthful person,
lonely man ploughing this land with the
seeds of wisdom, and we have just to reap
just a truthful person, do not feel guilty about
it. He is the one who planted it, water made
it. Do not feel you have committed sin.
There's a little story in India that one
ready by Shakespeare you can say. We
have had many great poets here.
missionary came to a village in India.
Villagers in India are very simple, you know,
Wordsworth is another one who really is
enchanting and beautiful .1 think
they are not so sophisticated, So when he
Wordsworth must have seen the feat of
was going they praised him a lot and said,
William Blake and he said better describe
"Sir we are so thankful to you that you have
the nature, forget about human beings, he
told what is sin and that we are sinners".
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 16
The Divine Cool Breeze
July-Aug., 2006
he has described at every chakra we
must have thought of it, thinking it to be an
created a devil and put them in the library,
incorrigible land where you can not sow
and that's why I'm against the books very
anything.
much myseif. But why did he become a
But whatever it is, what Blake has
done is to give you a new vision, and a
printer? It's very important to know, and
new idea, because in the West Christ had
why he wrote so much about printing? You
see the media today, the media, that,s the
been shrunk to the position of someone
devil he described. The media is the one
who is just a human being. And now when
has ruined you completely, believe me. Just
you hear the way people describe him, I'm
to make money out of you, playing upon
amazed. From where did they get this
your weaknesses, making your children
vision? Have they got eyes or are they blind
to talk like this about him? And ! hear the
and you weaker and weaker, the society
bishop talking like that, or your archbishops
completely being destroyed, systematically.
This is the media he wanted to hit. That's
talking like that. Have they no fear of God?
why he took his birth and became a printer.
He could have been anything else. No poet
What's going to happen to this country if
you talk about Christ like that? And you are
was a printer, in England or anywhere else.
going to have now pictures and films
It was Blake who became that. The reason
showing him to be an unrighteous
personality, showing his mother naked, no
was he wanted to show that this media is
respect. Even Blake, I don't know if you
the one, and let him cut it at its root. But
have noticed, he paints human beings
as you know, evil grows whether you like
naked, all right, but not Gods. Christ he
it or not, and today's media we can not
understand to what extent it has destroyed
never painted. He never paints them that
us, our roots, our faith, all our sublime and
way, the respect. While we the great
intellectuals of modren times are trying all
righteous visions!
1 know that I myself was asked by
these tricks just to bring forth the wrath of
your television people, and all that, to come
God upon ourselves.
The second point about him was
down and talk to them. I'm amazed the
that he was a printer. We should think why
way people told me that an Anglo-Saxon
brain, God knows who made that brain,
did he become a printer.Why Blake took to
can not understand anything that can be
printing? He has described himself the Hell
done without money. I said you first take
where the books were created, and how
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 17
July - Aug, 2005
The Divine Coal Breeze
your realisation otherwise I'm not coming
write Jerusalem and I think aiter fourteen
to your programs or to your television.
years also, if I could really feel satisfied
That's the triumphant pride of Christ yor
that I've been able to do some justice to
can see in his crucifixion. He didn't care.
him, in this Jerusalem that he wanted to
build, I' Il be very much grateful to you all.
He could have gone, fallen at the feet as
our politicians do, morning till evening
But that's not so. It's a very disappointing
moving from one place to another. He would
thing. People don't want to listen to
anything, they want to listen to something
that they like, that you have to play on their
have gone to the scribes and the Pharisees
and said, "oh please forgive, I will serve
you all my life, I'll sell everything". He would
weaknesses all the time, tell them that
whatever wrong you are doing is a good
not accept. That pride. He went with that
triumphant pride on the cross. But what
thing, go ahead.
does it show, what does it show? That we
Now the compassion and the love of
the stupid crucify that great personality and
Christ can work out miracles, no doubt it
today are we not again curcifying him?
can work out because he came for us.
That's why I say that he was a great
The whole universe was created for us. It
prophet, because he made prophecies, that
is for us to receive all the blessings of the
if you do not take the right path, if you do
divine. It is we who are going to become
not take to the higher seeking all these
the spirit, as he said, "you are to be born
things will show. Now we have to
again". But the conditioning or the subtle
understand because it concerns us. This
conditionings of the surroundings and the
is what is happening to us, to us, to our
atmosphere, the history and all that, is so
children to our families, to our society, to
much embedded in us that we don't realise
our country. Let us face it and understand
and are not aware that we have to look
that compassion of God can fail in such a
upward. Blake's life was another crucifixion
horrible lazy heart, which doesn't have any
I feel. When I read him tears fall
understanding of the spirit.
continuously sometimes. What a son of a
Sahaja Yoga came on this earth long
great father! Who said Christ was not
time back, much before I came on this
bothered about his parents? He ran away
earth, and today it has come to England.
from the house at the age of twelve years.
We should say I came here twelve years
THE
That means all the boys are now running
back. It took fourteen years for Blake to
from their houses at twelve years, taking
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-19.txt 
 July - Aug., 2006
18
The Divine Cool Breeze
What do we get ? We can't love our
to drugs? That's the best way we can pay
children, we kill our children, we ill-treat
homage to him, by running away from the
them. You are sitting in the heart of the
houses, taking to drugs, because Christ
ran away from the house at the age of universe, this is the heart of the
universe, and what do you have to give to
the world ? The spirit. The spirit resides in
twelve years! And he said this is my
Father's business, that's what he writes.
What do I care for the parents ? That does
your heart, and that's why Blake said that
England has to become Jerusalem
because it is the heart. That means spirit
not mean that you should not respect your
parents, but it means that I am at a
I have a
higher seeking,
has to come in the attention of the universe
higher
seeking, I have to go in another
otherwise things won't work out. But from
where is it going to come ? The spirit,
direction. You have lived in this direction,
where is it going to be awakened ? It is
whatever it is you have balanced your life,
but I have to ascend. This is the message
going to be awakened in the human beings.
he has tried to put forward before you, very
And where are those human beings ? In
the heart. Where are they living ? And those
clearly, that it is so obvious, so clear-cut.
Whenever he says fight it, whenever he is
who are living here are already lethargic.
The heart is lethargic, it cannot pump
so compassionate, whenever he is so
anything out of it. First it was over pumping,
gentle, whenever he is so modest, the inner
line is one, that achieve your ascent,
trying to impress the whole world, and now
after the impression it is in depression.
achieve your higher being, become
that. He has prepared ground for us here
This heart has to awaken to make
the whole world a spiritual being. Do we
in England, as you know.
As I told you many times, England is
realise our responsibility ? Do we
understand this ? What is the role we have
a very important part of the universe, which
I don't know how many Englishmen realise.
It is the heart of the universe, it is small but
to play as a spiritual being ? You have to
play a role as a spiritual being now, but we
are not. We are busy with all other
so important, but what do we get from the
heart, what do we have in the heart ?
nonsensical things but with the spirit. I've
Racialism! If
Christ comes here you'll
throw him out because he is not English,
laboured for twelve years, as I said, and
think I'll have to stay here for two years
or do you believe that he was English ?
more. Fourteen years, and then only
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 July-Aug., 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
19
agnostic. Agnostic? Then they asked him,
maybe, I hope so, Jerusalem will start
"then what are you doing here"? He said, "I
showing it's risen in this country. You can
m doing my job as you are doing your job".
do it. You are the only ones who can do it,
He's agnostic, he doesn't know anything
nobody else. You are entitled to that.
about Holy Ghost. What is Holy Ghost?
God has chosen you to be born here,
William Blake has said it resides within
with a purpose, but you can't talk to anyone
you.' Why don't we find out where does it
about religion, they don't discuss religion.
reside? Why not we go out of the way to
What religion? Religion which contains al
find out. Bible cannot contain Christ, the
the religions of the world, religion which is
whole universe cannot contain Christ. Let
the inner balance, the tranquillity within you
us go out and find out what others have to
which gives you the ascent. But we don't
discuss it. This is out of etiquette. We can
say about it. We are very insular self-
discuss all the drunkards and all the pubs
opiniated great people sitting here in
complete lethargy. We have no time, we
don't think anybody to be considered about
it. Let us go and see.
of the world but we cannot discuss such
a horrible thing like religion, which is so
• innate and within ourselves. You cannot
What is the Holy Ghost is very
have anything in the newspaper about it,
but he has described all the fake gurus
simple. Holy Ghost is the kundalini if you
and all the satanic people. It's such a
use logic, not rationality. Logic is different.
strong description of all these and you see
If you use your logic you will see that we
have a trinity, holy trinity. We have God
them and thousands follow these
nonsensical people, pay them money,
almighty, all right, and we have the Son,
and the Holy Ghost. Have you heard of any
become beggars, but they don't want to
father having a son without the mother ?
come to reality. Why, I ask myself ? Why
is it happening like this? No use going to
Then who is the Holy Ghost ? It's the
Primordial Mother. Automatically you come
any extremes.
Here is someone who has given you
to that conclusion. But mother should not
such a lot of explanation. Holy Ghost, he
be mentioned ? That's why Blake has said
about the daughters of Albion, beacause
says, "and Holy Ghost a vacuum". You ask
he knew the way women were suppressed
anyone, I was surprised when it was asked
in a very sophisticated way. In Sanskrit we
to some very big bishop, what do you think
of Holy Ghost. He says ah
I'm
say: "Yatra narya pujyante tatra ramante
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July - Aug.. 2006
20
devata", Where the women are worshipped,
forgiveness for the cunning, what is the
there remains the domain of the deities,
forgiveness for the crooked, what is the
forgiveness for Satan? Discrimination is
where they are worshipped. And they are
needed when we talk of forgiveness.
to be worshipful, not the hariots and the
brothels and the women who walk nude
Forgiveness is for the people who think they
have committed sins. It's only in thinking
and show off their nudity to excite the baser
self, but the ones who are worshipful.
you commit sins. Otherwise you do not.
Where they reside, reside the Gods. So
Look at a dog, look at a tiger, look at all
these people. If tiger has to eat the cow it
eats. Does it commit any sin ? It does not
these women were suppressed, and
suppressed to such an extent that they did
not want to talk about God as a woman,
know about the sin: "I didn't know what this
sin is", he will say that "I didn't know it was
anywhere. So Holy Ghost is something
abstract, a dove. All right it's a dove, then
a sin, you see, I just ate it". But what is the
sin ? Just to condemn someone all the
what ? What do we do with the dove ?
time: "You are the sinners, you did this sin,
Why is it so important that we should have
blessings from the dove, nobody
you did that sin". Human beings are the
temple of God. With what prayer, love,
explains ? It's a mystery! We have to live
with the mystery. Everything is a mystery.
affection and delicacy they are created ?
The banking is a mystery here, but where
For what ? These lotuses have been
does the money go is also a mystery. It brought out of the Maya of illusion, for
what ? To be condemned, to be trampled,
has something to do with the mafia, that's
to be ill-treated in this way, that too in the
also a mystery. Then the Masonic people
are organising the Switzerland bank, is also
name of God ?
a mystery. Everything mysterious and
Lotuses are created to be offered to
hidden and kept out, "oh that's not to be
the Gods, with the fragrance to illuminate
said, this is just overseas banking, oh good,
the whole world. They are the poetic genius
very good name" It's overseas banking, it
of the lord, as he has described, while we
is this, it is that and we carry on with this
look at human beings as something to be
exploited, to be suppressed, to be
hypocrisy, we carry on with all the false
notions, "oh, that's all right, that's all right,
oppressed! And so, as he says, there are
that's part of it".
two types of people, and he has given
horrible names to them who try to oppress
This is not forgiveness. What is the
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-22.txt 
 July - Aug., 2006
21
The Divine Cool Breeze
criticism I read they said he was not
the people, who try to devour the people.
acceptable because he went too far, same
And he says that the religion now has
with me. People don't accept me because
become the compromising thing between
the two, while the innocent suffer, while
I go too far. I must try to please them. Am
I seeking your vote that I should try to piease
the simple suffer, while the seekers suffer,
while the good suffer. That's a fact.
you ? I have to tell you the truth whether
you like it or not. I want you to accept it
Let us all of us join together now
because that's what I am here for. I'm here
and get our realisation, become the spirit.
for that, that you accept the truth and get
It's the easiest thing to do because the
it. l'll do my level best. I can make food for
Holy Ghost, which is the Kundalini, is within
you, I can give good food to you, I can give
you. In the triangular bone she resides and
she can be awakened, while they may say
you presents, I can do whatever a mother
can do for her children. But when it doesn't
that why didn't he talk about Kundalini ?
work out she has to shout, sometimes she
Whatever he talked, who listenend to
has to say things clearly, because you have
him ? Whatever he said who tried to
to get it. Now you cannot force it on people,
understand ? Till today I don't find many
this is the biggest problem. You cannot
people have understood him. Whatever he
force self-realisation onto people. You
manifested, who bothered to know about
cannot do it with force. Say if supposing
it ? And if he had talked of something more
it would have been obscure. And he says,
Russians tell me, they are very much
interested about Sahaja Yoga no doubt, but
"I don't care for the idiots for whom my
if they tell that you come to our government
sayings are obscure". He says clearly. He
and give them realisation, I cannot. I cannot
has used only thrice the word 'idiot' and
do it. You are to be free people. When you
many times 'stupid', and so many times
are free, then you are a beggar ? See the
the 'fools'.
Above all of that, to me all of them
wages of freedom we are paying. Nobody
is free, in Europe if you go I have to take
are God's own children. I know how he
out all these ornaments, which I'm
was angry, I know why he was angry, and
I also understand him, that he thought that
supposed to wear beause of my family. I
have to go there without a purse. I have to
before Sahaja Yoga coming here, let me
tie my purse inside here, fit something,
give them a thump, let me open them with
otherwise they rob it. Nothing is safe. So
a big blow so they are ready. But in his
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-23.txt 
 July Aug, 2006
22
The Divino Cooi Breeze
this kind of a freedom which leads to
and don't have that, you cannot do it. You
do not have that power of the spirit.
violence, to butchery, actually the way we
Most of the incarnations who came
have butchered our children, butchered our
before Christ didn't realise this point, that
eiders, the way we insulted every one of
human beings are not enlightened, they
them, all that goes hand in hand with
freedom. This is no freedom. This is
don't have the power of the spirit with them.
Christ realised it, and he said it openly,
absolutely unleashed abandonment of the
brutal self within us.
"you are to be born again". Not only that
but he said, "first of all forgive". He talked
So whether you go to Russia or to
Europe, Sahaja Yoga is in a problem,
of forgiveness, so that they settle down,
that they are not paranoid, that they are
Whether you go the left or to the right I just
don't understand
where
not upset. Let them be settled down in
will it
prosper.Where freedom is used with
peace and in compassion, and then
awaken their Kundalini, and then give them
wisdom, with respect. If you cannot respect
realisation. So then you have the power,
the freedom of others you do not have the
then there is no temptation, nothing like
freedom at all, you have never known the
that. Will you tempt Christ with anything ?
freedom, you have never enjoyed the
freedom. So the freedom of human beings
You cannot. In the same way you do not
get enslaved to any temptations. You rise
has to be respected, and when this freedom
is respected, then only you can get your
in your own beauty and glory, and your
own strength and power. You don't have to
realisation, and then only you can enter into
get something to end. This is what is self-
higher freedom, into complete liberty that
Blake has described. There are seekers,
realisation.
so many seekers in this country, and so
Sahaja Yoga came to London twelve
years back, when I came. I'm not an
many are lost, so many are lost. There
have been people who are saved by Sahaja
immigrant for your information, at all. I just
Yoga who have been taking drugs.
came by chance, I should say, or by God's
Overnight they get it. Overnight how ? It's
ordained programming. My husband got
a mechanism within you. God has built that,
elected to this job out of a hundred and
that power of the spirit when it enlightens thirty four nations, you see, he was
you. It just becomes so powerful you give
elected. We came here just because he
up. But beforehand if I say don't have this
was elected, not even appointed, but
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-24.txt 
 23
The Divine Cool Breeze
July - Aug., 2006
tell them about this great knowledge we
elected four times
elected, and
had in that country, and everything
unanimously. He is a senior, most senior
subsided.
Secretary General, so we had to come
This knowledge is not meant for
here, and that's how I'm here. Otherwise I
India, is not meant for any particular place,
may not have ever come to England to
it's meant for the whole world, as your
teach Sahaja Yoga. With Blake one feels
knowledge of sciences. All the knowledge
compelled to try, and try and try to establish
of the tree is meant for the whole world,
Jerusalem, whatever maybe the case,
which you gave it to us, or you gave it to
whatever maybe the disappointment,
all the eastern countries. All people accept
whatever maybe the disgust, doesn't matter,
it. What's the harm in accepting the
one has to do it. He had such faith in the
knowledge which comes to you for your
England's soil that we have to build the
Jerusalem, but first every one of you who
benevolence ? Only because it is from the
eastern side you feel so insecure about it.
are here must get your realisation and
From where did Christ come ? He came
humble down before your realisation. You
from America ? 1 think he must have run
are not to be arrogant with it.
away! Despite that I must say among all
He said Christ was not humble
of them, British are the most matured. But
before human beings, but before God he
we run after Americans, we run after
was, before his Father he was. In the same
French, we run after everyone not being
way you have to be humble before your
aware of ourselves, what we are.
spirit, and before your self-realisation, and
We are wisdom, we are the people
you have to get to the higher state. It's
who represent the heart of the universe,
surprising that in India we had all this
and time has taken, from him to this time,
knowledge all these years, but we were
that we have matured now. I hope we have
supposed to be Heathens, or what else
they called us, we were supposed to be
matured enough to understand that there
has to be a breakthrough. When they
slaves. Nobody wanted to know anything
about it. The knowledge of the roots existed
published my handbills, you see, somehow
and our intellectuals also never bothered,
it so happened that my face has come out
quite black in that. I said forget it, nobody
they always followed Oxford and
will come to our program if you show such
Cambridge traditions. With this Oxbridge
business we never got through people to
a black face. They'll say, "oh somebody
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-25.txt 
 24
The Divine Cool Breeze
July - Aug., 2006
"Beware of the doomsday, you give the
coming from Africa is trying to teach us
what is Jerusalem", so they had to redo it.
money, we'll save you, give you a certificate
that at the doomsday you'll stand with a
to show that I'm not that black. What
certificate, you'll be saved". First they will
difference does it make this skin deep
go down in the doomsday.
colour ? The colour comes from the heart,
This is for every religion. People have
the beauty comes from the heart, the
exuberance of the heart expresses that
used it for very baser things, making
money, creating political ideas. I can't
understand how can diamonds be thrown
into dirt like this, and covered with that,
beauty on your being. And the beauty of
the truth is that it acts, it works, it just
doesn't decorate itself. It doesn't try to take
and the fragrance turned into filth. It is
to the ways and methods of luring people,
acts. Whether you like it or not it
beyond me. The powers of human beings
but
acts. Let us work it out, it's simple.
sometimes supersede that of God. You can
see the way they can change the forms,
Instead of going into intellectual feats
and going in the direction of finite they can change beauty, they can change
everything that is reality into something
understanding through your brains, let us
go to the infinite. That's only possible when
nonsensical and stupid. And they live with
it. They don't want to know about it, they
you get to your spirit, which is infinite, which
creats a collective consciousness within
enjoy it, "we are very happy people, what's
you, which creates, I say, which means
wrong ?"
knowledge. But knowledge does not mean
What a waste, one feels, of this
creation. With what aspirations and visions
what you know through your brain, but what
you know through your central nervous
these human beings were created on this
earth. And then what should we do to make
system, that you can feel it, that you can
feel the chakras of everyone on your
them understand what they are, to make
fingertips. Mohammed Sahib has said, "at
them aware with that perception, with that
the time of resurrection your hands will
vision of the Divine that they are.
Sometimes I also cry in the wilderness and
speak", but look at the Muslims, they never
share some of the pathos of all these poets
talk of the resurrection, whereas most of
the Koran is nothing but resurrection.
who came on this earth and suffered and
suffered and suffered. I hope today with all
They talk of the doomsday because they
have to make money by frightening people:
this anguish, that whatever l'm telling you
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-26.txt 
 July -Aug., 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
25
you'll try to see that sincerity is the only
he said the samething, which he said in
way you can understand yourself. No
books, nothing, no conditioning, no denying,
nothing can convince you but the sincerity here, jungles I think. And that is also
England, after twelve thousand years,
because at that time I don't know what was
wasted. How much could Christ talk about
to know the spirit which is within you; and
Kundalini ? He talked about Holy Ghost.
this sincerity I call it as the 'pure desire'. If
you have that pure desire which is the power
But why stick on to that ? Now I've come
to talk to you, better take your realisation.
of your Kundalini you will get your
When he came they talked of Moses, when
realisation now, just now, you should.
Moses came they talked of Abraham. What
That's all is needed, the pure desire
to be the spirit, nothing more than that. But
about the present ? I am with you. Why
not have your realisation. All religions
when it is awakened, then it is to be looked
after. That's very important. It has to be
were built that you get your realisation,
looked after, it has to be kept burning, it to give you the balance, to give you
has to be manoeuvred and kept at a point
that property by which you ascend. Like
when you have an aeroplane you fix it up.
that you start growing more and more.
I need not tell you all about Sahaja
In the same way they wanted to fix you up.
But religions went astray, they make people
Yoga, it's going to be too much for you. But
how Blake has worked for us, so many
crooked, the things they fixed! Wrong bolts
poets have done this job, and now the new
into wrong places, the whole aeroplane is
in a tattered condition, if you fly you'll fal
great poets are coming to finish us off, to
please the media, to make money, befool
down. Better give up all these ideas. But
us, using
Kundalini is such a great force, it comforts,
flowery
sentences, taking us to hell directly. Beware
pleasing
words,
it cures you, it builds up all your centres
of them. Beware, save your children
and slowly moves upward. And when you
from them, save the whole community.
get realisation it goes back and attends to
all these problems that you have...
The whole of England has to be saved
because if the heart dies the whole universe
This celebration of William Blake's birthday
will die. May God bless you all.
organised by Sahaja Yogis at the
Extract from questions and answers:
Hammersmith Town Hall, London, 28th
.....Markandeya, who was in India twelve
November 1985, included an exhibition
thousand years back, incarnated here as
about Sahaja Yoga and William Blake.
(Available in CD format)
William Blake. Twelve thousand years back
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Sydeny Town Hall Public Programme
Sir C.P Srivastava's Speech 6th February, 2006
Honoured and distinguished guests,
are. That you should find time to be with
us to celebrate an occasion, which is
Ladies and gentlemen, Mr. Chris kyriacou,
twenty-five years of Sahaja Yoga, shows
the national Co-ordinator of Sahaja Yoga in
your keen interest in spirituality, in ethics
Australia, All members of the National
and a good life. So I bow down to you again,
Council for the advancement of Sahaja
and thank you very very much for the great
Yoga.
honour you have done Shri Maraji Nirmala
Ladies and gentlemen,
Devi and myself, by being here to-day.
Very, very kind things have been said about
me. They're very kind. Please do not believe
all that has been said. But what has been
said about my wife is entirely true, and I'l
come back to that a little later.
First of all, I would like to tell you how
wonderful the Sahaja Yogis of Australia are.
You know, only a few weeks ago they invited
Is and she accepted the invitation, and
within a period of about six weeks they all
got together to transform a residence here
into an ashram, and you have to see to
believe what they have done. They have
converted it into a little heaven on earth for
their beloved Goddess and Mother. They're
There are moments when it becomes
so devoted, so true, so pure that I bow
difficult to express yourself, and this is one
down to them and each one of them, and
such moment.
I would like first of all to say how very
convey my feelings of most abiding
very grateful I am to all of you who are
here to-day. I know how preoccupied you
gratitude for the wonderful work they have
done, for their marvellous hospitality, for
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-28.txt 
 27
2006
July - Aug.
The Divine Cool Breeze
their extreme kindness. They are my
the world, trying to convey a message, a
message of love, of togetherness. Believe
me, she has travelled by plane, by
beloved people, and I call them angels.
They are truly angles.
helicopter, by car, by bus, by bullock cart
Well, Ladies and gentlemen, I would
and on foot. She has gone to villages, to
like also to express my profound gratitude
cities, and she has gone to many, many
to Honourable Mr. Gough Whitlam, former
Prime Minister of Australia. I had the honour
places in all the five continents, and she
has done so out of a tremendous
of being received by him. I regard him as
conviction within her that this world needs
one of the most visionary leaders of our
a new message. If the worid has to live,
time, desperately needed by the world to-
has to survive, then something new has
day. I thank him for very kind words about
to be communicated to humankind. And
our visit here. And I extend the same
with that belief in her, single-handed for
gratitued to Honourable Kim Beazley,
Leader of the Opposition in Australia%3;
many years, she went around; gradually
Honourable Morris Lemma, Premier of
Sahaja Yogis came along; what they saw,
the worth of what she was saying, and
NSW; Honourable Alan Carpenter, Premier
, to-day she has followers in eighty, ninty
of Western Australia; Honourable Kate Ellis,
Countries. Wherever I go there are Sahaja
Member for Adelaide, South Australia; Ms.
Yogis, Sahaja Yoginis, beloved children
Jule du Varrens, Director of the Institute of
of hers, and what a wonderful thing she
Communication Ethics;Mr. Peter Debnan,
has created I What is it? How do I see
NSW Leader of the Opposition; and Lord
it, as her husband? Well then, I must
Mayor, Clover Moore, city of Sydney. To all
of them, our profound and deepest gratitude
say, for her to have been doing all this
meant she has been away from me for
for the very kind words in which they have
a long, long time, but I knew that she
welcomed us here.
Ladies and gentlemen, I now come
was doing something wonderful work for
to what I wanted to mention to you. This is
the world, and so it was.
Now her message as I see it is
too important a gathering for me to miss
the occasion, and I want to say what lies
simple, straight, and she says: all men
and woman and children of the world are
in my heart. But first I must tell you, this
the creation of one Almighty. Some people
lady who is sitting here, my wife, for thirty-
say: " My God is Almighty", other say:
five years she has been running around
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-29.txt 
 July - Aug., 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
28
"My God is Almighty". By definition, you
given to ethics, morality, everything that is
can't have more than one Almighty. If you
good. That is what it is, that's what your
have two of them, neither of them will be
destiny is. But if you want to be in
Almighty! So it's as simple as that, and
communion, you can be in communion.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, the point
somtimes people don't really see that. But
I want to make to you is my own point. My
she says: "First thing is, remember that
point is, I have worked for India as a civil
there is only one Almighty, and that is the
servant, and I have also had the privilege
Almighty power of Divine love." And then
of working for the United Nations, as
she says: " All persons who are here on
this earth have been created by that Secretary General of the International
Maritime Organisation; and believe me,
Almighty." Whether they are white or brown,
ladies and gentlemen, I tried to implement
or blue or yellow; whether they live in Africa
her ideas in my working at the United
of Australia or India or wherever, they're all
her children,are children of that Almighty
Nations level. You know the United Nations
means many, many countries; countries of
power.
But if that is so, why not live together
different growth of development, with
happily, peacefully? Why feel divided? Why
different capability and so on and so forth,
feel one against the other? Now it's one
and they all come together to work together:
thing to believe, and she believes in that.
it's not an easy task. I was in the maritime
world, and when I was elected Secretary
General, I was the first from a developing
She herself was born in a Christan family,
I was born in a Hindu family, but we both
believe in one Almighty power, one human
country. All my predecessors had been
family, and that's how we are together. Now
Europeans, and people were surprised
this is the message she has conveyed,
that someone from the developing world
and she has conveyed this to many
should come. The maritime scene at that
audiences, saying: You are the creation of
time was dominated by the Western world,
that Almighty, you are in His or Her image,
and the Organisation was known as a "rich
and there is in you a concealed power
man's club". And here was me: how could
I be Secretary General of a rich man's club,
which she can perhaps help to awaken.
And when that is awakened, called kundalini,
poor me? What a task it was!
then you are in communion with your
I said: " Well, I have been elected so
Creator. And you'll have a beautiful life then,
I must apply her message. "Her message
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-30.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July-Aug., 2006
29
was: everyone is the same, everyone is
not impossible dream. It is something which
is achievable. But the world needs this
equal. So I made it a point to make every
member state of the Organisation an equal
message, her message, the message of
love. And why I'm involved in to speak to
member. They were not at that time equal.
you here, because I sincerely believe from
The rich countries who had shipping, they
my heart that in Australia there's something
were dominating, for they had maritime
unique. It's not just to praise or flatter you,
no. I would not say that if I didn't believe it.
expertise, many of the deveioping countries
had not joined, and the problem was, how
to make it a proper world organisation. So But I believe it because I find in Australia
with that message in my heart I set about,
the best of Occident, of the Westem values.
I'm a great admirer of Western values. I'm
went round, mentioned first to developed
countries that it was in their interest to get
a proud Indian, I am proud of my heritage,
but I am also a great admirer of the British
the developing world in. They accepted that.
It's to their great credit that they came along,
people. They were rulers in India, well that's
different, but whenever you go to live in
helping the developing countries to build
up their own maritime expertise, to join the
U.K you find they're full of values, of ethics,
of rule of Law, of decency. Now I find all of
those values which I admire, here in
organisation. Very soon they all came, and
to-day it is one of the finest agencies,
because it has the support of every
Australia among Australians,but there's
member state of the world, every country.
something more, something more that you
may not know, you may not see even, but
Now that is a premisé on which I want to
I see, as a visitor; and that is a certain
present an appeal to you, and the appeal
is this:
measure of Oriental dignity, humility,
The world, if you read newspapers, if
kindness, courtesy, and that combined
creates a wonderful nation. Now here you
you see, if you hear news, is in trouble.
have people coming from different countries,
People are propagating hatred for each
different origins. They' re all living together
other. There's voilence in the world. What
for? Why? Who will gain from that? If we
happily as Australians. This is her ideal,
and that ideal I see in the political life of
are children of the same Almighty power,
Australia. So I said: "Well, if I get a chance
why can't we live together? Why must we
talk about differences? Why can't we talk
to speak about her message, why not
like she does of our togetherness? And it's
here?"
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-31.txt 
 30
The Divine Cool Breeze
July-Aug., 2006
has to be conquered, not by force. Force
won't work. You have to use force in certain
So my appeal to you is this: she has
done her job. She has for thirty-five years
situations, I'm not saying you cannot ever
been running around. She has done her
job, created Sahaja Yoga in eighty, ninety
use it, but the only way for the people of
the world to come together, is to come
countries, and she has created beautiful
things. Well I'll relate to you just one
together on the basis of her philosophy,
which is again based on ancient Indian
incident.
philosophy: one Almighty, one human family,
Some time ago we were in London,
all to get together regardless of their colour
of skin, regardless of their language, they
and one evening about twenty-five of her
disciples were sitting round talking to her,
all come together. Now if this is a message
and I was sitting by her side, looking round
and seeing, and I began to wonder. In that
which you accept, then it must be
propagated. But if this message is not given,
gathering, (and believe me, ladies and
if people don't come to that conclusion, they
gentlemen, it's God's truth), there were
continue to believe that they are different, A
people who came from different countries,
versus B, B versus C, there's no end to
different walks of life, different colours of
trouble, and we have such means of
skin and different religions. Now one of them
destruction in this world that the world is
was a Catholic, one was a Protestant, one
threatened, the world is threatened to-day,
was a Jew, one was a Muslim, one was a
the existence of the world. Let us not make
Sikh, several were Hindus, but do you think
light of that. It's a very, very difficult situation.
they ever even remembered who they were
But there's a saving for that. The saving is:
before they came to Sahaja Yoga? No.
let us all come together. And if you in
They were all sitting there as Sahaja Yogis,
Australia can accept first of all the sincerity
citizens of the world, the beloved children
of Shri Mataji. She had forgotten it. no
of what I am saying, and then make it a
mission of yours also, as she has made a
difference. All together, from the heart.
Now, that kind of thing has happened,
and I wanted to appeal to you, to beg of
mission of hers, then this visit will have
been successful.
This ia all that I wanted to mention to
you to help this world. I assure you, the
you. I know you have been here a long
world is in trouble. Do you not see every
time. I don't want to take up too much of
evening what's happening? People wanting
your time, but if the good things have been
to kill, terrorism, this, that and the rest. That
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-32.txt 
 July - Aug., 2006
31
The Divine Cool Breeze
I said: " Do I see what I see? I see a young
said about me, I want to thank them very
I can say is, they are nothing
man sitting there. What's this?"
much. But all
She said: " Yes, yes, yes! There's
more than a reflection of what she has
nothing wrong with that. You know I had
given to me. My heart has been converted
gone to London, Piccadilly Circus, and there
by her. And before I close l'll tell you one
I saw a young man lying uncared for, sick,
story of how I got converted. I'm a civil
so I stepped out of the car and went to
servant, I don't ever believe in things unless
him. I said: What's the matter?' He said:
I'm totally convinced. So when she said,
"We're living in London without any care.
thirty-five years ago: "I'm going to launch a
Sol said: " Would you like to be taken care
movement, I'm going to change people, "I
off?' So he said: "Yes." I said: 'Ok, get up,
said: "Change people?" and I laughed. I
and come and sit in my car and come
said: "Do you really believe you can change
people?" That's how I began, a sceptic.
home."
She brought him home, and when he
But something happened and that changed
came home he had to be cleaned and
me, and the story is very nice.
washed. He didn't have any clothes except
When I was elected to this office in
mine. Ok, so he was there, sitting in that
London, Secretary General, I went and took
fashion, and I loved her for that even more.
up a residence, and she was with me, 1
I praised her. I said: "Wonderful that you
took a residence just outside London, so I
did it!" And then, you see, we began to give
used to commute by train, and one evening
treatment to him. He was a young
when I came back from office I pushed the
Sahaja
man, and after every week he began to
bell, the door opened, I went in, and I went
to the drawing-room as we call it, or living-
change. He became flowered out. He had
become addicted to drugs: drugs went
room of my house, and saw a young man,
a young white gentleman sitting there
reading a newspaper. And when I entered,
away, drinks went away and he flowered
out into a beautiful, handsome young man,
he looked at me as if I was an intruder. I
a new person. I said: " If this can happen
said: "I didn't know that anyone was to
to one, why not everyone?" So that
converted me, and I became a Sahaja Yogi.
come here. " And what baffled me even
That's how it was.
more was that he was wearing my kurta
Well, Ladies and gentlemen, I won't
and pyjamas! I said: " Something gone
wrong with my head." So I went to my wife.
take any more of your time. I want to
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-33.txt 
 32
July Aug., 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
Yoga, they can be further enhanced, and
.conclude by once again thanking you,
from Australia maybe another message
expressing my profound and abiding
gratitude to you for the time that you have,
goes to the wider world: we're all children
of the same Almighty God, one God. Let's
your precious time that you have given to
live together, let's love each other, let's be
us; but believe me, it fills my heart with a
brothers and sisters. Why have quarrel,
feeling of abiding gratitude, and if you will
why fight? Why not live together? That is
kindly consider my message well, it's not
the only way the world can live and survive
my message, it's her message, I'm merely
and live happily.
a carrier of that message. then maybe the
efforts of those who are promoting Sahaja
Thank you all, ladies and gentlemen.
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-34.txt 
 International Sahaja Yoga Research & Health Centre
10th Anniversary Celeberations
Mumbai- 19th February 2006
The International Sahaja Yoga
Research and Health Centre surrounded
research & Health Centre (Vashi hospital)
by Deities, Shri Shiva and Parvati on its
celebrated its 10th Anniversary (19th
roof, Shri Ganesha dancing near by, Shri
February 2006). Exactly a decade back
Vishnu flying over it on Shri Garuda. and
on this auspicious day on the 19 th of
Shri Mataji in the fore front looking aside at
February 1996 our Beloved Mother H.H.
the stone writtin # A Gift of Love to
Shri Mataji blessed and inaugurated this
Humanity" which stands in the entry hall.
Research project as a Gift of the Humanity.
Later, in the evening at 6: 00 pm the
Locality of this Centre although is in CBD,
programme started with an introductory
Belapur, Navi Mumbai but, popularly came
speech delivered by Dr. Sandeep Rai. Dr.
to be known as named "Vashi Hospital" by
Rai recalled the memory down the lane of
the yogis worldwide.
this last decade since the Centre was
A lot of enthusiasm was seen in the
blessed by Her Holy Lotus feet in 1996.
Yogis and Yoginis in the Centre waiting for
The speech was very inspiring with
this day since long.With tremendous love
punches of subtle touch of humour as he
and devotion, the dedicated Yogis & Yoginis
narrated the ups and downs of this Health
Centre, since its inception from conceiving
decorated the whole campus very
aesthetically. Traditional Indian 'Rangolis'
this as a mere project to the rising up to
were made to welcome the Divine Mother
this day. It was Shri Mataji Herself Who
in Her Nirakar form. Trustees of the Health desired a Centre to be gifted to the
Centre, a few special invitees and 300- humanity, where people would be cured
400 yogis were invited to share the joy of using only Sahaja Yoga techniques. But
the occasion. Pt. (Dr.) Arun Apte,
when She had asked (late) Professor U.C.
Smt.Surekha Apte and Pt. Subramanium
Rai to come down to Bombay from Delhi
rendered Divine music dear to Mother
to open the centre, She felt Dr. was a bit
Kundalini. A large fabric tapestry was
reluctant to come to Bombay, as he had
displayed on a big theatre screen: it
built up all the contacts in Delhi and well
represented the International Sahaja Yoga
established there. So, later Shri Mataji
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-35.txt 
 34
July-Aug., 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
asked Professor Rai's son instead, Dr.
And that is how Professor UC Rai
finally came to Bombay with Mrs. Rai to
Sandeep Rai to meet Her. She advised him
start running the nascent International
that he should open this Centre using only
Sahaja Yoga Research & Health Centre and
Sahaja techniques, to which Dr. Sandeep
finally settle here in the service of humanity
recalled that he humbly submitted to Shri
as Shri Mataji always desired. It was a
Mataji that he needed adequate equipments
divine desire and that was how it got
to open and run the hospital. So Shri Mataji
enacted.
said "Yes, equipment you have already!-
Later, Dr. Sandeep Rai requested
You take My picture and that's all
some of the key workers to address the
equipment you need! Immediately, Dr.
gathering. Concluding the address to the
Sandeep wondered, "Shri Mataji, I can
collectivity, Dr Sandeep Rai thanked his
hardly feel the vibrations, how can I
mother Mrs. Lily Rai who had been the
Shri
Mataji
people?"
cure
compassionately comforted him saying.
"You just have to sit behind the
everloving Gruhalakshmi and had been
taking care of all those coming to the Health
Centre since last 10 years!
patient facing My photograph, and pray
Just before the Puja which started at
to Me "Mataji please cure that person"
6.30pm, the collectivity, there was yet
and if he wants to be cured he"ll be
another exciting event that took place. The
cured!"
collectivity was privileged to witness the
At once responding to this strong
event of the historical moment of the
statement Dr. Sandeep candidly confided
in Shri Mataji that for this honour, it would
inauguration Ceremony of 19th February
be better that if his father does the job.
1996 through screening of a rare video of
that day. The inauguration ceremony was
"But, Shri Mataji enquired, "Would he come
to Bombay?" "Yes, Shri Mataji, I can work
followed by Mother's speech in Marathi, in
it out with him" "Sure?" "Definitely Shri
which Mother explained that how this place
became the most conducive and
Mataji, we can all move here, I cannot come
here and leave my parents behind in Deihi."
appropriate for building up süch a Centre.
She also explained that how subtly a left
"So that's very fine, you have him
Vishuddhi catch could be worked out using
come and he will manage the Centre, he's
the right person for that." (Laughters in the
audience)
a candle.
The vibrations were extremely
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-36.txt 
 July- Aug., 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
35
to Mrs. Madhur Rai. The entire collectivity
powerful, as if Mother Herself was there in
Her Sakar form to accept this Puja and
rejoiced sharing the prasad and tales of
the miracles of the evening's grace till late
blessing Her children as tremendous love
flowed. The meditation was very deep, so
night.
much so that some patients got instantly
All those who were blessed to be
there that day will recall the beautiful
cured! After offering Aarti to the Devi, the
meditation and heartfelt joy that was
environment was so joyous and full with
vibrations that kundalini had a spontaneous
collectively felt during all that day after this
wonderful Puja; Shri Mataji, kindly accept
response through expression of dance in
our heartfelt thanks for the wonderful
joy before Shri Mataji's Altar with the bhajans
like ' Jago he Jagdambe' amongst others
evening and the Puja that You blessed us
to enjoy and take home the vibrations of
sung.
Later a huge Cake was also offered
this International Sahaja Yoga Health and
to the Mother in Her Nirakar form on behalf
Research Centre of CBD, Belapur, Navi
of the grateful patients who received the
Mumbai, India!
Jai Shri Mataji!
magical healing through Mother's Love in
Sahaja- and a present for the Health Centre
Gauvin Didier
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-37.txt 
 A Patient's Testimony
(The 10 th Anniversary Puja of ISY Health Centre as I lived it.)
I would like to share with you a personal
that day as it was really becoming difficult to
experience that happened here in Vashi
bear I took the aspirin and various pain killers
Health Centre on 19th February 2006- the
given to me... but hardly got any relief from
day of the Intermational Sahaja Yoga Research
these.. Friday night I went to see Dr. Madhur
and Health Centre. This is no unique story
Rai- I came to believe may be I had a real
as many of us heard some other miraculous
physical infection in my body, or something
cures that day- I shall mention another one
misplaced in the spine (?) and I wanted an
at the end of this message but as this is my
X-Ray done by a normal hospital.. she gave
personal story I cannot doubt that this is
me permission to go to the nearby MGM
hundred (and eight) percent true.
hospital to be examined there.. But as soon
After two weeks of normal cleansing in
as I arrived in there I realized that these
the Centre I was to leave the previous 'normal' doctors would not see nor
Thursday (16/02) when 'something' happened
understand anything to my sickness. asking
I fell sick that day. The terrible pain in
where are the pains, if I could bend -no- move
the back- all the left side. The evening before
my left side-painful-etc.. actually I would have
I was normal and walking up, all that pain...I
to give them the reasons or causes of this
strongly felt it was a vibratory 'workout, but
sufferings when it was what I was actually
the negativity had become a physical pain
looking for... could they possibly understand
which would prevent me to bend, walk, stand
what I was feeling about myself i.e. some
up normally etc.... I had the body of 90 years
subtle negativity and had become a physical
old or plus- without exaggeration.
pain? And I did not go there just to be given
Just to lie down on the bed was painful,
some pain killers which effciency to be
conceived about. So I left without much
and it was not the least comfortable aspect
of this experience.. My doctor would give
relief- both physical and mental- realizing that
only Shri Dhanvantari could provide me the
full camphor treatment, and I actually could
feel some improvment during the treatment,
real relief and cure I needed- surely I had to
but then some time after the pain would
put a better attention on Shri Mataji Herself.
steadily come back- slowly but surely... I never
Saturday early morning I woke up again
in pain- some Indian brothers gave me a
took pain killers in my life; but the evening of
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-38.txt 
 July-Aug, 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
myself dancing along with the others-
completely forgetting that I was not supposed
good massage- and- it helped... but again
the pain would come back along the day
Would I be able to attend the puja next day
to even just walk normally... The pain had
gone... All vanished... I just could not believe
everybody was so eagerly expecting?
it. was a dream that I had, one or two hours
So the day after, Sunday 19/02 10 th
ago? Or was I dreaming now? No, there was
Anniversary of the inaugration of the ISY
no doubt; I could shake and dance there was
Health Centre by H.H. Shri Mataji and day of
no hint of the former pain. I respectfully
the puja after attending the collective
bowed down at Shri Mataji's Lotus Feet in
meditation, l enjoyed the beautiful
performance given by Pt. Arun & Surekha
my heart.
There was light everywhere and joy on
Apte then Pt. Subramaniam in the
our hearts and on very rhythmical songs after
afternoon.Just behind them was a real big
the puja one could feel the unity of the spirit
picture of Shri Mataji covering the whole back
bounding all of us. on the stage Shri Mataji
wall of the Meditation hall which had been
was like smiling watching us enjoying.
put for the occasion. The powerful vibrations
AsI mentioned earlier that was not the
during the rendering of the bhajans glued
only instant curing that was recorded that
everybody in the hall- we felt as if it was puja
already.. After such a treat we all got ready
day: A Finish yogini felt drenched in waves of
vibrations at the end of the puja. they were
for the evening puja and I carried this body to
coming from above through her whole body
a bench on the lawn in front of the big scene,
as waves of love and bliss... all her bad stuff
praying Shri Mataji for cure; when in his
vanished too.. And many more felt the same.
speeh Dr. Sandeep Rai quoted Shri Mataji
Thank you again Shri Mataji for all your
%23
saying "and those who want to be cured will
bounties and the beautiful blessings you
be cured" it some how "clicked" deep inside.
"Do I want to be cured? Of course I
miraculously shower upon uS
Ya Devi Sarva Bhuteshu, Bhranti
do, Shri Mataji!" during puja the attention was
Namastasyai,
Ruprena Samsthta,
good; we were easily carried to be in
Namastasyai Namastasyai namo namaha..!
Sahasrara.
Jai Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devai
What happened during this puja I don't
exactly know is that at the end of it I found
Namoh Namaha!
Govind D. (Africa)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-39.txt 
 YOGESHWARA
LORD KRISHNA PUJA
LONDON, 15.8. 1982
(Pravachan of H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
sprouting of the new life of the new
Today is a great day for all of us to
age starts. Bur still what is the speciality,
be jubiliant that the primordial being Himself
incarnated on this earth as Shri Krishna.
the greatness of Yogeshwara? Because He
is Ishwara for you. He is the Ishwara of all
So many aspects of His being have been
the Yogis and what is His capacity, what
described in so many of my lectures to
is His nature that for Him everything is a
you all; but the greatest and greatest of all
play- "Leela" ?
the aspects of this primordial being was
For Shri Ram it was not a play. For
that He was the Yogeshwara. He was the
Him life was a platform on which he had to
H God of Yoga- Yogeshwara, He was the
demonstrate how to lead a very dharmic
Lord of our Union with the Divine. Without
life as "Maryada Purushottama". Bur Shri
His permission and without His sanction
Krishna came up to show, that He is the.
we cannot be Sahaja Yogis. He was
"Leeladhara"- the one who plays the Leela,
Yogeshwara and a real Yogi is a person
the play.
who gets this Yogeshwara awakened within
The whole thing is a play, the whole
him. The word "Yoga" that we understand
universe is a play. All that is created by Adi
is the union of our attention with the Divine.
Shakti, all these three gunas is nothing but
But still we do not realize the implications-
a play. And that is what He manifested in
what does it mean? What should have
His own incarnation. But still what is
happened to us?
Yogeshwara? "Leeladhara" is the one for
whom this whole universe is a play, that
Of course, you get powers. As soon
as you become the spirit, you get powers.
He is at the axis, and for the whole
One of the powers you get is of "collective
periphery is nothing but a play. Because
everything is false, except for your spirit
consciousness", that is also the gift of Shri
Krishna and that you start feeling the
collectivity. Your ego and superego are everything ia false. It's all a joke going
on, you can say, a drama going on,
sucked in, so you get rid of your karmas
nothing so serious, Spirit is the only
and your conditionings and a new
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-40.txt 
 July- Aug., 2006
39
The Divine Cool Breeze
truth within us, the rest is all untruth.
your sister, your brother- you see these
are dharmas, like "stridharma"- a woman's
There cannot be many types of "truth". In
job
Sanskrit language there is only truth or
Then we can say also there is
untruth, 'Satya' or 'Asatya', there are no ten
"rashtra dharma". Today is the day of India's
words for truth.
freedom. So we have rashtra dharma, we
So when this happens, when this
are patriotic people. Patriotism to your own
great happening takes place within you,
country is rashtra dharma. Then you have
when you become one with the spirit you
got "samaj dharma", that is duty towards
get powers, without even your maturity
your society, is samaj dharma. Then you
reaching that stage, your understanding
have got "pati dharma", that is husbands
reaching that stage and your heart opening
duties, wives duties. Everybodies' duties are
out. You get the powers, all right, to begin
with. So that you have faith with open
called as dharmas because this is what
you have to do. You are duty bound, they
understanding. If you have faith with
form your dharmas. But He said, " give
experience of it- so it starts on. When you
up all these dharmas, give up all the
start using your powers you see it is
manifesting, you are sometimes amazed,
how you raise kundalini of people, how you
duties, just surrender yourself fully to
Me"
Because you have become now the
fie them up, how you give them realization,
collective being, now you have become one
how you cure peoplel You are amazed,
with Him, now He looks after your dharmas,
how it has happened! So we can say it is
He looks after your relationships, He
all built within you, which has started
manifesting. But there is so much more
glances them, He purifies them, so you
just surrender yourself to Him fully. He said
it to Shri Arjuna only, not to everyone. He
that has still to manifest, which has to
establish and make you grow.
didn't say to everyone, they didn't deserve
it. Or He didn't think it proper to say to
One of the very important point is the
Yogeshwara and that point we must
them, but I think you are proper people to
know. So I'm telling you that forget every
understand that unless and until you follow
the path of Yogeshwara, you cannot
other duty to every other thing but do your
establish yourself fully. So Krishna has said
duty to your collective being, to your
that: 'Sarva dharmanam Pritajya mamekam
sharnam vraja.' You give up all your collectivity.
But He is Yogeshwara. That's the
relationships, dharma is relationship; like
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-41.txt 
 40
The Divine Cool Breeze
July Aug., 2006
sin can be attached. He married because
main point. And to do duty to Him first and
He had to marry His five principles or the
foremost thing is you to develop that purity
five elements. So He made them into
of a Yogeshwara. For him sublimation was
women and married them, He had to marry
not needed, He was sublime. He was the
16,000women because He had to have
source of sublimation. He did not need
16,000powers and He had to channelize
sublimations from the baser instincts of
them through some bodies. So they came
human beings. He did not need anything to
as women. To Him it was not a reiationship
do, to be done to Himself to raise Himself
of a wife, but a pure relationship. To Him
out of the maya as they call it. Specially in
sex had no existence at all. He was beyond
the West, as you know, we have created a
it. So no question of temptations and
hell for ourselves, a real hell. All kinds of
perversions; it is out of question.
perverted ideas are within us. For the
The story is that once. His five wives
Yogeshwara this is nothing but maya,
wanted to go and pray to some saint who
absolutely filth, it never comes into Him that
had become a great saint. But he stayed
such things are possible. They are
across the river, so they wanted to go and
shocking.
On his birthday I would say if today is
warship him and they found a very good
time when they could go and see him. So
His birthday and if He was born as He was
when they went near the river they said it
at that time, He would have gone back
is in spate, we cannot cross it, it's not the
immediately. He would have said, no sorry,
time that you can cross it. So they felt it
I've nothing to do, I've had enough. And
was very inauspicious, if they did not go
and that was such an auspicious time.
They wanted to go at that time and worship
that too, If He had met the Western culture,
He would have been shocked, oh God, no,
nothing doing. I'm not coming here. Despite
this guru.
the times when He was born, where there
So they went to Krishna and said:
was dharma, there were people who
"Now, how can we cross, the river is in
understood what was right, what was
spate?" He said: "Really? Doesn't matter.
wrong, when none of these nonsensical.
You go and tell the river- that is the river
things were there, He came as
Tapi, they were crossing- he said go and
Yogeshwara, pure.
tell the river that if we have a husband who
The story about Him is that one day
is Shri Krishna, who is "Yogeshwara", that
His wives wanted to go. To Him what was
means who never indulges into any sex
wives? Nothing, just look at it. To Him no
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-42.txt 
 41
July - Aug, 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
that means if I have eaten all the food you've
activity.
Yogeshwara means a person who
given me, but I've not enjoyed it, I've not
indulged into it, then let the river subside."
never indulges into any sex relationships.
Then they went and told the river, I mean
That's not possible. One cannot think of
they could not believe it because they had
such a thing, means though He indulges,
He never indulges, though He was in
fed him, that:
"Whatever food we offered to him, if
it, still He was not there. Like a lotus. If
He has not indulged into any such action, he has not eaten any food, then you
subside". And the river subside!
it was only possible for Him- nobody else.
So the moral of the whole thing is
That's why He is an incarnation, He is not
that your ideal in this respect, is Shri
a human being. Only incarnations can do
Krishna. Not that you think you are the ideal
it. If some human being starts saying that
of the rest. This is the big mistake Sahaja
I'm Shri Krishna, so I am doing this andI
Yogis do.They think imrnediately they have
am doing that- you see, there are very
become now Shri Krishna. Or they think
bombastic ones, you must have heard
they have become something greater or
about them. They do not become, is only
that there is an ideal that they have imbibed
an incarnation can do it. That means
within themselves. It is not so.
Yogeshwara is the one who had incarnated.
There is one thing one has to know,
So they went and told the river: "If He
that that is the ideal you have to reach. And
is the Yogeshwara, then please you
subside". And she went down. So they went
your eyes should be towards that ideal and
to the other side, did the puja to the guru
the movements should be towards that.
Before that, if you fall into any such things
and they came back. Again the river was in
like perversions and nonsensical sexual
spate, and they could not cross. So they
went to the guru. You see, the sign of a
good guru or a real guru, is an incarnated
things and all that, you must know that you
are falling down very badly. It's a possession
that is working on you. That's an ideal- they
guru, and they said: " See we cannot cross,
the river is in spate "So then he said: are incarnations. You are not incarnations,
"Really, how did you come?" They said:
nor can you become incarnations. But they
are the light, which are enlightening your
Shri Krishna asked us, that if I am the
path, on which you are walking. They are
Yogeshwara, it will go down, you ask the
question. So he said: "All right, now you go
taking you to the realm where they are the
and ask the question, that if I, the mukta,
kings and they are the Lords.
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-43.txt 
 42
The Divine Cool Breeze
July Aug., 2006
This ia a big problem here. It's the biggest
He is the Ishwara- He is your Ishwara.
You are not Ishwaras. But you are at least
problem we have,
Now corruption is something you can
the Yogis. we have to be the yogis first,
avoid. Because if you are not corrupt, it is
then He is our Ishwara, now otherwise He
doesn't want to rule you. So what we have
all right, you can be. But immorality is such
to do, is to become the Yogis first. And one
of the signs of a yogi is, that he is in his
sex life extremely pure. Absolute purity must
a thing that, if you live in an immoral world,
it has an effect on everyone. For example,
a moral woman is walking on the road and
there is a man full of lust and all that looking
exist and after some time, one should get
at her. In any way she looses her chastity.
beyond. Your relationships with other
She doesn't mean to attract him or
people, whether it is your sister or a brother
anything, she doesn't want to loose her
or any other woman or any other man,
chastity, but the way he is looking at her,
there should be complete purity, And this is
extremely important.
you see, though her simple methods are
Now in the countries like India, people
there, she may be responsible in a distant
way to ruin his chastity, his morality. Even
are extremely corrupt, very corrupt,
a little child, who is a simple, innocent child
extremely corrupt. You can give them 5
when there is a dirty man with dirty eyes,
rupees and you can buy anybody there. It's
really corrupt, moneywise. But people are
not so immoral, they know it is immorality,
he can have very dirty feelings for the child.
So, though of course that person himself
is dirty and all that, we cannot say the child
I mean they know, if they do immoral thing
they know it is not moral.
is not affected. But in a way, that becomes
In the West the immorality has
an object, a sort of a . as you call it, a
thing which makes another person even
become a general rule. For them the word
morality should vanish now, I mean there
lower than what he is.
Even an ordianary picture which has
doesn't exist anything like morality. Do
nothing to do in this place there, and funny
everything whatever you like, people don't
thing, can give some dirty feelings. Because
these days I have seen so many symbols
think of immorality. They don't want to talk
of it, it is Victorian. And if somebody says
that one should be moral, they start thinking
have started, which to my eye I don't even
see when there is anything wrong in it,
he is a hypocrite. They cannot think that
there can be any connection between
that to my eye I can't see because I'm too
human being and morality in a genuine way.
innocent, my eyes can't see there is
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-44.txt 
 43
The Divine Cool Breeze
July Aug., 2008
wears yellow.
anything wrong, but if somebody, who is
He himself came, made Him into man
an expert on these things, will immediately
and married Him to Radha. Then again He
say, oh look at this! I mean really it is
became a child, jusi to appear to be a child.
impossible to understand, how the human
Somebody may appear to be a child. To
mind has really woven the yarns all around
some of you, I appear to you to be a sixteen
and made these patterns to ruin themselves
year old girl as you say, but I'm not. I may
and ruin others.
be according to some sixty years of age,
To worship Yogeshwara, we must
but I'm not. My age is eternal. I can't say
know that our relationships with everyone
in this world have to be pure. He played
what age is Mine. It could be two years old
or it could be absolutely ageless, it could
lots of things in His lite-time. The time when
He came, the whole life country was be anything.
So in His whole life, whatever He did,
absolutely drowned into fanatic ideas about
He did with purity of understanding. So
religion. If Freud was there, he would have
said, oh this is all nonsense. What's wrong? Radhaji was married to Him first. And
afterwards when He came as a child, when
Go ahead. krishna did not do that. He
He was a child, He did all kinds of pranks
wanted to break all the nonsensical
shackles of traditions and shackles of false
and things, was not sitting like this and
seriously telling about things, but with a little
bit here and there, He tried to improve their
fanaticism. But He did it in a very beautiful
manner keeping the relationships absolutely
chakras and raise their kundalinis. Of
pure.
course, realization was not possible in a
Now people ask questions, Mother,
game, You cannot do it. Supposing I just
was He married to Radha? He is eternally
play about with you, you cannot get your
married to Her, doesn't matter. But He
realization because at the Sahasrara stage
actually performed the marriage, just the
you have to completely recognize.
day He was born. He was brought by His
It has to be a "game of serenity". Of
father across the river and put down on
the bank of the river, when Shri course, you can just raise your hands and
give realization to them. But you have to
Brahmadeva himself came on this earth.
bring them to a serene level. You just sit
That's why He wears a yellow thing, always,
and you say, alright you just play about, it
as a blessing from Brahmadeva to cover
would be all finished. You have to sit down
His lower part, lower than the waist with a
and meditate, you have to do it. So one
cloth. That's the sign that's why He always
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-45.txt 
 44
July Aug, 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
have that purity to understand relationship
could not say that all the time if you are
with a mother. I mean,imagine! It is such a
playing, if you are just singing songs.or if
clear cut background of this man which
you are in a very happy mood, a mirthiul
shows, how wrong he must have been.
mood, then it's the end of Sahaja Yoga. It's
Because what was in him, such filth, such
not so, It's a serious matter.
So He did not give them realization,
dirt, that he could not even look at his mother
but He reduced the ténsion on their minds
clearly. Must have been all mud in his eyes
or I don't know what he must have been, to
of this so called dharma and its shackels
of fanaticism and He made it loose and He
see things like that.
You are shaking with my vibrations
wanted them to understand that dharma is
already. NoW when we think of him as
not going to enslave. You have to rise above
Yogeshwara, that means we are Yogis and
the dharma and become dharma itself. But
He is our Ishwara. Ishwara is to be praised-
Yogeshwara is to be worshipped with pure
.- you have to praise, you have to praise
heart. In this atmosphere it is difficult, 1
Him for his quality as Yogeshwara because
know. You just go out and you see a horrid
He is your Ishwara. So you have to praise
thing there. You open any page of the
Him. Now what praise can we give Him.
magazine, there is another horrid thing.
Today He is born. What should we do on
Anywhere at the advertising. I turn another
such a great occasion when He is born?
page and I find a discotheque nonsense
We have to decide that He is our Ishwara
going on there. What can you do, You just
He is the Ishwara aspect and if He is our
cannot help it. All this is all, I mean, if you
Ishwara, then we have to cleanse our
look at it, how gross, dirty, filthy the whole
attitude towards sex, towards the gross way
thing is! To add to problems, psychologists
of life that we have developed. You just
have come forward. They themselves are
shun it and throw it away. Absolutely. There
affected by their methods and everything,
cannot be any compromise in that.
they are so possessed and their sense
Otherwise you cannot be a yogi, you cannot
about morality is absolutely in complete
be a yogi. You may become very powerful,
confusion, no doubt about it.
You know Frued, what happened to
maybe for the time being because I play
with you. You get ideas that you are very
him? He was having relations with his
powerful and all that. But that's not true.
mother. He could not even understand, I
As My name is Nirmala, as My name
mean imagine what an adharmi he must
is purity, you have to be pure yogis. Nobody
be, horrible wretched fellow, he did not even
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-46.txt 
 July-Aug. 2006
45
The Divine Cool Breeze
run from man to woman and man to man
says you should not marry, nobody says
and then to all donkeys and do all those
you should not have proper sex
things. It is impossible that you could be a
relationships with you wives, that's not true.
yogi with all these dirty ideas. And then you
But that's one thing people may avoid and
cannot mature, even a normal person will
spoil it. But the other thing which is the
not mature. In India a person who is about
most important is, your attention to be pure
of sex attractions. Any kind. Your attention
40 years, he becomes a mature father. You
leave any giris with him, anybody with him,
should never go to anything like that. You
it will not even get into his head that there
see, to Me, i mean I'm now supposed to
something could exist between them.Once
be an old lady. I don't see things which
you are married it should not. I mean I have
normally people see. This is something
seen my two sons-in law, they never get
surprising. You see, I see something andI
these ideas in their heads. So try to put
don't know what's happening and usally
they laugh at me, in the house, they don't
understand, how I didn't see the point. But
your attention into proper things because
your Ishwara is Yogeshwara.
I don't understand these jokes because the
Now the other side of Shri Krishna
people do not know. It's a play, all right. But
He is Samhara-shakti. He is the power of
attention never goes into these dirty things.
never goes into these things. I can't see till
somebody tells me that this is this. They
destruction. It's very good He comes with
everything to protect us. But He also has
have to explain it ten times.
So all these sophisticated methods
got Sudarshan chakra. Sudarshan, "su"
means auspicious, "darshan" is vision. He
of nonsense and the filth and the dirt that
we are accumulating here, please wash
off your hands of that. That is one thing
which will not be tolerated in Sahaja Yoga,
gives us auspicious visions, you see. You
try tricks with Him, that goes round your
neck and then you have auspicious
to every Sahaja Yogi I must tell. Itself sex
cannot be enjoyed, if you live like this. You
darshans of yourself, that you are hanging
in the air somewhere.
So Shri Krishna's method on one
cannot. You don't enjoy sex at all in this
side is that He is a "Leelamai", He ia
country. None of them.
compassionate, He stands by His bhaktas,
Only in a country, where people are
He comes on this earth to revive your
innocent, you can enjoy. If you were
dharma. if the dharma goes down, He
enjoying, you would not run from one
woman to another woman, you would not
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-47.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July-Aug., 2006
46
comes to uplift it. "Yada yadahi dharmasya"-
Ishwara. That is we have to have Him as
wherever there is the decline of dharma.
our ideal. With the understanding that today
Bur dharma doesn't mean only corruption,
is the day- in the night about 120'clock,
it doesn't mean only honesty and
now it must be about 120'clock in India
dishonesty, basically it means Mooladhara.
also, about that, so it matches- He was
That is the beginning of the end.
born at this time in the night, because it
And He comes to- "sansthapnarthaya"-
was real night symbolically, under horible
again to establish into the holy stale.Again,
circumstances He came. At a time Hien,
when His own birth was very dangerously
He comes on this earth to raise human
beings to that level. This is what he does.
placed. He was saved and then in His very
So if we are Sahaja Yogis, we are part and
childhood He killed rakshasas. But all this
He did because He was an incanation.
parcel of His being. We are instrumented
into His working. So we have to establish
Nobody is asking you to go and kill
dharma, but the one, who has no dharma
rakshasas.
within himself, what dharmas is he going
In Sahaja Yoga did I ask you to go
to establish anywhere. He has come on
and kill some rakshasas? On the contrary
this earth to establish the dharma in its
I'm just saying keep yourself protected.
holy aspect. Not like Roman Catholic There was a rakshasin who came, her
church or another Pentacostal church or
name was Putana and she wanted to put
these Hindu religious activities or these
poison through her breast and she took
Hindu termples or the Islamic state. But
the child and started nursing. He was a
dharma in its pure state we have to
littie baby. And when He started sucking
establish. But if there is no dharma within
her breast, she came out in her true form
us, how are we going to establish?
and she died.
So He comes on this earth every time
Of course, He was after all, He was
to establish dharma at Vishnu level, but at
an incarnation. Can anyone of us do that?
Shri Krishna level, He comes
I mean the Sahaja Yogis. Then as a child
as
Yogeshwara. This is the point many people
He was very mischievous. He ate some
have not even thought of.For Vishnu they
clay, I think whether He ate or not, His
did not say Yogeshwara, that is He is the
mother doubted, she got very angry and
Ishwara of Yogis, as Ganesha is the
she said: "Open your mouth, I would like to
Ishwara of the Ganas. You see, Ganpati
see, did you eat that? And He opened the
looks after the Ganas, and He is our
mouth- she saw a complete universe
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-48.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July Aug., 2006
what is His basic nature, it is innocence.
moving in His throat- because this is
Vishuddi chakra. She saw because she
He is going to judge you on your innocence.
could see, she had powers to see. Not
If you are a superego you can say, Oh I got
possessed by a bhoot, you see and the
bhoot did this. So he will say: "Alright you
everybody can see that. Those who have
powers can see. We don't even have the
go to the bhoot ior the certificate not to
powers as much an she had to see the
me.". And what were you coing, you were
universe.
witnessing it like Shri Krishna. With all these
So one has to understand that first
as Sahaja Yogis we get the powers things happening, I get a big promise
much before we have passed really the
sometimes, that, "Mother alright, now we
are not going to quarrel, there are not going
test of Sahaja Yogis. Just the other way
to be any problems, you rest assured, we'll
round it is in the university. They will
all live in harmony". And suddenly I find
first give you the degree, the certificate
that somebody is fighting for a bathroom
and then you will get a job, maybe you
don't get a job also. Here you get the
or for a soap or something like that. That's
job first of all, you get all the powers
not for a Sahaja Yogi to behave.
First of all you have to be a satisfied
you are paid for, but the degree is still
person, a person of great dignitiy and
Yogi, next day I find him coming out with forbearing, otherwise what are you going
to bear? " I love him very much, but he
not sure. Anybody walks about as Sahaja
something else. There are certified
Sahaja Yogis, I have seen. They become
should not have taken my towel." For small,
small things if you go on insisting, be sure
afterwards certified something else,
God knows how. So this is the thing of
you are not a yogi as yet. If you are fighting
for things, then you are not a Sahaja Yogi
at all. Nothing of these things matters, I
Sahaja Yoga that you can become a Sahaja
Yogi even without having the real certificate,
It's definitely so. And the certificate is given,
never say anything about anything, do 1?
That I must have this, I must have that,
as you know, by Lord Jesus Christ. He
doesn't care. He doesn't give certificate
how did you prepare this, though it is
easily. That's why He is very, very strict.
sometimes really wrong and unprotocolish.
I never say, why did you bring these
He is not going to give in. He is extremely
bananas, they are no good, I'm not going
strict as far as the Sahaja Yogis are
concerned. He is not going to give you
to eat, Did I say so? I mean, even the
certificates, He is going to judge you. And
flowers you use may not be auspicious, I
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-49.txt 
 The Diyine Cool Breeze
July-Aug, 20O6
48
important because you have to be innocent.
know certain flowers should not be used
for puja. But l'm not opening my mouth. If
Purity must be brought in. Last time on
1 have to tell you, I just tell you because
this great dav we had 16 marriages. They
you have to know it for your own good, not
came out well, most of them. Not all, but
most of them were very good and I am
for my good.
So, on a day like this, which is a day
really very happy that such good couples
of great joy to all the world and happiness,
came on that day. It was very auspicious.
And marriage gives you a sense of purity.
you should know one thing, that when Christ
And that's why our marriage is important in
was borm in a very humble place, but when
Krishna was born, He was born in the most
Sahaja Yoga. But that's not the last word,
horrifying circumstances. It is the same in
like this is not a hunting ground for
the case of Sahaja Yogis today. It's a thing
everyone, I'm finding you this husband or
of great joy and jubilation, no doubt, that
I'm finding you that husband. That must be
stopped completely. Leave it to Sahaja.
He came and gave us His Vishuddhi power,
You are not to search out your wives in
but we must understand that we are born
in a very precarious time. I have been saying
Sahaja Yoga, no, not at all, nor
husbands. Leave it. If you have done
this so many times. There is not only one
Kansa there. So many are there. There is
something like that, then you will be
a big fight going on, in that you people are
harmed.
Don't do any searching or any thing.
here incharge. You are the ones employed
A time will come, when you will find that I
by God, you are the ones, who have been
will myself tell you to marry this person,
given this great work, you have powers.
Like Shri Krishna, when He was crossing,
people who just take out people and try
as a child was put in a basket and the
courting. That's not needed in Sahaja
father was carrying the child in the basket
Yoga, no courting is needed. You see
and when His feet touched the river
we have gof so many cases, where the
Yamuna, the river went down. Because she
marriage was decided like that, they
married, they are very happily married. Then
was in spate, she went down.
In the same way, you too have all
are there people who had courting, this
these powers. Krishna has given you all
thing, selections, nominations and elections
the powers. Though they will be really known
and everything and after that you find within
2 days they are out for divorce. In Sahaja
to you, when only Lord Jesus Christ
accepts you as Sahaja Yogis. And that's
Yoga it is spontaneous and instantaneous.
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-50.txt 
 July -Aug., 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
49
You don't have to do all these things, with
everywhere, looking out, oh this is that, this
one that one, then discard. It has to come
all these celebrations what have you
achieved? It's just spontaneous. So you
you specially. And all great things happen
to
don't have to worry. You don't have to
suddenly always: The more delibrations
think. You don't have to say, that " Oh
you will have, the worse it will be. So
don't form ideas, don't plan about it, it
Mother, I have to find a girl for..." You
will happen, it is not so important. That
will give you a lot of purity. Your ego
don't! Leave it to me, it's my headache.
But once you are married in Sahaja
will be perfect.
Yoga, you must know what it means. And
I know of someone, whom nobody
both of you must work it out properly
wanted to marry. And when I suggested
and if it is for the good of everyone, it
should be good for everyone.
someone, who agreed with great difficulty,
she said, I don't want to marry. It's funny.
This is what it is. And I would say
that on this day, let us take one vow: To
It is very funny the way our ego is working
decide that we will be worshipping
out. Because when we are looking at
another person for marriage or anything,
Yogeshwara. You have to worship Him.
we are not thinking of Yogeshwara. We
don't think that it is Yogeshwara, who
Means our relationships about these things
have to be cleaned. We should not get
will do everything for us, we are
involved with this, nothing is important. It's
thinking, we have to do it. So we go
just like having your food or to be with your
ahead and spoil our attention
wife- the need of the body. But you don't
completely. " Sarva dharmanam pritajya
mamekam sharnam vraja." In this part of
eat on the roads, do you? You don't eat
from the dirty plates, do you? You want to
have a clean plate. You want to have a
your decisian, if you can leave it to God, it
will be better. I tell you, if you can do that,
plate, which you have used yourself, your
own plate, that should be clean. If you could
you have crossed your ego half way
through. At least 50% of ego is used in
have a cleaner plate, you would like to have,
this. In the West specially, In India this
if you can get a silver plate, you would like.
A golden plate is even better. In the same
question doesn't arise much. Because the
way, we should also have a very pure parents can't decide here, nobody can
decide, you have to decide yourself. It's a
understanding that it is the need of the body,
big responsibilty and a big thing for you. So
50% of your ego problem will be finished.
the body which can be very subtle. So let
us not just go on shopping for it
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-51.txt 
 50
July-Aug, 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
it's all right. But to get in, also is difficult
I tell you, once you just give up this
because He is always throwing you out.
responsibility of choosing a bride or a
bridegroom for yourself. Just forget it.
Such a waste of energy, I tell you.
Shri Krishna has said, that "You will be
the...", to Jesus, He said, "You will be the"
When I see people, young people, doing al
these things I wish they could understand
Adhara", the support of the universe".
Means the innocence is the support. If that
the value of their lives, the esteem of their
innocence is not established in you, then
Shri Krishna cannot help you. He is
lives. Their Ishwara is Shri Krishna, He is
helpless then. Because you don't become
not Ishwara of everyone. Only of yogis.
a yogi and so He is not your Ishwara any
Anybody else who tries to say "Hare Rama,
more. When we say, Mother the Agnya
Hare krishna" will get throat cancer. So He
Chakra is here and He is here, all right,
is only available to you, He is only your
When you cross your Agnya Chakra that
Ishwara. He manifests only for you. He is
means He is sitting here and the Virata is
your own. He won't act for any Dick, Tom
sitting here So unless and untill you pass
and Harry. Maybe you might be a prime
your Agnya Chakra properly, you can't get
minister, you may be a queen or king, it
to Virata. And Yogeshwara is the Virata.
makes no difference to Him. To Him only a
That is the aspect we have to worship, we
yogi, only a yogi can call Himn. Only a yogi
have to worship!
can ask for His help. He is not bothered
Worshipping doesn't mean that you
about anybody else. And if a yogi
If a
recommends, then only He can look after
become that person. You worship Me, you
don't become Me. What does happen,
someone. Otherwise He will not bother
when you worship? You surrender all that,it
is not liked by Me, in the fire, in the water,
about him. So He is actually your own king.
who is always there, looking after you, When
outside, in the elements you throw them
you call Him, He comes with all His powers
away. And you bring to Me your heart. That
is what is worshipping. In the same way
to support you. But you have to be a yogi.
If you are not a yogi, which is of course
we have to worship the aspect of Shri
certified by Lord Jesus Christ, then Krishna
has nothing to do with you.
Krishna in me, which is Yogeshwara. I am
So before the entry to Shri Krishna,
Yogeshwara. Things do not come into My
head at all, I don't see things like that.I
though He is not the one who is going to
don't know what this temptation is, what
judge your innocence, in the door stands
attraction is, I just don't understand. On
Lord Jesus Christ. When you get in, then
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-52.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July - Aug, 2006
51
the contrary these things repel me, repel
your eyes at all. But the eyes, which are
innocent, receive nothing, they just give.
absolutely, I vomit. Even to hear these
They just give. Innocence is very
things, I don't want to open My ears, My
ears become deaf. I can't hear this, I can't
penetrating, very purifying, very soothing
and very beautiful. We have to become
beautiful people.
understand any dirty jokes. have no brain
for this, My brains refuse to understand. I
Today I said all these things because
I'm sometimes disturbed the way people
become a dumb person, absolutely, deaf
and dumb. People have written books and
don't understand that purity of sex life is so
books on these things, I don't know what
important to Sahaja Yoga, specially in the
they must be writing. What is that to write
West. People don't understand. For Indians
things?
So today we have to know that our
this lecture has no meaning, they will think,
why Mother is wasting Her energy so much.
personal life has to be extremely clean. We
Because they don't understand. But to Me
face ourselves every moment and find out
within ourselves, are we really worshipping
it is very important here. Whatever I have
Yogeshwara within ourselves who resides
seen and heard and see all around. I think
today's message should be of Yogeshwara.
within us: Let us develop that purity. Then
Let us worship Yogeshwara today with our
innocence will be established in our eyes.
We will be innocent, the eyes will speak of
heart. When you worship Me today, it should
innocence. What is the use of having eyes
be the worship of Yogeshwara and nothing
which are all the time shifting, you don't
else.
know where they are going, wobbly eyes,
May God bless you.
you see, like this, like this. You can't trust
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-55.txt 
 %3D
