The Divine Cool Breeze March-April 2006

 IT

 Divine Cool Breeze 1Vine Sahaja Sangha News & Information Issue 3-4, 2006 (Special Issue) In this Issue Diwali Puja - 2005 Pune, India Visnu-Tattwa - (Principal) Sahaja News and Information 3) 1. 6 2. 8. 3. S.W.A.N. - Sahaja Worldwide Announcement and News 5. 8. A. The Updated World Council Membership Message from H.H. Shri Mataji - World Council for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga (WCASY) Acceptance of Resolutions by the World Council of Sahaja Yoga World Council for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga World Council for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga 10. World Council for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga Announcement of new collective leadership in Italy Announcement of new collective leadership in Russia 13. The United Kingdom National Committee for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga New Leadership Structure in Switzerland 15. National Trust-India Mesasge on the Occasion of Trust Meeting 17. Gift of Cabella Properties to the World Sahaja Collective A productive second session of the WCASY at Guru Puja in New Jersey 19. Major Event in the History of Sahaja Yoga 6. 10 7. 10 8. 11 9. 12 13 I. 13 14 14 14. 15 15 16. 15 15 18. 18 19 20. Sahaja Yoga Projects 1. Nirmal Infosystems and Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 2. Acquisition of Shri Mataji's house in Chhindwara 3. Vishwa Nirmala Prem Ashram 4. International Sahaja Public School, Talnoo, Dharamshala 5. International Sahaja Yoga Research & Health Center, CBD, Belapur 6. Shri PK Salve Kala Pratishthan, (Academy) Vaitarna, Maharashtra Books Published and Projects related to Sahaja Yoga 22. List of a few imporatnt Sahaja Yoga establishments and addresses for contacts, subscriptions, onine information/Newsletter/Newspaper and magazines published regularly worldwide. 19 21 22 24 27 31 33 21, 35

 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZZE Published by Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 108, Chandragupt Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411029 DIL Printed by Krishna Printer & Designer Tri Nagar, Delhi-35 Mob.: 9868545679 For Subscription Please Write to: Shri G.L. Agrawal Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 222, Desh Bandhu Apartments Kalkaji, New Delhi-110019 Tel.No.: 011-26422054, 26216654 Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles, Miracle Photographs etc. to: Shri O.P. Chandna G-11 (463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110 034

 Diwali Puja Seminar 2005, Pune, India (A Report) take leave of you and I beg of you, I urge you to pickup the banner and go forward". Interesting, there was a simultaneous hosting of small musical programme in the Holy presence of Shri Mataji on 12th November evening in Pratisthan while the main musical programme was being hosted in the stadium amidst the collectivity. It was an informal gathering in Pratisthan, where Shri Mataji blessed the musical evening along with Her family members. Shri Mataji was seen radiating brilliantly like a thousand suns. A couple of bhajans were offered at Her Holy Lotus Feet. Entire collectivity at the stadium was blessed to enjoy the vibrations of this event as the recorded video was screened within half an hour of the same evening. Dear Brothers and sisters of the world The much-awaited two day long Diwali Puja seminar (12th-13 Nov.) turned out to be one of the most beautiful seminars of this year. The Pune climate was cool, so were its vibrations by the blessings of Her Holy presence in this blessed land (Punya Bhoomi). On the 13th of Nov. although the puja was announced for half past seven in the evening, collective meditation started in the Stadium with a vibrant gathering of approximately 8500 yogis. It was indeed a wonderful sight to see the beutiful children of Shri Adi Shakti humbly brushing the past each other in colourful dresses with a smile expressing the joy of their inner state. Approximately 6,000 yogis attended the 12th Evening Diwali seminar, in the Chhatrapati Shivaji Stadium of Pune. Sir CP and Kalpana Didi were the guests of honour who graced the evening's programme. Papaji addressed the collectivity after a brief musical performance on this day and spoke about the message of Shri Mataji. The message emerged as a powerful resolution and introspection of the eve of Diwali Puja for Sahaja Yogis. Concluding his speech he assured, as he confided.."Your Mother will be looked after, yes! I am there with Her 24 Hours and there can be ne better privilege than that. I am with Her, because that is the only duty I have now. It's my duty and I am living just for that purpose, there is no other purpose in my life. So be assured that everything that is possible the best possible treatment, the best possible attention, on your behalf, is being given to her and I have no doubt at all, I wanted to tell you something... that "She is better today than what She was two years ago". So, with these words I thank you and I The stage was beautifully decorated with a touch of oriental style of art and craft work. Kolkata, the Eastern State of India had their repertoire of love expressing through the exquisite decor on the walls and the roof with especial kind of natural thermocol like material called "sola". The

 Issue: 3 & 4 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze should prevail in us. It was about the discretion that we must have within. It was about the truth that Shri Mataji had been struggling for ages through out Her life to establish its victory on earth. He said "let us celebrate the victory of that joy today". Shri Mataji all the while was keenly observing every minute detail in the Puja and accepted the Puja offered at Her Holy Lotus Feet. She seemed very pleased. It was so absorbing, the entire collectivity stood up during the Arti and sang together "Sabko Dua Dena" and offered Pranam with the three Mahamantra. It was'nt a Nirakar Puja (Formless) but seemed like Puja in Her Holy presence in the Stadium. stage was a living temple that exhibited a number of statues in the niche of the backdrop wall, while the roof had very fine art work of ancient temples. The entire set up was accentuated by the exclusive electric lighting every where. The light decorations in entrances, gates and everywhere not only expressed the joy on this day, but also constituted an integral part that helped enlightenment in the heart of flow of vibrations. The altar of Shri Mahalaxmi on stage had two elephants on the hands and the theme of Ashta-Laksmi (Eight Laxmis) at the backdrop in carvings. Then it was the turn of the Sahaja musicians who sang a number of bhajans and the shower of virbrations flowed and filled the stadium. Pt. Subramanium, Jain, the Nirmal Sangeet Sarita team, Rajiv and others rendered a number of vibratory bhajans. A few bhajans were from the popular numbers like 'Aei Maan Ma Ke sharan mein rahiyo..., Yeh hain. dil mein sahaj ko basaya karo'. .Nirmal Dham, Apne At quarter to Nine the projections in the screen, suddenly focused on the much lighted scenario resulting out of the fire crackers on the ground at the entrance of the gate that announced the arrival of our Holy Mother. To this was added the shooting of the high-air firecrackers in the sky that spread the flower-like sparklers all over the clear sky. The sparklers blossomed with the expression of joy that was welcoming Her Holy arrival. The blowing of conches and the lighting of firecrackers on high air on Her Holy arrival on the stage seemed to enlighten every heart. The collectivity was overwhelmed with joy, as it joined the choir with the welcoming bhajan. Swagata Agata Swagatam. The puja started with the bhajan "Vinati Suniye Adi Shakti Meri". As the children silently came up to the stage to perform Ganesha Puja, Shri Mataji lovingly watched them, The puja coninued with the recital of Shri Ganesh-artharva-shirsham and then the Mahalaxmi Strotram. The entire Two videos were shown at the beginning of the evening programme. First, was the "Award receiving ceremony in Rashtrapati Bhavan (President's House), New Delh, India on First of October", where Sir CP was being honoured with the prestigious Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri award for excellence in the fileld of Management and Administration. In his speech, Sir CP expressed the emotions, the wisdom and the dedication in praise of the late Prime Minister of India that was really moving. (One can enjoy the citations; the award and the speech details compiled and documented in websites.) The second video was a recording of the Puja offered at the Holy Lotus Feet of Shri Mataji hosted in Pratisthan premises of Pune, India on first of November. After the puja in Her Holy Sir CP delivered a very moving speech presence, that spelt the message of love and wisdom that

 Issue: 3 & 42006 The Divine Cool Breeze nce. Switzerland besides other countries like mucat. orkey, Argentina, Austria, New Zealand, Romania South Africa, Nepal. Oman, Bahrais, Kuwait. Malaysia, Thailand, Holland, USA, Russia, Kazakhstan, Estonia, Ukraine, Hong Kong, Germany, UK, Iran, Algeria, Australia, Italy and concluding with Laxmi gifts fromt the hosting countries where again Yoginis queued up with various gifts of household items to the Devi in Her Mahalaxmi Form. With the signal of drawing the stage curtain announcing the Holy departure of Shri Mataji, the invitation for the forthcoming Christmas Puja was announced for 24th, 25th and 26th December in this stadium. Arneau de Kalbermatten, Coordinator of the "World Council for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga" expressed his humble vote of thanks and gratitude to the hosting countries for hosting this great Puja. He expressed his heartfeld gratitude on behalfof the World Council and the collectivity to the management committee that welcomed this huge gathering and extended all facilities to the collectivy to spend their stay in Pune with all possible comforts. atome.phere transformed into a heaven (Bikuntha) as the couplets were being recited and sung in praise of Shri Mahalaxmi. Then came the time for the Shringar of the Devi that continued through offering necessary shringar by the Seven Yoginis on stage with the bhajans of Namostute...Namostute. and then... Jago Savera Aya hai (Bhajan with the 108 names of Shri Mataji). The Shringar of the Devi concluded with the song of Vishwa Vandita.. Nirmala Mata. As the Shringar was done the collectivity witnesed yet another rare mudra (gesture/form) of Shri Mahalaxmi in Her Shri Mataji form. bedecked and resplendent in Her shingar. What a tremendous flow of vibrations...how fortunate was our Sahaja Family to witness this divine moment! It was time for Her Holy departure at half past ten. Her face was glowing like the thousand Suns.. Shri Mataji left behind a trail of cool breeze that brought quietude in all hearts. The silence could be felt as Her Van drove out of the stadium. Mother, we enjoyed every moment of the day and we would like to thank you time and again for this wonderful experience-Your kind gesture of accepting our puja at Your Holy Lotus Feet. We thank You for this wonderful gathering of collective. We celebrated our Diwali within our hearts as You enlightened the light of joy in us with Your endiess love and compassion on this day. Kindly accept our prayers at Your Holy Lotus Feet to awaken the Mahalaxmi Principle within International and National Gifts on behalf of their respective collectivity queued up as the names were being read out. Shri Mataji was seen very very pleased receiving the Yogis and Yoginis from various countries. At times She expressed her love through certain words of praises, as the gifts came from hosting countries. India, Portugal, us. Jai Shri Mataji, SITA India

 VISHNU - TATTWA (Principal) (Internet Version) Shakuntala Tandale (U.K.) (This article comes out of a conversation Dr. Rustom had with Shri Mataji, in London, in which she wondered why Sahaja Yogis are not more blessed by Shri Lakshmi.) They say that the 1000 heads of Lord Shesha hissing above Lord Vishnu represents the constant mental activity, a brain constantly trying to sustain and balance the world. Lord Vishnu is Vishwapala and the Lord of the Sushumna Nadi He is the essence of the nervous system controlling all the different angas or limbs of the Virata as the nerves penetrate every last, minute portion of the body, so he permeates every last portion of the Virata and, like the nerves, receives, transmits, and integrates information. All the great charkas, and nerve plexuses are placed ultimately in the Sushumna and it is He who, in various forms, and using various powers, controls them. In the Nabhi, the Void and Swadisthana, in the Anahata, in the Vishuddhi and eventually as Maha Vishnu, in the Agnya and the two cerebral hemispheres. He is the Sukshma- tisukshama that penetrates the deepest levels of the Sushumna-the Brahma Nadi and it is through His Grace, by the ascent in the Brahma Nadi that we get and give realization. neither one, nor the other, connecting them both. It is thanks to His sense of responsibility and detached balance from both left and right that we are sustained. It is very easy for a Yogi to say, "I am a Yogi, am not interested in material things" and it is true that one should remain detached. But yet Lord Vishnu is a far greater Yogi than most of us and yet through the nerves in the body of the Virata his energy flows to every minutest aspect of material nature-transforming, enlightening, and making all auspicious. So, while detached, one should pay attention to one's sustenance, for, as realised souls, we are like the nerves in the body of the Virata and that enlightened energy that flows into matter through our attention can enlighten it, so we act as instruments of the Lord. This is a very subtle point and one should not underestimate it, for the key words are detachement and responsibility; and there are many dangers for those not absolutely in the centre. If one is not detached there is no point pretending one is, for in the end one's suppressed attachment and greed will rise up and hit one on the head when one least expects it. Rather one should acknowledge what one is and witness it. We cannot fight ourselves, we can only leave it to the Kundalini and the Atma to work things out for us, by the constant practice of Sahaja Yoga shoe-beating, foot-soaking, Dhyana etc. and since it all happends automatically, there should be no room for ego intervention or mental activity. Hence He is the coordinator and there is no detail too small to escapte His attention by Him the beggar is fed and sustained, the family and planetary horoscope of every birth is approved and arranged, marriages take place etc. In a sense He is the great bureaucrat organizing every aspect of the universe. If we were idle or inattentive for one moment, think what the consequences would be; He is the one who, in constant 'Leela and 'Maya' maintains the creation and writes the drama. For without 'Leela' and Lord Vishnu is the one who oversees the four Ashramas or stages of life-and one of them, is "Grihastha' or house-holder. For a man who is "Maya' there would be no creation and no drama, only Atma. It is he who stands in the middie between the Maya of the Adi Shakti and the pure Atmasakshatkari and a realsied sould-such a thing witness of the Paramatma Shri Shiva Sadashiva

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 3 & 4 - 2006 7. can be a great Tapasya but without the collective cannot survive and it's evolution and the drama, which is the basis of the creation, is harmed. This drama is born of Divine Will and Desire, and therefore that is opposed. In the West, one has an ideal that 'Grihastha' and marriages are given to us to enjoy- and it is true that this is the outer manifestation - but there is a deeper hidden meaning :- not accept our responsibility to maintain our Lakshmi, it will be hard for Sahaja Yoga to penetrate the material universe, for who will build the Ashrams and hold the programmes? Often in Sahaja Yoga one is asked to pay this and that and people grumble. But they see only the gross drama not the deep subtle meaning: that one is being asked to pay attention to the Lakshmi Vishnu tattwa so that the Virata can be enlightened by the enlightened Atmas we all possess by Shri Mataji's grace. It is very small thing we are being asked for, to help enlighten our Mother's universe. The attackes of left and right that endanger this for that, by it we fulfill our duty to our God who has manifested as the Virata-so that in spite of being one with the Atma we accept the burden and responsibility of matter, to be one with Him and prove our Love and Bhakti for Him. There is a very subtle and twisting play here, for, the Sadhaka seeking the Athma gains it, but with it also matter as tapasya this time and not indulgence. If one accepts one's material responsibilities, then one has to go down into the world of filth and commonness - and our vibrations get spoilt. However, we have been given the capacity to cleanse ourselves and by doing so, we cleanse also that, from which we caught- and by doing so, we clear our Mother's creation and, in some small part, repay to Her are familiar to all-and it will not elaborate. But we should know that the Lakshmi of Sahaja Yoga is our responsibility, not our Mother's. We should shoulder the burden, not our Mother-and we should find ways to work it out somehow or the other. As I said, Lakshmi is a tapasya and we should not expect to earn money easily or effortlessly except by our Mother's grace. For the enlightenment to have meaning, we should enlighten the universe and enter gross matter regardless of the consequences for we are pure the enormous debt we owe Her. If we are not prepared to face the world we go against the Vishnu tattwa, and His Shakti Shri Lakshmi forsakes us. Further, we deny the fact of our birth and material existence in this world gained through the grace and auspices of Lord Vishnu supported by Lord Ganesha. If we do Atma. We should not forget that our Mother, who is the Purest of the Pure, took birth in the darkest night of Kaliyuga to help us, and we should now stand by Her side and fight it out. Let us hope we can all work it out. Jai Shri Mataji!

 Sahaja News & Information Saturday, 15th October, 2005,Gurgaon, India Message to the world collectivity of Sahaja Yogis and Yoginis from Sir. CP Srivastava (Papaji) be sent from here to the world? Now dear Sahaja Yogis, Sahaja Yoginis, there is a task before us, and the task is to preserve Her message of Sahaja Yoga. That message is contained in numerous audio cassettes, video cassettes and so on, And the first responsibility which we all have in all parts of the world is to make sure that what ever She has said, where ever She has said, ".....One year ago She decided that She has already for 30 to 35 years done Her best to create the message of Sahaja Yoga and to spread it. As you know She has traveled all over the world by plane, by helicopter, by train, by bus, on foot, in bullock carts and She has been all over the world, cities and villages etc. and She has created a world wide fraternity of Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis She felt that after She crossed the age of 80, it was the time for Her to sit back and ask Her all that should be preserved in such a form that it becomes the lasting wealth in Sahaja Yoga. And that is the effort which is being made in all parts children that yourselves to take over the responsibility of spreading Sahaja Yoga further. You don't have to create Sahaja Yoga. She has done it. But, the message has to be spread and She came to the conclusion that while, She will be sitting there and She will be the source of inspiration, the Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis should take up the responsibility for spreading Her message throughout the world. And therefore, She decided that this responsibility should be performed collectively, not by individual leaders, but by a collective group every where, all over the world in every country in every city. So collective leadership is Her wish and Her desire. And in effect collective leadership means that all of you sitting here are involved in that process. The whole Sahaja collectivity has now been given the responsibility of spreading Her message of Sahaja Yoga. 1 want to make one proposal before you. I want to make a submission. I hope you will agree with me, I have no doubt you would, as far as Sahaja Yoga is concerned, there is only One Creator.... Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. there is only one Leader that is Shrimati Mataji Nirmala Devi. of the world. Following Her desire of collective leadership, She has created a World council and She has created collective leadership in number of countries and that movement is on. And now, individual leaders will be replaced by collective leaders. And they are performing the task in a very very joyous and combined manner. In India also new Trust have been established for the same kind of work namely for the collective leadership. And I am happy to be able to tell you that Trust has started working". (Eve of Navratri Puja, Gurgaon, India, 15.10.2005) S.W.A.N.-Sahaja Worldwide Announcements and News The World Council for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga (WCASY) Tuesday, December 02, 2003 Dear Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis of the World, We are extremely honored to share with you the great news concerning a dynamic event in the history of Sahaja Yoga world wide regarding creation of The World Council for the And And I request you, if you agree to endorse my words when I say that, "She is today the sole leader in Sahaja Yoga and She will ALWAYS...ALWAYS remain the sole leader in Saakar or Nirakaar form". Do I take it that you all agree and you would like this message to Advancement of Sahaja Yoga by H.H. Shri Mataji Nimmala Devi. In December, 2003, before She left America,

 Issue: 3 & 4 - 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze 19. David Dunphy 20. Zafar Rashid 21. Bohdan Shehovich 22. Gagan Ahluwalia 24. Alan Wherry 26. Sandeep Gadkary 27. Mihaela Balasescu 28. Viktor Bondar Shri Mataji created The World Council for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga. The purpose of this body is to stimulate the further growth of Sahaja Yoga and to provide support to the efforts of all the national collectives. The World Council for the Advancement of 23. Paul Ellis 25. Alan Pereira 29. Dmitry Korotaev 30.Alexander Solodyankin 31. Chris Kyriacou Sahaja Yoga is composed of 34 members designated as world leaders. Advisors of the Council for financial, legal and communications affairs have also been identified. The Council is expected to mcet twice a year. The announcement from Shri Mataji reads as follows: *The world is in turmoil today. People everywhere are anxious about the future. What they need is the soothing, uniting, elevating spiritual message of Sahaja Yoga. They have to be enabled to experience "Self Realization" and thereby attain inner transformation. Only then will they begin to regard all human beings as members of one global family regardless of their race, culture etc. Only then will they discard hatred and violence.. Sahaja Yogis have a momentous responsibility at this crucial time in human history. They have to spread Sahaja Yoga in all the parts of the world by written and spoken word.... For this purpose, a well thought out approach is required." Advisors to the Council: 1. Gagan Ahluwalia: Financial, Accounting and Property matters 2. Paul Ellis: Legal Affairs 3. Alan Wherry : Publication Issues Message From H. H. Shri Mataji - World Council For The Advancement of Sahaja Yoga Thursday, November 04, 2004 In complete accordance with my expectations, Ameau de Kalbermatten has made an excellent beginning in the performance of his important responsibilities as CO-ORDINATOR of "THE WORLD COUNCIL FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF SAHAJA YOGA". His reports show that the fundamental subjects for present study and future planning have already been identified carefully and entrusted to well constituted committees of THE WORLD COUNCIL. I am also very happy to be advised that all Members of THE WORLD COUNCIL are working together with SAHAJ VISION and total dedication. They know that they have the crucially important task of spreading the SAHAJ message of love and togetherness in a deeply divided and troubled world. I wish the World Council all success and in order to ensure continuity, I extend the term of Ameau de Kalbermatten as CO-ORDINATOR of The Updated World Council Membership CHAIRPERSON: SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI Members ( All designated as World Leaders): Rajesh Shah 2. Gregoire de Kalbermatten 3. David Spiro 5. Manoj Kumar 7. Wolfgang Hackl 9. Phillip Zeiss 11. Arneau de Kalbermatten 12. Nese Algan 13. Ivan Tan 15. Alex Henshaw 17. Rajiv Kumar Vijay Nalgirkar Eduardo Marino 4. 6. 8. Majid Golpour 10. Derek Lee THE FOR WORLD COUNCIL ADVANCEMENT OF SAHAJA YOGA till 31 December, 2006. MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI 14. Karan Khurana 16 Aldo Gandolfi 18. Brian Wells 3 November, 2004

 Issue: 3 & 4 -2006 10 The Divine Cool Breeze Yogis were present at the time when She nade the decision to form the World Council including Grégoire dekalbermatten, Karan Khurana, Manoj Kumar, Gagan Ahluwalia and Paul Ellis. Shri Mataji clearly affirmed that the document She was signing was an expression of Her will and desire. She was actively engaged in the discussion and talked to those present at great length. She spoke with complete clarity in Her inimitable style that we all know so well. Shri Mataji personally reviewed the list of the people on the World Council and made changes as She saw fit. All of the above mentioned Sahaja yogis, who were present on that occasion felt privileged to be a of this moment in the formation of the World Acceptance of Resolutions by The World Council Of Sahaja Yoga Thursday, November 24, 2005 Dear Brothers and Sisters of the world collective, The World Council for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga (WCASY) would like to share with you all the seminal resolutions establishing the initial formation of the World Council by Our Holy Mother and our humble acceptance of Her charge, our commitment to the principles of collective leadership as established by Shri Mataji in 2001, and finally, the Mission Statement of the World Council describing its mandate as homage to Shri Mataji and a service to the world collective. It is intended that these resolutions and mission statement will establish the basis to fully preserve and enhance Shri Mataji's legacy for generations to come and create a code of ethics and procedures for the Council to discharge its responsibilities in a manner in accordance with Sahaja principles. The following documents are attached hereto for your information and understanding: 1. The resolution for the Humble Acceptance of Responsibility and The resolution of Commitment to Collective Leadership 2. The Mission Statement of WCASY part Council and be witness to Shri Mataji creating this expression of Her will. Preamble Sahaja Yoga is a spiritual movement inspired by the sincerity and the devotion of its members to the person and legacy of the Maha Avatar Adi Shakti Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. Shri Mataji has placed each one of us on this Council for a purpose and role only She fully knows by Her eternal principle of Divine knowledge, and it is by this consciousness that She guides us as Her devotees. It is not for us to question whom or why, but to always remember that Shri Mataji is our Eternal Guru and Her choice is the only one. As none of the Council members are infallible, and as integral part of our Sahaja collective existence we will search with humility for wisdom and guidance through our permanent connection with Her, to discover the divine direction She continually gives us, and to humbly follow Her directive in selflessly working to fulfill It is our sincere hope that this will be one of many regular communications from the WCASY in our efforts to keep you all apprised of developments taking place in the Sahaja Sangha all over the world. With Love and Respect, Your Brothers and Sisters of the World Council World Council for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga Resolution for the Humble Acceptance of Responsibility Background on Formation of the World Council The formation of the World Council for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga took place on November 20th, 2003 at the Residence of Shri Mataji in Los Angeles, USA. A number of Sahaja Her vision in helping to bring the experience of en-masse self-realization to all humanity. It is our responsibility to fully preserve and enhance the legacy of Shri Mataji for all time to come. To do this, we must do the work of Sahaja Yoga as one body united in our devotion to Shri Mataji, and fully responsive to our vibrations and collective consciousness.

 11. Issue: 3 & 4 -2006 The Divine Cool Breeze Dharma USA (VND). Shri Mataji personally chose the seven Directors of VND to work closely with the national leader and carry out a collective decision making process in all matters related to national significance. A second layer of officers was added by Her to work closely in carrying out the processes and represent VND in its operations. Onethis occasion She provided us with a deeper insight in to Her wishes on the subject of Sahaja governance with a global perspective that all Sahaja decision making, ought to occur in this collective committee format. She further added that all countries should follow this model that She has Resolution Under the direct mandate of our Divine Mother and Guru, Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi, We, the members of the World Council, accept that as long as Shri Mataji chooses to withdraw from routine matters of Sahaja Yoga, it is our responsibility to provide leadership, guidance and decisions on all institutional and governance aspects, and matters that impact the world collective, and on global matters that would otherwise be guided directly by Shri Mataji through Her pure, omnipotent and omnipresent attention. The Council will formulate and adopt its code of conduct and rules of procedures to carry out its responsibilities in a Sahaja way following the vibrations of divine love, the Paramchaitanya. We fully dedicate ourselves to the task of sharing Shri Mataji's gift of Sahaja Yoga with the world and to nurturing a Sahaja environment that strengthens the bonds of love and collectivity amongst all the Sahaja Yogis of the world. We pray to Shri Mataji to bless us with wisdom, as we continue Her work with humility and courage; we beg Her forgiveness for any mistakes that we make, and pray that She give us a place at Her lotus feet and in Her heart, created. Preamble Collective consciousness is the most fundamental principle of Sahaja existence, by which the Paramchaitanya communicates Her divine message, and we communicate with each other. She inspires and guides us in our collective existence as Her nature mnolds our character as one collective living being, and allows us to participate and fulfill the role we must play for Her and therefore we must resolve to function as one. We hold these truths as self-obvious: That yoginis and yogis are their own masters and that they do not need a clerical establishment as intermediary between their Sahasrara chakra and their God. The Council is fully aware that the need for legislation is minimal as knowledge and guidance in Sahaja Yoga is vested in the teachings of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi that are contained in the written, audio and video records of Her lectures. This is why the leadership institution in Sahaja Yoga, ineluding the membership of the World Council, is not considered as a spiritual hierarchy but as an enabling and empowering force. Shri Mataji is our example and our ideal. She is Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti who has come on this earth to World Council for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga Resolution of Commitment to Collective Leadership Background on the principle of collective leadership Collectivity is the binding force of Sahaja Yoga that fulfills our consciousness and our existence. In our collective meditation the vibrations are the strongest, and when Sahaja decisions are made collectively by dedicated and sincere Sahaja Yogis, it reflects the will and desire of Shri Mataji. Shri Mataji defined and established the direction and guidance on this matter on a historic day in December 2001. She gave Her first guidance on Sahaja governance and signed into effect the creation of collective leadership of Vishwa Nirmala give God's creation its true meaning through Sahaja Yoga and has dedicated Her life in selflessly working to spread Sahaja Yoga all over the world. The World Council, national leaders and associated committees are to uphold, channel and

 Issue: 3 & 4-2006 12 The Divine Cool Breeze The Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga World Foundation (also known as the World Council for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga) exists to propagate and continue Her great work. It is an international non-profit organization dedicated to promoting, spreading and perpetuating the teachings and message of the global spiritual work of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. The Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga World Foundation carries out its mission by sustaining the inner science and practice of Sahaja Yoga worldwide through special events (such as conferences and seminars), knowledge management (such as communication material and skills), institutional developments (such as advancements in education, health and ecologically sustainable practices), creation of centers and places of worship and meditation (such as ashrams, temples and public centers), and through support to the financial, legal and research needs of the Sahaja Yoga collectivity. The World Council discharges its mandate as homage to its Teacher and as a service to the world collective. With a view to advancing the collective awareness of all of its members in an atmosphere of mutual support and understanding, the World Council abides by the spirit of two resolutions embodying fundamental principles that all prospective members of the World Council are expected to agree to: The Resolution on the Humble Acceptance of Responsibility and The Resolution on the Commitment to Collective Leadership facilitate in a benevolent manner the harmonious and dynamic progress of their collectives. Resolution We the members of the World Council fully commit to the Sahaja principle of collective decision-making. We solemnly affirm that the functioning of the World Council will be in keeping with the protocol of collective decision making with at least 75% majority agreement, by either direct consultation or by means of committees, in each of which there must be at least a minimum of three members in keeping with the collective process. Further, we affirm the commitment of the World Council in providing guidance, direction and support in putting the appropriate collective decision-making processes in place for all national collectives and all levels of Sahaja collectivity. The Council aims at maintaining the highest standard of spirituality and ethics in the operation of all the Sahaja institutions and committees, thereby insuring worldwide consistency in the operations of all the Sahaja messages and approaches in conformity with the teachings of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. We humbly pray to Shri Mataji to allow the Paramchaitanya to guide us and keep the living work of Sahaja Yoga in a manner She has personally taught each one of us. As our compassionate and loving Mother, our benevolent Guru, and the Devi whom we worship, we offer our prayers that She always be present within us. The World Council for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga Manifestation of the Knowledge The World Council recognizes that the knowledge of Sahaja Yoga is a living knowledge carried, developed and manifested by each yogini and yogi who truly follows the guidance of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi through his or her own inner enlightenment. To facilitate and sustain the spreading and the benefits of this spiritual experience, the World Council stands for the faithful custody and active promotion of the body of teachings of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, as Mission Statement Preamble Society cannot be improved or transformed without first improving or transforming its members. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Srivastava, Founder of Sahaja Yoga, has dedicated Her life to the cause of the spiritual empowerment of all those who seek Self-enhancement and Spiritual Evolution.

 Issue: 3 & 4 - 2006 13 The Divine Cool Breeze enshrined in speeches, written texts and discourses contained in print, audio and video formats, Spiritual and Cultural Integration En masse Self-realization is now possible for the first time by the teachings and methods of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, and is a happening of enormous historical significance in the evolution of world spirituality. The World Council acknowledges that the experience of Self- realization that is now an accessible reality through Sahaja Yoga, is indeed at the core of the messages of the great religions of mankind. The World Council thus understands its responsibility to be a driving and binding force for a new understanding and tolerance among diverse cultures, religions and civilizations. With immediate effect, I appointi the following to constitute THE ITALIAN NATIONAL SAHAJA YOGA COMMITTEE for providing collective leadership in respect of all activities for the advancement of SAHAJA YOGA in Italy, always in full compliance with the decisions of the WORLD COUNCIL FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF SAHAJA YOGA: 1. Aldo Gandolfi (Coordinator) 2. Andrea Antoniani 3. Marco Arciglio 5. Massimo Cesetti 7. Giampiero De Michelis 8. Giancarlo Fuente 9. Michela Cavalletti 11.Allessandro Giannotti 12. Emesto Kuhn 4. Duilio Cartocci 6. Sandra Castelli 10. Sandeep Gadkery Governance 14. Tommaso Merella 13. Sanjay Mane 15. Felicia Micolucci Under the chairmanship of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, the World Council is responsible for providing leadership, decisions and advice in all institutional and governance aspects concerning the Sahaja Yoga collectivity as a whole. The World Council will collaborate with national collectivities in the appointment of their national leadership committees. It is also the final arbiter in the unlikely event that dissenting views on matters of importance cannot be settled at the national level. Through its Committees, task forces and action programs, the World Council will address global matters that impact the world collective and will advance related projects and 16. Luigi Piccinini 17. Ezio Prandini 18. Alessandro Scarno 19. Antonio Scialo 20. Maurizio Taddei 21. Rubens Tommasi 22. Antony Visconti SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI Announcement of a New Collective Leadership in Russia Sunday, August 07, 2005 We are pleased to announce that Shri Mataji has approved and blessed a new collective leadership of Russia. Dmitry Korotaev will be the Coordinator of The Russian National Council for initiatives. Announcement of new collective leadership in Italy Tuesday, July 26, 2005 We are pleased to announce that Shri Mataji has approved and blessed a new collective leadership of Italy. Aldo Gandolfi will be the Coordinator of The Italian National Sahaja Yoga Committee, the other members of which are set forth below. The World Council for The Advancement of Sahaja Yoga the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga, the other members of which are set forth below. The appointmnent of the new collective leadership committee follows Shri Mataji's acceptance of the resignation of Sergey Perezhogin from all the offices he has held in Sahaja Yoga. With immediate effect, I appoint the following to constitute THE RUSSIAN NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF SAHAJA YOGA for providing collective leadership

 14 Issue: 3 & 4 - 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze 19. Robbert Ruigrok 21. Anthony Headlam in respect of all activities of SAHAJA YOGA in Russia, always in full compliance with the decisions of the WORLD COUNCIL FOR THE 20. Bhanu Prakash Reddy 22. Daniel Wagner MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI 10 October, 2005 ADVANCEMENT OF SAHAJA YOGA: 1. Dmitry Korotaev 2. Alexander (Sasha) Solodiankin (National Coordinator) 3. Valentina Kushnarenko 4. Slava Ivanov 5. Viktor Chaschin 6 Tamara Sostamoynen 7. Viktor Fedorov 8. Anatoly Gromov 9. Kontstantin Nazrachov 10. Viktor Yevstaviev II. Anatoly Kozuhov 12. Bohdan Shehovych 13. Alan Wherry New Leadership Structure In Switzerland To the attention of our Beloved and Divine Mother Shri Mataji Beloved Shri Mataji, Switzerland has been able to expand its Sahaja collective in the last years. Our country needs however a new impulsion to spread further your Divine Work and to project spiritual dynamism in each town and village. In this perspective, we felt that the time has come to implement a new leadership structure, which would successfully fulfil your vision of human inner emancipation. We recognized that a collective leadership structure would appropriately meet these requirements of Spiritual enforcement. Therefore, I humbly ask you Shri-Mataji to bless this new Swiss leadership structure, and I pray to You that You would graciously guide them and counsel them in their future responsibilities. The names of the Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yogini that I would humbly suggest for this group and would be best suited for this work are the following: 1. Arneau de Kalbermatten (National coordinator) 2. Bernd Treichel 4. Eric Deladoëy SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI The United Kingdom National Committee For The Advancement Of Sahaja Yoga Monday, October 10, 2005 Time has come for collective leadership at all levels in order to provide greater impetus to the advancement of Sahaja Yoga. Such arrangements have been made already in several countries. I have now decided to appoint the following 3. Christian Mathys 5. Franca Clendon 7. Gilles Rode 9. Jean-Pierre Koller 11. Richard Mathys as THE UNITED KINGDOM NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF 6. Gilbert Jeanneret SAHAJA YOGA: 8. Harsha Mohan 10. Jose Di Munno 12. Thibaut Denblyden The above list has been blessed by Shri Mataji Herself on November 12th 2005 in 1. Dr. David Spiro (Co-Ordinator) 2. Derek Lee 3. Dr. Zafar Rashid 5. Alan Pereira 7. Hesta Spiro 9. Dr. Sarah Setchell 11. Ray Harris 13. Nigel Powell 15. Pasquale Scialo 17. Peter Yeboah 4. Dr. Brian Wells 6. John Glover 8. Guy Beaven 10. Vinayaka Francis 12. Alan Henderson 14. Patty Prole 16. Martin Watt 18. Geoffery Godfrey Prathisthan. With eternal love and respect Arneau, November 20th 2005

 15 Issue: 3 & 4 - 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze National Trust is to spread my message of Sahaja Yoga and of love, harmony and Kundalini awakening to the farthest corners and to every National Trust-India 8th April, 2005 Dear Brothers and Sisters, seeker in this ancient land of ours. This is a historic We are glad to inform that H.H. Shri Mataji responsibility, which I am entrusting to you all. I am sure that you will work selflessly, tirelessly and with ever more commitment to spread this has formed the "H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI SAHAJA YOGA TRUST" for India. Listed below are the details. message and strengthen the Sahaja collective through sharing joy and love amongst all Sahaja yogis. At the same time I know that you will strive continuously to become deeper in your meditation and evolve spiritually. In the above context I will like the Trustees to CHAIRPERSON H.H. MATAJI SHRINIRMALA DEVI VICE CHAIRMAN SIR C.P. SRIVASTAVA JOINT VICE CHAIRMAN Rajesh Shah adopt the following Code of Conduct, which will become the guiding framework for the working TRUSTEES: Rajiv Kumar Suresh Kapoor Kalpana Srivastava Vijay K. Gautam Y.P. Singh VJ. Nalgirkar of the National Trust. Dinesh Rai Ashok Agarwal With my blessings and best wishes, Sadhana Varma (Signature) R.K. Pugalia MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI The following are appointed as Special Invites to meetings of the National Trust: Bhagwati Singh S. Ram Mohan Rao Karun Sanghi Parag Raje Gift of Cabella Properties to the World Sahaja Collective Thursday, September 15, 2005 A few days back, Shri Mataji and Sir C.P. gave the wonderful news confirming the announcement of last year that the four properties in Cabella Palazzo Doria, the hangar, Centrassi and Daglio are to be gifted to a Sahaja foundation. This will be in addition to Shri Mataji's generous donation of Her house in New Jersey. In connection with this gift, Sir C.P. explained, with Shri Mataji listening on, that there should be one Puja each year in Cabella--Guru Puja-which should be a global gathering for yogis from all over the world, and that we should continue to hold many other activities on these properties to spread Sahaja Yoga and strengthen and expand the Sahaja collective. One activity in particular that was mentioned that should continue is the camp for the children at Daglio each summer. Kiran Walia Chandra Prabha G.L. Agarwal With my blessings and best wishes, (Signature) MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI 16th April, 2005 Pratishthan, Pune. MESSAGE ON THE OCCASION OF THE TRUST MEETING OF TRUSTEES OF H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI AND SAHAJA YOGA TRUST, MUMBAI 25 APRIL 2005 I have established Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga Trust (the National Trust) on 8 April 2005. The objective of the

 Issue: 3 & 4 - 2006 16 The Divine Cool Breeze Following Her announcement, it has now been determined that a new foundation will be created FIVE COMMITTEES OF THE WCASY TO SERVE THE SANGHA At its recent session, the World Council adopted its code of conduct and rules of procedures and it turned the existing task forces into standing committees. The creation of the Committee on Legal Affairs was ratified and accepted by the Members of the World Council. Paul Ellis was elected as Chairman of this in Italy for the purpose of receiving these properties. This will occur over the coming weeks in order to officially receive Shri Mataji's generous donation during the next couple of months. On behalf.of the entire Sahaja collective, we have conveyed our gratitude and thankfulness to Shri Mataji for the immense generosity that She and Sir CP and their entire family have expressed in giving to the posterity of Sahaja Yoga these properties which hold such a unique position in the annals of Her great work and in the hearts of Sahaja Yogis around the world. We have pledged that, as a worldwide collective, we will dedicate ourselves to utilizing these properties to perpetuate the vision that She has bestowed upon us, a vision of Divine Love, a Vision of complete inner transformation, a vision of a new era of the Holy Spirit's Spiritual supremacy. Jai Shri Mataji!! CO committee until the end of 2006. Similarly the Committee on Communication and Publication was created with Alan Wherry as its Chair and the Committee on Budget and Financial Matters was created with Gagan Ahluwalia as its chair. The meeting at Guru Puja created two new committies: 1. A new Committee on Health was formed, chaired by Dr David Spire. Over the next few months it is intended to recruit the members of this committee and they will explore the function this committee can fulfil. National Leaders are requested to assist in this process. The committee hopes to support the very good work that is already going on, for example at the clinic at Vashi and the research project taking place in Australia and will submit its The World Council for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga A productive second session of the WCASY at Guru Puja in New Jersey report and programme at the 3rd session of the Council. 2. The Committee on Education, chaired by Dr Wolfgang Hackl, shall represent the World Council on the trusts of boards of the various Sahaja Yoga education institutions, such as the schools in India, Europe and America. National Leaders are invited to liaise with Monday, August 01, 2005 One year after its creation and as it met in the land of Shri Krishna, the world Council for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga (WCASY) is gaining a wonderful feeling of oneness and dynamism. At the recent Guru Puja in New Jersey, the WCASY met several times. In a first informal Wolfgang and to refer to him potential resource persons and inform him of any pertinent developments. The Chair will likewise report to the Council at its 3rd session. The Chairmen of the committee were given meeting on Saturday, consensus was achieved to move together beyond the events of Adi Shakti puja in Cabella. While all members of the sangha are invited to pray from the depth of their heart for Mother's long life and good health, we need to trust those in whose care She has entrusted Herself. the authority to set up sub committees in order to recruit personnel with appropriate skills to advise and implement the tasks in hand. The authority was also given to co-optpersonnel outside the

 Issue: 3 & 4- 2006 17 The Divine Cool Breeze affairs of a country when global or institutional situations arise or when there is a need for arbitration. Shri Mataji gave a personal World Council. In other words, national leaders can help in identifying qualified member of the sangha that are willing to volunteer and join in the endorsement to the role of the Council in a work at hands. It was understood that the Chair of the respective Committees would prepare a work plan, report to the Council and seek the Council's approval to endorse their Committee's decisions. Between the sessions of the Council they would consult the Coordinator and the Secretary as wonderful session of evening bhajans at Her residence on Saturday evening. There is a common desire to keep close. contact with the National Leaders and to share experience and suggestions. In this respect a very positive meeting took place the same evening with national leaders present in New Jersey, It emphasized the spirit of the Council and of the national leaders forming one united global team. Information was exchanged and feelings of mutual respect, affection and support were expressed. It was agreed, whenever possible, to have similar coordination meetings at each Pujas. appropriate. INTRODUCING THE "SHRI MATAJI YOGA SAHAJA DEVI NIRMÁLA FOUNDATION" An introduction was given by Paul Ellis to the new Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga Foundation and the constitutive formal board meeting took place on Monday 25th July. OTHER DECISIONS TAKEN We were reminded that the Council was not proceeding with setting up a foundation in Italy. The new nonprofits corporation foundation set up in America was to accept the generous gift of the house in New Jersey given by Shri Mataji; it is also the legal vehicle doing business as the World Council for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga. Beyond the above mentioned significant developments, the Council entrusted specific tasks to some of its members such as advancing on issues of resource mobilization and intellectual property or liaising to support developments in specific countries or regions. In this respect Majid Golpour was requested to act on behalf of the WCASY in support of Africa. This nonstock, nonprofit corporation was filed in the state of Delaware on the day of the occasion of Guru Purnima, on 21st July 2005. Sir CP Srivastava was offered to be an honorary member of the board of director of the Foundation in recognition for his constant support to Sahaja yoga and he graciously agreed. Appreciation was expressed by all for the hard work that some of us were privileged to deliver in the service of the Council. Gathering in New Jersey, we were all grateful to have moved ahead in a wonderful spirit of togetherness and deeply aware of the protection that Our Guru bestowed on this second session of the WCASY COORDINATION WITH NATIONAL LEADERS On behalf of the Coordinator and with love world sangha, The WCASY seeks its inspiration from the nurturing leadership of Our Mother and Guru Shri Mataji. It was clearly recognized by the Council Members that WCASY should support, encourage and sustain the National Leaderships, but that it may. from time to time, need to intervene in the the and to respect Signed Alan Pereira Secretary WCASY

 Issue: 3 & 4 - 2006 18 The Divine Cool Breeze While Shri Mataji and Sir C.P. enjoyed their cake, we reflected on the great significance of this Major Event In The History Of Sahaja Yoga event. Thursday, September 29, 2005 New Jersey, USA Friday, 16 September 2005 We observed that, while no other incarnation has left a record of his or her actual words, we have the great blessing to have thousands of tapes In a short, simple ceremony on Friday, September 16th, with a small group of World Council members and U.S. leaders as witnesses, Shri Mataji signied several documents that legally transfer ownership of all Her work Her entire life's teachings to the trusteeship of the Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga World Foundation. of our Mother in which She has memorialized the sacred and subtle knowledge of Sahaja Yoga. We also acknowledged to Shri Mataji and Sir C.P. that, given that these 35 years worth of talks represent the entire body of Her life's teachings, for Her to give them to the Foundation in this manner signifies the generosity not only of our Holy Mother, but of Sir C.P. and of their entire family. Through this act, the entire family has expressed, in a beautiful and gracious manner, their commitment to the great vision that Shri Mataji has offered to the world. This is a momentous event in the history of Sahaja Yoga, for it places the responsibility for the propagation and dissemination of Shri Mataji's teachings fully with Sahaja Yogis. Paul Ellis, speaking on behalf of the World Council and the Sahaja Yoga world collective, affirmed the historic significance of this event and expressed gratitude for this gift whose value is beyond measure. As Sir C.P. said to us at the closing of the evening, "The whole family is united and forcefully behind all this. No two opinions about it. Anything more we can do, we will regard it as our Tirst Upon the completion of the signing, we pledged to Shri Mataji that, as a world collective, we would take up this important responsibility of preserving and maintaining Her talks in perpetuity and making them readily available in every corner duty." We now embark on a huge project. A formal committee has been established under the supervision of the Sahaja Yoga World Council that will strengthen national and international resources to make the knowledge of Her Holiness Shri Mataji more widely and easily accessible. !Jai Shri Mataji! Manoj Kumar, Paul Ellis and Alan Wherry On behalf of the World Council for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga of the world. Additionally, Sir C.P. signed the papers to transfer title of their house in New Jersey to the Foundation.

 Sahaja Yoga Projects 1. Nirmal Infosystems and the rare documents published since earlier times in Sahaja Yoga". Technologies Pvt. Ltd. This will enable an easy accessibility and flow of Sahaja materials at an affordable price from one central channel to the farthest corner. Also, many of whom, who may have never had the Back ground: Her Holiness Shri Mataji desired that all Sahaja publications and materials should be made available to Sahaja yogis all over India and eventually the entire world would also come under one platform. opportunity to attend Sahaja Yoga seminars or Puja seminar to access Sahaja material in form of books and audio visual documents that helps us With this objective, Nirmal Infosys, the erstwhile Pune based company, blessed by Her Holiness Shri Mataji in the year 2000, was rechristened as Nirmal Infosystem and Technologies Private Limited for this divine purpose. treasure Shri Mataji's teachings and insights can also have easy access to all these materials from their local meditation Centers. Aim and Objectives: Papaji (Sir CP) also announced to the world collectivity of Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis recently regarding the need and the appeal for preserving Mother's messages for propagation of Sahaja Yoga. Papaji's message was loud and clear when he said "...Now dear Sahaja Yogis, Sahaja Yoginis, there is a task before us, and the task is This project was blessed by Her Holy grace of Shri Mataji in the year 2004 and has since then been dedicated to the cause of publishing, creating/ generating and maintaining sustained supply of all Sahaja related materials to the Sahaja Yogis across the globe, with especial attention to the Sahaja Yogis in India at affordable price to spread the message of Sahaja Yoga. The functions of the company include mainteriance of all forms of Sahaja books to preserve Her message of Sahaja Yoga. That message is contained in numerous audio cassettes, video cassettes and so on. And the first literature, magazines, periodicals and compilations besides all the published and unpublished audio video cassettes, CDs, DVDS, Puja materials, music and bhajans cassettes. responsibility which we all have in all parts of the world is to make sure that what ever She has said, where ever She has said, all that should be preserved in such a form that it becomes the lasting wealth Nimal Infosystem is operative on a centralized system of distribution of Sahaja materials through authoritative and appointed Sahaja Yogi Agents in Sahaja Yoga. And that is the effort which is being made in all parts of the world". (15th October, Gurgaon, India). across the country, to meet the growing demands It is in this direction that Nirmal Infosystem is dedicated to act as a window to the world, and requirements of the local city and State centre in India. It has its central repository in Pune. through which the entire world will get its desired Procurement of the Sahaja Material is made access to the message of Mother. It will not only help propagation of Mother's precious message to the world, but will also indirectly help archive available through the published catalogue from this channel of Nirmal Infosystem to the city

 20 Issue: 3 & 4- 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze Infosystem prior to publishing of any Sahaja related material (documents in any form of literature/audio/ video) in india, is mandatory which otherwise shall be treated illegal. The governing body shall hold all rights over the published documents and materials for Sahaja Yoga in India. centers, from where an individual can exercise his/her direct access to this company. However, efforts are in progress to adopt the latest and modern state of the art technology to guide, edit, publish, print, and reproduce the Sahaja related materials with utmost care and quality. Hence forth, seeking approval of the Nirmal H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Chairperson Sir C.P. Srivastava Vice chairperson Board of Directors Mrs. Sadhna Verma Mrs. Kalpana Srivastava Mr. R.K.Pugalia Mr. Anil Sud and Mr. Rajesh Gupta Mr. Muneesh Pande (General Manager) Address for contact: Nirmal Infósystems and Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 8, Chandragupt Hsg. Society, Kothrud, Paud Road, Pune -411 029 Tel No. +91-20-25286537, Fax +91-20-25286722 Email: marketing@nirmalinfosys.com Website: www.nirmalinfosys.com

 2. Acquisition of Shri Mataji's house in Chhindwara Chhindwara, India The Birth place of H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Tuesday, July 26, 2005 On 7 April 2005, Shri Mataji established H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga Trust to manage all the affairs of Sahaja Yoga in India. She is the Chairperson of this National Trust. Sir C. P. Srivastava is the Vice Chairman and Shri Rajesh Shah the joint Vice Chairman. The Trust, which will henceforth provide the collective leadership for Sahaja in India is made up of 12 Trustees and 7 Special Invitees. The Trust's offices are in New Delhi in the Sahaja Temple at 17-C Qutab Institutional Area. The Indian collective leadership, represented by the National Trust, will now take up the holy and important task of building the World Sahaja Yoga Ashram and the most beautiful Memorial to our Mother on Her birthplace. A special committee will soon be constituted for this task and everybody is invited to contribute to this Holy task through ideas, resources and voluntary work. Those interested in contributing to this effort could contact Rajiv Kumar, Executive Secretary, Indian National Trust at äarkey1951@vahoo.co.in or at 919818098072. From the very inception the National Trust placed the highest priority to the acquisition of the holy birth place of Shri Mataji (the Chhindwara House) for the international Salaja collective and build a Memorial. The task was entrusted to the Asset Management Committee of the National Trust. The Indian collective leadership recognizes the immensity of this historic task and prays to Shri Mataji to give us the wisdom, courage and humility to undertake this task. For the Indian Collective, Rajiv Kumar With the collective efforts of all the Trustees and of Sahaja Yogis from Nagpur, Bhopal, Pune and Mumbai and the tireless follow up by Shri Dinesh Rai, the chairman of the Asset Management Committee, this holy task was accomplished on 14 July 2005. The property has been officially transferred in the name of the H.H. Shri Mataji Nimala Devi Sahaja Yoga Trust and all legalities have been completed. A collective havan and puja were held on the premises on 14 July. Following instructions from Shri Mataji, sign boards declaring it as Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga World Ashram and the Holy Birthplace of Shri Mataji have already been put in place. The most holy place for all Sahaja Yogis of the world "... the birthplace of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in Chhindwara, that house has been acquired by the Trust and it will become the permanent shrine for Sahaja Yogis all over the world. That shrine will be renovated in order to ensure its permanence. And the Trust proposes to have another building where visiting Sahaja Yogis both from India and from foreign countries could go to stay, when they go to pay their homage to that shrine. And the land is proposed to be acquired soon, where a building will be constructed, so that any of you or any other from any parts of India or the world can go there. It will now become really one of the most holy places or perhaps the most holy place for all Sahaja Yogis of the world. It is important to mention that funds collected through an international appeal for the acquisition of the Chhindwara House has been transferred in full to the accounts of the newly established National Trust in India. Moreover, members of Shri Mataji's family (namely Sir C.P. and the two daughters, Kalpana and Sadhana) have donated generously towards the cost of acquiring the holy birthplace. Sahaja Yogis from all over the world and for all times to come will be beholden to this extremely gracious donation by Shri Mataji's family that demonstrates their commitment to perpetuating the legacy of our Holy Mother. We will go on all together, and I invite you all, each one of you to join in that effort to propagate individually, group wise, collective wise the message of Sahaja Yoga which your Mother has given to you". (Excerpt from the speech of Sir. CP (Papaji) to the World Sahaja collectivity on the Eve of Navratri Puja, Gurgaon, India, 15.10. 2005)

 3. Vishwa Nirmala Prem Ashram Home for the destitute women and orphan children, (A project of "H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Foundation") (A Non Government Charitable Organization) Ashram Address: Vishwa Nirmala Prem Ashram, Regd.office: C-17 Qutab Institutional Area, New Delhi-110016(India) Tel:+91-11-26966652,Fax: :+91-11-26866801 email:delhiashram@rediffmail.com Plot No. 9, Institutional Area, Greater Noida, U.P.(India)Tel:+91-120-2230681, Mob:+919810774865, email:Gisela oma_7@yahoo.com building anda huge garden ona plot of about 10,000 sq.mtrs. in the prestigious knowledge Park/ Institutional Area of Greater Noida. They are also guided spiritually so that they are transformed to a state of inner peace and balance enabling them to face life in a much better way. Vishwa Nirmala PremAshram isthe first Project of its series in India and abroad inaugurated on 27th March, 2003 by H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi as a non Government charitable organization dedicated tothe rehabilitationofthe destitute womenand orphan children with focus on girl child. The Ashram is providing temporary stay with free boarding, lodging, clothing, vocational training and medical care to helpless destitute women of the society. After training forthe periodofóto 24 months, they are expected to earn their livelihood independently and lead their lives with dignity. They willalso beassisted in securing suitable employment. Destitute women up to age of 40 years will be admitted. The orphan children from 2 to 8 years are being admitted who are provided free food, clothes, accommodation, education, medical care up to age of 18 years. Thereafter, they will be rehabilitated in You can help the cause of such destitute women or orphan children by: • Directing them to us for seeking shelter on the address and phone numbers of the Ashram. Sending donation by cheque/ draft in the name of "H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Foundation" on the addresses of the Ashram. Adopting a child by reimbursing expenses incurred by the Ashram. • All donations are exempted from the Income tax under section 80G. Donating directly in thename of "H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Foundation" at Standard Chartered Bank, E-10,Cennaught Place, New Delhi-110001,1India. their life. The residents at the ashram enjoy a loving family atmosphere with a very clean and hygienic living. rich food, games etc. housed in a two storey spacious

 23 Issue: 3 & 4 -2006 The Divine Cool Breeze 7. The governing council has the right to waive any of above conditions. Guidelines for admission of Orphan Girl The Governing Body The Names and Designations of present Members of the Governing Council of the Society to whom by the Regulation of the Society, the management of its affairs is entrusted are: H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Chairperson and Founder Mrs. Sadhna Verma Child in the Ashram 1. Normally an orphan giri child between the ages of 2-8 years will be admitted. However, with the permission of Trustees, an orphan girl beyond the age of 8 years couldalso beadmitted in special circumstances. Member Secretary Mrs. Kiran Walia Mr. Vinay Anant Deopujari Mrs. Gisela Matzer Treasurer 2. The child will be sent for the health check up before actual admission to avoid the chance of communicable harmful diseases Member Member Mrs. Vineeta Kumar Member Mrs. Nita Rai 3. The orphan children can be admitted by Sahaja Yoga centers, police, NGO's, religious organizations oranyreliableorganization/person Mrs. Malini Khanna Mrs. Malati Prasad Mr. R.D. Bhardwaj Mr. G.L. Agarwal (Special Invitee) Auditor Guidelines for Helpless Destitute Women seeking shelter in the Ashram 1. Women up to 60 years of age may seek shelter in the Ashram for limited period with a view to get vocational training for 6-24 months in the area they are suitable for. 2. The women will have to accept the prevalent rules ofthe Ashram and Sahaja Yogameditation. 3. They will have to appear for health check up to ensure they are free from a disease which can harm other residents. 4. the women seeking shelter shall come through Sahaja Yoga centers, police, jail, NGO's, social servants or țeferred by some authorities etc. with necessary documents/papers showing that they do not have any family ties or rejection by society. 5. The Ashram reserves the right to restrict/refuse the shelter to any women without assigning any Member Member Member /distant relatives. 4. The person getting the girl child admitted will produce death certificates of the parents or any other proof so as to ascertain that the girl child is orphan and financially poor. 5. Lost girl child can be admitted by police or local magistrate. If the guardian is located later, he will pay all the expenses incurred by the Ashram. 6. All children admitted will follow the discipline rules of the Ashram and Sahaja Yoga meditation. 7. The Ashram shall have all rights on the admitted children as that of parents as per rules of the Government. 8. The trustees will have full rights on an admitted orphan girl child for her up bringing, education, marriage, adoption etc. as may be deemed fit by them. 9. If any child leaves the Ashram, is lost on her ownordies, the Ashram shall not be responsible for any compensations etc. 10. The Trustees of the Ashram reserve the right to restrict admission of any child or expel anyone to a safe place without assigning any reason. 11. The governing council has the right to waive any of above conditions.. reason. The women found suitable for long term assignmentin the Ashram may continue for long durations if the authorities of the Ashram desire so. She will be suitably rewarded. 6.

 4. International Sahaja Public School Talnoo, Dharamshala and imagination power in this serene majestic environment. The vibrations in the air help the pupil understand the essence of spiritualism and the realized style of living. Shri Mataji says "I have seen children coming from our school in Dharamsala, extremely confident and extremely humble and I asked them, "What do you do?"They said, "Mother, we meditate. We meditate in the school in the evening and that meditation helps." Imagine these small children can say that". Besides, the essence of developing spiritualism, the school also allows the children to develop personality and individuality and yetretains the ability to relate, work, share and play harmoniously without evoking competition and enjoy the reality of the collectivity. The children are made mindful of their individual and collective responsibilities such as respect and duty towards his parents, elders, teachers, fellowmen, public property, country and world at large. That's why an ex-student who graduated from the school prefers to reserve kis comment as ... "They often say that the Himalayas are like the seat of the Universe. And we know they are the Sahasrara of India and the Sahasrara of the world. It is where "the sky is always lit with the brilliance of vibrations and Mother's divine love." Itis Her school and She is always there to bless Her children." Education, Standards, Academics and The international School is situated at Talnoo, a beautiful spot in the lap of the Himalayan range called Dhaulagiri. The word dhaula means *compietely pure', nirmal. Dhar geans 'range. (The mountain range is called Dhauladhar).itis ata heightof 2000mand is approximately 16 Kilometres drive from Dharamshala, the well known tourist centre of Himachal Pradesh in India. The Aim and Objectives of the School A unique system of education evolved by H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi dedicating to the cause of grooming the humanity with moral values on one hand and wisdom on the other. The system of Sahaja Education imparted here not only extends an opportunity for children to enjoy the purity of innocence, but also makes them a valuable citizen of this world to understand the essence of living. Shri Mataji says "Innocence is an eternal quality which can never be lost or destroyed", while the basic objective of thisschool is to reflectsuch divinity in all students who come across the globe to be intellectually and spiritually evolved. In yetanother revelation Shri Mataji says "Our present day educational system is failing to bring out the great potential inherent in human beings, as proven by the terrible state of affairs in the west. Born realized as well as our Sahaja Yogi Childrenneed an enlighten school system where they can grow and manifest the great soul that have taken birth". This School popularly named as ISPS extends an opportunity to inculcate love for nature, care for environment, gentleness, nobility, honesty, wisdom and yet a lure foradventure. Childrenare surrounded with everything that enriches the Spirit in a human being in this divine land. It not only helps transformation of individual but encourages and helps stimulate ones' natural curiosity, creativity Routine The School is affiliated to the Indian Council of Secondary Education Board and the admissions for children are held for Std. I to Std. X. • The medium of instruction is English. The school is residential with lodging and boarding facilities. There are 15 dormitories and one care taker authority is attached to

 Issue: 3 & 4 - 2006 25 The Divine Cool Breeze approximately a group of 8 students. The dom Aunties and the authorities take care of the chiidren as parents do. • The School Session starts from the 23rd March and end on 21" December. There are five tests. three Unit tests, a halfyearlyexamandan Annual Exam held for eachsession. The Annual Report is based on the overall performances of all the Tests undertaken. The school has a library with an excellent repertoire of 6-7 thousands books on various subjects besides a special Sahaja library with Sahaja literature, audio and video cassettes. The school has a provision for Indian and continental food. Special attention is given to the nutritional values. The school has its own bakery that caters fresh items to the students. Asa partofrecreation the student enjoy regular watching video cassettes besides Sahaja cassettes. The children enjoy periodical trekking, excursion and educational tours besides variouS sports and games in the School premise. The daily routine starts from morning meditation, breakfast, and then academic classes from 8:45 to 10:45 a.m. with 15 minutes short break. The Lunch is served at 12:20 p.m. for the junior classes, while the seniors at 1:00p.m. The classes resumes after lunch for the senior classes while the juniors are taken care of as they have an hour siesta. The after noon session concludes witha break for sports in the evening. The evening session starts with evening meditation at 6:15 p.m. and then is the time for homework preparatory classes for all. After the dinner usually the students go to bed by 10:00 p.m. The routine is subjected to revision with the seasonal changes. Regular subjects opted are English as first Language, Hindi /German as the second, Mathematics, Science covering Physics, Chemistry and Biology, Social Sciences including History. Geography and Civics, Computer seience is taught from standard -III. While the other co curricular subjects cover Music (Vocal and Instrumental) Dance (Classical, Folk and Mime), Wood work, Drawing and Painting, Clay works and paper craft. All children must apply for a student visa. Any other type of visa will not be accepted by the local foreigner Registration Office (FRO). Students who arrive with a tourist visa will have be leave India after six month. Parents who require a letter from School in order to request a student visa should email to the school account with the following references: • The name and the surname of the child and his/ her class The date and place of Birth of the child Passport number, its expiry date and nationality, Fax number and the addresses to the accountant's email at: ispsim@vahoo.com • Email address for communicating with • Junior wing-in charge: isps office@vahoo.co.uk.ispsoffice@rediffmail.com and senior wings in charge at isps senior@rediffmail.com • Contact address: International Sahaja Public School, Talnoo, Dharamshala(H.P.) at www.sahajapublicschool.org IS Graduates remember Shri Mataji's School in the Lap of the Himalayas • I can think of no school to do this job better than the International Sahaj Public School. This school doesn't just give the best possible grounding for a development ofanideal human being. butalso the spiritual guideline that we all need to become better individuals in society. Analyzing thetotally unique nature ofthe school, the International Sahaja Public School is not only the ideal school for students, but also a ground where better human beings are made and creativity is acknowledged. I would have no hesitation in recommending this school to any parent who cares about the welfare of their children and their development into better human beings. It is a society of better human beings that, ultimately, will result in a better world for all.- Rishi Nicolai, Australia • At Dharamsala, in a pure and healthy environment, we were given the chance to grow into adults without the threats and dangers of today-nodrugs, no alcohol, but an absolutely

 Issue: 3 & 4-2006 26 The Divine Cool Breeze strong feeling of security and love. This school let us grow up in something comparable to an intact family. At such a young age, the feeling of being protected is one of the greatest needs and the school gave it to us, totally in contrast to the situation I found later in Europe.l have met many people who have no back-up from their families and I have seen their state. Aggression, hatred, insecurity have become their guidelines. Quarrel and disorder within families of this Western world are the cause. I was taught to respect my parents. I was taught to search for answers within the family and1 found them. Although we were often separated from our parents for months, I never felt left alone. In fact, the bond to my parents grew and so did the respect. It was they who had to let loose and overcome their conditionings on how children should be brought up, to give me the chance to grow up in a functioning and working community. My experience in the school enriched my personality in several ways. Firstly, it gave me an open and tolerant attitude towards other cultures that I found was lacking in some European public schools I went to later. Being at boarding school and far from home, it also developed my skills of handling situations independently. I also learnt how to cooperate, coordinate and live with other students my age, with each of us, our habits, likes and dislikes. The different system of teaching lead to the fact that, when coming back to Europe, my levels of math and sciences were superior to those of my classmates. My years at the school have been of the most instructive and enriching of my life, precisely because it offered so much more than just the usual academic curriculum.- Niranjana de Kalbermatten, Switzerland the difference to myself, my personality, if I had not been there, for it is what I learned during those young years in my life that has made me who I am today. Most abviously, the education I received was of a much higher standard than what is offered in Canada, where "perfect" in the Western education system is the "satisfactory" that is expected by the Indian International Board of Education that I studied under. Along with a second language, the experience of Indian classical music, dance and art, I have come away with an international perspective on a very diverse world. But it is not just the academic education I received at the International Sahaj Public School which is of such a high standard, but more importantly the deeper values that I learned through the spiritual aspect that underlies the way in which the school is run. These are valuesthat developed qualities of my personality and matured them much beyond my peers back in Canada. Most importantly, I was allowed to leamaboutmyself and the world around me and, in doing so, become more self-confident and secure in who I am, a quality very much lacking in the West, where insecurity, problems of personal identity, family and social dysfunction are dominant everywhere.It is also due to the simple meditation techniques I learned that allow me to reduce any stress in my life that comes from university course work, job work and even day- to-day problems that arise. My friends are envious that I am able to remain peaceful and balanced in my life while under pressure and, at the same time, top the class in almost every course and receive high praise from my lecturers. My attention is more focussed and my mind is clearer. I fall asleep with no effort at nightand wake up in the morning well rested, something I have come to know that most people around me do not enjoy.-Gautama Payment, Canada I can not express in words how lucky and how privileged I feel to have been able to attend school in India, at the Sahaj Yoga School in Dharamsala. I cannot even pretend to imagine

 5. International Sahaja yoga Research & Health Center, CBD, Belapur Situated in a sylvan surrounding, the International Centre for Sahaja Yoga Research and Health Centre stands as a unique centre of its kind in the world, where treatment is done by vibratory awareness, developed by Sahaja yoga meditation. Contact Address: International Sahara Yoga Research & Health Center, Plot.1, Sec-8, H.H.Shri Nirmala Devi Marg CBD, Belapur Navi Mumbai -400614. Telephone details: Tel: Reception:(022) 27571341, (022) 27576922 Tele-Fax: (022) 27576795 Timing: 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Email: sahaja center@ vsnl.net On 19h February 1996, Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, founded and graced this sprawling International Health centre as a gift to humanity at CBD, Belapur, Navi Mumbai. Late Dr. UC Rai, former Head Physiolagy Department Jawaharlal Institute of Post graduate Medical Education and Research, Pondicherry, and professor in various medical colleges of Delhi, was appointed as its first director by Shri Mataji. After his demise, Shri Mataji appointed Dr. Madhur Rai as the next in charge of this Health Centre. Some important Quotes from our Mother, while talking to Doctors in the International Health Centre on 19th February 1996 ..."Through our evolution we have become human beings, We have become human beings and what we have all the things within us about which we have no knowledge, we have knowledge whatever we see outside but what is within us we Mother's Divine Grace has cured many patients from all over the world. About thirty-five countries including U.S.A., Australia, England, Africa, Malaysia, Singapore, Russia, Canada) have benefited from the Sahaja treatment in this Health have no knowledge so far because we have not yet studied or have tried to find out what is written in so many ancient books about what we have inside ourselves. So it is a question of understanding that all these things written since ancient times in our country by many saints, many incarnations must be some reason why they wrote about it. Now this power is nothing mysterious today it's the power that is to sprout for our last breakthrough of our evolution. After the human awareness which is a complete understanding of ourselves, this new awareness that has been talked about, told about by Zen system which you know that is followed very well in Japan, then also by Lao Tse in China, by so many people it has been talked about that one has to become a person who is beyond the mind". Center; Cases of varied etiology like Hypertension, Bronchial-Asthma, Diabetes, Migraine, Epilepsy, Depression, & Cancer have been cured at Health Center. Not only patients with physical ailments but also yogis with subtle system imbalance visit Health Center. The total number of patients (indoor admissions + out patient) has risen progressively from a figure of nine hundred and fifty four in 1996 to five thousand and twenty five in 2004. For admission at this Health Center one needs to send in (fax/post or e-mail) their brief medical history or brief account of subtle imbalance experienced to Dr. In charge. Subsequently, the bookings and reservations for the accommodations of Rooms in the Health Centre are made at the *,„. Seekers of truth. It's a very different thing today that I have to speak to people who are professionally doctors and are following a kind of reception.

 Issue: 3 & 4 - 2006 28 The Divine Cool Breeze are available to you, we don't want to bother them too much and neither they are bothered about us. They only depend on doctors so you can have them. But for us more important is the middle class and the lower middle class especially the people who can't afford to go to doctors and hospital". a medical practice which is supposed to be absolutely scientific. I am not here to in any way denounce or put down any one of the thearies that are prevalent and are practiced by the doctors all over the world. In no way one has to degrade any knowledge whatever is available. But the problem is when you find any knowledge is not fully developed or not competent we should open our minds to something that could be something better than what we are following. Because we have studied in a medical science, because we know about medical studies it's not necessary that we should be so conditioned that we can not take This science is absolutely free to you, you can learn it in one month. For medical science you have to work for seven years. What is the advantage for doctors to know it because they can locate it very well, they can grasp this much better. They can understand that it's so scientific. It's so beautifully working out. They are amazed at it. I would say that, this is so great a science, we can call it a meta science as Doctor sahib(referring to Late Dr. UC Rai) has said , but this science can explain it logically but science to anything that is new, is available. In the ethics of medical science as far as I know, it is for the benevolence of the people that we are working, we are not working for just pocketing money or for propagating a one kind of theory that we know of. cannot encepass the whole. Science is still a little cup can't get ail the ocean in to it. So for that all the scientific people who think science is great should try to terstand what is such a wealth of our country. May God Bless You All". As it is you know, every time in the science theories are challenged. Starting from earlier times, you see all becomes hypothesis then becomes laws and then the laws are challenged. Another thing is the science is amoral. It doesn't look at that aspect of human being where it is important that morality must be imbibed. Thirdly it's a limited thing, it's limited because it is dealing with our efforts through our mind. With our mind, whatever we try to know need not be absolute truth, that is the reason there is always difference of opinion. If it was absolute truth there would have been no difference of opinion. So what we have to do is to get to a point where we can know absolute truth, absolute meaning that every doctor should feel the same way, diagnosis should be the same. From all these point of views we have to a little bit humble down and see for ourselves what knowledge lies before us in this great country of India. We have no idea as to this knowledge of Sahaja Yoga existed thousands and thousands of years back." A few interesting experiences shared by the Sahaja Yogis who visited the Centre Etienne Loyson, a 62 year old architect from Belgium, is just spell-bound, "Earlier I had high blood pressure. Doctors abroad had suggested taking several tablets on routine as the only treatment method. But today, with Sahaja yoga treatment and the blessing of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, I am full of energy. I have stopped all medicines and I feel I am just 30 years old." Katherine Reid from England (who suffered from irritable bowels syndrome) is a happy woman today, in contrast to her life previously when she had to take several medicines prior to her arrival in CBD, Belapur Centre. "I feel much better having stopped my medication completely. My health has improved by about eighty per cent."Anna Kargaity, a Canadian who suffered from depressive psychosis is full of smiles today. "I now have a positive outlook towards life, being able to develop In Sahaja Yoga you don't have to take any money or anything just works out through your powers. You can help the poor people very well .Of course if there are very rich people, they

 Issue: 3 & 4 -2006 29 The Divine Cool Breeze my own personality and express my feelings", she says. Similar benefits were highlighted by Belinda from Australia, Kumar from Canada, Bryan from USA and others. follow the recommendations of doctors. It should be noted that the centre has achieved cures or improvements in cases where medical science could offer no relief whatsoever. Even if you receive the full medical treatment specified by your doctor, you may still wish to come to the clinic. Sahaja Yoga practice is the way to cure a medical problem. This must be emphasized. On being asked as to why so many foreigners are coming to India, when advanced medicines sare available with doctors of modem medicine all over the world, Late Dr. UC Rai once commented, "The doctors abroad don't have a treatment for the psyche of human being, except giving tranquillizers, sedatives and anti-depressant drugs. These are not only harmful, but also habit-forming. In view of this, Sahaja yoga, which can control the psyche of human being by meditation, has become very popular to the treatment and prevention of psychosomatic diseases like bronchial asthma, migraine, irritable bowel syndrome, infertility, multiple sclerosis and spondylitis, to name a few. It is all due to the blessings of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, who founded Sahaja Yoga centre, and has enlightened thousands of people all over the world." In sickness, the medical profession simply eliminates the symptom. Medical practice does not cure. A cure is effected only when the negativity in the subtle system that caused a disease to manifest is itself eliminated, Otherwise, the cause is still in the subtle system and the patient simply begins to work himself into something worse. Only fragments remain of the works of the ancient Greek philosopher Heracletus from Ephesus (circa 500 BC). In one of them he says, "The doctors, by cutting and burning, they work up the same as the diseases and they receive payment, which they do not deserve." This is as applicable then as it is today, despite all the progress in medicine. Theodore Efstathiou From Greece In February of 2002, I was at the Sahaja Yoga Health Centre at Belapur, in order to dust off some more negativity from my subtle system. On the 19th of February, it was the sixth anniversary of the operation of the centre. For the occasion, a puja was offered to our Divine Mother. Vibrations were very strong and it was very auspicious to have attended such a puja. The event marks a milestone and it is a good opportunity to say a few things about the centre, about its operation and the need for it. Socrates has explained this more fully by saying that "No doctor knows himself. This is the reason he is a doctor." Putting this in the language of our Sahaja culture, it says that "No doctor is self-realized and this is the reason he is a doctor." Yogis with medical problems should consider going to the centre to benefit from the experience and focused attention of the Sahaja Yoga doctors there. Those without medical problems Those with medical problems With respect to persons who have no medical problems, the natural question is why one should take the big step and come to the health centre. Once Prof. Rai quoted our Holy Mother, who said that the negativity in Sahaja Yogis is so strong. that they cannot feel their catches. The question was raised in the past, as to why Sahaja Yogis need to come to the centre for treatment. The question hardly needs any answer when one has some evident medical or severe emotional problem. In such a case, one should consult a physician and determine the ailment and its cause. Normal practice is for Sahaja Yogis to This is a very strong statement by our Holy Mother. It indicates that unless you can feel your

 30 Issue; 3 & 4 -2006 The Divine Cool Breeze catches, your spiritual ascent may be very difficult to achieve. It is after you understand your problem that you can eliminate it. Routine at the centre During your stay at the health centre your attention is set on your spiritual progress and on nothing else. There is a morning meditation at 8 am and an evening meditation at about 7 pm, which includes watching a video or listening to a talk by our Holy Mother from an audio tape. You will have the opportunity to get up at 4 am, in order to get to the lawn for a very early meditation and prayers. In this way, you will get the experience of the difference it makes to have early meditation, as our Holy Mother urges us. You will also get the experience of feeling Mother Earth as a Goddess who is there to help you by sucking from your feet all your negativity, when at this early hour you walk around saying Her mantra and asking Her to absorb the negativity. In order to appreciate Shri Mataji's remark, She has stated that the number of diseases that exist is the total number of combinations and permutations of the chakras, On the three channels there are twenty-one chakras, so the total number of combinations and permutations can be computed as the product of 21 x 20 x 19 x 18 3х2х1. I tried to compute this expression on my computer in integer format and the computer run out of numbers. So I used Stirling's approximate method to estimate the value of this product and it turns out to be of the order of ten raised to the eighteenth power. This is a fantastically big number and is of the order of a quintillion. This shows the hopeless task with which the medical profession and the bio-technologists are faced in trying to determine the genetic code of diseases in order to effect cures. The doctors see you twice a day and they prescribe to you the treatment that you have to give to yourself until the next time they see you. The idea of the treatment is to get the Ida and Pingala Nadis to balance, so that you are always on the Sushumna Nadi. In so doing, they can tell which chakras need to be corrected next, thus At the same time, it also gives an idea of the fact that in each one of us, the condition of the subtle system is not as simple as it might be indicated because we feel a chakra catching. Of finding the way in the labyrinth of the cross- catches that exist in you. The techniques used in the health centre are not different than what has already been published either in the Sahaja Yoga Prayer Book or in other treatment publications. What really counts is that the grounds are highly vibrated. Our Holy Mother has Her attention on the health centre and She course, no human ever attains this fantastic number of catches. To ascertain the condition of the subtle system and to treat the various catches and cross-catches, a person who has a well developed vibratory awareness is required. Such people are the doctors to be found in the health centre at Belapur. Such people are the ones who can balance a subtle system and get a person on their way to spiritual effects all cures. It must be appreciated that the Goddess is realized by devotion. Once you are here, you are devoted, for there is nothing else to distract your attention. Mother has said that prayer ascent. is the greatest weapon of a Sahaja Yogi. The health centre is a very good place to learn devotion and surrender to our Holy Mother and to learn how to What this points out is the fact that when people who have lived a average life and have had no unusual experiences, it is not easy to feel and understand the inner workings of affirmations, mantras and treatments. pray effectively.

 6. Shri P K Salve Kala Pratishthan, (Academy) Vaitarna, Maharashtra the academy during the duration of their studies. A proper attitude needs to be adopted. Students of this academy are NOT clients, but rather students of Indian Spiritual Music, which is being taught in the holy context of Shri Mataji's academy. Throughout their stay they must be aware that being here is not a prerogative of theirs but rather a blessing that the Divine has bestowed upon them. An understanding of this reality is required if a student is to apprehend the nature of this. Information for the students willing to join the Academy Infrastructure: The academy of Indian Classical Music and Fine Arts at Vaitarna, Maharashtra has been established and blessed by Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi as a prestigious project. Vaitarna, surrounded by Dams and Lakes in the vicinity of scenic greenery, is about 100 kilometers from Mumbai and about 80 kilometers from Nasik off National Highway 3 (Mumbai Agra Highway), easily accessible from Khardi Railway Station (25 kilometers) of the Central Railways. The Institute is situated within an area of 40 acres of land comprising of the streams, undulations and natural landscape. Modak Sagar and Tansa Dams are in the vicinity with a thick reserved forest cover. The following infrastructural provisions exist for making your stay comfortable & your learning experience memorable: 1. Comfortable Indian style accommodation on twin-sharing basis for individuals and single rooms for family. 2. Hygienically prepared Healthy and Nutritious Indian Vegetarian & Non - Vegetarian food. 3. Library, Study & Practice rooms with Books, CDs, Cassettes & study material provided for reference. The buildings have been architecturally planned under the instructions of our Divine Mother, with a central courtyard and a covered stage. Course Durations Term Academy Course Duration 1stTerm: Ist January to 15th April (15th to 30th March Holidays) 2nd Term: 15th June to 15th September 3rd Term :16th September to l6th December Individual Course durations are stated in the Syllabus of the particular course. Mission Statement 4. Electronic devices like TV, VCD/DVD & Audio equipments. 5. Communications:- a. Internet facility for email, web conferencing and surfing. b. Phones & Faxes(Calling card can be purchased for international calls) c. Scanning and Photocopying 6. Music studio for recording (under construction), useful for students and teachers. Music is a Divine Inspiration to become the Spirit. This is the prime goal of the Music Academy. The Academy An Academy is an Institution of learning Art and a Research centre where people get generous time to introspect, contemplate and conduct a spiritual research on themselves. On a Subtle and Gross level Art is the medium to know and Visa & Immigration: 1. Students who wish to stay in the academy for more than six months should arrange for their Indian visa from their respective countries. For the Indian Embassy locations in your respective countries click on any of the following links: a. http://passport.nic.in b. http://www.india-visa.com experience their inner selves and raise it to a higher degree of divinity. Preamble: The rules have been framed upon the underlying fundamentals of Sahaja Yoga as expounded by the teachings of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. Students must respect the pertinent statutes at all times within and outside the academy premises as they represent

 Issue: 3 & 4- 2006 32 The Divine Cool Breeze well as practical which is not very surprising as they were designed fully by Our Mother Herself. 2. Musical Instruments: Musical instruments can either be purchased or the instruments at the academy can be used for learning purposes. Having your own instrument is recommended. The whole Ashram emits vibrations and we are constantly bathing in this bliss. Moreover there is the jungle which is all around the Academy as well as rural area with a small village nearby named Vaitarna. There is the Attention of H.H.Shri Mataji on this new project of Hers which is very evident to all of us. Shri Mataji Herself inquires in detail about the ongoing activities of the Academy, how it is going and who is there and so on. We can feel the warmth and affection of Our Divine Guru in every step we take in that blissful abode. Contact Information:- Academy address: Near Vaitarna Dam (also known as Modak Sagar Dam), Village Belvad, At Post Vaitarna, Taluka Sahapur, District Thane 421 304 (Maharashtra, India) Phone: +91 2527 248 528 /248 530 (Call only between 10.00 am to 06.00 pm as per Indian time) Principal: Dr. Arun Apte Mobile No: +91 9325316580 Looking back to what has happened to me in Sahaja terms is that Mother has carefully lifted me up in vibrations and I feel so much lighter (in vibrations) than before the trip. Academy-homepage: www.pksacademy.com Mumbai Office: Shri P. K. Salve Kala Pratishthan This Indian Classical Music which I study is such a beautiful thing that only this Music itself has lots of vibrations and is capable of changing a lot in human beings. It touches the hearts of the listener and the singer at the same time. The combination of Sahaja with Indian traditional Art like Music, Dance and Miniature Painting is an explosion of Vibrations at least for me. 612-B, Umila Co. Hsg. Soc., Shivaji Chowk, Sahar Road, Andheri East, Mumbai - 400 069 Phone: +91 22 2684 3169, Fax: +91 22 2683 1314 E-mail: draruapte@yahoo.co.in (Call only between 10.00 am to 06.00 pm as per Indian time) Experience shared by yogi who visited this Academy in the recent past 1. Anand Schreuer, from Austria With the Grace of Our Holy Mother I had the opportunity to study a few months in this blessed place which I call Our Academy. Looking back I can see how much weight has been lost of Ego and other enemies of the Spirit. The Academy student had opportunity to perform before Her Holy Lotus Feet in the recent past. Our youngest student was a 7-year-old girl studying Kuchipudi. Together with her elder sisters (in Sahaja) she gave a touching performance just in the presence of Mother on the 24th December. After that many Indians have registered for the Academy as they were so touched by the performance. Staying in this Divine place was such a joyous experience. So many aspects are incredibie and hard to describe. There is the multi-cultured flavour of being in a big Ashram together with Sahaja students from all over the world. There is the stage where not long ago, where Puja was offered at Her Holy Lotus Feet of Shri Adi Shakti Herself on the occasion of opening the Academy. On this same stage we Sahajis are allowed to meditate. There are the buildings that are incredibly beautiful as The Academy provides you a nice room which is usually shared by two brothers/sisters. Every room has a bathroom attached. All the work is done by Sahaja Yogis. They cook and clean for you. We are completely free to attend our lessons and study and have fun. What a blessing to be born in this time and able to use all this Divine Facilities Our Mother created for us.

 Books Published and Projects related to Sahaja Yoga The list is not all that Sahaja Yoga has treasured over the period of its evolution since 1970. But, it's an attempt to compile most of them from all cormers of the globe that speaks of the volumes of books or booklet or such publications (known so far in wide collectivity or information received), However, a few of these (earlier ones) may still be available in newer editions or reprints, while, a few may not be in circulation as of now. This list does not reflect recommendations for literature study, but is an attempt to refresh our awareness of the works ever attempted in Sahaja Yoga, including the verses and text in form of book from divine nectar blessed by our beloved Mother Herself at one place time to time on Sahaja yoga is underway and not ignored. • International Sahaja Yoga Book Project (From SWAN) Background This project was personally approved by Shri Mataji in 2003, and has been in progress since September of that year. Objective To publish internationally in mainstream bookshops, between 10 and 11 books by H.H. Shri Mataji Nimala Devi. The books will be initially published by daisyamerica LLC and then through an expanding network. This will allow the general reading public, many of whom may never attend a Sahaja Yoga meeting, to have access to Shri Mataji's teachings and insights. It will enable such readers to experience Self-realization and later, if they so wish, to connect to the Sahaja collective. The ongoing Projects related to Sahaja literature Keeping in view of the compilation and archival works done on the Holy Scriptures of various religions across the globe today, it is high time that we the Sahaja Yogis of the world collective, must collectively pray at Her Holy Lotus Feet that this beautiful world be blessed with compilation of volumes that archives the words of Divinity for our ascent and our self Realization for today and of future long after we are gone. Her talks that are the mantras for the world, those will be our Vedas, Puranas and the epic Holy Scripture, the world shall ever witness with the Advent of Method A team of Sahaja Yogis, from numerous countries have begun to produce new, accurately verified transcriptions from the large body of Shri Mataji's talks in the English language, currently in audio and video format. From these transcripts, editors will compile books on various topics as suggested by the following provisional titles: 1. An Introduction to Sahaja Yoga 2. The Keeper at the Gate (Innocence and Wisdom, Shri Ganesha and Lord Jesus Christ) greatest incarnation on Earth, Shri Adi Shakti, Shri Mataji Herself on Earth. The objective and the intention of project undertaken in these direction, is to accurately transcribe as many talks as possible that were given in the English language so that an importani resource is created as a by produci, that will be available to researchers, academicians and to countries who wish to translate transcripts of talks into other languages. However, the list of Research papers and other related documents already published in magazines, periodicals and journals are not included in this exhaustive list. At the same time compilation of the list of such articles or papers published from 3. How to be your own Guru (Adiguru Datatreya) 4. The Cool Fire (Kundalini and Self-realization) 5. The Inner World (The Subtle System and Chakras) 6. The Praxis of Transformation (Clearing Techniques, Balance, How to Meditate, How to Introspect) 7. The Enlightened Mind (The Buddha, Buddhism and Hamsa)

 34 Issue: 3 & 4-2006 The Divine Cool Breeze The Mantra Book should be based on Sahaj shastras, the existing body of texts that were prepared for and accepted by HH Shri Mataji at different pujas over the years. The draft will be scrutinized by Sahaja yogis who are Sanskrit experts and reviewed by members of the Committee and interested members of the WCASY 8. The Pantheon of Light (The Deities) 9. Fortune and Misfortune of Religions (Islam, Christianity, Hinduism, Judaism) 10. A Day Book (Random quotes from Shri Mataji's Talks) Alan Wherry from New York is Director of the project; Ken Williams, from London, UK, is the leading Managing Editor. Shruti Gupta and Ann Capazzoli, both from New York, and Anton Grabmayer from Austria are also Managing Editors and are heading up teams of Yogis, working in pairs, for the initial transcription phase of the project. Team members must be established Sahaja Yogis, with balance, good hamsa qualities and a working knowledge of Sahaj terms. They must be able to work with accuracy in the English language. From the completed body of tramscriptions, editors will compile books on the above topics into a cohesive whole with the essence of the work being that it can be read, understood and enjoyed by a reader with no previous knowledge of Sahaja Yoga. Each book will finally be reviewed by David Spiro and Grégoire de Kalbermatten before going to press. The intention is to accurately transcribe as many talks as possible that were given in the English language so that an important resource is created as a byproduct, that will be available to researchers, academicians and to countries who wish to translate transcripts of talks into other languages. prior to final clearance and printing. In this manner each yogini and yogi will know that the utmost care has been invested in the production of this important document. There are nowa number of differing Mantra Books in circulation and we are aware that, this year, a text entitled Sahaja Yoga Mantra Book has recently been circulated on the web and printed in a limited number of copies in India with the mention on the cover page of rights to Shri Mataji and the Life Eternal Trust. It should be clear that this work represents an individual effort, which has not been cleared in its present form by the Committee. No matter how well meaning attempts by individual yogis may be, they will create unnecessary confusion. While recognizing the concern of the author, some of the changes he brought to the texts of the old book are not called for. Many texts that are changed in this edition have been read to and accepted by HHSM and have become part of our devotional practice and there is a need to further improve on Sanskrit translation and to ensure objectivity. Therefore the Publication Committee does not encourage or authorize at this stage the publication er circulation of a new SY Mantra Book other than the one to be soon developed and approved in the context of the WCASY. In the meantime the old (green) mantra book is the one recommended for use by the sangha. We are grateful for everybody's understanding in this matter. As Mantras are a corner stone of The Sahaja Yoga Mantra Book Monday, April 04, 2005 We are pleased to inform the sangha that the Publication Committee of the World Council for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga (WCASY) has taken up the task of producing an updated, accurate Sahaja Yoga Mantra Book. In due course, this will be complemented with a second publication, a Sahaja Yoga Book of Worship. This will contain prayers existing in the old mantra book and completed with a few selected texts from world religions that have a specific relationship to Sahaja Yoga. Sahaj practices, we are conscious that the sangha expects a Book carrying the needed authority. We are confident that the above process shall serve well the need for a universal and consistent SY Book of Mantras. For the Publication Committee of the WCASY Alan Wherry -Grégoire de Kalbermatten - Philipp SIS Zeiss

 Name of Book Author Language English Corruption-India's Enemy Within (2001) Sir CP Srivastava Bhrashtachar-Bharat ki Bhiteri Shatru Sir CP Srivastava Marathi/ Hindi (Hindi Version of Corruption) (2002) - Nirmalanjali » Sahaja Yoga Songbook - Pushparpan Sahaja Pushpanjali (1995) Prayer/Song Book Compilation Compilation compiled by Sushil Kejriwal(Songs) Hindi/ Marathi English Hindi Hindi Armaity.H. Bhabha compiled by Sushil Kejriwal(Songs) Sahajamala( Book of Poems) (2000) • Sahaja Gectarpan (1995) English Hindi * Sahaja Yoga Geetanjali Compiled book of songs (English,Hindi, Marathi) Compilation H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi English Sahaja Yoga Parichay Pustika * Sahaja Yoga The Unique Discovery Hindi English English Sahaja Yoga- A Guide for Parents, Teachers and Students Helga Fein Compilation Mantra Folder English Excerpt from Speeches of Shri Mataji Nimala Devi Geoferey Godfrey & RK Pal - The Joy of spreading Sahaja Yoga (2005) English English Divine Light- Miracle Photographs of Shri Mataji (1998) The Divine Mother- 1008 Photographs of Shri Mataji- The Great Guru (2000) Geoffrey Godfrey, English Islam Enlightened (1998) The Light of the Koran- Knowiedge through Sahaja Yoga (1998) Geeta Enlightened (1986) Bible Enlightened-Religions and Yoga (Vol. First, Second and Third) (2003), Music & Sahaja Yoga (1997) English English Javed Khan Flore Descieux, Transl: Caroline Mc Carthy Yogi Mahajan Dr. Dan Costian English English Dr.Arun Apte and D.V. Athavale H.H Shri Mataji English * Sahaja Yoga 1991(Eng)/1998(Hindi) Sahaja Yoga Research and Health Centre English/Hindi Nirmala Devi H.H Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi H.H Shri Mataji English ► Education Enlightened- A Guide for Schools English Nirmala Devi Meta Modern Era (1996) H.H Shri Nirmala Devi English H.H Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi * Para Aadhunic Yug (Hindi Version of Meta Morderm Era) (2000) My Memories (2000) Hindi Babamama( HP Salve) English

 Hindi Babamama HP Salve) Translation, O.P Chandna Mere Sansmaran (Hindi Version of My Memoirs) (2002) Hindi * Sahaja Yogu Prakritik Jadi Bution Dwara Rog Niwaran + The Advent (1979) Compilation- Booklet Gregoire De Kalbermatten English French Trans:Lotus heart L'Avenement (French edition of The Advent) (1985) El Advenimiento (1994) (Spanish Version of The Advent) The Third Advent (2003) Spanish Gregoire De Kalbermatten English English English English Gregoire De Kalbermatten Yogi Mahajan Jail Break Miracles of God The Search for the Divine Mother (1997) Cooking With Love- Divine Recipes (2003) Lal Bahadur Shastri- A Life of Truth in Politics (1995) Lal Bahadur Shastri- Rajneeti Mein Satyanishth Jivan (2000) (Hindi version) Navaratri Talks-Pune 1988 (2002) Gwenael Verez English Recipes of H.H Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Sir C.P. Shrivastava English Hindi Sir C.P. Shrivastava (Trans: Shankar Nene) English Talks of H.H Shri Mataji on Navaratri 1988. Pune Talks of H.H Shri Mataji on Navaratri 1988. Pune Hindi Navaratri Pravachan Pune 1988(Hindi Vesrion) 2003 English - Medical Science Enlightened- New Insight into Vibratory Awareness for Holistic Health Care (1993) Professor Dr. Umesh C Rai, M.D. English Ed. Dr. JI Sood, Dr. MN Sood & Dr. R Garg New Delhi Medicos Vol.13 April&May 1997 Nos. 4&5 (1997) English Yogi Mahajan Yogi Mahajan translation by CL Patel The Ascent Utthan (Hindi Version of The Ascent) (1994) Hindi English Yogi Mahajan Realized Saints English English English/Hindi English Yogi Mahajan Yogi Mahajan Yogi Mahajan Yogi Mahajan Sufi Odes to Divine Mother Great Women of India The Face of God/Parmatma Ka Swaroop New Millenuim Fulfilis Ancient Prophecies Hindi Yogi Mahajan translation by O.P. Chandna Nav Sahasrabdi (Hindi Version of New Millenuim Fulfills Ancient Prophecies) (2000) English * Unique Discovery Divine Knowledge through Vibrations (1992) A Collection of Prayer & Praise-Sahaja Yoga (1990) Booklet PT Rajasekharan & R Venkatesan English Compilation English

 Sahaja Yoga Puja Book (1990) Sahaja Yoga Mantra Book 1989 French Compilation- From Le Puja English H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi English Prayers, Praises & Protocol to Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Come the Mother Calls A Tribute of Love to Shri Mataji Nimala Devi Children in Sahaja Yoga (1991) * Cabella 94 (photographs by Michael Markl, Vienna) (1995) English Collection Compilation English Compilation Compilation-printed by Adolf Holzhausens Nfg. Vienna English English English Compilation Souveneir Nirmal Dham- A Project of H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Foundation Compilation English Hindi Grace Sant Kabir Aur Sahaja Yog (1999) (Ek Vaigyanik Drishti) Shree Ganesha Puja-1999 Compilation-Souveneir Compilation- Souveneir Compilation-Souveneir Compilation Hindi/English English Eriglish English/Hindi The age of Ascent - Vibrations (2000) Shiva Tattwa (2000) - Birthday Messages Health, Peace, Morality Culture "East-West" (9th. All Russian Scientific and Practical Conference) (9-10 June, 1998) English/ Compilation Moscow, Russia Russian English/French Russian * A Seeker's Journey-Searching for clues to life's mcaning (1995) Greg Turek. Australia German, Chinese Chinese Edwin Hou Actualise Your Self-Realisation Chinese Sahaja Yoga Meditation Beginners Guide Nimal Fragrance Kwong Ming Wai English Compilation Periodicals and Magazines Akashwani Volume I Yuva Shakti, bound English Yuva Shakti, bound English English/Hindi Akashwani Volume II Anant Jeevan (1979-1980) The Divine Cool Breeze USA (1987-2005) English * Chaitanya Lahiri The Divine Cool Breeze, India Hindi English English/Hindi Yuvadrishti Germany Hermes English English/Hindi English/ Hindi English/Hindi English English • The Knowledge of Reality The Life Eternal Maha Avatar (1980) Nirmala Yoga (1981-1985) Sahaj Amrit Open Heart

 24 112 Pratisthan, Gurgoan, India

 38 Issue: 3 & 4 - 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze List of a few Important Sahaja Yoga establishments and Projects alongwith addresses for contact / online information / Newsletter /Newspaper and Magazine subscriptions, published regularly worldwide. Sahaja Yoga Mandir (Ashram at Delhi, India) C-17, Qutab Institutional Area New Delhi 110016 (India) Tel. 91-11-26966652 Fax. 91-11-26866801 e-mail-delhiashram@rediffimail.com Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. Plot No.8, Chandragupt Hsg. Society, Kothrud, Paud Road, Pune 411029. Maharashtra,(India) Ph No. 020-25286537 Fax: 020-25285232, email: marketing@nirmalinfosys.com Pratisthan NDA Road Near Chandni Chowk, Pune-411023, Maharashtra, India Sahaja Yoga Health & Research Center, Plot # 1, Sector # 8, Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Marg, CBD, Konkan Bhavan, Belapur, Navi Mumbai - 400 703. Maharashtra, (India) Phone : (91) + (022) 27576795, 27571341, 6795. Director: Dr. (Mrs.) Madhu Rai {Contact From 10.00 Hrs IST - 14.00 Hrs IST} sahaja center@vsnl.net Nirmal Dham Sahaja Yoga Ashram Behind BSF Camp Chhawala Gaon Delhi – 110041, India Ph. 91-11-25023190 Vishwa Nirmala Prem Ashram (NGO) Home for the destitute women Plot No. 9, Institutional Area, Greater Noida, U.P. (India) Tel. 0091-120-2230681 Shri PK Salve Kala Pratishthan Near Vaitarna Dam, Village Belvad, Taluka Sahapur, District Thane. Maharashtra, India International Sahaja Public School Talnoo, Dharamshala Cantt. Distt. Kangra H.P. - 176216 India site: www.sahajapublicschool.org Phone: +91 2527 248528 /248 530 URL: www.pksacademy.com Publications: Subscription rates are subject to revision. The quoted rates are updated as on Jan. 2005. Sahaja School at Jejuri, India Vishwa Nirmala Vidya Mandir Clo Old Sadashiv Medicals, Jejuri-412303 Distt. Pune, Maharashtra, India Principal : Mr. Patrick Redican International Sahaja School Canajoharie Canajoharie.school@sahajayoga.org Chaitanya Lahari (Marathi) Rs. 225/- annually 6 issues per year Correspondence: Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. Plot No.8, Chandragupt Hsg. Society, Kothrud, Paud Road, Pune 411029. Maharashtra, (India) For Subscription: Demand Draft in favour of "Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd." payable in Pune. Sahaja Kindergarden and Ashram Borotin, Czech Republic http://www.nirmala.cz/borotin, borotin@nirmala.czb

 Issue: 3 & 4- 2006 39 The Divine Cool Breeze Yuvadrishti (magazine managed by Yuva Shakti in India) Correspondence: Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. Plot No.8, Chandragupt Hsg. Society, Kothrud, Paud Road, Pune 411029. Phone: +91-20- 5286105 US (S 5.50)* $5.0 for each back issues Herndon, Virginia 20172 USA US ($11.00)* for the special issues. (703 471-8484) ("for Credit Card System) http://www.sahajayoga.org/store/subscription.asE Cheques or money orders payable to "The Divine Cool Breeze" dcb108@yahoo.com Stories, photos and artwork can be sent to. The Divine Cool Breeze, 881 Frederick Road, North Vancouver British Columbia, Canada V7K 2Y5 or to coolbreeze@shaw.ca yuvadrishti@yahoo.com For Subscription: Demand Draft in favour of "Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd." payable in Pune. Rs. 120/- (National) ,INR 500/- (International) 4 issues per year Chaitanya Lahari (Hindi) Correspondence: Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. Clo G. L. Agrawal, 222, Deshbandhu Apartments, Kalkaji, New Delhi - 110019.India Ph.: 011-26216654 Fax: 011-26422054 For Subseription: Demand Draft in favour of "Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd." payable in Delhi. Rs. 350/- annually 6 issues per Akashwani (Yuva Shakti Magazine) C/O. Shreya Payment, 8272,141 A Street, Surrey, BC, Canada V3W 0V6 editors@akashwani:org List of on going Sahaja Projects: Under the auspices of the World Council for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga, a new subsection of the www.sahajayoga.org web site has been created so that yogis around the world can see details of various projects and activities that are year Divine Cool Breeze (Indian Edition) 350/- annually 6 issues per year Correspondence: Nirmal Infosystems Technologies Pvt. Ltd. Clo G. L. Agrawal, 222, Deshbandhu Apartments, Kalkaji, New Delhi - 110019.India Ph.: 011-26216654 Fax: 011-26422054 & happening in the Sahaja collective. This site has a number of benefits: to communicate the range of our activities to advance Sahaja Yoga to allow Sahaja Yogis to participate in these activities where appropriate so that we can learn from each other, and possibly avoid unnecessary duplication of effort. For Subscription: Demand Draft in favour of "Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd." payable in Delhi. For more information like books & others visit www.nirmalinfosys.com Details of the project should be written in English, and sent to Alan Wherry, email: info@daisyamerica.com and to Dave Dunphy, email : dunphitect@aol.com. The email should be copied to the relevant country leader in all cases, it should be clear from which country it comes and it should contain a contact address with the text so that Bharat Vidhata (Hindi-Marathi Weekly Newspaper) Publisher: RT Manuja, Mumbai, India Phone:3793578/32956124 Annual Divine Cool Breeze Subscription (international Edition) CiO. Sarvesh Singh, US (S 30)* $28 Per Annum for six issues 2042 Capstone Circle, available queries or requests can be sent to the right person.

 Issue: 3 & 4 - 2006 40 The Divine Cool Breeze An example of the suggested style of an article can be seen at http.//www.sahajavoga.org/current projects.asp For International Sahaja Yoga Book Project A few selected URLS (online site address) to view International Sahaja Yoga sites and related Sahaja information like Newsletter: http://www.sahajayoga.org/Sahaja Yoga Intemational Site http://www.geocities.com/seattleyoga/ Sahaja Yoga in Seattle http://sahajabhakta.org/nysahajayoga/ Sahaja Yoga New York and New Jersey http://www.shrimataji.net rare photographs of Puja and other http://www.sahajayoga.org/swan/ Sahaja world wide Announcement and News http://www.sahajayoga.org/sahajnews/ American News letter North http://www.sahajayoga.org.in/ India News Letter/ SITA India http://www.theatreofeternalvalues.com/docHTML/ newsletter.htm TEV (Theatre of Eternal Values) Newsletter http://www.geocities.com/vndsybenin/nigeria/ Sahaja Yoga in Nigeria and Lagos http://www.poetry-enlightened.org/ecrire/ enlightened poetry section http://www.sahajayoga.es/uma/ Promised land of Spain http://sahasrara.nirmala.info/ Sahaja Yoga contacts and other related information. contact@sahajayoga.ca Sahaja Path (Sahaja Yoga Canada Newsletter) sahajnews@yahoo.com, johndobbie@innocent.com Australian Newsletter. dalysean@hotmail.com Australian National Yuva Shakti Newsletter (Until publish) http://www.sol.com.au/kor/home.htm Knowledge of Reality: Australia Magazine ramoodley@worldonline.co.za African Newsletter. A few more URLS: That may interest Sahaja Yogis to view on the net http://www.valaya.co.uk/IN-DEEP.htm Mother's talk Excerpts http://www.daisyamerica.com/ Sahaja Book Publication http://www.sakshi.org Sakshi Pokhari - The Pond of the Witness http://homepages.ihug.co.nz/-sahaj_nz Seeking Sahaja Self Realization. http://www.sahajayogamumbai.org Seeking Sahaja Knowledge. www.nirmala.cz Czech Sahaja WebPages. www.sahajayoga-arabia.com Arabic Site for Self Realization. http://sitemaker.umich.edu/sahajayoga Sahaja Yoga of Michigan USA Sahaja Related Information (evidence based outreach). http://bayyoga.intelligentfilms.com/ San Francisco /Oakland Sahaja Yoga website( A video testimonial from a Sahaja Yogi). http://www.yogacolorado.org/login.php?page-leela Sahaja Yoga Colorado/ Leela Game. Also video film *vision'. http://www.sahajvidya.freeuk.com/jsmsy Excerpts of Mother's talk http://www.sahajayogasardegna.it/musica.htm Music related site, Nirmal Tarang in MP3 http://www.yuvashakti.com/ Yuva Shakti International http://www.chicagoyoga.org/seeker_cd Sahaja Yoga Chicago. http://www.bhajan.nirmalvihar.info http://www.nirmalbhakti.com Devotional Indian Music. Sahaja Bhajan. http://www.yuvadrishti.com/ Indian Yuva Shakti Magazine



----------------------

2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The
Divine Cool Breeze
March-April 2006
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 IT
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Divine Cool Breeze
1Vine
Sahaja Sangha News & Information
Issue 3-4, 2006
(Special Issue)
In this Issue
Diwali Puja - 2005 Pune, India
Visnu-Tattwa - (Principal)
Sahaja News and Information
3)
1.
6
2.
8.
3.
S.W.A.N. - Sahaja Worldwide Announcement and News
5.
8.
A.
The Updated World Council Membership
Message from H.H. Shri Mataji - World Council for the Advancement
of Sahaja Yoga (WCASY)
Acceptance of Resolutions by the World Council of Sahaja Yoga
World Council for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga
World Council for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga
10. World Council for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga
Announcement of new collective leadership in Italy
Announcement of new collective leadership in Russia
13. The United Kingdom National Committee for the Advancement
of Sahaja Yoga
New Leadership Structure in Switzerland
15. National Trust-India
Mesasge on the Occasion of Trust Meeting
17. Gift of Cabella Properties to the World Sahaja Collective
A productive second session of the WCASY at Guru Puja
in New Jersey
19. Major Event in the History of Sahaja Yoga
6.
10
7.
10
8.
11
9.
12
13
I.
13
14
14
14.
15
15
16.
15
15
18.
18
19
20. Sahaja Yoga Projects
1. Nirmal Infosystems and Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
2. Acquisition of Shri Mataji's house in Chhindwara
3. Vishwa Nirmala Prem Ashram
4. International Sahaja Public School, Talnoo, Dharamshala
5. International Sahaja Yoga Research & Health Center, CBD, Belapur
6. Shri PK Salve Kala Pratishthan, (Academy) Vaitarna, Maharashtra
Books Published and Projects related to Sahaja Yoga
22. List of a few imporatnt Sahaja Yoga establishments and addresses for
contacts, subscriptions, onine information/Newsletter/Newspaper and
magazines published regularly worldwide.
19
21
22
24
27
31
33
21,
35
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZZE
Published by
Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 108, Chandragupt Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411029
DIL
Printed by
Krishna Printer & Designer
Tri Nagar, Delhi-35
Mob.: 9868545679
For Subscription Please Write to:
Shri G.L. Agrawal
Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
222, Desh Bandhu Apartments
Kalkaji, New Delhi-110019
Tel.No.: 011-26422054, 26216654
Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles, Miracle Photographs etc. to:
Shri O.P. Chandna
G-11 (463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110 034
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Diwali Puja Seminar 2005, Pune, India
(A Report)
take leave of you and I beg of you, I urge you to
pickup the banner and go forward".
Interesting, there was a simultaneous hosting of
small musical programme in the Holy presence
of Shri Mataji on 12th November evening in
Pratisthan while the main musical programme
was being hosted in the stadium amidst the
collectivity. It was an informal gathering in
Pratisthan, where Shri Mataji blessed the musical
evening along with Her family members. Shri
Mataji was seen radiating brilliantly like a
thousand suns. A couple of bhajans were offered
at Her Holy Lotus Feet. Entire collectivity at the
stadium was blessed to enjoy the vibrations of
this event as the recorded video was screened
within half an hour of the same evening.
Dear Brothers and sisters of the world
The much-awaited two day long Diwali Puja
seminar (12th-13 Nov.) turned out to be one of
the most beautiful seminars of this year. The Pune
climate was cool, so were its vibrations by the
blessings of Her Holy presence in this blessed
land (Punya Bhoomi).
On the 13th of Nov. although the puja was
announced for half past seven in the evening,
collective meditation started in the Stadium with
a vibrant gathering of approximately 8500 yogis.
It was indeed a wonderful sight to see the beutiful
children of Shri Adi Shakti humbly brushing the
past each other in colourful dresses with a smile
expressing the joy of their inner state.
Approximately 6,000 yogis attended the 12th
Evening Diwali seminar, in the Chhatrapati Shivaji
Stadium of Pune. Sir CP and Kalpana Didi were
the guests of honour who graced the evening's
programme. Papaji addressed the collectivity
after a brief musical performance on this day
and spoke about the message of Shri Mataji. The
message emerged as a powerful resolution and
introspection of the eve of Diwali Puja for Sahaja
Yogis. Concluding his speech he assured, as he
confided.."Your Mother will be looked after, yes!
I am there with Her 24 Hours and there can be
ne better privilege than that. I am with Her,
because that is the only duty I have now. It's my
duty and I am living just for that purpose, there is
no other purpose in my life. So be assured that
everything that is possible the best possible
treatment, the best possible attention, on your
behalf, is being given to her and I have no doubt
at all, I wanted to tell you something... that "She
is better today than what She was two years
ago". So, with these words I thank you and I
The stage was beautifully decorated with a touch
of oriental style of art and craft work. Kolkata,
the Eastern State of India had their repertoire of
love expressing through the exquisite decor on
the walls and the roof with especial kind of
natural thermocol like material called "sola". The
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Issue: 3 & 4 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
should prevail in us. It was about the discretion
that we must have within. It was about the truth
that Shri Mataji had been struggling for ages
through out Her life to establish its victory on
earth. He said "let us celebrate the victory of
that joy today". Shri Mataji all the while was
keenly observing every minute detail in the Puja
and accepted the Puja offered at Her Holy
Lotus Feet. She seemed very pleased. It was
so absorbing, the entire collectivity stood up
during the Arti and sang together "Sabko Dua
Dena" and offered Pranam with the three
Mahamantra. It was'nt a Nirakar Puja
(Formless) but seemed like Puja in Her Holy
presence in the Stadium.
stage was a living temple that exhibited a number
of statues in the niche of the backdrop wall, while
the roof had very fine art work of ancient
temples. The entire set up was accentuated by
the exclusive electric lighting every where. The
light decorations in entrances, gates and
everywhere not only expressed the joy on this
day, but also constituted an integral part that
helped enlightenment in the heart of flow of
vibrations. The altar of Shri Mahalaxmi on stage
had two elephants on the hands and the theme
of Ashta-Laksmi (Eight Laxmis) at the backdrop
in carvings.
Then it was the turn of the Sahaja musicians who
sang a number of bhajans and the shower of
virbrations flowed and filled the stadium. Pt.
Subramanium, Jain, the Nirmal Sangeet Sarita
team, Rajiv and others rendered a number of
vibratory bhajans. A few bhajans were from the
popular numbers like 'Aei Maan Ma Ke sharan
mein rahiyo..., Yeh hain.
dil mein sahaj ko basaya karo'.
.Nirmal Dham, Apne
At quarter to Nine the projections in the screen,
suddenly focused on the much lighted scenario
resulting out of the fire crackers on the ground
at the entrance of the gate that announced the
arrival of our Holy Mother. To this was added
the shooting of the high-air firecrackers in the
sky that spread the flower-like sparklers all over
the clear sky. The sparklers blossomed with the
expression of joy that was welcoming Her Holy
arrival. The blowing of conches and the lighting
of firecrackers on high air on Her Holy arrival
on the stage seemed to enlighten every heart.
The collectivity was overwhelmed with joy, as it
joined the choir with the welcoming bhajan.
Swagata Agata Swagatam.
The puja started with the bhajan "Vinati Suniye
Adi Shakti Meri". As the children silently came
up to the stage to perform Ganesha Puja, Shri
Mataji lovingly watched them, The puja coninued
with the recital of Shri Ganesh-artharva-shirsham
and then the Mahalaxmi Strotram. The entire
Two videos were shown at the beginning of the
evening programme. First, was the "Award
receiving ceremony in Rashtrapati Bhavan
(President's House), New Delh, India on First
of October", where Sir CP was being honoured
with the prestigious Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri
award for excellence in the fileld of Management
and Administration. In his speech, Sir CP
expressed the emotions, the wisdom and the
dedication in praise of the late Prime Minister of
India that was really moving. (One can enjoy
the citations; the award and the speech details
compiled and documented in websites.)
The second video was a recording of the Puja
offered at the Holy Lotus Feet of Shri Mataji
hosted in Pratisthan premises of Pune, India on
first of November. After the puja in Her Holy
Sir CP delivered a very moving speech
presence,
that spelt the message of love and wisdom that
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Issue: 3 & 42006
The Divine Cool Breeze
nce. Switzerland besides other countries like
mucat. orkey, Argentina, Austria, New Zealand,
Romania South Africa, Nepal. Oman, Bahrais,
Kuwait. Malaysia, Thailand, Holland, USA,
Russia, Kazakhstan, Estonia, Ukraine, Hong
Kong, Germany, UK, Iran, Algeria, Australia,
Italy and concluding with Laxmi gifts fromt the
hosting countries where again Yoginis queued up
with various gifts of household items to the Devi
in Her Mahalaxmi Form.
With the signal of drawing the stage curtain
announcing the Holy departure of Shri Mataji,
the invitation for the forthcoming Christmas Puja
was announced for 24th, 25th and 26th December
in this stadium. Arneau de Kalbermatten,
Coordinator of the "World Council for the
Advancement of Sahaja Yoga" expressed his
humble vote of thanks and gratitude to the hosting
countries for hosting this great Puja. He
expressed his heartfeld gratitude on behalfof the
World Council and the collectivity to the
management committee that welcomed this huge
gathering and extended all facilities to the
collectivy to spend their stay in Pune with all
possible comforts.
atome.phere transformed into a heaven
(Bikuntha) as the couplets were being recited
and sung in praise of Shri Mahalaxmi. Then came
the time for the Shringar of the Devi that
continued through offering necessary shringar by
the Seven Yoginis on stage with the bhajans of
Namostute...Namostute. and then... Jago
Savera Aya hai (Bhajan with the 108 names of
Shri Mataji). The Shringar of the Devi concluded
with the song of Vishwa Vandita.. Nirmala Mata.
As the Shringar was done the collectivity
witnesed yet another rare mudra (gesture/form)
of Shri Mahalaxmi in Her Shri Mataji form.
bedecked and resplendent in Her shingar. What
a tremendous flow of vibrations...how fortunate
was our Sahaja Family to witness this divine
moment!
It was time for Her Holy departure at half past
ten. Her face was glowing like the thousand
Suns.. Shri Mataji left behind a trail of cool
breeze that brought quietude in all hearts. The
silence could be felt as Her Van drove out of the
stadium.
Mother, we enjoyed every moment of the day
and we would like to thank you time and again
for this wonderful experience-Your kind gesture
of accepting our puja at Your Holy Lotus Feet.
We thank You for this wonderful gathering of
collective. We celebrated our Diwali within our
hearts as You enlightened the light of joy in us
with Your endiess love and compassion on this
day. Kindly accept our prayers at Your Holy Lotus
Feet to awaken the Mahalaxmi Principle within
International and National Gifts on behalf of their
respective collectivity queued up as the names
were being read out. Shri Mataji was seen very
very pleased receiving the Yogis and Yoginis
from various countries. At times She expressed
her love through certain words of praises, as the
gifts came from hosting countries. India, Portugal,
us.
Jai Shri Mataji, SITA India
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 VISHNU - TATTWA (Principal)
(Internet Version)
Shakuntala Tandale (U.K.)
(This article comes out of a conversation Dr. Rustom had with Shri Mataji, in London,
in which she wondered why Sahaja Yogis are not more blessed by Shri Lakshmi.)
They say that the 1000 heads of Lord Shesha
hissing above Lord Vishnu represents the
constant mental activity, a brain constantly trying
to sustain and balance the world. Lord Vishnu is
Vishwapala and the Lord of the Sushumna Nadi
He is the essence of the nervous system
controlling all the different angas or limbs of the
Virata as the nerves penetrate every last, minute
portion of the body, so he permeates every last
portion of the Virata and, like the nerves, receives,
transmits, and integrates information. All the
great charkas, and nerve plexuses are placed
ultimately in the Sushumna and it is He who, in
various forms, and using various powers, controls
them. In the Nabhi, the Void and Swadisthana,
in the Anahata, in the Vishuddhi and eventually
as Maha Vishnu, in the Agnya and the two
cerebral hemispheres. He is the Sukshma-
tisukshama that penetrates the deepest levels of
the Sushumna-the Brahma Nadi and it is through
His Grace, by the ascent in the Brahma Nadi
that we get and give realization.
neither one, nor the other, connecting them both.
It is thanks to His sense of responsibility and
detached balance from both left and right that
we are sustained.
It is very easy for a Yogi to say, "I am a Yogi,
am not interested in material things" and it is true
that one should remain detached. But yet Lord
Vishnu is a far greater Yogi than most of us and
yet through the nerves in the body of the Virata
his energy flows to every minutest aspect of
material nature-transforming, enlightening, and
making all auspicious. So, while detached, one
should pay attention to one's sustenance, for, as
realised souls, we are like the nerves in the body
of the Virata and that enlightened energy that
flows into matter through our attention can
enlighten it, so we act as instruments of the Lord.
This is a very subtle point and one should not
underestimate it, for the key words are
detachement and responsibility; and there are
many dangers for those not absolutely in the
centre. If one is not detached there is no point
pretending one is, for in the end one's suppressed
attachment and greed will rise up and hit one on
the head when one least expects it. Rather one
should acknowledge what one is and witness it.
We cannot fight ourselves, we can only leave it
to the Kundalini and the Atma to work things out
for us, by the constant practice of Sahaja Yoga
shoe-beating, foot-soaking, Dhyana etc. and since
it all happends automatically, there should be no
room for ego intervention or mental activity.
Hence He is the coordinator and there is no detail
too small to escapte His attention by Him the
beggar is fed and sustained, the family and
planetary horoscope of every birth is approved
and arranged, marriages take place etc. In a sense
He is the great bureaucrat organizing every
aspect of the universe. If we were idle or
inattentive for one moment, think what the
consequences would be; He is the one who, in
constant 'Leela and 'Maya' maintains the creation
and writes the drama. For without 'Leela' and
Lord Vishnu is the one who oversees the four
Ashramas or stages of life-and one of them, is
"Grihastha' or house-holder. For a man who is
"Maya' there would be no creation and no drama,
only Atma. It is he who stands in the middie
between the Maya of the Adi Shakti and the pure
Atmasakshatkari and a realsied sould-such a thing
witness of the Paramatma Shri Shiva Sadashiva
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 3 & 4 - 2006
7.
can be a great Tapasya but without the collective
cannot survive and it's evolution and the drama,
which is the basis of the creation, is harmed. This
drama is born of Divine Will and Desire, and
therefore that is opposed. In the West, one has
an ideal that 'Grihastha' and marriages are given
to us to enjoy- and it is true that this is the outer
manifestation - but there is a deeper hidden
meaning :-
not accept our responsibility to maintain our
Lakshmi, it will be hard for Sahaja Yoga to
penetrate the material universe, for who will build
the Ashrams and hold the programmes?
Often in Sahaja Yoga one is asked to pay
this and that and people grumble. But they
see only the gross drama not the deep
subtle meaning: that one is being asked to
pay attention to the Lakshmi Vishnu tattwa
so that the Virata can be enlightened by the
enlightened Atmas we all possess by Shri
Mataji's grace. It is very small thing we are being
asked for, to help enlighten our Mother's universe.
The attackes of left and right that endanger this
for
that, by it we fulfill our duty to our God who has
manifested as the Virata-so that in spite of being
one with the Atma we accept the burden and
responsibility of matter, to be one with Him and
prove our Love and Bhakti for Him. There is a
very subtle and twisting play here, for, the
Sadhaka seeking the Athma gains it, but with it
also matter as tapasya this time and not
indulgence. If one accepts one's material
responsibilities, then one has to go down into the
world of filth and commonness - and our
vibrations get spoilt. However, we have been
given the capacity to cleanse ourselves and by
doing so, we cleanse also that, from which we
caught- and by doing so, we clear our Mother's
creation and, in some small part, repay to Her
are familiar to all-and it will not elaborate. But
we should know that the Lakshmi of Sahaja
Yoga is our responsibility, not our Mother's.
We should shoulder the burden, not our
Mother-and we should find ways to work it out
somehow or the other. As I said, Lakshmi is a
tapasya and we should not expect to earn money
easily or effortlessly except by our Mother's
grace.
For the enlightenment to have meaning, we should
enlighten the universe and enter gross matter
regardless of the consequences for we are pure
the enormous debt we owe Her.
If we are not prepared to face the world we go
against the Vishnu tattwa, and His Shakti Shri
Lakshmi forsakes us. Further, we deny the fact
of our birth and material existence in this world
gained through the grace and auspices of Lord
Vishnu supported by Lord Ganesha. If we do
Atma.
We should not forget that our Mother, who is the
Purest of the Pure, took birth in the darkest night
of Kaliyuga to help us, and we should now stand
by Her side and fight it out. Let us hope we can
all work it out.
Jai Shri Mataji!
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Sahaja News & Information
Saturday, 15th October, 2005,Gurgaon, India
Message to the world collectivity of Sahaja Yogis and Yoginis
from Sir. CP Srivastava (Papaji)
be sent from here to the world?
Now dear Sahaja Yogis, Sahaja Yoginis, there
is a task before us, and the task is to preserve Her
message of Sahaja Yoga. That message is contained
in numerous audio cassettes, video cassettes and
so on, And the first responsibility which we all
have in all parts of the world is to make sure that
what ever She has said, where ever She has said,
".....One year ago She decided that She has
already for 30 to 35 years done Her best to create
the message of Sahaja Yoga and to spread it. As
you know She has traveled all over the world by
plane, by helicopter, by train, by bus, on foot, in
bullock carts and She has been all over the world,
cities and villages etc. and She has created a world
wide fraternity of Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis
She felt that after She crossed the age of 80, it
was the time for Her to sit back and ask Her
all that should be preserved in such a form that it
becomes the lasting wealth in Sahaja Yoga. And
that is the effort which is being made in all parts
children that yourselves to take over the
responsibility of spreading Sahaja Yoga further.
You don't have to create Sahaja Yoga. She has
done it. But, the message has to be spread and
She came to the conclusion that while, She will be
sitting there and She will be the source of
inspiration, the Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis
should take up the responsibility for spreading Her
message throughout the world. And therefore, She
decided that this responsibility should be
performed collectively, not by individual leaders,
but by a collective group every where, all over the
world in every country in every city. So collective
leadership is Her wish and Her desire. And in effect
collective leadership means that all of you sitting
here are involved in that process. The whole Sahaja
collectivity has now been given the responsibility
of spreading Her message of Sahaja Yoga.
1 want to make one proposal before you. I
want to make a submission. I hope you will agree
with me, I have no doubt you would, as far as
Sahaja Yoga is concerned, there is only One
Creator.... Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi.
there is only one Leader that is Shrimati Mataji
Nirmala Devi.
of the world.
Following Her desire of collective leadership,
She has created a World council and She has
created collective leadership in number of
countries and that movement is on. And now,
individual leaders will be replaced by collective
leaders. And they are performing the task in a very
very joyous and combined manner.
In India also new Trust have been established
for the same kind of work namely for the collective
leadership. And I am happy to be able to tell you
that Trust has started working".
(Eve of Navratri Puja, Gurgaon, India,
15.10.2005)
S.W.A.N.-Sahaja Worldwide
Announcements and News
The World Council for the Advancement
of Sahaja Yoga (WCASY)
Tuesday, December 02, 2003
Dear Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis of the World,
We are extremely honored to share with you
the great news concerning a dynamic event in the
history of Sahaja Yoga world wide regarding
creation of The World Council for the
And
And I request you, if you agree to endorse
my words when I say that, "She is today the
sole leader in Sahaja Yoga and She will
ALWAYS...ALWAYS remain the sole leader
in Saakar or Nirakaar form". Do I take it that
you all agree and you would like this message to
Advancement of Sahaja Yoga by H.H. Shri
Mataji Nimmala Devi.
In December, 2003, before She left America,
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Issue: 3 & 4
- 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
19. David Dunphy
20. Zafar Rashid
21. Bohdan Shehovich 22. Gagan Ahluwalia
24. Alan Wherry
26. Sandeep Gadkary
27. Mihaela Balasescu 28. Viktor Bondar
Shri Mataji created The World Council for the
Advancement of Sahaja Yoga. The purpose of
this body is to stimulate the further growth of
Sahaja Yoga and to provide support to the efforts
of all the national collectives.
The World Council for the Advancement of
23. Paul Ellis
25. Alan Pereira
29. Dmitry Korotaev 30.Alexander Solodyankin
31. Chris Kyriacou
Sahaja Yoga is composed of 34 members
designated as world leaders. Advisors of the
Council for financial, legal and communications
affairs have also been identified. The Council is
expected to mcet twice a year.
The announcement from Shri Mataji reads as
follows:
*The world is in turmoil today. People
everywhere are anxious about the future.
What they need is the soothing, uniting,
elevating spiritual message of Sahaja Yoga.
They have to be enabled to experience "Self
Realization" and thereby attain inner
transformation. Only then will they begin to
regard all human beings as members of one
global family regardless of their race, culture
etc. Only then will they discard hatred and
violence.. Sahaja Yogis have a momentous
responsibility at this crucial time in human
history. They have to spread Sahaja Yoga in
all the parts of the world by written and spoken
word.... For this purpose, a well thought out
approach is required."
Advisors to the Council:
1. Gagan Ahluwalia: Financial, Accounting
and Property matters
2. Paul Ellis: Legal Affairs
3. Alan Wherry : Publication Issues
Message From H. H. Shri Mataji - World
Council For The Advancement of Sahaja
Yoga
Thursday, November 04, 2004
In complete accordance with my expectations,
Ameau de Kalbermatten has made an excellent
beginning in the performance of his important
responsibilities as CO-ORDINATOR of "THE
WORLD COUNCIL FOR THE ADVANCEMENT
OF SAHAJA YOGA". His reports show that the
fundamental subjects for present study and future
planning have already been identified carefully and
entrusted to well constituted committees of THE
WORLD COUNCIL.
I am also very happy to be advised that all
Members of THE WORLD COUNCIL are working
together with SAHAJ VISION and total dedication.
They know that they have the crucially important
task of spreading the SAHAJ message of love and
togetherness in a deeply divided and troubled
world.
I wish the World Council all success and in
order to ensure continuity, I extend the term of
Ameau de Kalbermatten as CO-ORDINATOR of
The Updated World Council
Membership
CHAIRPERSON: SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA
DEVI
Members ( All designated as World Leaders):
Rajesh Shah 2. Gregoire de Kalbermatten
3. David Spiro
5. Manoj Kumar
7. Wolfgang Hackl
9. Phillip Zeiss
11. Arneau de Kalbermatten 12. Nese Algan
13. Ivan Tan
15. Alex Henshaw
17. Rajiv Kumar
Vijay Nalgirkar
Eduardo Marino
4.
6.
8. Majid Golpour
10. Derek Lee
THE
FOR
WORLD COUNCIL
ADVANCEMENT OF SAHAJA YOGA till 31
December, 2006.
MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
14. Karan Khurana
16 Aldo Gandolfi
18. Brian Wells
3 November, 2004
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Issue: 3 & 4 -2006
10
The Divine Cool Breeze
Yogis were present at the time when She nade
the decision to form the World Council including
Grégoire dekalbermatten, Karan Khurana, Manoj
Kumar, Gagan Ahluwalia and Paul Ellis.
Shri Mataji clearly affirmed that the document
She was signing was an expression of Her will
and desire. She was actively engaged in the
discussion and talked to those present at great
length. She spoke with complete clarity in Her
inimitable style that we all know so well. Shri Mataji
personally reviewed the list of the people on the
World Council and made changes as She saw fit.
All of the above mentioned Sahaja yogis, who were
present on that occasion felt privileged to be a
of this moment in the formation of the World
Acceptance of Resolutions by The World
Council Of Sahaja Yoga
Thursday, November 24, 2005
Dear Brothers and Sisters of the world collective,
The World Council for the Advancement of
Sahaja Yoga (WCASY) would like to share with
you all the seminal resolutions establishing the initial
formation of the World Council by Our Holy
Mother and our humble acceptance of Her charge,
our commitment to the principles of collective
leadership as established by Shri Mataji in 2001,
and finally, the Mission Statement of the World
Council describing its mandate as homage to Shri
Mataji and a service to the world collective.
It is intended that these resolutions and mission
statement will establish the basis to fully preserve
and enhance Shri Mataji's legacy for generations
to come and create a code of ethics and procedures
for the Council to discharge its responsibilities in
a manner in accordance with Sahaja principles.
The following documents are attached hereto for
your information and understanding:
1. The resolution for the Humble Acceptance
of Responsibility and The resolution of
Commitment to Collective Leadership
2. The Mission Statement of WCASY
part
Council and be witness to Shri Mataji creating this
expression of Her will.
Preamble
Sahaja Yoga is a spiritual movement inspired
by the sincerity and the devotion of its members
to the person and legacy of the Maha Avatar Adi
Shakti Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi.
Shri Mataji has placed each one of us on this
Council for a purpose and role only She fully
knows by Her eternal principle of Divine
knowledge, and it is by this consciousness that
She guides us as Her devotees. It is not for us to
question whom or why, but to always remember
that Shri Mataji is our Eternal Guru and Her choice
is the only one. As none of the Council members
are infallible, and as integral part of our Sahaja
collective existence we will search with humility
for wisdom and guidance through our permanent
connection with Her, to discover the divine
direction She continually gives us, and to humbly
follow Her directive in selflessly working to fulfill
It is our sincere hope that this will be one of
many regular communications from the WCASY
in our efforts to keep you all apprised of
developments taking place in the Sahaja Sangha
all over the world.
With Love and Respect,
Your Brothers and Sisters of the World Council
World Council for the Advancement of
Sahaja Yoga
Resolution for the Humble Acceptance of
Responsibility
Background on Formation of the World Council
The formation of the World Council for the
Advancement of Sahaja Yoga took place on
November 20th, 2003 at the Residence of Shri
Mataji in Los Angeles, USA. A number of Sahaja
Her vision in helping to bring the experience of
en-masse self-realization to all humanity.
It is our responsibility to fully preserve and
enhance the legacy of Shri Mataji for all time to
come. To do this, we must do the work of Sahaja
Yoga as one body united in our devotion to Shri
Mataji, and fully responsive to our vibrations and
collective consciousness.
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 11.
Issue: 3 & 4 -2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
Dharma USA (VND). Shri Mataji personally
chose the seven Directors of VND to work closely
with the national leader and carry out a collective
decision making process in all matters related to
national significance. A second layer of officers
was added by Her to work closely in carrying out
the processes and represent VND in its operations.
Onethis occasion She provided us with a deeper
insight in to Her wishes on the subject of Sahaja
governance with a global perspective that all Sahaja
decision making, ought to occur in this collective
committee format. She further added that all
countries should follow this model that She has
Resolution
Under the direct mandate of our Divine Mother
and Guru, Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi,
We, the members of the World Council, accept
that as long as Shri Mataji chooses to withdraw
from routine matters of Sahaja Yoga, it is our
responsibility to provide leadership, guidance and
decisions on all institutional and governance
aspects, and matters that impact the world
collective, and on global matters that would
otherwise be guided directly by Shri Mataji through
Her pure, omnipotent and omnipresent attention.
The Council will formulate and adopt its code
of conduct and rules of procedures to carry out
its responsibilities in a Sahaja way following the
vibrations of divine love, the Paramchaitanya.
We fully dedicate ourselves to the task of
sharing Shri Mataji's gift of Sahaja Yoga with the
world and to nurturing a Sahaja environment that
strengthens the bonds of love and collectivity
amongst all the Sahaja Yogis of the world.
We pray to Shri Mataji to bless us with wisdom,
as we continue Her work with humility and
courage; we beg Her forgiveness for any mistakes
that we make, and pray that She give us a place at
Her lotus feet and in Her heart,
created.
Preamble
Collective consciousness is the most
fundamental principle of Sahaja existence, by
which the Paramchaitanya communicates Her
divine message, and we communicate with each
other. She inspires and guides us in our collective
existence as Her nature mnolds our character as
one collective living being, and allows us to
participate and fulfill the role we must play for
Her and therefore we must resolve to function as
one.
We hold these truths as self-obvious: That
yoginis and yogis are their own masters and that
they do not need a clerical establishment as
intermediary between their Sahasrara chakra and
their God. The Council is fully aware that the need
for legislation is minimal as knowledge and guidance
in Sahaja Yoga is vested in the teachings of Shri
Mataji Nirmala Devi that are contained in the
written, audio and video records of Her lectures.
This is why the leadership institution in Sahaja
Yoga, ineluding the membership of the World
Council, is not considered as a spiritual hierarchy
but as an enabling and empowering force. Shri
Mataji is our example and our ideal. She is Sakshat
Shri Adi Shakti who has come on this earth to
World Council for the Advancement of
Sahaja Yoga
Resolution of Commitment to Collective
Leadership
Background on the principle of collective
leadership
Collectivity is the binding force of Sahaja Yoga
that fulfills our consciousness and our existence.
In our collective meditation the vibrations are the
strongest, and when Sahaja decisions are made
collectively by dedicated and sincere Sahaja Yogis,
it reflects the will and desire of Shri Mataji.
Shri Mataji defined and established the direction
and guidance on this matter on a historic day in
December 2001. She gave Her first guidance on
Sahaja governance and signed into effect the
creation of collective leadership of Vishwa Nirmala
give God's creation its true meaning through Sahaja
Yoga and has dedicated Her life in selflessly
working to spread Sahaja Yoga all over the world.
The World Council, national leaders and
associated committees are to uphold, channel and
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Issue: 3 & 4-2006
12
The Divine Cool Breeze
The Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga
World Foundation (also known as the World
Council for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga)
exists to propagate and continue Her great work.
It is an international non-profit organization
dedicated to promoting, spreading and perpetuating
the teachings and message of the global spiritual
work of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi.
The Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga
World Foundation carries out its mission by
sustaining the inner science and practice of Sahaja
Yoga worldwide through special events (such as
conferences and seminars), knowledge
management (such as communication material and
skills), institutional developments (such as
advancements in education, health and ecologically
sustainable practices), creation of centers and
places of worship and meditation (such as
ashrams, temples and public centers), and through
support to the financial, legal and research needs
of the Sahaja Yoga collectivity.
The World Council discharges its mandate as
homage to its Teacher and as a service to the world
collective. With a view to advancing the collective
awareness of all of its members in an atmosphere
of mutual support and understanding, the World
Council abides by the spirit of two resolutions
embodying fundamental principles that all
prospective members of the World Council are
expected to agree to:
The Resolution on the Humble Acceptance of
Responsibility and
The Resolution on the Commitment to
Collective Leadership
facilitate in a benevolent manner the harmonious
and dynamic progress of their collectives.
Resolution
We the members of the World Council fully
commit to the Sahaja principle of collective
decision-making. We solemnly affirm that the
functioning of the World Council will be in keeping
with the protocol of collective decision making
with at least 75% majority agreement, by either
direct consultation or by means of committees, in
each of which there must be at least a minimum
of three members in keeping with the collective
process.
Further, we affirm the commitment of the
World Council in providing guidance, direction and
support in putting the appropriate collective
decision-making processes in place for all national
collectives and all levels of Sahaja collectivity.
The Council aims at maintaining the highest
standard of spirituality and ethics in the operation
of all the Sahaja institutions and committees,
thereby insuring worldwide consistency in the
operations of all the Sahaja messages and
approaches in conformity with the teachings of
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. We humbly pray to Shri
Mataji to allow the Paramchaitanya to guide us
and keep the living work of Sahaja Yoga in a
manner She has personally taught each one of us.
As our compassionate and loving Mother, our
benevolent Guru, and the Devi whom we worship,
we offer our prayers that She always be present
within us.
The World Council for the Advancement
of Sahaja Yoga
Manifestation of the Knowledge
The World Council recognizes that the
knowledge of Sahaja Yoga is a living knowledge
carried, developed and manifested by each yogini
and yogi who truly follows the guidance of Shri
Mataji Nirmala Devi through his or her own inner
enlightenment. To facilitate and sustain the
spreading and the benefits of this spiritual
experience, the World Council stands for the
faithful custody and active promotion of the body
of teachings of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, as
Mission Statement
Preamble
Society cannot be improved or transformed
without first improving or transforming its
members. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Srivastava,
Founder of Sahaja Yoga, has dedicated Her life to
the cause of the spiritual empowerment of all those
who seek Self-enhancement and Spiritual
Evolution.
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Issue: 3 & 4 - 2006
13
The Divine Cool Breeze
enshrined in speeches, written texts and discourses
contained in print, audio and video formats,
Spiritual and Cultural Integration
En masse Self-realization is now possible for
the first time by the teachings and methods of Shri
Mataji Nirmala Devi, and is a happening of
enormous historical significance in the evolution
of world spirituality. The World Council
acknowledges that the experience of Self-
realization that is now an accessible reality through
Sahaja Yoga, is indeed at the core of the messages
of the great religions of mankind. The World
Council thus understands its responsibility to be a
driving and binding force for a new understanding
and tolerance among diverse cultures, religions and
civilizations.
With immediate effect, I appointi the following
to constitute THE ITALIAN NATIONAL SAHAJA
YOGA COMMITTEE for providing collective
leadership in respect of all activities for the
advancement of SAHAJA YOGA in Italy, always
in full compliance with the decisions of the
WORLD COUNCIL FOR THE ADVANCEMENT
OF SAHAJA YOGA:
1. Aldo Gandolfi (Coordinator)
2. Andrea Antoniani
3. Marco Arciglio
5. Massimo Cesetti
7. Giampiero De Michelis 8. Giancarlo Fuente
9. Michela Cavalletti
11.Allessandro Giannotti 12. Emesto Kuhn
4. Duilio Cartocci
6. Sandra Castelli
10. Sandeep Gadkery
Governance
14. Tommaso Merella
13. Sanjay Mane
15. Felicia Micolucci
Under the chairmanship of Shri Mataji Nirmala
Devi, the World Council is responsible for providing
leadership, decisions and advice in all institutional
and governance aspects concerning the Sahaja
Yoga collectivity as a whole.
The World Council will collaborate with
national collectivities in the appointment of their
national leadership committees. It is also the final
arbiter in the unlikely event that dissenting views
on matters of importance cannot be settled at the
national level. Through its Committees, task forces
and action programs, the World Council will
address global matters that impact the world
collective and will advance related projects and
16. Luigi Piccinini
17. Ezio Prandini
18. Alessandro Scarno
19. Antonio Scialo
20. Maurizio Taddei
21. Rubens Tommasi
22. Antony Visconti
SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
Announcement of a New Collective
Leadership in Russia
Sunday, August 07, 2005
We are pleased to announce that Shri Mataji
has approved and blessed a new collective
leadership of Russia. Dmitry Korotaev will be the
Coordinator of The Russian National Council for
initiatives.
Announcement of new collective
leadership in Italy
Tuesday, July 26, 2005
We are pleased to announce that Shri Mataji
has approved and blessed a new collective
leadership of Italy. Aldo Gandolfi will be the
Coordinator of The Italian National Sahaja Yoga
Committee, the other members of which are set
forth below.
The World Council for The Advancement of
Sahaja Yoga
the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga, the other
members of which are set forth below.
The appointmnent of the new collective
leadership committee follows Shri Mataji's
acceptance of the resignation of Sergey Perezhogin
from all the offices he has held in Sahaja Yoga.
With immediate effect, I appoint the following
to constitute THE RUSSIAN NATIONAL
COUNCIL FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF
SAHAJA YOGA for providing collective leadership
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 14
Issue: 3 & 4 - 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
19. Robbert Ruigrok
21. Anthony Headlam
in respect of all activities of SAHAJA YOGA in
Russia, always in full compliance with the
decisions of the WORLD COUNCIL FOR THE
20. Bhanu Prakash Reddy
22. Daniel Wagner
MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
10 October, 2005
ADVANCEMENT OF SAHAJA YOGA:
1. Dmitry Korotaev
2. Alexander (Sasha) Solodiankin
(National Coordinator)
3. Valentina Kushnarenko
4. Slava Ivanov
5. Viktor Chaschin
6 Tamara Sostamoynen
7. Viktor Fedorov
8. Anatoly Gromov
9. Kontstantin Nazrachov
10. Viktor Yevstaviev
II. Anatoly Kozuhov
12. Bohdan Shehovych
13. Alan Wherry
New Leadership Structure In
Switzerland
To the attention of our Beloved and Divine
Mother Shri Mataji
Beloved Shri Mataji,
Switzerland has been able to expand its Sahaja
collective in the last years. Our country needs
however a new impulsion to spread further your
Divine Work and to project spiritual dynamism in
each town and village. In this perspective, we felt
that the time has come to implement a new
leadership structure, which would successfully
fulfil your vision of human inner emancipation.
We recognized that a collective leadership
structure would appropriately meet these
requirements of Spiritual enforcement. Therefore,
I humbly ask you Shri-Mataji to bless this new
Swiss leadership structure, and I pray to You that
You would graciously guide them and counsel them
in their future responsibilities. The names of the
Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yogini that I would humbly
suggest for this group and would be best suited
for this work are the following:
1. Arneau de Kalbermatten (National coordinator)
2. Bernd Treichel
4. Eric Deladoëy
SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
The United Kingdom National
Committee For The Advancement Of
Sahaja Yoga
Monday, October 10, 2005
Time has come for collective leadership at all
levels in order to provide greater impetus to the
advancement of Sahaja Yoga. Such arrangements
have been made already in several countries.
I have now decided to appoint the following
3. Christian Mathys
5. Franca Clendon
7. Gilles Rode
9. Jean-Pierre Koller
11. Richard Mathys
as THE UNITED KINGDOM NATIONAL
COMMITTEE FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF
6. Gilbert Jeanneret
SAHAJA YOGA:
8. Harsha Mohan
10. Jose Di Munno
12. Thibaut Denblyden
The above list has been blessed by Shri
Mataji Herself on November 12th 2005 in
1. Dr. David Spiro (Co-Ordinator)
2. Derek Lee
3. Dr. Zafar Rashid
5. Alan Pereira
7. Hesta Spiro
9. Dr. Sarah Setchell
11. Ray Harris
13. Nigel Powell
15. Pasquale Scialo
17. Peter Yeboah
4. Dr. Brian Wells
6. John Glover
8. Guy Beaven
10. Vinayaka Francis
12. Alan Henderson
14. Patty Prole
16. Martin Watt
18. Geoffery Godfrey
Prathisthan.
With eternal love and respect
Arneau, November 20th 2005
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 15
Issue: 3 & 4 - 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
National Trust is to spread my message of Sahaja
Yoga and of love, harmony and Kundalini
awakening to the farthest corners and to every
National Trust-India
8th April, 2005
Dear Brothers and Sisters,
seeker in this ancient land of ours. This is a historic
We are glad to inform that H.H. Shri Mataji
responsibility, which I am entrusting to you all. I
am sure that you will work selflessly, tirelessly
and with ever more commitment to spread this
has formed the "H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA
DEVI SAHAJA YOGA TRUST" for India. Listed
below are the details.
message and strengthen the Sahaja collective
through sharing joy and love amongst all Sahaja
yogis. At the same time I know that you will strive
continuously to become deeper in your meditation
and evolve spiritually.
In the above context I will like the Trustees to
CHAIRPERSON
H.H. MATAJI SHRINIRMALA DEVI
VICE CHAIRMAN
SIR C.P. SRIVASTAVA
JOINT VICE CHAIRMAN
Rajesh Shah
adopt the following Code of Conduct, which will
become the guiding framework for the working
TRUSTEES:
Rajiv Kumar
Suresh Kapoor
Kalpana Srivastava
Vijay K. Gautam
Y.P. Singh
VJ. Nalgirkar
of the National Trust.
Dinesh Rai
Ashok Agarwal
With my blessings and best wishes,
Sadhana Varma
(Signature)
R.K. Pugalia
MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
The following are appointed as Special Invites to
meetings of the National Trust:
Bhagwati Singh
S. Ram Mohan Rao
Karun Sanghi
Parag Raje
Gift of Cabella Properties to the World
Sahaja Collective
Thursday, September 15, 2005
A few days back, Shri Mataji and Sir C.P. gave
the wonderful news confirming the announcement
of last year that the four properties in Cabella
Palazzo Doria, the hangar, Centrassi and Daglio
are to be gifted to a Sahaja foundation. This
will be in addition to Shri Mataji's generous
donation of Her house in New Jersey.
In connection with this gift, Sir C.P. explained,
with Shri Mataji listening on, that there should be
one Puja each year in Cabella--Guru Puja-which
should be a global gathering for yogis from all over
the world, and that we should continue to hold
many other activities on these properties to spread
Sahaja Yoga and strengthen and expand the Sahaja
collective. One activity in particular that was
mentioned that should continue is the camp for
the children at Daglio each summer.
Kiran Walia
Chandra Prabha
G.L. Agarwal
With my blessings and best wishes,
(Signature)
MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
16th April, 2005
Pratishthan,
Pune.
MESSAGE ON THE OCCASION OF
THE TRUST MEETING OF TRUSTEES
OF H.H. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA
DEVI AND SAHAJA YOGA TRUST,
MUMBAI 25 APRIL 2005
I have established Her Holiness Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga Trust (the National
Trust) on 8 April 2005. The objective of the
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Issue: 3 & 4 - 2006
16
The Divine Cool Breeze
Following Her announcement, it has now been
determined that a new foundation will be created
FIVE COMMITTEES OF THE WCASY TO
SERVE THE SANGHA
At its recent session, the World Council
adopted its code of conduct and rules of
procedures and it turned the existing task forces
into standing committees. The creation of the
Committee on Legal Affairs was ratified and
accepted by the Members of the World Council.
Paul Ellis was elected as Chairman of this
in Italy for the purpose of receiving these
properties. This will occur over the coming weeks
in order to officially receive Shri Mataji's generous
donation during the next couple of months.
On behalf.of the entire Sahaja collective, we
have conveyed our gratitude and thankfulness to
Shri Mataji for the immense generosity that She
and Sir CP and their entire family have expressed
in giving to the posterity of Sahaja Yoga these
properties which hold such a unique position in
the annals of Her great work and in the hearts of
Sahaja Yogis around the world. We have pledged
that, as a worldwide collective, we will dedicate
ourselves to utilizing these properties to perpetuate
the vision that She has bestowed upon us, a vision
of Divine Love, a Vision of complete inner
transformation, a vision of a new era of the Holy
Spirit's Spiritual supremacy.
Jai Shri Mataji!!
CO
committee until the end of 2006. Similarly the
Committee on Communication and Publication
was created with Alan Wherry as its Chair and the
Committee on Budget and Financial Matters was
created with Gagan Ahluwalia as its chair. The
meeting at Guru Puja created two new committies:
1. A new Committee on Health was formed,
chaired by Dr David Spire. Over the next few
months it is intended to recruit the members
of this committee and they will explore the
function this committee can fulfil. National
Leaders are requested to assist in this process.
The committee hopes to support the very good
work that is already going on, for example at
the clinic at Vashi and the research project
taking place in Australia and will submit its
The World Council for the Advancement of
Sahaja Yoga
A productive second session of the
WCASY at Guru Puja in New Jersey
report and programme at the 3rd session of
the Council.
2. The Committee on Education, chaired by
Dr Wolfgang Hackl, shall represent the World
Council on the trusts of boards of the various
Sahaja Yoga education institutions, such as the
schools in India, Europe and America.
National Leaders are invited to liaise with
Monday, August 01, 2005
One year after its creation and as it met in the
land of Shri Krishna, the world Council for the
Advancement of Sahaja Yoga (WCASY) is gaining
a wonderful feeling of oneness and dynamism.
At the recent Guru Puja in New Jersey, the
WCASY met several times. In a first informal
Wolfgang and to refer to him potential resource
persons and inform him of any pertinent
developments. The Chair will likewise report
to the Council at its 3rd session.
The Chairmen of the committee were given
meeting on Saturday, consensus was achieved to
move together beyond the events of Adi Shakti
puja in Cabella. While all members of the sangha
are invited to pray from the depth of their heart
for Mother's long life and good health, we need to
trust those in whose care She has entrusted Herself.
the authority to set up sub committees in order to
recruit personnel with appropriate skills to advise
and implement the tasks in hand. The authority
was also given to co-optpersonnel outside the
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Issue: 3 & 4- 2006
17
The Divine Cool Breeze
affairs of a country when global or institutional
situations arise or when there is a need for
arbitration. Shri Mataji gave a personal
World Council. In other words, national leaders
can help in identifying qualified member of the
sangha that are willing to volunteer and join in the
endorsement to the role of the Council in a
work at hands.
It was understood that the Chair of the
respective Committees would prepare a work plan,
report to the Council and seek the Council's
approval to endorse their Committee's decisions.
Between the sessions of the Council they would
consult the Coordinator and the Secretary as
wonderful session of evening bhajans at Her
residence on Saturday evening.
There is a common desire to keep close.
contact with the National Leaders and to share
experience and suggestions. In this respect a very
positive meeting took place the same evening with
national leaders present in New Jersey, It
emphasized the spirit of the Council and of the
national leaders forming one united global team.
Information was exchanged and feelings of mutual
respect, affection and support were expressed. It
was agreed, whenever possible, to have similar
coordination meetings at each Pujas.
appropriate.
INTRODUCING THE "SHRI MATAJI
YOGA
SAHAJA
DEVI
NIRMÁLA
FOUNDATION"
An introduction was given by Paul Ellis to the
new Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga
Foundation and the constitutive formal board
meeting took place on Monday 25th July.
OTHER DECISIONS TAKEN
We were reminded that the Council was not
proceeding with setting up a foundation in Italy.
The new nonprofits corporation foundation set up
in America was to accept the generous gift of the
house in New Jersey given by Shri Mataji; it is
also the legal vehicle doing business as the World
Council for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga.
Beyond the above mentioned significant
developments, the Council entrusted specific tasks
to some of its members such as advancing on
issues of resource mobilization and intellectual
property or liaising to support developments in
specific countries or regions. In this respect Majid
Golpour was requested to act on behalf of the
WCASY in support of Africa.
This nonstock, nonprofit corporation was filed
in the state of Delaware on the day of the occasion
of Guru Purnima, on 21st July 2005. Sir CP
Srivastava was offered to be an honorary member
of the board of director of the Foundation in
recognition for his constant support to Sahaja yoga
and he graciously agreed.
Appreciation was expressed by all for the hard
work that some of us were privileged to deliver in
the service of the Council. Gathering in New
Jersey, we were all grateful to have moved ahead
in a wonderful spirit of togetherness and deeply
aware of the protection that Our Guru bestowed
on this second session of the WCASY
COORDINATION WITH NATIONAL
LEADERS
On behalf of the Coordinator and with love
world sangha,
The WCASY seeks its inspiration from the
nurturing leadership of Our Mother and Guru Shri
Mataji. It was clearly recognized by the Council
Members that WCASY should support, encourage
and sustain the National Leaderships, but that it
may. from time to time, need to intervene in the
the
and
to
respect
Signed
Alan Pereira
Secretary WCASY
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Issue: 3 & 4 - 2006
18
The Divine Cool Breeze
While Shri Mataji and Sir C.P. enjoyed their
cake, we reflected on the great significance of this
Major Event In The History Of
Sahaja Yoga
event.
Thursday, September 29, 2005
New Jersey, USA
Friday, 16 September 2005
We observed that, while no other incarnation
has left a record of his or her actual words, we
have the great blessing to have thousands of tapes
In a short, simple ceremony on Friday,
September 16th, with a small group of World
Council members and U.S. leaders as witnesses,
Shri Mataji signied several documents that legally
transfer ownership of all Her work Her entire
life's teachings to the trusteeship of the Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga World Foundation.
of our Mother in which She has memorialized the
sacred and subtle knowledge of Sahaja Yoga.
We also acknowledged to Shri Mataji and Sir
C.P. that, given that these 35 years worth of talks
represent the entire body of Her life's teachings,
for Her to give them to the Foundation in this
manner signifies the generosity not only of our
Holy Mother, but of Sir C.P. and of their entire
family. Through this act, the entire family has
expressed, in a beautiful and gracious manner, their
commitment to the great vision that Shri Mataji
has offered to the world.
This is a momentous event in the history of
Sahaja Yoga, for it places the responsibility for the
propagation and dissemination of Shri Mataji's
teachings fully with Sahaja Yogis.
Paul Ellis, speaking on behalf of the World
Council and the Sahaja Yoga world collective,
affirmed the historic significance of this event and
expressed gratitude for this gift whose value is
beyond measure.
As Sir C.P. said to us at the closing of the
evening, "The whole family is united and forcefully
behind all this. No two opinions about it. Anything
more we can do, we will regard it as our Tirst
Upon the completion of the signing, we
pledged to Shri Mataji that, as a world collective,
we would take up this important responsibility of
preserving and maintaining Her talks in perpetuity
and making them readily available in every corner
duty."
We now embark on a huge project. A formal
committee has been established under the
supervision of the Sahaja Yoga World Council that
will strengthen national and international resources
to make the knowledge of Her Holiness Shri Mataji
more widely and easily accessible.
!Jai Shri Mataji!
Manoj Kumar, Paul Ellis and Alan Wherry
On behalf of the World Council for the
Advancement of Sahaja Yoga
of the world.
Additionally, Sir C.P. signed the papers to
transfer title of their house in New Jersey to the
Foundation.
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Sahaja Yoga Projects
1. Nirmal Infosystems and
the rare documents published since earlier times
in Sahaja Yoga".
Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
This will enable an easy accessibility and flow
of Sahaja materials at an affordable price from one
central channel to the farthest corner. Also, many
of whom, who may have never had the
Back ground:
Her Holiness Shri Mataji desired that all Sahaja
publications and materials should be made available
to Sahaja yogis all over India and eventually the
entire world would also come under one platform.
opportunity to attend Sahaja Yoga seminars or Puja
seminar to access Sahaja material in form of
books and audio visual documents that helps us
With this objective, Nirmal Infosys, the erstwhile
Pune based company, blessed by Her Holiness Shri
Mataji in the year 2000, was rechristened as Nirmal
Infosystem and Technologies Private Limited for
this divine purpose.
treasure Shri Mataji's teachings and insights can
also have easy access to all these materials from
their local meditation Centers.
Aim and Objectives:
Papaji (Sir CP) also announced to the world
collectivity of Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yoginis
recently regarding the need and the appeal for
preserving Mother's messages for propagation of
Sahaja Yoga. Papaji's message was loud and clear
when he said "...Now dear Sahaja Yogis, Sahaja
Yoginis, there is a task before us, and the task is
This project was blessed by Her Holy grace
of Shri Mataji in the year 2004 and has since then
been dedicated to the cause of publishing, creating/
generating and maintaining sustained supply of all
Sahaja related materials to the Sahaja Yogis across
the globe, with especial attention to the Sahaja Yogis
in India at affordable price to spread the message
of Sahaja Yoga. The functions of the company
include mainteriance of all forms of Sahaja books
to preserve Her message of Sahaja Yoga. That
message is contained in numerous audio cassettes,
video cassettes and so on. And the first
literature, magazines, periodicals and compilations
besides all the published and unpublished audio
video cassettes, CDs, DVDS, Puja materials, music
and bhajans cassettes.
responsibility which we all have in all parts of the
world is to make sure that what ever She has said,
where ever She has said, all that should be preserved
in such a form that it becomes the lasting wealth
Nimal Infosystem is operative on a centralized
system of distribution of Sahaja materials through
authoritative and appointed Sahaja Yogi Agents
in Sahaja Yoga. And that is the effort which is
being made in all parts of the world".
(15th October, Gurgaon, India).
across the country, to meet the growing demands
It is in this direction that Nirmal Infosystem
is dedicated to act as a window to the world,
and requirements of the local city and State centre
in India. It has its central repository in Pune.
through which the entire world will get its desired
Procurement of the Sahaja Material is made
access to the message of Mother. It will not only
help propagation of Mother's precious message
to the world, but will also indirectly help archive
available through the published catalogue from
this channel of Nirmal Infosystem to the city
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 20
Issue: 3 & 4- 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
Infosystem prior to publishing of any Sahaja related
material (documents in any form of literature/audio/
video) in india, is mandatory which otherwise shall
be treated illegal. The governing body shall hold
all rights over the published documents and
materials for Sahaja Yoga in India.
centers, from where an individual can exercise
his/her direct access to this company.
However, efforts are in progress to adopt the
latest and modern state of the art technology to
guide, edit, publish, print, and reproduce the Sahaja
related materials with utmost care and quality.
Hence forth, seeking approval of the Nirmal
H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Chairperson
Sir C.P. Srivastava
Vice chairperson
Board of Directors
Mrs. Sadhna Verma
Mrs. Kalpana Srivastava
Mr. R.K.Pugalia
Mr. Anil Sud and
Mr. Rajesh Gupta
Mr. Muneesh Pande
(General Manager)
Address for contact:
Nirmal Infósystems and Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
8, Chandragupt Hsg. Society,
Kothrud, Paud Road,
Pune -411 029
Tel No. +91-20-25286537, Fax +91-20-25286722
Email: marketing@nirmalinfosys.com
Website: www.nirmalinfosys.com
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 2. Acquisition of Shri Mataji's house in Chhindwara
Chhindwara, India
The Birth place of H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Tuesday, July 26, 2005
On 7 April 2005, Shri Mataji established H. H.
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga Trust to manage
all the affairs of Sahaja Yoga in India. She is the
Chairperson of this National Trust. Sir C. P. Srivastava
is the Vice Chairman and Shri Rajesh Shah the joint
Vice Chairman. The Trust, which will henceforth
provide the collective leadership for Sahaja in India is
made up of 12 Trustees and 7 Special Invitees. The
Trust's offices are in New Delhi in the Sahaja Temple
at 17-C Qutab Institutional Area.
The Indian collective leadership, represented by
the National Trust, will now take up the holy and
important task of building the World Sahaja Yoga
Ashram and the most beautiful Memorial to our
Mother on Her birthplace. A special committee will
soon be constituted for this task and everybody is
invited to contribute to this Holy task through ideas,
resources and voluntary work. Those interested in
contributing to this effort could contact Rajiv Kumar,
Executive Secretary, Indian National Trust at
äarkey1951@vahoo.co.in or at 919818098072.
From the very inception the National Trust placed
the highest priority to the acquisition of the holy birth
place of Shri Mataji (the Chhindwara House) for the
international Salaja collective and build a Memorial.
The task was entrusted to the Asset Management
Committee of the National Trust.
The Indian collective leadership recognizes the
immensity of this historic task and prays to Shri Mataji
to give us the wisdom, courage and humility to
undertake this task.
For the Indian Collective,
Rajiv Kumar
With the collective efforts of all the Trustees and
of Sahaja Yogis from Nagpur, Bhopal, Pune and
Mumbai and the tireless follow up by Shri Dinesh
Rai, the chairman of the Asset Management Committee,
this holy task was accomplished on 14 July 2005. The
property has been officially transferred in the name
of the H.H. Shri Mataji Nimala Devi Sahaja Yoga
Trust and all legalities have been completed. A
collective havan and puja were held on the premises
on 14 July. Following instructions from Shri Mataji,
sign boards declaring it as Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Sahaja Yoga World Ashram and the Holy Birthplace
of Shri Mataji have already been put in place.
The most holy place for all Sahaja Yogis of the world
"... the birthplace of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in
Chhindwara, that house has been acquired by the
Trust and it will become the permanent shrine for
Sahaja Yogis all over the world. That shrine will be
renovated in order to ensure its permanence. And the
Trust proposes to have another building where
visiting Sahaja Yogis both from India and from foreign
countries could go to stay, when they go to pay their
homage to that shrine. And the land is proposed to
be acquired soon, where a building will be
constructed, so that any of you or any other from any
parts of India or the world can go there. It will now
become really one of the most holy places or perhaps
the most holy place for all Sahaja Yogis of the world.
It is important to mention that funds collected
through an international appeal for the acquisition of
the Chhindwara House has been transferred in full to
the accounts of the newly established National Trust
in India. Moreover, members of Shri Mataji's family
(namely Sir C.P. and the two daughters, Kalpana and
Sadhana) have donated generously towards the cost
of acquiring the holy birthplace. Sahaja Yogis from all
over the world and for all times to come will be
beholden to this extremely gracious donation by Shri
Mataji's family that demonstrates their commitment
to perpetuating the legacy of our Holy Mother.
We will go on all together, and I invite you all,
each one of you to join in that effort to propagate
individually, group wise, collective wise the message
of Sahaja Yoga which your Mother has given to you".
(Excerpt from the speech of Sir. CP (Papaji) to the
World Sahaja collectivity on the Eve of Navratri
Puja, Gurgaon, India, 15.10. 2005)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 3. Vishwa Nirmala Prem Ashram
Home for the destitute women and orphan children,
(A project of "H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Foundation")
(A Non Government Charitable Organization)
Ashram Address: Vishwa Nirmala Prem Ashram,
Regd.office: C-17 Qutab Institutional Area,
New Delhi-110016(India)
Tel:+91-11-26966652,Fax: :+91-11-26866801
email:delhiashram@rediffmail.com
Plot No. 9, Institutional Area, Greater Noida,
U.P.(India)Tel:+91-120-2230681, Mob:+919810774865,
email:Gisela oma_7@yahoo.com
building anda huge garden ona plot of about 10,000
sq.mtrs. in the prestigious knowledge Park/
Institutional Area of Greater Noida. They are also
guided spiritually so that they are transformed to a
state of inner peace and balance enabling them to
face life in a much better way.
Vishwa Nirmala PremAshram isthe first Project
of its series in India and abroad inaugurated on 27th
March, 2003 by H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi as a
non Government charitable organization dedicated
tothe rehabilitationofthe destitute womenand orphan
children with focus on girl child.
The Ashram is providing temporary stay with
free boarding, lodging, clothing, vocational training
and medical care to helpless destitute women of the
society. After training forthe periodofóto 24 months,
they are expected to earn their livelihood
independently and lead their lives with dignity. They
willalso beassisted in securing suitable employment.
Destitute women up to age of 40 years will be
admitted. The orphan children from 2 to 8 years are
being admitted who are provided free food, clothes,
accommodation, education, medical care up to age
of 18 years. Thereafter, they will be rehabilitated in
You can help the cause of such destitute
women or orphan children by:
• Directing them to us for seeking shelter on the
address and phone numbers of the Ashram.
Sending donation by cheque/ draft in the name
of "H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Foundation"
on the addresses of the Ashram.
Adopting a child by reimbursing expenses
incurred by the Ashram.
• All donations are exempted from the Income
tax under section 80G.
Donating directly in thename of "H.H.Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi Foundation" at Standard
Chartered Bank, E-10,Cennaught Place, New
Delhi-110001,1India.
their life.
The residents at the ashram enjoy a loving family
atmosphere with a very clean and hygienic living.
rich food, games etc. housed in a two storey spacious
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-24.txt 
 23
Issue: 3 & 4 -2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
7. The governing council has the right to waive
any of above conditions.
Guidelines for admission of Orphan Girl
The Governing Body
The Names and Designations of present
Members of the Governing Council of the Society to
whom by the Regulation of the Society, the
management of its affairs is entrusted are:
H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Chairperson and Founder
Mrs. Sadhna Verma
Child in the Ashram
1. Normally an orphan giri child between the ages
of 2-8 years will be admitted. However, with the
permission of Trustees, an orphan girl beyond
the age of 8 years couldalso beadmitted in special
circumstances.
Member
Secretary
Mrs. Kiran Walia
Mr. Vinay Anant Deopujari
Mrs. Gisela Matzer
Treasurer
2. The child will be sent for the health check up
before actual admission to avoid the chance of
communicable harmful diseases
Member
Member
Mrs. Vineeta Kumar
Member
Mrs. Nita Rai
3. The orphan children can be admitted by Sahaja
Yoga centers, police, NGO's, religious
organizations oranyreliableorganization/person
Mrs. Malini Khanna
Mrs. Malati Prasad
Mr. R.D. Bhardwaj
Mr. G.L. Agarwal (Special Invitee) Auditor
Guidelines for Helpless Destitute Women
seeking shelter in the Ashram
1. Women up to 60 years of age may seek shelter
in the Ashram for limited period with a view to
get vocational training for 6-24 months in the
area they are suitable for.
2. The women will have to accept the prevalent
rules ofthe Ashram and Sahaja Yogameditation.
3. They will have to appear for health check up to
ensure they are free from a disease which can
harm other residents.
4. the women seeking shelter shall come through
Sahaja Yoga centers, police, jail, NGO's, social
servants or țeferred by some authorities etc. with
necessary documents/papers showing that they
do not have any family ties or rejection by
society.
5. The Ashram reserves the right to restrict/refuse
the shelter to any women without assigning any
Member
Member
Member
/distant relatives.
4. The person getting the girl child admitted will
produce death certificates of the parents or any
other proof so as to ascertain that the girl child is
orphan and financially poor.
5. Lost girl child can be admitted by police or local
magistrate. If the guardian is located later, he
will pay all the expenses incurred by the Ashram.
6. All children admitted will follow the discipline
rules of the Ashram and Sahaja Yoga meditation.
7. The Ashram shall have all rights on the admitted
children as that of parents as per rules of the
Government.
8. The trustees will have full rights on an admitted
orphan girl child for her up bringing, education,
marriage, adoption etc. as may be deemed fit by
them.
9. If any child leaves the Ashram, is lost on her
ownordies, the Ashram shall not be responsible
for any compensations etc.
10. The Trustees of the Ashram reserve the right to
restrict admission of any child or expel anyone
to a safe place without assigning any reason.
11. The governing council has the right to waive
any of above conditions..
reason.
The women found suitable for long term
assignmentin the Ashram may continue for long
durations if the authorities of the Ashram desire
so. She will be suitably rewarded.
6.
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-25.txt 
 4. International Sahaja Public School
Talnoo, Dharamshala
and imagination power in this serene majestic
environment. The vibrations in the air help the pupil
understand the essence of spiritualism and the
realized style of living. Shri Mataji says "I have seen
children coming from our school in Dharamsala,
extremely confident and extremely humble and I
asked them, "What do you do?"They said, "Mother,
we meditate. We meditate in the school in the evening
and that meditation helps." Imagine these small
children can say that".
Besides, the essence of developing spiritualism,
the school also allows the children to develop
personality and individuality and yetretains the ability
to relate, work, share and play harmoniously without
evoking competition and enjoy the reality of the
collectivity. The children are made mindful of their
individual and collective responsibilities such as
respect and duty towards his parents, elders,
teachers, fellowmen, public property, country and
world at large.
That's why an ex-student who graduated from
the school prefers to reserve kis comment as ...
"They often say that the Himalayas are like the seat
of the Universe. And we know they are the Sahasrara
of India and the Sahasrara of the world. It is where
"the sky is always lit with the brilliance of vibrations
and Mother's divine love." Itis Her school and She
is always there to bless Her children."
Education, Standards, Academics and
The international School is situated at Talnoo,
a beautiful spot in the lap of the Himalayan range
called Dhaulagiri. The word dhaula means
*compietely pure', nirmal. Dhar geans 'range.
(The mountain range is called Dhauladhar).itis ata
heightof 2000mand is approximately 16 Kilometres
drive from Dharamshala, the well known tourist
centre of Himachal Pradesh in India.
The Aim and Objectives of the School
A unique system of education evolved by H.H.
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi dedicating to the cause of
grooming the humanity with moral values on one
hand and wisdom on the other. The system of Sahaja
Education imparted here not only extends an
opportunity for children to enjoy the purity of
innocence, but also makes them a valuable citizen
of this world to understand the essence of living.
Shri Mataji says "Innocence is an eternal quality
which can never be lost or destroyed", while the
basic objective of thisschool is to reflectsuch divinity
in all students who come across the globe to be
intellectually and spiritually evolved. In yetanother
revelation Shri Mataji says "Our present day
educational system is failing to bring out the great
potential inherent in human beings, as proven by
the terrible state of affairs in the west. Born realized
as well as our Sahaja Yogi Childrenneed an enlighten
school system where they can grow and manifest
the great soul that have taken birth".
This School popularly named as ISPS extends
an opportunity to inculcate love for nature, care for
environment, gentleness, nobility, honesty, wisdom
and yet a lure foradventure. Childrenare surrounded
with everything that enriches the Spirit in a human
being in this divine land. It not only helps
transformation of individual but encourages and
helps stimulate ones' natural curiosity, creativity
Routine
The School is affiliated to the Indian Council of
Secondary Education Board and the admissions
for children are held for Std. I to Std. X.
• The medium of instruction is English.
The school is residential with lodging and
boarding facilities. There are 15 dormitories and
one care taker authority is attached to
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Issue: 3 & 4 - 2006
25
The Divine Cool Breeze
approximately a group of 8 students. The dom
Aunties and the authorities take care of the
chiidren as parents do.
• The School Session starts from the 23rd March
and end on 21" December. There are five tests.
three Unit tests, a halfyearlyexamandan Annual
Exam held for eachsession. The Annual Report
is based on the overall performances of all the
Tests undertaken.
The school has a library with an excellent
repertoire of 6-7 thousands books on various
subjects besides a special Sahaja library with
Sahaja literature, audio and video cassettes.
The school has a provision for Indian and
continental food. Special attention is given to
the nutritional values. The school has its own
bakery that caters fresh items to the students.
Asa partofrecreation the student enjoy regular
watching video cassettes besides Sahaja
cassettes. The children enjoy periodical
trekking, excursion and educational tours
besides variouS sports and games in the School
premise.
The daily routine starts from morning
meditation, breakfast, and then academic
classes from 8:45 to 10:45 a.m. with 15 minutes
short break. The Lunch is served at 12:20 p.m.
for the junior classes, while the seniors at
1:00p.m. The classes resumes after lunch for
the senior classes while the juniors are taken
care of as they have an hour siesta. The after
noon session concludes witha break for sports
in the evening. The evening session starts with
evening meditation at 6:15 p.m. and then is the
time for homework preparatory classes for all.
After the dinner usually the students go to bed
by 10:00 p.m. The routine is subjected to
revision with the seasonal changes.
Regular subjects opted are English as first
Language, Hindi /German as the second,
Mathematics, Science covering Physics,
Chemistry and Biology, Social Sciences
including History. Geography and Civics,
Computer seience is taught from
standard -III.
While the other co curricular subjects cover
Music (Vocal and Instrumental) Dance
(Classical, Folk and Mime), Wood work,
Drawing and Painting, Clay works and paper
craft.
All children must apply for a student visa. Any
other type of visa will not be accepted by the local
foreigner Registration Office (FRO). Students who
arrive with a tourist visa will have be leave India
after six month. Parents who require a letter from
School in order to request a student visa should
email to the school account with the following
references:
• The name and the surname of the child and his/
her class
The date and place of Birth of the child
Passport number, its expiry date and nationality,
Fax number and the addresses to the
accountant's email at: ispsim@vahoo.com
• Email address for communicating with
• Junior wing-in charge:
isps office@vahoo.co.uk.ispsoffice@rediffmail.com
and senior wings in charge at
isps senior@rediffmail.com
• Contact address:
International Sahaja Public School,
Talnoo, Dharamshala(H.P.) at
www.sahajapublicschool.org
IS
Graduates remember Shri Mataji's
School in the Lap of the Himalayas
• I can think of no school to do this job better
than the International Sahaj Public School. This
school doesn't just give the best possible
grounding for a development ofanideal human
being. butalso the spiritual guideline that we all
need to become better individuals in society.
Analyzing thetotally unique nature ofthe school,
the International Sahaja Public School is not
only the ideal school for students, but also a
ground where better human beings are made
and creativity is acknowledged. I would have
no hesitation in recommending this school to
any parent who cares about the welfare of their
children and their development into better
human beings. It is a society of better human
beings that, ultimately, will result in a better
world for all.- Rishi Nicolai, Australia
• At Dharamsala, in a pure and healthy
environment, we were given the chance to
grow into adults without the threats and dangers
of today-nodrugs, no alcohol, but an absolutely
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Issue: 3 & 4-2006
26
The Divine Cool Breeze
strong feeling of security and love. This school
let us grow up in something comparable to an
intact family. At such a young age, the feeling
of being protected is one of the greatest needs
and the school gave it to us, totally in contrast
to the situation I found later in Europe.l have
met many people who have no back-up from
their families and I have seen their state.
Aggression, hatred, insecurity have become
their guidelines. Quarrel and disorder within
families of this Western world are the cause. I
was taught to respect my parents. I was taught
to search for answers within the family and1
found them. Although we were often separated
from our parents for months, I never felt left
alone. In fact, the bond to my parents grew
and so did the respect. It was they who had to
let loose and overcome their conditionings on
how children should be brought up, to give me
the chance to grow up in a functioning and
working community. My experience in the
school enriched my personality in several ways.
Firstly, it gave me an open and tolerant attitude
towards other cultures that I found was lacking
in some European public schools I went to later.
Being at boarding school and far from home, it
also developed my skills of handling situations
independently. I also learnt how to cooperate,
coordinate and live with other students my age,
with each of us, our habits, likes and dislikes.
The different system of teaching lead to the
fact that, when coming back to Europe, my
levels of math and sciences were superior to
those of my classmates. My years at the school
have been of the most instructive and enriching
of my life, precisely because it offered so much
more than just the usual academic
curriculum.- Niranjana de Kalbermatten,
Switzerland
the difference to myself, my personality, if I
had not been there, for it is what I learned during
those young years in my life that has made me
who I am today. Most abviously, the education
I received was of a much higher standard than
what is offered in Canada, where "perfect" in
the Western education system is the
"satisfactory" that is expected by the Indian
International Board of Education that I studied
under. Along with a second language, the
experience of Indian classical music, dance and
art, I have come away with an international
perspective on a very diverse world. But it is
not just the academic education I received at
the International Sahaj Public School which is
of such a high standard, but more importantly
the deeper values that I learned through the
spiritual aspect that underlies the way in which
the school is run. These are valuesthat developed
qualities of my personality and matured them
much beyond my peers back in Canada. Most
importantly, I was allowed to leamaboutmyself
and the world around me and, in doing so,
become more self-confident and secure in who
I am, a quality very much lacking in the West,
where insecurity, problems of personal identity,
family and social dysfunction are dominant
everywhere.It is also due to the simple
meditation techniques I learned that allow me
to reduce any stress in my life that comes from
university course work, job work and even day-
to-day problems that arise. My friends are
envious that I am able to remain peaceful and
balanced in my life while under pressure and,
at the same time, top the class in almost every
course and receive high praise from my
lecturers. My attention is more focussed and
my mind is clearer. I fall asleep with no effort
at nightand wake up in the morning well rested,
something I have come to know that most
people around me do not enjoy.-Gautama
Payment, Canada
I can not express in words how lucky and how
privileged I feel to have been able to attend
school in India, at the Sahaj Yoga School in
Dharamsala. I cannot even pretend to imagine
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-28.txt 
 5. International Sahaja yoga Research &
Health Center, CBD, Belapur
Situated in a sylvan surrounding, the
International Centre for Sahaja Yoga Research and
Health Centre stands as a unique centre of its kind
in the world, where treatment is done by vibratory
awareness, developed by Sahaja yoga meditation.
Contact Address:
International Sahara Yoga Research & Health
Center,
Plot.1, Sec-8, H.H.Shri Nirmala Devi Marg CBD,
Belapur
Navi Mumbai -400614.
Telephone details:
Tel: Reception:(022) 27571341, (022) 27576922
Tele-Fax: (022) 27576795
Timing: 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.
Email: sahaja center@ vsnl.net
On 19h February 1996, Her Holiness Shri
Mataji Nirmala Devi, founded and graced this
sprawling International Health centre as a gift to
humanity at CBD, Belapur, Navi Mumbai. Late Dr.
UC Rai, former Head Physiolagy Department
Jawaharlal Institute of Post graduate Medical
Education and Research, Pondicherry, and
professor in various medical colleges of Delhi, was
appointed as its first director by Shri Mataji. After
his demise, Shri Mataji appointed Dr. Madhur Rai
as the next in charge of this Health Centre.
Some important Quotes from our
Mother, while talking to Doctors in the
International Health Centre on
19th February 1996
..."Through our evolution we have become
human beings, We have become human beings and
what we have all the things within us about which
we have no knowledge, we have knowledge
whatever we see outside but what is within us we
Mother's Divine Grace has cured many
patients from all over the world. About thirty-five
countries including U.S.A., Australia, England,
Africa, Malaysia, Singapore, Russia, Canada) have
benefited from the Sahaja treatment in this Health
have no knowledge so far because we have not
yet studied or have tried to find out what is written
in so many ancient books about what we have
inside ourselves. So it is a question of
understanding that all these things written since
ancient times in our country by many saints, many
incarnations must be some reason why they wrote
about it. Now this power is nothing mysterious
today it's the power that is to sprout for our last
breakthrough of our evolution. After the human
awareness which is a complete understanding of
ourselves, this new awareness that has been talked
about, told about by Zen system which you know
that is followed very well in Japan, then also by
Lao Tse in China, by so many people it has been
talked about that one has to become a person who
is beyond the mind".
Center;
Cases of varied etiology like Hypertension,
Bronchial-Asthma, Diabetes, Migraine, Epilepsy,
Depression, & Cancer have been cured at Health
Center. Not only patients with physical ailments
but also yogis with subtle system imbalance visit
Health Center. The total number of patients (indoor
admissions + out patient) has risen progressively
from a figure of nine hundred and fifty four in
1996 to five thousand and twenty five in 2004.
For admission at this Health Center one needs
to send in (fax/post or e-mail) their brief medical
history or brief account of subtle imbalance
experienced to Dr. In charge. Subsequently, the
bookings and reservations for the accommodations
of Rooms in the Health Centre are made at the
*,„. Seekers of truth. It's a very different thing
today that I have to speak to people who are
professionally doctors and are following a kind of
reception.
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-29.txt 
 Issue: 3 & 4 - 2006
28
The Divine Cool Breeze
are available to you, we don't want to bother them
too much and neither they are bothered about us.
They only depend on doctors so you can have
them. But for us more important is the middle class
and the lower middle class especially the people
who can't afford to go to doctors and hospital".
a medical practice which is supposed to be
absolutely scientific. I am not here to in any way
denounce or put down any one of the thearies
that are prevalent and are practiced by the doctors
all over the world. In no way one has to degrade
any knowledge whatever is available. But the
problem is when you find any knowledge is not
fully developed or not competent we should open
our minds to something that could be something
better than what we are following. Because we
have studied in a medical science, because we
know about medical studies it's not necessary that
we should be so conditioned that we can not take
This science is absolutely free to you,
you can learn it in one month. For medical science
you have to work for seven years. What is the
advantage for doctors to know it because they
can locate it very well, they can grasp this much
better. They can understand that it's so scientific.
It's so beautifully working out. They are amazed
at it. I would say that, this is so great a science,
we can call it a meta science as Doctor
sahib(referring to Late Dr. UC Rai) has said , but
this science can explain it logically but science
to anything that is new, is available. In the ethics
of medical science as far as I know, it is for the
benevolence of the people that we are working,
we are not working for just pocketing money or
for propagating a one kind of theory that we know
of.
cannot encepass the whole. Science is still a little
cup can't get ail the ocean in to it. So for that all
the scientific people who think science is great
should try to terstand what is such a wealth of
our country. May God Bless You All".
As it is you know, every time in the science
theories are challenged. Starting from earlier times,
you see all becomes hypothesis then becomes laws
and then the laws are challenged. Another thing is
the science is amoral. It doesn't look at that aspect
of human being where it is important that morality
must be imbibed. Thirdly it's a limited thing, it's
limited because it is dealing with our efforts through
our mind. With our mind, whatever we try to know
need not be absolute truth, that is the reason there
is always difference of opinion. If it was absolute
truth there would have been no difference of
opinion. So what we have to do is to get to a point
where we can know absolute truth, absolute
meaning that every doctor should feel the same
way, diagnosis should be the same. From all these
point of views we have to a little bit humble down
and see for ourselves what knowledge lies before
us in this great country of India. We have no idea
as to this knowledge of Sahaja Yoga existed
thousands and thousands of years back."
A few interesting experiences shared by
the Sahaja Yogis who visited the Centre
Etienne Loyson, a 62 year old architect from
Belgium, is just spell-bound, "Earlier I had high
blood pressure. Doctors abroad had suggested
taking several tablets on routine as the only
treatment method. But today, with Sahaja yoga
treatment and the blessing of Shri Mataji Nirmala
Devi, I am full of energy. I have stopped all
medicines and I feel I am just 30 years old."
Katherine Reid from England (who suffered
from irritable bowels syndrome) is a happy woman
today, in contrast to her life previously when she
had to take several medicines prior to her arrival
in CBD, Belapur Centre. "I feel much better having
stopped my medication completely. My health has
improved by about eighty per cent."Anna Kargaity,
a Canadian who suffered from depressive
psychosis is full of smiles today. "I now have a
positive outlook towards life, being able to develop
In Sahaja Yoga you don't have to take
any money or anything just works out through
your powers. You can help the poor people very
well .Of course if there are very rich people, they
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Issue: 3 & 4 -2006
29
The Divine Cool Breeze
my own personality and express my feelings", she
says. Similar benefits were highlighted by Belinda
from Australia, Kumar from Canada, Bryan from
USA and others.
follow the recommendations of doctors.
It should be noted that the centre has achieved
cures or improvements in cases where medical
science could offer no relief whatsoever. Even if
you receive the full medical treatment specified
by your doctor, you may still wish to come to the
clinic. Sahaja Yoga practice is the way to cure a
medical problem. This must be emphasized.
On being asked as to why so many foreigners
are coming to India, when advanced medicines
sare available with doctors of modem medicine all
over the world, Late Dr. UC Rai once commented,
"The doctors abroad don't have a treatment for
the psyche of human being, except giving
tranquillizers, sedatives and anti-depressant drugs.
These are not only harmful, but also habit-forming.
In view of this, Sahaja yoga, which can control
the psyche of human being by meditation, has
become very popular to the treatment and
prevention of psychosomatic diseases like
bronchial asthma, migraine, irritable bowel
syndrome, infertility, multiple sclerosis and
spondylitis, to name a few. It is all due to the
blessings of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, who
founded Sahaja Yoga centre, and has enlightened
thousands of people all over the world."
In sickness, the medical profession simply
eliminates the symptom. Medical practice does not
cure. A cure is effected only when the negativity
in the subtle system that caused a disease to
manifest is itself eliminated, Otherwise, the cause
is still in the subtle system and the patient simply
begins to work himself into something worse.
Only fragments remain of the works of the
ancient Greek philosopher Heracletus from
Ephesus (circa 500 BC). In one of them he says,
"The doctors, by cutting and burning, they work
up the same as the diseases and they receive
payment, which they do not deserve." This is as
applicable then as it is today, despite all the progress
in medicine.
Theodore Efstathiou From Greece
In February of 2002, I was at the Sahaja Yoga
Health Centre at Belapur, in order to dust off some
more negativity from my subtle system. On the
19th of February, it was the sixth anniversary of
the operation of the centre. For the occasion, a
puja was offered to our Divine Mother. Vibrations
were very strong and it was very auspicious to
have attended such a puja. The event marks a
milestone and it is a good opportunity to say a few
things about the centre, about its operation and
the need for it.
Socrates has explained this more fully by
saying that "No doctor knows himself. This is the
reason he is a doctor." Putting this in the language
of our Sahaja culture, it says that "No doctor is
self-realized and this is the reason he is a doctor."
Yogis with medical problems should consider
going to the centre to benefit from the experience
and focused attention of the Sahaja Yoga doctors
there.
Those without medical problems
Those with medical problems
With respect to persons who have no medical
problems, the natural question is why one should
take the big step and come to the health centre.
Once Prof. Rai quoted our Holy Mother, who said
that the negativity in Sahaja Yogis is so strong.
that they cannot feel their catches.
The question was raised in the past, as to why
Sahaja Yogis need to come to the centre for
treatment. The question hardly needs any answer
when one has some evident medical or severe
emotional problem. In such a case, one should
consult a physician and determine the ailment and
its cause. Normal practice is for Sahaja Yogis to
This is a very strong statement by our Holy
Mother. It indicates that unless you can feel your
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-31.txt 
 30
Issue; 3 & 4 -2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
catches, your spiritual ascent may be very difficult
to achieve. It is after you understand your problem
that you can eliminate it.
Routine at the centre
During your stay at the health centre your
attention is set on your spiritual progress and on
nothing else. There is a morning meditation at 8
am and an evening meditation at about 7 pm, which
includes watching a video or listening to a talk by
our Holy Mother from an audio tape. You will have
the opportunity to get up at 4 am, in order to get
to the lawn for a very early meditation and prayers.
In this way, you will get the experience of the
difference it makes to have early meditation, as
our Holy Mother urges us. You will also get the
experience of feeling Mother Earth as a Goddess
who is there to help you by sucking from your
feet all your negativity, when at this early hour
you walk around saying Her mantra and asking
Her to absorb the negativity.
In order to appreciate Shri Mataji's remark,
She has stated that the number of diseases that
exist is the total number of combinations and
permutations of the chakras, On the three channels
there are twenty-one chakras, so the total number
of combinations and permutations can be
computed as the product of 21 x 20 x 19 x 18
3х2х1.
I tried to compute this expression on my
computer in integer format and the computer run
out of numbers. So I used Stirling's approximate
method to estimate the value of this product and it
turns out to be of the order of ten raised to the
eighteenth power. This is a fantastically big
number and is of the order of a quintillion. This
shows the hopeless task with which the medical
profession and the bio-technologists are faced in
trying to determine the genetic code of diseases in
order to effect cures.
The doctors see you twice a day and they
prescribe to you the treatment that you have to
give to yourself until the next time they see you.
The idea of the treatment is to get the Ida and
Pingala Nadis to balance, so that you are always
on the Sushumna Nadi. In so doing, they can tell
which chakras need to be corrected next, thus
At the same time, it also gives an idea of the
fact that in each one of us, the condition of the
subtle system is not as simple as it might be
indicated because we feel a chakra catching. Of
finding the way in the labyrinth of the cross-
catches that exist in you.
The techniques used in the health centre are
not different than what has already been published
either in the Sahaja Yoga Prayer Book or in other
treatment publications. What really counts is that
the grounds are highly vibrated. Our Holy Mother
has Her attention on the health centre and She
course, no human ever attains this fantastic
number of catches.
To ascertain the condition of the subtle system
and to treat the various catches and cross-catches,
a person who has a well developed vibratory
awareness is required. Such people are the doctors
to be found in the health centre at Belapur. Such
people are the ones who can balance a subtle
system and get a person on their way to spiritual
effects all cures. It must be appreciated that the
Goddess is realized by devotion. Once you are
here, you are devoted, for there is nothing else to
distract your attention. Mother has said that prayer
ascent.
is the greatest weapon of a Sahaja Yogi. The health
centre is a very good place to learn devotion and
surrender to our Holy Mother and to learn how to
What this points out is the fact that when
people who have lived a average life and have had
no unusual experiences, it is not easy to feel and
understand the inner workings of affirmations,
mantras and treatments.
pray effectively.
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-32.txt 
 6. Shri P K Salve Kala Pratishthan, (Academy)
Vaitarna, Maharashtra
the academy during the duration of their studies.
A proper attitude needs to be adopted. Students
of this academy are NOT clients, but rather
students of Indian Spiritual Music, which is being
taught in the holy context of Shri Mataji's academy.
Throughout their stay they must be aware that
being here is not a prerogative of theirs but rather
a blessing that the Divine has bestowed upon them.
An understanding of this reality is required if a
student is to apprehend the nature of this.
Information for the students willing to
join the Academy
Infrastructure:
The academy of Indian Classical Music and
Fine Arts at Vaitarna, Maharashtra has been
established and blessed by Her Holiness Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi as a prestigious project.
Vaitarna, surrounded by Dams and Lakes in
the vicinity of scenic greenery, is about 100
kilometers from Mumbai and about 80 kilometers
from Nasik off National Highway 3 (Mumbai Agra
Highway), easily accessible from Khardi Railway
Station (25 kilometers) of the Central Railways.
The Institute is situated within an area of 40
acres of land comprising of the streams,
undulations and natural landscape. Modak Sagar
and Tansa Dams are in the vicinity with a thick
reserved forest cover.
The following infrastructural provisions exist
for making your stay comfortable & your learning
experience memorable:
1. Comfortable Indian style accommodation on
twin-sharing basis for individuals and single
rooms for family.
2. Hygienically prepared Healthy and Nutritious
Indian Vegetarian & Non - Vegetarian food.
3. Library, Study & Practice rooms with Books,
CDs, Cassettes & study material provided for
reference.
The buildings have been architecturally planned
under the instructions of our Divine Mother, with
a central courtyard and a covered stage.
Course Durations
Term Academy Course Duration
1stTerm: Ist January to 15th April (15th to 30th
March Holidays)
2nd Term: 15th June to 15th September
3rd Term :16th September to l6th December
Individual Course durations are stated in the
Syllabus of the particular course.
Mission Statement
4. Electronic devices like TV, VCD/DVD &
Audio equipments.
5. Communications:-
a. Internet facility for email, web
conferencing and surfing.
b. Phones & Faxes(Calling card can be
purchased for international calls)
c. Scanning and Photocopying
6. Music studio for recording (under
construction), useful for students and
teachers.
Music is a Divine Inspiration to become the
Spirit. This is the prime goal of the Music
Academy.
The Academy
An Academy is an Institution of learning Art
and a Research centre where people get generous
time to introspect, contemplate and conduct a
spiritual research on themselves. On a Subtle and
Gross level Art is the medium to know and
Visa & Immigration:
1. Students who wish to stay in the academy
for more than six months should arrange for
their Indian visa from their respective
countries. For the Indian Embassy locations
in your respective countries click on any of
the following links:
a. http://passport.nic.in
b. http://www.india-visa.com
experience their inner selves and raise it to a higher
degree of divinity.
Preamble:
The rules have been framed upon the underlying
fundamentals of Sahaja Yoga as expounded by the
teachings of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. Students
must respect the pertinent statutes at all times within
and outside the academy premises as they represent
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Issue: 3 & 4- 2006
32
The Divine Cool Breeze
well as practical which is not very surprising as
they were designed fully by Our Mother Herself.
2. Musical Instruments:
Musical instruments can either be purchased
or the instruments at the academy can be used
for learning purposes. Having your own
instrument is recommended.
The whole Ashram emits vibrations and we
are constantly bathing in this bliss. Moreover
there is the jungle which is all around the Academy
as well as rural area with a small village nearby
named Vaitarna. There is the Attention of H.H.Shri
Mataji on this new project of Hers which is very
evident to all of us. Shri Mataji Herself inquires
in detail about the ongoing activities of the
Academy, how it is going and who is there and
so on. We can feel the warmth and affection of
Our Divine Guru in every step we take in that
blissful abode.
Contact Information:-
Academy address:
Near Vaitarna Dam
(also known as Modak Sagar Dam),
Village Belvad, At Post Vaitarna, Taluka Sahapur,
District Thane 421 304 (Maharashtra, India)
Phone: +91 2527 248 528 /248 530
(Call only between 10.00 am to 06.00 pm
as per Indian time)
Principal: Dr. Arun Apte
Mobile No: +91 9325316580
Looking back to what has happened to me in
Sahaja terms is that Mother has carefully lifted me
up in vibrations and I feel so much lighter (in
vibrations) than before the trip.
Academy-homepage: www.pksacademy.com
Mumbai Office:
Shri P. K. Salve Kala Pratishthan
This Indian Classical Music which I study is
such a beautiful thing that only this Music itself
has lots of vibrations and is capable of changing a
lot in human beings. It touches the hearts of the
listener and the singer at the same time. The
combination of Sahaja with Indian traditional Art
like Music, Dance and Miniature Painting is an
explosion of Vibrations at least for me.
612-B, Umila Co. Hsg. Soc., Shivaji Chowk, Sahar
Road, Andheri East, Mumbai - 400 069
Phone: +91 22 2684 3169, Fax: +91 22 2683 1314
E-mail: draruapte@yahoo.co.in
(Call only between 10.00 am to 06.00 pm
as per Indian time)
Experience shared by yogi who visited this
Academy in the recent past
1. Anand Schreuer, from Austria
With the Grace of Our Holy Mother I had the
opportunity to study a few months in this blessed
place which I call Our Academy.
Looking back I can see how much weight
has been lost of Ego and other enemies of the Spirit.
The Academy student had opportunity to
perform before Her Holy Lotus Feet in the recent
past. Our youngest student was a 7-year-old girl
studying Kuchipudi. Together with her elder sisters
(in Sahaja) she gave a touching performance just
in the presence of Mother on the 24th December.
After that many Indians have registered for the
Academy as they were so touched by the
performance.
Staying in this Divine place was such a joyous
experience. So many aspects are incredibie and
hard to describe. There is the multi-cultured flavour
of being in a big Ashram together with Sahaja
students from all over the world. There is the stage
where not long ago, where Puja was offered at
Her Holy Lotus Feet of Shri Adi Shakti Herself on
the occasion of opening the Academy. On this same
stage we Sahajis are allowed to meditate. There
are the buildings that are incredibly beautiful as
The Academy provides you a nice room which
is usually shared by two brothers/sisters. Every
room has a bathroom attached. All the work is
done by Sahaja Yogis. They cook and clean for
you. We are completely free to attend our lessons
and study and have fun.
What a blessing to be born in this time and
able to use all this Divine Facilities Our Mother
created for us.
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Books Published and
Projects related to Sahaja Yoga
The list is not all that Sahaja Yoga has treasured
over the period of its evolution since 1970. But,
it's an attempt to compile most of them from all
cormers of the globe that speaks of the volumes of
books or booklet or such publications (known so
far in wide collectivity or information received),
However, a few of these (earlier ones) may still be
available in newer editions or reprints, while, a few
may not be in circulation as of now. This list does
not reflect recommendations for literature study,
but is an attempt to refresh our awareness of the
works ever attempted in Sahaja Yoga, including
the verses and text in form of book from divine
nectar blessed by our beloved Mother Herself at
one place
time to time on Sahaja yoga is underway and not
ignored.
• International Sahaja Yoga Book Project
(From SWAN)
Background
This project was personally approved by Shri
Mataji in 2003, and has been in progress since
September of that year.
Objective
To publish internationally in mainstream
bookshops, between 10 and 11 books by H.H. Shri
Mataji Nimala Devi. The books will be initially
published by daisyamerica LLC and then through
an expanding network.
This will allow the general reading public,
many of whom may never attend a Sahaja Yoga
meeting, to have access to Shri Mataji's teachings
and insights. It will enable such readers to
experience Self-realization and later, if they so wish,
to connect to the Sahaja collective.
The ongoing Projects related to Sahaja
literature
Keeping in view of the compilation and archival
works done on the Holy Scriptures of various
religions across the globe today, it is high time
that we the Sahaja Yogis of the world collective,
must collectively pray at Her Holy Lotus Feet that
this beautiful world be blessed with compilation
of volumes that archives the words of Divinity
for our ascent and our self Realization for today
and of future long after we are gone. Her talks
that are the mantras for the world, those will be
our Vedas, Puranas and the epic Holy Scripture,
the world shall ever witness with the Advent of
Method
A team of Sahaja Yogis, from numerous
countries have begun to produce new, accurately
verified transcriptions from the large body of Shri
Mataji's talks in the English language, currently in
audio and video format.
From these transcripts, editors will compile
books on various topics as suggested by the
following provisional titles:
1. An Introduction to Sahaja Yoga
2. The Keeper at the Gate (Innocence and
Wisdom, Shri Ganesha and Lord Jesus
Christ)
greatest incarnation on Earth, Shri Adi Shakti, Shri
Mataji Herself on Earth.
The objective and the intention of project
undertaken in these direction, is to accurately
transcribe as many talks as possible that were given
in the English language so that an importani
resource is created as a by produci, that will be
available to researchers, academicians and to
countries who wish to translate transcripts of talks
into other languages.
However, the list of Research papers and other
related documents already published in magazines,
periodicals and journals are not included in this
exhaustive list. At the same time compilation of
the list of such articles or papers published from
3. How to be your own Guru
(Adiguru Datatreya)
4. The Cool Fire
(Kundalini and Self-realization)
5. The Inner World
(The Subtle System and Chakras)
6. The Praxis of Transformation (Clearing
Techniques, Balance, How to Meditate,
How to Introspect)
7. The Enlightened Mind (The Buddha,
Buddhism and Hamsa)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-35.txt 
 34
Issue: 3 & 4-2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
The Mantra Book should be based on Sahaj
shastras, the existing body of texts that were
prepared for and accepted by HH Shri Mataji at
different pujas over the years. The draft will be
scrutinized by Sahaja yogis who are Sanskrit
experts and reviewed by members of the
Committee and interested members of the WCASY
8. The Pantheon of Light (The Deities)
9. Fortune and Misfortune of Religions
(Islam, Christianity, Hinduism, Judaism)
10. A Day Book (Random quotes from Shri
Mataji's Talks)
Alan Wherry from New York is Director of
the project; Ken Williams, from London, UK, is
the leading Managing Editor. Shruti Gupta and Ann
Capazzoli, both from New York, and Anton
Grabmayer from Austria are also Managing Editors
and are heading up teams of Yogis, working in
pairs, for the initial transcription phase of the
project.
Team members must be established Sahaja
Yogis, with balance, good hamsa qualities and a
working knowledge of Sahaj terms. They must
be able to work with accuracy in the English
language.
From the completed body of tramscriptions,
editors will compile books on the above topics into
a cohesive whole with the essence of the work
being that it can be read, understood and enjoyed
by a reader with no previous knowledge of Sahaja
Yoga.
Each book will finally be reviewed by David
Spiro and Grégoire de Kalbermatten before going
to press.
The intention is to accurately transcribe as
many talks as possible that were given in the
English language so that an important resource is
created as a byproduct, that will be available to
researchers, academicians and to countries who
wish to translate transcripts of talks into other
languages.
prior to final clearance and printing. In this manner
each yogini and yogi will know that the utmost
care has been invested in the production of this
important document.
There are nowa number of differing Mantra
Books in circulation and we are aware that, this
year, a text entitled Sahaja Yoga Mantra Book has
recently been circulated on the web and printed in
a limited number of copies in India with the mention
on the cover page of rights to Shri Mataji and the
Life Eternal Trust. It should be clear that this work
represents an individual effort, which has not been
cleared in its present form by the Committee.
No matter how well meaning attempts by
individual yogis may be, they will create
unnecessary confusion. While recognizing the
concern of the author, some of the changes he
brought to the texts of the old book are not called
for. Many texts that are changed in this edition
have been read to and accepted by HHSM and
have become part of our devotional practice and
there is a need to further improve on Sanskrit
translation and to ensure objectivity.
Therefore the Publication Committee does
not encourage or authorize at this stage the
publication er circulation of a new SY Mantra
Book other than the one to be soon developed
and approved in the context of the WCASY.
In the meantime the old (green) mantra book
is the one recommended for use by the sangha.
We are grateful for everybody's understanding
in this matter. As Mantras are a corner stone of
The Sahaja Yoga Mantra Book
Monday, April 04, 2005
We are pleased to inform the sangha that the
Publication Committee of the World Council for
the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga (WCASY) has
taken up the task of producing an updated,
accurate Sahaja Yoga Mantra Book.
In due course, this will be complemented with
a second publication, a Sahaja Yoga Book of
Worship. This will contain prayers existing in the
old mantra book and completed with a few selected
texts from world religions that have a specific
relationship to Sahaja Yoga.
Sahaj practices, we are conscious that the sangha
expects a Book carrying the needed authority.
We are confident that the above process shall serve
well the need for a universal and consistent SY
Book of Mantras.
For the Publication Committee of the WCASY
Alan Wherry -Grégoire de Kalbermatten - Philipp
SIS
Zeiss
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-36.txt 
 Name of Book
Author
Language
English
Corruption-India's Enemy Within
(2001)
Sir CP Srivastava
Bhrashtachar-Bharat ki Bhiteri Shatru
Sir CP Srivastava
Marathi/ Hindi
(Hindi Version of Corruption) (2002)
- Nirmalanjali
» Sahaja Yoga Songbook
- Pushparpan
Sahaja Pushpanjali (1995)
Prayer/Song Book
Compilation
Compilation
compiled by
Sushil Kejriwal(Songs)
Hindi/ Marathi
English
Hindi
Hindi
Armaity.H. Bhabha
compiled by
Sushil Kejriwal(Songs)
Sahajamala( Book of Poems) (2000)
• Sahaja Gectarpan (1995)
English
Hindi
* Sahaja Yoga Geetanjali
Compiled book of songs
(English,Hindi, Marathi)
Compilation
H.H. Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi
English
Sahaja Yoga Parichay Pustika
* Sahaja Yoga The Unique Discovery
Hindi
English
English
Sahaja Yoga- A Guide for Parents,
Teachers and Students
Helga Fein
Compilation
Mantra Folder
English
Excerpt from Speeches of
Shri Mataji Nimala Devi
Geoferey Godfrey &
RK Pal
- The Joy of spreading Sahaja Yoga
(2005)
English
English
Divine Light-
Miracle Photographs of Shri Mataji
(1998)
The Divine Mother-
1008 Photographs of Shri Mataji-
The Great Guru (2000)
Geoffrey Godfrey,
English
Islam Enlightened (1998)
The Light of the Koran-
Knowiedge through Sahaja Yoga
(1998)
Geeta Enlightened (1986)
Bible Enlightened-Religions and Yoga
(Vol. First, Second and Third) (2003),
Music & Sahaja Yoga (1997)
English
English
Javed Khan
Flore Descieux, Transl:
Caroline Mc Carthy
Yogi Mahajan
Dr. Dan Costian
English
English
Dr.Arun Apte and
D.V. Athavale
H.H Shri Mataji
English
* Sahaja Yoga
1991(Eng)/1998(Hindi)
Sahaja Yoga Research and
Health Centre
English/Hindi
Nirmala Devi
H.H Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi
H.H Shri Mataji
English
► Education Enlightened-
A Guide for Schools
English
Nirmala Devi
Meta Modern Era (1996)
H.H Shri
Nirmala Devi
English
H.H Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi
* Para Aadhunic Yug
(Hindi Version of Meta Morderm Era)
(2000)
My Memories (2000)
Hindi
Babamama( HP Salve)
English
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-37.txt 
 Hindi
Babamama HP Salve)
Translation, O.P Chandna
Mere Sansmaran
(Hindi Version of My Memoirs)
(2002)
Hindi
* Sahaja Yogu Prakritik
Jadi Bution Dwara Rog Niwaran
+ The Advent (1979)
Compilation- Booklet
Gregoire De Kalbermatten
English
French
Trans:Lotus heart
L'Avenement
(French edition of The Advent) (1985)
El Advenimiento (1994)
(Spanish Version of The Advent)
The Third Advent (2003)
Spanish
Gregoire De Kalbermatten
English
English
English
English
Gregoire De Kalbermatten
Yogi Mahajan
Jail Break
Miracles of God
The Search for the Divine Mother
(1997)
Cooking With Love- Divine Recipes
(2003)
Lal Bahadur Shastri-
A Life of Truth in Politics (1995)
Lal Bahadur Shastri-
Rajneeti Mein Satyanishth Jivan (2000)
(Hindi version)
Navaratri Talks-Pune 1988
(2002)
Gwenael Verez
English
Recipes of H.H Shri
Mataji Nirmala Devi
Sir C.P. Shrivastava
English
Hindi
Sir C.P. Shrivastava
(Trans: Shankar Nene)
English
Talks of H.H Shri
Mataji on Navaratri 1988.
Pune
Talks of H.H Shri
Mataji on Navaratri 1988.
Pune
Hindi
Navaratri Pravachan
Pune 1988(Hindi Vesrion)
2003
English
- Medical Science Enlightened-
New Insight into Vibratory Awareness
for Holistic Health Care (1993)
Professor
Dr. Umesh C Rai, M.D.
English
Ed. Dr. JI Sood,
Dr. MN Sood &
Dr. R Garg
New Delhi Medicos Vol.13
April&May 1997 Nos. 4&5 (1997)
English
Yogi Mahajan
Yogi Mahajan
translation by CL Patel
The Ascent
Utthan (Hindi Version of The Ascent)
(1994)
Hindi
English
Yogi Mahajan
Realized Saints
English
English
English/Hindi
English
Yogi Mahajan
Yogi Mahajan
Yogi Mahajan
Yogi Mahajan
Sufi Odes to Divine Mother
Great Women of India
The Face of God/Parmatma Ka Swaroop
New Millenuim Fulfilis
Ancient Prophecies
Hindi
Yogi Mahajan
translation by O.P. Chandna
Nav Sahasrabdi
(Hindi Version of New Millenuim
Fulfills Ancient Prophecies) (2000)
English
* Unique Discovery
Divine Knowledge through Vibrations
(1992)
A Collection of Prayer &
Praise-Sahaja Yoga (1990)
Booklet
PT Rajasekharan &
R Venkatesan
English
Compilation
English
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-38.txt 
 Sahaja Yoga Puja Book
(1990)
Sahaja Yoga Mantra Book
1989
French Compilation-
From Le Puja
English
H.H. Shri
Mataji Nirmala Devi
English
Prayers, Praises & Protocol to
Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Come the Mother Calls
A Tribute of Love to
Shri Mataji Nimala Devi
Children in Sahaja Yoga (1991)
* Cabella 94 (photographs by
Michael Markl, Vienna) (1995)
English
Collection
Compilation
English
Compilation
Compilation-printed by
Adolf Holzhausens Nfg.
Vienna
English
English
English
Compilation Souveneir
Nirmal Dham-
A Project of H.H. Shri
Mataji Nirmala Devi Foundation
Compilation
English
Hindi
Grace
Sant Kabir Aur Sahaja Yog (1999)
(Ek Vaigyanik Drishti)
Shree Ganesha Puja-1999
Compilation-Souveneir
Compilation- Souveneir
Compilation-Souveneir
Compilation
Hindi/English
English
Eriglish
English/Hindi
The age of Ascent
- Vibrations (2000)
Shiva Tattwa (2000)
- Birthday Messages
Health, Peace, Morality Culture
"East-West" (9th. All Russian Scientific
and Practical Conference) (9-10 June, 1998)
English/
Compilation
Moscow, Russia
Russian
English/French
Russian
* A Seeker's Journey-Searching for
clues to life's mcaning (1995)
Greg Turek. Australia
German,
Chinese
Chinese
Edwin Hou
Actualise Your Self-Realisation
Chinese
Sahaja Yoga Meditation Beginners Guide
Nimal Fragrance
Kwong Ming Wai
English
Compilation
Periodicals and Magazines
Akashwani Volume I
Yuva Shakti, bound
English
Yuva Shakti, bound
English
English/Hindi
Akashwani Volume II
Anant Jeevan (1979-1980)
The Divine Cool Breeze USA (1987-2005)
English
* Chaitanya Lahiri
The Divine Cool Breeze, India
Hindi
English
English/Hindi
Yuvadrishti
Germany
Hermes
English
English/Hindi
English/ Hindi
English/Hindi
English
English
• The Knowledge of Reality
The Life Eternal
Maha Avatar (1980)
Nirmala Yoga (1981-1985)
Sahaj Amrit
Open Heart
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-39.txt 
 24
112
Pratisthan, Gurgoan, India
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-40.txt 
 38
Issue: 3 & 4 - 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
List of a few Important Sahaja Yoga establishments and Projects alongwith addresses
for contact / online information / Newsletter /Newspaper and Magazine
subscriptions, published regularly worldwide.
Sahaja Yoga Mandir
(Ashram at Delhi, India)
C-17, Qutab Institutional Area
New Delhi 110016 (India)
Tel. 91-11-26966652
Fax. 91-11-26866801
e-mail-delhiashram@rediffimail.com
Nirmal Infosystems &
Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No.8, Chandragupt Hsg. Society,
Kothrud, Paud Road,
Pune 411029. Maharashtra,(India)
Ph No. 020-25286537
Fax: 020-25285232,
email: marketing@nirmalinfosys.com
Pratisthan
NDA Road
Near Chandni Chowk,
Pune-411023,
Maharashtra, India
Sahaja Yoga Health &
Research Center,
Plot # 1, Sector # 8,
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Marg,
CBD, Konkan Bhavan, Belapur,
Navi Mumbai - 400 703.
Maharashtra, (India)
Phone : (91) + (022) 27576795,
27571341, 6795.
Director: Dr. (Mrs.) Madhu Rai
{Contact From
10.00 Hrs IST - 14.00 Hrs IST}
sahaja center@vsnl.net
Nirmal Dham
Sahaja Yoga Ashram
Behind BSF Camp
Chhawala Gaon
Delhi – 110041, India
Ph. 91-11-25023190
Vishwa Nirmala Prem Ashram
(NGO)
Home for the destitute women
Plot No. 9, Institutional Area,
Greater Noida, U.P. (India)
Tel. 0091-120-2230681
Shri PK Salve Kala Pratishthan
Near Vaitarna Dam,
Village Belvad, Taluka Sahapur,
District Thane. Maharashtra, India
International Sahaja Public School
Talnoo, Dharamshala Cantt.
Distt. Kangra H.P. - 176216 India
site: www.sahajapublicschool.org
Phone: +91 2527 248528 /248 530
URL: www.pksacademy.com
Publications:
Subscription rates are subject to revision. The
quoted rates are updated as on Jan. 2005.
Sahaja School at Jejuri, India
Vishwa Nirmala Vidya Mandir
Clo Old Sadashiv Medicals,
Jejuri-412303
Distt. Pune, Maharashtra, India
Principal : Mr. Patrick Redican
International Sahaja School
Canajoharie
Canajoharie.school@sahajayoga.org
Chaitanya Lahari (Marathi) Rs. 225/- annually
6 issues per year
Correspondence: Nirmal Infosystems &
Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No.8, Chandragupt Hsg. Society,
Kothrud, Paud Road,
Pune 411029. Maharashtra, (India)
For Subscription: Demand Draft in favour of
"Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd."
payable in Pune.
Sahaja Kindergarden and Ashram
Borotin, Czech Republic
http://www.nirmala.cz/borotin,
borotin@nirmala.czb
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-41.txt 
 Issue: 3 & 4- 2006
39
The Divine Cool Breeze
Yuvadrishti (magazine managed by Yuva Shakti
in India)
Correspondence: Nirmal Infosystems &
Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No.8, Chandragupt Hsg. Society,
Kothrud, Paud Road, Pune 411029.
Phone: +91-20- 5286105
US (S 5.50)* $5.0 for each back issues
Herndon, Virginia 20172 USA
US ($11.00)* for the special issues.
(703 471-8484)
("for Credit Card System)
http://www.sahajayoga.org/store/subscription.asE
Cheques or money orders payable to "The
Divine Cool Breeze" dcb108@yahoo.com
Stories, photos and artwork can be sent to. The
Divine Cool Breeze,
881 Frederick Road, North Vancouver
British Columbia,
Canada V7K 2Y5 or to coolbreeze@shaw.ca
yuvadrishti@yahoo.com
For Subscription: Demand Draft in favour of
"Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd."
payable in Pune. Rs. 120/- (National) ,INR 500/-
(International) 4 issues per year
Chaitanya Lahari (Hindi)
Correspondence: Nirmal Infosystems &
Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
Clo G. L. Agrawal, 222, Deshbandhu Apartments,
Kalkaji, New Delhi - 110019.India
Ph.: 011-26216654 Fax: 011-26422054
For Subseription: Demand Draft in favour of
"Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd."
payable in Delhi. Rs. 350/- annually 6 issues per
Akashwani (Yuva Shakti Magazine)
C/O. Shreya Payment,
8272,141 A Street,
Surrey, BC,
Canada V3W 0V6
editors@akashwani:org
List of on going Sahaja Projects:
Under the auspices of the World Council for the
Advancement of Sahaja Yoga, a new subsection
of the www.sahajayoga.org web site has been
created so that yogis around the world can see
details of various projects and activities that are
year
Divine Cool Breeze (Indian Edition) 350/-
annually 6 issues per year
Correspondence: Nirmal Infosystems
Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
Clo G. L. Agrawal, 222, Deshbandhu Apartments,
Kalkaji, New Delhi - 110019.India
Ph.: 011-26216654 Fax: 011-26422054
&
happening in the Sahaja collective.
This site has a number of benefits:
to communicate the range of our activities to
advance Sahaja Yoga
to allow Sahaja Yogis to participate in these
activities where appropriate
so that we can learn from each other, and
possibly avoid unnecessary duplication of
effort.
For Subscription: Demand Draft in favour of
"Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd."
payable in Delhi.
For more information like books & others visit
www.nirmalinfosys.com
Details of the project should be written in
English, and sent to Alan Wherry, email:
info@daisyamerica.com and to Dave Dunphy,
email : dunphitect@aol.com.
The email should be copied to the relevant
country leader in all cases, it should be clear
from which country it comes and it should
contain a contact address with the text so that
Bharat Vidhata (Hindi-Marathi Weekly
Newspaper)
Publisher: RT Manuja, Mumbai, India
Phone:3793578/32956124
Annual
Divine Cool Breeze
Subscription
(international Edition)
CiO. Sarvesh Singh,
US (S 30)* $28 Per Annum for six issues
2042 Capstone Circle,
available
queries or requests can be sent to the right
person.
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-42.txt 
 Issue: 3 & 4 - 2006
40
The Divine Cool Breeze
An example of the suggested style of an article can be seen at
http.//www.sahajavoga.org/current projects.asp For International Sahaja Yoga Book Project
A few selected URLS (online site address) to view International Sahaja
Yoga sites and related Sahaja information like Newsletter:
http://www.sahajayoga.org/Sahaja Yoga Intemational
Site
http://www.geocities.com/seattleyoga/ Sahaja Yoga
in Seattle
http://sahajabhakta.org/nysahajayoga/ Sahaja Yoga
New York and New Jersey
http://www.shrimataji.net rare photographs of Puja
and other
http://www.sahajayoga.org/swan/ Sahaja world wide
Announcement and News
http://www.sahajayoga.org/sahajnews/
American News letter
North
http://www.sahajayoga.org.in/ India News Letter/
SITA India
http://www.theatreofeternalvalues.com/docHTML/
newsletter.htm TEV (Theatre of Eternal Values)
Newsletter
http://www.geocities.com/vndsybenin/nigeria/ Sahaja
Yoga in Nigeria and Lagos
http://www.poetry-enlightened.org/ecrire/
enlightened poetry section
http://www.sahajayoga.es/uma/ Promised land of
Spain
http://sahasrara.nirmala.info/ Sahaja Yoga contacts
and other related information.
contact@sahajayoga.ca Sahaja Path (Sahaja Yoga
Canada Newsletter)
sahajnews@yahoo.com,
johndobbie@innocent.com Australian Newsletter.
dalysean@hotmail.com Australian National Yuva
Shakti Newsletter (Until publish)
http://www.sol.com.au/kor/home.htm Knowledge of
Reality: Australia Magazine
ramoodley@worldonline.co.za African Newsletter.
A few more URLS: That may interest Sahaja Yogis to
view on the net
http://www.valaya.co.uk/IN-DEEP.htm Mother's talk
Excerpts
http://www.daisyamerica.com/ Sahaja Book
Publication
http://www.sakshi.org Sakshi Pokhari - The Pond of
the Witness
http://homepages.ihug.co.nz/-sahaj_nz Seeking
Sahaja Self Realization.
http://www.sahajayogamumbai.org Seeking Sahaja
Knowledge.
www.nirmala.cz Czech Sahaja WebPages.
www.sahajayoga-arabia.com Arabic Site for Self
Realization.
http://sitemaker.umich.edu/sahajayoga Sahaja Yoga
of Michigan USA Sahaja Related Information
(evidence based outreach).
http://bayyoga.intelligentfilms.com/ San Francisco
/Oakland Sahaja Yoga website( A video testimonial
from a Sahaja Yogi).
http://www.yogacolorado.org/login.php?page-leela
Sahaja Yoga Colorado/ Leela Game. Also video film
*vision'.
http://www.sahajvidya.freeuk.com/jsmsy Excerpts of
Mother's talk
http://www.sahajayogasardegna.it/musica.htm Music
related site, Nirmal Tarang in MP3
http://www.yuvashakti.com/ Yuva Shakti
International
http://www.chicagoyoga.org/seeker_cd Sahaja Yoga
Chicago.
http://www.bhajan.nirmalvihar.info
http://www.nirmalbhakti.com Devotional Indian
Music.
Sahaja Bhajan.
http://www.yuvadrishti.com/ Indian Yuva Shakti
Magazine
