Yuvadrishti Vol 7 September Issue 3 2006

 INDEX Devay Namo Namah 1. 2. Nirmal Vani 3. 84 Names of Shri Vishnu Maya 4. Maharana Partap The Vaitarna Day 5. 11 6. Find the words 12 7. Kundalini - The primordial truth 13 8. Shri Mahalakshmi goes shopping 15 10. Anecdotes of Jesus Christ 17 20 11. संगीत 13. Yuvashakti Update 22 246 9

 YUVADRISHTI Published by Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 8, Chandragupta Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 029 Printed by Shrada Printary Pune Please send your experiences, Suggestions, Articles etc., to: Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 8, chandragupta Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 029 1.

 "Devay Namo Namah" The onus of bringing the Last Judgment has been given to Shri Kalki (the tenth incarnation of Shri Vishnu, to be born in Kaliyuga). Let us try and understand what Shri Mataji has described about Him. Om Twameva Sakshat "Shri Kalki" Sakshat Shri Adishakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyei Namo Namah Shri Mataji has often talked about the Last Judgment. She situated on your bhaala. Bhaala is the forehead. And here has repeated many a times that in these modern times the He is going to be born. That is resurrection of the people will happen through their the real meaning of the word Sambhaalpur. In between, Kundalini Awakening only. Before the Last Judgment there is a time given for resurrection. One may ask what is Jesus Christ, and His resurrection? Resurrection means rising to life after death, destroying incarnation, of which was shown by Jesus Christ (when He rose to life on Mahavishnu - called as Kalki, the third day after His crucifixion). Resurrection of Christ there is a time given to human beings to rectify themselves, was a symbolical happening of self-realisation, because in for them to enter into our realization we rise from our three dimensional existence the of Mind/Body/Emotions (which is dead matter, remains only Kingdom of God, which in the with the human life) to the state of Spirit (which is eternally Bible is called as Last Judgment. That you'll be judged, all of you... will be judged living and never dies). People who have their Sahastrara open and are in the on this earth. The population of the world is the maximum, they say, because all those - practically all those who had Kingdom of God, will be the only one to pass this Judament: aspirations to enter into the Kingdom of God are born in the that is why Sahaja Yoga has been described as the Last Judgment by Shri Mataji, Shri Kalki (the tenth and fast modern times and are going to be born very soon, This is the Incarnation of Shri Vishnu ) will be the one who will do this most important time, because Sahaja Yoga is the Last Judgment." Judgment. Shri Mataji is the Holy Spirit, She is Shri Kalki, There are eleven Rudras in Him, means there are She is the comforter, the redeemer and the saviour. It has been prophesized that Shri Kalki will come on a white horse eleven destructive powers absolutely powerfully settled in and only pious souls will be able to ride this white horse. The Him... Which are, guarding, the beauty of Sahaj Yoga. white horse of Shri Kalki is collective consciousness Anybody who tries to play around with Sahaja Yoga is harmed very badly." (saamuhik chetna). "... The word Kalki, actually is an abbreviation of the word "... You have not come here to add to your sins, but to Nishkalank. Nishkalank means the same as my name is, cleanse them this is the time of cleansing, that's why I am here as Nirmala, to cleanse it! Whatever is wrong is wrong, which means Nirmala it is spotlessly clean, something that is spotlessly clean is - Nishkalanka, without any spots on. whether it is today, tomorrow or yesterday or thousands of Now this incarnation has been described in many Puranas year back, whatever is wrong for your dharma, for your will be coming onthis earth on a white horse, in a village of sustenance is wrong! The new phrase, is that "What's Sambhaalpur, they call it, Sambhaalpur. Is very interesting wrong in this, what's wrong in that?" That question will be everything so literally. answered by Kalaki only! I'm just telling you that it is wrong, take how The people world Sambhaala means: bhaala is, this forehead, sambahaal and it is extremely wrong, it is against your ascent, it is means at that stage. That means Kalaki is against your being, and then you will not

 have any time to repent and to ask this question: "What's person, who is going to get. When the Kalaki chakra is caught-up. all your wrong?" You will be chopped off. fingers, start burning. On the hands, and So many rakshasas have entered into your brains. You side with so many people who are wrong, who are doing on the palm, sometimes even in the body, you get terrible burning. A person's wrong, who are doing all kinds of wrong things in the name Kalaki chakra catching means, he might of politics, in the name of religion, in the name of progress be down, with a, horrible disease like and education and all that. Once you are sided with them, cancer maybe, leprosy. Maybe any such then they are in your brain, they are within you. And when they are within you, how to destroy? The dushkruthaams diseases, or maybe that he is about to collapse into some sort of a calamity. So Kalaki chakra must be kept all right in balance. At least there are eleven sub-chakras of the Kalaki (the evil doers), they are within you! You may be a good person, but you may be destroyed because of having them chakra. And out of them, at least try to keep some of them in your heads. So there is no hard and fastrule as to sav who alive, so that the others can be rescued. But if all the chakras is a real negative and who is a real positive." are ruined, then, it is very difficult to give you realization. I'm here to work for you day and night, that you kriow I What is the thing one should do, to keep your Kalaki all work very hard for you. I'll spare no efforts, to help you and do everything that is possible, to make you all right to pass right? To keep your Kalaki all right you must have that awe for God. If you do not have awe for God, if you are not afraid this examination of Last Judgment. But you have to of God, if you are not afraid, that if you do wrong He is there cooperate with Me and you have to go headlong about it and with His wrath. And that He is a wrathful God, and that He is full of. poison for us, if we try to do anything wrong, if there is devote most of your time for Sahaja Yoga and for imbibing all that is great and noble. no fear of that. Not that it is to be hidden from Me, or from *...Today is the day, of warning you, because you have anybody else but not you yourself know that you are doing asked Me to talk, about Kalaki. He is placed on our wrong. If you are doing something wrong, and you know in forehead. When the Kalaki is caught-up the chakra of your hearts of hearts that "I am doing something wrong,.' please, don't do it! Otherwise your Kalaki will go out. Kalaki is caught-up the whole of Buddha, on top, goes out of order. In the Kundalini awakening, we find, that the Buddha is all out of order it doesn't rise; the whole head becomes a blockade. Such people do not allow the Kundalini to rise above, the... we can say the Hamsa chakra. At the most they might try to, raise up to Agnya, but the Kundalini falls down. Of course one of the reasons as I said that if you, put your forehead before wrong gurus, also, you suffer. But too much thinking also creates a problem on the right-hand-side here, and one of the... one of the aspects of Kalaki gets spoilt. And there is an imbalance is created, on this side. The whole forehead, if it is, full of lots of bumps, then one must know, that the Kalaki chakra is out of order. If the Kalaki chakra is out of order, the person is about to go into some sort of a very bad calamity; is a sign, of a

 "Nirmal Vani" Some priceless jewels on selected topics, extracted from the treasure trove of our Mother's eternal words of wisdom, have been strung into exquisite necklace called "Nirmal Vani". This issue, lets focus on mother's advice on how to establish the eternal child within us. BROTHER SISTER RELATIONSHIP superego is controlled, your The Left Vishuddhi family is contralled, everybody In our Sahaja Yoga the significance of left wrist is that it is the is under control, under the left Vishuddhl. Left Vishuddhi, which is here. And this is the left Vishuddhi expressed here, you know that very well guidance of this pure power of Now, left Vishuddhi is the place where our relationship of Vishnumaya which exists within all of us. brothers and sisters exist. When they are disturbed within Now, in a group we are sitting uS we start getting the problem of the left Vishuddhi. In these here, like that, in any group a modern times the talk of pure relationship seems to be quite brother and a sister they are, boring for many people, but it's very practical and logical. I they know that they exist as would say it is the most scientific thing to do. For example, every brother has a special feeling for a sister, and her brothers and sisters, bur they triMet the Etam BtaA chastity is very dear to every brother, if he is a normal don't cling onto one person, person, if he's abnormal then forget it. But normally a they don't talk to one person, they don't get friendly with that brother is very particular about the chastity of the sister, and sister. But a brother and a sister are never friends. But normally you don't talk to your brother much nor the brother he doesn't like anybody to- in any way-even pass a remark talks to you so much, you don't get friendly. But at the time of against the chastity of his sister... but the normal thing is to difficulties, at the time of maryadas, at the time of consulting feel that way, purely, about the sister. And the sister about about some thing that is dear to the family, the sister comes. the brother. Brothers and sisters' relations are extremely The brother is protected by sister. And the sister's chastity is pure and are also accepted in this country very well.. looked after by the brother. A brother who doesn't feel hurt if Left Vishuddhi comes out of guilt. But in the subconscious his sister chastity is in danger or she plays about with her the greatest guilt in a human being is when he crosses the chastity, he is not a brother. He is not a brother anymore. limits of sisterhood. This is the greatest guilt in his mind He's responsible to see that his sister keeps her chastity. which he is not aware. Only her chastity can protect him it's a mutual working. This Shri Vishnumaya & Brother-Sister relationships feeling, if it does rot develop that, "She is my sister and that! Vishnumaya's power is to protect your chastity. Now the have to look after her chastity, for that I have to behave sister's job is not to take sides, but to show that if you cross myself well, so that she doesn't find faults with me." It's such SO you limits of your brotherliness then there will be a a cleansing process this relationship has, as much as the lightening, because the sister in the family has to see that electricity has the cleansing process for you. the brothers don't fight, they are all looked after well, that So how the brother's love can compel even Adi Shakti to do they are not challenged by others, that she gives them the maryadas how far to go. How far to go. So the limiting forces things that She would not normally do. In the same way, when Draupadi was challenged, Shri Krishna was not in of Vishnumaya are such, that your ego is controlled, your Hastinapur where it happened. He was thousand, at least

 more than thousand miles away from that place. He said had married an Indian lady and the great Alexander was in jail. That was the day of Vishnumaya. So she sent this lady that, "Shankha chakra gada padma, garuda lai sidhare." He came on His condor with all His weapons shankha, chakra, was very clever, his wife she sent a rakhi in a small, little gada, padma. All these He brought to save the chastity of thali covered nicely to the King Puru. And, as the rituals are, that day this was presented to him. So he had to accept. If it His Sister. is sent, you have to accept. A sister sends it with Now this sisterly relationship existed in other incarnations deliberations but you have to accept. And he accepted it, also. Like Mohammed Sahib had a sisterly relationship with and it was tied. Then Puru said, "Who is my sister?" They actually what we have to say that His Sister as such was Ali's said, "Your sister is the wife of Alexander." Said, "Oh God, wife, but She was born to him as a daughter. So They can be that meansI have arrested my own brother-in-law!" born as a Daughter or as the Sister. She was born as Immediately becomes a brother-in-law, immediately. No Nanaka's Sister Nanaki. In the same way, Sahaja Yogis and marriage took place, nothing. He's a brother-in-law. He rushed to the jail, fell flat before the great emperor. Sahaja Yoginis are brothers and sisters. You have to understand that you are brothers and sisters, and the Alexander couldn't understand, "What's happening to Puru? relationship between us has to be purer and purer and Why did he do all this?" Puru said, "Sir, I am sorry", in his own language, "I'm sorry I didn't know you were my brother- purer. There should be no choice going on between brothers and sisters- but if somebody has a feeling for someone from in-law. I'm sorry whatever I've done. Will you forgive me?" the very beginning, not like a sister, then a relationship can and all that. And he brought him, asked him to sit on his be established or somebody sees someone for the first time, throne. Alexander couldn't understand, "What's this going not as a Sahaja Yogini but is shown as a bride or something, on?" "Please." Made him sit there, garlanded him, did his then it's a different point. But if the person has been a Sahaja aarti, gave him ornaments, gave him big garlands of Yogi and a Sahaja Yogini, let this feeling grow within you of diamonds and rubies and things, and touched his feet, complete purity. It will clear out many of our problems and you will be amazed, our attention will settle down really washed his feet and then, with great honor, sent him home. He couldn't understand. "Has he gone mad or he's beautifully within us. possessed by someone?" He must have thought, "Some For a Sahaja Yogi it is very important to look after our Greek has possessed this fellow", the way he was chastity. As I told you yesterday, it is not necessary to find a surrendering. When he went home his wife was smiling. He girl for yourself, or a boy for yourself. It is also against the said, "Why are you smiling?" She said, "I knew the trick will rules of chastity, I am not saying that you should allow your work with Indian mind." "What was the trick?" She showed parents to decide, but let him one string. "This was the trick." He couldn't understand, the Sahaja Yoga decide, started looking at it. "What is this?" She said, "This is the because you are Sahaja rakhi. This is the thing I sent him. This has the symbol of a Yogis. You are born after sister, that's how you're released." Alexander sat back. He the image of Ganesha who said, "Oh God, these people can release their enemies on a ultimately becomes Christ. The Strength of Rakhi string? I can't capture these people. They are too good. They are too subtle. These subtleties we cannot When Alexander the Great understand." was arrested by one king called Puru. Alexander 5.

 84 Names of Shri Vishnu Maya Shri Kali : You are verily Shri Kali Shri Swayam Tyakta : You are verily the one, who sacrificed herself in order to announce the birth of Shri Shri Mahakali Nirmita : You were created by Shri Krishna Mahakali Shri Krishna Janamodghoshak Vidyullata : You, who Shri Vishuddhi Padma : You dwell in the Vishuddhi became lightning to announce the birth of Shri Krishna Padma, the Lotus of Vishuddhi Shri Vaikrtika Rahasya: You, who are the Maya that is impossible to surpass Shri Kulishangi : You are Shri Kulishangi. Thunderbolt- bodied Shri Shiv Brahma Vishnu Gyan Parangata : You are verily the Maya that is even beyond the knowledge of Shri Shiva, Shri Brahma and Shri Vishnu Shri Tatillata Samaruchih : You are dazzling like lightning Shri Vishisht Shastra : You are verily the one, who has special weapons Shri Murti Rahasya : You are of mysterious form Shri Darim Pushpa Rakta Danta : You are the one whose teeth are red as pomegranates Shri Americeshwari Shastra : You yourself are a weapon of Shri Americeshwari Shri Shat Netra : You are verily with a hundred eyes Shri Rakshas Vijayani : You are verily the conqueror of Shri Narayani : You are verily Shri Narayani rakshasas and devils Mahishasura Ghatini : You conquered Mahishasura, salutations to You Shri Peeda Nivarini : You are the Goddess who is the Gracious Remover of affliction Nishumbha Shumba Sanhantri : You are the destroyer Shri Pavitrya Dayini : You give Chastity, the Foundation of Shumbha and Nishumbha of all Dharmas Shri Chir Kaumaari : You are the eternal virgin Shri Ganesha Pavitrya Pushpa : Your flowers of chastity express the power of Shri Ganesha Shri Vindhya Priya Putri : You are the beloved daughter of the Vindya mountains Shri Pavitrya Rakhsaka : You are the one who insisted that chastity be protected by battle with the Kauravas Shri Devi Mahatmayam Stuta : You are the Devi praised in the Devi Mahatmyam Shri Draupadi : You incarnated as Shri Draupadi Shri Shankaracharya Prashasta : You are the one to whom Shri Adi Shankaracharya gave praise Shri Bandhu Rakshit Pavitraya : You are the one whose chastity is protected by Her brother Shri Nand Gop Yashoda Stuta : You were bom into the house of the cowherd Nanda, You are the daughter of Shri Bandhu Atma Prabodhita : You are the one who cares for the spirituality of Her brother Shri Yeshoda Shri Mahabharat Karini : You are the one, who was responsible for Mahabharata Shri Krishna Samjata : You are bom on the same day as Shri Krishna Shri Panch Mahabhoot Sammilita : You join the five elements, the five Pandavas. Shri Krishna Bhagini Maya shakti : You are the sister of Shri Krishna who came in the form of the Maya Shakti (the power of illusion) Shri Satya Avtaar Udghoshini : She announced that an incarnation of truth has come among us Shri Sarvabhoot Pravishta : You can enter into all the elements

 sophistication Shri Hrud-Buddhi Melka : You are the one who integrates heart and brain. Shri Nishkalanka : You are the one who is blameless Shri Shighra Karini : You are quick-acting Shri Pitamaha Gaurav Rakshika : You protect the respect for grandparents Shri Sarva Badha Jwalana : You are the one who burns away negativity Shri Matrutatwa Gaurav Rakshika : You guard the respect for the Mother principle. Shri Vidyujjanit Mangala : You are the powerful one whose electricity brings auspiciousness Shri Bhagini Samarthya Rupa : You are the power of the sister in the family Shri Sarvansh Atmika : You make us part and parcel of the whole Shri Atma-Sanshaya Nashini : You are the remover of self-doubt Shri Asatya Mantra Nashini : You are the destroyer of false mantras Shri Chakra Maryada Sthapini : You help to keep the maryadas of the charkas Shri Asatya Spatikaran Nashini : You are verily the one who destroys false explanations. Shri Hridaya Moola : Your roots are in the heart, Shri Nisarga Prakop Damana : You control lightning, earthquakes, typhoons and burning forests Shri Dhairya Dayini : You are the giver of patience. Shri Stri Shakti Rupa : You are the power in a woman that cannot be dominated by money or materialism. Shri Adbhut Chitra Pradayini : You verily give miracle photographs Shri Asatya Katha Nashini : You are the destroyer of myths. Shri Chaya Chitra Prakashka : You enlighten the film medium Shri Kritak Adarsh Nivarin: You remove all artificial Shri Sunrit Vani Dayini : Verily You give pure speech. погms Shri Mantra Samarthya Dayini : You empower all Shri Avyakta Prakatan Karini : You reveal what is mantras underneath Shri Nirahankara : You are without ego Shri Ananda Aadhara : You are the support of joy Shri Namrata Pradayini : You bestow true humility Shri Sukshma Samvid Dayini : You give comprehension of the subtle. Shri Vishwas Nirmankari : You create confidence Shri Satya Rakshika : You are the keeper of reality Shri Aatma Sakshatkar Path Nirmal Karini : You are the one who clears the path for Self-realization Shri Sarva Badha Udghatika : You are the one who Shri Uphaas Asahishnu : You do not tolerate sarcasm exposes negativity Shri Aleek Dambh Nashini : You destroy false

 Shri Viprachitta Rakshas Ghatini : You are verily the destroyer of the Danavas and the Asuras of Viprachitta Shri Poorna Samartha : You are the one who is fully capable Shri Sahaja Yoga Parisamarpana Rupa : You give the quality of being whole-hearted about Sahaja Yoga Shri Shakambhari Devi : You are known as Shri Sakambhari Shri Maha Bhramari : You are verily the Great Brahmari, Her fiery beauty slays even the worst foes Shri Virata Prapini : You bring us to the Virata Shri Vitthal Vishnumaya Virata : You are Shri Vithala Vishnumaya Virata Shri Ida Nadi Stha Agni Shakti : You are the fire power of the Ida Nadi ShriVaam Vishuddhi Sthit Mahashati : You reside in the Shri Satya Bhasini Akasha Shodhika : You are the one who speaks the truth and purifies the ether Left Vishuddhi as the Maha Shakti Shri Bhagini Kanya Rupa Fatima : You incarnated as Shri Fatima, the pure sister and daughter. Shri Stri Shakti : You are the power of a woman Shri Hamsa Chakra Sthit Saraswati : You are Shri Saraswati who becomes Shri Vishnumaya Shakti at the Shri Pratidin Pujya :You are the Goddess, who is to be worshiped everyday. Hamsa Chakra. Nitl Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. You are requested to tick in blocks given below for the magazines you would like to subscribe for the Year 2007. Outstation Rs. 225/- Chaitanya Lahiri Marathi 1. Chaitanya Lahiri Hindi Rs. 300/- Local (for Pune) Rs.200/- Rs. 120/- 4. Yuvadrishti Rs. 300/- 3. Divine Cool Breeze Please provide the full Postal address for mailing the magazines. (PLEASE FILL IN BLOCK LETTERS ONLY) Name Address Amount Rs. Date For Office use only: Issued Receipt No. Drawn on Dated By way of Cash/ Cheque/ Demand Draft No. Please send the above form duly filled along with the Cheque/DD to the Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. (6) 8

 "The Great Indian Saga" Maharana Pratap: The Warrior Yogi of Mewar महाराणा प्रताप का किस्सा है, मेवाड़ के, वो जब लड़ाई में गए तो उनके सैनिकों ने सोचा कि ये तो हारने वाले है, तो उनसे कहा कि 'आप वापिस जाइए, क्योंकि हम चाहते हैं कि आप बच जाऐँ, मेवाड़ के लिए।' उन्होंने कहा, "नहीं, तुम लोग सब वापिस जाओ मैं तो ऐसे ही डटा रहूँगा, क्योंकि गण मेरे साथ खड़े हुए हैं।' सहजयोगी थे ना वह। 'जिसने जाना है जाए, मैं तो ऐसे ही डटा रहूँगा। * श्री हनुमान पूजा, पुणे, ३१ मार्चए ६६ The history of India is replete with majestic & fearless kings Pratap and he took over the charge. The people found a true who gave up their kingdoms and lives for the sake of their leaderin Rana Pratap. word and honor of women and their subjects. Among these the Ranas of Mewar (in Rajasthan) are regarded as the first The atmosphere of his time was of surrender to invaders among equals, who laid down their sarvasvava for the sake and losing honor. Even Pralap's own brothers, Jagmal, of independence and protection of honor against invaders' Shakti Singh and Sagar Singh, were serving Akbar. But tyranny. Not only the kings but the wives and mothers of this Maharana Pratap had resolved to free Chittorgarh, his clan are held in highest esteem for their sense of honor and homeland and so he sent all friendly overtures from Akbar supreme sacrifice. The illustrious sons of this kingdom were back. Rana Udaisingh (saved by Panna dhai as an infant) and the With the failure of efforts to negotiate a treaty, Akbar tallest of them all Maharana Pratap. The Ranas had their capital at Chittorgarh. blockaded Mewar from the rest of the world. He appointed Sagar Singh, a younger brother of Pratap, to rule the conquered territory, so as to alienate Pratap. However, Sagar, regretting his own treachery, soon returned from Chittor, and committed suicide with a dagger in the Mughal Court. Shakti Singh also fled the Mughal court temporarily and warned his brother of Akbar's actions. Meanwhile, in preparation for the inevitable war with the Mughals, Maharana Pratap the alliance with Akbar submitted to him. However Udai altered his administration. He commanded his subjects to Singh maintained his independence though he lost his leave for the Aravali mountains and leave behind nothing for capital. Maharana Pratap was born to him in the 1539 A.D the approaching enemy - the war would be fought in a He was a person of extraordinary courage and strength of mountain terrain which the Mewar army was used to but not Character, Born in the noble family of Bappa Raval, he was the Mughals. It is a testament to the young king's respect inspired by his late grandfather Rana Sanga (Sangram amongst his subjects that they obeyed him and left for the It was October, 1567 and the fort of Chittor had been besieged by Akbar. Taking advantage of the death of the king Rana Sanga and the weak position of his son Udai Singh, he attacked the fort. With the fall of Chittor, the other Rajputs who avoided Singh) who is famous for receiving as many as eighty mountains. wounds on his body, in a battle. and yet continuing fighting. Only 28 years, when he was forced to flee by his nobles It was the beginning of a life of struggle and hardship to fulfll alongwith his father, he determined to struggle against the dream of reconquering Chittor and for this sake slavery all through his life and keep aloft the flag of Maharana Pratap himself undertook several penances, not because his finances forced him to do so, but because he wished to remind himself, and all his subjects, why they After Udai Singh's death on March 3, 1572, Crown prince were undertaking this pain - to win back their freedom, their Pratap was to ascend the throne. But under the infiuence of right to exist as they wished. He foreswore that he would eat his favorite wife, Udai Singh had willed that Jagmal, Pratap's from leaf-plates, would sleep on the floor and would not half brother be the next king. In deference to his father's shave. In his self-inflicted state of poverty, the Maharana wishes, Pratap decided to let Jagmal become the next king. lived in mud-huts made from mud and bamboo. The army of However, knowing this to be disastrous for Mewar, the late Mewar now raided Mughal trade caravans going from Delhi nationalism. Maharana's nobles forced Jagmal to leave the throne to 9.

 to Surat. A section of his army guarded the all important of the Aravalli hills provided Pratap with their support during Haldighati Pass, the only way to get into Udaipur from the times of war and their expertise in living off the forests during North. Totally frustrated now at his inability to overpower Mewar, Akbar dispatched his mighty army under the leadership of Prithviraj Rathore's letter Raja Man Singh to deal with Maharana Pratap. On Jurie 21. Finally, the exiles were facing the prospect of actual 1576 the two armies met at Haldighati, near the town of - bread Gogunda in present-day Rajasthan. Before the Battle of - was stolen by a dog. This cut into Haldighati started, Raja Man Singh (who was leading Maharana Pratap's heart deeply and He began to think Mughul armies) was out hunting with a few hundred about submitting to the Mughals. His wife, on seeing his faith retainers. Pratap's Bhil spies reported this to him at his camp a few kilometers away. Some of Pratap's noDles this child is the cause of your weakness and makes you suggested that they seize the opportunity to attack and kill despondent then better to kill him than losing freedom and Man Singh and thus demoralize the Mughal armies. Pratap honor to the Mughals". But Pratap also could not see his refused, which showed his sense of righteousness even at subjects suffer for sa lang and thought of writing to Akbar times of peace. starvation. Once even Pratap's children's meal made from grass waver, puta sword on the neck of her child and told Pratap "lf the prospect of facing defeat. indicating his readiness to negotiate a treaty. Akbar was overjoyed when he got a letter from Pratap. When Pratap's first cousin Prithviraj Rathore, who was one of Akbar's courtiers and great poet, heard of this offer, he was astonished and grieved by Maharana Pratap's decision, and told Akbar that the note was the forgery of some foe to defame the Mewar king. "I know him well," he explained, "and he would never submit to your terms. Then he wrote a couplet to his cousin Pratap exhorting him to uphold the honor of Mewar and his freedom even under difficult conditions. Pratapreplied to him "By my God Eklinga, Pratap would call the emperor Turk alone (a word to convey his disrespect) and the sun would The Mughal forces greatly outnumbered Pratap's men. The rise in the east. You may continue your proud bearing as battle of Haldighati lasted only four hours. In this short long as Pratap's sword dangles on the Mughal head. Pratap period, Pratap's men essayed many brave exploits on the would be guilty of Sanga's blood, if he was to tolerate Akbar. field. Maharana Pratap personally attacked Man Singh: his You would have the better of it, no doubt Prithviraj, in this horse Chetak placed its front feet on the trunk of Man wordy quarrel." Singh's elephant and Pratap threw his lance; Man Singh Thus the years passed and when his finances started failing, a Mewar businessman and a great patriot Bhamashah offered him all his wealth enough to maintain an army of 25,000 for 12 years. He was thus able to reorganise his army and it proved such a nuisance that the Mughal occupying force in Mewar never knew peace. Later, Pratap relocated to His one attempt at open confrontation having thus failed, Chavand in the mountainous southeastern area of Mewar Pratap resumed the tactics of guerilla warfare. Using the and the exiles survived in those ravines for many years by hills as his base, Pratap harassed the large, therefore subsisting on wild berries and by hunting and fishing. awkward Mughal forces in their encampments. Akbar Eventually within his own life time Maharana Pratap was despatched three more expeditions to ferret Pratap out of able to regain as many as 77 out of 80 of his forts lost to the ducked, and the elephant driverwas killed. However, the numerical superiority of the Mughal army finally prevailed. A wounded Pratap was carried to safety by his steed Chetak into the hilly wilderness of the Aravallis. his mountainous hideouts, but they all failed, The Bhil tribals enemy. 10

 VAITARNA DAY Maharana Pratap is a great hero in the eyes of many Indians, and is much respected and loved by his people. During a dark chapter of Rajput history, Pratap alone stood firmly for his honor and dignity; he never compromised his honor for safety. In an incident, the womenfolk of Abdur Rahim Khankhana, a mughal officer, fell into the hands of Pralap's son Amar Singh. At this point of time, Khankhana was actually on the march against Pratap, and was camping at Sherpur in order to make preparations for an assault against Pratap. Nonwithstanding all this, Pratap commanded his son Amar Singh (eldest of 17 sons and 5 daughters) to arrange for the safe conveyance of the mughal ladies to their camp. Khankhana was so affected by this incident that he refused to campaign against such a chivalrous monarch. As the sun raises at dawn we, the collective sit on the lawn. Vibrations shower flooding the sky raising the kundalini so high. Our darling Mother brought us here, The gates of Heaven so teasingly near. As the classes begin for the day little can take our attention away rhythm and music flows through the veins taking away all physical pains. Our dearest Mother gives us Her strength So we can praise and worship at length. сап Maharana Pratap died of injuries sustained in a hunting accident. He died at Chavand, on January 29, 1597, aged fifty-six, It is said that as he lay dying, Pratap made his son and successor, Amar Singh, swear to maintain eternal conf man.lict against the mughals. Thus imminent death did not overpower Pratap even in his declining years; he remained intrepid to the end. He died fighting for his nation, for his people, and most importantly as a proud and free As we sit and enjoy a meal for a few seconds we remember its real Friendship and laughter fills the air, never forgetting there's so much to share. Our greatest Mother gave us this joy, part and parcel of Her ploy. As the moonlight fills the night sky We, the collective sit up on high. Mischief and games, the children awake with innocent pleasure, what noise we make. Our divine Mother watches us play Witnessing the tale of a Vaitarna day. 11

 Find the Words MNVT GHF D SPEL VI KKL 24P M. P OI YAUDL A I NEL UA DJ MNE S. H. EWSS IR MD URQ GHD A. A. VNPT MAF 12 NAGF ANI D DA ETNA RG GOL A TRN OIE NMH YOKV A. IT GRI LE P. TI RMAL CAA DF GI MBB ARMLI NE D. L. A. T. AD H MW T. NAVDC BRAT BNH OL G. Y. R. A. Find the 15 words jumbled inside this box 12) 6 letter word - mother of purest wisdom ; one of the Hint: 1)9 letter word: it can be cool or hot ; we can feel it in names from shree mataji's 108 names. hands. 13) 6 letter word synonym-like god 2) 6 letter word: Day before Christmas; Shri Mataji had 14) 4 letter word short form of group of yuvashakti. written a book named 15) 7 letter word bestowing perfect happiness on her devotees ; one of the names from shree mataji's 108 3)5 letter word: flower with many ray-like petals, Shri Mataji's childhood name names 4) 11 letter word: we become aware of ourself when we get our 5)4 letter word :Name of Dharmashala school. 6) 6 letter word: Sweet fluid from plants. 7)7 letter word without any companion ;one of the names from Shree Mataji's 108 names . www. 8)6 letter word framework of bones below the waist. 9) 6 letter word the place where Shree Mataji opened her sahastrar. For Answers, read "Shri Mahalakshmi goes shopping".. 10) 9 letter word the english meaning of ADISHAKTI. 11) 11 letter word the place where the diwali puja was held. 12. S.

 Kundalini: The Primodial Truth The traditions of India and its neighboring countries offer scripture of the Hindus. Thus Gyanadeva was convinced by more spiritual knowledge than any other region of the world. his brother to write a commentary on the Bhagavad-Gita in According to old scriptures Shri Adi Shakti is the primordial Marathi popularly known as Gyaneshwari. and highest power. She is the one who created the first manifestation, the bridge between the formless non- Shankaracharya (8th century AD) says in the Saundarya manifested god and the whole formed creation. Her Lahari in the 10th verse: reflection kundalini builds a connection with the Divine, Thyself assuming the form of a serpent of three-and-a-half connecting the individual to a collective, higher awareness. coil, sleeping thou in the hollow of the kulakunda The description refers to the triangular bone, in which If a human being is perfectly pure in his inner, subtle system kundalini resides. In Devi bhagawatam chapter 5 mother of (which practically means that he has become a saint) he the worlds (Shri Adi Shakti) is again described as the receives his total liberation, "moksha", at the moment of the "kundalini in the mooladhar". The three-and-half coils of kundalini awakening. This perfect liberation took place for kundalini relate to the three "moods" (basic principles) of the Buddha after he had renounced all his attachments and creation and the half coil to the primordial power. These temptations. If kundalini awakening takes place in "non- moods are Mahakali, Mahasaraswati and Mahalaxmi: perfect" human beings, she starts cleansing different energy centers, the "charkas". The last and complete liberation is the union of the soul, the atma (Shri Shiva) with the kundalini (Shakti) in order to make the atma aware or conscious in us. desire(and destruction of evil). action(and creation), and finally the power of the central channel(evolution). Our first chakra Mooladhara, It lies at the root of our body and guards the sleeping kundalini in the sacrum (mooladhar). Any That means, the truth, the all- pervading awareness and the pure joy become reality in us. The Sahasrara chakra above weakness of this chakra, which is the throne of innocence and wisdom, causes permanent difficulties, as it is the support of the kundalini. There is a the fontanel bone at the top of the skull opens up and replaces the biggest part of our ego and our conditionings. This process has often been described poetically in old scriptures. Tukaram says "today my service has borne fruit" considerable difference between the mooladhara- chakra and the mooladhar which lies above it (sacrum), the triangular bone at the end of the spine. At the awakening of the kundalini, her pulsations can often be seen with the Bhagwatgita the subject of kundalini has been very naked eye at the sacrum. Lying at the base of the spine, briefly referred to. The Upanishads have only treated parts Kundalini rises through the middle channel (Sushumna). of it. Markendeya was the first one to break with the tab00 which corresponds with the canalis centralis in the grey (thousands of years ago), and talked openly about it. What matter of the backbone. The medical term is "os sacrum, these classical scriptures have in common is that they are "holy bone", taken over directly from the Greeks and difficult to understand and that the effects of kundalini have Romans. Egyptians attributed this "os sacrum" to the god not been described in detail. This changed in the 13th Osiris. It is eager to give the second birth, to permeate the century AD, around 1275 in the central part of India by whole body and to renew its organs, each cell is being Gyanadeva (also called Gyaneshwar or Dyaneshwar) who touched and purified by kundalini. This process has been took birth in Maharashtra. Although he left this world at a described in detail right up to the roots of the hair by very young age, he is one of India's greatest saints. As the Gyanadeva. The Gyaneshwari continues with the Bhagavad-Gita had been written in Sanskrit the masses did procedure after the purification of the subtle centers, the not have direct access to this most popular religious kundalini stays in the centre-channel (Sushumna) of three In 13

 subtle channels and pours out "of her mouth water, that becomes nectar". This nectar in its turn brings forth a "vital wind, ...That gives a cooling sensation in and on the body". The perception of the cool breeze is the beston the palms of the hands and at the top of our head (Sahasrara chakra).. In the 13 sub-chapter of Gyaneshwari it is mentioned that the palms of the hands should be kept upwards, in order to feel the Kundalini-energy. This coolness is also described in the Koran- sura 36, 65: "one day we will seal their mouths, but their hands will speak."The hands "speak" in such a way that each finger, root of the hand and Palm correspond with a chakra and the various sensations of the part of the hand Kabir Says... Abode of the Beloved Oh Companion That Abode Is Unmatched, Where My Complete Beloved is. In that Place There Is No Happiness or Unhappiness, No Truth or Untruth Neither Sin Nor Virtue. There Is No Day or Night, No Moon or Sun, There Is Radiance Without Light. inform about the condition of the charkas. There Is No Knowledge or Meditation In the gospel of John, 4, Jesus describes the process of awakening to a Samaritan woman next to a well "if you knew the gift of god, and who it is that asks you for a drink, you would have asked him, and he would have given you water of life. The woman said to him, sir, you have nothing to draw with, and the well is deep: where can you get that water of Jesus answered, everyone who drinks this water will be thirsty again: but whoever drinks the water that I give him vill never thirst. Indeed, the water I give him will become in him a spring of water welling up into eterna! life." No Repetition of Mantra or Austerities, Neither Speech Coming From Vedas or Books. Doing, Not-Doing, Holding, Leaving All These Are All Lost Too In This Place. No Home, No Homeless, Neither Outside or Inside, life? Micro and Macrocosm Are Non-Existent. Five Elemental Constituents and the Trinity Are Both Not There Witnessing Un-struck Shabad Sound is Also Not There. As described in the poetry of Shankaracharya, the ascending kundalini passes through the Nabhi, Swadisthana, Anahata-, Vishudhi-, and Agnya chakra. As soon as the Agnya chakra at the forehead gets pierced through thoughtlessness, is achieved. Only at that very moment one can talk about an experience which allows a deeper understanding of the "Gyaneshwari" for instance. Nirvichar Samadhi is spontaneous, like every movement of the kundalini. Samadhi cannot be achieved through human willpower that is why the concept, that through efforts of concentration real spiritual progress could be achieved, is wrong. After the Sushumna, which is the central channel, the subtle channels on the left and the right are enlightened. The left (ida-nadi) represents the emotions, conditionings and the past, the right (pingala-nadi) activity, planning and No Root or Flower, Neither Branch or Seed, Without a Tree Fruits are Adorning, Primordial Om Sound, Breath-Synchronized Soham, This and That All Are Absent, The Breath Too Unknown Where the Beloved Is There is Utterty Nothing Says Kabir I Have Come To Realize. Whoever Sees My Indicative Sign Will Accomplish the Goal of Liberation. The Garden Of Flowers Do not go to the garden of flowers the future. Do not go to the garden of flowers! The whole process physically relates with the parasympathetic system and therefore cannot be controlled consciously. Awakening of Kundalini gives a kind of profound peace and joy. Do not go to the garden of flowers! O Friend ! go not there; In your body is the garden of flowers. Take your seat on the thousand petals of the lotus, and there gaze on the Infinite Beauty. 14

 Shri Mahalakshmi Goes Shopping Shri Mataji and Sir CP go shopping in London Even more importantly, as in much of Her publicactivity, Shri Mataji even now seemed destined to seek out the crowds of people, where the maximum possible number can receive the massive outpouring of Her Chaitanya, in the form of On Saturday, the 14th of October, 2006 the Divine Motherly Love, that she emitted during the whole shopping blessed us with trip. At one store, several sales assistants became enamoured by her Divine presence and asked who She was. They were told to hold out their hands toward Her and ask this question to Her directly, in their hearts. Shri Mataji looked at them, their faces glowing and their hearts melting under the infiuence of Her charisma and simply said with a what is now a rare opportunity. Shri Mataji and Sir CP decided to go shopping, to buy shoes and wave of Her hand "they have it" The Divine responded other accessories. Shri Mataji led us on a magical journey through the shoe shops of the West End of London, In each immediately and they felt the cool breeze on their hands and one Shri Mataji pointed to many different types of shoes and handbags, touching many to assess the quality of the people seemed drawn to Her without understanding why, leather and craftsmanship. Yogis brought different examples of merchandise from all corners of each shop for Her to see and touch. She looked at each item carefully, felt the leather, enquired about the price and discussed with Sir CP the relative merits of each. Sir CP was keen to buy his beloved Wife a gift, but for quite some time She was unable to find anything that suited Her. Throughoul the shopping trip, as you can see in the photos, Shri Mataji made endless jokes and humorous comments about the various styles of merchandise and their prices. above their head. Like this, throughout the shopping trip, and yet their faces showed that within them s ome heartstring had begun to resonate and their mind had beco me inexplicably silent. Such was their destiny that the Divine had to find a way for them to come face to face with the Cosmic Mother, and so they were drawn to the shops and streets that She chose to move on during this joyful day. And so the shopping party progressed through large numbers of stock, only to decide that another shop should be tried and so on until we arrived at the inevitable- Harrods department store. It seemed clear to many of us that She Finally, Shri Mataji found some shoes and a handbag that was doing more than just shopping since by vibrating the She liked. Sir CP succeeded in convincing Her that the price many items that She touched there would be many recipients of Her blessings. most of them unsuspecting shoppers who might purchase was agreeable and so he bought a gift for his wife. Jai Shri Mataji See My face In the dining roaom of Brompton Square She used to have all these different tea sets and teapots and cups and saucers and things around the picture rail. And some of them, remember, we bought in Hong Kong when She was there and She just bought them from the local Chinese emporium for not very much money at all, but when they were up in the Adi Shakti's dining room they looked absolutely stunning We did a lot of shopping in this Chinese emporium in Hong Kong and She would see lots of statues of Quan Yin there an item that had been touched by the Divine incarnate. Little would they know that destiny had chosen them to be a recipient of Mother's love, hidden as paramchaitanya in their new box of shoes or handbag. 15

 and say, "See My face, See My face there" and all these Quan Yin statues in this china shop. This was '81. I asked Mother if She could know everything. She replied, "I can know all thoughts and things, past, present and future, simultaneously. But I can't be bothered." Then, with great naivety, I asked Mother how much was Her ability to cure someone and how much it was their faith in Her. Mother very sweetly and patiently replied, "One hundred percent your faith." ...And walking down the street with Her in Hong Kong was incredible because Hong Kong is so crowded, so it is so that you can't walk abreast. And I was walking behind Her and watching all the people's faces as they were looking at Her and seeing the amazed lok on their faces and virtually Linda Williams seeing their kundalinis come up as they focused on Her face of this amazing Indian woman walking like an elephant through this crowd of Chinese, down on the crowded streets of Hong Kong... wwAnd that was the time She said, "Oh, I need some money, some Hong Kong money." And I leant it to Her. She said, "Now you must remember to tell Me to pay you back when we get to London because," She said, "I can't owe people money in this lifetime, otherwise l'll have to come back and pay you back in another lifetime." And I said, "That's all right with me then, Mother."And She laughed. And then She said, "But do you know "and She laughed then, but She said, "But do you realize how difficult it is for Me to incarnate?" "So the power of Kundalini is to purify, she purifies us like fire. She doesn't purify us like water, surprisingly: she doesn't purify us like water. Now, water, what does the water do? Water never burns off anything, but it dissolves certain things. It can take in something within Kay McHugh Agood thing for Her to buy Mother was at a weekend seminar in Dorset. We had a lovely weekendand various things happened, but there was one which was connected with shopping. Apparently Mother had gone to the local town. There was a clock in an antique shop. which Mother stopped and seemed interested in. She went in and bought it and the shop owner said it had been in the window for a very long time. When She had bought it, She explained to the people with Her that She could work on every person who had looked at the clock as they passed up the street and that was why it was a good thing for Her to buy. itself, see. It can contain some of the dirt within itself. Supposing you put a color in the water - it assumes the color. But Kundalini does not assume the color. She burns out. Do you follow my point? So, if you have anything wrong within you, she'll burn it off, but she'll not absorb - she's pure. She cannot absorb those things into her that will pollute her. She cannot be polluted." H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Australia 1981 Linda Williams 9) NARGOL, 10) HOLYGHOST, 11) NIRMALNAGRI, 12) SUMATI, 13) DIVINE, 14) NSYS, 15) SUKHADA 1) VIBRATIONS, 2) ADVENT, 3) DAISY, 4) REALISATION, 5) ISPS, 6) NECTAR, 7) VISANGI, 8) PELVIC, Answers to crossword: 16

 Anecdotes Off Jesus Christ The Great Picnic (When Jesus fed the Five Thousand) down to teach them again. He healed the sick ones whom they had brought to him, and taught them many things about the kingdom ofheaven. After a while the day wore on and evening came. Still the A boy's lunch-basket is a very small thing compared with a great miracle, But in this story we shall see how a great people lingered near, seeming to forget they could find no miracle grew out of a boy's lunch-basket. It all came about in food or sheiter in the desert place. The disciples grew this manner - impatient with them and came to ask Jesus to send them away. "They have brought no food," said the disciples, "and The disciples whom Jesus sent to preach in the towns and we can not supply food for them in this wildermess; therefore cities of Galilee had returned joyfully, telling their Master send them away that they may buy food in the towns and about their success in healing the sick and in casting out the villages as they journey home." But Jesus answered, "We evil spirits justas they had seen him do. And now the famne of must feed them before sending them away." Then, turning to Philip he asked, "Where shall we find bread, that all these people may Jesus was increasing every day, and many more people from distant parts of the country were flocking to hear him. So urgent were the people who eat?" Philip looked at the great multitude and shook his head. "If we should buy two hundred pennyworth of bread," came to hear Jesus and to have their loved ones healed, that they pressed constantly upon him, and allowed no time for him to rest or even eat. Then he answered, "there would not be enough for each one to have a small piece." While Jesus and the disciples were discussing what to do, the boy who had not forgotten to carry his Jesus called his twelve disciples aside from the multitude and said, "Come with me to a quiet place, for we must resta while." lunch came near and heard their conversation. Then he showed his Taking a ship they sailed away from basket of food to one of the disciples, and he offered to give the food to Jesus. The disciples, who was the multitude to the other side of the Sea, and went into a desert place near a mountain. But they did not find much time to rest even in this lonely spot, for soon they saw a great throng of people coming toward them. The multitude had followed are there in the basket?" asked Jesus. Andrew said, "Only from the other side of the Sea. Perhaps the disciples were five and two small fishes. But what will that be among so disappointed because the people had found them again, but many people?" Jesus replied, "Bring them to me." Jesus looked pityingly upon the great throng, and said of them, "They are like sheep that had no shepherd. They Then he told his disciples to bid the people sit down in wander about here and there hunting for their own pasture- groups, in some fifty and in others a hundred, and wait for grounds." In this great throng were five thousand men, who their evening meal. While they waited, he took the little had come from different parts of Galilee. Some of them had loaves and the fishes and blessed them and broke them into brought their wives and children along, and other women small pieces. He filled a basket for each of the twelve had come, too. When they had started they did not know disciples and sent them to pass the food among the hungry they would have to go so very far to find Jesus, and many of people. Then the disciples returned and again he filled their them had brought nothing to eat. One boy, however, had not empty baskets. forgotten his lunch-basket, and in his basket he carried five When all the people had eaten, he sent the disciples to Andrew, came and told Jesus what the boy had said, "How many loaves little loaves of bariey bread and two small fishes. When the galiner uP the scraps that had been left over, and they found multitude came near, Jesus received them kindly and sat 17

 twelve baskets full of scraps. And every one in the great Jesus was here! He never told us how to cope with ghosts!" multitude had eaten enough to satisfy his hunger. The boy they wanted to look, they did not dare to. The spectral man who had brought the lunch-basket to Jesus had all that he trod boldly from wave to wave. "Don't fret!" he called. "It's could eat, and he shared his ittle lunch with every one in the only me."The boat hove to, while the disciples rushed up and down, grabbing each other by sleeve and gasping." Walking on the water! Do you see? He is isn't he? He's This unusual miracle caused much excitement among the walking on water!" Suddenly it struck some of them that this people. They wanted Jesus to become their king instead of might not be Jesus al alI, but a demon in disguise (the Devil great throng because he had let Jesus bless his offering. letting the Roman government rule them any longer. They is always out to prick people). believed that he could set them "If it is you Lord, tell me to come free from the rule of the Romans, whom they hated. They thought it would be wonderful to have a king rule them who could feed them by working miracles. But Jesus would not allow the people to take him for their king. Although he was a King, yet he had not come to earth to rule an earthly over the water," said Peter. He was excited, eyes bright, cheeks flushed. "Tell me to come." Jesus beckoned him. Bundling his robes up in one hand, Peter scrambled over the rail, eager to see what it felt like to walk on water! The sea took his weight. He set each foot on the black kingdom. waves and felt them, like a He commanded his disciples to enter their ship at once and return springy garden of bed of newly turned earth, under his sandals. "But it's water" he thought. "Rough water, too. And men can't walk on. ." As his faith failed, he began to sink, Jesus was reaching out encouraging hands, but Peter began to sink, because what he was doing was impossible. In that to the other side of the Sea. And when they left him, then he dismissed the multitude and went alone upon the mountain near by to pray. moment, he thought he was about to drown. "Lord, save When Jesus Walked On Water... me!" Before the Great Picnic had disbanded, Jesus told the "Oh, how little faith you have!" Jesus reproached Peter. disciples to sail across the Sea of Galilee, while he said "Why did you start to doubt me?" goodbye to the last.of the five thousand. "How will you catch Together, they climbed into the boat. The wind dropped. The LIS up?" they asked, but Jesus had already turned away. sea fell flat, flat as spilled oil. Then Peter began to regret his When he was finally alone, Jesus walked to a hiltop and lack of faith. What might he have done with more faith? But prayed. And when he finished praying, he walked down no, he had doubted, He had taken fright. Worst of all, he had again down the grassy slope, now deserted the grass failed Jesus, and rather than do that, he would have walked flattened by five thousand feet, across the rocky beach, on across half the oceans of the world. to where the water broke against the shore in while surf. And Around Jesus, the other disciples fell top their knees, "No then on further still. doubt about it," they said. "No question. You are the Son of God" Meanwhile, a keen wind had sprung up, and disciples. though a good half-mile from shore, were making a little headway. The swell was heavy, the waves menacing. At first, they thought that they were seeing spray scuffed up off the crest of the waves. But then they saw it had a shape of a man, and were panic-stricken. "A ghost! A ghost! If only 18

 Lord Jesus was born on Diwali On one occasion, many years ago in London, Shri Mataji spoke to us about star signs. She mentioned that Lord Jesus, the great incamation of Lord Ganesha, was born under the sign of Scorpio, which is the sign of death and resurrection. He was actually born at Diwali, which falls at the time of year which is Scorpio in the astrological calendar. The chakra of Lord Jesus is the Agnya, of course, and this is the chakra associated with the light element. So it is only right that Diwali is the festival of lights. Also, for the Christians Lord Jesus came as a light to lighten the darkness, so again there is that connection to light. The 10 Names of Shri Lakshmi: The reason why Christmas is celebrated as the birth of 1. ShriAdi Shakti - The Primal Cause. Christ is because for nearly seventeen hundred years this has been traditional in most of the churches. The ancient 2.Shri Vidya Lakskhmi - The Goddess who bestows and politically powerful Romans adopted Christianity in the Knowledge. third century AD, and changed the date of Christmas to the 25th of December, because of various pagan Roman festivals which fell on and around that date. So now, of course, Christmas is on that date. But as Shri Mataji 4. Shri Amruta Lakshmi - The Goddess who bestows the explained - He was actually born at Diwali! 3. Shri Saubhagya Lakshmi - The Goddess who bestows Good Fortune. Nectar of Immortality. At the 1980 Diwali Puja in London, Shri Mataji explained that 5. Shri Gruha Lakshmi - The Goddess who bestows the there is a close relationship between the Swastika and the Divine Qualities of a wife. Cross, and the one is a symbol of the other. There is also a similarity in the way Lord Jesus came on earth, and the 6. Shri Raja Lakshmi - The Goddess who bestows Queenly creation of Lord Ganesha both were born without a father, totally from the Mother. As we know, Shri Ganesha was 7 Shri satva Lakshmi - The Goddess who bestows the Graciousness. created from the turmeric(haldi) paste that had anointed the body of Shri Parvati, and Lord Jesus was born of the Virgin Mary. Awareness of Truth. 8. Shri Bhogya Lakshmi - The Goddess who bestows Sustenance and Enjoyment. At that same Diwali Puja, in 1980, Shri Mataji asked a Sahaja Yogini to read out the ten names of Shri Laxshmi that are now in the mantra book, and She commented briefly on each one. So the meanings there are directly from Shri Mataji. Here they are, and may we all humbly ask Shri Mataji for all these blessing for all our family of Sahaja Yogis, 9. Shri Yoga Lakshmi - The Goddess who bestows Union with the Divine. 10. Shri Maha Lakshmi - The Goddess who is the Power of Evolution. wherever we are. 19

 "संगीत" (एक परिचायात्मक अध्ययन) प्ररम्भ से ही संगीत मनुष्य की भावनाओं को प्रकट करने "गीतं वाद्यं नृत्तं च त्रयं संगीत मूच्यते"- अर्थात गायन, का सर्वश्रेष्ट माध्यम रहा है। यह मानव का चिरसंगी है। वादन व नृत्य इन तीनों के मिले-जूलै रूप को संगीत किसी भी अथवा सभी प्रकार के बन्धनों से मुक्त, संगीत कहते हैं। कुछ अन्य विद्वानों ने संगीत को निम्न प्रकार से भावों (expressions) की एक स्वच्छन्द अभिव्यंजना, परिभाषित किया अभिव्यक्ति (manifesation) है। यह कला हर जाति, हर 1. धर्म से स्वतंत्र है। इसी में एकमात्र ऐसी शक्ति है जो Music is the food of soul. Music is the universal language. Musicis the medicine for the broken heart. 2. 3. मनुष्य के कठोर हृदय को भी पिघला सकती है। यह भाषा विहीन, सार्वभौमिक व सार्वकालिक कला है। किसी भी युग संगीत का अदुभव एवं विकास आदि-अनादि काल से में मानव संगीत की मोहक शक्ति से अछूता नहीं रह पाया अपना आस्तित्व धारण किये, यह कला देवी-देवताओं, है। किसी भी रूप में क्यों न हो संगीत प्रकृति के कण-कण । गन्धर्वों आदि से प्रभावित होती हुई पृथ्वी पर अवतरित हुई ऐसा माना जाता है कि यह कला सर्वप्रथम शिवजी ने देवी में व्याप्त है। चाहे पक्षियों की चहचहाहट हो या झरनों का कलरव, संगीत सर्व व्याप्त है। सरस्वती को सिखाई तत्पश्चात सरस्वती जी ने इसे नारद आदिकाल से ही संगीत, स्वयं ईश्वरीय भाषा होने के कारण पी को दिया, नारद जी ने स्वर्ग के गन्धर्वो, किन्नरों, 'मोक्ष प्राप्ति का सुगम (सरल) से ऋषि-मुनि प्राकृतिक वातावरण में अनहद् नाद का अनुभव ध्यान-धारणा द्वारा करके मौक्ष को प्राप्त करते थे, पृथ्वी पर आने के पश्चात वैदिक काल में रचित चारों वेदों परमात्मा से एकाकारिता प्राप्त करते थे। अत: संगीत में से सामवेद पूर्णतः संगीतमय था। सामवेद में वर्णित सभी अप्सराओं आदि को संगीत का ज्ञान दिया तथा अन्त में यह मार्ग रहा है । प्राचीन समय पृथ्वी पर प्रकट हुई। । मनोरंजन के साथ-साथ मोक्ष प्राप्ति का भी सुगम व मंत्रों का उच्चारण अथवा पाठ संगीतमय होता था। उस सर्वश्रेष्ठ मार्ग है । काल का संगीत "सामगान" कहलाता था। साधारणतः गायन, वादन व नृत्य इन तीनों के सम्मिश्रण इसके पश्चात संगीत मन्दिरों में, देवालयों में देवी-देवताओं को संगीत कहते हैं। संगीत का तात्पर्य मात्र गायन से ही की स्तुति गान, भक्ति संगीत आदि हेतु प्रयुक्त हुआ पर नहीं लिया जाता वरन् संगीत के अन्तर्गत नृत्य व वादन भी शनै: शनैः संगीत ईश्वर की उपासना, मोक्ष प्राप्ति के लक्ष्य आते है। इन तीनों कलाओं के समायोजन से ही संगीत से उठकर मनोरंजन के साधन के रूप में विकसित होता सम्पूर्ण बनता है। चला गया। संगीत की परिभाषा देते हुये पं शारंगदेव ने अपने ग्रंथ अत: आधुनिक परिपेक्ष्य में संगीत अपने व्यापक रूप में स्थापित हो चुका है। 'संगीत रत्नाकर में कहा है ত 20

 परन्तु आज का संगीत अपनी मौलिकता खोकर वीभत्स रूप धारण करता जा रहा है आधुनिक समय में संगीत, पश्चिमी सभ्यता (Western Culture) से बहुत प्रभावित है तथा इसी कारण यह अपनी मौलिकता (originality), अपने आस्तित्व को नष्ट कर रहा है। न संगीत जो कि मोक्ष प्राप्त कराने वाला था आज मात्र मनोरंजन का साधन बनकर रह गया है। आज के वातावरण के मार्गी संगीत कहीं लुप्त होता जा रहा है। संगीत का आध्यात्मिक स्वरूप - जिस प्रकार समस्त जगत अनुसार व्यवहार नादाधीन है उसी प्रकार संगीत भी नाद पर ही ४ आधारित है। सृष्टि में सर्वप्रथम जो नाद गुंजरित हुआ वह ॐ" है। सम्पूर्ण जगत, चर, अचर, व्यंगम सभी ॐ पर ही आधारित है। प्राचीनकाल में ऋषि-मुनियों ने ॐ की राम साधना, उपासना करके मोक्ष को प्राप्त किया। संगीत के प्रकार - संगीत के दो प्रकार माने गये हैं- अत: हम देख सकते हैं कि संगीत सर्वश्रेष्ठ होते हुये, स्वयं ईश्वरीय भाषा होते हुये भी उपसंहार (conclusion) मार्गी संगीत । देशी संगीत । 1. 2. आधुनिक समय में अपने मूल को नष्ट कर रही है। आज मार्गी संगीत अर्थात् मार्ग दिखाने वाला अथवा मोक्ष प्राप्त संगीत अपने उद्देश्य से कहीं भटक गया है। कराने वाला तथा देशी संगीत वह कहलाता है जो जन-मन रंजन हेतु देश, काल, परिस्थिति व वातावरण के अनुसार परन्तु सहजयोग में श्रीमाताजी की असीम अनुकम्पा से, कुण्डलिनी जागरण के पश्चात एक सच्चा साधक संगीत को पुनः उसी रूप में पाने लगता है। सहजयोग में ध्यान धारणा के पश्चात संगीत को हम अपने सूक्ष्म नाड़ी तंत्र पर परिवर्तनशील होता हैं। देशी संगीत के दो प्रकार होते हैं- शास्त्रीय संगीत। (Classical Music) सुगम अथवा भाव संगीत। (Light Music) 2. अनभव करने लगते हैं तथा परमात्मा से एकाकारित होते हैं। अत: इस प्रकार संगीत अपने आस्तित्व को धारण किये शास्त्रीय संगीत अर्थात् जो नियमों (शास्त्रानुसार) में बंधा हुये अपने परम लक्ष्य को प्राप्त कराने में एक सशक्त होता है, जिसे बदला नहीं जा सकता तथा सुगम संगीत जैसे माध्यम के रूप में प्रकट होता है। गीत, गजल, भजन, लोक संगीत, चित्रपट (फिल्मी) संगीत आदि। ত 21 ত) ु

 Yuvashakti Update prayed to Mother to take them into meditation. The peace that everyone felt inside and the feeling of being under the protection of our AdiShakti Mother cannot be described in words. The next session, was about imbibing more Sangh National Yuva Shakti Nirmal Seminar,Sadhupul (Distt Chail, Himachal Pradesh) With the blessings of our beloved Param Pujya Shri Mataji, a seminar for Nirmal Shakti Yuva Sangh (fondly knowledge about our beloved Mother. YuvaShakti of Yamuna Nagar prepared a great presentation on Shri Mataji covering all aspects right from her birth, parentage, childhood, Shri Mataji's association with Mahatma Gandhi, Her active contributions to freedom of India, marriage, discovery of Sahaja Yoga, etc. to make aware the 2223 31 2.78 known as Yuva yuvashaktis about the divine life of our Mother. Shakti) was held at Indra Holiday The Evening session was very special, wrapped with some surprises, to prepare and participate in cultural activities and task collectively. The session started with meditation and Kandaghat Chail Road, Distt Solan, a beautiful location in then all the yuvashakti(s) were divided irito 25 teams. Each Himachal Pradesh. Aplace very near to Shimla, it is siluated team was given a Sahaja project related to understanding at around 350 km away from Delhi. Itslt's a place full of and promotion of Sahaja Yoga (bhajan medley, on-the-spot mountains and beautiful landscapes with a bhajan and Qawwali /posters and banners/ skits and quiz/ stream. In the high ranges of interior Himachal Pradesh, dance drama / Sahaja News Channel / backdrop canvas lush, vibrant green is the predominant colour and the painting of the stage for pujas/ public programmes). Thus Home, Sadhu Pul, serenading mountains are resplendent green all year around. More than 550 enthusiastic young Sahaja Yogis and yoginis from our Yuvashakti(s) got a chance to explore their creativity. The teams were divided so beautifully that all participants Haryana, Delhi, Punjab, Uttaranchal, Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan and other states gathered to enjoy this collectivity, to understand and fullfil Mothers collectively within 1 hour!! Every team started their projects Vision toward's establishing this Sangha. were involved in one or the other collective activity. All with great enthusiasm and ideas, after an hour, it was great As one arrived at the foothills of the Sahasrara of the joy to see the creativity of the collectivity, The performances Universe, the Himalayas, one felt the bubbling of kicked off with the qawwali "chhaap tilak" which was so followed by canvas painting (signifying the essence of Shri Adishakti), story of Lord Rama in a sweet bhajan, a play in which showed Shri Adishakti giving transformation in the era of Kaliyuga, and many more. Bhajans at the feet of Divine made yuvashakti speechless blissful, expectations with a soft cool breeze all over, welcoming the fresh looking (from singing bhajans throughout the journey) yuvashaktis arriving at the firstrays of dawn. 30th September, Saturday: Seminar started on 30th September with morning and made everyone dance on tune of vibrations enjoying meditation. The toot and tootles of birds and rustling leaves the blessings of Mother. Everyone enjoyed this session very provided soothing sound effects in the background making much till late night. this session very beautiful. Everyone experienced great joy 1st October. Sunday of our Mother in their hearts, at such a pure and natural place. It was a nice experience for all yuvashakti(s) to be On the second day after morning meditation all Yuvashakti together during such auspicious days of Navratri. The joined for Tug of War. It was good to see our young Yuva breakfast was prepared and managed under the Shakti brothers flexing their muscles while the Yuva Shakti supervision of Chandigarh collectivity, and everyone got sisters (Shakti) cheered them on. Soon the roles were time to know and meet our brother and sisters from different reversed and everyone bonded beautifuliy in Mother's corners of country. The late morning session focused on divine joy that was spread all around... meditation and everyone heard Shri Mataji's tape and 22

 Next day again started with moming meditation followed by ISPS students, who performed a beautiful dance drama sports session Tug-of-War and kho-kho. It was fun to watch The Ascent of Innocence." All children looked like little young boys and girls playing and enjoying at their fullest. angels. Further, young girl students performed a very nice Indian classical dance.Everyone felt the efforts and dedication of all these young students that they put in elder sahajis put their best foot forward. After a uring learning dance, drama and music in form of strong session, everyone did collective shoe beating and then vibrations. The performance received a standing ovation Yuvashakti boys and girls enjoyed foatsoaking in a lovely from the audience. Everyone was deeply touched by small river flowing close to the seminar site. It was so unwavering attention in inculcating what Shri Mataji has soothing that none of the sahaja yogis could resist spending suggested many times to all yuvashakti boys and girls to a little time over there. Everyone enjoyed presence of know about music, classical dance and drama. The sterling Mother everywhere amongst the exquisite beauty of nature. performance was followed by a very lovely humourous play After breakfast, the morning session was that of meditation scripted on transformation of Narada -how he realizes his on each Chakra. Everyone felt the peak point of vibrations ego and gets to know the importance of surrender. Peals of meditating on each Chakra and reciting the Beej Mantras. laughter could be heard from all every now and then as the play progressed.. Another beautiful drama was also performed by these enthusiastic young yogis from Dehradun, who concluded their play with a video The sports meet got even more pleasant when some of the One unique aspect of this seminar was that it was presentation on 21 Golden Rules for Sahaj yogis. collectively The lovable evening was extended with Ravana Dahan Symbolizing the destruction of Ravana through the divine play of Shri Rama & Shri Sita, which was celebrated after the dinner. An effigy of Ravana was burnt and all enjoyed the accompanying crackers as they announced the advent of a yuvashakti bubbling with energy to take on the work of spreading the light and conquering darkness. A bonfire was also lit up nearby and everyone sang bhajans and danced organized by yuvashakti from all India. Over Therefore. each session was organized by collectivity of a different city like Chandigarh, Yamuna Nagar, Dehradun, around the fire. Soon afterwards, Dharmshala students Jaipur, Gurgaon, Delhi, etc. In the afternoon session, we came with their musical instruments and all yogis/yoginis had a discussion on started singing bhajans in praise of our beloved Mother. When everyone started dancing on beautiful musical notes and bhajans, all felt tremendous flow of cool vibrations all around. All brothers and sisters enjoyed this till 3 am. various treatments advised by Shri Mataji like candle treatment, string knotting, paper 2nd October, Monday: On the third and the last day, after breakfast, all participants exchanged vibrations. The right way to exchange vibrations was also explained. Participants were also told about how to spread Sahaja Yoga in offices, schools and how to perform market realization programs. burning and Matka Treatment. It was advised that these treatments are an aid to our dhyaan and should be performed with discretion. Thereafter short in the concluding session of seminar all expressed their documentary on Param Pujya Shri Mataji was played, giving sincere thanks to our Divine Mother for such a nice the importance and values of sahaja protocol. After that all collectivity, for all joy and Divine blessings.In the spirit of enjoyed watching a documentary on International Sahaja moving on to spread the joy and love, the lovely Sahaja Public School, Dharamshala "Nine Months Together", yuvashakti collectivity that had gathered in the lap of which made us feel like going back to school and this time, Himalayas also dispersed - With cherished memoriess of such timeless moments, and a promise to all our brothers and sisters in our hearts to spread the message of ur only Sahaja School in Dharamshala! The evening session started with performance of young Mother to make every soul a realized. Jai Shri Mataji 23

 आदिशक्ति जन्मस्थल द অकत स RAVCHA आदिशक्ति उमल्क् क



----------------------

2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Yuvadrishti
Vol 7
September
Issue 3
2006
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-1.txt 
 INDEX
Devay Namo Namah
1.
2. Nirmal Vani
3. 84 Names of Shri Vishnu Maya
4. Maharana Partap
The Vaitarna Day
5.
11
6. Find the words
12
7. Kundalini - The primordial truth
13
8. Shri Mahalakshmi goes shopping 15
10. Anecdotes of Jesus Christ
17
20
11. संगीत
13. Yuvashakti Update
22
246 9
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-2.txt 
 YUVADRISHTI
Published by
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 8, Chandragupta Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 029
Printed by
Shrada Printary
Pune
Please send your experiences, Suggestions, Articles etc., to:
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 8, chandragupta Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 029
1.
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-3.txt 
 "Devay Namo Namah"
The onus of bringing the Last Judgment has been given to Shri Kalki (the tenth incarnation of Shri Vishnu,
to be born in Kaliyuga). Let us try and understand what Shri Mataji has described about Him.
Om Twameva Sakshat
"Shri Kalki"
Sakshat Shri Adishakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyei Namo Namah
Shri Mataji has often talked about the Last Judgment. She
situated on your bhaala. Bhaala is the forehead. And here
has repeated many a times that in these modern times the
He is going to be born. That is
resurrection of the people will happen through their the real meaning of the word
Sambhaalpur.
In between,
Kundalini Awakening only. Before the Last Judgment there
is a time given for resurrection. One may ask what is Jesus Christ, and His
resurrection? Resurrection means rising to life after death, destroying incarnation, of
which was shown by Jesus Christ (when He rose to life on Mahavishnu - called as Kalki,
the third day after His crucifixion). Resurrection of Christ there is a time given to human
beings to rectify themselves,
was a symbolical happening of self-realisation, because in
for them to enter into
our realization we rise from our three dimensional existence
the
of Mind/Body/Emotions (which is dead matter, remains only
Kingdom of God, which in the
with the human life) to the state of Spirit (which is eternally Bible is called as Last
Judgment. That you'll be judged, all of you... will be judged
living and never dies).
People who have their Sahastrara open and are in the on this earth. The population of the world is the maximum,
they say, because all those - practically all those who had
Kingdom of God, will be the only one to pass this Judament:
aspirations to enter into the Kingdom of God are born in the
that is why Sahaja Yoga has been described as the Last
Judgment by Shri Mataji, Shri Kalki (the tenth and fast modern times and are going to be born very soon, This is the
Incarnation of Shri Vishnu ) will be the one who will do this most important time, because Sahaja Yoga is the Last
Judgment."
Judgment. Shri Mataji is the Holy Spirit, She is Shri Kalki,
There are eleven Rudras in Him, means there are
She is the comforter, the redeemer and the saviour. It has
been prophesized that Shri Kalki will come on a white horse eleven destructive powers absolutely powerfully settled in
and only pious souls will be able to ride this white horse. The
Him... Which are, guarding, the beauty of Sahaj Yoga.
white horse of Shri Kalki is collective consciousness Anybody who tries to play around with Sahaja Yoga is
harmed very badly."
(saamuhik chetna).
"... The word Kalki, actually is an abbreviation of the word
"... You have not come here to add to your sins, but to
Nishkalank. Nishkalank means the same as my name is, cleanse them this is the time of cleansing, that's why I am
here as Nirmala, to cleanse it! Whatever is wrong is wrong,
which means Nirmala it is spotlessly clean, something that
is spotlessly clean is - Nishkalanka, without any spots on.
whether it is today, tomorrow or yesterday or thousands of
Now this incarnation has been described in many Puranas year back, whatever is wrong for your dharma, for your
will be coming onthis earth on a white horse, in a village of sustenance is wrong! The new phrase,
is that "What's
Sambhaalpur, they call it, Sambhaalpur. Is very interesting
wrong in this, what's wrong in that?" That question will be
everything
so literally.
answered by Kalaki only! I'm just telling you that it is wrong,
take
how
The
people
world
Sambhaala means: bhaala is, this forehead, sambahaal and it is extremely wrong, it is against your ascent, it is
means at that stage. That means Kalaki is
against your being, and then you will not
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-4.txt 
 have any time to repent and to ask this question: "What's person, who is going to get. When the
Kalaki chakra is caught-up. all your
wrong?" You will be chopped off.
fingers, start burning. On the hands, and
So many rakshasas have entered into your brains. You
side with so many people who are wrong, who are doing on the palm, sometimes even in the
body, you get terrible burning. A person's
wrong, who are doing all kinds of wrong things in the name
Kalaki chakra catching means, he might
of politics, in the name of religion, in the name of progress
be down, with a, horrible disease like
and education and all that. Once you are sided with them,
cancer maybe, leprosy. Maybe any such
then they are in your brain, they are within you. And when
they are within you, how to destroy? The dushkruthaams diseases, or maybe that he is about to collapse into some
sort of a calamity. So Kalaki chakra must be kept all right in
balance. At least there are eleven sub-chakras of the Kalaki
(the evil doers), they are within you! You may be a good
person, but you may be destroyed because of having them
chakra. And out of them, at least try to keep some of them
in your heads. So there is no hard and fastrule as to sav who
alive, so that the others can be rescued. But if all the chakras
is a real negative and who is a real positive."
are ruined, then, it is very difficult to give you realization.
I'm here to work for you day and night, that you kriow I What is the thing one should do, to keep your Kalaki all
work very hard for you. I'll spare no efforts, to help you and
do everything that is possible, to make you all right to pass
right? To keep your Kalaki all right you must have that awe
for God. If you do not have awe for God, if you are not afraid
this examination of Last Judgment. But you have to
of God, if you are not afraid, that if you do wrong He is there
cooperate with Me and you have to go headlong about it and
with His wrath. And that He is a wrathful God, and that He is
full of. poison for us, if we try to do anything wrong, if there is
devote most of your time for Sahaja Yoga and for imbibing
all that is great and noble.
no fear of that. Not that it is to be hidden from Me, or from
*...Today is the day, of warning you, because you have anybody else but not you yourself know that you are doing
asked Me to talk, about Kalaki. He is placed on our wrong. If you are doing something wrong, and you know in
forehead. When the Kalaki is caught-up the chakra of your hearts of hearts that "I am doing something wrong,.'
please, don't do it! Otherwise your Kalaki will go out.
Kalaki is caught-up the whole of Buddha, on top, goes out
of order. In the Kundalini awakening, we find, that the
Buddha is all out of order it doesn't rise; the whole head
becomes a blockade. Such people do not allow the
Kundalini to rise above, the... we can say the Hamsa
chakra. At the most they might try to, raise up to Agnya, but
the Kundalini falls down. Of course one of the reasons as I
said that if you, put your forehead before wrong gurus, also,
you suffer. But too much thinking also creates a problem on
the right-hand-side here, and one of the... one of the
aspects of Kalaki gets spoilt. And there is an imbalance is
created, on this side. The whole forehead, if it is, full of lots of
bumps, then one must know, that the Kalaki chakra is out of
order. If the Kalaki chakra is out of order, the person is about
to go into some sort of a very bad calamity; is a sign, of a
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-5.txt 
 "Nirmal Vani"
Some priceless jewels on selected topics, extracted from the treasure trove of our Mother's eternal words of
wisdom, have been strung into exquisite necklace called "Nirmal Vani". This issue, lets focus on mother's
advice on how to establish the eternal child within us.
BROTHER SISTER RELATIONSHIP
superego is controlled, your
The Left Vishuddhi
family is contralled, everybody
In our Sahaja Yoga the significance of left wrist is that it is the
is under control, under the
left Vishuddhl. Left Vishuddhi, which is here. And this is the
left Vishuddhi expressed here, you know that very well guidance of this pure power of
Now, left Vishuddhi is the place where our relationship of Vishnumaya which exists
within all of us.
brothers and sisters exist. When they are disturbed within
Now, in a group we are sitting
uS we start getting the problem of the left Vishuddhi. In these
here, like that, in any group a
modern times the talk of pure relationship seems to be quite
brother and a sister they are,
boring for many people, but it's very practical and logical. I
they know that they exist as
would say it is the most scientific thing to do. For example,
every brother has a special feeling for a sister, and her brothers and sisters, bur they
triMet
the Etam BtaA
chastity is very dear to every brother, if he is a normal don't cling onto one person,
person, if he's abnormal then forget it. But normally a they don't talk to one person, they don't get friendly with that
brother is very particular about the chastity of the sister, and sister. But a brother and a sister are never friends. But
normally you don't talk to your brother much nor the brother
he doesn't like anybody to- in any way-even pass a remark
talks to you so much, you don't get friendly. But at the time of
against the chastity of his sister... but the normal thing is to
difficulties, at the time of maryadas, at the time of consulting
feel that way, purely, about the sister. And the sister about
about some thing that is dear to the family, the sister comes.
the brother. Brothers and sisters' relations are extremely
The brother is protected by sister. And the sister's chastity is
pure and are also accepted in this country very well..
looked after by the brother. A brother who doesn't feel hurt if
Left Vishuddhi comes out of guilt. But in the subconscious
his sister chastity is in danger or she plays about with her
the greatest guilt in a human being is when he crosses the
chastity, he is not a brother. He is not a brother anymore.
limits of sisterhood. This is the greatest guilt in his mind
He's responsible to see that his sister keeps her chastity.
which he is not aware.
Only her chastity can protect him it's a mutual working. This
Shri Vishnumaya & Brother-Sister relationships
feeling, if it does rot develop that, "She is my sister and that!
Vishnumaya's power is to protect your chastity. Now the have to look after her chastity, for that I have to behave
sister's job is not to take sides, but to show that if you cross
myself well, so that she doesn't find faults with me." It's such
SO
you limits of your brotherliness then there will be a a cleansing process this relationship has, as much as the
lightening, because the sister in the family has to see that electricity has the cleansing process for you.
the brothers don't fight, they are all looked after well, that
So how the brother's love can compel even Adi Shakti to do
they are not challenged by others, that she gives them the
maryadas how far to go. How far to go. So the limiting forces things that She would not normally do. In the same way,
when Draupadi was challenged, Shri Krishna was not in
of Vishnumaya are such, that your ego is controlled, your
Hastinapur where it happened. He was thousand, at least
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-6.txt 
 more than thousand miles away from that place. He said had married an Indian lady and the great Alexander was in
jail. That was the day of Vishnumaya. So she sent this lady
that, "Shankha chakra gada padma, garuda lai sidhare." He
came on His condor with all His weapons shankha, chakra, was very clever, his wife she sent a rakhi in a small, little
gada, padma. All these He brought to save the chastity of thali covered nicely to the King Puru. And, as the rituals are,
that day this was presented to him. So he had to accept. If it
His Sister.
is sent, you have to accept. A sister sends it with
Now this sisterly relationship existed in other incarnations
deliberations but you have to accept. And he accepted it,
also. Like Mohammed Sahib had a sisterly relationship with
and it was tied. Then Puru said, "Who is my sister?" They
actually what we have to say that His Sister as such was Ali's
said, "Your sister is the wife of Alexander." Said, "Oh God,
wife, but She was born to him as a daughter. So They can be
that meansI have arrested my own brother-in-law!"
born as a Daughter or as the Sister. She was born as
Immediately becomes a brother-in-law, immediately. No
Nanaka's Sister Nanaki. In the same way, Sahaja Yogis and
marriage took place, nothing. He's a brother-in-law. He
rushed to the jail, fell flat before the great emperor.
Sahaja Yoginis are brothers and sisters. You have to
understand that you are brothers and sisters, and the
Alexander couldn't understand, "What's happening to Puru?
relationship between us has to be purer and purer and
Why did he do all this?" Puru said, "Sir, I am sorry", in his
own language, "I'm sorry I didn't know you were my brother-
purer. There should be no choice going on between brothers
and sisters- but if somebody has a feeling for someone from
in-law. I'm sorry whatever I've done. Will you forgive me?"
the very beginning, not like a sister, then a relationship can
and all that. And he brought him, asked him to sit on his
be established or somebody sees someone for the first time,
throne. Alexander couldn't understand, "What's this going
not as a Sahaja Yogini but is shown as a bride or something,
on?" "Please." Made him sit there, garlanded him, did his
then it's a different point. But if the person has been a Sahaja
aarti, gave him ornaments, gave him big garlands of
Yogi and a Sahaja Yogini, let this feeling grow within you of
diamonds and rubies and things, and touched his feet,
complete purity. It will clear out many of our problems and
you will be amazed, our attention will settle down really
washed his feet and then, with great honor, sent him home.
He couldn't understand. "Has he gone mad or he's
beautifully within us.
possessed by someone?" He must have thought, "Some
For a Sahaja Yogi it is very important to look after our Greek has possessed this fellow", the way he was
chastity. As I told you yesterday, it is not necessary to find a
surrendering. When he went home his wife was smiling. He
girl for yourself, or a boy for yourself. It is also against the
said, "Why are you smiling?" She said, "I knew the trick will
rules of chastity, I am not saying that you should allow your work with Indian mind." "What was the trick?" She showed
parents to decide, but let
him one string. "This was the trick." He couldn't understand,
the Sahaja Yoga decide,
started looking at it. "What is this?" She said, "This is the
because you are Sahaja
rakhi. This is the thing I sent him. This has the symbol of a
Yogis. You are born after
sister, that's how you're released." Alexander sat back. He
the image of Ganesha who
said, "Oh God, these people can release their enemies on a
ultimately becomes Christ.
The Strength of Rakhi
string? I can't capture these people. They are too good.
They are too subtle. These subtleties we cannot
When Alexander the Great
understand."
was arrested by one king
called Puru. Alexander
5.
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-7.txt 
 84 Names of Shri Vishnu Maya
Shri Kali : You are verily Shri Kali
Shri Swayam Tyakta : You are verily the one, who
sacrificed herself in order to announce the birth of Shri
Shri Mahakali Nirmita : You were created by Shri
Krishna
Mahakali
Shri Krishna Janamodghoshak Vidyullata : You, who
Shri Vishuddhi Padma : You dwell in the Vishuddhi became lightning to announce the birth of Shri Krishna
Padma, the Lotus of Vishuddhi
Shri Vaikrtika Rahasya: You, who are the Maya that is
impossible to surpass
Shri Kulishangi : You are Shri Kulishangi. Thunderbolt-
bodied
Shri Shiv Brahma Vishnu Gyan Parangata : You are
verily the Maya that is even beyond the knowledge of Shri
Shiva, Shri Brahma and Shri Vishnu
Shri Tatillata Samaruchih : You are dazzling like
lightning
Shri Vishisht Shastra : You are verily the one, who has
special weapons
Shri Murti Rahasya : You are of mysterious form
Shri Darim Pushpa Rakta Danta : You are the one
whose teeth are red as pomegranates
Shri Americeshwari Shastra : You yourself are a
weapon of Shri Americeshwari
Shri Shat Netra : You are verily with a hundred eyes
Shri Rakshas Vijayani : You are verily the conqueror of
Shri Narayani : You are verily Shri Narayani
rakshasas and devils
Mahishasura Ghatini : You conquered Mahishasura,
salutations to You
Shri Peeda Nivarini : You are the Goddess who is the
Gracious Remover of affliction
Nishumbha Shumba Sanhantri : You are the destroyer
Shri Pavitrya Dayini : You give Chastity, the Foundation
of Shumbha and Nishumbha
of all Dharmas
Shri Chir Kaumaari : You are the eternal virgin
Shri Ganesha Pavitrya Pushpa : Your flowers of chastity
express the power of Shri Ganesha
Shri Vindhya Priya Putri : You are the beloved daughter
of the Vindya mountains
Shri Pavitrya Rakhsaka : You are the one who insisted
that chastity be protected by battle with the Kauravas
Shri Devi Mahatmayam Stuta : You are the Devi praised
in the Devi Mahatmyam
Shri Draupadi : You incarnated as Shri Draupadi
Shri Shankaracharya Prashasta : You are the one to
whom Shri Adi Shankaracharya gave praise
Shri Bandhu Rakshit Pavitraya : You are the one whose
chastity is protected by Her brother
Shri Nand Gop Yashoda Stuta : You were bom into the
house of the cowherd Nanda, You are the daughter of
Shri Bandhu Atma Prabodhita : You are the one who
cares for the spirituality of Her brother
Shri Yeshoda
Shri Mahabharat Karini : You are the one, who was
responsible for Mahabharata
Shri Krishna Samjata : You are bom on the same day
as Shri Krishna
Shri Panch Mahabhoot Sammilita : You join the five
elements, the five Pandavas.
Shri Krishna Bhagini Maya shakti : You are the sister of
Shri Krishna who came in the form of the Maya Shakti
(the power of illusion)
Shri Satya Avtaar Udghoshini : She announced that an
incarnation of truth has come among us
Shri Sarvabhoot Pravishta : You can enter into all the
elements
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-8.txt 
 sophistication
Shri Hrud-Buddhi Melka : You are the one who
integrates heart and brain.
Shri Nishkalanka : You are the one who is blameless
Shri Shighra Karini : You are quick-acting
Shri Pitamaha Gaurav Rakshika : You protect the
respect for grandparents
Shri Sarva Badha Jwalana : You are the one who burns
away negativity
Shri Matrutatwa Gaurav Rakshika : You guard the
respect for the Mother principle.
Shri Vidyujjanit Mangala : You are the powerful one
whose electricity brings auspiciousness
Shri Bhagini Samarthya Rupa : You are the power of
the sister in the family
Shri Sarvansh Atmika : You make us part and parcel of
the whole
Shri Atma-Sanshaya Nashini : You are the remover of
self-doubt
Shri Asatya Mantra Nashini : You are the destroyer of
false mantras
Shri Chakra Maryada Sthapini : You help to keep the
maryadas of the charkas
Shri Asatya Spatikaran Nashini : You are verily the one
who destroys false explanations.
Shri Hridaya Moola : Your roots are in the heart,
Shri Nisarga Prakop Damana : You control lightning,
earthquakes, typhoons and burning forests
Shri Dhairya Dayini : You are the giver of patience.
Shri Stri Shakti Rupa : You are the power in a woman
that cannot be dominated by money or materialism.
Shri Adbhut Chitra Pradayini : You verily give miracle
photographs
Shri Asatya Katha Nashini : You are the destroyer of
myths.
Shri Chaya Chitra Prakashka : You enlighten the film
medium
Shri Kritak Adarsh Nivarin: You remove all artificial
Shri Sunrit Vani Dayini : Verily You give pure speech.
погms
Shri Mantra Samarthya Dayini : You empower all
Shri Avyakta Prakatan Karini : You reveal what is
mantras
underneath
Shri Nirahankara : You are without ego
Shri Ananda Aadhara : You are the support of joy
Shri Namrata Pradayini : You bestow true humility
Shri Sukshma Samvid Dayini : You give comprehension
of the subtle.
Shri Vishwas Nirmankari : You create confidence
Shri Satya Rakshika : You are the keeper of reality
Shri Aatma Sakshatkar Path Nirmal Karini : You are
the one who clears the path for Self-realization
Shri Sarva Badha Udghatika : You are the one who
Shri Uphaas Asahishnu : You do not tolerate sarcasm
exposes negativity
Shri Aleek Dambh Nashini : You destroy false
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Shri Viprachitta Rakshas Ghatini : You are verily the
destroyer of the Danavas and the Asuras of Viprachitta
Shri Poorna Samartha : You are the one who is fully
capable
Shri Sahaja Yoga Parisamarpana Rupa : You give the
quality of being whole-hearted about Sahaja Yoga
Shri Shakambhari Devi : You are known as Shri
Sakambhari
Shri Maha Bhramari : You are verily the Great Brahmari,
Her fiery beauty slays even the worst foes
Shri Virata Prapini : You bring us to the Virata
Shri Vitthal Vishnumaya Virata : You are Shri Vithala
Vishnumaya Virata
Shri Ida Nadi Stha Agni Shakti : You are the fire power
of the Ida Nadi
ShriVaam Vishuddhi Sthit Mahashati : You reside in the
Shri Satya Bhasini Akasha Shodhika : You are the one
who speaks the truth and purifies the ether
Left Vishuddhi as the Maha Shakti
Shri Bhagini Kanya Rupa Fatima : You incarnated as
Shri Fatima, the pure sister and daughter.
Shri Stri Shakti : You are the power of a woman
Shri Hamsa Chakra Sthit Saraswati : You are Shri
Saraswati who becomes Shri Vishnumaya Shakti at the
Shri Pratidin Pujya :You are the Goddess, who is to be
worshiped everyday.
Hamsa Chakra.
Nitl
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
You are requested to tick in blocks given below for the magazines you would like to subscribe for the Year 2007.
Outstation Rs. 225/-
Chaitanya Lahiri Marathi
1. Chaitanya Lahiri Hindi
Rs. 300/-
Local (for Pune) Rs.200/-
Rs. 120/-
4. Yuvadrishti
Rs. 300/-
3. Divine Cool Breeze
Please provide the full Postal address for mailing the magazines. (PLEASE FILL IN BLOCK LETTERS ONLY)
Name
Address
Amount Rs.
Date
For Office use only: Issued Receipt No.
Drawn on
Dated
By way of Cash/ Cheque/ Demand Draft No.
Please send the above form duly filled along with the Cheque/DD to the Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
(6)
8
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-10.txt 
 "The Great Indian Saga"
Maharana Pratap: The Warrior Yogi of Mewar
महाराणा प्रताप का किस्सा है, मेवाड़ के, वो जब लड़ाई में गए तो उनके सैनिकों ने सोचा कि ये तो हारने वाले है, तो उनसे कहा कि 'आप वापिस
जाइए, क्योंकि हम चाहते हैं कि आप बच जाऐँ, मेवाड़ के लिए।' उन्होंने कहा, "नहीं, तुम लोग सब वापिस जाओ मैं तो ऐसे ही डटा रहूँगा, क्योंकि
गण मेरे साथ खड़े हुए हैं।' सहजयोगी थे ना वह। 'जिसने जाना है जाए, मैं तो ऐसे ही डटा रहूँगा। *
श्री हनुमान पूजा, पुणे, ३१ मार्चए ६६
The history of India is replete with majestic & fearless kings Pratap and he took over the charge. The people found a true
who gave up their kingdoms and lives for the sake of their leaderin Rana Pratap.
word and honor of women and their subjects. Among these
the Ranas of Mewar (in Rajasthan) are regarded as the first The atmosphere of his time was of surrender to invaders
among equals, who laid down their sarvasvava for the sake and losing honor. Even Pralap's own brothers, Jagmal,
of independence and protection of honor against invaders' Shakti Singh and Sagar Singh, were serving Akbar. But
tyranny. Not only the kings but the wives and mothers of this Maharana Pratap had resolved to free Chittorgarh, his
clan are held in highest esteem for their sense of honor and homeland and so he sent all friendly overtures from Akbar
supreme sacrifice. The illustrious sons of this kingdom were back.
Rana Udaisingh (saved by Panna dhai as an infant) and the With the failure of efforts to negotiate a treaty, Akbar
tallest of them all Maharana Pratap. The Ranas had
their capital at Chittorgarh.
blockaded Mewar from the rest of the world. He appointed
Sagar Singh, a younger brother of Pratap, to rule the
conquered territory, so as to alienate Pratap.
However, Sagar, regretting his own treachery,
soon returned from Chittor, and committed
suicide with a dagger in the Mughal Court.
Shakti Singh also fled the Mughal court
temporarily and warned his brother of Akbar's
actions. Meanwhile, in preparation for the
inevitable war with the Mughals, Maharana Pratap
the alliance with Akbar submitted to him. However Udai altered his administration. He commanded his subjects to
Singh maintained his independence though he lost his leave for the Aravali mountains and leave behind nothing for
capital. Maharana Pratap was born to him in the 1539 A.D the approaching enemy - the war would be fought in a
He was a person of extraordinary courage and strength of mountain terrain which the Mewar army was used to but not
Character, Born in the noble family of Bappa Raval, he was the Mughals. It is a testament to the young king's respect
inspired by his late grandfather Rana Sanga (Sangram amongst his subjects that they obeyed him and left for the
It was October, 1567 and the fort of Chittor had
been besieged by Akbar. Taking advantage of
the death of the king Rana Sanga and the weak
position of his son Udai Singh, he attacked the
fort.
With the fall of Chittor, the other Rajputs who avoided
Singh) who is famous for receiving as many as eighty mountains.
wounds on his body, in a battle. and yet continuing fighting.
Only 28 years, when he was forced to flee by his nobles It was the beginning of a life of struggle and hardship to fulfll
alongwith his father, he determined to struggle against the dream of reconquering Chittor and for this sake
slavery all through his life and keep aloft the flag of Maharana Pratap himself undertook several penances, not
because his finances forced him to do so, but because he
wished to remind himself, and all his subjects, why they
After Udai Singh's death on March 3, 1572, Crown prince were undertaking this pain - to win back their freedom, their
Pratap was to ascend the throne. But under the infiuence of right to exist as they wished. He foreswore that he would eat
his favorite wife, Udai Singh had willed that Jagmal, Pratap's from leaf-plates, would sleep on the floor and would not
half brother be the next king. In deference to his father's shave. In his self-inflicted state of poverty, the Maharana
wishes, Pratap decided to let Jagmal become the next king. lived in mud-huts made from mud and bamboo. The army of
However, knowing this to be disastrous for Mewar, the late Mewar now raided Mughal trade caravans going from Delhi
nationalism.
Maharana's nobles forced Jagmal to leave the throne to
9.
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-11.txt 
 to Surat. A section of his army guarded the all important of the Aravalli hills provided Pratap with their support during
Haldighati Pass, the only way to get into Udaipur from the times of war and their expertise in living off the forests during
North.
Totally frustrated now at his inability to overpower Mewar,
Akbar dispatched his mighty army under the leadership of Prithviraj Rathore's letter
Raja Man Singh to deal with Maharana Pratap. On Jurie 21. Finally, the exiles were facing the prospect of actual
1576 the two armies met at Haldighati, near the town of - bread
Gogunda in present-day Rajasthan. Before the Battle of - was stolen by a dog. This cut into
Haldighati started, Raja Man Singh (who was leading Maharana Pratap's heart deeply and He began to think
Mughul armies) was out hunting with a few hundred about submitting to the Mughals. His wife, on seeing his faith
retainers. Pratap's Bhil spies reported this to him at his
camp a few kilometers away. Some of Pratap's noDles this child is the cause of your weakness and makes you
suggested that they seize the opportunity to attack and kill despondent then better to kill him than losing freedom and
Man Singh and thus demoralize the Mughal armies. Pratap honor to the Mughals". But Pratap also could not see his
refused, which showed his sense of righteousness even at subjects suffer for sa lang and thought of writing to Akbar
times of peace.
starvation. Once even Pratap's children's meal
made from grass
waver, puta sword on the neck of her child and told Pratap "lf
the prospect of facing defeat.
indicating his readiness to negotiate a treaty. Akbar was
overjoyed when he got a letter from Pratap. When Pratap's
first cousin Prithviraj Rathore, who was one of Akbar's
courtiers and great poet, heard of this offer, he was
astonished and grieved by Maharana Pratap's decision, and
told Akbar that the note was the forgery of some foe to
defame the Mewar king. "I know him well," he explained,
"and he would never submit to your terms. Then he wrote a
couplet to his cousin Pratap exhorting him to uphold the
honor of Mewar and his freedom even under difficult
conditions.
Pratapreplied to him
"By my God Eklinga, Pratap would call the emperor Turk
alone (a word to convey his disrespect) and the sun would
The Mughal forces greatly outnumbered Pratap's men. The rise in the east. You may continue your proud bearing as
battle of Haldighati lasted only four hours. In this short long as Pratap's sword dangles on the Mughal head. Pratap
period, Pratap's men essayed many brave exploits on the would be guilty of Sanga's blood, if he was to tolerate Akbar.
field. Maharana Pratap personally attacked Man Singh: his You would have the better of it, no doubt Prithviraj, in this
horse Chetak placed its front feet on the trunk of Man wordy quarrel."
Singh's elephant and Pratap threw his lance; Man Singh
Thus the years passed and when his finances started failing,
a Mewar businessman and a great patriot Bhamashah
offered him all his wealth enough to maintain an army of
25,000 for 12 years. He was thus able to reorganise his army
and it proved such a nuisance that the Mughal occupying
force in Mewar never knew peace. Later, Pratap relocated to
His one attempt at open confrontation having thus failed, Chavand in the mountainous southeastern area of Mewar
Pratap resumed the tactics of guerilla warfare. Using the and the exiles survived in those ravines for many years by
hills as his base, Pratap harassed the large, therefore subsisting on wild berries and by hunting and fishing.
awkward Mughal forces in their encampments. Akbar Eventually within his own life time Maharana Pratap was
despatched three more expeditions to ferret Pratap out of able to regain as many as 77 out of 80 of his forts lost to the
ducked, and the elephant driverwas killed.
However, the numerical superiority of the Mughal army
finally prevailed. A wounded Pratap was carried to safety by
his steed Chetak into the hilly wilderness of the Aravallis.
his mountainous hideouts, but they all failed, The Bhil tribals
enemy.
10
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-12.txt 
 VAITARNA DAY
Maharana Pratap is a great hero in the eyes of many
Indians, and is much respected and loved by his people.
During a dark chapter of Rajput history, Pratap alone stood
firmly for his honor and dignity; he never compromised his
honor for safety.
In an incident, the womenfolk of Abdur Rahim Khankhana, a
mughal officer, fell into the hands of Pralap's son Amar
Singh. At this point of time, Khankhana was actually on the
march against Pratap, and was camping at Sherpur in order
to make preparations for an assault against Pratap.
Nonwithstanding all this, Pratap commanded his son Amar
Singh (eldest of 17 sons and 5 daughters) to arrange for the
safe conveyance of the mughal ladies to their camp.
Khankhana was so affected by this incident that he refused
to campaign against such a chivalrous monarch.
As the sun raises at dawn
we, the collective sit on the lawn.
Vibrations shower flooding the sky
raising the kundalini so high.
Our darling Mother brought us here,
The gates of Heaven so teasingly near.
As the classes begin for the day
little can take our attention away
rhythm and music flows through the veins
taking away all physical pains.
Our dearest Mother gives us Her strength
So we can praise and worship at length.
сап
Maharana Pratap died of injuries sustained in a hunting
accident. He died at Chavand, on January 29, 1597, aged
fifty-six, It is said that as he lay dying, Pratap made his son
and successor, Amar Singh, swear to maintain eternal conf
man.lict against the mughals. Thus imminent death did not
overpower Pratap even in his declining years; he remained
intrepid to the end. He died fighting for his nation, for his
people, and most importantly as a proud and free
As we sit and enjoy a meal
for a few seconds we remember its real
Friendship and laughter fills the air,
never forgetting there's so much to share.
Our greatest Mother gave us this joy,
part and parcel of Her ploy.
As the moonlight fills the night sky
We, the collective sit up on high.
Mischief and games, the children
awake with innocent pleasure,
what noise we make.
Our divine Mother watches
us play
Witnessing the tale of a Vaitarna day.
11
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Find the Words
MNVT
GHF
D
SPEL VI
KKL
24P
M.
P OI
YAUDL
A I
NEL
UA DJ
MNE
S.
H.
EWSS
IR
MD
URQ
GHD
A.
A.
VNPT
MAF
12
NAGF
ANI
D DA ETNA RG
GOL A
TRN
OIE
NMH
YOKV
A.
IT
GRI
LE
P.
TI
RMAL
CAA DF
GI
MBB
ARMLI
NE
D.
L.
A.
T.
AD
H MW
T.
NAVDC
BRAT
BNH OL
G.
Y.
R.
A.
Find the 15 words jumbled inside this box
12) 6 letter word - mother of purest wisdom ; one of the
Hint:
1)9 letter word: it can be cool or hot ; we can feel it in
names from shree mataji's 108 names.
hands.
13) 6 letter word synonym-like god
2) 6 letter word: Day before Christmas; Shri Mataji had
14) 4 letter word short form of group of yuvashakti.
written a book named
15) 7 letter word bestowing perfect happiness on her
devotees ; one of the names from shree mataji's 108
3)5 letter word: flower with many ray-like petals, Shri
Mataji's childhood name
names
4) 11 letter word: we become aware of ourself when we
get our
5)4 letter word :Name of Dharmashala school.
6) 6 letter word: Sweet fluid from plants.
7)7 letter word without any companion ;one of the
names from Shree Mataji's 108 names .
www.
8)6 letter word framework of bones below the waist.
9) 6 letter word the place where Shree Mataji opened
her sahastrar.
For Answers, read "Shri Mahalakshmi goes shopping"..
10) 9 letter word the english meaning of ADISHAKTI.
11) 11 letter word the place where the diwali puja was
held.
12.
S.
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Kundalini: The Primodial Truth
The traditions of India and its neighboring countries offer scripture of the Hindus. Thus Gyanadeva was convinced by
more spiritual knowledge than any other region of the world. his brother to write a commentary on the Bhagavad-Gita in
According to old scriptures Shri Adi Shakti is the primordial Marathi popularly known as Gyaneshwari.
and highest power. She is the one who created the first
manifestation, the bridge between the formless non- Shankaracharya (8th century AD) says in the Saundarya
manifested god and the whole formed creation. Her Lahari in the 10th verse:
reflection kundalini builds a connection with the Divine, Thyself assuming the form of a serpent of three-and-a-half
connecting the individual to a collective, higher awareness.
coil, sleeping thou in the hollow of the kulakunda
The description refers to the triangular bone, in which
If a human being is perfectly pure in his inner, subtle system kundalini resides. In Devi bhagawatam chapter 5 mother of
(which practically means that he has become a saint) he the worlds (Shri Adi Shakti) is again described as the
receives his total liberation, "moksha", at the moment of the "kundalini in the mooladhar". The three-and-half coils of
kundalini awakening. This perfect liberation took place for kundalini relate to the three "moods" (basic principles) of the
Buddha after he had renounced all his attachments and creation and the half coil to the primordial power. These
temptations. If kundalini awakening takes place in "non- moods are Mahakali, Mahasaraswati and Mahalaxmi:
perfect" human beings, she
starts cleansing different
energy centers, the "charkas".
The last and complete liberation
is the union of the soul, the atma
(Shri Shiva) with the kundalini
(Shakti) in order to make the
atma aware or conscious in us.
desire(and destruction of evil).
action(and creation), and finally
the power of the central
channel(evolution).
Our first chakra Mooladhara, It
lies at the root of our body and
guards the sleeping kundalini in
the sacrum (mooladhar). Any
That means, the truth, the all-
pervading awareness and the
pure joy become reality in us.
The Sahasrara chakra above
weakness of this chakra, which
is the throne of innocence and
wisdom, causes permanent
difficulties, as it is the support of
the kundalini. There is a
the fontanel bone at the top of
the skull opens up and replaces
the biggest part of our ego and
our conditionings. This process
has often been described poetically in old scriptures.
Tukaram says "today my service has borne fruit"
considerable difference
between the mooladhara-
chakra and the mooladhar which lies above it (sacrum), the
triangular bone at the end of the spine. At the awakening of
the kundalini, her pulsations can often be seen with the
Bhagwatgita the subject of kundalini has been very naked eye at the sacrum. Lying at the base of the spine,
briefly referred to. The Upanishads have only treated parts Kundalini rises through the middle channel (Sushumna).
of it. Markendeya was the first one to break with the tab00 which corresponds with the canalis centralis in the grey
(thousands of years ago), and talked openly about it. What matter of the backbone. The medical term is "os sacrum,
these classical scriptures have in common is that they are "holy bone", taken over directly from the Greeks and
difficult to understand and that the effects of kundalini have Romans. Egyptians attributed this "os sacrum" to the god
not been described in detail. This changed in the 13th Osiris. It is eager to give the second birth, to permeate the
century AD, around 1275 in the central part of India by whole body and to renew its organs, each cell is being
Gyanadeva (also called Gyaneshwar or Dyaneshwar) who touched and purified by kundalini. This process has been
took birth in Maharashtra. Although he left this world at a described in detail right up to the roots of the hair by
very young age, he is one of India's greatest saints. As the Gyanadeva. The Gyaneshwari continues with the
Bhagavad-Gita had been written in Sanskrit the masses did procedure after the purification of the subtle centers, the
not have direct access to this most popular religious kundalini stays in the centre-channel (Sushumna) of three
In
13
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-15.txt 
 subtle channels and pours out "of her mouth water, that
becomes nectar". This nectar in its turn brings forth a "vital
wind, ...That gives a cooling sensation in and on the body".
The perception of the cool breeze is the beston the palms of
the hands and at the top of our head (Sahasrara chakra).. In
the 13 sub-chapter of Gyaneshwari it is mentioned that
the palms of the hands should be kept upwards, in order to
feel the Kundalini-energy. This coolness is also described
in the Koran- sura 36, 65: "one day we will seal their mouths,
but their hands will speak."The hands "speak" in such a way
that each finger, root of the hand and Palm correspond with
a chakra and the various sensations of the part of the hand
Kabir Says...
Abode of the Beloved
Oh Companion That Abode Is Unmatched,
Where My Complete Beloved is.
In that Place There Is No Happiness or Unhappiness,
No Truth or Untruth
Neither Sin Nor Virtue.
There Is No Day or Night, No Moon or Sun,
There Is Radiance Without Light.
inform about the condition of the charkas.
There Is No Knowledge or Meditation
In the gospel of John, 4, Jesus describes the process of
awakening to a Samaritan woman next to a well "if you knew
the gift of god, and who it is that asks you for a drink, you
would have asked him, and he would have given you water
of life. The woman said to him, sir, you have nothing to draw
with, and the well is deep: where can you get that water of
Jesus answered, everyone who drinks this water will
be thirsty again: but whoever drinks the water that I give him
vill never thirst. Indeed, the water I give him will become in
him a spring of water welling up into eterna! life."
No Repetition of Mantra or Austerities,
Neither Speech Coming From Vedas or Books.
Doing, Not-Doing, Holding, Leaving
All These Are All Lost Too In This Place.
No Home, No Homeless, Neither Outside or Inside,
life?
Micro and Macrocosm Are Non-Existent.
Five Elemental Constituents and the Trinity Are Both
Not There Witnessing Un-struck Shabad Sound is Also
Not There.
As described in the poetry of Shankaracharya, the
ascending kundalini passes through the Nabhi,
Swadisthana, Anahata-, Vishudhi-, and Agnya chakra. As
soon as the Agnya chakra at the forehead gets pierced
through thoughtlessness, is achieved. Only at that very
moment one can talk about an experience which allows a
deeper understanding of the "Gyaneshwari" for instance.
Nirvichar Samadhi is spontaneous, like every movement of
the kundalini. Samadhi cannot be achieved through human
willpower that is why the concept, that through efforts of
concentration real spiritual progress could be achieved, is
wrong. After the Sushumna, which is the central channel,
the subtle channels on the left and the right are enlightened.
The left (ida-nadi) represents the emotions, conditionings
and the past, the right (pingala-nadi) activity, planning and
No Root or Flower, Neither Branch or Seed,
Without a Tree Fruits are Adorning,
Primordial Om Sound, Breath-Synchronized Soham,
This and That All Are Absent, The Breath Too
Unknown
Where the Beloved Is There is Utterty Nothing
Says Kabir I Have Come To Realize.
Whoever Sees My Indicative Sign
Will Accomplish the Goal of Liberation.
The Garden Of Flowers
Do not go to the garden of flowers
the future.
Do not go to the garden of flowers!
The whole process physically relates with the
parasympathetic system and therefore cannot be controlled
consciously. Awakening of Kundalini gives a kind of
profound peace and joy.
Do not go to the garden of flowers!
O Friend ! go not there;
In your body is the garden of flowers.
Take your seat on the thousand petals of the lotus,
and there gaze on the Infinite Beauty.
14
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Shri Mahalakshmi Goes Shopping
Shri Mataji and Sir CP go shopping in London
Even more importantly, as in much of Her publicactivity, Shri
Mataji even now seemed destined to seek out the crowds of
people, where the maximum possible number can receive
the massive outpouring of Her Chaitanya, in the form of
On Saturday, the
14th of October,
2006 the Divine
Motherly Love, that she emitted during the whole shopping
blessed us with
trip. At one store, several sales assistants became
enamoured by her Divine presence and asked who She
was. They were told to hold out their hands toward Her and
ask this question to Her directly, in their hearts. Shri Mataji
looked at them, their faces glowing and their hearts melting
under the infiuence of Her charisma and simply said with a
what is now a
rare opportunity.
Shri Mataji and
Sir CP decided to
go shopping, to
buy shoes and
wave of Her hand "they have it" The Divine responded
other accessories. Shri Mataji led us on a magical journey
through the shoe shops of the West End of London, In each immediately and they felt the cool breeze on their hands and
one Shri Mataji pointed to many different types of shoes and
handbags, touching many to assess the quality of the people seemed drawn to Her without understanding why,
leather and craftsmanship. Yogis brought different
examples of merchandise from all corners of each shop for
Her to see and touch. She looked at each item carefully, felt
the leather, enquired about the price and discussed with Sir
CP the relative merits of each. Sir CP was keen to buy his
beloved Wife a gift, but for quite some time She was unable
to find anything that suited Her. Throughoul the shopping
trip, as you can see in the photos, Shri Mataji made endless
jokes and humorous comments about the various styles of
merchandise and their prices.
above their head. Like this, throughout the shopping trip,
and yet their faces
showed that within
them s ome
heartstring had
begun to resonate
and their mind had
beco me
inexplicably silent.
Such was their
destiny that the Divine had to find a way for them to come
face to face with the Cosmic Mother, and so they were
drawn to the shops and streets that She chose to move on
during this joyful day.
And so the shopping party progressed through large
numbers of stock, only to decide that another shop should
be tried and so on until we arrived at the inevitable- Harrods
department store. It seemed clear to many of us that She Finally, Shri Mataji found some shoes and a handbag that
was doing more than just shopping since by vibrating the She liked. Sir CP succeeded in convincing Her that the price
many items that She touched
there would be many
recipients of Her blessings.
most of them unsuspecting
shoppers who might purchase
was agreeable and so he bought a gift for his wife.
Jai Shri Mataji
See My face
In the dining roaom of Brompton Square She used to have all
these different tea sets and teapots and cups and saucers
and things around the picture rail. And some of them,
remember, we bought in Hong Kong when She was there
and She just bought them from the local Chinese emporium
for not very much money at all, but when they were up in the
Adi Shakti's dining room they looked absolutely stunning
We did a lot of shopping in this Chinese emporium in Hong
Kong and She would see lots of statues of Quan Yin there
an item that had been touched
by the Divine incarnate. Little
would they know that destiny
had chosen them to be a
recipient of Mother's love,
hidden as paramchaitanya in
their new box of shoes or
handbag.
15
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-17.txt 
 and say, "See My face, See My face there" and all these
Quan Yin statues in this china shop. This was '81.
I asked Mother if She could know everything. She
replied, "I can know all thoughts and things, past,
present and future, simultaneously. But I can't be
bothered." Then, with great naivety, I asked Mother how
much was Her ability to cure someone and how much it
was their faith in Her. Mother very sweetly and patiently
replied, "One hundred percent your faith."
...And walking down the street with Her in Hong Kong was
incredible because Hong Kong is so crowded, so it is so that
you can't walk abreast. And I was walking behind Her and
watching all the people's faces as they were looking at Her
and seeing the amazed lok on their faces and virtually
Linda Williams
seeing their kundalinis come up as they focused on Her face
of this amazing Indian woman walking like an elephant
through this crowd of Chinese, down on the crowded streets
of Hong Kong...
wwAnd that was the time She said, "Oh, I need some money,
some Hong Kong money." And I leant it to Her. She said,
"Now you must remember to tell Me to pay you back when
we get to London because," She said, "I can't owe people
money in this lifetime, otherwise l'll have to come back and
pay you back in another lifetime." And I said, "That's all right
with me then, Mother."And She laughed.
And then She said, "But do you know "and She laughed
then, but She said, "But do you realize how difficult it is for
Me to incarnate?"
"So the power of Kundalini is to purify, she purifies us
like fire. She doesn't purify us like water, surprisingly:
she doesn't purify us like water. Now, water, what does
the water do? Water never burns off anything, but it
dissolves certain things. It can take in something within
Kay McHugh
Agood thing for Her to buy
Mother was at a weekend seminar in Dorset. We had a
lovely weekendand various things happened, but there was
one which was connected with shopping. Apparently
Mother had gone to the local town. There was a clock in an
antique shop. which Mother stopped and seemed
interested in. She went in and bought it and the shop owner
said it had been in the window for a very long time. When
She had bought it, She explained to the people with Her that
She could work on every person who had looked at the clock
as they passed up the street and that was why it was a good
thing for Her to buy.
itself, see. It can contain some of the dirt within itself.
Supposing you put a color in the water - it assumes the
color. But Kundalini does not assume the color. She
burns out. Do you follow my point? So, if you have
anything wrong within you, she'll burn it off, but she'll not
absorb - she's pure. She cannot absorb those things
into her that will pollute her. She cannot be polluted."
H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Australia 1981
Linda Williams
9) NARGOL, 10) HOLYGHOST, 11) NIRMALNAGRI, 12) SUMATI, 13) DIVINE, 14) NSYS, 15) SUKHADA
1) VIBRATIONS, 2) ADVENT, 3) DAISY, 4) REALISATION, 5) ISPS, 6) NECTAR, 7) VISANGI, 8) PELVIC,
Answers to crossword:
16
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Anecdotes Off Jesus Christ
The Great Picnic (When Jesus fed the
Five Thousand)
down to teach them again. He healed the sick ones whom
they had brought to him, and taught them many things about
the kingdom ofheaven.
After a while the day wore on and evening came. Still the
A boy's lunch-basket is a very small thing compared with a
great miracle, But in this story we shall see how a great people lingered near, seeming to forget they could find no
miracle grew out of a boy's lunch-basket. It all came about in food or sheiter in the desert place. The disciples grew
this manner -
impatient with them and came to ask Jesus to send them
away. "They have brought no food," said the disciples, "and
The disciples whom Jesus sent to preach in the towns and we can not supply food for them in this wildermess; therefore
cities of Galilee had returned joyfully, telling their Master send them away that they may buy food in the towns and
about their success in healing the sick and in casting out the villages as they journey home." But Jesus answered, "We
evil spirits justas they had seen him do. And now the famne of must feed them before sending them away." Then, turning to
Philip he asked, "Where shall we find
bread, that all these people may
Jesus was increasing every day, and
many more people from distant parts
of the country were flocking to hear
him. So urgent were the people who
eat?"
Philip looked at the great multitude
and shook his head. "If we should buy
two hundred pennyworth of bread,"
came to hear Jesus and to have their
loved ones healed, that they pressed
constantly upon him, and allowed no
time for him to rest or even eat. Then
he answered, "there would not be
enough for each one to have a small
piece." While Jesus and the disciples
were discussing what to do, the boy
who had not forgotten to carry his
Jesus called his twelve disciples
aside from the multitude and said,
"Come with me to a quiet place, for
we must resta while."
lunch came near and heard their
conversation. Then he showed his
Taking a ship they sailed away from
basket of food to one of the disciples,
and he offered to give the food to
Jesus. The disciples, who was
the multitude to the other side of the
Sea, and went into a desert place
near a mountain. But they did not find
much time to rest even in this lonely
spot, for soon they saw a great throng
of people coming toward them. The multitude had followed are there in the basket?" asked Jesus. Andrew said, "Only
from the other side of the Sea. Perhaps the disciples were five and two small fishes. But what will that be among so
disappointed because the people had found them again, but many people?" Jesus replied, "Bring them to me."
Jesus looked pityingly upon the great throng, and said of
them, "They are like sheep that had no shepherd. They Then he told his disciples to bid the people sit down in
wander about here and there hunting for their own pasture- groups, in some fifty and in others a hundred, and wait for
grounds." In this great throng were five thousand men, who their evening meal. While they waited, he took the little
had come from different parts of Galilee. Some of them had loaves and the fishes and blessed them and broke them into
brought their wives and children along, and other women small pieces. He filled a basket for each of the twelve
had come, too. When they had started they did not know disciples and sent them to pass the food among the hungry
they would have to go so very far to find Jesus, and many of people. Then the disciples returned and again he filled their
them had brought nothing to eat. One boy, however, had not empty baskets.
forgotten his lunch-basket, and in his basket he carried five When all the people had eaten, he sent the disciples to
Andrew, came and told Jesus what
the boy had said, "How many loaves
little loaves of bariey bread and two small fishes. When the
galiner uP the scraps that had been left over, and they found
multitude came near, Jesus received them kindly and sat
17
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-19.txt 
 twelve baskets full of scraps. And every one in the great Jesus was here! He never told us how to cope with ghosts!"
multitude had eaten enough to satisfy his hunger. The boy they wanted to look, they did not dare to. The spectral man
who had brought the lunch-basket to Jesus had all that he trod boldly from wave to wave. "Don't fret!" he called. "It's
could eat, and he shared his ittle lunch with every one in the only me."The boat hove to, while the disciples rushed up
and down, grabbing each other by sleeve and gasping."
Walking on the water! Do you see? He is isn't he? He's
This unusual miracle caused much excitement among the walking on water!" Suddenly it struck some of them that this
people. They wanted Jesus to become their king instead of might not be Jesus al alI, but a demon in disguise (the Devil
great throng because he had let Jesus bless his offering.
letting the Roman government rule them any longer. They
is always out to prick people).
believed that he could set them
"If it is you Lord, tell me to come
free from the rule of the Romans,
whom they hated. They thought it
would be wonderful to have a king
rule them who could feed them by
working miracles. But Jesus
would not allow the people to take
him for their king. Although he
was a King, yet he had not come
to earth to rule an earthly
over the water," said Peter. He
was excited, eyes bright, cheeks
flushed. "Tell me to come." Jesus
beckoned him. Bundling his
robes up in one hand, Peter
scrambled over the rail, eager to
see what it felt like to walk on
water! The sea took his weight.
He set each foot on the black
kingdom.
waves and felt them, like a
He commanded his disciples to
enter their ship at once and return
springy garden of bed of newly
turned earth, under his sandals.
"But it's water" he thought.
"Rough water, too. And men can't
walk on. ." As his faith failed, he began to sink, Jesus
was reaching out encouraging hands, but Peter began to
sink, because what he was doing was impossible. In that
to the other side of the Sea. And
when they left him, then he
dismissed the multitude and went
alone upon the mountain near by to pray.
moment, he thought he was about to drown. "Lord, save
When Jesus Walked On Water...
me!"
Before the Great Picnic had disbanded, Jesus told the "Oh, how little faith you have!" Jesus reproached Peter.
disciples to sail across the Sea of Galilee, while he said "Why did you start to doubt me?"
goodbye to the last.of the five thousand. "How will you catch Together, they climbed into the boat. The wind dropped. The
LIS up?" they asked, but Jesus had already turned away.
sea fell flat, flat as spilled oil. Then Peter began to regret his
When he was finally alone, Jesus walked to a hiltop and lack of faith. What might he have done with more faith? But
prayed. And when he finished praying, he walked down no, he had doubted, He had taken fright. Worst of all, he had
again down the grassy slope, now deserted the grass failed Jesus, and rather than do that, he would have walked
flattened by five thousand feet, across the rocky beach, on across half the oceans of the world.
to where the water broke against the shore in while surf. And Around Jesus, the other disciples fell top their knees, "No
then on further still.
doubt about it," they said. "No question. You are the Son of
God"
Meanwhile, a keen wind had sprung up, and disciples.
though a good half-mile from shore, were making a little
headway. The swell was heavy, the waves menacing. At
first, they thought that they were seeing spray scuffed up off
the crest of the waves. But then they saw it had a shape of a
man, and were panic-stricken. "A ghost! A ghost! If only
18
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Lord Jesus was born on Diwali
On one occasion, many years ago in London, Shri Mataji
spoke to us about star signs. She mentioned that Lord
Jesus, the great incamation of Lord Ganesha, was born
under the sign of Scorpio, which is the sign of death and
resurrection. He was actually born at Diwali, which falls at
the time of year which is Scorpio in the astrological
calendar.
The chakra of Lord Jesus is the Agnya, of course, and this is
the chakra associated with the light element. So it is only
right that Diwali is the festival of lights. Also, for the
Christians Lord Jesus came as a light to lighten the
darkness, so again there is that connection to light.
The 10 Names of Shri Lakshmi:
The reason why Christmas is celebrated as the birth of 1. ShriAdi Shakti - The Primal Cause.
Christ is because for nearly seventeen hundred years this
has been traditional in most of the churches. The ancient 2.Shri Vidya Lakskhmi - The Goddess who bestows
and politically powerful Romans adopted Christianity in the Knowledge.
third century AD, and changed the date of Christmas to the
25th of December, because of various pagan Roman
festivals which fell on and around that date. So now, of
course, Christmas is on that date. But as Shri Mataji 4. Shri Amruta Lakshmi - The Goddess who bestows the
explained - He was actually born at Diwali!
3. Shri Saubhagya Lakshmi - The Goddess who bestows
Good Fortune.
Nectar of Immortality.
At the 1980 Diwali Puja in London, Shri Mataji explained that 5. Shri Gruha Lakshmi - The Goddess who bestows the
there is a close relationship between the Swastika and the Divine Qualities of a wife.
Cross, and the one is a symbol of the other. There is also a
similarity in the way Lord Jesus came on earth, and the 6. Shri Raja Lakshmi - The Goddess who bestows Queenly
creation of Lord Ganesha both were born without a father,
totally from the Mother. As we know, Shri Ganesha was 7 Shri satva Lakshmi - The Goddess who bestows the
Graciousness.
created from the turmeric(haldi) paste that had anointed the
body of Shri Parvati, and Lord Jesus was born of the Virgin
Mary.
Awareness of Truth.
8. Shri Bhogya Lakshmi - The Goddess who bestows
Sustenance and Enjoyment.
At that same Diwali Puja, in 1980, Shri Mataji asked a
Sahaja Yogini to read out the ten names of Shri Laxshmi that
are now in the mantra book, and She commented briefly on
each one. So the meanings there are directly from Shri
Mataji. Here they are, and may we all humbly ask Shri
Mataji for all these blessing for all our family of Sahaja Yogis,
9. Shri Yoga Lakshmi - The Goddess who bestows Union
with the Divine.
10. Shri Maha Lakshmi - The Goddess who is the Power of
Evolution.
wherever we are.
19
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-21.txt 
 "संगीत"
(एक परिचायात्मक अध्ययन)
प्ररम्भ से ही संगीत मनुष्य की भावनाओं को प्रकट करने "गीतं वाद्यं नृत्तं च त्रयं संगीत मूच्यते"- अर्थात गायन,
का सर्वश्रेष्ट माध्यम रहा है। यह मानव का चिरसंगी है। वादन व नृत्य इन तीनों के मिले-जूलै रूप को संगीत
किसी भी अथवा सभी प्रकार के बन्धनों से मुक्त, संगीत कहते हैं। कुछ अन्य विद्वानों ने संगीत को निम्न प्रकार से
भावों
(expressions) की एक स्वच्छन्द अभिव्यंजना, परिभाषित किया
अभिव्यक्ति (manifesation) है। यह कला हर जाति, हर
1.
धर्म से स्वतंत्र है। इसी में एकमात्र ऐसी शक्ति है जो
Music is the food of soul.
Music is the universal language.
Musicis the medicine for the broken heart.
2.
3.
मनुष्य के कठोर हृदय को भी पिघला सकती है। यह भाषा
विहीन, सार्वभौमिक व सार्वकालिक कला है। किसी भी युग संगीत का अदुभव एवं विकास
आदि-अनादि काल से
में मानव संगीत की मोहक शक्ति से अछूता नहीं रह पाया
अपना आस्तित्व धारण किये, यह कला देवी-देवताओं,
है। किसी भी रूप में क्यों न हो संगीत प्रकृति के कण-कण ।
गन्धर्वों आदि से प्रभावित होती हुई पृथ्वी पर अवतरित हुई
ऐसा माना जाता है कि यह कला सर्वप्रथम शिवजी ने देवी
में व्याप्त है। चाहे पक्षियों की चहचहाहट हो या झरनों का
कलरव, संगीत सर्व व्याप्त है।
सरस्वती को सिखाई तत्पश्चात सरस्वती जी ने इसे नारद
आदिकाल से ही संगीत, स्वयं ईश्वरीय भाषा होने के कारण पी को दिया, नारद जी ने स्वर्ग के गन्धर्वो, किन्नरों,
'मोक्ष प्राप्ति का सुगम (सरल)
से ऋषि-मुनि प्राकृतिक वातावरण में अनहद् नाद का
अनुभव ध्यान-धारणा द्वारा करके मौक्ष को प्राप्त करते थे, पृथ्वी पर आने के पश्चात वैदिक काल में रचित चारों वेदों
परमात्मा से एकाकारिता प्राप्त करते थे। अत: संगीत में से सामवेद पूर्णतः संगीतमय था। सामवेद में वर्णित सभी
अप्सराओं आदि को संगीत का ज्ञान दिया तथा अन्त में यह
मार्ग रहा है । प्राचीन समय
पृथ्वी पर प्रकट हुई।
।
मनोरंजन के साथ-साथ मोक्ष प्राप्ति का भी सुगम व मंत्रों का उच्चारण अथवा पाठ संगीतमय होता था। उस
सर्वश्रेष्ठ मार्ग है ।
काल का संगीत "सामगान" कहलाता था।
साधारणतः गायन, वादन व नृत्य इन तीनों के सम्मिश्रण इसके पश्चात संगीत मन्दिरों में, देवालयों में देवी-देवताओं
को संगीत कहते हैं। संगीत का तात्पर्य मात्र गायन से ही
की स्तुति गान, भक्ति संगीत आदि हेतु प्रयुक्त हुआ पर
नहीं लिया जाता वरन् संगीत के अन्तर्गत नृत्य व वादन भी शनै: शनैः संगीत ईश्वर की उपासना, मोक्ष प्राप्ति के लक्ष्य
आते है। इन तीनों कलाओं के समायोजन से ही संगीत से उठकर मनोरंजन के साधन के रूप में विकसित होता
सम्पूर्ण बनता है।
चला गया।
संगीत की परिभाषा देते हुये पं शारंगदेव ने अपने ग्रंथ
अत: आधुनिक परिपेक्ष्य में संगीत अपने व्यापक रूप में
स्थापित हो चुका है।
'संगीत रत्नाकर में कहा है
ত
20
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-22.txt 
 परन्तु आज का संगीत अपनी मौलिकता खोकर वीभत्स रूप
धारण करता जा रहा है आधुनिक समय में संगीत,
पश्चिमी सभ्यता (Western Culture) से बहुत प्रभावित है
तथा इसी कारण यह अपनी मौलिकता (originality), अपने
आस्तित्व को नष्ट कर रहा है।
न
संगीत जो कि मोक्ष प्राप्त कराने वाला था आज मात्र
मनोरंजन का साधन बनकर रह गया है। आज के
वातावरण के मार्गी संगीत कहीं लुप्त होता जा रहा
है।
संगीत का आध्यात्मिक स्वरूप - जिस प्रकार समस्त जगत
अनुसार
व्यवहार नादाधीन है उसी प्रकार संगीत भी नाद पर ही
४
आधारित है। सृष्टि में सर्वप्रथम जो नाद गुंजरित हुआ वह
ॐ" है। सम्पूर्ण जगत, चर, अचर, व्यंगम सभी ॐ पर
ही आधारित है। प्राचीनकाल में ऋषि-मुनियों ने ॐ की
राम
साधना, उपासना करके मोक्ष को प्राप्त किया।
संगीत के प्रकार - संगीत के दो प्रकार माने गये हैं-
अत: हम देख सकते हैं कि
संगीत सर्वश्रेष्ठ होते हुये, स्वयं ईश्वरीय भाषा होते हुये भी
उपसंहार (conclusion)
मार्गी संगीत ।
देशी संगीत ।
1.
2.
आधुनिक समय में अपने मूल को नष्ट कर रही है। आज
मार्गी संगीत अर्थात् मार्ग दिखाने वाला अथवा मोक्ष प्राप्त संगीत अपने उद्देश्य से कहीं भटक गया है।
कराने वाला तथा देशी संगीत वह कहलाता है जो जन-मन
रंजन हेतु देश, काल, परिस्थिति व वातावरण के अनुसार परन्तु सहजयोग में श्रीमाताजी की असीम अनुकम्पा से,
कुण्डलिनी जागरण के पश्चात एक सच्चा साधक संगीत को
पुनः उसी रूप में पाने लगता है। सहजयोग में ध्यान
धारणा के पश्चात संगीत को हम अपने सूक्ष्म नाड़ी तंत्र पर
परिवर्तनशील होता हैं। देशी संगीत के दो प्रकार होते हैं-
शास्त्रीय संगीत। (Classical Music)
सुगम अथवा भाव संगीत। (Light Music)
2.
अनभव करने लगते हैं तथा परमात्मा से एकाकारित होते
हैं। अत: इस प्रकार संगीत अपने आस्तित्व को धारण किये
शास्त्रीय संगीत अर्थात् जो नियमों (शास्त्रानुसार) में बंधा हुये अपने परम लक्ष्य को प्राप्त कराने में एक सशक्त
होता है, जिसे बदला नहीं जा सकता तथा सुगम संगीत जैसे माध्यम के रूप में प्रकट होता है।
गीत, गजल, भजन, लोक संगीत, चित्रपट (फिल्मी)
संगीत आदि।
ত
21
ত)
ु
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Yuvashakti Update
prayed to Mother to take them into meditation. The peace
that everyone felt inside and the feeling of being under the
protection of our AdiShakti Mother cannot be described in
words. The next session, was about imbibing more
Sangh
National
Yuva
Shakti
Nirmal
Seminar,Sadhupul (Distt Chail, Himachal
Pradesh)
With the blessings
of our beloved
Param Pujya Shri
Mataji, a seminar
for Nirmal Shakti
Yuva Sangh (fondly
knowledge about our beloved Mother. YuvaShakti of
Yamuna Nagar prepared a great presentation on Shri Mataji
covering all aspects right from her birth, parentage,
childhood, Shri Mataji's association with Mahatma Gandhi,
Her active contributions to freedom of India, marriage,
discovery of Sahaja Yoga, etc. to make aware the
2223
31
2.78
known as Yuva
yuvashaktis about the divine life of our Mother.
Shakti) was held at
Indra Holiday
The Evening session was very special, wrapped with some
surprises, to prepare and participate in cultural activities and
task collectively. The session started with meditation and
Kandaghat Chail Road, Distt Solan, a beautiful location in then all the yuvashakti(s) were divided irito 25 teams. Each
Himachal Pradesh. Aplace very near to Shimla, it is siluated team was given a Sahaja project related to understanding
at around 350 km away from Delhi. Itslt's a place full of and promotion of Sahaja Yoga (bhajan medley, on-the-spot
mountains and beautiful landscapes with a bhajan and Qawwali /posters and banners/ skits and quiz/
stream. In the high ranges of interior Himachal Pradesh, dance drama / Sahaja News Channel / backdrop canvas
lush, vibrant green is the predominant colour and the painting of the stage for pujas/ public programmes). Thus
Home, Sadhu Pul,
serenading
mountains are resplendent green all year around. More
than 550 enthusiastic young Sahaja Yogis and yoginis from
our Yuvashakti(s) got a chance to explore their creativity.
The teams were divided so beautifully that all participants
Haryana, Delhi, Punjab, Uttaranchal, Himachal Pradesh,
Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan and other states gathered to
enjoy this collectivity, to understand and fullfil Mothers collectively within 1 hour!! Every team started their projects
Vision toward's establishing this Sangha.
were involved in one or the other collective activity. All
with great enthusiasm and ideas, after an hour, it was great
As one arrived at the foothills of the Sahasrara of the joy to see the creativity of the collectivity, The performances
Universe, the Himalayas, one felt the bubbling of kicked off with the qawwali "chhaap tilak" which was so
followed by canvas painting (signifying the
essence of Shri Adishakti), story of Lord Rama in a sweet
bhajan, a play in which showed Shri Adishakti giving
transformation in the era of Kaliyuga, and many more.
Bhajans at the feet of Divine made yuvashakti speechless
blissful,
expectations with a soft cool breeze all over, welcoming the
fresh looking (from singing bhajans throughout the journey)
yuvashaktis arriving at the firstrays of dawn.
30th September, Saturday:
Seminar started on 30th September with morning and made everyone dance on tune of vibrations enjoying
meditation. The toot and tootles of birds and rustling leaves the blessings of Mother. Everyone enjoyed this session very
provided soothing sound effects in the background making much till late night.
this session very beautiful. Everyone experienced great joy 1st October. Sunday
of our Mother in their hearts, at such a pure and natural
place. It was a nice experience for all yuvashakti(s) to be On the second day after morning meditation all Yuvashakti
together during such auspicious days of Navratri. The joined for Tug of War. It was good to see our young Yuva
breakfast was prepared and managed under the Shakti brothers flexing their muscles while the Yuva Shakti
supervision of Chandigarh collectivity, and everyone got sisters (Shakti) cheered them on. Soon the roles were
time to know and meet our brother and sisters from different reversed and everyone bonded beautifuliy in Mother's
corners of country. The late morning session focused on divine joy that was spread all around...
meditation and everyone heard Shri Mataji's tape and
22
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Next day again started with moming meditation followed by ISPS students, who performed a beautiful dance drama
sports session Tug-of-War and kho-kho. It was fun to watch The Ascent of Innocence." All children looked like little
young boys and girls playing and enjoying at their fullest. angels. Further, young girl students performed a very nice
Indian classical dance.Everyone felt the efforts and
dedication of all these young students that they put in
elder sahajis put their best foot forward. After a uring learning dance, drama and music in form of strong
session, everyone did collective shoe beating and then vibrations. The performance received a standing ovation
Yuvashakti boys and girls enjoyed foatsoaking in a lovely from the audience. Everyone was deeply touched by
small river flowing close to the seminar site. It was so unwavering attention in inculcating what Shri Mataji has
soothing that none of the sahaja yogis could resist spending suggested many times to all yuvashakti boys and girls to
a little time over there. Everyone enjoyed presence of know about music, classical dance and drama. The sterling
Mother everywhere amongst the exquisite beauty of nature. performance was followed by a very lovely humourous play
After breakfast, the morning session was that of meditation scripted on transformation of Narada -how he realizes his
on each Chakra. Everyone felt the peak point of vibrations ego and gets to know the importance of surrender. Peals of
meditating on each Chakra and reciting the Beej Mantras. laughter could be heard from all every now and then as the
play progressed.. Another beautiful drama was also
performed by these enthusiastic young yogis from
Dehradun, who concluded their play with a video
The sports meet got even more pleasant when some of the
One unique aspect
of this seminar was
that it was
presentation on 21 Golden Rules for Sahaj yogis.
collectively
The lovable evening was extended with Ravana Dahan
Symbolizing the destruction of Ravana through the divine
play of Shri Rama & Shri Sita, which was celebrated after
the dinner. An effigy of Ravana was burnt and all enjoyed the
accompanying crackers as they announced the advent of a
yuvashakti bubbling with energy to take on the work of
spreading the light and conquering darkness. A bonfire was
also lit up nearby and everyone sang bhajans and danced
organized by
yuvashakti from all
India.
Over
Therefore. each
session was
organized by
collectivity of a
different city like Chandigarh, Yamuna Nagar, Dehradun, around the fire. Soon afterwards, Dharmshala students
Jaipur, Gurgaon, Delhi, etc. In the afternoon session, we came with their musical instruments and all yogis/yoginis
had a discussion on
started singing bhajans in praise of our beloved Mother.
When everyone started dancing on beautiful musical notes
and bhajans, all felt tremendous flow of cool vibrations all
around. All brothers and sisters enjoyed this till 3 am.
various treatments
advised by Shri
Mataji like candle
treatment, string
knotting, paper
2nd October, Monday:
On the third and the last day, after breakfast, all participants
exchanged vibrations. The right way to exchange vibrations
was also explained. Participants were also told about how to
spread Sahaja Yoga in offices, schools and how to perform
market realization programs.
burning and Matka
Treatment. It was
advised that these
treatments are an
aid to our dhyaan
and should be performed with discretion. Thereafter short in the concluding session of seminar all expressed their
documentary on Param Pujya Shri Mataji was played, giving sincere thanks to our Divine Mother for such a nice
the importance and values of sahaja protocol. After that all collectivity, for all joy and Divine blessings.In the spirit of
enjoyed watching a documentary on International Sahaja moving on to spread the joy and love, the lovely Sahaja
Public School, Dharamshala "Nine Months Together", yuvashakti collectivity that had gathered in the lap of
which made us feel like going back to school and this time, Himalayas also dispersed - With cherished memoriess of
such timeless moments, and a promise to all our brothers
and sisters in our hearts to spread the message of ur
only Sahaja School in Dharamshala!
The evening session started with performance of young Mother to make every soul a realized.
Jai Shri Mataji
23
 2006_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-25.txt 
 आदिशक्ति जन्मस्थल
द
অकत
स
RAVCHA
आदिशक्ति उमल्क्
क
