The Divine Cool Breeze Nov. Dec. 2006

 Divine Cool The Breeze Nov, - Dec. - 2006 NIRMALA HWA ERSAL URERELIGN CONTENTS Diwali Puja - 2006 (A Report) 3. 7. Guru Purnima - 2006 (A Report) 7. Vishwa Nirmala Dharma - Religion in Spain 7. 1000 Months of Shri Mataji's Incarnation 8. Honorary Citizenship to Shri Mataji 8. Second S.Y. Ashram in Kolkata 10. The Purpose of Being Incarnated on This Earth 12. Ram Navmi Puja - 5-4-1988 14. Innocence - From Nirmala Yoga 15. What is Praying - From Nirmala Yoga From Nirmala Yoga 18. We Sahaja Children - From Nirmala Yoga 19. H.H.Shri Mataji's Advice - 24.5.1981 From Nirmala Yoga 27. A Letter From Canada - From Nirmala Yoga 28. Leaders in Sahaja Yoga (Part-ll) From Nirmala Yoga 30. The Visage of Salvation 31. Little Angel Prays Before Mother Mary Pravachan of H.H. Shri Mataji- 18.8.1979 - From Nirmala Yoga 32. 40. Nirmal Shakti Yuva Sangh Seminar-Delhi 24-25 June 2006 DHARM

 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE Published by Nirmal infosystems &Technologies Pvt.Ltd. Plot No. 108, Chandragupt Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411029 Ph. No. : 020-25285232 Printed by Krishna Printer & Designer Tri Nagar, Delhi-35 Mob.: 9212238008 For Subscription Please Write to: Nirmal infosystems & Technologies Pvt.Ltd. 222, Desh Bandhu Apartments Kalkaji, New Delhi-110019 Tel. :011-26422054 Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles, Miracle Photographs etc. to : Shri O.P. Chandna G-11 (463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110 034 Ph.: 011-65356811

 Shri Mahalakshmi revisits Nirmal Nagri Pune, The Holy Land 22nd October 2006 Sunday the 22nd october 2006 marks yet another historic event since the creation of mankind with the witnessing and welcoming once again Her Holy Lotus Feet of Shri Mahalakshmi after thousands of who was the one in charge of that. He was here in Treta Yuga and Krishna came at the time of Dwapar Yuga. When I came it was Kali Yuga but now today the time is of Krita Yuga. The. years in Her Shrimataji form on this land of Nirmal Nagri, Bhukum in the Khatpewadi village, Pune, India. Yuga where work will be done - Krita Yuga. This is the time where work will be done -H.H.Shri Mataji, Chelsham Road, London, 2nd April 1982. It was thonsands of years ago in the Treta Yuga (an era as per Indian calendar) that Shri Rama as Shri Vishnu incarnate along with Shri Sita as Shri Mahalaskhmi incranate vibrated this land with Their Holy Lotus Feet. It was in Maharashtra only that Shri Ram and Shri Sita walked bare foot. The myth behind this part of the land say - Shri Sita and Shri Rama had spent quite a few important days here during their period of 14 years of exile. Villagers in Khatpewadi claim, the remnant or fossilized remains of the utensils used by them in the neighbouring hillocks still bear the imprint and the proof of their holy visit as they can still be traced there. Vibrations on this land speak for its own importance. The Nirmal Nagri covers about eleven acres of this holy land. Shri Mataji once enlightened us with the story of Shri Rama's advent and His Maharashtra tour bare foot, as the land Even the subtler aspect that marks this day as very significant and historic is for the fact that - the celebration of 'Diwali Festival' with lights intrinsically is associated with Shri Rama's victory over Ravana and heart His return. It is a divine bliss that every loves to light that essence Love that enlightens the Raja Lakshmi principle within to mark the joy of the victory of good over the evil forces. That's why Shri Mataji says, "Whatever is good for your Spirit will automatically work out as soon as this integration takes place, and that is the work of Sahaja Yoga Today. That's why I said it is Krita Yuga, is to be done, And this integration must be achieved within ourselves, so sometimes you have to make your body come -H.H. Shri Mataji, Chelsham Road, London, 2nd April 1982. to this level". had to be vibrated and Shri Ganesha Himself expresses on the land as the Earth element. So He had to walk without sandals. It is further amazing to share an interesting fact as a yogini fondly recollects, "on one occasion, many years ago in London, Shri Mataji spoke to us about star signs. She mentioned that Lord Jesus, the great incarnaltion of Lord Ganesha, was born under the sign of Scorpio, which is the sign of death and resurrection. He was actually born at Diwali, which falls at the time of year which is Scorpiɔ in the astrological calendar. "Because first of all when human beings came on this earth they were frightened of all the animals who would invade them and all kinds of harrible Rakshasas and all those people, and negative forces would trouble them. In that state they needed to create a king, a ruler,

 Issue: 11 & 12-2006 The Divine Cool Breeze in the evening. It was tremendous joy to wit- ness the movement of the 13-15 thousand collectivity, that had gathered in Nirmal Nagri from across the world to offer their puja on behalf of the entire globe at Her Holy Feet of Shri Mataji in Her Mahalakshmi Form. The Chakra of Lord Jesus is the Agnya and this is the Chakra associated with the light element. So it is only right that Diwali is the festival of lights. Also, for the Christians Lord Jesus came as 'a light to lighten the darkness', so again there is that connection to light. As a matter of casual approach almost every heart felt from their previous experiences that the puja schedule announced always happens to be much before Mother's actual arrival. Although the Puja was announced for half past five, the entire collectivity even at five in the evening wore a very casual look, little realizing what transpired behind as the divine play Shri Mataji Herself was ready to accept the puja even before the scheduled time. Was it the vibrated land that The reason why Christmas is celebrated as the birth of Christ is because for nearly seventeen hundred years this has been traditional in most of the churches. The ancient and politically powerful Romans adopted Christianity in the third century AD, and changed the date of Christmas to the 25th of December, because of various pagan Roman festivals which fell on and around that So now Christmas is an that date". date. was keen to welcome our most Holy Mother, or was it Shri Mahalakshmi Herself desired to revisit the land to accept the puja? Or was it, that Mother could not resist Shri Ganesha's How fortunate are we, the Sahaja Yogis to be here - the collectivity of the realized souls - to celebrate the Diwali Puja today and also shall be fortunate to celebrate the Christmas Puja 2006 later in December on this holy land of Nirmal Nagri. seeking from inside to give Her Holy darshan(divine glimpse) even before time. So, Shri Mataji decided an early start from Pratishthan (The residence of Shri Mataji approximately 15 Kilometres away from Nirmal Nagri) even before the announced time for the Puja. The day seemed to be quite joyous in spite of the day's heat and the hectic schedule. The evening althoughturned cooler, but traces of cloud could be seen hovering in scattered fashion. The Nirmal Nagri wore quite a different look today. It was cheerful and joyous, every heart desired to get their best out of the best. Suddenly, a cavalcade with fleet of cars was seen trailing behind our Mother's vehicle in a precise protocol with the pilots in front near the Nirmal Nagri gate at quarter past five. It was the most exciting event that all yogis were seen rushing to settle themselves in the main pandal to welcome the arrival of our Holy Mother just in the precise time. As if all hearts were singing in Her Praise: "Subhamangal maya Divas hai aya...Adi ShaktiSwayam Hain Padhari' (The very auspicious day has arrived when Shri Adi Shakti has arrived Herself). The internet news had already brought a lot of joys in the hearts of yogis since early this year, as we could learn of Shri Mataji's good state of health, the best of moods, the shopping in UK and above all Her Joining the singing choir to sing a full stanza from the Bhajan- 'Ma Teri Jai Ho, Teri Hi Vijaya Ho (Her own composition) in USA, It was now that all eyes were waiting for Her Holy Darshan in the Diwali puja that was announced for 5.30 Yogis It was then a long pause that the

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze with Her holy darshan then. It was indeed this very moment that thousands of seekers were waiting for. experienced from the other side of the covered curtain, while Shri Mataji arrived in the inner room (especially decorated for Her) adjoining the stage and spent some time. The vibrations spoke for itself for Her Holy Ganeshas were seen rushing upto the stage presence. Then suddenly the choir sprang alive with 'Swagata Agat Swagatam' >Welcoming Mother with the curtain still closed on the stage at quarter to six in the evening. The stage wore a divine look as the curtains were drawn apart slowly all eyes were trying either to catch up the faint projections of pictures on the erected four giant screens across the main pandal or the stage itself. The evening sky wasnt still dark enough to brighten the picture quality on the screens. It was then the time for the Jaikara'(call for a collective jai' in praise fo our Holy Mother) for 'Shri Adi Arti and chanting of the three maha-mantras, Shakti Mataji Shri Nimala Devi' followed by a jaikara for our beloved Papaji, Sir CP Sir CP then took the mike to announce the Holy message of our most beloved Mother, Shri Mataji to the collectivity of the world in his typical steady diction addressing in Hindi. At quarter past Six the children, the little to offer their puja with flowers at Her Holy Lotus Feet with the Shri Ganesh-artharva- shrisham, Followed by Prayer bhajan Vinati Suniye Adi Shakti' and then puja bhajan with Shrimataji's 108 names Jago Savera' It was then followed by Shringar bhajans as seven married ladies held the curtain before Shri Mahalakshmi for the shringar with 'Mahamaya Mahakali, "Tujhya Pujani' and 'Mahalakshmi strotram. Exactly at seven with the offering of the Diwali Puja at Her Holy Lotus Feet in Her Shri Mahalakshmi Form was concluded. Our most holy Mother, it is indeed a blessing to be here today as we pray collectively on behalf of the Sahaja Yogi brothers and sisters across the globe that may aur offerings of millions of pranams at Your Holy Lotus Feel being completely surrendered within and expression of our heartfelt gratitude for accepting the Puja be kindly accepted by Your holy grace. He said - "Shri Mataji has conveyed to be told to you that..We are all one; there is only one God (Paramatma). There is nothing more left to be said. She has worked for the cause and benefit of the mankind with Her untiring efforts and journey for the last 35 years across the globe. Now that we should forget that we are different. We are all one and should It was then the time for a wonderful and colourful firecracker display that filled the entire span of the sky over Nirmal Nagri, celebrating the joy before Shri Mahalakshmi. The little Ganeshas were excited and were seen jumping in excitement as they enjoyed the display while, Shri Mataji Herself seemed very happy and pleased staring deep into the high air, acknowledging the love display that Her children had to offer at Her Holy Lotus Feet on Diwali. The vibrations were work together shouldering all the responsibility to spread Her message through out the country to make Her vision come true". Shri Mataji was staring deep within the collectivity and at times compassionately staring at our beloved Papaji as if nodding in affirmation. Her very looks reminded us of the popular bhajans 'Pyar Bhare yeh do Nimal Nayan' (Love filled these two pure eyes.). As if our hearts were melting as we were blessed tremendous and phenomenal. While the firecracker display

 12-2006. Issue: 11 & The Divine Cool Breeze palms open amidst fountain of vibrations with incredible gush of strong wind that brushed past the collectivity with droplets of rains. continued in the high air, various country representatives from hosting countries, national and internationals queued up on the stage to offer their gifts to Our Holy Mother The gifts were offered from countries like India, France, Australia, Switzerland, Portugal, Italy, Bahrain, Hong Kong, Austria, Malta, Ireland, Bulgaria, Greece, Russia, Argentina, Romania, USA and many more. The Mahalakshmi tattwa seemed to express itself with the over pouring of generous amount of donations for the development of Chhindwara Project (the Holy birthplace of our beloved Mother) from various nations along with the other gifts. It was as though the rain god (Varun Devta) along with the ganas were over joyed with Her arrival and the Puja in that holy land that it could not help express its joy along with the collectivity in form of downpour delicately not to disturb the Sahaja Yogis enjoying the vibrations. Gradually the droplets of rains coalesced to form larger drops and finally to fall as drops of rain just enough to drizzle to a light shower for half and hour after Mother's departure. It seemed to be heavy enough to cool us down with vibrations and spread the mundane fragrance of the Earth all around, but not really that heavy enough to soak or to freeze the yogis in attendance there under the open sky. The climate grew very pleasant as the eight and half thousand yogis who were camped in the Nirmal Nagri enjoyed the rest of the evening recollecting their personal experiences, while the floating collectivity of another five to six thousand left the venue gradually carrying with them the vibrations of a very significant Shri Mahalakshmi Puja. As the offering of gift was drawing close, there was an announcement made for the forthcoming schedule and venue for hosting the international Christmas and Birthday Puja. The Christmas Puja 2006 seminar will be hosted in Ithe Nirmal Nagri, Pune itself on 24th, 25th and 26th December 2006, while the Birthday puja 2007seminar will be hosted in Chhindwara, India on 14th, 20th and 21st March 2007. There was a big applause as everyone expressed their joy as if a long cherished desire was being fulfilled. It was almost half past seven or quarter to eight that the curtains were drawn and the collectivity stood up with Jai Shri Mataji Rabi Ghosh (India) (Intenet Version)

 Vishwa Nirmala Dharma Religion in Spain Wednesday, July 19, 2006 GURU PURNIMA - 2006 (A Report) Tuesday 11th July saw the actual Guru Purnima. The moon was full and high over Cabella, many Yogis gathered in the courtyard outside Shri Mataji's house. There was an atmosphere of devotion pervading the air as everyone prepared to pay their respects and offer their devotion to Shri Mataji. LEGAL REGISTER OF VISHWA NIRMALA DHARMA AS A RELIGION IN SPAIN Individually Shri Mataji received each collective and they offered flowers and gifts Nation by nation they came, then collective by collective until finally the Yuva Shakti and then the child en from Dharmsala school offered Her flowers. There was a beautiful June 1st, 2006 Dear Brothers and Sisters, embroidery by Iran which had taken 1,900 hours to complete and featured Shri Mataji in the middle with the names of other Gurus It's a great pleasure for the Spanish collective to announce that as of 31st of May 2006, Vishawa Nirmala Dharma has been legally registered and acknowledged as a religion in Spain. around Her. An ancient desire of the Spanish collective has just become true, thanks to Shri Mataji's blessings: Vishwa Nirmala Dharma has been legally acknowledged as a religion. After a long time of documentation preparing and numerous administrative procedures, we finally got the positive response from the Ministry of Justice. The Spanish Sahaja Yogis hope that this will be the first step in the legal and official acknowledgement of HH Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi and Vishwa Nirmala Dharma in Europe and in the whole world. 1000 Months of H.H. Shri Mataji's Incarnation (Celebrated In Italy) fortunate country to host and celebrate Shri Mataji on such a day. Best wishes to the Italian collective. on July 21, 2006 Shri Mataji completed exactly 1000 month on Earth (i.e., 83 years and 4 month). This is an extremely auspicious day that is comparable to the usual Birthdays (March 21). Italy is the most Adrian Vasiu Jai Shri Mataji (Internet News)

 Honorary Citizenship To Be Conferred Upon Shri Mataji (29th June 2006) It is with great joy that we announce the Honorary Citizenship to be conferred upon Shri Mataji Nimala Devi, Cabella Ligure in 1991. With this good news flowers were offered to Shri Mataji, She was very pleased by this gesture and sent all Her love to all those well wishers and local citizens who have actively supported Sahaja Yoga activities throughout the years. The local assembly for the Municipal Office of Cabella Ligure, Alessandria Italy met recently and unanimously elected to award Shri Mataji with the Honorary Citizenship of Italy. Holding Shri Mataji in the highest regard this Honorary Citizenship has been offered in recognition of the Her great works and life enriching experience. Great prosperity and peace has been brought to the valley of Val Borberra since 1991 when Shri Mataji first took up residence here in On the 8th July there will be an official gathering to formally present Shri Mataji with Her honorary citizenship, attended by the Mayor of the Municipal Office of Cabella Ligure and other local dignitaries. (Internet Version) Inaguration of Second Ashram By Sahaja Yoga Society (West Bengal Chapter) Kolkata (30.5.2006) Kolkata S.Y. Co-ordinator Sh. Himanshu Shah informs as under- ALARTI ASHRAM www JAI SHRI MATAJI In the year 2004, 50 km from Kolkata in rural Bengal a land was purchased and Ashram constructed where nearly 200 people from nearby villages come and meditate. With the blessings of Param Pujya Shri Mataji, we the Sahaja Yogis of West Bengal could purchase the land & start two Ashrams. The details are as under:-

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 11 & 12 - 2006 ADDRESS : ALARTI ASHRAM, Distt: HOGHLY, WEST BENGAL. AREA :10 Kottahs i.e. 7200 sq.ft. purchased & the total land is free hold and duly transferred in name of Sahaja Yoga Society, West Bengal Chapter on 31.3.06. All Nirakar Pujas are held here. In the year 2005, in the heart of Kolkata a beautiful Ashram has been CIZET ADDRESS: 43/1,ASHOK SHASTRI NAGAR, HARINAVI, KOLKATA. AREA: 18 Kottahs i.e. 12960 sq.ft. In future we can construct another 3 storey. Himanshu Shah Kolkata

 The Purpose of Being Incarnated on This Earth (The positivity lies in understanding why we are here first of all) (16-07-1983) "Now these Dharmas, as I have told you many times, are ten, and we should look after these ten Dharmas in a very careful manner. These are expressed outside, but whatever is inside comes out Now I find when you people talk, and you say things, I know that this person is negative, that person is definitely positive. There are so many ways of expression of positivity but how I know that I cannot tell you because I don't know how to tell you that, but I just know that such a person is definitely positive and such a person is negative. The positivity lies in understanding why we are here first of all, why are we on this Earth? Why are we human beings? In understanding, what are we going to do about it? Why are we Sahaja Yogis? What a Sahaja Yogi has to do? What is his responsibility as a Sahaja Yogi? Then he moves forward to understand: why Mother is so kind to me? Why have I got vibrations? Why am I among the very few who have got this special blessing?" These are fundamental questions that a seeker asks when he or she first starts seeking. Firstly, when a person is not a Sahaji it becomes a very deep analytical process where one tries to define life and everything that is around him in terms of the "reality" that exists around them. A book like "Zen and the art of motorcycle riding" -which has more to do with personal analysis than motorbike riding, is a good example of a seeker going to the point of nothingness without getting an answer because the answer does not lie there. When we then start reading Carl Jung and Socrates and the works of other great realized souls (without knowing what realized souls are at that time before getting our self realization) we come into a different perspective about life and "reality". Why are we on this Earth? The purpose of human evolution is to reach Godhead-achieve the yoga with the Divine-where the reflection and the reflector Introspecting on the above lines of our Divine Mother and taking refuge in the words of Rabindranath Tagore. "into the Heaven of freedom let our soul be awake" become one and the same. But first to reach the human stage of evolution is necessary for the reflection of God Almighty lies in the hearts of Man and not in His/Her other creations. That is why it is not a sin to kill animals for food or security but it is a sin to kill another human being. The answer below was given by a yogi: The positivity lies in understanding why we are here first of all, why are we on this Earth? Why are we human beings? In understanding, what are we going to do about it? Why are we Sahaja Yogis? What a Sahaja Yogi has to do? What is his responsibility as a Sahaja Yogi? Then he inoves forward to understand: why Mother is so kind to me? Why have I got vibrations? Why am I among the very few who have got this special blessing?" Having been bestowed with the awareness of human beings the awareness seeks to satisfy itself by going further and looks first at the immediate surrounding and engages in matter, material, and other physical, emotional and mental stimuli to fulfill itself. Without a spiritual dimension to it the awareness is soon reduced to a sensual and artificial ex-pression to which it succumbs and becomes lost in the Maya of worldly life-

 Issue: II & 12 - 2006 131 The Divine Cool Breeze until it either dies and is reborn OR GETS SELF REALISATION. value it more than our life itself as life is meaningless without the connection, Hence when we place Sahaja Yoga above all else including our family, work, marriage, life- everything, and rest our Attention at the Lotus Feet of Shri Mataji, we enter into this realm where a separate reality exists within the framework of the 3 dimensional world we Why are we Sahaja Yogis? What a Sahaja Yogi has to do? What is his responsibilty as a Sahaja Yogi? Then he moves forward to understand: why Mother is so kind to me? Why have I got vibrations? Why am I among the very few who have got this special blessing? live in. Working out the negativities of the world in the subtle level without speaking or The only people who have been given the ability to cross the Sea of Illusion (the void) and raise the awareness without being told but by just knowing-always in a state to receive the vibrations through which we receive our instructions on what has to getting lost in the mire of Maya's web are those who have their self realization through be done without knowing what is to be done- in complete silence and thoughtless awareness, knowing and recognizing our position in the plan of the divine and not questioning our role nor having any doubt about what is to be done by being the Shri Mataji who She calls as Sahaja Yogis. SYs are not here by accident but are here now at the end of Kali yuga to receive the boon of eons of cycles of birth and deaths that they have been through and have complete instruments of the Divine to work Her will on us to achieve the emancipation and salvation of Mankind and finding attained the state of worthiness to enter into Her realm. Not all Sahajis will be saved. Immaterial of where we are, we are subject complete satisfaction in so doing where the Awareness has finally merged with its to so many tests and only those who are steadfast and live by all the principles and tenets of divine laws will make it through the purpose and is completely satisfied by being dissolved in its nothingness-that is the state of the ultimate union with the Divine-the state of Sat Chit Anand. doors before it is closed. Since the Adi Shakti Herself has given us our connection by Kundalini awakening, which is her pure -Jai Shree Mataji (Internet Version) (5.5.2006) desire, to the whole we must respect and

 Ram Navmi Puja (The text of the talk given by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi on the occassion of a short puja performed at Noida House on 05. April, 1988, Shalivahana Shaka 1920) As compared to Maharashtra Navratri of Chaitra month of Shalivahana Shaka (Dynasty) from Pratipada to Navami is celebrated with more grandour in North India. In Maharashtra the birth of Shri Krishna (Shri Vitthala i.e. Shri Krishna as a King) is celebrated with religious fervor as 'Gokulashtami' Shri Vitthala was the eighth incarnation of Lord Vishnu, was born at 12:00 noon on the ninth day of Chaitra month. This day is called as Ram Navmi. Uddhar', 'Moksha' to (Adiwasi woman Shabri), Killing of Bali, who was the king of monkeys, who was doing Adharma, as well as the killing of Ravana because he kidnapped Shri Sitaji, to establish the rule of 'Dharma'. Actually, Shri Rama was "Dharmatita i.e. Beyond Dharma. But strictly speaking, Dharma was in born in him i.e. he should be called 'Dharmasthita'. He was the embodiment of Dharma. To uphold the maryadas of the throne he renounced Shri Sitaji (who was very dear to him), simply because people doubted her despite her crossing the fire (Agnipariksha). Shri Sitaji herself also left Shri Rama, in a way in the end after bringing up her children nicely; who had acquired all Vidyas and had mastered the art of Archery, so much so that they defeated their own uncle Shri Laxmana and ultimately Shri Rama had to come to fight with them to free the horse of 'Ashwamedh Yaganya' But Shri Sitaji who stood on 'Dharma', intervened and averted the fight between the father and the sons. Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi also incarnated on March 21, 1923 at 12:00 noon, like Shri Rama, in Chhindwara, Madhya Pradesh. Chhindwara is situated in east- west and south-north directions where two lines meet. This date of birth is as per calendar based on lunar months. But as per the calendar based on solar months, Shri Mataji's birthday was due on the first day of the first month i.e. Chaitra month of Shalivahana Shaka 1845. In Maharashtra the first day of Chaitra-is known as Gudi Padwa. This happens to be the birthday of Shri Mataji as well as the day of coronation of King Shalivahana. Now Shalivahana Shaka 1920 commences from March 28, 1998 as Chaitra Pratipada, the first day of the first month. Shri Rama in his own way, acted in life as if he were acting in a drama, forgetting that he was a Divine incarnation. But later on, when he incarnated as lord Shri Krishna, he was alive of his powers and used them diplomatically and punished all the Rakshasas one by one. Shri Ram was the ideal husband where as Shri Sitaji was an ideal wife and the Children born to them, known as Lav and Kusha, were also the ideal sons. Shri Rama wanted to establish the high ideals to be emulated by humanity. Socrates, as you all know called him 'A Benevolent King'. Shri Rama was also a great Devi Bhakta i.e. devotee of Shakti. Before attacking Sri Lanka he performed Devi Puja for which he needed a Brahmin for conducting various rites (sanctified acts) to please the Devi. He then sent for Ravana Actually all the events that occurred in the life span of Shri Rama like 'Ahilaya

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2006 13 The Divine Cool Breeze of the seven eternal personalities. He also comes and helps me and performs all the tasks assigned to him. He is always present in all my pujas and on one occassion he had been visible in the king of Sri-Lanka who was a Brahmin and Devi Bhakta. He readily responded and helped Shri Rama in performing the puja of the Devi with all nine types of rites. Had Shri Rama been of a cunning disposition, he could have killed Sri Ravana then and there but he was a 'Maryada Purshottama' (A righteous person). He did not do such a mean and irresponsible act, They were enemies but while performing the puja the enemity was completely forgotten. vibratory form, in one of the photographs taken in Bombay. So character of all these great personalities are to be emulated by all Sahaja Yogis in their life styles to achieve their ascent in Sahaja Yoga. May all of you follow such great characters and be successful in achieving the high ideals of human behaviour. You should bestow love Even his sevaka (most obedient disciple) Shri Hanumana was an ideal disciple to be emulated by all the Sahaja Yogis. He was of great powers. He is an innocent personality of a very high order, always keen to perform the task set out for him by Shri Rama. Later on also He appeared during the incarnation of Shri Vishnu as Shri Krishna and used to ride on the top of the chariot of Shri Krishna. He is known as 'Chiranjeev', an eternal being, one and compassion on each other and on the people you come across in your lives and become ideal Sahaja Yogi brothers and sisters. May God bless you with eternal blessings. (Internet Version)

 INNOCENCE Deep in our heart we feel the longing for a most loving and most powerful state of being. Innocence is that state, it is power itself. And, at the same children of the Devi. "O Mother we cannot thank you but with the strong wish to establish the kingdom of God on this earth, to bring back the lost paradise." Fighting, of course, is also a matter of being clever. As our Mother very clearly tells: "If you can fight negativity fight it; otherwise run away." Innocence gives us the finest sense of tactics and strategy. Innocence is spontaneity. Spontaneity is wisdom. When this wisdom grows within us the Spirit shines more and more. Before I came to Sahaja Yoga I was time, when innocence is lost, we are faced with the eruption of the worst destructive forces within us. In the West, alas, innocence is absolutely lost. Eyes are turned here and there towards all sorts of nonsense. The attention is sucked by funny things which are thrown at us by the medias, the television, the magazines etc. It is as if people would now relish dirt, filth, violence and crime ! When we hear the all the time with friends who had no sense way non Sahaja Yogis sometimes talk we could really become very angry, not so much with the persons themselves but with this special kind of negativity which is trying to destroy our race and to bring of innocence at all. Although I was feeling that innocence is a beautiful and holy thing Iwas unable to defend this subtle feeling against my environment. So, one of the blessings I got out of Sahaja Yoga is the full understanding of innocence and the us down to a much lower level than possibility to spread this understanding to friends and students I meet everyday in the University. Therefore I pray to our Holy Mother that we all should have growing animals. This anger that we, Sahaja Yogis, sometimes feel, is a very good thing, it is the wrath of Shri Ganesha within us. While opportunities to raise Kundalinis Awakening Kundalini is awakening and celebrating Innocence. joy in Sahaja Yoga is the incentive to grow, wrath is the incentive to fight. And as we are the children of the Devi we know that we will win every single fight; realizing this we feel tremendous confidence and JAI SHRI NIRMALA GANESHA! security within our hearts. We are the -Engelbert, Vienna (Nirmala Yoga - 1983)

 What is Praying? Prayers have a great importance in human life. What is praying? It is an expression to one's desire and requesting and soliciting its fulfilment, to a power that is far superior and that, one knows, would bestow what is desired. Praying suggests accepting one's inability to accomplish the objective only through one's own efforts. It is surrendering to the will of the power, to either grant or reject the request, although response in the positive is generally muttering of words that makes a prayer, but sincerity of heart that is associated with it. Also, it is important to discriminate so as to avoid reciting the prayers that have left-side bias. It is essential to recite the compositions of realized souls. It is also equally important that one should be clear on all chakras, at least on vishuddhi, so that mantras and prayers invoke good vibrations and become effective. Before the recitation, one should improve vishuddhi by saying "Om Twameva Sakshat Sarva Mantra Siddhi Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Shri Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai Namo Namaha". assumed. Right-sided are persons over-confident of their capabilities, and have no faith in praying whereas, left sided would only desire and pray, without making any efforts. However, right sided people, on failing to achieve what they desire, turn to praying. As has been seen on many occasions, after doctors express helplessness people seek Sahaja cures, which realization and recitation of mantras besides Sanskrit synonym for the word prayer, is 'prarthana'. i.e. 'pra+arthana'. Arthana is requesting or soliciting. Shri Mataji has advised us that words having prefix 'Pra' suggests enlightenment. Hence 'prarthana' is an enlightened prayer, is a prayer made by a person who has got his enlightenment. Enlightenment comes from the Spirit. Hence such prayers are the expressions of desires of the Spirit. They have the power to turn one's attention towards Atma, and kindle the spark of desire in every one's mind, to seek the ultimate. They inspire those, in whose hearts the spark has grown into a flame, to go deeper and closer to the Spirit, e.g. Om Brahma Medhase/Madhu Medhase/ Brahmaiva madhu medhase (please give me Brahma, please give me honey i.e, sweet. Brahma alone is sweet.) Many vedic mantras are prayers to different deities requesting help for seeking the ultimate. Great sages of ancient lore have prayed even to the Sun, Moon, Wind-God (Vayu) and Varuna (rain God) and also to water to give them strength so that they could attain the realization of Atma. It is interesting to see the following prayer. involves, praying for the self- other treatment. Although praying would appear to be a left-side activity, its origin would be from right side at personal level, as their orientation is to achieve limited personal ambition. In such cases, the prayers could possibly be the result of egotism and would come from ego not from heart. Even pujas are performed, by some people desiring a materialistic reward, which is again a right-side activity. Puja-mantras are the prayers invoking the deities to be present for the puja and accept offerings. Tor However, praying would help balancing over-active right side provided the recitation of prayers is done from heart and with complete surrender. It is not just

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: II & 12-2006 16 with us to Cosmic Mother Jagadamba, the creatrix of everything from Brahmadeva down to an insect, to protect and guide all the seekers, in Her present form, for ever ॐ आपो हिष्ठा मयोभुवस् ता न ऊर्जे दधातन। महे रणाय चक्षसे।। Om apo hishtha mayo-bhuvastana urje dadhatana. Mahe-Ranaya chakshase. and ever. O water as you are pleasing, give us food and protect us for attaining Self- realization whích is extremely blissful. Thereafter, with complete reverence approach the sustainer of creation, the protector of Dharma, and his power Shri Lakshmi. May his qualities be awakened in us, so that we work tirelessly for the divine cause of propagating Sahaja Yoga. May he allow us to pray along with them, to Adi-shakti, that all satanic & adharamic forces be destroyed. By the grace of Shri Mataji, Sahaja yogis have got their enlightenment. Hence prayers composed by them, or their recitation of the prayers composed by other great saints & prophets would be 'prarthana' in real sense. All the deities are awake within the Supreme Goddess and respond quickly when invoked in Her name. Our brothers would certainly allow us to seek their indulgence and help us. Obeisance to Primordial Master, at Bhavasagar, who came many times in the world, by the instructions of Adi-shakti, to help man-kind evolve itself. Seek his forgiveness for the illtreatment meted out to his incarnations. Our sincere desire is to be the instruments in the myriad hands of Param Parameshwari. May the qualities of Primordial Master be inculcated by us. Humbly approach Shri Ganesha at Mooladhar and pray for his blessings and to give us his innocence & purity so that we become loving children of our Mother keeping absolute faith in Her, and request him to join us to pray to Her to keep Her form in good health for years & years. Surrender before the Father of the Universe. Existence of all existences. Again and again pray for being pardoned as we are engrossed in the illusion, ignoring the reality. May our attention ever rest at the feet of our Cosmic Parents who are one as With Shri Ganesha's permission respectfully pray to mother Kundalini to clean our subtle being and develop the flickering flame of our Spirit into a big torch, that would be one with Supreme Spirit. Then pray with her to Sakshat Shri Mahakundalini to be ever present amidst us in Her present form and give realization to all the seekers. words and their meaning and are manifesting themselves as our Beloved Mother. May our endeavour be to always please Her. Salutations to Shri Krishna and Shri Radha who showed the divine play as a child and also showed true Virata cosmic form having myriads of hands, faces and legs, encompassing within his being every living and non living thing in the universe. He played and danced with every milk-man and milk-maid and awakened their kundalinis and Bow to Shri Brahmadeva, the God of creation, whose four faces are said to be four Vedas and his shakti, Shri Saraswati, Goddess of knowledge and art. Pray to him, in the name of Shri Mataji, that we enjoy the beauty of his creations rather than thinking and planning about ours. Surely, Shri Brahmadeva and Shri Saraswati would pray

 17 12-2006 Issue: 11 & The Divine Cool Breeze Sahasrara ! Integrated and subtle universe ! The kingdom of God placed in every human being, Our Beloved Mother is the Empress, Raj-Rajeshwari of the kingdom of God, Rajya-dayini, the conferer of the kingdom of God. She has granted liberally all boons and all that is auspicious at the same time transcended above them, thus proving that Supreme Spirit is all-pervading and foundational to all existence and yet uninvolved and unaffected by it. May Shri Radha & Shri Krishna, one as Sun-rays and sun-light, within our Mother, lead us to the perfect witness state. May the Mother of entire creation be amongst us in to Her children. Let us not forget that She is good health for years & Years. Abhyasati-shaya-Jnata, (अभ्यासातिशयज्ञात, known through tremendously long practice). It is only through the intense meditation that we can know Her. Let every Sahaja yogi make a vow to accept Her every spoken word and not to be casual in her presence; to devote whole heartedly to the cause of Sahaja Yoga. May the kingdom of God be soon established in the universe. Let us approach Shri Jesus and Shri Mary after repeating Lord's prayer. Remember, "forgive us of our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us", We deserve God's forgiveness only after we forgive others. May he help us grow in our awareness beyond our narrow individuality. May he confer upon us his dedication and love for our Mother. Om Twameva Sakshat Sarva Mantra Siddhi Sakshat Shri Adi-Shakti Shri Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai Namo Namah (Nirmala Yoga 1983) *******

 WE SAHAJA CHILDREN From the first wave that gave us birth, resounding through the universe, From the first sound we were born, to reverberate through the resounding world. Of father's eternal auspiciousness and Mother's Joyous love and innocence, Of spontaneous play and freedom dance, of eternal longing we were born. To give meaning to sanctity, to return essence to sacredness, To give vein to joyous song and mirth, and flow in freedom throughout the earth, For of our Mother's womb we were born, and once more from Her crowned head. And in both were unctuous joy and love, and immaculate glory overspread. Like a fabric She takes the cosmic sounds, rends and from the rents give forth, Eternal sounds that dance like men, and to eternal glory return again. Like bees round nectar drinking deeply, soul deep round the sacred cup, In sacred innocents cheerful shouting, crowd thick around their Mother's lap, Like lotuses waving in the wind, each one filled with sacred strands, And bowing to each lotus head with wings outspread, filling deep their lotus hands. Lotus like born of loving softness, returning softness born of love. Each one filled joyously resounding, the softness of the eternal word. Each with sacred love cascading, each with love sacred overflowing, Each to cosmic love surrendering, Eternal lost in eternal love. Each child longs to meet its Mother, drowned in Her fulfilling love, Each one longs to peal with laughter, and pour his love into the flood. Each one pouring with reverence flowing, the glory that is of his birthright, Each in glory deep entwining drawing, the threads of eternal union tight. Each one brother to the other, sister to each others love, Proving in their close communion, the boundless limits of their Mother's love. Embraced in the all encompassing, filled with the all pervading, Swimming in the all-containing, dissolving in the all sustaining. -Dr. Rustom AMEN (Nirmala Yoga 1983)

 H.H. Shri Mataji's Advice Chelsham Road, London 24th May, 1981 (Subconscious, Supraconscious and our correct Foundations and ideals) this work or that work, control this or go there. And these bhools feel very happy about it as they are servile. So, if there is someone suffering from a mental problem, for example, someone of his has died then he gets a mental push-back into the collective subconscious and gets possessed. Such people go to the Mantrikas and these Mantrikas tell the dead QUESTION : What are the curing powers coming from the supraconscious as there are so many people who are curing other people with supraconscious power and what is the difference between this curing power and curing power of the Kundalini? MOTHER: There can be two types of curing power. One could be those who get the power of the collective subconscious and those who get the power of the collective supraconscious. Both can cure depending on where the problem is. For example a person with the power of the collective sub-conscious can cure problems of the left side And a supraconscious person can cure the physical side. spirits that you have been troubling this man for a long time and you leave this man. So they remove this dead spirit and put an- other dead spirit in its place and tell the first dead spirit that he can get another body to go to. These Mantrikas are the mediators or liaison officers. They catch hold of these spirits and remove themn from one man and put them onto some other person. So the first person is 'cured'. For example, there was a lady whose husband used to drink quite a lot. She went to one of the lady Mantrikas who said she will cure her husband but the lady must pay Rs. 100 for that. So She put a dead spirit on this man by which the 'bhoot' of the drunkard on him was removed. So this man gave up drinking but he started going to races. Then she solved that problem by removing the 'races' bhoot" and put another one by which he started going to dirty women. Now this lady got frightened. Every time she would pay Rs. 100 and had ended up by paying a lot of money. Then she complained to the lady Mantrika about it. After that she found that her husband was doing all three things together. So She went to fight with that lady Mantrika, who put a bhoot on her too, Since then, that woman is still mad and I have not been able to cure her. She is a very We have two types of people in India known as Mantrikas and Tantrikas. The Mantrikas are those people who go to the funerals and cemeteries and they try to capture the dead spirits. These dead spirits are of the sly type. These sly spirits are the so-called 'social workers' or 'busy-bodies' trying to help others. They are in the category of Chaturvarnas or Vishudhras, the people who believe in serving others. They appear to be good people because they want to serve other people and help others and that is why they do not want to die and want to stay around the earth planet. One could call this a 'servant class'. They are absolutely servile. They like to be whipped, beatenup and be ill-treated. They are another extreme. They enjoy a horrid type of existence-they are masochists. All such dead people are around us and they are left-sided bhoots i.e. very timid and clinging. These mantrikas get hold of such dead people and tell them to do

 20 Issue: II & 12-2006 The Divine Cool Breeze goodlooking woman married to a very rich man who owns a factory and this is the life both of them are leading i.e. burning the candle on both ends. This is the case of the subconscious people. intercommunication was established on that level ie, the collective supraconscious. A lady who was suffering from high blood pressure, kidney and uterus problems went to them. They told her to write a letter to the Centre in London who wrote back that on this particular day, at this particlar time we will The second case is of the people of supraconscious type. For example "Dr. Lamb's International Curative Centre" "International bhoots" he had ! You have to write to them that you are suffering from such and such disease. All the dead appear within you and cure you but you must lie down in your bed. On that particular day and at that particular time she started shivering and one of the 'dead doctors' entered into her and she got cured. For one year she was alright. But then she started feeling very dizzy. When she came to me she was in a tattered condition. Absolutey Finished. She knew that a spirit had come in her at the time she came to see me. She said and knew that there were at least ten or eleven within her and she could not bear them. So this kind of curing also can take place from the supraconscious. Supposing there is an architect and he approaches such people he can get the spirit of a dead architect upon himself. Now this Jack the Ripper was possessed of the spirit of a dead ripper. One has to have an inclination for such things. This weakness is there within such people, that is why they are easily possessed. Otherwise it does not happen Only if you are weak in mind and have weaknesses for such things, then these dead spirits can catch hold of you. If It has something to do with your physical side then the supraconscious can help you. If it has something to do with your mental side then the subconscious people can help you. But they help you very temporarily and then come back with a big foursome. supraconsciOus people the very ambitious type i.e. all the 'great' doctors, all the 'great' lawyers, all the 'great' scientists, all the 'great' engineers and architects, Hitler and all such 'great' warriors gather on the right hand side. When Dr. Lamb died he met all his friends there and he could communicate with them because these doctors did not want to die as they had been experimenting with this or that. So they started Dr. Lamb's Clinic. Now this Dr. Lamb who died lived in London and had a son, Dr. Lamb's spirit at- tacked an ordinary soldier in Vietnam and told him that he was Dr. Lamb from London and that he better go to his son and tell him that you want to start such a clinic. He did not attack his son as he knew that his son would not be able to bear him as the son was not healthy. He wanted a very healthy and sturdy man whom he could possess. So the soldier went to his son and said that "your father is within me and he wants to open a clinic". The son would not believe it. So the soldier went into a trance and told him that I have got some money in a secret place kept for you and he had talked in secret about it. So the son believed and started the clinic for him. He gave all that money for the clinic. And all the 'Bhoot doctors' were helping this man to act wanted But Sahaja Yoga makes you so powerful and so pure that impurities just fall out. It is a cleansing force. It is a very different thing where your intention is not to and he whenever an

 21 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 11 & 12-2006 people will just obstruct it. They will trouble you like anything. But you have to fight it and for that you should be evolved. It is strange cure but as a by-product people get cured. Now many dynamic things are happening. In Australia I met an Australian couple who were journalists and the lady was the that all great people, children of God, men president of the Journalist Association of Australia. She could not conceive. Doctors said she can never have a baby. Still they kept having tests done as the husband wanted a baby very much. But after coming to Sahaja Yoga she conceived after about fifteen years of marriage. Now her entire idea thing that can be demolished very easily. We of life has changed. First she indulged in all kinds of therapies. She was a Catholic to begin with and then went to different gurus and tried different therapies She overcame all that after coming to Sahaja Yoga. Now she finds the answer physically for I have made all bhoots get out of her. Now she said she is going to expose all such people. I told her that if she could write what these people are doing she would be able to show that this is madness. And once you have talked about it then you can prepare a base for Sahaja Yoga and then show that this is the reality which makes you sane, powerful and loving. Then only people are going to get convinced. Sahaja Yoga achieves miracles, on the material level, on the mental level, on the emotional level and ultimately on the spiritual level. You are all endowed with such especially in Maharashtra, but the yearning tremendous powers for you are realised souls, and if you want to give realisation you can. For example, this lamp which is enlightened may be unclean or may not be good to light but once it is lit it can enlighten others. Similarly your Spirit is pure. But we have to fight all those 'bhoots'. On the unlimited I am working very hard. That is how they are exposed. But on the limited yoOu have foundations. These horrible kings who kept to work hard. To fight, you should prepare yourself to fight these evil forces for they are the ones who ruin your own being. There will be a big depression coming on and of God, are born more in the west than in the east. They have been born in countries where there is a lot of affluence and they do not have so much poverty and troubles and these are the very people who are lost. For, the modern concept of life is to make some- should relise that the reason for this is that our foundations have been made very weak by the satanic forces and they have built it since long. That is why our ideas are very weak. In the west if you observe the behaviour and life-style of the kings and the queens, and the kind of life the people lived was so debased and horrifying. Even what the socalled "religious" people and the Catholic churches did was so horrid that these very foundations were shaken. Now you have to rebuild your foundations. You have to lay new foundations for dharmic life. You have to absolutely accept the dharmic way of life. That is the only way to make foundation strong again. your In India the foundations are good and aspiring is not there. For example, an aeroplane which is so perfectly built that it can never fly. And another aeroplane which as soon as it flies goes into pieces. So one must realise that the damage to our foundation by the satanic forces is much deeper, much more subtle than what you understand. You have to fight these very seven wives etc. are not your ideals. Your ideals are yourself. You have to bring new ideas in the wěstern countries then only you can change it because you are such a

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2006 22 The Divine Cool Breeze because you have the source under your command. Everything is possible. Just ask for it and it wilI be done. But build it up. Even now if you cannot build up your personality and new ideals then when are you going to do so? I am here with all the chakras intact. It is easy to justify yourself, i.e. this is wrong or that is right. Finish all this. You have to become That. So the first is that you change your foundation. We have great people like Shakespeare, Tennyson, Mozart, Jung and tremendous people in this country also. Taking their name itself liberates vibrations. In those countries single-handed they created their ideas and just think how in those countries they must have fought all these satanic forces. But who accepts these dynamic force. Everyone of you have to rise up and build yourseif into ideals and try to lead a life of that ideal within. For this you have to sacrifice.. And the greatest sacrifice is that of your ego which makes you so obstinate and hard-hearted. Face yourself. This ideal has to be created. One has to have compassion, one has to have love and understanding. Never talk illof one another Never. Try to help each other for we are very few and we cannot afford to fight among ourselves, for we are wedded to a very great cause. We cannot have wrong ideas, we cannot waste our time on mundane things like marriage. If marriage has to be, then it has to be good and compatible and you must try to patch up your problems. You have to make people? Everyone of you is capable of it a beautiful institution. Do not indulge in small and petty things, for otherwise we cannot carry out this task because we have still a very long way to go in life. These satanic forces are very nicely built up and very united in these western countries. They did not bother about India because India is a poor country. The blessings of poverty are that it teaches you to have a proper foundation. The poor are just the same as the rich. The very rich are not your ideals nor the very poor. You are your own ideal and you have to create new ideals. You are the new Presidents of America and Prime going to blast them. Before that you should ministers of England. You are the ones who are great people. So you have to stand upto come back on you people. So you should it. i.e. people of character, generosity, of hardwork and proper understanding, by that It is the easiest thing for me to blast Otherwise you cannot do this task. It is very easy to study and get degrees like MD, MA, PhD, but to be an ideal you have to mature. You have to constantly tell yourself that you have to come up and you have to do this tremendous work which is not difficult being like them. Everyone of you has to become a leader. In Poland an ordinary factory worker did that but he was not a realised soul. He could not communicate with God. He had no way of knowing the Absolute. So channelize yourself properly, cleanse yourself properly and dedicate yourself. For dedication you have to do nothing but give up your ego and superego. Take these ideas off and create a space which is the heart and it will work out. It is easy to kill these rakshasas but what about the lost souls? Everything will work out for a year or so or even two years. After that I am be ready because once I blast them they will be such top people that you are not finished them all, finish them off. But first they will go to the subconscious and then they will attack you again. Sol want them to live with paralysis, with diabetes, with all sorts of things. And they will live, they wont's die. It is

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2006 23 The Divine Cool Breeze a tremendous task. And I am working twenty four hours, I have no sleep and no rest and you know that. I can see the whole vision very clearly of those beautiful days when we all will be enjoying each other and the bliss of God together. All that I want is that we pull out so many human beings in the clutches of the evil forces for which we have to dedicate ourselves. Our attention is on too all these rituals and protocols and I have no care for these things. It makes no difference whether you say good morning to me or good evening to me. What you say to your brothers and sisters is the most important thing. Sahaja Yoga will never work if you do not look after that side, i.e. how you behave towards your wife, husband, your brothers and sisters. That is the most important thing and anybody who does otherwise will get out of Sahaja Yoga. You know I have thrown out the so called important people out of Sahaja Yoga who tried to dominate others by saying "this is not good. You should not put your hand there. Don't put your feet there etc., etc." many useless things, materialistic things. There is no end to it. Be satisfied with less. You will be looked after materialy also. There won't be much problem. So don't run after so many things. Just don't have interest in these. It is all trash. You should be loving and affectionate. Once you start giving up the Real you become hard-hearted persons. "I have no interest in anything." Then who has interest in such a stone as you? Who can know the protocol of the Divine Mother. You cannot bind me into protocol. You cannot bind me into anything. I am unlimited. I am detached. To think that, you have me attracted towards you by your protocol, which is dead, has no meaning. It has to be a living protocol of being kind and generous. Be beautiful. Some are lethargic. Like a husband who wants the wife to work You are the foundation and your children will talk of you, not of these horrible persons. You have to be ideals of love, affection, and not of domination and all such nonsenses. All of you will be the first Sahaja yogis. You are the ones who are going to change the complete concept of life. New ideas have to be built up. Are you people really aware of your responsibilities? Sometimes you are worried about yourselves only, "where I am catching? What is happening to me?" It is so self-centred or you are worried about others, "he should not have done this or that. He should not have all the time or the wife who wants the husband to work every time. Everybody finds fault with each other. They are not Sahaja Yogis. Sahaja Yogis are the ones who take it Sahaja. If sombody is not working that person will go down. I will put that person out of Sahaja Yoga. Why did you come to Sahaja Yoga? You are seekerş. You have been seeking for ages. Are you going to waste your life? In any case you have to sleep most of your life. Why not work it out now? In every way be active. sat next to Mother." Nobody should think they love me more than anybody else. Some people know more rituals, others know more protocols but does not mat- ter. I know the one who loves me. The one who loves others loves me the most. I don't care for your protocols and ritu- als. It is nonsense for me. What does it Firstly you become real and very good citizens and with moral values which are your foundation. You yourself judge. You are realised soul. I leave it to you to judge. You will lose your vibrations. You can become matter to me? The one who loves others is the one who really loves me. I have had

 24 &12-2006 Issue: The Divine Cool Breeze powerful, so you have gone into it. Somebody says you will become a great guru and you go into it. But nobody says you become the Spirit and become One with the Whole. When I say you are realised, you are great, you are saints, there is more bloating of the ego-balloon. I say it to create that awareness within you. Your ideals have all been full of ego. See Churchill standing there with a stick in his hand. The complete body looks like the ego. We have to form new ideals. He was right for meeting another ego called Hitler. So it was alright to break their heads together. silent. Silence can be from other agencies. Negative forces from the left side of the Agya are giving ideas. You must have your own ideas. "I can't, I go on thinking" this nonsense goes on. Just tell yourself how dare you do all this nonsense of the left side. Those who are left sided better go for lemon treatment and shoebeating. Those who are right sided better shoe-beat 108 times. Get in the centre. You should really tove yourself, cleanse yourself and be in the centre. Never be proud of your ego. 'O' I think this is correct. Beat yourself 108 times. You can be very high headed and then you can have no embarrassment of what you are doing! You can be absolutely shameless! But you are a Sahaja Yogi. You should feel embarrassed about such things. There should be a little 'sankoch'. There should be reservations about it. How can you say such a thing to some one? Why hurt anyone? Agya bloats more and more. So many are like that. I know where somebody tries to show off, tries to be a Guru and tries to push down others. "O'l know Sahaja yoga. I am a great Sahaja Yogi". Then I make their 'ego-horns' come out. You can feel it jutting out of your head. Push it down. This is the sticking point. Though the balloon goes thin, it sticks on. You are all Buddhas. Buddha is the one who is realised, the one who is enlightened, one who knows. You are the enlightened ones. How can you have an ego? But now we need new ideals. The past is over now. When there is flood you need boats to carry you across. But after reaching the shore you don't carry the boats with you. You leave them behind. These boats are no good for us. They have done the job. Now we have to go ahead with our own feet. So no bloating of the ego should be there. We should realise that we are in no way exceptional, for only you are blowing up your ego. You have to be ideals. You have to be in the centre. You have to be a Sahaja Yogi. That is the most important thing. Don't judge yourself by what you think of yourself but what Mother thinks of you. How much joy are you giving to your Mother? If you make Her unhappy then what is the use. You must have noticed that there are really very few true seekers in this world. And seekers also must realise that they cannot be happy with anything else but their Spirit. This is the test of a seeker and a non-seeker can never understand a seeker. It is very difficult to live with a man or woman who is not a seeker because you catch all the bad points and you suffer. If the person has an ego you catch it on your Agya. Nothing happeris to him. He is very nicely off. He has Ego and super ego are the greatest enemies. I have seen people who suffer from super-ego. You push it down and it goes to the ego. So in the west we have the greatest problem of the ego. Whatever appeals to the ego we run to that. That is how people are made mad by these 'gurus'. They say you can fly, so you have gone into it. Somebody says you will become very

 25 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze circulation. Sahaja Yoga rejects more than accepts. It is a judgement going on, Such people will go out a realisation. You can talk to them of realisation, give them bandhans etc. for, they are the people in whom you could be interested but they are lost otherwise. For example, butter is made out of curd by churning. A little butter comes out and the rest is butter milk. To seperate it, a big lump of butter is put in the butter-milk and when it is churned all the butter gets around that big lump and gathers into a larger lump of butter. But some butter par- ticles are left behind. If they do not stick to the larger lunmp of butter they are thrown away with butter-milk. So, those who do not come to Sahaja Yoga and are not upto the mark, will be thrown out. It is a fact but you should have 'nirpekshita' i.e. you should have no attachment to such people. his ego intact, and he is torturing you But a person who is a seeker is a better person because you can give realisation to such a person and your vibratory awareness can be shared. But to be with a nonseeker can be a very difficult situation. You cannot make a fruit into a flower. In your case you have become the fruit. But you must have a flower around which you can make into a fruit. Those who are entangled with problems like "my father, my mother, my brother, my son" etc. should leam not to get entangled with such problems. Those who are not flowers should be avoided, forgotten and lost. The more you try to improve them the more entangled you will become. They can never improve. I give you a big rope. If thay are not seekers then they will never be so and you cannot inject seeking into them. They may become seekers and you forget about them. You may have to suffer because of them, for if they catch, you suffer. If they have a nabhi chakra you suffer. This kind of person is very difficult to change. Do not waste your energy. Christ has side "do not cast your pearls before swine", You cannot force anybody to become a seeker. There are millions of seekers in the world, so forget about such relationships. They may call you mad or crazy or anything but they will realise one thing that you lead a much better life than they do. You are much more peaceful, blissful, dharmic and sane but they won't accept your life. Play around with them with the understanding that they cannot change. Even if they change mentally they cannot have that urge because to a seeker nothing is important except seeking. May God Bless you Answering to another question Shri Mataji Said: The question is that the psychologists say that mind is limited, i.e. whatever the mind does is limited. Whatever action we perform is done through mind only and this mind has limited energy and so it cannot take you to the unlimited. So something has to be which is beyond the control of the mind, that is the only spontaneous thing. Now see the confusion. But their question can be answered on mental level. What is the basic difference between Divine and human? How to con- vince ordinary humans of Sahaja Yoga and the Divine? They are doubting you as you are doubting them. QUESTION: What about the people who are good people, not seekers, but who have got realisation but don't seem to see the significance of Sahaja yoga? The simple answer is that whatever you do with your mind like shouting, howling, jumping etc. can be done by the limited mind. So one who is doing is some human agency, some human being and not the Divine. But you cannot make your MOTHER: They will go out of

 26 Issue: 11 & 12- 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze pulsate the Kundalini. It is a living force and human being cannot create or generate life. They cannot make the pupil dilate when the Kundalini goes up. As ordinary humans and so-called gurus cannot feel the vibrations you cannot talk of the vibratory awareness to them but you can see with your naked eyes. They cannot make the cool breeze come out of your head. This is something extraordinary. What I can do with the limited Kundalini pulsate with your mind. The Divine, if it has to do something, must be extra-ordinary which human beings cannot do. To pulsate Kundalini is only possible for the Divine. It is a living force. Man makes things-dead things. Man can do dead actions. But a living force cannot be activated. What is the need to go to the gurus if they make you do the limited actions of the mind. You can always shout, howl and jump without them. But you cannot make the Kundalini pulsate. is make myself. I can also do unlimited. That is the side of the Divine Mother. In the same way you are limited now but you have jumped into the unlimited. So you can do all these things. That is why you are saints. The things you can do in the unlimited you could not have done before realisation. You start Divine does something which you cannot do. You cannot make the cool breezes flow from your hand. So, if you go beyond the mind it has to be something extraordinary, something different. The limited and the unlimited are two different dimensions. This is the secret of your Mother's Maya, that I live on unlimited and do unlimited things. That is how I create Maya. You can know me only through knowing you vibratory awareness. If you put your hand on the head of someone nobody can make you shake. So the Divine force is something that human beings cannot do through their mind. I repeat, you cannot doing some that you could not have done before, i.e. to raise your Kundalini and of the people. The gurus, so-called, can shout, howl, jump and do all these things but they cannot raise the Kundalini of the people. All other things, we can say, are arbitrary, subjective. Then, you will get your cure, change your mental attitude and all that. (Nirmala Yoga 1983)

 A Letter from Canada Dear Brothers and Sisters, experienced this mysterious guidance from our Holy Mother and we do feel to have been blessed this way. She is so wonderfull! There was a time a few years ago when I and many others, believed that in the light of the world's social economic and political situation we were surely doomed. Very few advocated recovery and enlightenment for it appeared that we were in the centre of an irreversible worldwide crisis. These were the days before I knew I was a seeker (not a guru shopper but rather a knowledge hound). Those were days of sadness, disappointment and general skepticism. I felt as though the Universal A very beautiful thing about our Divine Mother's love is that that She has enabled us to rise above all the nonsense of the Maya to experience the truth and reality; the love and the bliss that is heaven on earth. Although this ia astounding by itself, it is also quite amazing to realize that we have only begun and that the possibilities are virtually inconceivable at this point. unknown entity had led me down the garden path and I didn't know where to turn. I prayed continually to the "collective" to help me and show me the way, one thought always remained in my mind. However, I knew that before this life time was out I would learn the secret to it "all". We can now say with absolute joy, faith and authority that yes, there is hope, there is a great light at the end of the tunnel. Things will change and improve, we will all become one again and the absolute peace and love will once again be restored. Very soon we will be thriving within the supreme radiance of our Divine Mother's grace. All this occurred through the years 1971-1978. I know now that my prayers were being answered. I know, also, that these were not only my personal formative years but also the formative years of Sahaja Yoga and the beginning of the reversal of all adharmic direction. Most of us have The world will never look Back again! Much love, your sister, Liallyn Musa Calgary, Alberta, Canada (Nirmala Yoga 1983)

 LEADERS IN SAHAJA YOGA-PARTI Yuga the right to lead men is earned through understanding how to obey God. Sahaja Yoga in its present condition could, at times, look like a big nursery and, actually, this is quite a refreshing sight. The sangha of the Sahaja Yogis is the "Divine Kindergarten" in which, protected by the omnipotent love from above, we grow into spiritual maturity. When babies grow up they become children and grown up children start helping the mother in looking after the younger brothers and sisters who are still babies. As the children mature they fully realise the qualities of childhood. They know that they are not going to recreate another boring "adult" world, this world that we know only too well, which is serious to the point of foolishness, rational to the point of insanity, a world in which the world "adult" itself has become a stamp on something dirty : adult movies, adult books..A world in which the leaders are such sinners that entire countries are cursed because of them. In this respect, we, the children in Sahaja Yoga are enjoying a special blessing from sakshat Shri Gopal Krishna. This is the age in which the saints have become mischievous : endorsed by the supreme authority of the Lord we can gently make fun of many of those pseudoauthorities on the earth. It is nice to have earned the right to laugh. To obey God means "Thy will be done". It means "O Shri Mataji Thou are the sole and only Doer. Let Thy immaculate mode of action oparate through me". To obey means to be great. After all who are our models, who are the true leaders of Sahaja yoga? Shri Ganesha who is Adi bandhu, that is, the primordial friend of the yogi, was beheaded, defending, on his Mother's orders, the access to her inner apartments against lord Shiva himself. Christ, no less obedient, let himself be crucified. Let us face it: what is the depth of our obedience to Shri Mataji? How many "but Shri Mataji", how many "I think, I believe", how many explanations, justifications, argumentations or even advices have l-in my abyssmal stupidity-given to the one who knows everything but who is Mahamaya?I really feel like pulling my ears down to ground level. Only because Shri Adi Shakti is cloaked into Mahamaya is it at all possible that our daily lack of obedience should be forgiven. Only because She is Divine Patience, does She go on correcting, guiding us. But we should leam. Learn fast. To this effect, we must remember a key word. Yet mature children know whom to "ATTENTION" is the first word of Aldous Huxley's novel /sland and it gives this book its best line. Attention (chitta) is crucially important. When projected inside, it allows us to watch how the ego plays its rebellious tricks, how the super ego isolates our consciousness from God's will through a cocoon of conditionnings. Without full attention, real obedience to Shri Mataji is not possible And without developing such a laugh at and whom to obey. It is all right to run in the courtyard during playtime but, back in the classroom, the whole class stands up at attention when the master comes in. This is what our Kundalini does when Shri Mataji's presence is felt. And this is a fundamental characteristic of those who are to become leaders in Sahaja Yoga : they have to display absolute, uncompromising obedience to the Mahavatar Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. In Satya

 29 Issue: 11 & 12 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze Reality and thus he lets Her do so. That is why he will perhaps find the answer to that most clever question : "How can I best please Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi?" respectful sense of obedience how could we call for obedience in others? We have to be disciples before becoming gurus. Besides this obvious point the deities, devas and ganas are constantly watching how obedient we are towards Shri Mataji and if we don't satisfy them or this criterion we cannot rise into higher spiritual planes, we cannot develop the status of a sahaja yogi elder. Unfortunately even today old sahaja yogis aren't sometimes quick enough to follow the Goddess's instructions, they hesitate before implementing them. As a result the whole divine project which was conceived for their benefit fizzles out and, -Obedience to Shri Mataji is the establishment of our brotherhood with Shri Ganesha-Christ. -Obedience to Her is the highest punya. -Obedience to Her is the acceleration of the evolutionary process. -Obedience to Her is the actualisation of surrender. -Obedience to Her is the way to the Father. -Obedience to Her is the mark of pure intelligence. -Obedience to Her, the Parameshwari, the sacred Emperess, obedience to Her again, and again. sure enough, they find themselves the losers. A child but also an elder, humble but proud too, simple yet subtle, a leader in Sahaja Yoga is, above all, obedient to his Divine Mother. He has understood that She Jai Shri Mataji is guiding him on the safest road towards (Nirmala Yoga 1983)

 The Visage of Salvation Virgin, pure in heavenly sheen, Mother, throned supernal, Highest birth, out chosen Queen, Goodhead's peer eternal. Faust is the piece of the German literature which should be read by all Sahaja Yogis. Goethe's Doctor Faust was the archetype of the modern seeker. He was so sure that nothing, short of the Absolute, could quench his thirst that he made a pact with Mephistopheles, the Devil, prince of the seducers. "If any wordly temptation can bind me, then my soul will belong to you." Now Near her splendour Floats a light cloud, Penitents tender In gentle crowd, Tasting heaven's ether, At her feet kneeling, For grace appealing. Yet it isn't an easy game the one we play with the devil and the path of Faust, strewn with lust and death, finally leads to doom. At the end of the drama though, Goethe unfurls a heavenly vision Redeemer, of the seeker stuck in his sins. appears in great glory. No doubt, the Sahaja yogis will be quick to recognize who that magnificient Divine Being is: To thee enthroned in holy awe, Power is not denied, That the lightly erring draw, Trusting, to thy side. Hard to save whom lust be spake, Weak, before his fire; Who in single strength can break Chanins of dark desire? So the foot will swiftly slip, On the slant way gliding, Heart the fool of eye and lip, In soft words confiding." the "Here is free prospect wide, The soul up-bearing. There women-figures glide, Heavenwards faring. With them the heavenly Queen, Majesty tender, In wreath of stars is seen, Clear in her splendour. Yes, Goethe, the greatest German poet, himself struggling to escape the net of the senses, extolled sakshat Shri Adi Shakti. In this Mater Gloriosa he was not portraying the role that Shri Mahalakshmi played as Pavilioned in the heaven's blue, Queen on high of all the world, For the holy sight I sue, Of the mystery unfurled. Sanction what in man may move Feelings tender and austere, And with glow of sacred love Lifts him to thy presence near. Mary, the modest maiden of Nazareth, but the majesty of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in Her heavenly form. It is said that the very face of the Goddess sends out cool moon rays, that Her darshan introduces us into the state of smadhi. Indeed the Sahaja Yogis have the experience that they become absolutely thoughtless merely by watching the face of Shri Mataji. Souls unconquerable rise If, sublime, thou will it; Sinks that storm in peaceful wise If thy pity still it. "O contrite hearts, seek with you eyes the visage of salvation3;

 31, Issue: 11 & 12 - 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze two, left a powerful message to mankind, I wish that all our brothers and sisters who Blissful in that gaze, arise, Through glad regeneration. Now may every pulse of good Seek to serve before thy face, Virgin, Queen of Motherhood, Keep us, Goddess, in thy grace." are still struggling in their quest could hear it. They would come straight to sahaja Yoga. "All things corruptible Are but a parable; Earth's insufficiency Here finds fulfilment; Here the ineffable Wins life through love; Eternal Womanhood Leads us above. By praising this Holy Face of the Mother, Goethe, unconsciously, or, perhaps, consciously?-brought at Her Lotus Feet the homage of those many talents that She, as Saraswati, had bestowed upon him. We can very clearly see that the poet perceived the decisive role of the Cosmic Mother. Indeed the very last words of Faust Part Jai Shri Mataji (A former mini doctor Faust) (Nirmala Yoga - 1983) Little Angel Prays Before Mother Mary Amy and and Andrew J. DiMaggio Jr. of LaPlace don't have to be told that their one some point and walk upto our statue of Mary," the DiMaggios said. In this photo, she was holding her hands - up and talking to Mary in her own babble language. We hope that this picture will inspire your readers to remember year old daughter Anna Maria is special. They get a glimpse of it every day when the toddler walks out to the front yard of her house and the words of Jesus who said that "as to enter begins an animated conversation with the the kingdom of heaven we must be open as a Blessed Mother. "Whenever she is with us in the frontyard, she will always stop playing at child." Internet Version

 Pravachan of H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Delhi - 18 August 1979 Although reflection of the sun is seen in water, he is away in the sky and not in water. Similarly Atma is as much as it is seen. It is beyond all that and not limited by it. But, for any reflection to be clearly visible the mirror which is the cause of that reflection must be clean. If the mirror is not clean, or instead of mirror a stone is there, the sun's reflection will not be seen in it. In the same way, that man looks disturbed who has not yet become clean like mirror, so that he can see the Paramatma's reflection within himself. Although the sun is seen taking different shapes on the ripples of flowing water, he is steady at his place and it is only his reflection that changes its shape. Similarly, the reflection of Atma appears to be absent or it just shines for a moment and disappears, in the person who is full of sin and wickedness or whose heart is loaded with false ambitions and desires. It thus entails that all these--body, mind, intellect, ego etc, that we know, should be converted into a mirror. It should be transformed into a The sudden arrival is for various reasons. In Sahaja yoga sudden arrival has a special significance. We must have seen many incidents in our lives, which have suddenly happened. They do not mean anything to us. If we try on intellectual level, we cannot understand why a particular incident has taken place in our life. It has been the way of human being, that he wants to understand everything through reasoning. This is correct on his part because his awareness has not yet awakened. When his awareness is limited and when he is searching the proof of everything though his intellect it is difficult for him to adopt some other means which are outside the scope of reasoning You have heard a lot about Paramatma, Atma, Adi-shakti etc. You have also read about them in books. Every now and then, man talks about Atma and Parmatma. There have been many incarnations, who have told that you should first realise your Atma because man cannot reach Paramatma, without knowing his Atma. As you cannot identify colours without eyes in the same way, you cannot attain Paramatma unless you meet your Atma, You cannot intellectually understand Paramatma. It is only through Atma that you can understand Paramatma. So far, all saints have said "be alert in the observance of your Dharma, search your Atma, understand the Atma that is residing in you." mirror. How will it happen? God has made that arrangement within us. Many incarnations have worked for evolving us from ameoba to human being and have brought us into our present stage. When we are moving about as alert human beings we are alert but not enlightened. A blind man is very alert but one who has sight sees everything without being bothered about it. A blind man can perceive small small things. What is Atma? What work is it doing residing within us and how is it related to Paramatma? It is said that Atma is the reflection of Paramatma in our heart. This reflection is like that of the sun in water. He knows small details of every place. One who is having the sight looks at only those things which are worth seeing and which he wants to know about.

 İssue: 11 & 12- 2006 33 The Divine Cool Breeze fee bad about it, and would like to get it cleaned somehow, immediately. Kundalini Shakti that is residing in us has been placed in us by Paramatma and has been created by His desire. Kundalini Shakti creates our mirror, develops it and cleans it. Slowly She makes it capable of receiving in itself the reflection of Atma. In Sahaja Yoga you know that awakening of Kundalini is very easy and spontaneous. But Sahaja Yogis must know that they have come to Sahaja Yoga primarily to clean their mirror, to wash their sins and past deeds, to become purified of all the dirt that has been accumulated within from time immemorial. They have not come to collect sins and dirt, but to become pure. Many Sahaja Yogis are aware that Kundalini is that current which Suppose if there is a catch on some Chakra, say on Agnya, you will understand it yourself. You will have some pain or some such similar feeling. In the light you will understand that you have problem there; and you will clear it. But if you are not sensitive and do not feel the problem, you may go mad and may land in lunatic assylum without even knowing that your such and such Chakra was caught, and such filth entered inside you. Similarly you never know even if you contact some disease, because you are sitting in the dark. In the darkness you do not understand whether you are sitting on a snake or some bomb has fallen on you. When the light shines inside you, you realise which calamity you are facing. So the first glimpse of knowledge is regarding yourself. You know your problems. passes through their Chakras and awakens their Chakras. When the light comes on your Chakras you can know their condition even on your finger tips. This is the knowledge. This alone is to be known. So far the knowledge that you have had was not enlightened. There was no light in it. Now because of the light, you can know which of your chakras have problems. There is a way to clear the Chakras of those problems. How to do it, is also taught in Sahaja Yoga. In Sahaja Yoga, people get the realization. Immediately thereafter man sees his own faults and as human nature is, he starts running away from Sahaja Yoga. Initially, he gets scared, the very moment he starts seeing his own faults. He cannot believe that so many faults exist in him. He is scared and then he starts doubting. You have seen; thousands of people come and get the realisation but they do not come again. What is the reason for it? If hundred people are realised only 10 percent come back. It always happens. Therefore Sahaja Yoga is developing rather slowly. That does not matter. Its reason is that man is so much indentified with himself that he does not want You can not see the filth so long as there is no light. It is not visible in the dark. You will see it when light illumines within you. So the first object is, to accomplish the light, to-what people call-achieving the truth or knowing the truth. First we should know the truth and in the truth we initially come to know what our qualities are, In Sahaja Yoga, man easily accepts his faults, because he can see them in the light. Suppose there is a spot on this saree, and it is dark. If some one points it out, we won't agree and may even feel offended. But if we see it in light, we would be surprised that there is such a big spot and we have not noticed it ! We won't to know his faults; and when he knows them, he starts running away. But it is better; to know your faults and correct them, rather than carrying their burden from life to life. People do not know what time has come. It

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2006 34 The Divine Cool Breeze is the last chance. You. won't get any more chance. In Bible it has been described as the 'Last Judgement'. Your last judgement is in Sahaja Yoga and how it will be done can be judged by yourself. When the light comes within you, you judge yourself. "See my such and such Chakra has been caught." Then you say "Mother, I have a catch on this Chakra". You know that am ready to put in all efforts for you. You can also work on each other, thereby you can completely clean all your faults, problems and sins etc. Why should you carry that burden? Instead of throwing it off people are running away from Sahaja Yoga. This is human brain. That keeps thinking and always remains worried. There is nothing to be scared of. If you become little steady, you will realise how big is this power, which not only brings into light your faults, but also removes them and removes them as auspicious, here. Some persons are very auspicious whereas some are quite inauspicious Latter ones bring calamities in the house or in the country they enter. There will be difficulties, wherever they stay. One gentleman came to me. He was a young man of 23-24 years. He said "Mother I am quite inauspicious". "How do you know?" I asked. He said I am very inauspicious. Even children are afraid of me. When I go to a house the family has to face some difficulties or the other, or some bad event occurs, that people are now convinced that that there is something wrong with me and I am inauspicious, because it has happened repeatedly. Such people are inauspicious because al darkness of sin is associated with them and it is so deep that like a blind person they face tremendous difficulties, grief, sorrow, sickness etc. and ultimately they are finished in that. If such a person visits a family some one from them may even completely. So, first of all you must know, that Kundalini Shakti is extremely holy and virgin. This virgin power makes us clean and pure. In Sahaja Yoga, She is very much pleased to give you the realisation. Then there can be only two possibilities. Either you recognise the self-realisation within you, and rise upto its greatness and go deep in it; or leave it altogether. There cannot be a third alternative. AS someone asked, "How many turns are there in London?" Only two; left and right. Either you completely accept it or leave it. If you have decided to accomplish it and to completely clean yourself, then the reflection of Atma will shine in you. In this Kundalini Yoga you become aware in collective consciounsness, you remain aware in collective consciousness and you clean others also while cleaning yourself. Others' sins are also washed. It is regarded die. Considerations regarding good or bad omens is in vogue in our country since time immemorial. Those who are saints. although they are care free, have no place of their own-they may not be bothered about their clothes and food and may be staying in jungles-bring prosperity wherever they go. This is also told about God. If you want to recognise God. His biggest identity is that the biggest auspiciousness is in His hands. He does good to all and makes all happy. Touch of His feet makes everything auspicious. There are six gifts of God, which bring prosperity, well being, happiness etc. Whenever incarnations came, great and auspicious works were done. But now the time has come in which that work will be

 35 Issue: 11 & 12-2006 The Divine Cool Breeze of Brahma Nadi, reason is man's attachment to his karmas. That extremely subtle channel Brahma Nadi is loaded with sin and dirty things and thereby gets so much narrowed, that very thin fibre of Kundalini could pass through it. Imagine that Kundalini is like an enlightened rope made of small fibres. Its very thin fibre could pass through Brahma Nadi. This is the condition. You have all seen that this is a very subtle, very deep process. Most of you have seen Kundalini's movements and pulsations. She tries to make, somehow a small opening at the bottom, so that it becomes possible to pass at least one strand through the extremely narrow passage of Brahma Nadi and with that very subtle strand She pierces the Brahmarandhra. Initially this happening takes place very easily in most of the people. But She again coils down due to the pressure of the burden and then they even forget that the peace, serenity and cool brations etc. which they had once received are no more with them. They are shocked when they see in the light that these things are embodied in themselves. Then they get scared and become suspicious. done, which is the most auspicious work ever done, thereby, you also will be the doers of auspiciousness and will realise the Spirit residing within you. This is the ever great work of Sahaja Yoga and the incarnatios. It great should inspire the entire society. In this eternal life, when shadows of Kaliyuga are enveloping the whole universe, your torches (flame) should burn high, and in their light you may attain auspiciousness, joy and pros- perity. It is necessary, for this, to keep your lamps clean, you should wash your sins and past deeds. Your past deeds are washed along with your ego. Karmas are done by your ego. You must have observed that after coming to Sahaja Yoga, you can very easily see your ego (Ahankar) and how it works. In Sahaja Yoga also, you come across many temptations and in that when your ego dominates, you forget whether you have to go to Sahaja Yoga or Sahaja Yoga is to come to you. Many people when they surrender to their ego, turn their backs to Sahaja Yoga expecting Sahaja Yoga to follow them. So long as your ego is enveloping, you cannot have the glimpse of your Spirit. vi- Man's intellect comes up with many But it is useless to fight with your ego. doubts. The first doubt which is very common, is 'VWho is Mataji'? This is the first question, I want to tell you that you can not understand Me so long as the eyes of your Spirit are not open, and you should not even make efforts to understand. First you open the eye of your Spirit. In Sahaja Yoga you do not have to fight with your ego, but you have just to see because your attention is itself awakened. Your ego cools down by just seeing, as your attention is enlightened and in that light you witness the play of your ego and laugh at it, and laugh at the ideas given by your ego. As you start seeing yourself, your ego starts getting deflated and as your ego is deflated you rise in your light. When Shri Ram came, people said that they accepted Parashuram, when Shri Krishna came they said, they accepted Shri Ram and at the time of Shri Nanaka, they accepted Shri Krishna, when Christ was here they accepted Abrahim. All of them had taken human form. But it is all the play of Sahaja Yoga is a very subtle process. Few people know that it is a very subtle process. Sushumna Nadi is extremely small, extremely thin, exactly at the centre

 36 Issue: 11 & 12-2006 The Divine Cool Breeze Buddhi (the intellect), how interesting it is! Now, I have come and people are accepting Shri Sai Nath (of Shirdi). But when he lived here, he did not even get any thing to eat. (ego). Man has too much of ego. If you had accepted Shri Rama in his days, he would have told you to get your Kundalini awakened and get the realisation and get established in Sahaja Yoga. Had you recognised Shri Krishna, he would not have played Sahaja Yoga in Gokul, but would have given you the realisation and told you to practise Sahaja Yoga. If Shri Nanak had been accepted, there was no need for him to break his head telling you to do different Why was it so? He was also a human being. So long as he was alive, he too was considered useless and tortured but when he died he was regarded as Bhagwan (God). What is the reason of this all? Why has man been tike this? You will have water of the Ganges, where She flows. If She is flowing here, will you say 'We do not accept Her as the Ganges!" There may be nothing at the place where She was flowing earlier, or may be, only a nulah at present. If you want to take it as the Ganges you go your way. If the Ganges is flowing at this place, why not accept it? things. He would have simply taught Sahaja Yoga, but very few understood him in his days. Now, when he is not here, you have built Gurudwaras in his name. When Mohammad is not here mosques have been made, because they think now Mohammad Sahib is in their hands. Now Rama is in their hands, and they can make his temple and say "This is our temple, this Rama is our property. We have authority over him and It is not easy to understand human intellect. it is the most difficult job in the world! whatever you have brought-all money and other things, offer them to this idol". You say It is easy to understand God, because He is what He is. He does not have such double dealings. Man has a variety of all this because you think you are the authority of this idol. It is sheer ego because of which man thinks , that he can keep God in his control and for that he is making all qualities, not just double. All animals from snakes and scorpians to elephants, horses and lions are residing in him. You will not understand at all, why his brain is working in this way. the show. Every time the same show was repeated. Even now. I see big temples. What is happening in them? What is going on even in those temples having 'swayambhu' idols? (Those idols which have come spontaneously out of Mother earth are called Swayambhu idols. They are not Now when the Ganges is flowing why do not you take water from Her? Imagine this plug has been connected here. Will you contect in its place a plug which is out of order? It is quite pragmantic. I cannot understand what hallucination is there on human intellect, that he does not accept the truth which he is seeing but accepts something that is not seen! Its reason was understood long back and that is Ahankar man-made Ego makes donkey out of man. Even donkey has its respect. Donkey also may have some sense of propriety but an egoist can be wrose than a donkey. If a man is

 37 Issue: 11 & 12-2006 The Divine Cool Breeze equated with his ego, then the result is a donkey, I always say, you will be surprised to see how the ego is inflated in a man. If one gets excess of money he goes astray. One out of one lakh rich people, talks sense. If they receive money, they will think in which pub they would go or to which dirty woman they would go etc! Never would that man think, that the money he has got could be spent on the work, within himself and without that would be acceptable to God and would bring His blessing. They will make the show of ego even in that, they will make a temple and inscribe on it that the temple of Shri Rama has been built by such and such person in the name of his father. What will you call it, if not madness! If his father had done some work, automatically he would have become famous. By seeing such dreams of false ego man remains away from the truth. Even though man sees the truth face to face, the ego teaches him not to accept it because by accepting the truth he would be free from ego. affairs. But an ordinary person cannot, because he has no ability to wield an excess of anything. He cannot go to an extreme when he attains the extremes of his Spirit, rest everything becomes valueless for him. On the contrary, due to his ego he loses his freedom and day and night he remains in such nasty hallucination that like a fool he thinks that he is being praised. Never can he think as to what he is doing and which is the right path for him. Now the time has come to stop and see. It is now time to rise and to know. It is time for you to stop wherever you have reached on the mount of your ego and look back. So far, you have not achieved anything, you do not know anything. Accept it with humility and let it be imbibed in you. You have not yet understood your Spirit. With your every step, you are getting more and more involved in dead things that put you in the fetters of dependence and enslavement of your six enemies (viz Passion anger, greed, pride, temptation and jealousy), stop for a while and see your mirror there itself which is within you and you will find the Paramatma of your eternal Atma residing It has many remedies. Say a man receives plenty of money and becomes very powerful. Excessive power also makes One a donkey. One behaves like a joker and becomes a laughing stock, with too much of power because that goes to one's head. If a woman becomes extremely beautiful and she takes it into her head that she is a within you, Know Him and go deep. Enjoy that bliss and with that light dispel darkness of the world. This is very great work and many people are not sticking to this great work. That is the difficulty. Thousands will come here if I start mesmerising. ravishing beauty, then she goes down to a nadir. Why does man become a donkey when he has excess of something? Its reason is-he cannot wield it. If he is an One such fake guru reached London. He emptied the pockets of ninety thousand people, he charged $ 6000 from each person. Sixty people from them came to me, they were suffering from epilepsy, I asked them as to what he taught them, which mantras he told. At the cost of six thousand dollars, those poor things, got the emperor, even millions of rupees have no value for him, but let a pauper have some money and he will be flabbergasted. If a real king comes to power, it does not matter for him at all. He lives in the world like a king and is not bothered by small and petty

 Issue: 11& 12 - 2006 38 The Divine Cool Breeze through considerable pressure and strain, because of which you have to face big problems. Hence, initially, you have to become simple. You know, that my work has great impetus in villages. Ego is more powerful in cities. Due to small things, people become egoists and that is why, they surrender to those who pamper their ego and run away with their money. You just keep looking at them and receive disease. You will be surprised, all those patients of deadly diseases, like cancer, etc. whom I have cured, all of them without any exception were the victims of fake gurus and tantrikas. I have not seen any cancer patient who was not connected with a false guru. That's why it is said that doctors cannot cure cancer. You would now understand, how wicked, inauspicious and harmful these people are! Even environments around them are bad. Those who go into their environments come to such a tremendous grief that you will be shocked to know. Very large number of people have died in Morvi, some of them were innocent, but worst kind of sin was to be committed at that place. You have heard that those people had decided to buy for a sadhu a huge land in Kucch. Man must see and think in whose hands he is playing and how he is inviting his own disastrous end. mantra-Ainga, phinga, thinga! This mantra was passed to them secretly in writing and they were told that by chanting this mantra they would get many siddhis. Today, those people are on the roads, their homes have been ruined, their plight is miserable. Had they been wise and tried to understand, they would not have gone to such a person who was pampering their ego. Always he would tell them "you are a great person, you are Ponganand, all should come in their best etc." Those who fill their coffers, keep inflating other people's ego and all people in the world like such persons. Big news papers, will bring out their advertisement and write their praise because those persons have money which attracts money. Big ce- lebrities would call on them, But inside, there is a big falsehood. Can we say man worships falsehood? But man himself lives in a big falsehood, which is his ego. One who preserves such falsehood and is carried away by it, invites his disaster. Why,-I am repeatedly asking you,-why are you inviting that disastrous end? What is the reason for which you do not want to know yourself? Why don't you want to surrender before God? Why are you following wrong people? You are ready to sacrifice even your life for those who are robbing you, destroying you, who have done all harm to you because they have mesmerised you. Have you got no capacity of your own to understand what is going on? Paramatma can be known, only in complete freedom. You are getting scared of whatever little freedom you initially experience in Sahaja Yoga and want to go back to your old state of dependence. I am telling you as your mother and persuading you not to go to such wicked people and invite your disaster. Do not destroy your Spirit by going to such people. You should understand your Spirit. There is no need to spoil everything in the oscillations of questions and counter questions. Get realisation first. First know your Spirit. I will do the rest. On what basis will you ask questions before that? Have you got any means to ascertain who is genuine and who is fake. You must know your Spirit first. So Sahaja Yoga is very simple, but you people are not. There are many complications in cities. You have to pass

 39 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 11 & 12-2006 persons in this country who have come to Sahaja Yoga and attained their Spirit. long as you do not know your Spirit it is useless to discuss because it is a very subtle subject and not shallow, that you could come and see somebody's face and say something and that's all! Never get into such a mess that you cannot come out of it. Sahaja Yoga is a superb feat, it is extremely great. Some times I myself am amazed at it! It is such a fantastic thing. It looked really very difficult how would it take place in a man and then grow further. Jesus could be considered as the last man, to do a lot of work and after Him we can say on Guru principle Nanak Sahib came. Even in his time so many could not know their Spirit. He was breaking his head on advising the people. He had taken human form but still He was not recognised. This is the last judgement, let us see what happens. Whatever people come is alright for me. Even if they do not come, it's still alright. Remember God will not bow before you. You have to accomplish Him in your own freedom. If you have not achieved Him, It is not His fault, nor is it of Sahaja Yoga, mine, or that of Atma. You, who are having your ego, will have yourself to blame. It is your wealth or your asset and it has been given to you only because you should accept it, know it and enjoy it. May God bless you. (Nirmala Yoga-1983) Translated from Hindi I was with Him, in fact with all of them. I am glad that there are about 10,000

 Nirmal Shakti Yuva Sangh Seminar Delhi, 24-25 June, 2006 that when we pray to Shri Mataji from our heart and take Her Holiest of Holy names with humility, all Her Powers manifest. These Powers (and not any technique) spontaneously and effortlessly cure us, balance us, make us peaceful, and guide us, so that we work to please our Almighty All-knowing loving Mother. With the blessings from our beloved Param Pujya Shri Mataji, a seminar for Nirmal Shakti Yuva Sangh (Mostly referred to as Yuva Shakti) was held in Delhi. Young Sahaja Yogis from Noida, Gurgaon, Faridabad and Ghaziabad also participated in the Seminar. Around 700 enthusiastic young Sahaja Yogis had very enjoyable 2 days at Nirmal Darbar, on 24th and 25th June 2006. The Seminar was held with the aim of instilling and developing further, the feeling of devotion and dedication towards our Guru Sakshat Adi Shakti Param Pujya thoughtless awareness. Also to develop Mataji. The Young Sahaja Yogis are the innocent hands of the Divine-they have to glorify themselves as instrument of the "Pure Power of Love" (Nirmal Shakti)- as a young, Advice of our Holy Mother and allow these loving, dedicated and pure collectivity (Yuva blessings of Param Chaitanya to Protect, Sangh). The main path towards realizing this objectives was to encourage the collectivity of young Sahaja Yogis to go deeper in Dhyan by achieving the peaceful state of sensitivity and feeling of vibratory awareness-the tool for our guidance. Only then we understand deeply the Divine Cure and Transform us. With this we also It was felt that we should realise within us the Reality of this Age, the Incarnation of our Divine Mother who is God Almighty. That we should be able to feel that Reality on our own systems and experience become better instruments in the spreadment of Shri Mataji's Love, and of the unique and most precious gifts of Kundalini Awakening and Sahaja Yoga, to others. With these objectives, each session

 Issue: 11 & 12- 2006 The Divine Cool Breeze It was also explained how one can be benefited in studies with the Blessings of Sahaja Yoga. started with Dhyan. Many of the participants were introduced to sharing of vibrations. It was emphasized that while meditating each one, individually, is directly seeking blessings from Shri Mataji. Blessings flowing from Shri Mataji cleanse us, give us balance and take us into Thoughtless Awareness. Thoughtless Awareness is only achieved effortlessly, by each one praying directly to the Adi Shakti for the same, (and not by any other actions or procedures or through any other person). All participants felt vibrations more strongly and also felt the Thoughtless Awareness within themselves in a sustained manner. In the Seminar, time was earmarked to enjoy and encourage the feeling of " Sangha-the collectivity" amongst the youngsters. They also experienced how beautiful things work out when each one in the collectivity is in meditation, working while connected to the Spirit. All the participants were divided into 25 teams and each team was given a project related to understanding, promotion and publicity of Sahaja Yoga: through talks/music/posters and banners/skits and plays/ dance drama/ Sahaj New channel/ Backdrop of the stage for pujas/ public programmes/ Facts about Shri Mataji's life, about deities & chakras etc. It was so arranged that all 700 were involved in one or the other collective activity. All presentation were prepared spontaneously and collectively, within an hours, and were appreciated and enjoyed by the all participants. The importance of taking bandhan was also experienced by all-not to do it mechanically, but with attention on Shri Mataji and on the flow of vibrations from our hands covering us with Shri Mataji's Power of Love. The participants were told about the aims of forming Nirmal Shakti Yuva Sangh as desired by Shri Mataji.

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2006 42 The Divine Cool Breeze deeply caring and all-knowing love, ensured that throughout the weather was extremely cool and pleasant. (One of the prominent News Papers even reported on front page this surprising fact : of the nature providing rains only in a other parts of Delhi remained hot and dry.) On the second day morning everyone joined in the morning weekly meditation in which around 100 new seekers had come. This time the young Sahaja Yogis were enthusiastically involved in raising Kundalinis of, and attending to the newcomers, and enjoyed the experience along with elder Sahaja Yogis. particular region, while Another miracle was, that while arrangements had been made for about 250 participants, the actual number at the time of lunch was just about three times of that. Besides, just then there was heavy rain and strom. But Shri Mataji's Love again managed everything. By Goddess Annapurna's grace, spontaneously, arrangements were made, and food was ready for all the participants. We all deeply thanked our Mother for showering Her Love. The participants collectively gave bandhan to the modern electronic Media and its negative impact, and everyone took a vow not to watch any undesireable programmes shown on Television etc. Each day videos of The Mother's talks were also shown, and an extremely touching Documentary titled The Source of Supremely Love" on the life of the Divine Mother, was also shown. Everyone was in the mood of dhyan, and felt very strong vibrations. The meditation session following this beautiful film about Shri Mataji made everyone absolutely thoughtless and opened everyone's heart. How much it elevates us whenever we realize with our hearts that Shri After the seminar, parents have reported that their children are meditating and doing foot-soak at home, of their own, and are enjoying the thoughtless awareness and vibrations and the feeling of devotion towards our Divine Mother. (Also watching TV much less.) Mataji is God Almighty, and bow to the Adi Shakti in our hearts with humility! On the whole, it was a memorable Seminar full of blessings from our Divine Mother : The wonderful vibrations, and the young hearts devoted to Divine Mother in meditation. We offer our pranams and gratitude at the Lotus Feet of the Adi Shakti and pray thatAlmighty Mother grants us more such opportunities of collectively enjoying Her Love. A miracle that took place. The weather of Delhi that had been unberably hot and sunny with high temperature, but as soon as the seminar commenced, within minutes, the whole sky was overcast with clouds and there was a heavy downpour particularly in and around the area where the seminar was taking place. Shri Mataji's Jai Shri Mataji Delhi Collectivity

 November - December 2006 We have to realise that we are very close, all of us. We are very close. If that is realised, then finished, then you don't have to bother about anything else. That is....we are brothers and sisters... that is a different point now, but this is doing Sahaja yoga, You are.... Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi London, August 2, 2006



----------------------

2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The
Divine Cool Breeze
Nov. Dec. 2006
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Divine
Cool
The
Breeze
Nov, - Dec. - 2006
NIRMALA
HWA
ERSAL
URERELIGN
CONTENTS
Diwali Puja - 2006 (A Report)
3.
7. Guru Purnima - 2006 (A Report)
7. Vishwa Nirmala Dharma - Religion in Spain
7. 1000 Months of Shri Mataji's Incarnation
8. Honorary Citizenship to Shri Mataji
8. Second S.Y. Ashram in Kolkata
10. The Purpose of Being Incarnated on This Earth
12. Ram Navmi Puja - 5-4-1988
14. Innocence - From Nirmala Yoga
15. What is Praying - From Nirmala Yoga
From Nirmala Yoga
18. We Sahaja Children
- From Nirmala Yoga
19. H.H.Shri Mataji's Advice - 24.5.1981
From Nirmala Yoga
27. A Letter From Canada
- From Nirmala Yoga
28. Leaders in Sahaja Yoga (Part-ll)
From Nirmala Yoga
30. The Visage of Salvation
31. Little Angel Prays Before Mother Mary
Pravachan of H.H. Shri Mataji- 18.8.1979 - From Nirmala Yoga
32.
40. Nirmal Shakti Yuva Sangh Seminar-Delhi 24-25 June 2006
DHARM
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-3.txt 
 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
Published by
Nirmal infosystems &Technologies Pvt.Ltd.
Plot No. 108, Chandragupt Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411029
Ph. No. : 020-25285232
Printed by
Krishna Printer & Designer
Tri Nagar, Delhi-35
Mob.: 9212238008
For Subscription Please Write to:
Nirmal infosystems & Technologies Pvt.Ltd.
222, Desh Bandhu Apartments
Kalkaji, New Delhi-110019
Tel. :011-26422054
Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles, Miracle Photographs etc. to :
Shri O.P. Chandna
G-11 (463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110 034
Ph.: 011-65356811
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Shri Mahalakshmi revisits Nirmal Nagri
Pune, The Holy Land
22nd October 2006
Sunday the 22nd october 2006
marks yet another historic event since the
creation of mankind with the witnessing and
welcoming once again Her Holy Lotus Feet
of Shri Mahalakshmi after thousands of
who was the one in charge of that. He was
here in Treta Yuga and Krishna came at the
time of Dwapar Yuga.
When I came it was Kali Yuga but
now today the time is of Krita Yuga. The.
years in Her Shrimataji form on this land of
Nirmal Nagri, Bhukum in the Khatpewadi
village, Pune, India.
Yuga where work will be done - Krita Yuga.
This is the time where work will be done
-H.H.Shri Mataji, Chelsham Road,
London, 2nd April 1982.
It was thonsands of years ago in the
Treta Yuga (an era as per Indian
calendar) that Shri Rama as Shri Vishnu
incarnate along with Shri Sita as Shri
Mahalaskhmi incranate vibrated this land
with Their Holy Lotus Feet. It was in
Maharashtra only that Shri Ram and Shri Sita
walked bare foot. The myth behind this part
of the land say - Shri Sita and Shri Rama
had spent quite a few important days here
during their period of 14 years of exile.
Villagers in Khatpewadi claim, the remnant
or fossilized remains of the utensils used
by them in the neighbouring hillocks still bear
the imprint and the proof of their holy visit as
they can still be traced there. Vibrations on
this land speak for its own importance. The
Nirmal Nagri covers about eleven acres of
this holy land. Shri Mataji once enlightened
us with the story of Shri Rama's advent and
His Maharashtra tour bare foot, as the land
Even the subtler aspect that marks
this day as very significant and historic is
for the fact that - the celebration of 'Diwali
Festival' with lights intrinsically is associated
with Shri Rama's victory over Ravana and
heart
His return. It is a divine bliss that every
loves to light that essence Love that
enlightens the Raja Lakshmi principle within
to mark the joy of the victory of good over
the evil forces. That's why Shri Mataji says,
"Whatever is good for your Spirit will
automatically work out as soon as this
integration takes place, and that is the
work of Sahaja Yoga Today. That's why I
said it is Krita Yuga, is to be done, And this
integration must be achieved within
ourselves, so sometimes you have to make
your body come
-H.H. Shri Mataji, Chelsham Road,
London, 2nd April 1982.
to this level".
had to be vibrated and Shri Ganesha
Himself expresses on the land as the Earth
element. So He had to walk without
sandals.
It is further amazing to share an
interesting fact as a yogini fondly recollects,
"on one occasion, many years ago in
London, Shri Mataji spoke to us about star
signs. She mentioned that Lord Jesus, the
great incarnaltion of Lord Ganesha, was born
under the sign of Scorpio, which is the sign
of death and resurrection. He was actually
born at Diwali, which falls at the time of year
which is Scorpiɔ in the astrological calendar.
"Because first of all when human
beings came on this earth they were
frightened of all the animals who would
invade them and all kinds of harrible
Rakshasas and all those people, and
negative forces would trouble them. In that
state they needed to create a king, a ruler,
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12-2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
in the evening. It was tremendous joy to wit-
ness the movement of the 13-15 thousand
collectivity, that had gathered in Nirmal Nagri
from across the world to offer their puja on
behalf of the entire globe at Her Holy Feet of
Shri Mataji in Her Mahalakshmi Form.
The Chakra of Lord Jesus is the Agnya
and this is the Chakra associated with the
light element. So it is only right that Diwali is
the festival of lights. Also, for the Christians
Lord Jesus came as 'a light to lighten the
darkness', so again there is that connection
to light.
As a matter of casual approach
almost every heart felt from their previous
experiences that the puja schedule announced
always happens to be much before Mother's
actual arrival. Although the Puja was
announced for half past five, the entire
collectivity even at five in the evening wore a
very casual look, little realizing what transpired
behind as the divine play Shri Mataji Herself
was ready to accept the puja even before the
scheduled time. Was it the vibrated land that
The reason why Christmas is
celebrated as the birth of Christ is because
for nearly seventeen hundred years this has
been traditional in most of the churches. The
ancient and politically powerful Romans
adopted Christianity in the third century AD,
and changed the date of Christmas to the 25th
of December, because of various pagan
Roman festivals which fell on and around that
So now Christmas is an that date".
date.
was keen to welcome our most Holy Mother,
or was it Shri Mahalakshmi Herself desired to
revisit the land to accept the puja? Or was it,
that Mother could not resist Shri Ganesha's
How fortunate are we, the Sahaja
Yogis to be here - the collectivity of the
realized souls - to celebrate the Diwali Puja
today and also shall be fortunate to celebrate
the Christmas Puja 2006 later in December
on this holy land of Nirmal Nagri.
seeking from inside to give Her Holy
darshan(divine glimpse) even before time.
So, Shri Mataji decided an early start from
Pratishthan (The residence of Shri Mataji
approximately 15 Kilometres away from
Nirmal Nagri) even before the announced time
for the Puja.
The day seemed to be quite joyous in
spite of the day's heat and the hectic
schedule. The evening althoughturned cooler,
but traces of cloud could be seen hovering in
scattered fashion. The Nirmal Nagri wore quite
a different look today. It was cheerful and
joyous, every heart desired to get their best
out of the best.
Suddenly, a cavalcade with fleet of
cars was seen trailing behind our Mother's
vehicle in a precise protocol with the pilots in
front near the Nirmal Nagri gate at quarter past
five. It was the most exciting event that all
yogis were seen rushing to settle themselves
in the main pandal to welcome the arrival of
our Holy Mother just in the precise time. As if
all hearts were singing in Her Praise:
"Subhamangal maya Divas hai aya...Adi
ShaktiSwayam Hain Padhari' (The very
auspicious day has arrived when Shri Adi
Shakti has arrived Herself).
The internet news had already brought
a lot of joys in the hearts of yogis since early
this year, as we could learn of Shri Mataji's
good state of health, the best of moods, the
shopping in UK and above all Her Joining the
singing choir to sing a full stanza from the
Bhajan- 'Ma Teri Jai Ho, Teri Hi Vijaya Ho
(Her own composition) in USA, It was now
that all eyes were waiting for Her Holy Darshan
in the Diwali puja that was announced for 5.30
Yogis
It was then a long pause that the
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
with Her holy darshan then. It was indeed this
very moment that thousands of seekers were
waiting for.
experienced from the other side of the
covered curtain, while Shri Mataji arrived in the
inner room (especially decorated for Her)
adjoining the stage and spent some time. The
vibrations spoke for itself for Her Holy Ganeshas were seen rushing upto the stage
presence. Then suddenly the choir sprang
alive with 'Swagata Agat Swagatam'
>Welcoming Mother with the curtain still
closed on the stage at quarter to six in the
evening. The stage wore a divine look as the
curtains were drawn apart slowly all eyes were
trying either to catch up the faint projections
of pictures on the erected four giant screens
across the main pandal or the stage itself. The
evening sky wasnt still dark enough to brighten
the picture quality on the screens. It was then
the time for the Jaikara'(call for a collective
jai' in praise fo our Holy Mother) for 'Shri Adi Arti and chanting of the three maha-mantras,
Shakti Mataji Shri Nimala Devi' followed by a
jaikara for our beloved Papaji, Sir CP Sir CP
then took the mike to announce the Holy
message of our most beloved Mother, Shri
Mataji to the collectivity of the world in his
typical steady diction addressing in Hindi.
At quarter past Six the children, the little
to offer their puja with flowers at Her Holy
Lotus Feet with the Shri Ganesh-artharva-
shrisham, Followed by Prayer bhajan Vinati
Suniye Adi Shakti' and then puja bhajan with
Shrimataji's 108 names Jago Savera' It was
then followed by Shringar bhajans as seven
married ladies held the curtain before Shri
Mahalakshmi for the shringar with 'Mahamaya
Mahakali, "Tujhya Pujani' and 'Mahalakshmi
strotram.
Exactly at seven with the offering of
the Diwali Puja at Her Holy Lotus Feet in Her
Shri Mahalakshmi Form was concluded.
Our most holy Mother, it is indeed a
blessing to be here today as we pray
collectively on behalf of the Sahaja Yogi
brothers and sisters across the globe that
may aur offerings of millions of pranams at
Your Holy Lotus Feel being completely
surrendered within and expression of our
heartfelt gratitude for accepting the Puja be
kindly accepted by Your holy grace.
He said - "Shri Mataji has conveyed
to be told to you that..We are all one; there is
only one God (Paramatma). There is nothing
more left to be said. She has worked for the
cause and benefit of the mankind with Her
untiring efforts and journey for the last 35 years
across the globe. Now that we should forget
that we are different. We are all one and should
It was then the time for a wonderful and
colourful firecracker display that filled the
entire span of the sky over Nirmal Nagri,
celebrating the joy before Shri Mahalakshmi.
The little Ganeshas were excited and were
seen jumping in excitement as they enjoyed
the display while, Shri Mataji Herself seemed
very happy and pleased staring deep into the
high air, acknowledging the love display that
Her children had to offer at Her Holy Lotus
Feet on Diwali. The vibrations were
work together shouldering all the
responsibility to spread Her message through
out the country to make Her vision come true".
Shri Mataji was staring deep within the
collectivity and at times compassionately
staring at our beloved Papaji as if nodding in
affirmation. Her very looks reminded us of
the popular bhajans 'Pyar Bhare yeh do Nimal
Nayan' (Love filled these two pure eyes.). As
if our hearts were melting as we were blessed
tremendous and phenomenal.
While the firecracker display
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-7.txt 
 12-2006.
Issue: 11 &
The Divine Cool Breeze
palms open amidst fountain of vibrations with
incredible gush of strong wind that brushed
past the collectivity with droplets of rains.
continued in the high air, various country
representatives from hosting countries,
national and internationals queued up on the
stage to offer their gifts to Our Holy Mother
The gifts were offered from countries like
India, France, Australia, Switzerland, Portugal,
Italy, Bahrain, Hong Kong, Austria, Malta,
Ireland, Bulgaria, Greece, Russia, Argentina,
Romania, USA and many more. The
Mahalakshmi tattwa seemed to express
itself with the over pouring of generous
amount of donations for the development
of Chhindwara Project (the Holy birthplace
of our beloved Mother) from various nations
along with the other gifts.
It was as though the rain god (Varun
Devta) along with the ganas were over joyed
with Her arrival and the Puja in that holy land
that it could not help express its joy along with
the collectivity in form of downpour delicately
not to disturb the Sahaja Yogis enjoying the
vibrations. Gradually the droplets of rains
coalesced to form larger drops and finally to
fall as drops of rain just enough to drizzle to a
light shower for half and hour after Mother's
departure. It seemed to be heavy enough to
cool us down with vibrations and spread the
mundane fragrance of the Earth all around,
but not really that heavy enough to soak or to
freeze the yogis in attendance there under the
open sky. The climate grew very pleasant as
the eight and half thousand yogis who were
camped in the Nirmal Nagri enjoyed the rest
of the evening recollecting their personal
experiences, while the floating collectivity of
another five to six thousand left the venue
gradually carrying with them the vibrations of
a very significant Shri Mahalakshmi Puja.
As the offering of gift was drawing
close, there was an announcement made for
the forthcoming schedule and venue for
hosting the international Christmas and
Birthday Puja. The Christmas Puja 2006
seminar will be hosted in Ithe Nirmal
Nagri, Pune itself on 24th, 25th and 26th
December 2006, while the Birthday puja
2007seminar will be hosted in Chhindwara,
India on 14th, 20th and 21st March 2007.
There was a big applause as everyone
expressed their joy as if a long cherished
desire was being fulfilled. It was almost half
past seven or quarter to eight that the curtains
were drawn and the collectivity stood up with
Jai Shri Mataji
Rabi Ghosh (India)
(Intenet Version)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Vishwa Nirmala Dharma
Religion in Spain
Wednesday, July 19, 2006
GURU PURNIMA - 2006
(A Report)
Tuesday 11th July saw the actual
Guru Purnima. The moon was full and high
over Cabella, many Yogis gathered in the
courtyard outside Shri Mataji's house. There
was an atmosphere of devotion pervading
the air as everyone prepared to pay their
respects and offer their devotion to Shri
Mataji.
LEGAL REGISTER OF
VISHWA NIRMALA DHARMA
AS A RELIGION IN SPAIN
Individually Shri Mataji received each
collective and they offered flowers and gifts
Nation by nation they came, then collective
by collective until finally the Yuva Shakti and
then the child en from Dharmsala school
offered Her flowers. There was a beautiful
June 1st, 2006
Dear Brothers and Sisters,
embroidery by Iran which had taken 1,900
hours to complete and featured Shri Mataji
in the middle with the names of other Gurus
It's a great pleasure for the Spanish
collective to announce that as of 31st of May
2006, Vishawa Nirmala Dharma has been
legally registered and acknowledged as a
religion in Spain.
around Her.
An ancient desire of the Spanish
collective has just become true, thanks to
Shri Mataji's blessings: Vishwa Nirmala
Dharma has been legally acknowledged as
a religion. After a long time of documentation
preparing and numerous administrative
procedures, we finally got the positive
response from the Ministry of Justice.
The Spanish Sahaja Yogis hope that
this will be the first step in the legal and
official acknowledgement of HH Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi and Vishwa Nirmala Dharma
in Europe and in the whole world.
1000 Months of H.H. Shri Mataji's Incarnation
(Celebrated In Italy)
fortunate country to host and celebrate Shri
Mataji on such a day.
Best wishes to the Italian collective.
on July 21, 2006 Shri Mataji
completed exactly 1000 month on Earth (i.e.,
83 years and 4 month). This is an extremely
auspicious day that is comparable to the
usual Birthdays (March 21). Italy is the most
Adrian Vasiu
Jai Shri Mataji
(Internet News)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Honorary Citizenship To Be Conferred Upon Shri Mataji
(29th June 2006)
It is with great joy that we announce the Honorary
Citizenship to be conferred upon Shri Mataji
Nimala Devi,
Cabella Ligure in 1991.
With this good news flowers were
offered to Shri Mataji, She was very pleased
by this gesture and sent all Her love to all
those well wishers and local citizens who
have actively supported Sahaja Yoga
activities throughout the years.
The local assembly for the Municipal
Office of Cabella Ligure, Alessandria Italy
met recently and unanimously elected to
award Shri Mataji with the Honorary
Citizenship of Italy. Holding Shri Mataji in the
highest regard this Honorary Citizenship has
been offered in recognition of the Her great
works and life enriching experience. Great
prosperity and peace has been brought to
the valley of Val Borberra since 1991 when
Shri Mataji first took up residence here in
On the 8th July there will be an
official gathering to formally present Shri
Mataji with Her honorary citizenship,
attended by the Mayor of the Municipal Office
of Cabella Ligure and other local dignitaries.
(Internet Version)
Inaguration of Second Ashram By Sahaja Yoga Society
(West Bengal Chapter) Kolkata (30.5.2006)
Kolkata S.Y. Co-ordinator Sh. Himanshu Shah informs as under-
ALARTI ASHRAM
www
JAI SHRI MATAJI
In the year 2004, 50 km from Kolkata
in rural Bengal a land was purchased and
Ashram constructed where nearly 200 people
from nearby villages come and meditate.
With the blessings of Param Pujya
Shri Mataji, we the Sahaja Yogis of West
Bengal could purchase the land & start two
Ashrams. The details are as under:-
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-10.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 11 & 12 - 2006
ADDRESS : ALARTI ASHRAM,
Distt: HOGHLY, WEST BENGAL.
AREA :10 Kottahs i.e. 7200 sq.ft.
purchased & the total land is free hold and
duly transferred in name of Sahaja Yoga
Society, West Bengal Chapter on 31.3.06.
All Nirakar Pujas are held here.
In the year 2005, in the heart of
Kolkata a beautiful Ashram has been
CIZET
ADDRESS: 43/1,ASHOK SHASTRI NAGAR, HARINAVI, KOLKATA.
AREA: 18 Kottahs i.e. 12960 sq.ft.
In future we can construct another 3 storey.
Himanshu Shah
Kolkata
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-11.txt 
 The Purpose of Being Incarnated on This Earth
(The positivity lies in understanding why we are here first of all)
(16-07-1983)
"Now these Dharmas, as I have told
you many times, are ten, and we should look
after these ten Dharmas in a very careful
manner. These are expressed outside, but
whatever is inside comes out Now I find
when you people talk, and you say things, I
know that this person is negative, that person
is definitely positive. There are so many ways
of expression of positivity but how I know that
I cannot tell you because I don't know how
to tell you that, but I just know that such a
person is definitely positive and such a
person is negative. The positivity lies in
understanding why we are here first of all,
why are we on this Earth? Why are we
human beings? In understanding, what are
we going to do about it? Why are we Sahaja
Yogis? What a Sahaja Yogi has to do? What
is his responsibility as a Sahaja Yogi? Then
he moves forward to understand: why
Mother is so kind to me? Why have I got
vibrations? Why am I among the very few
who have got this special blessing?"
These are fundamental questions
that a seeker asks when he or she first starts
seeking. Firstly, when a person is not a
Sahaji it becomes a very deep analytical
process where one tries to define life and
everything that is around him in terms of the
"reality" that exists around them. A book like
"Zen and the art of motorcycle riding" -which
has more to do with personal analysis than
motorbike riding, is a good example of a
seeker going to the point of nothingness
without getting an answer because the
answer does not lie there. When we then
start reading Carl Jung and Socrates and
the works of other great realized souls
(without knowing what realized souls are at
that time before getting our self realization)
we come into a different perspective about
life and "reality".
Why are we on this Earth?
The purpose of human evolution is
to reach Godhead-achieve the yoga with the
Divine-where the reflection and the reflector
Introspecting on the above lines of
our Divine Mother and taking refuge in the
words of Rabindranath Tagore. "into the
Heaven of freedom let our soul be awake"
become one and the same. But first to reach
the human stage of evolution is necessary
for the reflection of God Almighty lies in the
hearts of Man and not in His/Her other
creations. That is why it is not a sin to kill
animals for food or security but it is a sin to
kill another human being.
The answer below was given by a yogi:
The positivity lies in understanding
why we are here first of all, why are we
on this Earth? Why are we human
beings? In understanding, what are we
going to do about it? Why are we Sahaja
Yogis? What a Sahaja Yogi has to do?
What is his responsibility as a Sahaja
Yogi? Then he inoves forward to
understand: why Mother is so kind to
me? Why have I got vibrations? Why am
I among the very few who have got this
special blessing?"
Having been bestowed with the
awareness of human beings the awareness
seeks to satisfy itself by going further and
looks first at the immediate surrounding and
engages in matter, material, and other
physical, emotional and mental stimuli to fulfill
itself. Without a spiritual dimension to it the
awareness is soon reduced to a sensual and
artificial ex-pression to which it succumbs
and becomes lost in the Maya of worldly life-
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Issue: II & 12 - 2006
131
The Divine Cool Breeze
until it either dies and is reborn OR GETS
SELF REALISATION.
value it more than our life itself as life is
meaningless without the connection, Hence
when we place Sahaja Yoga above all else
including our family, work, marriage, life-
everything, and rest our Attention at the Lotus
Feet of Shri Mataji, we enter into this realm
where a separate reality exists within the
framework of the 3 dimensional world we
Why are we Sahaja Yogis? What
a Sahaja Yogi has to do? What is his
responsibilty as a Sahaja Yogi? Then he
moves forward to understand: why
Mother is so kind to me? Why have I got
vibrations? Why am I among the very few
who have got this special blessing?
live in. Working out the negativities of the
world in the subtle level without speaking or
The only people who have been given
the ability to cross the Sea of Illusion (the
void) and raise the awareness without
being told but by just knowing-always in a
state to receive the vibrations through which
we receive our instructions on what has to
getting lost in the mire of Maya's web are
those who have their self realization through
be done without knowing what is to be done-
in complete silence and thoughtless
awareness, knowing and recognizing our
position in the plan of the divine and not
questioning our role nor having any doubt
about what is to be done by being the
Shri Mataji who She calls as Sahaja Yogis.
SYs are not here by accident but are here
now at the end of Kali yuga to receive the
boon of eons of cycles of birth and deaths
that they have been through and have
complete instruments of the Divine to work
Her will on us to achieve the emancipation
and salvation of Mankind and finding
attained the state of worthiness to enter into
Her realm. Not all Sahajis will be saved.
Immaterial of where we are, we are subject
complete satisfaction in so doing where the
Awareness has finally merged with its
to so many tests and only those who are
steadfast and live by all the principles and
tenets of divine laws will make it through the
purpose and is completely satisfied by being
dissolved in its nothingness-that is the state
of the ultimate union with the Divine-the state
of Sat Chit Anand.
doors before it is closed. Since the Adi Shakti
Herself has given us our connection by
Kundalini awakening, which is her pure
-Jai Shree Mataji
(Internet Version)
(5.5.2006)
desire, to the whole we must respect and
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Ram Navmi Puja
(The text of the talk given by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
on the occassion of a short puja performed at Noida House
on 05. April, 1988, Shalivahana Shaka 1920)
As compared to Maharashtra
Navratri of Chaitra month of Shalivahana
Shaka (Dynasty) from Pratipada to Navami
is celebrated with more grandour in North
India. In Maharashtra the birth of Shri Krishna
(Shri Vitthala i.e. Shri Krishna as a King) is
celebrated with religious fervor as
'Gokulashtami' Shri Vitthala was the eighth
incarnation of Lord Vishnu, was born at
12:00 noon on the ninth day of Chaitra month.
This day is called as Ram Navmi.
Uddhar', 'Moksha' to (Adiwasi woman
Shabri), Killing of Bali, who was the king of
monkeys, who was doing Adharma, as well
as the killing of Ravana because he
kidnapped Shri Sitaji, to establish the rule of
'Dharma'. Actually, Shri Rama was
"Dharmatita i.e. Beyond Dharma. But strictly
speaking, Dharma was in born in him i.e. he
should be called 'Dharmasthita'. He was the
embodiment of Dharma.
To uphold the maryadas of the throne
he renounced Shri Sitaji (who was very dear
to him), simply because people doubted her
despite her crossing the fire (Agnipariksha).
Shri Sitaji herself also left Shri Rama, in a
way in the end after bringing up her children
nicely; who had acquired all Vidyas and had
mastered the art of Archery, so much so that
they defeated their own uncle Shri Laxmana
and ultimately Shri Rama had to come to
fight with them to free the horse of
'Ashwamedh Yaganya' But Shri Sitaji who
stood on 'Dharma', intervened and averted
the fight between the father and the sons.
Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi also
incarnated on March 21, 1923 at 12:00 noon,
like Shri Rama, in Chhindwara, Madhya
Pradesh. Chhindwara is situated in east-
west and south-north directions where two
lines meet. This date of birth is as per
calendar based on lunar months. But as per
the calendar based on solar months, Shri
Mataji's birthday was due on the first day of
the first month i.e. Chaitra month of
Shalivahana Shaka 1845. In Maharashtra the
first day of Chaitra-is known as Gudi Padwa.
This happens to be the birthday of Shri Mataji
as well as the day of coronation of King
Shalivahana. Now Shalivahana Shaka 1920
commences from March 28, 1998 as
Chaitra Pratipada, the first day of the first
month.
Shri Rama in his own way, acted in
life as if he were acting in a drama, forgetting
that he was a Divine incarnation. But later
on, when he incarnated as lord Shri Krishna,
he was alive of his powers and used them
diplomatically and punished all the
Rakshasas one by one.
Shri Ram was the ideal husband
where as Shri Sitaji was an ideal wife and
the Children born to them, known as Lav and
Kusha, were also the ideal sons. Shri Rama
wanted to establish the high ideals to be
emulated by humanity. Socrates, as you all
know called him 'A Benevolent King'.
Shri Rama was also a great Devi
Bhakta i.e. devotee of Shakti. Before
attacking Sri Lanka he performed Devi Puja
for which he needed a Brahmin for
conducting various rites (sanctified acts) to
please the Devi. He then sent for Ravana
Actually all the events that occurred
in the life span of Shri Rama like 'Ahilaya
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2006
13
The Divine Cool Breeze
of the seven eternal personalities. He also
comes and helps me and performs all the
tasks assigned to him. He is always
present in all my pujas and on one
occassion he had been visible in
the king of Sri-Lanka who was a Brahmin
and Devi Bhakta. He readily responded and
helped Shri Rama in performing the puja of
the Devi with all nine types of rites.
Had Shri Rama been of a cunning
disposition, he could have killed Sri Ravana
then and there but he was a 'Maryada
Purshottama' (A righteous person). He did
not do such a mean and irresponsible act,
They were enemies but while performing the
puja the enemity was completely forgotten.
vibratory form, in one of the photographs
taken in Bombay.
So character of all these great
personalities are to be emulated by all
Sahaja Yogis in their life styles to achieve
their ascent in Sahaja Yoga. May all of you
follow such great characters and be
successful in achieving the high ideals of
human behaviour. You should bestow love
Even his sevaka (most obedient
disciple) Shri Hanumana was an ideal
disciple to be emulated by all the Sahaja
Yogis. He was of great powers. He is an
innocent personality of a very high order,
always keen to perform the task set out for
him by Shri Rama. Later on also He
appeared during the incarnation of Shri
Vishnu as Shri Krishna and used to ride on
the top of the chariot of Shri Krishna. He is
known as 'Chiranjeev', an eternal being, one
and compassion on each other and on the
people you come across in your lives and
become ideal Sahaja Yogi brothers and
sisters.
May God bless you with eternal
blessings.
(Internet Version)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-15.txt 
 INNOCENCE
Deep in our heart we feel the
longing for a most loving and most
powerful state of being. Innocence is that
state, it is power itself. And, at the same
children of the Devi. "O Mother we cannot
thank you but with the strong wish to
establish the kingdom of God on this earth,
to bring back the lost paradise."
Fighting, of course, is also a matter
of being clever. As our Mother very clearly
tells: "If you can fight negativity fight it;
otherwise run away." Innocence gives us
the finest sense of tactics and strategy.
Innocence is spontaneity. Spontaneity is
wisdom. When this wisdom grows within
us the Spirit shines more and more.
Before I came to Sahaja Yoga I was
time, when innocence is lost, we are faced
with the eruption of the worst destructive
forces within us. In the West, alas,
innocence is absolutely lost. Eyes are
turned here and there towards all sorts of
nonsense. The attention is sucked by
funny things which are thrown at us by the
medias, the television, the magazines etc.
It is as if people would now relish dirt, filth,
violence and crime ! When we hear the
all the time with friends who had no sense
way non Sahaja Yogis sometimes talk we
could really become very angry, not so
much with the persons themselves but
with this special kind of negativity which
is trying to destroy our race and to bring
of innocence at all. Although I was feeling
that innocence is a beautiful and holy thing
Iwas unable to defend this subtle feeling
against my environment. So, one of the
blessings I got out of Sahaja Yoga is the
full understanding of innocence and the
us down to a much lower level than
possibility to spread this understanding to
friends and students I meet everyday in
the University. Therefore I pray to our Holy
Mother that we all should have growing
animals.
This anger that we, Sahaja Yogis,
sometimes feel, is a very good thing, it is
the wrath of Shri Ganesha within us. While
opportunities to raise Kundalinis
Awakening Kundalini is awakening and
celebrating Innocence.
joy in Sahaja Yoga is the incentive to grow,
wrath is the incentive to fight. And as we
are the children of the Devi we know that
we will win every single fight; realizing this
we feel tremendous confidence and
JAI SHRI NIRMALA GANESHA!
security within our hearts. We are the
-Engelbert, Vienna
(Nirmala Yoga - 1983)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-16.txt 
 What is Praying?
Prayers have a great importance in
human life. What is praying? It is an
expression to one's desire and requesting
and soliciting its fulfilment, to a power that is
far superior and that, one knows, would
bestow what is desired. Praying suggests
accepting one's inability to accomplish the
objective only through one's own efforts. It
is surrendering to the will of the power, to
either grant or reject the request, although
response in the positive is generally
muttering of words that makes a prayer,
but sincerity of heart that is associated
with it. Also, it is important to discriminate
so as to avoid reciting the prayers that have
left-side bias. It is essential to recite the
compositions of realized souls. It is also
equally important that one should be clear
on all chakras, at least on vishuddhi, so that
mantras and prayers invoke good vibrations
and become effective. Before the recitation,
one should improve vishuddhi by saying "Om
Twameva Sakshat Sarva Mantra Siddhi
Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Shri Mataji Shri
Nirmala Devyai Namo Namaha".
assumed.
Right-sided
are
persons
over-confident of their capabilities, and have
no faith in praying whereas, left sided would
only desire and pray, without making any
efforts. However, right sided people, on
failing to achieve what they desire, turn to
praying. As has been seen on many
occasions, after doctors express
helplessness people seek Sahaja cures,
which
realization and recitation of mantras besides
Sanskrit synonym for the word
prayer, is 'prarthana'. i.e. 'pra+arthana'.
Arthana is requesting or soliciting. Shri Mataji
has advised us that words having prefix 'Pra'
suggests enlightenment. Hence 'prarthana'
is an enlightened prayer, is a prayer made
by a person who has got his enlightenment.
Enlightenment comes from the Spirit. Hence
such prayers are the expressions of desires
of the Spirit. They have the power to turn
one's attention towards Atma, and kindle the
spark of desire in every one's mind, to seek
the ultimate. They inspire those, in whose
hearts the spark has grown into a flame, to
go deeper and closer to the Spirit, e.g. Om
Brahma Medhase/Madhu Medhase/
Brahmaiva madhu medhase (please give
me Brahma, please give me honey i.e,
sweet. Brahma alone is sweet.) Many vedic
mantras are prayers to different deities
requesting help for seeking the ultimate.
Great sages of ancient lore have prayed
even to the Sun, Moon, Wind-God (Vayu)
and Varuna (rain God) and also to water to
give them strength so that they could attain
the realization of Atma. It is interesting to see
the following prayer.
involves, praying for the self-
other treatment.
Although praying would appear to be
a left-side activity, its origin would be from
right side at personal level, as their
orientation is to achieve limited personal
ambition. In such cases, the prayers could
possibly be the result of egotism and would
come from ego not from heart. Even pujas
are performed, by some people desiring a
materialistic reward, which is again a
right-side activity. Puja-mantras are the
prayers invoking the deities to be present for
the puja and accept offerings.
Tor
However, praying would help
balancing over-active right side provided the
recitation of prayers is done from heart and
with complete surrender. It is not just
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-17.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: II & 12-2006
16
with us to Cosmic Mother Jagadamba, the
creatrix of everything from Brahmadeva
down to an insect, to protect and guide all
the seekers, in Her present form, for ever
ॐ आपो हिष्ठा मयोभुवस् ता न ऊर्जे दधातन।
महे रणाय चक्षसे।।
Om apo hishtha mayo-bhuvastana urje
dadhatana. Mahe-Ranaya chakshase.
and ever.
O water as you are pleasing, give us
food and protect us for attaining Self-
realization whích is extremely blissful.
Thereafter, with complete reverence
approach the sustainer of creation, the
protector of Dharma, and his power Shri
Lakshmi. May his qualities be awakened in
us, so that we work tirelessly for the divine
cause of propagating Sahaja Yoga. May he
allow us to pray along with them, to
Adi-shakti, that all satanic & adharamic
forces be destroyed.
By the grace of Shri Mataji, Sahaja
yogis have got their enlightenment. Hence
prayers composed by them, or their
recitation of the prayers composed by other
great saints & prophets would be 'prarthana'
in real sense. All the deities are awake within
the Supreme Goddess and respond quickly
when invoked in Her name. Our brothers
would certainly allow us to seek their
indulgence and help us.
Obeisance to Primordial Master, at
Bhavasagar, who came many times in the
world, by the instructions of Adi-shakti, to help
man-kind evolve itself. Seek his forgiveness
for the illtreatment meted out to his
incarnations. Our sincere desire is to be the
instruments in the myriad hands of Param
Parameshwari. May the qualities of
Primordial Master be inculcated by us.
Humbly approach Shri Ganesha at
Mooladhar and pray for his blessings and to
give us his innocence & purity so that we
become loving children of our Mother
keeping absolute faith in Her, and request
him to join us to pray to Her to keep Her form
in good health for years & years.
Surrender before the Father of the
Universe. Existence of all existences. Again
and again pray for being pardoned as we
are engrossed in the illusion, ignoring the
reality. May our attention ever rest at the feet
of our Cosmic Parents who are one as
With Shri Ganesha's permission
respectfully pray to mother Kundalini to
clean our subtle being and develop the
flickering flame of our Spirit into a big torch,
that would be one with Supreme Spirit. Then
pray with her to Sakshat Shri Mahakundalini
to be ever present amidst us in Her present
form and give realization to all the seekers.
words and their meaning and are
manifesting themselves as our Beloved
Mother. May our endeavour be to always
please Her.
Salutations to Shri Krishna and Shri
Radha who showed the divine play as a child
and also showed true Virata cosmic form
having myriads of hands, faces and legs,
encompassing within his being every living
and non living thing in the universe. He
played and danced with every milk-man and
milk-maid and awakened their kundalinis and
Bow to Shri Brahmadeva, the God
of creation, whose four faces are said to be
four Vedas and his shakti, Shri Saraswati,
Goddess of knowledge and art. Pray to him,
in the name of Shri Mataji, that we enjoy the
beauty of his creations rather than thinking
and planning about ours. Surely, Shri
Brahmadeva and Shri Saraswati would pray
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-18.txt 
 17
12-2006
Issue: 11 &
The Divine Cool Breeze
Sahasrara ! Integrated and subtle
universe ! The kingdom of God placed in
every human being, Our Beloved Mother is
the Empress, Raj-Rajeshwari of the
kingdom of God, Rajya-dayini, the conferer
of the kingdom of God. She has granted
liberally all boons and all that is auspicious
at the same time transcended above them,
thus proving that Supreme Spirit is
all-pervading and foundational to all
existence and yet uninvolved and unaffected
by it. May Shri Radha & Shri Krishna, one
as Sun-rays and sun-light, within our Mother,
lead us to the perfect witness state. May the
Mother of entire creation be amongst us in
to Her children. Let us not forget that She is
good health for years & Years.
Abhyasati-shaya-Jnata, (अभ्यासातिशयज्ञात,
known through tremendously long practice).
It is only through the intense meditation that
we can know Her. Let every Sahaja yogi
make a vow to accept Her every spoken
word and not to be casual in her presence;
to devote whole heartedly to the cause of
Sahaja Yoga. May the kingdom of God be
soon established in the universe.
Let us approach Shri Jesus and Shri
Mary after repeating Lord's prayer.
Remember, "forgive us of our trespasses,
as we forgive those who trespass against
us", We deserve God's forgiveness only
after we forgive others. May he help us
grow in our awareness beyond our narrow
individuality. May he confer upon us his
dedication and love for our Mother.
Om Twameva Sakshat Sarva Mantra Siddhi Sakshat Shri Adi-Shakti
Shri Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyai Namo Namah
(Nirmala Yoga 1983)
*******
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-19.txt 
 WE SAHAJA CHILDREN
From the first wave that gave us birth, resounding through the universe,
From the first sound we were born, to reverberate through the resounding world.
Of father's eternal auspiciousness and Mother's Joyous love and innocence,
Of spontaneous play and freedom dance, of eternal longing we were born.
To give meaning to sanctity, to return essence to sacredness,
To give vein to joyous song and mirth, and flow in freedom throughout the earth,
For of our Mother's womb we were born, and once more from Her crowned head.
And in both were unctuous joy and love, and immaculate glory overspread.
Like a fabric She takes the cosmic sounds, rends and from the rents give forth,
Eternal sounds that dance like men, and to eternal glory return again.
Like bees round nectar drinking deeply, soul deep round the sacred cup,
In sacred innocents cheerful shouting, crowd thick around their Mother's lap,
Like lotuses waving in the wind, each one filled with sacred strands,
And bowing to each lotus head with wings outspread, filling deep their lotus hands.
Lotus like born of loving softness, returning softness born of love.
Each one filled joyously resounding, the softness of the eternal word.
Each with sacred love cascading, each with love sacred overflowing,
Each to cosmic love surrendering, Eternal lost in eternal love.
Each child longs to meet its Mother, drowned in Her fulfilling love,
Each one longs to peal with laughter, and pour his love into the flood.
Each one pouring with reverence flowing, the glory that is of his birthright,
Each in glory deep entwining drawing, the threads of eternal union tight.
Each one brother to the other, sister to each others love,
Proving in their close communion, the boundless limits of their Mother's love.
Embraced in the all encompassing, filled with the all pervading,
Swimming in the all-containing, dissolving in the all sustaining.
-Dr. Rustom
AMEN
(Nirmala Yoga 1983)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-20.txt 
 H.H. Shri Mataji's Advice
Chelsham Road, London 24th May, 1981
(Subconscious, Supraconscious and our correct Foundations and ideals)
this work or that work, control this or go
there. And these bhools feel very happy about
it as they are servile. So, if there is
someone suffering from a mental problem,
for example, someone of his has died then
he gets a mental push-back into the
collective subconscious and gets
possessed. Such people go to the
Mantrikas and these Mantrikas tell the dead
QUESTION : What are the curing
powers coming from the supraconscious as
there are so many people who are curing
other people with supraconscious power
and what is the difference between this
curing power and curing power of the
Kundalini?
MOTHER: There can be two types of
curing power. One could be those who get
the power of the collective subconscious
and those who get the power of the
collective supraconscious. Both can cure
depending on where the problem is. For
example a person with the power of the
collective sub-conscious can cure problems
of the left side And a supraconscious
person can cure the physical side.
spirits that you have been troubling this
man for a long time and you leave this man.
So they remove this dead spirit and put an-
other dead spirit in its place and tell the first
dead spirit that he can get another body to
go to. These Mantrikas are the mediators or
liaison
officers. They catch hold of these
spirits and remove themn from one man and
put them onto some other person. So the
first person is 'cured'. For example, there
was a lady whose husband used to drink
quite a lot. She went to one of the lady
Mantrikas who said she will cure her
husband but the lady must pay Rs. 100 for
that. So She put a dead spirit on this man by
which the 'bhoot' of the drunkard on him was
removed. So this man gave up drinking but
he started going to races. Then she solved
that problem by removing the 'races' bhoot"
and put another one by which he started
going to dirty women. Now this lady got
frightened. Every time she would pay
Rs. 100 and had ended up by paying a lot of
money. Then she complained to the lady
Mantrika about it. After that she found that
her husband was doing all three things
together. So She went to fight with that lady
Mantrika, who put a bhoot on her too, Since
then, that woman is still mad and I have not
been able to cure her. She is a very
We have two types of people in
India known as Mantrikas and Tantrikas. The
Mantrikas are those people who go to the
funerals and cemeteries and they try to
capture the dead spirits. These dead spirits
are of the sly type. These sly spirits are the
so-called 'social workers' or 'busy-bodies'
trying to help others. They are in the category
of Chaturvarnas or Vishudhras, the people
who believe in serving others. They appear
to be good people because they want to
serve other people and help others and that
is why they do not want to die and want to
stay around the earth planet. One could call
this a 'servant class'. They are absolutely
servile. They like to be whipped, beatenup
and be ill-treated. They are another extreme.
They enjoy a horrid type of existence-they
are masochists. All such dead people are
around us and they are left-sided bhoots i.e.
very timid and clinging. These mantrikas get
hold of such dead people and tell them to do
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-21.txt 
 20
Issue: II & 12-2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
goodlooking woman married to a very rich
man who owns a factory and this is the life
both of them are leading i.e. burning the
candle on both ends. This is the case of the
subconscious people.
intercommunication was established on that
level ie, the collective supraconscious. A lady
who was suffering from high blood pressure,
kidney and uterus problems went to them.
They told her to write a letter to the Centre in
London who wrote back that on this
particular day, at this particlar time we will
The second case is of the people of
supraconscious type. For example
"Dr. Lamb's International Curative Centre"
"International bhoots" he had ! You have to
write to them that you are suffering from such
and such disease. All the dead
appear within you and cure you but you must
lie down in your bed. On that particular day
and at that particular time she started
shivering and one of the 'dead doctors'
entered into her and she got cured. For one
year she was alright. But then she started
feeling very dizzy. When she came to me
she was in a tattered condition. Absolutey
Finished. She knew that a spirit had come
in her at the time she came to see me. She
said and knew that there were at least ten
or eleven within her and she could not bear
them. So this kind of curing also can take
place from the supraconscious. Supposing
there is an architect and he approaches such
people he can get the spirit of a dead
architect upon himself. Now this Jack the
Ripper was possessed of the spirit of a dead
ripper. One has to have an inclination for
such things. This weakness is there within
such people, that is why they are easily
possessed. Otherwise it does not happen
Only if you are weak in mind and have
weaknesses for such things, then these
dead spirits can catch hold of you. If It has
something to do with your physical side then
the supraconscious can help you. If it has
something to do with your mental side then
the subconscious people can help you. But
they help you very temporarily and then come
back with a big foursome.
supraconsciOus people the very ambitious
type i.e. all the 'great' doctors, all the 'great'
lawyers, all the 'great' scientists, all the
'great' engineers and architects, Hitler and
all such 'great' warriors gather on the right
hand side. When Dr. Lamb died he met all
his friends there and he could communicate
with them because these doctors did not
want to die as they had been experimenting
with this or that. So they started Dr. Lamb's
Clinic. Now this Dr. Lamb who died lived in
London and had a son, Dr. Lamb's spirit at-
tacked an ordinary soldier in Vietnam and
told him that he was Dr. Lamb from London
and that he better go to his son and tell him
that you want to start such a clinic. He did
not attack his son as he knew that his son
would not be able to bear him as the son
was not healthy. He wanted a very healthy
and sturdy man whom he could possess.
So the soldier went to his son and
said that "your father is within me and he
wants to open a clinic". The son would not
believe it. So the soldier went into a trance
and told him that I have got some money in
a secret place kept for you and he had talked
in secret about it. So the son believed and
started the clinic for him. He gave all that
money for the clinic. And all the 'Bhoot
doctors' were helping this man to act
wanted
But Sahaja Yoga makes you so
powerful and so pure that impurities just fall
out. It is a cleansing force. It is a very
different thing where your intention is not to
and
he
whenever
an
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-22.txt 
 21
The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 11 & 12-2006
people will just obstruct it. They will trouble
you like anything. But you have to fight it and
for that you should be evolved. It is strange
cure but as a by-product people get cured.
Now many dynamic things are happening.
In Australia I met an Australian couple who
were journalists and the lady was the that all great people, children of God, men
president of the Journalist Association of
Australia. She could not conceive. Doctors
said she can never have a baby. Still they
kept having tests done as the husband
wanted a baby very much. But after coming
to Sahaja Yoga she conceived after about
fifteen years of marriage. Now her entire idea thing that can be demolished very easily. We
of life has changed. First she indulged in all
kinds of therapies. She was a Catholic to
begin with and then went to different gurus
and tried different therapies She overcame
all that after coming to Sahaja Yoga. Now
she finds the answer physically for I have
made all bhoots get out of her. Now she said
she is going to expose all such people. I told
her that if she could write what these people
are doing she would be able to show that
this is madness. And once you have talked
about it then you can prepare a base for
Sahaja Yoga and then show that this is the
reality which makes you sane, powerful and
loving. Then only people are going to get
convinced. Sahaja Yoga achieves miracles,
on the material level, on the mental level, on
the emotional level and ultimately on the
spiritual level. You are all endowed with such especially in Maharashtra, but the yearning
tremendous powers for you are realised
souls, and if you want to give realisation you
can. For example, this lamp which is
enlightened may be unclean or may not be
good to light but once it is lit it can enlighten
others. Similarly your Spirit is pure. But we
have to fight all those 'bhoots'. On the
unlimited I am working very hard. That is how
they are exposed. But on the limited yoOu have foundations. These horrible kings who kept
to work hard. To fight, you should prepare
yourself to fight these evil forces for they are
the ones who ruin your own being. There
will be a big depression coming on and
of God, are born more in the west than in
the east. They have been born in countries
where there is a lot of affluence and they do
not have so much poverty and troubles and
these are the very people who are lost. For,
the modern concept of life is to make some-
should relise that the reason for this is that
our foundations have been made very weak
by the satanic forces and they have built it
since long. That is why our ideas are very
weak. In the west if you observe the
behaviour and life-style of the kings and the
queens, and the kind of life the people lived
was so debased and horrifying. Even what
the socalled "religious" people and the
Catholic churches did was so horrid that
these very foundations were shaken. Now
you have to rebuild your foundations. You
have to lay new foundations for dharmic life.
You have to absolutely accept the dharmic
way of life. That is the only way to make
foundation strong again.
your
In India the foundations are good
and aspiring is not there. For example, an
aeroplane which is so perfectly built that it
can never fly. And another aeroplane which
as soon as it flies goes into pieces. So one
must realise that the damage to our
foundation by the satanic forces is much
deeper, much more subtle than what you
understand. You have to fight these very
seven wives etc. are not your ideals. Your
ideals are yourself. You have to bring new
ideas in the wěstern countries then only you
can change it because you are such a
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2006
22
The Divine Cool Breeze
because you have the source under your
command. Everything is possible. Just ask
for it and it wilI be done. But build it up. Even
now if you cannot build up your personality
and new ideals then when are you going to
do so? I am here with all the chakras intact.
It is easy to justify yourself, i.e. this is wrong
or that is right. Finish all this. You have to
become That. So the first is that you change
your foundation. We have great people like
Shakespeare, Tennyson, Mozart, Jung and
tremendous people in this country also.
Taking their name itself liberates vibrations.
In those countries single-handed they
created their ideas and just think how in those
countries they must have fought all these
satanic forces. But who accepts these
dynamic force. Everyone of you have to
rise up and build yourseif into ideals and try
to lead a life of that ideal within. For this you
have to sacrifice.. And the greatest sacrifice
is that of your ego which makes you so
obstinate and hard-hearted. Face yourself.
This ideal has to be created. One has to
have compassion, one has to have love and
understanding. Never talk illof one another
Never. Try to help each other for we are very
few and we cannot afford to fight among
ourselves, for we are wedded to a very great
cause. We cannot have wrong ideas, we
cannot waste our time on mundane things
like marriage.
If marriage has to be, then it has to
be good and compatible and you must try to
patch up your problems. You have to make people? Everyone of you is capable of
it a beautiful institution. Do not indulge in
small and petty things, for otherwise we
cannot carry out this task because we have
still a very long way to go in life. These
satanic forces are very nicely built up and
very united in these western countries. They
did not bother about India because India is a
poor country. The blessings of poverty are
that it teaches you to have a proper
foundation. The poor are just the same as
the rich. The very rich are not your ideals
nor the very poor. You are your own ideal
and you have to create new ideals. You are
the new Presidents of America and Prime going to blast them. Before that you should
ministers of England. You are the ones who
are great people. So you have to stand upto come back on you people. So you should
it. i.e. people of character, generosity, of
hardwork and proper understanding, by that It is the easiest thing for me to blast
Otherwise you cannot do this task. It is very
easy to study and get degrees like MD, MA,
PhD, but to be an ideal you have to mature.
You have to constantly tell yourself that you
have to come up and you have to do this
tremendous work which is not difficult
being like them. Everyone of you has to
become a leader. In Poland an ordinary
factory worker did that but he was not a
realised soul. He could not communicate
with God. He had no way of knowing the
Absolute. So channelize yourself properly,
cleanse yourself properly and dedicate
yourself. For dedication you have to do
nothing but give up your ego and superego.
Take these ideas off and create a space
which is the heart and it will work out. It is
easy to kill these rakshasas but what about
the lost souls? Everything will work out for a
year or so or even two years. After that I am
be ready because once I blast them they will
be such top people that you are not finished
them all, finish them off. But first they will go
to the subconscious and then they will
attack you again. Sol want them to live with
paralysis, with diabetes, with all sorts of
things. And they will live, they wont's die. It is
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2006
23
The Divine Cool Breeze
a tremendous task. And I am working twenty
four hours, I have no sleep and no rest and
you know that. I can see the whole vision
very clearly of those beautiful days when we
all will be enjoying each other and the bliss
of God together. All that I want is that we pull
out so many human beings in the clutches
of the evil forces for which we have to
dedicate ourselves. Our attention is on too
all these rituals and protocols and I have no
care for these things. It makes no difference
whether you say good morning to me or
good evening to me. What you say to your
brothers and sisters is the most important
thing. Sahaja Yoga will never work if you do
not look after that side, i.e. how you behave
towards your wife, husband, your brothers
and sisters. That is the most important thing
and anybody who does otherwise will get out
of Sahaja Yoga. You know I have thrown out
the so called important people out of Sahaja
Yoga who tried to dominate others by
saying "this is not good. You should not put
your hand there. Don't put your feet there
etc., etc."
many useless things, materialistic things.
There is no end to it. Be satisfied with less.
You will be looked after materialy also. There
won't be much problem. So don't run after
so many things. Just don't have interest in
these. It is all trash. You should be loving
and affectionate. Once you start giving up
the Real you become hard-hearted persons.
"I have no interest in anything." Then who
has interest in such a stone as you?
Who can know the protocol of the
Divine Mother. You cannot bind me into
protocol. You cannot bind me into anything.
I am unlimited. I am detached. To think that,
you have me attracted towards you by your
protocol, which is dead, has no meaning. It
has to be a living protocol of being kind and
generous. Be beautiful. Some are lethargic.
Like a husband who wants the wife to work
You are the foundation and your
children will talk of you, not of these horrible
persons. You have to be ideals of love,
affection, and not of domination and all such
nonsenses. All of you will be the first Sahaja
yogis. You are the ones who are going to
change the complete concept of life. New
ideas have to be built up. Are you people
really aware of your responsibilities?
Sometimes you are worried about
yourselves only, "where I am catching? What
is happening to me?" It is so self-centred or
you are worried about others, "he should not
have done this or that. He should not have
all the time or the wife who wants the
husband to work every time. Everybody
finds fault with each other. They are not
Sahaja Yogis. Sahaja Yogis are the ones who
take it Sahaja. If sombody is not working
that person will go down. I will put that
person out of Sahaja Yoga. Why did you
come to Sahaja Yoga? You are seekerş. You
have been seeking for ages. Are you going
to waste your life? In any case you have to
sleep most of your life. Why not work it out
now? In every way be active.
sat next to Mother." Nobody should think
they love me more than anybody else.
Some people know more rituals, others
know more protocols but does not mat-
ter. I know the one who loves me. The
one who loves others loves me the most.
I don't care for your protocols and ritu-
als. It is nonsense for me. What does it
Firstly you become real and very
good citizens and with moral values which
are your foundation. You yourself judge. You
are realised soul. I leave it to you to judge.
You will lose your vibrations. You can become
matter to me? The one who loves others
is the one who really loves me. I have had
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-25.txt 
 24
&12-2006
Issue:
The Divine Cool Breeze
powerful, so you have gone into it.
Somebody says you will become a great
guru and you go into it. But nobody says you
become the Spirit and become One with the
Whole. When I say you are realised, you are
great, you are saints, there is more bloating
of the ego-balloon. I say it to create that
awareness within you. Your ideals have all
been full of ego. See Churchill standing there
with a stick in his hand. The complete body
looks like the ego. We have to form new
ideals. He was right for meeting another ego
called Hitler. So it was alright to break their
heads together.
silent. Silence can be from other agencies.
Negative forces from the left side of the Agya
are giving ideas. You must have your own
ideas. "I can't, I go on thinking" this nonsense
goes on. Just tell yourself how dare you do
all this nonsense of the left side. Those who
are left sided better go for lemon treatment
and shoebeating. Those who are right sided
better shoe-beat 108 times. Get in the
centre. You should really tove yourself,
cleanse yourself and be in the centre. Never
be proud of your ego. 'O' I think this is
correct. Beat yourself 108 times. You can
be very high headed and then you can have
no embarrassment of what you are doing!
You can be absolutely shameless! But you
are a Sahaja Yogi. You should feel
embarrassed about such things. There
should be a little 'sankoch'. There should be
reservations about it. How can you say such
a thing to some one? Why hurt anyone?
Agya bloats more and more. So many are
like that. I know where somebody tries to
show off, tries to be a Guru and tries to push
down others. "O'l know Sahaja yoga. I am a
great Sahaja Yogi". Then I make their
'ego-horns' come out. You can feel it jutting
out of your head. Push it down. This is the
sticking point. Though the balloon goes thin,
it sticks on. You are all Buddhas. Buddha is
the one who is realised, the one who is
enlightened, one who knows. You are the
enlightened ones. How can you have an
ego?
But now we need new ideals. The
past is over now. When there is flood you
need boats to carry you across. But after
reaching the shore you don't carry the boats
with you. You leave them behind. These
boats are no good for us. They have done
the job. Now we have to go ahead with our
own feet. So no bloating of the ego should
be there. We should realise that we are in
no way exceptional, for only you are blowing
up your ego. You have to be ideals. You have
to be in the centre. You have to be a Sahaja
Yogi. That is the most important thing. Don't
judge yourself by what you think of yourself
but what Mother thinks of you. How much
joy are you giving to your Mother? If you make
Her unhappy then what is the use.
You must have noticed that there are
really very few true seekers in this world. And
seekers also must realise that they cannot
be happy with anything else but their Spirit.
This is the test of a seeker and a non-seeker
can never understand a seeker. It is very
difficult to live with a man or woman who is
not a seeker because you catch all the bad
points and you suffer. If the person has an
ego you catch it on your Agya. Nothing
happeris to him. He is very nicely off. He has
Ego and super ego are the greatest
enemies. I have seen people who suffer from
super-ego. You push it down and it goes to
the ego. So in the west we have the
greatest problem of the ego. Whatever
appeals to the ego we run to that. That is
how people are made mad by these 'gurus'.
They say you can fly, so you have gone into
it. Somebody says you will become very
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-26.txt 
 25
Issue: 11 & 12 - 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
circulation. Sahaja Yoga rejects more than
accepts. It is a judgement going on, Such
people will go out a realisation. You can talk
to them of realisation, give them bandhans
etc. for, they are the people in whom you
could be interested but they are lost
otherwise. For example, butter is made out
of curd by churning. A little butter comes out
and the rest is butter milk. To seperate it, a
big lump of butter is put in the butter-milk
and when it is churned all the butter gets
around that big lump and gathers into a
larger lump of butter. But some butter par-
ticles are left behind. If they do not stick to
the larger lunmp of butter they are thrown
away with butter-milk. So, those who do not
come to Sahaja Yoga and are not upto the
mark, will be thrown out. It is a fact but you
should have 'nirpekshita' i.e. you should have
no attachment to such people.
his ego intact, and he is torturing you But a
person who is a seeker is a better person
because you can give realisation to such a
person and your vibratory awareness can
be shared. But to be with a nonseeker can
be a very difficult situation. You cannot make
a fruit into a
flower. In your case you have
become the fruit. But you must have a flower
around which you can make into a fruit.
Those who are entangled with problems like
"my father, my mother, my brother, my son"
etc. should leam not to get entangled with
such problems. Those who are not flowers
should be avoided, forgotten and lost. The
more you try to improve them the more
entangled you will become. They can never
improve. I give you a big rope. If thay are not
seekers then they will never be so and you
cannot inject seeking into them. They may
become seekers and you forget about them.
You may have to suffer because of them,
for if they catch, you suffer. If they have a
nabhi chakra you suffer. This kind of person
is very difficult to change. Do not waste your
energy. Christ has side "do not cast your
pearls before swine", You cannot force
anybody to become a seeker. There are
millions of seekers in the world, so forget
about such relationships. They may call you
mad or crazy or anything but they will realise
one thing that you lead a much better life
than they do. You are much more peaceful,
blissful, dharmic and sane but they won't
accept your life. Play around with them with
the understanding that they cannot change.
Even if they change mentally they cannot
have that urge because to a seeker nothing
is important except seeking.
May God Bless you
Answering to another question
Shri Mataji Said:
The question is that the
psychologists say that mind is limited, i.e.
whatever the mind does is limited. Whatever
action we perform is done through mind only
and this mind has limited energy and so it
cannot take you to the unlimited. So
something has to be which is beyond the
control of the mind, that is the only
spontaneous thing. Now see the confusion.
But their question can be answered on
mental level. What is the basic difference
between Divine and human? How to con-
vince ordinary humans of Sahaja Yoga and
the Divine? They are doubting you as you
are doubting them.
QUESTION: What about the people
who are good people, not seekers, but who
have got realisation but don't seem to see
the significance of Sahaja yoga?
The simple answer is that whatever
you do with your mind like shouting,
howling, jumping etc. can be done by the
limited mind. So one who is doing is some
human agency, some human being and not
the Divine. But you cannot make your
MOTHER: They will go out of
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-27.txt 
 26
Issue: 11 & 12- 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
pulsate the Kundalini. It is a living force and
human being cannot create or generate life.
They cannot make the pupil dilate when the
Kundalini goes up. As ordinary humans and
so-called gurus cannot feel the vibrations
you cannot talk of the vibratory awareness
to them but you can see with your naked
eyes. They cannot make the cool breeze
come out of your head. This is something
extraordinary. What I can do with the limited
Kundalini pulsate with your mind. The
Divine, if it has to do something, must be
extra-ordinary which human beings cannot
do. To pulsate Kundalini is only possible for
the Divine. It is a living force. Man makes
things-dead things. Man can do dead
actions. But a living force cannot be
activated. What is the need to go to the
gurus if they make you do the limited
actions of the mind. You can always shout,
howl and jump without them. But you
cannot make the Kundalini pulsate.
is make myself. I can also do unlimited. That
is the side of the Divine Mother. In the same
way you are limited now but you have jumped
into the unlimited. So you can do all these
things. That is why you are saints. The
things you can do in the unlimited you could
not have done before realisation. You start
Divine does something which you
cannot do. You cannot make the cool
breezes flow from your hand. So, if you go
beyond the mind it has to be something
extraordinary, something different. The
limited and the unlimited are two different
dimensions. This is the secret of your
Mother's Maya, that I live on unlimited and
do unlimited things. That is how I create
Maya. You can know me only through
knowing you vibratory awareness. If you put
your hand on the head of someone nobody
can make you shake. So the Divine force is
something that human beings cannot do
through their mind. I repeat, you cannot
doing some that you could not have done
before, i.e. to raise your Kundalini and of
the people. The gurus, so-called, can shout,
howl, jump and do all these things but they
cannot raise the Kundalini of the people. All
other things, we can say, are arbitrary,
subjective. Then, you will get your cure,
change your mental attitude and all that.
(Nirmala Yoga 1983)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-28.txt 
 A Letter from Canada
Dear Brothers and Sisters,
experienced this mysterious guidance from
our Holy Mother and we do feel to have been
blessed this way. She is so wonderfull!
There was a time a few years ago
when I and many others, believed that in the
light of the world's social economic and
political situation we were surely doomed.
Very few advocated recovery and
enlightenment for it appeared that we were
in the centre of an irreversible worldwide
crisis. These were the days before I knew I
was a seeker (not a guru shopper but rather
a knowledge hound). Those were days of
sadness, disappointment and general
skepticism. I felt as though the Universal
A very beautiful thing about our
Divine Mother's love is that that She has
enabled us to rise above all the nonsense of
the Maya to experience the truth and reality;
the love and the bliss that is heaven on earth.
Although this ia astounding by itself, it is also
quite amazing to realize that we have only
begun and that the possibilities are virtually
inconceivable at this point.
unknown entity had led me down the
garden path and I didn't know where to turn.
I prayed continually to the "collective" to help
me and show me the way, one thought
always remained in my mind. However,
I knew that before this life time was out
I would learn the secret to it "all".
We can now say with absolute joy,
faith and authority that yes, there is hope,
there is a great light at the end of the tunnel.
Things will change and improve, we will all
become one again and the absolute peace
and love will once again be restored. Very
soon we will be thriving within the supreme
radiance of our Divine Mother's grace.
All this occurred through the years
1971-1978. I know now that my prayers
were being answered. I know, also, that
these were not only my personal formative
years but also the formative years of Sahaja
Yoga and the beginning of the reversal of all
adharmic direction. Most of us have
The world will never look Back again!
Much love, your sister,
Liallyn Musa
Calgary, Alberta,
Canada
(Nirmala Yoga 1983)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-29.txt 
 LEADERS IN SAHAJA YOGA-PARTI
Yuga the right to lead men is earned through
understanding how to obey God.
Sahaja Yoga in its present condition
could, at times, look like a big nursery and,
actually, this is quite a refreshing sight. The
sangha of the Sahaja Yogis is the "Divine
Kindergarten" in which, protected by the
omnipotent love from above, we grow into
spiritual maturity. When babies grow up they
become children and grown up children start
helping the mother in looking after the
younger brothers and sisters who are still
babies. As the children mature they fully
realise the qualities of childhood. They know
that they are not going to recreate another
boring "adult" world, this world that we know
only too well, which is serious to the point of
foolishness, rational to the point of insanity,
a world in which the world "adult" itself has
become a stamp on something dirty : adult
movies, adult books..A world in which the
leaders are such sinners that entire
countries are cursed because of them. In
this respect, we, the children in Sahaja Yoga
are enjoying a special blessing from sakshat
Shri Gopal Krishna. This is the age in which
the saints have become mischievous :
endorsed by the supreme authority of the
Lord we can gently make fun of many of
those pseudoauthorities on the earth. It is
nice to have earned the right to laugh.
To obey God means "Thy will be
done". It means "O Shri Mataji Thou are the
sole and only Doer. Let Thy immaculate
mode of action oparate through me". To obey
means to be great. After all who are our
models, who are the true leaders of Sahaja
yoga?
Shri Ganesha who is Adi bandhu,
that is, the primordial friend of the yogi, was
beheaded, defending, on his Mother's
orders, the access to her inner apartments
against lord Shiva himself. Christ, no less
obedient, let himself be crucified. Let us face
it: what is the depth of our obedience to Shri
Mataji? How many "but Shri Mataji", how
many "I think, I believe", how many
explanations, justifications, argumentations
or even advices have l-in my abyssmal
stupidity-given to the one who knows
everything but who is Mahamaya?I really feel
like pulling my ears down to ground level.
Only because Shri Adi Shakti is cloaked into
Mahamaya is it at all possible that our daily
lack of obedience should be forgiven. Only
because She is Divine Patience, does She
go on correcting, guiding us. But we should
leam. Learn fast. To this effect, we must
remember a key word.
Yet mature children know whom to
"ATTENTION" is the first word of
Aldous Huxley's novel /sland and it gives this
book its best line. Attention (chitta) is
crucially important. When projected inside,
it allows us to watch how the ego plays its
rebellious tricks, how the super ego isolates
our consciousness from God's will through
a cocoon of conditionnings. Without full
attention, real obedience to Shri Mataji is not
possible And without developing such a
laugh at and whom to obey. It is all right to run
in the courtyard during playtime but, back in
the classroom, the whole class stands up at
attention when the master comes in. This is
what our Kundalini does when Shri Mataji's
presence is felt. And this is a fundamental
characteristic of those who are to become
leaders in Sahaja Yoga : they have to display
absolute, uncompromising obedience to the
Mahavatar Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. In Satya
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-30.txt 
 29
Issue: 11 & 12 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
Reality and thus he lets Her do so. That is
why he will perhaps find the answer to that
most clever question : "How can I best
please Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi?"
respectful sense of obedience how could
we call for obedience in others? We have
to be disciples before becoming gurus.
Besides this obvious point the deities, devas
and ganas are constantly watching how
obedient we are towards Shri Mataji and if
we don't satisfy them or this criterion we
cannot rise into higher spiritual planes, we
cannot develop the status of a sahaja yogi
elder. Unfortunately even today old sahaja
yogis aren't sometimes quick enough to
follow the Goddess's instructions, they
hesitate before implementing them. As a
result the whole divine project which was
conceived for their benefit fizzles out and,
-Obedience to Shri Mataji is the
establishment of our brotherhood
with Shri Ganesha-Christ.
-Obedience to Her is the highest punya.
-Obedience to Her is the acceleration of
the evolutionary process.
-Obedience to Her is the actualisation of
surrender.
-Obedience to Her is the way to the
Father.
-Obedience to Her is the mark of pure
intelligence.
-Obedience to Her, the Parameshwari,
the sacred Emperess, obedience to Her
again, and again.
sure enough, they find themselves the
losers.
A child but also an elder, humble but
proud too, simple yet subtle, a leader in
Sahaja Yoga is, above all, obedient to his
Divine Mother. He has understood that She
Jai Shri Mataji
is guiding him on the safest road towards
(Nirmala Yoga 1983)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-31.txt 
 The Visage of Salvation
Virgin, pure in heavenly sheen,
Mother, throned supernal,
Highest birth, out chosen Queen,
Goodhead's peer eternal.
Faust is the piece of the German
literature which should be read by all Sahaja
Yogis. Goethe's Doctor Faust was the
archetype of the modern seeker. He was so
sure that nothing, short of the Absolute, could
quench his thirst that he made a pact with
Mephistopheles, the Devil, prince of the
seducers. "If any wordly temptation can bind
me, then my soul will belong to you."
Now Near her splendour
Floats a light cloud,
Penitents tender
In gentle crowd,
Tasting heaven's ether,
At her feet kneeling,
For grace appealing.
Yet it isn't an easy game the one we
play with the devil and the path of Faust,
strewn with lust and death, finally leads to
doom. At the end of the drama though,
Goethe unfurls a heavenly vision
Redeemer, of the seeker stuck in his sins.
appears in great glory. No doubt, the Sahaja
yogis will be quick to recognize who that
magnificient Divine Being is:
To thee enthroned in holy awe,
Power is not denied,
That the lightly erring draw,
Trusting, to thy side.
Hard to save whom lust be spake,
Weak, before his fire;
Who in single strength can break
Chanins of dark desire?
So the foot will swiftly slip,
On the slant way gliding,
Heart the fool of eye and lip,
In soft words confiding."
the
"Here is free prospect wide,
The soul up-bearing.
There women-figures glide,
Heavenwards faring.
With them the heavenly Queen,
Majesty tender,
In wreath of stars is seen,
Clear in her splendour.
Yes, Goethe, the greatest German
poet, himself struggling to escape the net of
the senses, extolled sakshat Shri Adi Shakti.
In this Mater Gloriosa he was not portraying
the role that Shri Mahalakshmi played as
Pavilioned in the heaven's blue,
Queen on high of all the world,
For the holy sight I sue,
Of the mystery unfurled.
Sanction what in man may move
Feelings tender and austere,
And with glow of sacred love
Lifts him to thy presence near.
Mary, the modest maiden of Nazareth, but
the majesty of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in
Her heavenly form. It is said that the very
face of the Goddess sends out cool moon
rays, that Her darshan introduces us into the
state of smadhi. Indeed the Sahaja Yogis
have the experience that they become
absolutely thoughtless merely by watching
the face of Shri Mataji.
Souls unconquerable rise
If, sublime, thou will it;
Sinks that storm in peaceful wise
If thy pity still it.
"O contrite hearts, seek with you eyes
the visage of salvation3;
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-32.txt 
 31,
Issue: 11 & 12 - 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
two, left a powerful message to mankind, I
wish that all our brothers and sisters who
Blissful in that gaze, arise,
Through glad regeneration.
Now may every pulse of good
Seek to serve before thy face,
Virgin, Queen of Motherhood,
Keep us, Goddess, in thy grace."
are still struggling in their quest could hear
it. They would come straight to sahaja Yoga.
"All things corruptible
Are but a parable;
Earth's insufficiency
Here finds fulfilment;
Here the ineffable
Wins life through love;
Eternal Womanhood
Leads us above.
By praising this Holy Face of the
Mother, Goethe, unconsciously, or, perhaps,
consciously?-brought at Her Lotus Feet the
homage of those many talents that She, as
Saraswati, had bestowed upon him. We can
very clearly see that the poet perceived the
decisive role of the Cosmic Mother.
Indeed the very last words of Faust Part
Jai Shri Mataji
(A former mini doctor Faust)
(Nirmala Yoga - 1983)
Little Angel Prays Before Mother Mary
Amy and and Andrew J. DiMaggio Jr.
of LaPlace don't have to be told that their one
some point and walk upto our statue of Mary,"
the DiMaggios said. In this photo, she was
holding her hands - up and talking to Mary in
her own babble language. We hope that this
picture will inspire your readers to remember
year old daughter Anna Maria is special. They
get a glimpse of it every day when the toddler
walks out to the front yard of her house and
the words of Jesus who said that "as to enter
begins an animated conversation with the
the kingdom of heaven we must be open as a
Blessed Mother. "Whenever she is with us in
the frontyard, she will always stop playing at
child."
Internet Version
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Pravachan of H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Delhi - 18 August 1979
Although reflection of the sun is seen in
water, he is away in the sky and not in
water. Similarly Atma is as much as it is
seen. It is beyond all that and not limited by
it. But, for any reflection to be clearly visible
the mirror which is the cause of that
reflection must be clean. If the mirror is not
clean, or instead of mirror a stone is there,
the sun's reflection will not be seen in it. In
the same way, that man looks disturbed who
has not yet become clean like mirror, so that
he can see the Paramatma's reflection
within himself. Although the sun is seen
taking different shapes on the ripples of
flowing water, he is steady at his place and
it is only his reflection that changes its shape.
Similarly, the reflection of Atma appears to
be absent or it just shines for a moment and
disappears, in the person who is full of sin
and wickedness or whose heart is loaded
with false ambitions and desires. It thus
entails that all these--body, mind, intellect,
ego etc, that we know, should be converted
into a mirror. It should be transformed into a
The sudden arrival is for various
reasons. In Sahaja yoga sudden arrival has
a special significance. We must have seen
many incidents in our lives, which have
suddenly happened. They do not mean
anything to us. If we try on intellectual level,
we cannot understand why a particular
incident has taken place in our life. It has
been the way of human being, that he wants
to understand everything through reasoning.
This is correct on his part because his
awareness has not yet awakened. When his
awareness is limited and when he is
searching the proof of everything though his
intellect it is difficult for him to adopt some
other means which are outside the scope
of reasoning
You have heard a lot about
Paramatma, Atma, Adi-shakti etc. You have
also read about them in books. Every now
and then, man talks about Atma and
Parmatma. There have been many
incarnations, who have told that you should
first realise your Atma because man cannot
reach Paramatma, without knowing his
Atma. As you cannot identify colours
without eyes in the same way, you cannot
attain Paramatma unless you meet your
Atma, You cannot intellectually understand
Paramatma. It is only through Atma that you
can understand Paramatma. So far, all saints
have said "be alert in the observance of your
Dharma, search your Atma, understand the
Atma that is residing in you."
mirror.
How will it happen? God has made
that arrangement within us. Many
incarnations have worked for evolving us
from ameoba to human being and have
brought us into our present stage. When we
are moving about as alert human beings we
are alert but not enlightened. A blind man is
very alert but one who has sight sees
everything without being bothered about it. A
blind man can perceive small small things.
What is Atma? What work is it doing
residing within us and how is it related to
Paramatma? It is said that Atma is the
reflection of Paramatma in our heart. This
reflection is like that of the sun in water.
He knows small details of every place. One
who is having the sight looks at only those
things which are worth seeing and which he
wants to know about.
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-34.txt 
 İssue: 11 & 12- 2006
33
The Divine Cool Breeze
fee bad about it, and would like to get it
cleaned somehow, immediately.
Kundalini Shakti that is residing in us
has been placed in us by Paramatma and
has been created by His desire. Kundalini
Shakti creates our mirror, develops it and
cleans it. Slowly She makes it capable of
receiving in itself the reflection of Atma. In
Sahaja Yoga you know that awakening of
Kundalini is very easy and spontaneous. But
Sahaja Yogis must know that they have
come to Sahaja Yoga primarily to clean their
mirror, to wash their sins and past deeds, to
become purified of all the dirt that has been
accumulated within from time immemorial.
They have not come to collect sins and dirt,
but to become pure. Many Sahaja Yogis are
aware that Kundalini is that current which
Suppose if there is a catch on some
Chakra, say on Agnya, you will understand
it yourself. You will have some pain or some
such similar feeling. In the light you will
understand that you have problem there; and
you will clear it. But if you are not sensitive
and do not feel the problem, you may go mad
and may land in lunatic assylum without even
knowing that your such and such Chakra
was caught, and such filth entered inside
you. Similarly you never know even if you
contact some disease, because you are
sitting in the dark. In the darkness you do
not understand whether you are sitting on a
snake or some bomb has fallen on you.
When the light shines inside you, you realise
which calamity you are facing. So the first
glimpse of knowledge is regarding yourself.
You know your problems.
passes through their Chakras and awakens
their Chakras. When the light comes on your
Chakras you can know their condition even
on your finger tips. This is the knowledge.
This alone is to be known. So far the
knowledge that you have had was not
enlightened. There was no light in it. Now
because of the light, you can know which of
your chakras have problems. There is a way
to clear the Chakras of those problems. How
to do it, is also taught in Sahaja Yoga.
In Sahaja Yoga, people get the
realization. Immediately thereafter man sees
his own faults and as human nature is, he
starts running away from Sahaja Yoga.
Initially, he gets scared, the very moment he
starts seeing his own faults. He cannot
believe that so many faults exist in him. He
is scared and then he starts doubting. You
have seen; thousands of people come and
get the realisation but they do not come
again. What is the reason for it? If hundred
people are realised only 10 percent come
back. It always happens. Therefore Sahaja
Yoga is developing rather slowly. That does
not matter. Its reason is that man is so much
indentified with himself that he does not want
You can not see the filth so long as
there is no light. It is not visible in the dark.
You will see it when light illumines within you.
So the first object is, to accomplish the light,
to-what people call-achieving the truth or
knowing the truth. First we should know the
truth and in the truth we initially come to know
what our qualities are, In Sahaja Yoga, man
easily accepts his faults, because he can
see them in the light. Suppose there is a spot
on this saree, and it is dark. If some one
points it out, we won't agree and may even
feel offended. But if we see it in light, we
would be surprised that there is such a big
spot and we have not noticed it ! We won't
to know his faults; and when he knows them,
he starts running away. But it is better; to
know your faults and correct them, rather
than carrying their burden from life to life.
People do not know what time has come. It
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-35.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2006
34
The Divine Cool Breeze
is the last chance. You. won't get any more
chance. In Bible it has been described as
the 'Last Judgement'. Your last judgement
is in Sahaja Yoga and how it will be done
can be judged by yourself. When the light
comes within you, you judge yourself. "See
my such and such Chakra has been
caught." Then you say "Mother, I have a
catch on this Chakra". You know that am
ready to put in all efforts for you. You can
also work on each other, thereby you can
completely clean all your faults, problems
and sins etc. Why should you carry that
burden? Instead of throwing it off people are
running away from Sahaja Yoga. This is
human brain. That keeps thinking and
always remains worried. There is nothing to
be scared of. If you become little steady, you
will realise how big is this power, which not
only brings into light your faults, but also
removes them and removes them
as auspicious, here.
Some persons are very auspicious
whereas some are quite inauspicious
Latter ones bring calamities in the house or
in the country they enter. There will be
difficulties, wherever they stay. One
gentleman came to me. He was a young
man of 23-24 years. He said "Mother I am
quite inauspicious". "How do you know?" I
asked. He said I am very inauspicious. Even
children are afraid of me. When I go to a
house the family has to face some
difficulties or the other, or some bad event
occurs, that people are now convinced that
that there is something wrong with me and I
am inauspicious, because it has happened
repeatedly. Such people are inauspicious
because al darkness of sin is associated
with them and it is so deep that like a blind
person they face tremendous difficulties,
grief, sorrow, sickness etc. and ultimately
they are finished in that. If such a person
visits a family some one from them may even
completely.
So, first of all you must know, that
Kundalini Shakti is extremely holy and
virgin. This virgin power makes us clean and
pure. In Sahaja Yoga, She is very much
pleased to give you the realisation. Then
there can be only two possibilities. Either you
recognise the self-realisation within you, and
rise upto its greatness and go deep in it; or
leave it altogether. There cannot be a third
alternative. AS someone asked, "How many
turns are there in London?" Only two; left
and right. Either you completely accept it or
leave it. If you have decided to accomplish it
and to completely clean yourself, then the
reflection of Atma will shine in you. In this
Kundalini Yoga you become aware in
collective consciounsness, you remain
aware in collective consciousness and you
clean others also while cleaning yourself.
Others' sins are also washed. It is regarded
die.
Considerations regarding good or
bad omens is in vogue in our country since
time immemorial. Those who are saints.
although they are care free, have no place
of their own-they may not be bothered about
their clothes and food and may be staying in
jungles-bring prosperity wherever they go.
This is also told about God. If you want to
recognise God. His biggest identity is that
the biggest auspiciousness is in His hands.
He does good to all and makes all happy.
Touch of His feet makes everything
auspicious. There are six gifts of God, which
bring prosperity, well being, happiness etc.
Whenever incarnations came, great
and auspicious works were done. But now
the time has come in which that work will be
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-36.txt 
 35
Issue: 11 & 12-2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
of Brahma Nadi, reason is man's
attachment to his karmas. That extremely
subtle channel Brahma Nadi is loaded with
sin and dirty things and thereby gets so
much narrowed, that very thin fibre of
Kundalini could pass through it. Imagine that
Kundalini is like an enlightened rope made
of small fibres. Its very thin fibre could pass
through Brahma Nadi. This is the condition.
You have all seen that this is a very subtle,
very deep process. Most of you have seen
Kundalini's movements and pulsations. She
tries to make, somehow a small opening at
the bottom, so that it becomes possible to
pass at least one strand through the
extremely narrow passage of Brahma Nadi
and with that very subtle strand She pierces
the Brahmarandhra. Initially this happening
takes place very easily in most of the people.
But She again coils down due to the
pressure of the burden and then they even
forget that the peace, serenity and cool
brations etc. which they had once received
are no more with them. They are shocked
when they see in the light that these things
are embodied in themselves. Then they get
scared and become suspicious.
done, which is the most auspicious work
ever done, thereby, you also will be the doers
of auspiciousness and will realise the Spirit
residing within you. This is the ever great
work of Sahaja Yoga and the incarnatios. It
great
should inspire the entire society. In this
eternal life, when shadows of Kaliyuga are
enveloping the whole universe, your torches
(flame) should burn high, and in their light
you may attain auspiciousness, joy and pros-
perity. It is necessary, for this, to keep your
lamps clean, you should wash your sins and
past deeds. Your past deeds are washed
along with your ego. Karmas are done by
your ego. You must have observed that
after coming to Sahaja Yoga, you can very
easily see your ego (Ahankar) and how it
works. In Sahaja Yoga also, you come
across many temptations and in that when
your ego dominates, you forget whether you
have to go to Sahaja Yoga or Sahaja Yoga is
to come to you. Many people when they
surrender to their ego, turn their backs to
Sahaja Yoga expecting Sahaja Yoga to
follow them. So long as your ego is
enveloping, you cannot have the glimpse of
your Spirit.
vi-
Man's intellect comes up with many
But it is useless to fight with your ego.
doubts. The first doubt which is very
common, is 'VWho is Mataji'? This is the first
question, I want to tell you that you can not
understand Me so long as the eyes of your
Spirit are not open, and you should not even
make efforts to understand. First you open
the eye of your Spirit.
In Sahaja Yoga you do not have to fight with
your ego, but you have just to see because
your attention is itself awakened. Your ego
cools down by just seeing, as your attention
is enlightened and in that light you witness
the play of your ego and laugh at it, and laugh
at the ideas given by your ego. As you start
seeing yourself, your ego starts getting
deflated and as your ego is deflated you rise
in your light.
When Shri Ram came, people said
that they accepted Parashuram, when Shri
Krishna came they said, they accepted Shri
Ram and at the time of Shri Nanaka, they
accepted Shri Krishna, when Christ was
here they accepted Abrahim. All of them had
taken human form. But it is all the play of
Sahaja Yoga is a very subtle process.
Few people know that it is a very subtle
process. Sushumna Nadi is extremely
small, extremely thin, exactly at the centre
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-37.txt 
 36
Issue: 11 & 12-2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
Buddhi (the intellect), how interesting it is!
Now, I have come and people are accepting
Shri Sai Nath (of Shirdi). But when he lived
here, he did not even get any thing to eat.
(ego).
Man has too much of ego. If you had
accepted Shri Rama in his days, he would
have told you to get your Kundalini
awakened and get the realisation and get
established in Sahaja Yoga. Had you
recognised Shri Krishna, he would not have
played Sahaja Yoga in Gokul, but would have
given you the realisation and told you to
practise Sahaja Yoga. If Shri Nanak had been
accepted, there was no need for him to
break his head telling you to do different
Why was it so? He was also a
human being. So long as he was alive, he
too was considered useless and tortured but
when he died he was regarded as Bhagwan
(God). What is the reason of this all? Why
has man been tike this?
You will have water of the Ganges,
where She flows. If She is flowing here, will
you say 'We do not accept Her as the
Ganges!" There may be nothing at the place
where She was flowing earlier, or may be,
only a nulah at present. If you want to take it
as the Ganges you go your way. If the
Ganges is flowing at this place, why not
accept it?
things. He would have simply taught Sahaja
Yoga, but very few understood him in his
days. Now, when he is not here, you have
built Gurudwaras in his name. When
Mohammad is not here mosques have been
made, because they think now Mohammad
Sahib is in their hands. Now Rama is in their
hands, and they can make his temple and
say "This is our temple, this Rama is our
property. We have authority over him and
It is not easy to understand human
intellect. it is the most difficult job in the world!
whatever you have brought-all money and
other things, offer them to this idol". You say
It is easy to understand God,
because He is what He is. He does not have
such double dealings. Man has a variety of
all this because you think you are the
authority of this idol. It is sheer ego because
of which man thinks , that he can keep God
in his control and for that he is making all
qualities, not just double. All animals from
snakes and scorpians to elephants, horses
and lions are residing in him. You will not
understand at all, why his brain is working
in this way.
the show.
Every time the same show was
repeated. Even now. I see big temples.
What is happening in them? What is going
on even in those temples having
'swayambhu' idols? (Those idols which have
come spontaneously out of Mother earth are
called Swayambhu idols. They are not
Now when the Ganges is flowing why
do not you take water from Her? Imagine this
plug has been connected here. Will you
contect in its place a plug which is out of
order? It is quite pragmantic. I cannot
understand what hallucination is there on
human intellect, that he does not accept the
truth which he is seeing but accepts
something that is not seen! Its reason was
understood long back and that is Ahankar
man-made
Ego makes donkey out of man. Even
donkey has its respect. Donkey also may
have some sense of propriety but an egoist
can be wrose than a donkey. If a man is
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-38.txt 
 37
Issue: 11 & 12-2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
equated with his ego, then the result is a
donkey, I always say, you will be surprised
to see how the ego is inflated in a man. If
one gets excess of money he goes astray.
One out of one lakh rich people, talks sense.
If they receive money, they will think in which
pub they would go or to which dirty woman
they would go etc! Never would that man
think, that the money he has got could be
spent on the work, within himself and
without that would be acceptable to God and
would bring His blessing. They will make the
show of ego even in that, they will make a
temple and inscribe on it that the temple of
Shri Rama has been built by such and such
person in the name of his father. What will
you call it, if not madness! If his father had
done some work, automatically he would
have become famous. By seeing such
dreams of false ego man remains away from
the truth. Even though man sees the truth
face to face, the ego teaches him not to
accept it because by accepting the truth he
would be free from ego.
affairs. But an ordinary person cannot,
because he has no ability to wield an
excess of anything. He cannot go to an
extreme when he attains the extremes of his
Spirit, rest everything becomes valueless for
him. On the contrary, due to his ego he loses
his freedom and day and night he remains
in such nasty hallucination that like a fool he
thinks that he is being praised. Never can
he think as to what he is doing and which is
the right path for him.
Now the time has come to stop and
see. It is now time to rise and to know.
It is time for you to stop wherever you
have reached on the mount of your ego and
look back. So far, you have not achieved
anything, you do not know anything. Accept
it with humility and let it be imbibed in you.
You have not yet understood your Spirit. With
your every step, you are getting more and
more involved in dead things that put you in
the fetters of dependence and enslavement
of your six enemies (viz Passion anger,
greed, pride, temptation and jealousy), stop
for a while and see your mirror there itself
which is within you and you will find the
Paramatma of your eternal Atma residing
It has many remedies. Say a man
receives plenty of money and becomes very
powerful. Excessive power also makes One
a donkey. One behaves like a joker and
becomes a laughing stock, with too much
of power because that goes to one's head.
If a woman becomes extremely beautiful and
she takes it into her head that she is a
within you, Know Him and go deep. Enjoy
that bliss and with that light dispel darkness
of the world. This is very great work and
many people are not sticking to this great
work. That is the difficulty. Thousands will
come here if I start mesmerising.
ravishing beauty, then she goes down to a
nadir. Why does man become a donkey
when he has excess of something? Its
reason is-he cannot wield it. If he is an
One such fake guru reached London.
He emptied the pockets of ninety thousand
people, he charged $ 6000 from each
person. Sixty people from them came to me,
they were suffering from epilepsy, I asked
them as to what he taught them, which
mantras he told. At the cost of six thousand
dollars, those poor things, got the
emperor, even millions of rupees have no
value for him, but let a pauper have some
money and he will be flabbergasted. If a real
king comes to power, it does not matter for
him at all. He lives in the world like a king
and is not bothered by small and petty
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-39.txt 
 Issue: 11& 12 - 2006
38
The Divine Cool Breeze
through considerable pressure and strain,
because of which you have to face big
problems. Hence, initially, you have to
become simple. You know, that my work has
great impetus in villages. Ego is more
powerful in cities. Due to small things, people
become egoists and that is why, they
surrender to those who pamper their ego
and run away with their money. You just keep
looking at them and receive disease. You will
be surprised, all those patients of deadly
diseases, like cancer, etc. whom I have
cured, all of them without any exception were
the victims of fake gurus and tantrikas. I have
not seen any cancer patient who was not
connected with a false guru. That's why it is
said that doctors cannot cure cancer. You
would now understand, how wicked,
inauspicious and harmful these people are!
Even environments around them are bad.
Those who go into their environments come
to such a tremendous grief that you will be
shocked to know. Very large number of
people have died in Morvi, some of them
were innocent, but worst kind of sin was to
be committed at that place. You have heard
that those people had decided to buy for a
sadhu a huge land in Kucch. Man must see
and think in whose hands he is playing and
how he is inviting his own disastrous end.
mantra-Ainga, phinga, thinga! This mantra
was passed to them secretly in writing and
they were told that by chanting this mantra
they would get many siddhis. Today, those
people are on the roads, their homes have
been ruined, their plight is miserable. Had
they been wise and tried to understand, they
would not have gone to such a person who
was pampering their ego. Always he would
tell them "you are a great person, you are
Ponganand, all should come in their best
etc." Those who fill their coffers, keep
inflating other people's ego and all people in
the world like such persons. Big news
papers, will bring out their advertisement and
write their praise because those persons
have money which attracts money. Big ce-
lebrities would call on them, But inside,
there is a big falsehood. Can we say man
worships falsehood? But man himself lives
in a big falsehood, which is his ego. One
who preserves such falsehood and is
carried away by it, invites his disaster.
Why,-I am repeatedly asking
you,-why are you inviting that disastrous
end? What is the reason for which you do
not want to know yourself? Why don't you
want to surrender before God? Why are you
following wrong people? You are ready to
sacrifice even your life for those who are
robbing you, destroying you, who have done
all harm to you because they have
mesmerised you. Have you got no capacity
of your own to understand what is going on?
Paramatma can be known, only in complete
freedom. You are getting scared of whatever
little freedom you initially experience in
Sahaja Yoga and want to go back to your
old state of dependence.
I am telling you as your mother and
persuading you not to go to such wicked
people and invite your disaster. Do not
destroy your Spirit by going to such people.
You should understand your Spirit. There is
no need to spoil everything in the oscillations
of questions and counter questions. Get
realisation first. First know your Spirit. I will
do the rest. On what basis will you ask
questions before that? Have you got any
means to ascertain who is genuine and who
is fake. You must know your Spirit first. So
Sahaja Yoga is very simple, but you
people are not. There are many
complications in cities. You have to pass
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-40.txt 
 39
The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 11 & 12-2006
persons in this country who have come to
Sahaja Yoga and attained their Spirit.
long as you do not know your Spirit it is
useless to discuss because it is a very
subtle subject and not shallow, that you could
come and see somebody's face and say
something and that's all! Never get into such
a mess that you cannot come out of it.
Sahaja Yoga is a superb feat, it is extremely
great. Some times I myself am amazed at
it! It is such a fantastic thing. It looked really
very difficult how would it take place in a man
and then grow further. Jesus could be
considered as the last man, to do a lot of
work and after Him we can say on Guru
principle Nanak Sahib came. Even in his
time so many could not know their Spirit. He
was breaking his head on advising the
people. He had taken human form but still
He was not recognised.
This is the last judgement, let us see
what happens. Whatever people come is
alright for me. Even if they do not come, it's
still alright. Remember God will not bow
before you. You have to accomplish Him in
your own freedom. If you have not achieved
Him, It is not His fault, nor is it of Sahaja Yoga,
mine, or that of Atma.
You, who are having your ego, will
have yourself to blame. It is your wealth or
your asset and it has been given to you only
because you should accept it, know it and
enjoy it.
May God bless you.
(Nirmala Yoga-1983)
Translated from Hindi
I was with Him, in fact with all of
them. I am glad that there are about 10,000
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-41.txt 
 Nirmal Shakti Yuva Sangh Seminar
Delhi, 24-25 June, 2006
that when we pray to Shri Mataji from our
heart and take Her Holiest of Holy names
with humility, all Her Powers manifest. These
Powers (and not any technique)
spontaneously and effortlessly cure us,
balance us, make us peaceful, and guide
us, so that we work to please our Almighty
All-knowing loving Mother.
With the blessings from our beloved
Param Pujya Shri Mataji, a seminar for
Nirmal Shakti Yuva Sangh (Mostly referred
to as Yuva Shakti) was held in Delhi. Young
Sahaja Yogis from Noida, Gurgaon,
Faridabad and Ghaziabad also participated
in the Seminar. Around 700 enthusiastic
young Sahaja Yogis had very enjoyable 2
days at Nirmal Darbar, on 24th and 25th
June 2006. The Seminar was held with the
aim of instilling and developing further, the
feeling of devotion and dedication towards
our Guru Sakshat Adi Shakti Param Pujya thoughtless awareness. Also to develop
Mataji. The Young Sahaja Yogis are the
innocent hands of the Divine-they have to
glorify themselves as instrument of the "Pure
Power of Love" (Nirmal Shakti)- as a young, Advice of our Holy Mother and allow these
loving, dedicated and pure collectivity (Yuva blessings of Param Chaitanya to Protect,
Sangh).
The main path towards realizing this
objectives was to encourage the collectivity
of young Sahaja Yogis to go deeper in Dhyan
by achieving the peaceful state of
sensitivity and feeling of vibratory
awareness-the tool for our guidance. Only
then we understand deeply the Divine
Cure and Transform us. With this we also
It was felt that we should realise
within us the Reality of this Age, the
Incarnation of our Divine Mother who is God
Almighty. That we should be able to feel that
Reality on our own systems and experience
become better instruments in the
spreadment of Shri Mataji's Love, and of the
unique and most precious gifts of Kundalini
Awakening and Sahaja Yoga, to others.
With these objectives, each session
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-42.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12- 2006
The Divine Cool Breeze
It was also explained how one can
be benefited in studies with the Blessings of
Sahaja Yoga.
started with Dhyan. Many of the participants
were introduced to sharing of vibrations. It
was emphasized that while meditating each
one, individually, is directly seeking
blessings from Shri Mataji. Blessings
flowing from Shri Mataji cleanse us, give us
balance and take us into Thoughtless
Awareness. Thoughtless Awareness is only
achieved effortlessly, by each one praying
directly to the Adi Shakti for the same, (and
not by any other actions or procedures or
through any other person). All participants
felt vibrations more strongly and also felt the
Thoughtless Awareness within themselves
in a sustained manner.
In the Seminar, time was earmarked
to enjoy and encourage the feeling of "
Sangha-the collectivity" amongst the
youngsters. They also experienced how
beautiful things work out when each one in
the collectivity is in meditation, working while
connected to the Spirit. All the participants
were divided into 25 teams and each team
was given a project related to
understanding, promotion and publicity of
Sahaja Yoga: through talks/music/posters
and banners/skits and plays/ dance drama/
Sahaj New channel/ Backdrop of the stage
for pujas/ public programmes/ Facts about
Shri Mataji's life, about deities & chakras etc.
It was so arranged that all 700 were involved
in one or the other collective activity. All
presentation were prepared spontaneously
and collectively, within an hours, and were
appreciated and enjoyed by the all
participants.
The importance of taking bandhan
was also experienced by all-not to do it
mechanically, but with attention on Shri
Mataji and on the flow of vibrations from our
hands covering us with Shri Mataji's Power
of Love.
The participants were told about the
aims of forming Nirmal Shakti Yuva Sangh
as desired by Shri Mataji.
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-43.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2006
42
The Divine Cool Breeze
deeply caring and all-knowing love, ensured
that throughout the weather was extremely
cool and pleasant. (One of the prominent
News Papers even reported on front page
this surprising fact : of the nature providing
rains only in a
other parts of Delhi remained hot and dry.)
On the second day morning
everyone joined in the morning weekly
meditation in which around 100 new
seekers had come. This time the young
Sahaja Yogis were enthusiastically involved
in raising Kundalinis of, and attending to the
newcomers, and enjoyed the experience
along with elder Sahaja Yogis.
particular region, while
Another miracle was, that while
arrangements had been made for about 250
participants, the actual number at the time
of lunch was just about three times of that.
Besides, just then there was heavy rain and
strom. But Shri Mataji's Love again
managed everything. By Goddess
Annapurna's grace, spontaneously,
arrangements were made, and food was
ready for all the participants. We all deeply
thanked our Mother for showering Her Love.
The participants collectively gave
bandhan to the modern electronic Media and
its negative impact, and everyone took a
vow not to watch any undesireable
programmes shown on Television etc.
Each day videos of The Mother's
talks were also shown, and an extremely
touching Documentary titled The Source of
Supremely Love" on the life of the Divine
Mother, was also shown. Everyone was in
the mood of dhyan, and felt very strong
vibrations. The meditation session following
this beautiful film about Shri Mataji made
everyone absolutely thoughtless and opened
everyone's heart. How much it elevates us
whenever we realize with our hearts that Shri
After the seminar, parents have
reported that their children are meditating and
doing foot-soak at home, of their own, and
are enjoying the thoughtless awareness and
vibrations and the feeling of devotion towards
our Divine Mother. (Also watching TV much
less.)
Mataji is God Almighty, and bow to the Adi
Shakti in our hearts with humility!
On the whole, it was a memorable
Seminar full of blessings from our Divine
Mother : The wonderful vibrations, and the
young hearts devoted to Divine Mother in
meditation. We offer our pranams and
gratitude at the Lotus Feet of the Adi Shakti
and pray thatAlmighty Mother grants us more
such opportunities of collectively enjoying
Her Love.
A miracle that took place. The
weather of Delhi that had been unberably hot
and sunny with high temperature, but as
soon as the seminar commenced, within
minutes, the whole sky was overcast with
clouds and there was a heavy downpour
particularly in and around the area where the
seminar was taking place. Shri Mataji's
Jai Shri Mataji
Delhi Collectivity
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-45.txt 
 November - December 2006
We have to realise that we are very close, all of us. We are
very close. If that is realised, then finished, then you don't have
to bother about anything else. That is....we are brothers and
sisters... that is a different point now, but this is doing Sahaja
yoga, You are....
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
London, August 2, 2006
