17 The Divine Cool Breeze V. 00 January-February, 2006

 " ... Today I am openly revealing this to you that until you Recognize Me, this work will not be done. I did not say this before. Just like Shri Krishna said,'Sarvâdhârmânam parityajayâ mâ-mekam sharanâm vrajâ'. Likewise are My saying too. Like, Christ said 'I am the Light, I am the path', similar are My words too. "I am the Destination, not only the path." But, I never told this to you before, because, the previous experiences were so bad that I did not say this is to you. You have to take My refuge (Sharanâgat). You have to accept Me as your Mother and I have to take you as My son. Without that your work will not be done." (H.H. Shri Mataji, Mumbai. 29.03.1975) I1.

 COOL BREEZE THE DIVINE WA NIRMALA tINIVERSAL PURE RELIGION IN THIS ISSUE Award Presented to Sir C.P. Srivastava 3. Guru Purnima Puja -2005 (USA) - A Report 10. Guru Puja Weekend Report - USA- 2005 13. Acquisition of Shri Mataji's house in Chindwara-India 18. The Spirit - (Pravachan of Shri Mataji) 19. 22. Ekadash Rudra 23. Importance of Puja and Havana - June 18, 1983 Shri Mataji's Advice England 31st March, 1983 25. Leaders in Sahaja Yoga 30. Sahaja Yoga and Physical Cure III 32. The Memories of the Divine Mother 34. DHARMA PAHSIA

 COOL BREEZE THE DIVINE Published by Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 8, Chandragupt Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411029 Printed by Krishna Printer & Designer Vishram Nagar. Tri Nagar. Delhi-35 Mob. 9868545679 For Subscription Please Write to: Shri G.L. Agrawal Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 222. Desh Bandhu Apartments Kalkaji, New Delhi-110019 Tel No. 011-26422054, 26216654 Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles, Miracle Photographs etc. to: Shri O P Chandna G-11 (463), Rishi Nagar. Rani Bagh, Delhi-110 034 Tel. No. 011-55356811 Mor 8.00 AM - 9.00 AM Eve 8 30 PM - 10.30 PM

 Award Presented To Sir C. P. Srivastava by President Of India Papaji by the President of India, H.E. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam. The award carried a cash prize of Rs. 1 lakh, a citation and a plaque. At last the much awaited historic moment sprang up live on First of October in the evening at 4:30 IST in the Rashtrapati Bhavan, (President House), New Delhi on Saturday, when the prestigious award in due recognition for his contribution in the field of maritime exploration and Excellence in Public Administration, Academics and Sir CP Srivastava has been designated as a Lal Bahadur Shastri Fellow and his name inscribed on the honours roll of the Lal Bahadur Shastri Institute of Management, Delhi., The participants in the Rashtrapati Management was awarded to retired IAS officer, Sir. C.P. Srivastava, our beloved Bhavan award ceremony included Prime

 Issue :1 & 2 - 2006 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE 4 LGM Sir CP. Srivastava is the founding Chancellor Emeritus of the World Maritime University, Malmo, Sweden. He has also been the chairman of the governing board of the IMO Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh, United Progressive Alliance Chairperson Ms. Sonia Gandhi, Union Home Minister Mr. Shivraj Patil, and the former Union Minister and son of Lal Bahadur Shastri, Mr. Anil Shastri International Maritime Law Institute, Malta, along with other important dignitaries. and chairman of the Government of India Committee on Maritime Education and Mr. Shastri, who is also the chairman of the institute, said: "The award honours people from whom the younger generation can draw inspiration." Training. The Sahaja yogi present there at that gracious moment fondly recollects that the presence FED

 Issue :1& 2-2006 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE of Our Holy Mother gave the event a special quality and auspiciousness and that She was pleased. After, Sir CP was honoured with the prestigious award; he was subsequently invited to deliver his speech. The speech itself turned out to be historic in its own that he received from his daughters Kalpana and Sadhna. He also mentioned that Shri Mataji as his wife "Nirmala", who had always been at his side as inspiration and that Her principles were all that Mr. Lal Bahadur Shastri once prophesied as values in life and serving the cause of the humanity. She had been in that path only, helping mankind to improve upon all social activities and make a better living. He also added that he is now totally devoted and dedicated to essence as our Papaji, Sir CP Srivastava addressed the gathering with very powerful English diction in praise of the service he rendered under the principle and guidance of the erstwhile Prime Minister of India, the late Mr. Lal Bahadur Shastri. this cause what our beloved Mother, has taken up as the holy task of uplifting the humanity and transforming them to be Concluding his speech, the eyewitness recollected that Sir CP spoke with all candid persons with values. Later, he thanked the gesture and confided that whatever position he held today at 85, along with, all his achievements for which he is being honoured today, owe its all due credit to the values he has held through the love he received President and all the honourable members present there for the honour conferred upon him. It was half an hour ceremony and then all joined in the snacks and tea party hosted by throughout his 58 years of married life and association with Shri Mataji and also the love the President of India, where all the dignitaries came and congratulated our

 Issue :1 & 2- 2006 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE Mother turn by turn. Shri Mataji was very very pleased. She was probably ...why probably!!! Indeed working on the Indian Government machinery. speech turned us all present in that moment speechless. It was a fountain of vibrations. Mother was vibrant all the time and seemed to be emitting enough vibrations in the hall of the President House for vibrating the Indian Government machinery to work better. The yogi present there added, "...in Later, after the ceremony Mr. Anil Shastri, son of late Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri presented the volumes of the book my life time, I have never ever before entitled "Lal Bahadur Shastri "to the attended such a historic event in Sahaja Yoga. I am grateful to Mother for the moment ." The entire proceedings of the evening's event was broadcast by the Indian TV channel Doordarshan in the DD News that evening only. It seems even Shri Vishnumaya was impatient in announcing the great event. President authored by Papaji. Everything seemed to work subtly. The yogis present in the occasion expressed the moment to be historic. They were overjoyed in announcing and excited to reveal that Mother was very very pleased and that Pappaji's delivery of the powerful Jai Shri Mataji Gurgaon Collectivity, India

 Felicitation to Sir C.P. Srivastava at Kamani Auditorium, Delhi, India Dear Brothers and Sisters, divinity that should have been the protocol for such a statue that was immediately conveyed to Mr. Anil Shastri son of Late Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri and chairperson of the Institute as Mother's desire and message for On 3rd October 2005 another programme at the Kamani Auditorium, Mandi House, New Delhi was hosted by the Lal Bahadur Shastri Institute of Management, Delhi", Shastri Sadan, Sector III, R.K. Puram, New Delhi, to felicitate Sir CP Srivastava. The the needful action. Sir CP was invited to speak on the topic "Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri's programme started at morning eleven sharp on Monday. There was a gathering of about 700 out of which 300 plus were Sahaja Yogis. Sir CP Srivastava was the main source of attraction though, but all eyes were anxiously waiting compassionate gesture of our beloved Mother. Shri Mataji graced the entire venue by Her holy presence with a pleasing smile all the while. Strikingly, in the entrance of the Auditorium there was a statue of Late Vision and its relevance to India today". The eyewitness says it was not only touching speech with a fluent effortless diction in English, but a revelation that the world knew little of the personality called Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri and his magnanimity, His every action, principle and life was immaculate, simple in understanding and full of wisdom. Probably, we as Sahaja Yogis can assign all these qualities in Shri Ganesha as deity while, he spoke on the power of personality attraction, loving, compassionate caring, humility, politeness, wisdom, and principles. In one such incident he fondly loving and the for Lal Bahadur Shastri as Mother noticed that in a personal communication that " the statue should have remarked statue been in white and not in black "! The message emerged as powerful truth from

 Issue 1 & 2 - 2006 8 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE in life, while once he bought a toy as a gift for his son Anil Shastri, while he was a child. Shastriji refused to accept it!Certainly, it was not for the sake of the money but was a matter of principle. So, that is how his every action expressed the principles and honesty that were deep rooted in his entire philosophy of life that he held as a human being. recollected the interaction between the late Prime Minister and him on Shastriji's humbleness and humility. He said late Mr. Shastri was Home Minister and then , while, Sir CP was his cabinet secretary and as a person Shasrtiji always loved to nod with folded hands the gesture of 'namaskar to Shrivastavasaab even before Sir CP got an opportunity to do so in the first place. Such was his simplicity, never being proud of his position or ego whichnever overpowered his simple attitude. In another incident he refers to the interaction between the two Prime Later, Mr.Anil Shastri also spoke a lot about the greatness of the family of Sir CP. He also acknowledged with gratefulness for the family of Sir CP on many personal terms in helping him build his career. He fondly Ministers, while Shastriji was the Prime Minister of India and Mr. Ayub Khan the Prime Minister of Pakistan . recollected how he and his brother Sunil who were classes III and IV then, had their tuitions from none else other than our beloved Mother, Shri Mataji . He spoke of values, love, compassion and the high quality life that Sir CP and Shri Mataji as a person promises to the world. He spoke with all respect for Shri Mataji as how She was not only a source of inspiration since his early childhood but also a role model. Her In one formal meet , Mr. Shastri communicated to Mr. Khan in plain and simple words that he better not attempt or even think of annexing or taking edge over India ever, as India was far superior with her all qualities and people. They had their values and for such values India holds greater respect. Sir CP thus explained how Mr. Shastriji's words became a powerful instrument and helped avert a war and then both exchanged gestures of good will. Commenting, on war Shastriji used to say, its always a loss for both ends in a war Papaji, spoke in fluency for an hour recollecting the smallest of incidents/ episodes and association with this great personality . It was captivating, as if unfolding the untold history once again (rewinding) but with a realized eye, that we seemed to have missed out while learning our history lessons. All incidents sprang alive as he was speaking in his plain and simple English He referred to many tender moments compassion and love is unparalleled and difficult to describe. Mr.Anil Shastri, in narrating one personal incident reveals that once his brother-in-law had severe stomach problem, Shri Mataji with Her compassion placed Her hands over his stomach. The pain was gone the next moment never to return till date. Such was Her Love and the healing touch. It was indeed very touching moment as the audience listened to him with all expectation to hear more anecdotes that related to these two great families. Later Papaji donated the entire amount of 1 Lakh rupees; he received as cash prize attached to the award, to the Institute, and

 Issue :1& 2-2006 THE DIVINE COOL BREFZE also humbly donated yet another lakh for the cause of scholarship towards the students pursuing their degree and education from that Institute. He was pleased to distribute 450 copies of his authored book entitled, Lal Bahadur Shastri in English and in Hindi to loving Mother of the entire Universe whoblessed Her children who anxiously desired for Her Holy visit, but who is also present as Shri Mahamaya who is there to enjoy everything attached yet detached. Later in the evening the Institute hosted a dinner in honour of Sir CP and Shri Mataji at six in the India International Centre in Lodhi Road, New Delhi. In India many TV channels have already had good coverage of the entire event and shall be on telecast the students. What really makes a man larger than life is just not merely by the sum of his achievements , but by the enormous heart that beats for the cause of love, compassion and humanity. Probably these few moments are insufficient to speak of the volume of love exchanged and the vibrations that flowed into the auditorium in the Holy presence of Shri Mataji Herself as the wife of such a humble personality like Sir CP Srivastava , whose expression the world witnessed today as a compassionate and shortly. So we may wait for the next announcement to see the event and absorb the dynamite of love exploding in Her Holy Presence of our beloved Mother and our Papaji, Sir CP gracefully blessing the occasion. Jai Shri Mataji Gurgaon Collectivity, India

 Guru Purnima Puja (2005) To Shri Mataji (A Report) On Wednesday July 20, we had asked Shri Mataji if She would allow us to offer a Puja to Her the next day on the occasion of Guru Purnima. She gracefully agreed. followed by all the leaders offering haldi (turmeric) and kumkum at Shri Mataji's feet. We sang a Ganesha song, followed by "Guru Totza Mhanavi" and ended the bhajans with "Jago Savera". She was enjoying the bhajans so thoroughly, looking at all the yogis in the room, who were expressing their devotion to the Guru. This was then followed by offering a gift to Shri Mataji from the hosting countries. She asked where the gift was from and praised the craftsmanship of the gift. On Thursday morning, soon after Her breakfast, She explicitly requested some of the ladies to prepare Her Sari for the Puja. After her evening tea, Shri Mataji invited the collective into Her living room for this joyous and special occasion. This puja was attended by representatives from several countries, local USA centers and several yogis attending Shri Mataji. Puja started around 8pm with ladies offering a welcome aarti to Shri Mataji,

 İssue : I & 2- 2006 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE 11 Shri Mataji was looking so radiant this evening, enjoying the presence of so many of Her children at Her feet, pouring so much love on each yogi who was there. Several yogis were commenting about how much love they felt from Shri Mataji, and how pleased She looked throughout the evening. We all felt wave after wave of Divine Vibrations pouring out from Her during the entire evening, and every one was commenting how the vibrations have lifted in this area. At one point, when one yogi with a camera came into the room, She gave him a big smile and said "aa gaye" Some time after the puja, Manoj, Paul. Karan and Gagan presented documents pertaining to the incorporation of "Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga World Foundation" that were filed on this auspicious day. This was a very historical moment when, for the first time ever, the World Foundation has been given a legal status any where in the world. Shri Mataji accepted the articles of incorporation and gave Her blessings to the organization. At one point, She commented "What a team work!". acknowledging that the "official camera man" has arrived. Mark has been taking photographs during the many joyful bhajan sessions and other collective interactions with Shri Mataji. %3D Shri Mataji looked so pleased and asked at one point on number of yogis in the room and commented that Her living room was absolutely packed.

 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE Issue : 1 & 2 2006 12 Shri Mataji continued to enjoy the company of a few yogis for the rest of the evening, watching some movies and interacting with the yogis in the room. She spoke in length on the phone with Her family members in Los Angeles and ask them repeatedly when they were arriving for the Puja. It was a very special evening and we are so grateful for Her presence here in New Jersey. Please enjoy the pictures. Jai Shri Mataji Manoj, Vasu, Mark and Amurag

 Guru Puja Weekend Report USA 2005 promised new faces and the establishment of new friendships, and we were not disappointed. Appreciating each other, working on each other, and preparing for puja together, we were part of the Vishuddhi of the Virata. This Guru Puja weekend was historic, as the first international Guru Puja in the U.S.A. It was also historic in how the Sahaja Yogis understood the significance of the event. There was a collective maturity and inner silence. The 950 yogis who attended also celebrated - in embraces, Overall the level of comfort, service sincere conversations, singing and dance the atmosphere of deep affection and love, that is, Sahaja Yoga. A story appeared on Sunday in the daily New Jersey newspaper, They Recorded, and summed up the event with the headline, "Hundreds fill weekend with devotion and bliss." and food provided by the Sheraton Meadowlands Hotel was superb--with our physical needs so well taken care of, we could fully concentrate on our spiritual state. Conveniently located midway between a major airport and where Shri Mataji was staying, the hotel afforded us trees and expanses of green grass for meditating. Meals could be taken indoors or outside. While it was hot outside, there were breezes. and shady areas to make each meal a very enjoyable pienic. The weekend began for most of us with the arrival on Friday. The registration process, acquiring a room and a set of meal coupons, allowed each of us the chance to enter a state of patient witnessing as our own organizational needs intersected with the availability of rooms at the hotel. As we found in Los Angeles and New York in recent years, a good hotel room assignment On Friday and Saturday we had to meet in a large tent erected in the parking lot of the hotel, as the large ballroom wouldn't

 2-2006 Issue: 1 & 14 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE wanted to know what wonderful tape was be available until Sunday. As it turned out, the party using the ballroom on Saturday evening used it for a full-blown Indian wedding, and parts of the hotel had wonderful statues of Shri Ganesha and decorative columns which added to the being played, and then discovered it was a live performance coming from the front of the tent. Throughout the evening we saw and heard the amazing talent, evolving and expanding year by year, of young performers presenting music and classical Indian dance pieces. We enjoyed flute, guitar, kawali, Turkish drumming, and classical Indian vocals. When the ten Turkish drummers combined festive atmosphere. The highlight of the Friday evening entertainment program was a singing presentation by the small children of the Canajoharie school. Their enthusiasm and innocence showed the promise for the future of Sahaja Yoga in the U.S.A. Other activities over the weekend included a game of soccer, collective shoe beating, splashing in the hotel pool, and head oiling and their intoxicating beat with traditional Sahaja bhajans on harmonium, some of us could not stop ourselves from jumping up and dancing. Theatre of Eternal Values presented some improvisational comedy. massaging. Saturday night's entertainment program began with everyone settling into their places while beautiful hammer dulcimer music filled the air. One yogi The Yuva Shakti on the Realize America tour showed slides and talked about their experiences heading down the east coast of the U.S.A. (Their website is connect yourself.

 Issue : 1 & 2 - 2006 15 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE realizeamerica.com.). A theatrical presentation showed various incarnations and adi gurus teaching Mahatma Gandhi that his dream of world unity requires the intervention of the deities, but first and oremost it requires the advent of the Adi Shakti as Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala small children, laughing--manifesting the most adorable, magnetic, and motherly personality ever seen in history. There was footage showing Her tireless work of raising the kundalinis of thousands of people, in villages and in halls. As the camera panned back slowly, one could not see the end of the sea of seekers, all with one hand over the top of the head, feeling the cool breeze of the Holy Spirit for the first time. The video expressed for all of us our profound love and gratitude to Shri Mataji. Devi. The highlight of the evening was an anthem to Shri Mataji-a video presentation by the Italians which was so moving and overflowing with love that afterwards yogis could only embrace each other and let the inexpressible joy flow as tears. Archival foot- age showed our dear Holy Mother of twenty years ago, personally adjusting brides' and grooms' garlands at a wedding in India, cooking, playing the harmonium, singing, greeting and kissing All of the events of the weekend opened our hearts and enabled us to feel more than ever Shri Mataji's love. Everything was preparing us for puja. Only at Sahasrara, in silent bliss, could we do Her puja. The time for puja was set for 7:00 p.m. Sunday evening. Soon after 7 we started singing more or

 16 Issue : I & 2 - 2006 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE bhajans, and the puja had begun. Each of us was celebrating, in a hotel ballroom with 950 yogis, our personal and intimate connection with Shri Mataji. And then it was time to stand, with full respect and devotion, while Shri Mataji entered the ballroom. Twenty- a nonprofit organization in the United States. Operating as the World Council for the Advaneement of Sahaja Yoga, this new foundation will protect and preserve Shri Mataji's teachings, and support national collectives around the world in spreading Her divine message. We realized we were witnessing history--the first time a major world religion has been formally and legally brought into being with the direct guidance of the incarnation! With the generous support of Shri Mataji and Her family, the new one children were requested to come up on stage and offer Ganesha puja. Then several married ladies decorated the Goddess. Aarti was powerful, as if we announcing to the world, "She is here! The Guru of all the Gurus is here, with all Her were power and majesty!" foundation will have a solid footing. At this point there was no doubt that we had to stand and offer our Holy Mother a standing After we offered our collective pranam, the international and national gifts were brought on stage, one by one, and Shri Mataji stayed throughout the entire ceremony. After all the gifts had been offered, Arneau took the microphone to announce the news that, just two days earlier, the Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga Foundation had been officially registered as ovation. Then the clapping died down and we stood in silence. The large curtain was drawn across the front of the stage and Her time with us in physical form had come to an end. Individually we thanked Shri Mataji

 & 2 - 2006 Issue : 1 17 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE and dance, while some of us sat in silent reverence in front of Her chair on the stage. and prayed that we had absorbed all of the vibrations. After some time of meditation, prasad and commemorative gifts were distributed. And then we found a magnetic force kept us in the puja hall. Even if we went out of the ballroom, we found ourselves drawn back into the hall. Digital cameras were handed back and forth as many yogis shared miracle photos their camera had cap- tured. (Shri Mataji had said before the puja that many miracle photos would be taken.) Our hearts filled with exuberance and love, the ballroom then erupted in vigorous song Shri Mataji mentioned to Manoj while returning to Her house after the puja that "Vibrations were very good" and "many miracle photos would be seen". At this puja, we not only felt our individual connection to Shri Mataji at Sahasrara; we experienced the effortless, joyous state of being connected to Her in the collectivity of Sahaja Yoga. In this new state of being, we knew we weren't doing anything--She was doing everything. Jai Shri Mataji

 Aquisition of Shri Mataji's house in Chhindwara-India On 7 April 2005, Shri Mataji established H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga Trust to manage all the affairs of Sahaja Yoga in India. She is the Chairperson of this National Trust. Sir C. P. Srivastava is the Vice Chairman and Shri Rajesh Shah the joint Vice Chairman. The Trust, which will henceforth provide the collective leadership for Sahaja in India is made up of 12 Trustees and 7 Special Invitees. The Trust's offices are in New Delhi in the Sahaja Temple at 17-C Qutab Institutional Area. collected through an international appeal for the acquisition of the Chhindwara House amounting to Rs 77 lakhs were held in Shri Mataji's bank accounts in London for nearly ten years. This amount has been transferred in full to the accounts of the newly established National Trust in India. Moreover, members of Shri Mataji's family (namely Sir C.P. and the two daughters, Kalpana and Sadhana) have donated Rs. 58 lakhs towards the cost of acquiring the holy birthplace. Sahaja Yogis from all over the world and for all times to come will in great esteem behold this extremely gracious donation by Shri Mataji's family that demonstrates their commitment to From the very inception the National Trust placed the highest priority to the acquisition of the holy birth place of Shri Mataji (the Chhindwara House) for the international Sahaja collective and build a Memorial. The task was entrusted to the perpetuating the legacy of our Holy Mother. The Indian collective leadership, represented by the National Trust, will now take up the holy and important task of building the World Sahaja Yoga Ashram and the most beautiful Memorial to our Mother Asset Management Committee of the National Trust. With the collective efforts of all the Trustees and of Sahaja Yogis from Nagpur, Bhopal, Pune and Mumbai and the tireless follow up by Shri Dinesh Rai, the chairman of the Asset Management Committee, this holy task was accomplished on 14 July 2005. The property has been officially transferred in the name of the H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga Trust and all legalities have been completed. A collective havana and puja were held on the premises on 14 July. Following instructions from Shri Mataji, sign boards declaring it as Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga World Ashram and the Holy Birthplace of Shri Mataji have already been put in place. on Her birthplace. A special committee will soon be constituted for this task and everybody is invited to contribute to this Holy task through ideas, resources and voluntary work. Those interested in contributing to this effort could contact Rajiv Kumar, Executive Secretary Indian National Trust at aarkey1951@yahoo.co.in or at 91 9818098072. The Indian collective leadership recognizes the immensity of this historic task and prays to Shri Mataji to give us the wisdom, courage and humility to undertake this task. For the Indian Collective, Rajiv Kumar It is important to mention that funds

 THE SPIRIT Pravachan of Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Sanskrit there is a very good word for excited, it is the u i.e. pulsation) or when it is pulsated (His attention) or when it pulsates, then through His attention He starts creating, Spirit is the most precious thing that we have within ourselves. The preciousness of your Spirit is immeasurable and that is why it is called the thing of eternal value. Because it is infinite, we cannot measure. And He has the third quality, which we call 'Anand'. Anand is the feeling of 'Joy' that He gets by His perception, by His creation, the joy that He gets. All these three things 'Sat Chit Anand' when they are at a zero point where they meet, then they become principle of 'Brahma'. When these three things are one, where there is complete silence nothing is created and nothing is manifested, but the 'Joy' is one with the Now, God the Almighty, we say is "Sat-Chit-Anand'. Sat means the "Truth'. The truth, we understand, in human terminology is relative. But the 'Truth' I am telling you is the absolute, from where all the relations start. Example, I will tell you, how to understand. This Earth has got oceans and rivers and all kinds of waters you can say. But the Earth is enveloping all of them. If the Mother Earth was not there, there could not have been any of these existing. So we can say, that the Mother Earth is the support of all the things that exist on Earth. She is enveloping us. In the atoms, She exists, in the big mountains, She exists, because the elements are part of that Earth. In the same way God Almighty, The 'Sat of Him, the 'Truth' is the support of all the things that are created or not created. 'Attention' because the 'Attention' has reached to merge into 'Joy' and 'Joy' has become one with 'Truth'. This combination of three qualities separate and create three types of phenomena. 'Anand', the joy inwards merged with His creation and with the "Truth'. When 'Joy' starts moving with the part creation, the creation starts moving down from first, the 'Sat' or "Truth' stage to Asat" i.e. 'untruth' to 'Maya' i.e. 'Illusion'. And that time the creation starts working out and when it starts working out, the 'Joy', which is one on the left hand side, the emotional side of God also starts becoming grosser and grosser, till they reach a stage where there is, we can say, a complete darkness of Tamoguna, the complete cessation of the creativity and the complete sleeping of the jov. Is it clearer? You will understand Another example; you try to understand. How, the 'Sat' is the 'Purush', is the God who does not take actual part in the creation itself, but is a catalyst. The example can be like this, that,I am doing all the work, I am creating every thing, but I have a light in my hand. With out the light, I cannot do anything. Light is the support of my work. But the light does not in anyway do anything about what I do, In the same way, God Almighty is just the witness like a light. now Mahalakshmi, Mahakali, and Mahasaraswati. That is why Christ said, I am the light.' Because He represents the 'Sat'- the light of God. And when the light of God becomes absolutely gross, dormant or dead, But His another quality is the 'Chit', it is 'Attention'. When it is excited (in

 Issue :1 & 2 - 2006 20 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE eternal things. But it is really a precarious stage, that is, to be human being. Because at this stage, you have to jump only a little bit that side, while you start jumping this side and that side. Because this jumping is not then it reaches the second stage of creation. All these things go deeper and deeper and become grosser. That is one part of the parabole. Now the another part of the parabole possible unless and until the awareness starts when you are attaining back to God reaches that stage, where you become Almighty. That process now gradually starts independent and in that independence, you becoming higher and higher, subtler and subtler and finer and finer. In that refinement find your own course. This is the position. ultimately the light works for the Because your 'Self cannot be yours until and evolutionary process. Gradually the grosser parts start becoming enlightened. You find the lower animal is not much enlightened as is gross, how can you enjoy that eternal joy the higher animal. Gradually even the 'Joy' that is within you? So it is for you to expose starts becoming subtler and subtler. We can call it beautiful. Human joys are much more beautiful that that of animals. So the 'Joy' cleaner so that you feel that 'Divine!. also starts changing their manifestation. In the sense, you start more and more and wider range of 'Joy' comes into your hands. For getting Self-Realisation, unless and until example, to a dog beauty has no meaning, these three things start merging together, you decency has no meaning. So at a stage when cannot feel that you have established you reach, when you are a human being, to yourself. The Joy within you, must be felt that extent you develop your 'Sat', which is awareness; to that extent you also develop your Joy' and to that extent you also develop creative action. Now you see how the 'creativity' of God passes into the hands of Man, when he turns out, how the 'Joy' of God unless you are independent. As long as you are slave or under bondage or something that yourself more to that joy by opening out your "Self more and more and getting subtler and Once you know this point, that, after through your awareness, otherwise you cannot see it. Suppose you have no eyes, then how can you see? If you were not aware to see me, how will you see me? If you are not aware to hear me how will you understand me? And once that awareness comes to you then only the 'Joy' awakens within you. Because only through these passes into the hands of Man and how His Light' comes into the heart of Man as 'Spirit. subtle feeling of the awareness, you are going to absorb the Joy. Just now you felt, you said "what a beautiful thing it is!" You It is beautiful. I have just touched, when you have become a human being. People say human beings have a soul, not that others do not have, but light starts burning in a human being only. felt very happy. You are feeling the joy of creation at this stage and Man is the summit of creation. But only the crown part is such a little thing. Very little it is. Very little distance it crosses in no time, but only thing Because of that 'light' we talk of religion, we talk of God and we talk of

 Issue : 1 & 2-2006 21 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE is that, three things have to be combined. And that is why you find even if you get Self-realisation, you do not feel the silence. Because you have not become the 'Light'. You do not feel the Joy' because you have not become the 'Anand'. That is the left side of you. In everything there is 'Joy'. As a human being you start seeing 'Joy' in patterns. You see a key box, you open it out. You see the patterns. You call it the veneer. You call the roughness and things, the smoothness and the harmony of it. his own level and make him also feel the same 'Joy' as you are getting. Supposing a man who is an artist marries a blind girl. What is the use? She cannot enjoy the Arts created by this man. In the same way, if you are interested in your family people, in your relations, in your friends, the first thing and the finest and greatest thing you can do is to give them Self-realisation which means the 'Joy' of your Spirit. Expose them to the joy of their Spirit, which is the most precious thing. And this is the reason, why people flicker and they fiddle and they feel uneasy and they lose their 'Joy' very easily at small things that has parts of it and finished. It is like the ocean before you, where I am there and I want you all to come into it and enjoy. It is all for you. Whole thing was created for your enjoyment. You have to become subtler and subtler. You are wasting lot of time here on very gross things, you have noticed. You start feeling the matter, the Joy of His creation. But after realisation, you start feeling the 'Joy' of creation. The summit of creation is the human being and that is why for a Sahaja Yogi he must realize, if he tries to be friendly or interested or involved in a person who is at a lower level, he can never get the Joy' from that person. Only thing what he can do is, to raise that person higher to (From Nirmala yoga - 1983) ****

 EKADASHA RUDRA Some notes from Mother's advice Obstinacy catches here. v) on how to correct problems with the Ekadasha Rudra (given in Delhi - 1981) A half-hearted commitment to vi) Sahaja Yoga can cause a problem with the Ekadasha Rudra. i) Establish your innocence. Put your eyes to Mother Earth. The Ekadasha Rudra collects from vii) ii) Cleanse your void. If you went to a false Guru, beat him with shoes. the left and the right sympathetic. Therefore, the combination of a left catch with a right catch will iii) Put your attention more to Nature than to other people. Be careful when organizing; stop particularly affect it. iv) David Spiro Nirmala Yoga -1983 organizing if you are catching on this centre, and don't speak in public.

 IMPORTANCE OF PUJA AND HAVANA Talk given by Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Paris - June 18, 1983 not try to challenge it. If it start challenging it and if you hear to your intellect, you will again go down. Even if you get the glimpses of a star in the sky, then the scientist believe that there is a star. So in the same manner, even if you get the glimpses of your realization, you have to at least believe that you are also the Spirit. You go on sticking to that experience and keeping your attention on the fact that you are the Spirit. Tell your intellect not to cheat you anymore. You can turn the face of your intellect by I am so happy and joyous to be here with so many Sahaja Yogis and so many of them are very new, not very new to me, perhaps I have known all of you thousands of years back. In Sahaja Yoga, you all have to understand one simple thing, that you are the Spirit, and whatever is not the Spirit is not yourself. We can compare the Spirit with the sun: the sun can be covered with the clouds. There can be superimposition on the sun, but sun remains as it is at this point. You cannot enlighten the sun. It is illumined by itself. But, when the clouds are removed, the superimpositions are removed, the sun shines through the atmosphere. So our Spirit is also superimposed by ignorance. As long as there is superimposition, you can not see the Spirit. And even when few clouds disappear, the superimposition exists. One has to have a clear sky to see the light of the Spirit shining through. There are many ways by this. Now your intellect will start working for the pursuit of the Spirit. This is what faith means. Faith gives rise to pure intelligence. Now once you have seen clouds removed, still there are clouds. So you have to use the wind to remove the clouds, wind of the Holy Ghost. And that you know, there are many ways of taking advantage of the wind. So the wind comes from some other source. That is the source of the Holy Ghost, you own Kundalini, And also you have in person the Primordial Kundalini before you. Compared to many other seekers who came before you, you are very fortunate. which we can try to remove the clouds. The first and foremost thing is the assumption, the faith, that we are the Spirit and that the rest is superimposing. You have to assume that within yourself. After realization, it should become very easy. That you are something much more, something very different from what you have known Because worshipping any vigraha, any statue of self-created vibrations of the Mother Earth, people had big problems. They had to first of all do a meditation which was called as 'Savikalpa Samadhi'. That means, in that state you had to concentrate on such a statue-Vigraha. Vigraha means the one which is a vibrating statue. And then go on looking at that statue and try to raise your so far. So now the new situation arises: that do not have a blind faith, but you have a you faith that has come out of an experience. So your intellect should not fight it. It should

 Issue : 1 & 2 2006 24 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE Kundalini. And Kundalini used to come up to Agya, but the jumping beyond the Sahasrara was an impossible task because one has to go from form to formless, and it was so difficult to get out of form to formless, and even to concentrate on abstract or formless was another impossible task. As Seer has double meaning. The one who sees only, just sees and he is only knowledge, he is a seer. Without any thought, without any reaction, just sees and absorbs automatically, spontaneously, he is the seer. For me sometimes it is burdensome because there should be some parity between the Muslims did or many others tried to do. Under these circumstances it was necessary that the formless had to take a form so that you and the deities, some balance must be there. there were no more complications. As soon as you concentrated on the form you became formless. Like if you have ice before you, as soon as you start touching the ice, it melts away and you start feeling the cool. Here you are saying all the mantras and the deities are awakened and there you are who do not want to receive any thing within your heart. So I am the One who has to stock up all the extra energy that is produced in my Body. So it would be better ifyou all keep your hearts opened and watch the Puja without thinking about it. Today we will reverse the method of the Puja. First So the problem is very easily solved now. Puja is one of the things by which you can excite the forms into formless. Now your centers are the centers of energies, but they too have a guiding deity sitting on all these chakras. They are also the formless made into forms. And when you do the Puja, the forms melt into formless energies. And these formless energies start flowing, and then blows the wind. And that is how these we will do the Havana and then the Puja, it will be better. Because by that we will evoke the fire element which burns away all the evils. When you wash my Feet you do the same thing and even when you evoke the fire you do the same thing. misidentifications, these superimpositions on the Spirit are removed. Today first we will have the Havana and then the Puja, both are just the same. You can worship Me with water or with fire. The essence of fire is the glow. All that is Now you cannot think about the puja. These are things which happen into a realm which is beyond thinking. So you have to understand that you cannot rationalize the You should have the maximum wrong, all that is evil is burnt off an then the glow shows on the faces and on the bodies of the seekers. And also the atmosphere is charged with the beautiful vibrations when you have the Havana. Puja. advantage on your chakras. For that, vou must fully just concentrate on the puja, and how the wind is blowing. And the wind will see to it that it drives out all the clouds. So your only work is, your only method is, just to concentrate on the puja and witness. You May God bless you. (From Nimala Yoga - 1983) are a seer.

 Shri Mataji's advice 31st March, 1983 Hampstead town Hall, England God's Work and Negativity I realize that when something is very important from God's point of view all the negative forces work out their plans on how to delay, how to put obstructions, how to deviate or how to bring hindrances. It is very surprising. Today, it would be best if I tell you about God's will and how, we the human beings, try to go against it all the time. awareness that was our own, human awareness, was given to us for our freedom to be tested, to be experimented and to be seen and finally, to have ultimate freedom by which you become the Spirit. You have to become the Spirit ultimately. But as we start growing in our awareness s0-called, our concern is not for the Spirit. Iwould say that we are like a tree which pushes its roots down into the Earth God's will is extremely simple. His is Divine Love; He is compassion and He is the ocean of mercy. He created this world and then created human beings just to give them the highest thing in life - joy. Joy which is a simple thing, does not have duality like borrowed happiness. But how are we anti-God and anti-joy, and why does it happen? so as to stand and grow; so also the roots we have are in our brain. And then we start growing upwards and upwards till the leaves emerge, flowers bloom and fruits are created. But on the contrary before reaching the fruit stage what happens to us is that we start creating artificial leaves and enjoying them. We take to artificiality. Once this identification with artificiality starts, we begin to move away from reality to negative thoughts or to over positive thoughts which are actually anti-God because it is with them that we make atom bombs and all that. Our awareness, as you know, grows through our brain downwards. And what starts growing downwards takes us away from God. Ultimately we have to achieve God. But first we go a little away from that awareness of being one with God; just to understand that freedom has to be used So, there are really two branches into which we branch off. Some people like to go towards the left side or the negative attitude. They destroy themselves, trouble themselves and do all kinds of things by which they can die and in the most miserable manner. They get all kinds of diseases upon themselves. They torture their body, they torture everything that they have. Then the other side is the right hand side in which they move to torture others, to destroy properly. Without that training, without that education, it is no use giving freedom to human beings. You have seen the free countries. In their freedom what have they achieved, atom bombs to kill ourselves! It is stupidity. It is foolish. It is absurd. But we have done it. We are proud of it and are still busy on how to make it worse and worse for ourselves. This is how we move. The

 Issue :I & 2- 2006 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE 26 doing, all these politicians today? Fighting. For what? Just look at them. I can't others, to over power others. Both the ways are away from God, His mercy and His grace. The concern throughout should be towards the Spirit. Only then is the movement in the right direction. But this concern breaks up very easily in human beings because they have the freedom to do it. In their ego they break it up so much that when you develop the artificial way of easy going life, then even the consciousness of God is lost, that He understand what the fighting is for to create more destructive forces, more horrible things to destroy innocent human beings? Those who are innocent are simply warned. They don't know what to do. They don't understand why they are to be dead tomorrow because some people have gone off their heads! And those who have gone off their heads are sitting at the helm of our affairs. That is how the negativity grows within us. We become negative. Both are negative attitudes because they negate God. exists, that He is the one who is running the show. We become so conscious of ourselves that we think there is nothing wrong. We do this, we do that and plunge into all kinds of problems. What we are doing is really against ourselves, and ourselves means God because God has created us and He loves us. We Negation of God is the first crime we have committed. We are not afraid of God. He is compassion, He is Mercy, He is everything. But, in His mercy only, He is going to destroy this world. He won't allow more sins to be committed against Him. Even otherwise He destroys. What is cancer? What are all these diseases that are don't love ourselves. If we had loved ourselves, we would not have abused our body and our own systems and everything that we have by saying "what is wrong? Why not do it?" You must love this body of yours, this mind of yours and this society. You must love everything you have because God has created you in His love. But love itself has become a much perverted word. Now what is wrong in promiscuousness? Is it love? If I tell you that it is not because it is against nature and it gives you trouble, you will be in a mess. But people may think that this lady is matronly She is old-fashioned and Victorian. Listen. It is a fact. Why do we do things which will destroy? You can't create yourselves. You can't even create a rose for yourself leave alone the whole body. Then why should we be anti-ourselves? Why should we be anti-society which we have created? Or against the whole nation or nations that we have created? What are they coming up in our body? They are nothing but our own destructive forces that we have built within ourselves. There is no fear from outside ourselves or any star or any extra-terrestrial attack. No, there is none. It is within us that the attack is built, of which we should be aware. In the name of freedom we have gathered within ourselves all the germs of destruction. It is such a built-in process that we are not even aware that these attacks are coming, that they are there. We are quite satisfied with ourselves, our artificial life, etiquettes and superficial mannerisms. Innately, within us, resides the Spirit which wants to enlighten you, to give the

 Issue : 1 & 2 - 2006 27 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE have separate churches, separate temples and separate mosques? How can we become fanatical in the name of God? Can you imagine, this is what we have done to God! We have become fanatics. There is a stone which when He touches it becomes gold. When he touches anything it becomes gold. But, there must be a stone. When He touches human beings, they become like prisoners. That is why there is so much fanaticism. It is a problem, how to give this news and this message that you are the Spirit and you have to become the Spirit. peace, the bliss and the joy of our being. This beautiful lamp of yours has been created with a purpose. It has to be enlightened. Respect yourself. There is no word called 'respect', left in the dictionary today! Respect yourself. We have to respect this lamp which has the light of the Spirit and it should be enlightened. And let us be that lamp which shows the glory too. It is such a beautiful world God has created for us but we in our ignorance, in our so-called freedom, have ruined so many things. It is shocking to see where people are going-just towards hell directly. For a mother, it is a thing of great concern. How to stop this fall? How to get them out of it? How to make them understand what is their worth, their value. You should not take human life My mother-tongue is Marathi, and thank God, I have been born in Maharashtra because, it is a country of saints. Thousands of saints lived in that country. It is the tradition, it is so spiritual. Spirituality is the tradition of the place where I was born. "Maha' means great and 'rashtra' means nation. The tradition there is of spirituality and not of alcoholism, drugism or any other Spirituality is the tradition of that country where a very simple poet called Namdev was born. He was a tailor, just an ordinary tailor. But he has written many sweet poems, I will explain what he says, "A little boy is flying a kite in the sky. He is looking at the sky, he is talking to his friends, he is moving up and down and discussing things here and there. But his attention is always focused on the kite. Then, he says, a lady is carrying her little boy and doing her work in the house - giving water to her husband, sitting down with the kid, cooking and then rising up to do washing. The child is on her waist, resting. But her attention all the time is on the child. There is a woman for granted. It is a very precious life which was created out of many processes. It was created with great difficulty. Don't forget that you have to become the Spirit without which your life is waste. Nay, the whole creation is just a waste because you are the highest in creation. You are the epitome of that creation. 'ism'. And what are you upto? We have to form nucleuses that will talk openly about God. I was amazed to see that in this country people do not like to talk about God. You cannot talk about God! Can you imagine such a state of affairs where you cannot talk about your creator or that religion means nothing? Either you form some sort of secret organization which everybody cannot enter into and say "now we belong to a certain cult". How can God have cults? Just think of it. How can He

 Issue : 1 & 2- 2006 28 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE holding a pitcher of water on her head delicately balanced. She is walking with other women. As they are walking together laughing, smiling and talking to each other their attention is always on the pitcher of water, in the sense that the attention is on the Spirit." explanation is that 'you must undergo mortification'. Why should you mortify yourself? Because Christ did it.' Are you Christ? And that means whatever Christ did was a waste, so a little bit of yours was needed to add to it! Whatever has been done has been more than sufficient because Christ was the Prince. And if a prince has to undergo mortification what is so great about it? He has already done it and He has worked for us. He is to be enlightened within us and that is how we have to get our realisation. In the same way, though we have to lead a life here, it is absurd that we do have our attention on our Spirit which is the giver of the ultimate in life. But as soon as not you begin to talk about something spiritual, people think that it is a lot of trash which should not be listened to. They want to hear the same mundane things again and gain. If it is broadcast, say, the Conservative party or the Labour, they will listen to it for hours - such mundane stuff. Every year you hear that. But if someone says "No, this is all artificial, you have something more worthwhile within you and hearken to it", they think they have not come to hear all these things. What is it that this mother is telling us? The easiest thing to do is to sit down and ask question, but it is best to get your realisation. That is the most important thing today. Of course, under the circumstances, as human beings are, it is not going to work very fast. I am very sure of it, I have tried my level best. Like mountains you have to raise the Kundalini. It is really like raising mountains. You feel so tired and worn out. But then they don't want to appreciate it. So do not feel disappointed, do not get hurt about it. Slowly and steadily I am sure, in your own eyes, people will see how your life is transformed into joy and bliss and understanding. They will see how loving and delighted you have become and then they are going to believe that there is a better life for you. Some people are in such a bad state that they see a black picture of everything. They are so disappointed that they have given up. They have just given up. They say, "Now we have just finished with it. We have done everything and now we do not want to do anything more". I have seen in France, they But now awaken and arise. On a different level we have to understand what these people have done so far and we have accepted it. What we have taken for granted for all these years is beyond the horizon. A star is shining within us and that is our Spirit. People talked about it, talked about God, made another cult which said they were doing God's work. In 'God's work' the ladies are tying up their thighs and polishing their own flesh. Just imagine! In the name of God doing such horrible stuff! The

 Issue : 1 & 2-2006 29 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE are discussing about the collapse and the imminent destruction of the world. They are discussing that "Let us be finished now. We have had enough of it. Let us have the ultimate destruction whether it is an atom The only snag is that you will feel so many are still lost. It does not matter. You have to work hard. We have to understand that there are negative forces which are pulling them down. They are ignorant and they do not know there is a life beyond this. mundane strife. The eternal life of beauty and glory. But gradually, I am sure, it will work out. Especially, for this meeting, they have lots of ups and downs and the whole bomb or anything else. Let us be finished." It is so desperate! I can understand the desperation of those who are thinking about, of those who are concerned about it. I am bothered about it. I have no doubt one should feel desperate. Even the Sahaja Yogis sometimes get very upset and become extremely desperate saying "Give up, Mother, we have finished with it and no more." But I do not know how to remove my attention from the Spirit. If you can try, try your level best to remove it. You cannot, for you are there. So, whatever it is, you will fight to save as many as possible. So, all these Sahaja Yogis who get frustrated at certain intervals, I have to say, you should not be frustrated. You have to keep your courage and understanding if you have feelings for others and if you show concern for them, they will understand you and you will be able to get more and more people saved, emancipated and they will enter the kingdom of God. As you are enjoying, they will also enjoy. thing was discouraged. But one must still understand that God's work is blessed by God. He will bestow all His blessings and help on you so that you will perform your desired duties. The time is passing, very little time is left now. It is running out and that is why there is increasing desperation. The desperation itself has brought forth the advent of Sahaja Yoga on this Earth. And you should feel more strong to fight these obstructions that you feel, are around and work out the Ultimate Goal of this Creation. May God bless you. (Nirmala Yoga-1983)

 LEADERS IN SAHAJA YOGA "O Devi! You are modesty in the heart of the high born". Let us do something which is not very Sahaja, that is, cast a glance at the future. Sahaja Yoga is now taking momentum and we can easily foresee the need of the coming years. The new Sahaja Yogis of today will have to be the leaders of tomorrow. As the collective organism is growing, more and more cells are required to perform key functions. There will be a need for Sahaja Yogis to run Ashrams and schools, to talk to the public and to the media people, in a position, above all, to deal with neweomers while displaying the required mixture of love and firmness. The blending of these two qualities is important: love attracts and consolidates postivity, Firmness keeps negativity at bay. As already mentioned in this magazine, the inside (meditation) and outside (action) growths of the Yogi will complement each other. sex in the attention etc., etc.. But besides these classical traps, a leader has to watch very carefully difficulties which could stem from the very status of leadership when the latter is not really understood. Of course, the mischief maker is-guess what-capitalE capital G and capital O. We find in the Gospeis this lively story of the apostles quarrelling about who was the greatest among themselves and Christ took a child and said: "If you are not like a child...." It was nice of them to play this rehearsal because Christ could thus warmn the leaders in Sahaja Yoga not to again spoil the show. It is good for them to remember the story: a child is a simple, spontaneous, he likes to play... he also plays the role of the leader, but it's a play! Looking at my brothers and sisters who are in Sahaja Yoga since years and assume leadership functions, I could propose the following description of the good leader: he does whatever the Unconscious expects him to do, without false pride and without false humility; he doesn't do but he is; he doesn't perform but he vibrates; he does not appear but he shines (with, of course, the reflections of his Mother's qualities). Thank God, he has a sense of humour; he becomes a bit suspicious when his Mother starts praising him (although he just loves it) and extremely suspicious when he forgets to praise Her; when he cares about his "position", when thoughts of leadership Yet Shri Mataji has warned that leaders in Sahaja Yoga are particularly exposed and should thus move about in the various fields of life with full awareness. For a Sahaja Yogi, full awareness ultimately implies Atma-consciousness, that is, receiving, giving, perceiving through the Spirit, realizing thus the higher synthesis of the Vishnu-Shiva tattwa within himself. Then the fruit of spiritual maturity, i.e. detachment, will free him once and for all from the various bondages which can ensnare him, such as materialism, possessiveness in family life, job's worries,

 : I & 31 Issue 2-2006 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE A last word. Shri Vishnu is the Leader of Evolution, the Master of the Quest. come into his mind. He does not push himself forwards but, sometimes, the wind swell his sail; he does not climb the moun- tain but, sometimes, he finds himself sitting on the top: someone has done it for him. He smiles; his Mother did it again; what a wonderful sightseeing; His programme is to enjoy and he doesn't even feel sorry about it. He is neither guilty nor responsible. He is most responsible, his compassion is not his. He doesn't help anybody; everybody is helped. He carries with great pride two diadems, two bandans of sparkling snow and gold; the gratification of his Mother and the It is written in the Puranas how Shri Vishnu propitiated Shri Shiva in the Himalayas. He undertook to chant the thousand names of Mahadeva, offering Him thousand lotuses. His beautiful and melodious voice enchanted the higher worlds. As the last lotus was missing, he who is pushpalochana i.e. lotus eyed, plucked out one of his eyes and offered it to complete his worship. Shiva was enamoured and gave to Vishnu the absolute weapon, the Sudarshana Chakra. Shiva is said to be Naranaryana priya i.e. fond of Nara and Narayana. We shall all go into our depths and experience the relationship between the two Lords. When the leadership of consciousness surrenders itself to the Atma love of his brothers and sisters. These are the magic of his strength and the secret of his confidence. Anyone who is adorned by the contentment of the Goddess and shielded by the love of the Sahaja Yogis will become all temptations of the ego are finished. immortal. A disciple (Nirmala Yoga)

 SAHAJA YOGAAND PHYSICALCURE-II Let us consider diseases. Diseases can effect us either through the Ida or the Pingala Nadis, since both are affected by hordes of dead beings. Especially the Ida. direct access to Her, to place at Her Feet our perplexities and our confusion, our weakness and our strength so that She carefully, as Mother, may nurture and integrate them and educate and re-evolve us. To have such a direct relationship to the For a disease to enter the body, its vibratory defences must be weak. The strong points that protect the body are the Mooladhara and Agya Chakras and the Left Heart. These three Chakras have, above all, deities that stand for Spirit, Purity and Truth and transcendence over matter, Of these three, the most basic is the Mooladhara Chakra. supreme evolutionary power of the universe is a very great thing and in some sense condenses and summarizes all that there is in our existence. In resonance to this, Christ was born to Shri Mahalakshmi to stand at the ultimate gate of reality and ultimate truth. The Goddess is the Creator and Preserver and Destroyer or Liberator and Evolver of this Universe, and a wise child knows this, and nothing else, and knows that She stands at every door and turning point The Lord or the Swami of the Mooladhara Chakra is Shri Ganesha. His outstanding quality is respect for the Adi Shakti in the form of the Mother. This is the aspect of the Goddess which is paramount. With it go qualities such as absolute faith and trust in the Mother whose instinct is to sacrifice for the sake of Her child. An innocent child knows this and puts his faith and trust, his whole heart at Her Feet; with it goes devotion'and love and adoration of a simple innocent sort - spontaneous and without forethought, afterthought or ritualism. of human existence, placed Herself there, in various forms and in different powers and attributes. There is nothing else in the Universe Only the Parmatma - And any one who puts thoughts and attention on wordly matters eventually weakens both the Agya and Mooladhara. Be it on well-meaning things such as Science or Literature or Politics or anything. Anything that doesn't reflect the Spirit and its great Shakti, has no meaning in terms of development and eventually shifts one off The being, whose attention is fixed so closely and focally on the Mother, automatically develops other qualities such as pure wisdom, knowledge, chastity, obedience and love and above all, purity. This is because the Mother is the only source of these qualities in the entire cosmos and what does not emanate from Her is not true. balance. Any shift off balance, as one knows, can lead to collapse. It is only the constant flow of our Mother's Kundalini and it's powerful force constantly rebalancing that which unbalances itself, that maintains, furthers and pushes forward Sahaja Yoga. As being created by the Goddess, we worship Her, but as Her children we have

 33 Issue :I & 2 - 2006 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE The essence of human beings is their awareness or attention that decides what one is or what one becomes. Shri Mataji said that where one's awareness goes, 'that' one becomes. The seats of power in a human being are not material or gross, but subtle and immaterial, bound together by the subtle filaments of the awareness. If the attention indeed to know the absolute in human form and to have been given the chance to recognize HER - as SHE is. This is opportunity and privilege so great that words express or encompass it, and we must place our attention and feeling on it. Initially I thought to describe the various illnesses separately but that would distract our attention from the essential to the cannot is pure, then, the being is not affected by gross impurity. But if impure, then any state of gross purity is only transitional and cannot last. There are only two things worthy of contemplation in this universe- Parmatma and its surrounding Shaktis, both of which are really one and have incarnated in the form of our Holy Mother Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi. non-essential, so I will not speak of it. The attention is seated in the stomach through the Nabhi and when centre rise effortlessly through the smoothness of the Sushumna to touch the Feet of Shri Sadashiva Himself at the Sahasrara and then to continue its ascent to the highest levels that man can aspire to. So do not waste the attention. Keep it pure - and no disease can assail you - and no power in darkness can hinder your rise to the absolute. Let us consider our position, it is very great indeed for we have been privileged JAI SHRI MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA MATREYA NAMOH NAMAH -Dr. Rustom Nirmala Yoga -1983

 THE MEMORIES OF OUR DIVINE MOTHER you got the pronunciation wrong." So throughout the pujas, She would be directing the whole thing. "And we'll have THE FIRST PUJAS We had no idea about pujas. water now. We'll have this now, We'll have We had no idea about pujas. She had to bring a Brahmin in to do the pujas. Mother would give him Realization and would ask him do this, that and the other, but we would just sort of sit there while he went through the mantras and do everything. And when that now." And really, if Mother hadn't been there directing the puja, we'd probably never have completed it, would we? (Gail Pottinger) the time came for the aarti, we didn't know it, So we had this record of one Indian movie CAN YOU JUST COME OVER WE'LL HAVE A PUJA and it had a picture on the front of an Indian girl smoking a cigarette and it was about some Indian girl who had gone to America She had got lost and had then realized the error of her ways and had sort of come back to being an Indian. And we would solemnly get out this record and put it on the record player and play it and clap while it played. It was the music of "Sabko Dua Dehna," but My first puja was a Guru Puja (in 1977) and I remember once I was at work and then suddenly Jane (Brown), Gavin's wife, phoned me and said can you just come over, We'll have a puja. I didn't know what a puja was. So I came down. We were something like eight or nine people and there was a pujari, an Indian pujari. His name is Satpal. it was the original aarti. That was a puja. We didn't know how to do pujas. We didn't know how to do anything. We haven't seen him for a while now. Anyway, this puja was I didn't know what it was this was the first time that I was (Pat Anslow) seeing a puja. I just sat down and, for someone that is coming from an Islamic background, I guess it all feels and looks quite new to us, you know. Mother used to teach those protocols, you know. She used to tell us with which hand to do, how, you know, when we were to put this on. So She would lead the puja, (Djamel Metouri) wouldn't She? You know that Guru Puja ? That was the first Guru Puja, in Gavin (Brown)'s flat. There is a picture of Mother with some roses, (Malcolm Murdoch) holding some roses. I remember giving Her those flowers and saying, "Mother, be She was always stopping people and saying, "No, the mantra's said like this and

 Issue: 1& 2 - 2006 35 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE But, in any case, there were other pujas which took place during that summer. One of them was in my house, when She came to St. Albans. It was a Shri Krishna Puja and we washed Mother's Feet and we had a puja the way we do it today, but with perhaps not careful, there are thorns in them." And She said, "I have to take the thorns, too." And She took them and then She said, "Can you tape record this, my talk?" And that was the first time I remember Her giving a formal talk. And I remember thinking. "What is the point of taping it? We are all here." Shows all the ingredients, you know, We were not - it was not a fully fledged puja, as we see today. you how aware we were of what was going on. (Pat Anslow) (Djamel Metouri) We had a large piece with "Charlie WE JUST DIDN'T HAVEA CLUE Chakra" drawn and we were offering this rice and flowers to each of the Chakras, saying At Her house {near Oxted in Surrey, England, there was a puja}. At one stage She took us outside in the evening, into the garden and we had a havan outside and She mantras on each, for each charka, you know. And that puja, interestingly enough, was just a small puja, in a way because we were only was trying to clear us and trying to clear us and we all stood there and suddenly She said nine or ten people, but there is a picture of Mother who is holding the flowers between Her feet. something like, "That's it." And this huge wind came up and disturbed all the leaves and you just felt like the disciples gathered around Christ. She worked so hard all the time on us no matter what. She tried I can't say it was the first, but I remember it was my first Guru Puja in 1977 with just ten people as opposed to two thousand or three thousand today. And this everything to try and clear us out. (Maureen Rossi) was just happening in the lounge of Gavin Brown's house. And later on we had another puja in Her house, and that was more like a real puja with the amrit and all the elements and so on. That took place during a seminar that we had in Her house around September, In fact, in a way, that puja was done differently from the way we do it today, which is we do the puja directly to the Goddess and we wash Her Feet. At that time, 1977. That was in Hurst Green in Oxted. And I remember very well because, even Kevin, which is Pat's son, was there. He was quite we did wash Her Feet, but at the same time we were actually using this "Charlie Chakra" young. chart, actually doing offerings to the various (Djamel Metouri) charkas.

 Issue : 1 & 36 2-2006 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE hospitable and I remember feeling clueless There were just halfa dozen of us at that first puja. Kevin, my son, was there, He used to misbehave and I used to get furious with him and Mother used to take him away from me and calm me down and look after Kevin. No, Mother had to do everything for us. We in the light of their humble Indian hospitality and culture. She called all of us, very new people, to do Her puja and put the born - realised at the front. This included a little Dutch boy and myself. She told us that just didn't have a clue. double responsibility. Then we did Her puja with the other new people behind us. They put their hand on our ours was a (Pat Anslow) shoulders or upper arms, so we were all CLOSENESS AND INTIMACY connected. We didn't really know what we The house in Oxted that Shri Mataji were doing and Shri Mataji instructed us step had - I remember things attached to by step through the foot washing, the amrits, landscapes and environments quite a lot. I the kumkum paint, the sandal oil and the flowers. At the end, people came rushing through, trampling over us and stepping on our hands to get their photographs of our remember in Cxted, the sort of closeness and intimacy, Her relationship with the early Sahaja Yogis. It is something that the earlier Sahaja Yogis talk about quite a lot. For example, we would have ajwain and She would get under the sheet with everybody and all the Sahaja Yogis would be coughing and spluttering and She would say, "What's Mother. (Marilyn Leate) ONE MOMENT OF GLORY FORA wrong?" She would be completely all GALLANT FLOWER unaffected. One year Mother stayed in London for Christmas. It snowed on Christmas Eve (Kevin Anslow) and Mother said it was because Kevin I REMEMBER FEELING (Anslow), Pat's son, had wanted a white CLUELESS Christmas. We had planted a sunflower outside the kitchen window at Chelsham The first puja to Shri Mataji which I ever attended was Guru Puja 1978. It was Road (Ashram) and, as the months went by, it got taller and taller, but never seemed to form a flower. As December approached, I performed at a hall in Finchley, North London. Resident Indian people did most of the preparation. They were touchingly began to wonder because sunflowers are

 Issue : 1& 2 - 2006 37 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE frost-tender and are usually dead by October or November and this was in 1980 She was reading us so deeply. And She gave me three presents, three presents, and I was amazed, but what do you do? They were just handed to me. And I remember walking home from there, back to where I lived, quite late at night and feeling Her love. She had given me these things which were somehow so symbolic and, of course, I still or 81, before the greenhouse summers and climate change had started. By mid-December the plant still wasn't dead and started forming a flower head - again quite extraordinary in the dark, cold depths of the English winter. On Christmas morning it blossomed, even though it was snowing. We picked it and put it on the top of the Christmas tree in the room where Mother have them. (John Glover) came for the Christmas Puja - one moment of glory for a gallant sunflower, Mother had SHE WAS LOOKING AT THE often passed the flower when it had been growing as in those days She would come to VIBRATIONS Chelsham Road once a week or so. There was a Christmas Puja, which was one of the early ones. It was at the Temple of All Faiths in Hampstead and Shri Mataji, for myself, She gave me a picture and some of the other older Sahaja Yogis, She had different things. But what She had done there were a lot of Mr. CP's old - and (Linda Williams.) SHE WAS READING US SO DEEPLY I remember there was this Christmas I say "old" in inverted commas - ties and She Puja and it was early on because I came at the end of '79 and this might have been '80 and Mother gave a lot of presents. I can remember that the puja at that time was quite a difficult and often painful business. The had wrapped them all up. And they were all wrapped up in exactly the same way. They were all different, but they were all wrapped up the same way, so there was no way of knowing any one from the other. So Shri Mataji was giving these packages out. And spirit loved it, but everything else screamed and squealed and stamped its feet. remember She gave these presents and She gave one to somebody and then off he went and She gave a couple more out and then She said, "No, don't take that one. Give somehow, when I went up there, it was as if She could only see vibrations. She was so lost. She was in such an amazing state, She me that one back, please." And then She gave them to this other fellow. And then She was looking at people and it was almost as if She didn't know who they were, but She gave him another one and he opened it up and it matched the suit he was wearing knew much more than who they were. And

 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE Issue : 1 & 2- 2006 38 I THOUGHT THERE WAS SOME- THING WRONGWITH THE CAMERA exactly. So it is amazing, Shri Mataji wasn't looking at the person, She was looking at the vibrations and She knew that the The first puja we had at Chelsham Road was the Bhoomi Puja, the puja to bless the house. As the housewife, I was honoured to be called to actually offer the different item to Mother in the porch of the house, I was heavily pregnant with my second child at the time. Mother stood in the doorway and I offered the rice and other things to Her Feet. Everyone else crowded round in the hallway and garden. After we had finished the short puja, Mother told us to bury the vibrations were incorrect, so She put them right. That's the way it worked out. (Doughlas Fry) READING THE PRAISE OF THE GODDESS One time when we had a puja, the puja sort of started in the morning and went offerings on the right of the doorway, be- tween the door and the window. on through the whole of the day. And one particular puja, one of the very early pujas, About a year later I was taking some photos of the children who were sitting on the front door step in one photo and standing on what was then a little lawn in front of the window by the door in the next we had a havan outside and we had this book of the thousand Sanskrit names of the Goddess. This was, I believe, actually the first puja in praise of Shri Mataji and was at Her house at Parklands, Hurst Green. We one- the strange thing was that when the were sitting round there putting stuff on the havan and Shri Mataji was actually reading photos were developed, there was a bright light coming out of the ground where we the names of Herself. As She pointed out, She said, "This is very strange because you've got the Goddess reading the praise of had buried the offerings. At that time, we did not know about miracle photos and I thought there was something wrong with the the Goddess, which is rather unusual." %3D camera. Because She was the only one who could (Linda Williams) read them. But whilst we were there- and it LIKE IT WAS A FEAST was really cold outside, it was late in the year - and the whole sky opened up like a great We used to give, really, very poor meals to Mother in those days (at the pujas big halo above us. The sky was quite dark, but there was a whole light patch above in England) and She was so gracious, She ate everything. where we were because the vibrations that (Kay McHugh) were given out had sort of caused the sky to She always said how nice they were. open. (Douglas Fry) (Linda Williams)

 39 Issue :1 & 2 2006 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE And I think once when Rustum (Bujorjee) was in the Middle East, whenever he came back, he used to say, "Why don't we do namaz at the end of the puja or something? And then Mother said one day, Yes, She did. And I used to think. "Really?" Because it would be gluggy old grey rice and She'd act like it was feast. (Key McHugh) "All right, it is good to want to do namaz, THEIR HEARTS AND CHARKAS WERE CLEAN but namaz was something that you did when you didn't know God." You know, you had to do some practice something that would probably bring you closer to God beacause you didn't know God. "But now your know God. God is in front of you. You don't need to do namaz any more." We had a puja. Before this I had one of the first of many lessons. THe (Chelsham Road} ashram was a bit of a tip and I got everyone running around cleaning it up. When Mother came, She took me aside and was not pleased. She said it was just the supra-conscious bhoots in me that were making everyone run around and tidy up and that whereas I was clean outside-my charkas were filthy inside and, although the Sahaja Yogis' ashram was a bit untidy, their hearts and charkas were clean. But may be one good thing can be told. After the puja, we would all take turns to go up to Mother. One by one we would kneel in front of Her with our forehead on Her Feet and She would often work on us. As I knelt at Her Feet at that first ever puja, She told me that I would one day give Sahaja Yoga to many, many others. That promise, which has indeed come out, sustained me through all the hard times that came later. This is not to do with what Mother said in the very early days. It was something that She said much later on, may be 1984, 1985. She started talking about it. May be She talked about it. She didn't insist on it in the beginning. Why I said this is because certainly events happened several years later, then they relate to a whole period of time where She might not say anything. She saw us för many years in Sahaja Yoga and, in a way, She saw our conditioning. She saw our attachments to various bits and pieces here and there. She saw how we try to bring various bits and pieces from our own country. (Linda WiHiams) (Djamel Metouri) SHE SAW OUR CONDITIONING YOU COULD FEEL HER PRESENCE. When you come to Sahaja Yoga, and it happens to almost everyone, you tend to bring your own religion with you. And you want to sort of shift Mother's attention towards your own religion because somehow you want to be patted on the back and you want Mother to say to you, "Oh, how nice of you to talk to Me about your Islam" and so Läter on we started to have pujas at institutions, you know, proper, like hotels or conference places. But in the beginning, in I came(1979 and those first two years, when 1980), most of it was in people's houses. I know we had a lot of pujas in Brighton in Pamela (Bromley)'s house and I can on

 1 & 2-2006 40 Issue THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE foot, really sharp like a nail going through my foot. And She said, "What's the matter?" It was like the crucifixion, like a nail in my foot. I somehow didn't feel guilty. It was just recording. remember being in the ouse with Shri Mataji. It didn't matter if Shri Mataji was upstaris or in a different room, you could feel Her presence, that She was in the house and it would make you- you would become much more conscious of your behaviour of what you -I felt myself - of what you said or even what thoughts you allowed to pass through your mind. Sometimes you would feel it wasn't right to have a certain thought, it was almost dangerous for you because you were in the presence of the Goddess. (Vicky Halperin.) So I nipped out the back and went down to the local corner shop and got a pot of Gale's Honey, brought it back and that got presenteed to Shri Mataji and She said, "Oh, this is fine." (Chris Marlow) (Felcity Payment) IT WAS JUST RECORDING JUST TO GET HEART OUT OF THEM. I don't know why this was. I ended After the Ganesha Puja in Brighton, there was quite a big gathering and Shri Mataji was working on somebody and She wanted some honey to vibrate for clearing people's Agya. And someone had a very posh pot of honey, which had been bought in a nice health food shop. up in the front being dressed as an Indian in a dhoti and She had this material She wound round and round and round me and I ended up with these big trouser type things. What are they called? Just dhoti, yes. She was showing us how to do it. (Chris Marlow) She spent ages and ages with us because in those days, although there were The reason why I remember it so strongly was that I bought the acacia honey. I bought the food that was used for the catering from Paul(Winter)'s house and we had been to the wholesalers and various places and the honey was acacia honey. less people, it was less formal. Pujas were quite short. Although the pujas we did ourselves are very long, the pujas She did were actually quite short and they still are. But She used to spend whole evening with us, just trying to get us to entertain ourselves and that, I think, was one of the things She used to do. She used to do all kinds of funny things to make us laugh, because we were quite miserable all the time. That was one of (Vicky Halperin) Shri Mataji said, "No, this is no good. This is acacia honey and acacia is the tree that Christ was crucified on and it's also this horrible spiky thrn thing." the things, dressing people up, making them do things, just to get heart out of them. (Chris Marlow) (Ray Harris) When Shri Mataji made this comment about the honey and the acacia, I had the most extraordinary pain thrugh my

 Music bild Programme ņ d Prathisthan On 20th Nov.2005.

 MYSTIC ULURU



----------------------

2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-0.txt 
 17
The Divine Cool Breeze
V.
00
January-February, 2006
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-1.txt 
 " ... Today I am openly revealing this to you that until you Recognize Me,
this work will not be done. I did not say this before. Just like Shri Krishna
said,'Sarvâdhârmânam parityajayâ mâ-mekam sharanâm vrajâ'. Likewise
are My saying too. Like, Christ said 'I am the Light, I am the path', similar
are My words too. "I am the Destination, not only the path."
But, I never told this to you before, because, the previous experiences
were so bad that I did not say this is to you. You have to take
My refuge (Sharanâgat). You have to accept Me as your Mother and
I have to take you as My son.
Without that your work will not be done."
(H.H. Shri Mataji, Mumbai. 29.03.1975)
I1.
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-2.txt 
 COOL BREEZE
THE DIVINE
WA NIRMALA
tINIVERSAL PURE RELIGION
IN THIS ISSUE
Award Presented to Sir C.P. Srivastava
3.
Guru Purnima Puja -2005 (USA) - A Report
10.
Guru Puja Weekend Report - USA- 2005
13.
Acquisition of Shri Mataji's house in Chindwara-India
18.
The Spirit - (Pravachan of Shri Mataji)
19.
22.
Ekadash Rudra
23.
Importance of Puja and Havana - June 18, 1983
Shri Mataji's Advice England 31st March, 1983
25.
Leaders in Sahaja Yoga
30.
Sahaja Yoga and Physical Cure
III
32.
The Memories of the Divine Mother
34.
DHARMA
PAHSIA
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-3.txt 
 COOL BREEZE
THE
DIVINE
Published by
Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
8, Chandragupt Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411029
Printed by
Krishna Printer & Designer
Vishram Nagar. Tri Nagar. Delhi-35
Mob. 9868545679
For Subscription Please Write to:
Shri G.L. Agrawal
Nirmal Infosystems & Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
222. Desh Bandhu Apartments
Kalkaji, New Delhi-110019
Tel No. 011-26422054, 26216654
Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles, Miracle Photographs etc. to:
Shri O P Chandna
G-11 (463), Rishi Nagar. Rani Bagh, Delhi-110 034
Tel. No. 011-55356811
Mor 8.00 AM - 9.00 AM
Eve 8 30 PM - 10.30 PM
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Award Presented To Sir C. P. Srivastava by President Of India
Papaji by the President of India, H.E. A.P.J.
Abdul Kalam. The award carried a cash prize
of Rs. 1 lakh, a citation and a plaque.
At last the much awaited historic moment
sprang up live on First of October in the
evening at 4:30 IST in the Rashtrapati
Bhavan, (President House), New Delhi on
Saturday, when the prestigious award in due
recognition for his contribution in the field
of maritime exploration and Excellence in
Public Administration, Academics and
Sir CP Srivastava has been designated as a
Lal Bahadur Shastri Fellow and his name
inscribed on the honours roll of the Lal
Bahadur Shastri Institute of Management,
Delhi., The participants in the Rashtrapati
Management was awarded to retired IAS
officer, Sir. C.P. Srivastava, our beloved
Bhavan award ceremony included Prime
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Issue :1 & 2 - 2006
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
4
LGM
Sir CP. Srivastava is the founding Chancellor
Emeritus of the World Maritime University,
Malmo, Sweden. He has also been the
chairman of the governing board of the IMO
Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh, United
Progressive Alliance Chairperson Ms. Sonia
Gandhi, Union Home Minister Mr. Shivraj
Patil, and the former Union Minister and son
of Lal Bahadur Shastri, Mr. Anil Shastri
International Maritime Law Institute, Malta,
along with other important dignitaries.
and chairman of the Government of India
Committee on Maritime Education and
Mr. Shastri, who is also the chairman of the
institute, said: "The award honours people
from whom the younger generation can draw
inspiration."
Training.
The Sahaja yogi present there at that gracious
moment fondly recollects that the presence
FED
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Issue :1& 2-2006
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
of Our Holy Mother gave the event a special
quality and auspiciousness and that She was
pleased. After, Sir CP was honoured with the
prestigious award; he was subsequently
invited to deliver his speech. The speech
itself turned out to be historic in its own
that he received from his daughters Kalpana
and Sadhna. He also mentioned that Shri
Mataji as his wife "Nirmala", who had
always been at his side as inspiration and
that Her principles were all that Mr. Lal
Bahadur Shastri once prophesied as values
in life and serving the cause of the humanity.
She had been in that path only, helping
mankind to improve upon all social activities
and make a better living. He also added that
he is now totally devoted and dedicated to
essence as our Papaji, Sir CP Srivastava
addressed the gathering with very powerful
English diction in praise of the service he
rendered under the principle and guidance
of the erstwhile Prime Minister of India, the
late Mr. Lal Bahadur Shastri.
this cause what our beloved Mother, has
taken up as the holy task of uplifting the
humanity and transforming them to be
Concluding his speech, the eyewitness
recollected that Sir CP spoke with all candid
persons with values. Later, he thanked the
gesture and confided that whatever position
he held today at 85, along with, all his
achievements for which he is being honoured
today, owe its all due credit to the values he
has held through the love he received
President and all the honourable members
present there for the honour conferred upon
him.
It was half an hour ceremony and then all
joined in the snacks and tea party hosted by
throughout his 58 years of married life and
association with Shri Mataji and also the love
the President of India, where all the
dignitaries came and congratulated our
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Issue :1 & 2- 2006
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
Mother turn by turn. Shri Mataji was very
very pleased. She was probably ...why
probably!!! Indeed working on the Indian
Government machinery.
speech turned us all present in that moment
speechless. It was a fountain of vibrations.
Mother was vibrant all the time and seemed
to be emitting enough vibrations in the hall
of the President House for vibrating the
Indian Government machinery to work
better. The yogi present there added, "...in
Later, after the ceremony Mr. Anil Shastri,
son of late Prime Minister Lal Bahadur
Shastri presented the volumes of the book
my life time, I have never ever before
entitled "Lal Bahadur Shastri "to the
attended such a historic event in Sahaja Yoga.
I am grateful to Mother for the moment ."
The entire proceedings of the evening's event
was broadcast by the Indian TV channel
Doordarshan in the DD News that evening
only. It seems even Shri Vishnumaya was
impatient in announcing the great event.
President authored by Papaji. Everything
seemed to work subtly.
The yogis present in the occasion expressed
the moment to be historic. They were
overjoyed in announcing and excited to
reveal that Mother was very very pleased and
that Pappaji's delivery of the powerful
Jai Shri Mataji
Gurgaon Collectivity, India
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Felicitation to Sir C.P. Srivastava at Kamani Auditorium, Delhi, India
Dear Brothers and Sisters,
divinity that should have been the protocol
for such a statue that was immediately
conveyed to Mr. Anil Shastri son of Late Shri
Lal Bahadur Shastri and chairperson of the
Institute as Mother's desire and message for
On 3rd October 2005 another programme at
the Kamani Auditorium, Mandi House, New
Delhi was hosted by the Lal Bahadur Shastri
Institute of Management, Delhi", Shastri
Sadan, Sector III, R.K. Puram, New Delhi,
to felicitate Sir CP Srivastava. The
the needful action.
Sir CP was invited to speak on the topic
"Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri's
programme started at morning eleven sharp
on Monday. There was a gathering of about
700 out of which 300 plus were Sahaja Yogis.
Sir CP Srivastava was the main source of
attraction though, but all eyes were anxiously
waiting
compassionate gesture of our beloved
Mother. Shri Mataji graced the entire venue
by Her holy presence with a pleasing smile
all the while. Strikingly, in the entrance of
the Auditorium there was a statue of Late
Vision and its relevance to India today". The
eyewitness says it was not only touching
speech with a fluent effortless diction in
English, but a revelation that the world knew
little of the personality called Shri Lal
Bahadur Shastri and his magnanimity, His
every action, principle and life was
immaculate, simple in understanding and full
of wisdom. Probably, we as Sahaja Yogis can
assign all these qualities in Shri Ganesha as
deity while, he spoke on the power of
personality attraction, loving, compassionate
caring, humility, politeness, wisdom, and
principles. In one such incident he fondly
loving
and
the
for
Lal Bahadur Shastri as Mother noticed that
in a personal
communication that " the statue should have
remarked
statue
been in white and not in black "! The
message emerged as powerful truth from
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Issue 1 & 2 - 2006 8
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
in life, while once he bought a toy as a gift
for his son Anil Shastri, while he was a child.
Shastriji refused to accept it!Certainly, it was
not for the sake of the money but was a matter
of principle. So, that is how his every action
expressed the principles and honesty that
were deep rooted in his entire philosophy of
life that he held as a human being.
recollected the interaction between the late
Prime Minister and him on Shastriji's
humbleness and humility. He said late Mr.
Shastri was Home Minister and then , while,
Sir CP was his cabinet secretary and as a
person Shasrtiji always loved to nod with
folded hands the gesture of 'namaskar to
Shrivastavasaab even before Sir CP got an
opportunity to do so in the first place. Such
was his simplicity, never being proud of his
position or ego whichnever overpowered his
simple attitude. In another incident he refers
to the interaction between the two Prime
Later, Mr.Anil Shastri also spoke a lot about
the greatness of the family of Sir CP. He also
acknowledged with gratefulness for the
family of Sir CP on many personal terms in
helping him build his career. He fondly
Ministers, while Shastriji was the Prime
Minister of India and Mr. Ayub Khan the
Prime Minister of Pakistan .
recollected how he and his brother Sunil who
were classes III and IV then, had their tuitions
from none else other than our beloved
Mother, Shri Mataji . He spoke of values,
love, compassion and the high quality life
that Sir CP and Shri Mataji as a person
promises to the world. He spoke with all
respect for Shri Mataji as how She was not
only a source of inspiration since his early
childhood but also a role model. Her
In one formal meet , Mr. Shastri
communicated to Mr. Khan in plain and
simple words that he better not attempt or
even think of annexing or taking edge over
India ever, as India was far superior with her
all qualities and people. They had their values
and for such values India holds greater
respect. Sir CP thus explained how Mr.
Shastriji's words became a powerful
instrument and helped avert a war and then
both exchanged gestures of good will.
Commenting, on war Shastriji used to say,
its always a loss for both ends in a war
Papaji, spoke in fluency for an hour
recollecting the smallest of incidents/
episodes and association with this great
personality . It was captivating, as if
unfolding the untold history once again
(rewinding) but with a realized eye, that we
seemed to have missed out while learning
our history lessons. All incidents sprang alive
as he was speaking in his plain and simple
English He referred to many tender moments
compassion and love is unparalleled and
difficult to describe. Mr.Anil Shastri, in
narrating one personal incident reveals that
once his brother-in-law had severe stomach
problem, Shri Mataji with Her compassion
placed Her hands over his stomach. The pain
was gone the next moment never to return
till date. Such was Her Love and the healing
touch. It was indeed very touching moment
as the audience listened to him with all
expectation to hear more anecdotes that
related to these two great families.
Later Papaji donated the entire amount of 1
Lakh rupees; he received as cash prize
attached to the award, to the Institute, and
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Issue :1& 2-2006
THE DIVINE COOL BREFZE
also humbly donated yet another lakh for the
cause of scholarship towards the students
pursuing their degree and education from that
Institute. He was pleased to distribute 450
copies of his authored book entitled, Lal
Bahadur Shastri in English and in Hindi to
loving Mother of the entire Universe
whoblessed Her children who anxiously
desired for Her Holy visit, but who is also
present as Shri Mahamaya who is there to
enjoy everything attached yet detached.
Later in the evening the Institute hosted a
dinner in honour of Sir CP and Shri Mataji
at six in the India International Centre in
Lodhi Road, New Delhi. In India many TV
channels have already had good coverage of
the entire event and shall be on telecast
the students.
What really makes a man larger than life is
just not merely by the sum of his
achievements , but by the enormous heart
that beats for the cause of love, compassion
and humanity. Probably these few moments
are insufficient to speak of the volume of
love exchanged and the vibrations that
flowed into the auditorium in the Holy
presence of Shri Mataji Herself as the wife
of such a humble personality like Sir CP
Srivastava , whose expression the world
witnessed today as a compassionate and
shortly. So we may wait for the next
announcement to see the event and absorb
the dynamite of love exploding in Her Holy
Presence of our beloved Mother and our
Papaji, Sir CP gracefully blessing the
occasion.
Jai Shri Mataji
Gurgaon Collectivity, India
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Guru Purnima Puja (2005) To Shri Mataji (A Report)
On Wednesday July 20, we had asked Shri Mataji if She would allow us to offer a
Puja to Her the next day on the occasion of Guru Purnima. She gracefully agreed.
followed by all the leaders offering haldi
(turmeric) and kumkum at Shri Mataji's feet.
We sang a Ganesha song, followed by "Guru
Totza Mhanavi" and ended the bhajans with
"Jago Savera". She was enjoying the bhajans
so thoroughly, looking at all the yogis in the
room, who were expressing their devotion
to the Guru. This was then followed by
offering a gift to Shri Mataji from the
hosting countries. She asked where the gift
was from and praised the craftsmanship
of the gift.
On Thursday morning, soon after Her
breakfast, She explicitly requested some of
the ladies to prepare Her Sari for the Puja.
After her evening tea, Shri Mataji invited the
collective into Her living room for this
joyous and special occasion. This puja was
attended by representatives from several
countries, local USA centers and several
yogis attending Shri Mataji.
Puja started around 8pm with ladies
offering a welcome aarti to Shri Mataji,
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-12.txt 
 İssue : I & 2- 2006
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
11
Shri Mataji was looking so radiant
this evening, enjoying the presence of so
many of Her children at Her feet, pouring so
much love on each yogi who was there.
Several yogis were commenting about how
much love they felt from Shri Mataji, and
how pleased She looked throughout the
evening. We all felt wave after wave of
Divine Vibrations pouring out from Her
during the entire evening, and every one was
commenting how the vibrations have lifted
in this area.
At one point, when one yogi with
a camera came into the room, She gave
him a big smile and said "aa gaye"
Some time after the puja, Manoj, Paul.
Karan and Gagan presented documents
pertaining to the incorporation of "Shri
Mataji Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga World
Foundation" that were filed on this
auspicious day. This was a very historical
moment when, for the first time ever, the
World Foundation has been given a legal
status any where in the world. Shri Mataji
accepted the articles of incorporation and
gave Her blessings to the organization. At one
point, She commented "What a team work!".
acknowledging that the "official camera
man" has arrived. Mark has been taking
photographs during the many joyful bhajan
sessions and other collective interactions
with Shri Mataji.
%3D
Shri Mataji looked so pleased and
asked at one point on number of yogis in the
room and commented that Her living room
was absolutely packed.
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-13.txt 
 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
Issue : 1 & 2 2006
12
Shri Mataji continued to enjoy the company of a few yogis for the rest of the evening,
watching some movies and interacting with the yogis in the room. She spoke in length on
the phone with Her family members in Los Angeles and ask them repeatedly when they
were arriving for the Puja.
It was a very special evening and we are so grateful for Her presence here in New
Jersey. Please enjoy the pictures.
Jai Shri Mataji
Manoj, Vasu, Mark and Amurag
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Guru Puja Weekend Report
USA 2005
promised new faces and the establishment
of new friendships, and we were not
disappointed. Appreciating each other,
working on each other, and preparing for puja
together, we were part of the Vishuddhi of
the Virata.
This Guru Puja weekend was
historic, as the first international Guru Puja
in the U.S.A. It was also historic in how the
Sahaja Yogis understood the significance of
the event. There was a collective maturity
and inner silence. The 950 yogis who
attended also celebrated - in embraces,
Overall the level of comfort, service
sincere conversations, singing and dance
the atmosphere of deep affection and love,
that is, Sahaja Yoga. A story appeared on
Sunday in the daily New Jersey newspaper,
They Recorded, and summed up the event
with the headline, "Hundreds fill weekend
with devotion and bliss."
and food provided by the Sheraton
Meadowlands Hotel was superb--with our
physical needs so well taken care of, we
could fully concentrate on our spiritual state.
Conveniently located midway between a
major airport and where Shri Mataji was
staying, the hotel afforded us trees and
expanses of green grass for meditating.
Meals could be taken indoors or outside.
While it was hot outside, there were breezes.
and shady areas to make each meal a very
enjoyable pienic.
The weekend began for most of us
with the arrival on Friday. The registration
process, acquiring a room and a set of meal
coupons, allowed each of us the chance to
enter a state of patient witnessing as our own
organizational needs intersected with the
availability of rooms at the hotel. As we
found in Los Angeles and New York in
recent years, a good hotel room assignment
On Friday and Saturday we had to
meet in a large tent erected in the parking lot
of the hotel, as the large ballroom wouldn't
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-15.txt 
 2-2006
Issue: 1 &
14
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
wanted to know what wonderful tape was
be available until Sunday. As it turned out,
the party using the ballroom on Saturday
evening used it for a full-blown Indian
wedding, and parts of the hotel had
wonderful statues of Shri Ganesha and
decorative columns which added to the
being played, and then discovered it was a
live performance coming from the front of
the tent.
Throughout the evening we saw and
heard the amazing talent, evolving and
expanding year by year, of young
performers presenting music and classical
Indian dance pieces. We enjoyed flute,
guitar, kawali, Turkish drumming, and
classical Indian vocals. When the ten
Turkish drummers combined
festive atmosphere.
The highlight of the Friday evening
entertainment program was a singing
presentation by the small children of the
Canajoharie school. Their enthusiasm and
innocence showed the promise for the
future of Sahaja Yoga in the U.S.A. Other
activities over the weekend included a game
of soccer, collective shoe beating, splashing
in the hotel pool, and head oiling and
their
intoxicating beat with traditional Sahaja
bhajans on harmonium, some of us could not
stop ourselves from jumping up and
dancing. Theatre of Eternal Values presented
some improvisational comedy.
massaging.
Saturday night's entertainment
program began with everyone settling into
their places while beautiful hammer
dulcimer music filled the air. One yogi
The Yuva Shakti on the Realize
America tour showed slides and talked about
their experiences heading down the east
coast of the U.S.A. (Their website is
connect yourself.
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Issue : 1 & 2 - 2006
15
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
realizeamerica.com.). A theatrical
presentation showed various incarnations
and adi gurus teaching Mahatma Gandhi that
his dream of world unity requires the
intervention of the deities, but first and
oremost it requires the advent of the Adi
Shakti as Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala
small children, laughing--manifesting the
most adorable, magnetic, and motherly
personality ever seen in history. There was
footage showing Her tireless work of
raising the kundalinis of thousands of people,
in villages and in halls. As the camera panned
back slowly, one could not see the end of
the sea of seekers, all with one hand over
the top of the head, feeling the cool breeze
of the Holy Spirit for the first time. The video
expressed for all of us our profound love and
gratitude to Shri Mataji.
Devi.
The highlight of the evening was an
anthem to Shri Mataji-a video presentation
by the Italians which was so moving and
overflowing with love that afterwards yogis
could only embrace each other and let the
inexpressible joy flow as tears. Archival foot-
age showed our dear Holy Mother of twenty
years ago, personally
adjusting brides' and grooms' garlands at a
wedding in India, cooking, playing the
harmonium, singing, greeting and kissing
All of the events of the weekend
opened our hearts and enabled us to feel more
than ever Shri Mataji's love. Everything was
preparing us for puja. Only at Sahasrara, in
silent bliss, could we do Her puja. The time
for puja was set for 7:00 p.m. Sunday
evening. Soon after 7 we started singing
more
or
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-17.txt 
 16
Issue : I & 2 - 2006
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
bhajans, and the puja had begun. Each of us
was celebrating, in a hotel ballroom with 950
yogis, our personal and intimate connection
with Shri Mataji. And then it was time to
stand, with full respect and devotion, while
Shri Mataji entered the ballroom. Twenty-
a nonprofit organization in the United States.
Operating as the World Council for the
Advaneement of Sahaja Yoga, this new
foundation will protect and preserve Shri
Mataji's teachings, and support national
collectives around the world in spreading Her
divine message.
We realized we were witnessing
history--the first time a major world religion
has been formally and legally brought into
being with the direct guidance of the
incarnation! With the generous support of
Shri Mataji and Her family, the new
one children were requested to come up on
stage and offer Ganesha puja. Then several
married ladies decorated the Goddess. Aarti
was powerful, as if we
announcing to the world, "She is here! The
Guru of all the Gurus is here, with all Her
were
power and majesty!"
foundation will have a solid footing. At this
point there was no doubt that we had to stand
and offer our Holy Mother a standing
After we offered our collective
pranam, the international and national gifts
were brought on stage, one by one, and Shri
Mataji stayed throughout the entire
ceremony. After all the gifts had been offered,
Arneau took the microphone to announce the
news that, just two days earlier, the Shri
Mataji Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga
Foundation had been officially registered as
ovation. Then the clapping died down and
we stood in silence. The large curtain was
drawn across the front of the stage and Her
time with us in physical form had come to
an end.
Individually we thanked Shri Mataji
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-18.txt 
 & 2 - 2006
Issue : 1
17
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
and dance, while some of us sat in silent
reverence in front of Her chair on the stage.
and prayed that we had absorbed all of the
vibrations. After some time of meditation,
prasad and commemorative gifts were
distributed. And then we found a magnetic
force kept us in the puja hall. Even if we
went out of the ballroom, we found ourselves
drawn back into the hall. Digital cameras
were handed back and forth as many yogis
shared miracle photos their camera had cap-
tured. (Shri Mataji had said before the puja
that many miracle photos would be taken.)
Our hearts filled with exuberance and love,
the ballroom then erupted in vigorous song
Shri Mataji mentioned to Manoj
while returning to Her house after the puja
that "Vibrations were very good" and "many
miracle photos would be seen". At this puja,
we not only felt our individual connection
to Shri Mataji at Sahasrara; we experienced
the effortless, joyous state of being connected
to Her in the collectivity of Sahaja Yoga. In
this new state of being, we knew we weren't
doing anything--She was doing everything.
Jai Shri Mataji
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Aquisition of Shri Mataji's house in Chhindwara-India
On 7 April 2005, Shri Mataji
established H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Sahaja Yoga Trust to manage all the affairs
of Sahaja Yoga in India. She is the
Chairperson of this National Trust. Sir C. P.
Srivastava is the Vice Chairman and Shri
Rajesh Shah the joint Vice Chairman. The
Trust, which will henceforth provide the
collective leadership for Sahaja in India is
made up of 12 Trustees and 7 Special
Invitees. The Trust's offices are in New Delhi
in the Sahaja Temple at 17-C Qutab
Institutional Area.
collected through an international appeal for
the acquisition of the Chhindwara House
amounting to Rs 77 lakhs were held in Shri
Mataji's bank accounts in London for nearly
ten years. This amount has been transferred
in full to the accounts of the newly
established National Trust in India.
Moreover, members of Shri Mataji's family
(namely Sir C.P. and the two daughters,
Kalpana and Sadhana) have donated Rs. 58
lakhs towards the cost of acquiring the holy
birthplace. Sahaja Yogis from all over the
world and for all times to come will in great
esteem behold this extremely gracious
donation by Shri Mataji's family that
demonstrates their commitment to
From the very inception the National
Trust placed the highest priority to the
acquisition of the holy birth place of Shri
Mataji (the Chhindwara House) for the
international Sahaja collective and build a
Memorial. The task was entrusted to the
perpetuating the legacy of our Holy Mother.
The Indian collective leadership,
represented by the National Trust, will now
take up the holy and important task of
building the World Sahaja Yoga Ashram and
the most beautiful Memorial to our Mother
Asset Management Committee of the
National Trust.
With the collective efforts of all the
Trustees and of Sahaja Yogis from Nagpur,
Bhopal, Pune and Mumbai and the tireless
follow up by Shri Dinesh Rai, the chairman
of the Asset Management Committee, this
holy task was accomplished on 14 July 2005.
The property has been officially transferred
in the name of the H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala
Devi Sahaja Yoga Trust and all legalities
have been completed. A collective havana
and puja were held on the premises on 14
July. Following instructions from Shri
Mataji, sign boards declaring it as Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga World Ashram
and the Holy Birthplace of Shri Mataji have
already been put in place.
on Her birthplace. A special committee
will soon be constituted for this task and
everybody is invited to contribute to this
Holy task through ideas, resources and
voluntary work. Those interested in
contributing to this effort could contact Rajiv
Kumar, Executive Secretary Indian National
Trust at
aarkey1951@yahoo.co.in or
at 91 9818098072.
The Indian collective leadership
recognizes the immensity of this historic task
and prays to Shri Mataji to give us the
wisdom, courage and humility to undertake
this task.
For the Indian Collective,
Rajiv Kumar
It is important to mention that funds
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-20.txt 
 THE SPIRIT
Pravachan of Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Sanskrit there is a very good word for
excited, it is the u i.e. pulsation) or when
it is pulsated (His attention) or when it
pulsates, then through His attention He starts
creating,
Spirit is the most precious thing that
we have within ourselves. The preciousness
of your Spirit is immeasurable and that is
why it is called the thing of eternal value.
Because it is infinite, we cannot measure.
And He has the third quality, which
we call 'Anand'. Anand is the feeling of 'Joy'
that He gets by His perception, by His
creation, the joy that He gets. All these three
things 'Sat Chit Anand' when they are at a
zero point where they meet, then they
become principle of 'Brahma'. When these
three things are one, where there is complete
silence nothing is created and nothing is
manifested, but the 'Joy' is one with the
Now, God the Almighty, we say is
"Sat-Chit-Anand'. Sat means the "Truth'. The
truth, we understand, in human terminology
is relative. But the 'Truth' I am telling you is
the absolute, from where all the relations
start. Example, I will tell you, how to
understand. This Earth has got oceans and
rivers and all kinds of waters you can say.
But the Earth is enveloping all of them. If
the Mother Earth was not there, there could
not have been any of these existing. So we
can say, that the Mother Earth is the
support of all the things that exist on Earth.
She is enveloping us. In the atoms, She
exists, in the big mountains, She exists,
because the elements are part of that Earth.
In the same way God Almighty, The 'Sat
of Him, the 'Truth' is the support of all the
things that are created or not created.
'Attention' because the 'Attention' has
reached to merge into 'Joy' and 'Joy' has
become one with 'Truth'. This combination
of three qualities separate and create three
types of phenomena. 'Anand', the joy inwards
merged with His creation and with the
"Truth'. When 'Joy' starts moving with the
part
creation, the creation starts moving down
from first, the 'Sat' or "Truth' stage to Asat"
i.e. 'untruth' to 'Maya' i.e. 'Illusion'. And that
time the creation starts working out and when
it starts working out, the 'Joy', which is one
on the left hand side, the emotional side of
God also starts becoming grosser and
grosser, till they reach a stage where there
is, we can say, a complete darkness of
Tamoguna, the complete cessation of the
creativity and the complete sleeping of the
jov. Is it clearer? You will understand
Another example; you try to understand.
How, the 'Sat' is the 'Purush', is the God who
does not take actual part in the creation
itself, but is a catalyst. The example can be
like this, that,I am doing all the work, I am
creating every thing, but I have a light in my
hand. With out the light, I cannot do
anything. Light is the support of my work.
But the light does not in anyway do anything
about what I do, In the same way, God
Almighty is just the witness like a light.
now Mahalakshmi, Mahakali, and
Mahasaraswati. That is why Christ said, I
am the light.' Because He represents the 'Sat'-
the light of God. And when the light of God
becomes absolutely gross, dormant or dead,
But His another quality is the 'Chit',
it is 'Attention'. When it is excited (in
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Issue :1 & 2 - 2006
20
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
eternal things. But it is really a precarious
stage, that is, to be human being. Because at
this stage, you have to jump only a little bit
that side, while you start jumping this side
and that side. Because this jumping is not
then it reaches the second stage of creation.
All these things go deeper and deeper and
become grosser. That is one part of the
parabole.
Now the another part of the parabole possible unless and until the awareness
starts when you are attaining back to God reaches that stage, where you become
Almighty. That process now gradually starts independent and in that independence, you
becoming higher and higher, subtler and
subtler and finer and finer. In that refinement find your own course. This is the position.
ultimately the light works for the Because your 'Self cannot be yours until and
evolutionary process. Gradually the grosser
parts start becoming enlightened. You find
the lower animal is not much enlightened as is gross, how can you enjoy that eternal joy
the higher animal. Gradually even the 'Joy' that is within you? So it is for you to expose
starts becoming subtler and subtler. We can
call it beautiful. Human joys are much more
beautiful that that of animals. So the 'Joy' cleaner so that you feel that 'Divine!.
also starts changing their manifestation. In
the sense, you start more and more and wider
range of 'Joy' comes into your hands. For getting Self-Realisation, unless and until
example, to a dog beauty has no meaning, these three things start merging together, you
decency has no meaning. So at a stage when cannot feel that you have established
you reach, when you are a human being, to yourself. The Joy within you, must be felt
that extent you develop your 'Sat', which is
awareness; to that extent you also develop
your Joy' and to that extent you also develop
creative action. Now you see how the
'creativity' of God passes into the hands of
Man, when he turns out, how the 'Joy' of God
unless you are independent. As long as you
are slave or under bondage or something that
yourself more to that joy by opening out your
"Self more and more and getting subtler and
Once you know this point, that, after
through your awareness, otherwise you
cannot see it. Suppose you have no eyes,
then how can you see? If you were not aware
to see me, how will you see me? If you are
not aware to hear me how will you
understand me? And once that awareness
comes to you then only the 'Joy' awakens
within you. Because only through these
passes into the hands of Man and how His
Light' comes into the heart of Man as 'Spirit.
subtle feeling of the awareness, you are
going to absorb the Joy. Just now you felt,
you said "what a beautiful thing it is!" You
It is beautiful. I have just touched,
when you have become a human being.
People say human beings have a soul, not
that others do not have, but light starts
burning in a human being only.
felt very happy. You are feeling the joy of
creation at this stage and Man is the summit
of creation. But only the crown part is such
a little thing. Very little it is. Very little
distance it crosses in no time, but only thing
Because of that 'light' we talk of
religion, we talk of God and we talk of
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Issue : 1 & 2-2006
21
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
is that, three things have to be combined. And
that is why you find even if you get
Self-realisation, you do not feel the silence.
Because you have not become the 'Light'.
You do not feel the Joy' because you have
not become the 'Anand'. That is the left side
of you. In everything there is 'Joy'. As a
human being you start seeing 'Joy' in
patterns. You see a key box, you open it out.
You see the patterns. You call it the veneer.
You call the roughness and things, the
smoothness and the harmony of it.
his own level and make him also feel the
same 'Joy' as you are getting. Supposing a
man who is an artist marries a blind girl.
What is the use? She cannot enjoy the Arts
created by this man. In the same way, if you
are interested in your family people, in your
relations, in your friends, the first thing and
the finest and greatest thing you can do is to
give them Self-realisation which means the
'Joy' of your Spirit. Expose them to the joy
of their Spirit, which is the most precious
thing. And this is the reason, why people
flicker and they fiddle and they feel uneasy
and they lose their 'Joy' very easily at small
things that has parts of it and finished.
It is like the ocean before you, where
I am there and I want you all to come into it
and enjoy. It is all for you. Whole thing was
created for your enjoyment. You have to
become subtler and subtler. You are wasting
lot of time here on very gross things, you
have noticed.
You start feeling the matter, the Joy
of His creation. But after realisation, you start
feeling the 'Joy' of creation. The summit of
creation is the human being and that is why
for a Sahaja Yogi he must realize, if he tries
to be friendly or interested or involved in a
person who is at a lower level, he can never
get the Joy' from that person. Only thing what
he can do is, to raise that person higher to
(From Nirmala yoga - 1983)
****
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-23.txt 
 EKADASHA RUDRA
Some notes from Mother's advice
Obstinacy catches here.
v)
on how to correct problems with the
Ekadasha Rudra (given in Delhi - 1981)
A half-hearted commitment to
vi)
Sahaja Yoga can cause a problem
with the Ekadasha Rudra.
i)
Establish your innocence. Put your
eyes to Mother Earth.
The Ekadasha Rudra collects from
vii)
ii)
Cleanse your void. If you went to a
false Guru, beat him with shoes.
the left and the right sympathetic.
Therefore, the combination of a left
catch with a right catch will
iii)
Put your attention more to Nature
than to other people.
Be careful when organizing; stop
particularly affect it.
iv)
David Spiro
Nirmala Yoga -1983
organizing if you are catching on
this centre, and don't speak in
public.
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-24.txt 
 IMPORTANCE OF PUJA AND HAVANA
Talk given by Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Paris - June 18, 1983
not try to challenge it. If it start challenging
it and if you hear to your intellect, you will
again go down. Even if you get the glimpses
of a star in the sky, then the scientist believe
that there is a star. So in the same manner,
even if you get the glimpses of your
realization, you have to at least believe that
you are also the Spirit. You go on sticking
to that experience and keeping your
attention on the fact that you are the Spirit.
Tell your intellect not to cheat you anymore.
You can turn the face of your intellect by
I am so happy and joyous to be here
with so many Sahaja Yogis and so many of
them are very new, not very new to me,
perhaps I have known all of you thousands
of years back. In Sahaja Yoga, you all have
to understand one simple thing, that you are
the Spirit, and whatever is not the Spirit is
not yourself.
We can compare the Spirit with the
sun: the sun can be covered with the clouds.
There can be superimposition on the sun, but
sun remains as it is at this point. You cannot
enlighten the sun. It is illumined by itself.
But, when the clouds are removed, the
superimpositions are removed, the sun shines
through the atmosphere. So our Spirit is also
superimposed by ignorance. As long as there
is superimposition, you can not see the Spirit.
And even when few clouds disappear, the
superimposition exists. One has to have a
clear sky to see the light of the Spirit
shining through. There are many ways by
this.
Now your intellect will start
working for the pursuit of the Spirit. This is
what faith means. Faith gives rise to pure
intelligence. Now once you have seen clouds
removed, still there are clouds. So you have
to use the wind to remove the clouds, wind
of the Holy Ghost. And that you know, there
are many ways of taking advantage of the
wind. So the wind comes from some other
source. That is the source of the Holy Ghost,
you own Kundalini, And also you have in
person the Primordial Kundalini before you.
Compared to many other seekers who came
before you, you are very fortunate.
which we can try to remove the clouds.
The first and foremost thing is the
assumption, the faith, that we are the Spirit
and that the rest is superimposing. You have
to assume that within yourself. After
realization, it should become very easy. That
you are something much more, something
very different from what you have known
Because worshipping any vigraha,
any statue of self-created vibrations of the
Mother Earth, people had big problems.
They had to first of all do a meditation which
was called as 'Savikalpa Samadhi'. That
means, in that state you had to concentrate
on such a statue-Vigraha. Vigraha means the
one which is a vibrating statue. And then go
on looking at that statue and try to raise your
so far.
So now the new situation arises: that
do not have a blind faith, but you have a
you
faith that has come out of an experience. So
your intellect should not fight it. It should
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Issue : 1 & 2 2006
24
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
Kundalini. And Kundalini used to come up
to Agya, but the jumping beyond the
Sahasrara was an impossible task because
one has to go from form to formless, and it
was so difficult to get out of form to
formless, and even to concentrate on abstract
or formless was another impossible task. As
Seer has double meaning. The one
who sees only, just sees and he is only
knowledge, he is a seer. Without any
thought, without any reaction, just sees and
absorbs automatically, spontaneously, he is
the seer. For me sometimes it is burdensome
because there should be some parity between
the Muslims did or many others tried to do.
Under these circumstances it was necessary
that the formless had to take a form so that
you and the deities, some balance must be
there.
there were no more complications. As soon
as you concentrated on the form you became
formless. Like if you have ice before you,
as soon as you start touching the ice, it melts
away and you start feeling the cool.
Here you are saying all the mantras
and the deities are awakened and there you
are who do not want to receive any thing
within your heart. So I am the One who has
to stock up all the extra energy that is
produced in my Body. So it would be better
ifyou all keep your hearts opened and watch
the Puja without thinking about it. Today
we will reverse the method of the Puja. First
So the problem is very easily solved
now. Puja is one of the things by which you
can excite the forms into formless. Now your
centers are the centers of energies, but they
too have a guiding deity sitting on all these
chakras. They are also the formless made
into forms. And when you do the Puja, the
forms melt into formless energies. And these
formless energies start flowing, and then
blows the wind. And that is how these
we will do the Havana and then the Puja, it
will be better. Because by that we will evoke
the fire element which burns away all the
evils. When you wash my Feet you do the
same thing and even when you evoke the fire
you do the same thing.
misidentifications, these superimpositions
on the Spirit are removed.
Today first we will have the Havana
and then the Puja, both are just the same.
You can worship Me with water or with fire.
The essence of fire is the glow. All that is
Now you cannot think about the puja.
These are things which happen into a realm
which is beyond thinking. So you have to
understand that you cannot rationalize the
You should have the maximum
wrong, all that is evil is burnt off an then the
glow shows on the faces and on the bodies
of the seekers. And also the atmosphere is
charged with the beautiful vibrations when
you have the Havana.
Puja.
advantage on your chakras. For that, vou
must fully just concentrate on the puja, and
how the wind is blowing. And the wind will
see to it that it drives out all the clouds. So
your only work is, your only method is, just
to concentrate on the puja and witness. You
May God bless you.
(From Nimala Yoga - 1983)
are a seer.
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Shri Mataji's advice
31st March, 1983
Hampstead town Hall, England
God's Work and Negativity
I realize that when something is very
important from God's point of view all the
negative forces work out their plans on how
to delay, how to put obstructions, how to
deviate or how to bring hindrances. It is very
surprising. Today, it would be best if I tell
you about God's will and how, we the
human beings, try to go against it all the time.
awareness that was our own, human
awareness, was given to us for our freedom
to be tested, to be experimented and to be
seen and finally, to have ultimate freedom
by which you become the Spirit.
You have to become the Spirit
ultimately. But as we start growing in our
awareness s0-called, our concern is not for
the Spirit. Iwould say that we are like a tree
which pushes its roots down into the Earth
God's will is extremely simple. His
is Divine Love; He is compassion and He is
the ocean of mercy. He created this world
and then created human beings just to give
them the highest thing in life - joy. Joy which
is a simple thing, does not have duality like
borrowed happiness. But how are we
anti-God and anti-joy, and why does it
happen?
so as to stand and grow; so also the roots we
have are in our brain. And then we start
growing upwards and upwards till the leaves
emerge, flowers bloom and fruits are created.
But on the contrary before reaching the fruit
stage what happens to us is that we start
creating artificial leaves and enjoying
them. We take to artificiality. Once this
identification with artificiality starts, we
begin to move away from reality to negative
thoughts or to over positive thoughts which
are actually anti-God because it is with them
that we make atom bombs and all that.
Our awareness, as you know, grows
through our brain downwards. And what
starts growing downwards takes us away
from God. Ultimately we have to achieve
God. But first we go a little away from that
awareness of being one with God; just to
understand that freedom has to be used
So, there are really two branches into
which we branch off. Some people like to
go towards the left side or the negative
attitude. They destroy themselves, trouble
themselves and do all kinds of things by
which they can die and in the most
miserable manner. They get all kinds of
diseases upon themselves. They torture their
body, they torture everything that they have.
Then the other side is the right hand side in
which they move to torture others, to destroy
properly. Without that training, without that
education, it is no use giving freedom to
human beings. You have seen the free
countries. In their freedom what have they
achieved, atom bombs to kill ourselves! It
is stupidity. It is foolish. It is absurd. But we
have done it. We are proud of it and are still
busy on how to make it worse and worse for
ourselves. This is how we move. The
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Issue :I & 2- 2006
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
26
doing, all these politicians today? Fighting.
For what? Just look at them. I can't
others, to over power others. Both the ways
are away from God, His mercy and His grace.
The concern throughout should be towards
the Spirit. Only then is the movement in the
right direction. But this concern breaks up
very easily in human beings because they
have the freedom to do it. In their ego they
break it up so much that when you develop
the artificial way of easy going life, then even
the consciousness of God is lost, that He
understand what the fighting is for to
create more destructive forces, more horrible
things to destroy innocent human beings?
Those who are innocent are simply warned.
They don't know what to do. They don't
understand why they are to be dead
tomorrow because some people have gone
off their heads! And those who have gone
off their heads are sitting at the helm of our
affairs. That is how the negativity grows
within us. We become negative. Both are
negative attitudes because they negate God.
exists, that He is the one who is running the
show. We become so conscious of ourselves
that we think there is nothing wrong. We do
this, we do that and plunge into all kinds of
problems. What we are doing is really against
ourselves, and ourselves means God because
God has created us and He loves us. We
Negation of God is the first crime we
have committed. We are not afraid of God.
He is compassion, He is Mercy, He is
everything. But, in His mercy only, He is
going to destroy this world. He won't allow
more sins to be committed against Him.
Even otherwise He destroys. What is
cancer? What are all these diseases that are
don't love ourselves. If we had loved
ourselves, we would not have abused our
body and our own systems and everything
that we have by saying "what is wrong? Why
not do it?" You must love this body of yours,
this mind of yours and this society. You must
love everything you have because God has
created you in His love. But love itself has
become a much perverted word. Now what
is wrong in promiscuousness? Is it love? If
I tell you that it is not because it is against
nature and it gives you trouble, you will be
in a mess. But people may think that this
lady is matronly She is old-fashioned and
Victorian. Listen. It is a fact. Why do we do
things which will destroy? You can't create
yourselves. You can't even create a rose for
yourself leave alone the whole body. Then
why should we be anti-ourselves? Why
should we be anti-society which we have
created? Or against the whole nation or
nations that we have created? What are they
coming up in our body? They are nothing
but our own destructive forces that we have
built within ourselves. There is no fear from
outside ourselves or any star or any
extra-terrestrial attack. No, there is none. It
is within us that the attack is built, of which
we should be aware. In the name of freedom
we have gathered within ourselves all the
germs of destruction. It is such a built-in
process that we are not even aware that these
attacks are coming, that they are there. We
are quite satisfied with ourselves, our
artificial life, etiquettes and superficial
mannerisms.
Innately, within us, resides the Spirit
which wants to enlighten you, to give the
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Issue : 1 & 2 - 2006
27
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
have separate churches, separate temples and
separate mosques? How can we become
fanatical in the name of God? Can you
imagine, this is what we have done to God!
We have become fanatics. There is a stone
which when He touches it becomes gold.
When he touches anything it becomes gold.
But, there must be a stone. When He touches
human beings, they become like prisoners.
That is why there is so much fanaticism. It
is a problem, how to give this news and this
message that you are the Spirit and you have
to become the Spirit.
peace, the bliss and the joy of our being. This
beautiful lamp of yours has been created with
a purpose. It has to be enlightened. Respect
yourself. There is no word called 'respect',
left in the dictionary today! Respect
yourself. We have to respect this lamp which
has the light of the Spirit and it should be
enlightened. And let us be that lamp which
shows the glory too. It is such a beautiful
world God has created for us but we in our
ignorance, in our so-called freedom, have
ruined so many things.
It is shocking to see where people are
going-just towards hell directly. For a mother,
it is a thing of great concern. How to stop
this fall? How to get them out of it? How to
make them understand what is their worth,
their value. You should not take human life
My mother-tongue is Marathi, and
thank God, I have been born in Maharashtra
because, it is a country of saints. Thousands
of saints lived in that country. It is the
tradition, it is so spiritual. Spirituality is the
tradition of the place where I was born.
"Maha' means great and 'rashtra' means
nation. The tradition there is of spirituality
and not of alcoholism, drugism or any other
Spirituality is the tradition of that
country where a very simple poet called
Namdev was born. He was a tailor, just an
ordinary tailor. But he has written many
sweet poems, I will explain what he says,
"A little boy is flying a kite in the sky. He is
looking at the sky, he is talking to his friends,
he is moving up and down and discussing
things here and there. But his attention is
always focused on the kite. Then, he says, a
lady is carrying her little boy and doing her
work in the house - giving water to her
husband, sitting down with the kid, cooking
and then rising up to do washing. The child
is on her waist, resting. But her attention all
the time is on the child. There is a woman
for granted. It is a very precious life which
was created out of many processes. It was
created with great difficulty. Don't forget that
you have to become the Spirit without which
your life is waste. Nay, the whole creation
is just a waste because you are the highest in
creation. You are the epitome of that creation.
'ism'.
And what are you upto? We have to
form nucleuses that will talk openly about
God. I was amazed to see that in this
country people do not like to talk about God.
You cannot talk about God! Can you
imagine such a state of affairs where you
cannot talk about your creator or that
religion means nothing? Either you form
some sort of secret organization which
everybody cannot enter into and say "now
we belong to a certain cult". How can God
have cults? Just think of it. How can He
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-29.txt 
 Issue : 1 & 2- 2006
28
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
holding a pitcher of water on her head
delicately balanced. She is walking with
other women. As they are walking together
laughing, smiling and talking to each other
their attention is always on the pitcher of
water, in the sense that the attention is on
the Spirit."
explanation is that 'you must undergo
mortification'. Why should you mortify
yourself? Because Christ did it.' Are
you
Christ? And that means whatever Christ did
was a waste, so a little bit of yours was
needed to add to it! Whatever has been done
has been more than sufficient because Christ
was the Prince. And if a prince has to
undergo mortification what is so great about
it? He has already done it and He has worked
for us. He is to be enlightened within us and
that is how we have to get our realisation.
In the same way, though we have to
lead a life here, it is absurd that we do
have our attention on our Spirit which is the
giver of the ultimate in life. But as soon as
not
you begin to talk about something spiritual,
people think that it is a lot of trash which
should not be listened to. They want to hear
the same mundane things again and gain. If
it is broadcast, say, the Conservative party
or the Labour, they will listen to it for hours
- such mundane stuff. Every year you hear
that. But if someone says "No, this is all
artificial, you have something more
worthwhile within you and hearken to it",
they think they have not come to hear all
these things. What is it that this mother is
telling us?
The easiest thing to do is to sit down
and ask question, but it is best to get your
realisation. That is the most important thing
today. Of course, under the circumstances,
as human beings are, it is not going to work
very fast. I am very sure of it, I have tried
my level best. Like mountains you have to
raise the Kundalini. It is really like raising
mountains. You feel so tired and worn out.
But then they don't want to appreciate it. So
do not feel disappointed, do not get hurt
about it.
Slowly and steadily I am sure, in your
own eyes, people will see how your life is
transformed into joy and bliss and
understanding. They will see how loving and
delighted you have become and then they are
going to believe that there is a better life for
you. Some people are in such a bad state
that they see a black picture of everything.
They are so disappointed that they have given
up. They have just given up. They say, "Now
we have just finished with it. We have done
everything and now we do not want to do
anything more". I have seen in France, they
But now awaken and arise. On a
different level we have to understand what
these people have done so far and we have
accepted it. What we have taken for granted
for all these years is beyond the horizon. A
star is shining within us and that is our Spirit.
People talked about it, talked about
God, made another cult which said they were
doing God's work. In 'God's work' the ladies
are tying up their thighs and polishing their
own flesh. Just imagine! In the name of
God doing such horrible stuff! The
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Issue : 1 & 2-2006
29
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
are discussing about the collapse and the
imminent destruction of the world. They
are discussing that "Let us be finished now.
We have had enough of it. Let us have the
ultimate destruction whether it is an atom
The only snag is that you will feel so
many are still lost. It does not matter. You
have to work hard. We have to understand
that there are negative forces which are
pulling them down. They are ignorant and
they do not know there is a life beyond this.
mundane strife. The eternal life of beauty
and glory. But gradually, I am sure, it will
work out. Especially, for this meeting, they
have lots of ups and downs and the whole
bomb or anything else. Let us be finished."
It is so desperate! I can understand the
desperation of those who are thinking about,
of those who are concerned about it. I am
bothered about it. I have no doubt one should
feel desperate. Even the Sahaja Yogis
sometimes get very upset and become
extremely desperate saying "Give up,
Mother, we have finished with it and no
more." But I do not know how to remove
my attention from the Spirit. If you can try,
try your level best to remove it. You cannot,
for you are there. So, whatever it is, you will
fight to save as many as possible. So, all
these Sahaja Yogis who get frustrated at
certain intervals, I have to say, you should
not be frustrated. You have to keep your
courage and understanding if you have
feelings for others and if you show concern
for them, they will understand you and you
will be able to get more and more people
saved, emancipated and they will enter the
kingdom of God. As you are enjoying, they
will also enjoy.
thing was discouraged.
But one must still understand that
God's work is blessed by God. He will
bestow all His blessings and help on you so
that you will perform your desired duties.
The time is passing, very little time is left
now. It is running out and that is why there
is increasing desperation. The desperation
itself has brought forth the advent of Sahaja
Yoga on this Earth. And you should feel
more strong to fight these obstructions that
you feel, are around and work out the
Ultimate Goal of this Creation.
May God bless you.
(Nirmala Yoga-1983)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-31.txt 
 LEADERS IN SAHAJA YOGA
"O Devi! You are modesty in the heart of the high born".
Let us do something which is not very
Sahaja, that is, cast a glance at the
future. Sahaja Yoga is now taking
momentum and we can easily foresee the
need of the coming years. The new Sahaja
Yogis of today will have to be the leaders of
tomorrow. As the collective organism is
growing, more and more cells are required
to perform key functions. There will be a
need for Sahaja Yogis to run Ashrams and
schools, to talk to the public and to the
media people, in a position, above all, to deal
with neweomers while displaying the
required mixture of love and firmness. The
blending of these two qualities is important:
love attracts and consolidates postivity,
Firmness keeps negativity at bay. As already
mentioned in this magazine, the inside
(meditation) and outside (action) growths of
the Yogi will complement each other.
sex in the attention etc., etc..
But besides these classical traps, a
leader has to watch very carefully
difficulties which could stem from the very
status of leadership when the latter is not
really understood. Of course, the mischief
maker is-guess what-capitalE capital G and
capital O. We find in the Gospeis this lively
story of the apostles quarrelling about who
was the greatest among themselves and
Christ took a child and said: "If you are not
like a child...." It was nice of them to play
this rehearsal because Christ could thus warmn
the leaders in Sahaja Yoga not to again spoil
the show. It is good for them to remember
the story: a child is a simple, spontaneous,
he likes to play... he also plays the role of
the leader, but it's a play!
Looking at my brothers and sisters
who are in Sahaja Yoga since years and
assume leadership functions, I could propose
the following description of the good leader:
he does whatever the Unconscious expects
him to do, without false pride and without
false humility; he doesn't do but he is; he
doesn't perform but he vibrates; he does not
appear but he shines (with, of course, the
reflections of his Mother's qualities). Thank
God, he has a sense of humour; he becomes
a bit suspicious when his Mother starts
praising him (although he just loves it) and
extremely suspicious when he forgets to
praise Her; when he cares about his
"position", when thoughts of leadership
Yet Shri Mataji has warned that
leaders in Sahaja Yoga are particularly
exposed and should thus move about in the
various fields of life with full awareness. For
a Sahaja Yogi, full awareness ultimately
implies Atma-consciousness, that is,
receiving, giving, perceiving through the
Spirit, realizing thus the higher synthesis of
the Vishnu-Shiva tattwa within himself.
Then the fruit of spiritual maturity, i.e.
detachment, will free him once and for all
from the various bondages which can
ensnare him, such as materialism,
possessiveness in family life, job's worries,
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-32.txt 
 : I &
31
Issue
2-2006
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
A last word. Shri Vishnu is the
Leader of Evolution, the Master of the Quest.
come into his mind. He does not push
himself forwards but, sometimes, the wind
swell his sail; he does not climb the moun-
tain but, sometimes, he finds himself sitting
on the top: someone has done it for him. He
smiles; his Mother did it again; what a
wonderful sightseeing; His programme is to
enjoy and he doesn't even feel sorry about it.
He is neither guilty nor responsible. He is
most responsible, his compassion is not his.
He doesn't help anybody; everybody is
helped. He carries with great pride two
diadems, two bandans of sparkling snow and
gold; the gratification of his Mother and the
It is written in the Puranas how Shri Vishnu
propitiated Shri Shiva in the Himalayas. He
undertook to chant the thousand names of
Mahadeva, offering Him thousand lotuses.
His beautiful and melodious voice enchanted
the higher worlds. As the last lotus was
missing, he who is pushpalochana i.e. lotus
eyed, plucked out one of his eyes and
offered it to complete his worship. Shiva was
enamoured and gave to Vishnu the absolute
weapon, the Sudarshana Chakra. Shiva is
said to be Naranaryana priya i.e. fond of Nara
and Narayana. We shall all go into our depths
and experience the relationship between the
two Lords. When the leadership of
consciousness surrenders itself to the Atma
love of his brothers and sisters. These are
the magic of his strength and the secret of
his confidence. Anyone who is adorned by
the contentment of the Goddess and shielded
by the love of the Sahaja Yogis will become
all temptations of the ego are finished.
immortal.
A disciple
(Nirmala Yoga)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-33.txt 
 SAHAJA YOGAAND PHYSICALCURE-II
Let us consider diseases. Diseases
can effect us either through the Ida or the
Pingala Nadis, since both are affected by
hordes of dead beings. Especially the Ida.
direct access to Her, to place at Her Feet
our perplexities and our confusion, our
weakness and our strength so that She
carefully, as Mother, may nurture and
integrate them and educate and re-evolve us.
To have such a direct relationship to the
For a disease to enter the body, its
vibratory defences must be weak. The strong
points that protect the body are the
Mooladhara and Agya Chakras and the Left
Heart. These three Chakras have, above all,
deities that stand for Spirit, Purity and Truth
and transcendence over matter, Of these
three, the most basic is the Mooladhara
Chakra.
supreme evolutionary power of the universe
is a very great thing and in some sense
condenses and summarizes all that there is
in our existence. In resonance to this, Christ
was born to Shri Mahalakshmi to stand at
the ultimate gate of reality and ultimate truth.
The Goddess is the Creator and
Preserver and Destroyer or Liberator and
Evolver of this Universe, and a wise child
knows this, and nothing else, and knows that
She stands at every door and turning point
The Lord or the Swami of the
Mooladhara Chakra is Shri Ganesha. His
outstanding quality is respect for the Adi
Shakti in the form of the Mother. This is the
aspect of the Goddess which is paramount.
With it go qualities such as absolute faith
and trust in the Mother whose instinct is to
sacrifice for the sake of Her child. An
innocent child knows this and puts his faith
and trust, his whole heart at Her Feet; with it
goes devotion'and love and adoration of a
simple innocent sort - spontaneous and
without forethought, afterthought or
ritualism.
of human existence, placed Herself there, in
various forms and in different powers and
attributes. There is nothing else in the
Universe Only the Parmatma - And any
one who puts thoughts and attention on
wordly matters eventually weakens both
the Agya and Mooladhara. Be it on
well-meaning things such as Science or
Literature or Politics or anything. Anything
that doesn't reflect the Spirit and its great
Shakti, has no meaning in terms of
development and eventually shifts one off
The being, whose attention is fixed
so closely and focally on the Mother,
automatically develops other qualities such
as pure wisdom, knowledge, chastity,
obedience and love and above all, purity.
This is because the Mother is the only source
of these qualities in the entire cosmos and
what does not emanate from Her is not true.
balance.
Any shift off balance, as one knows,
can lead to collapse. It is only the constant
flow of our Mother's Kundalini and it's
powerful force constantly rebalancing that
which unbalances itself, that maintains,
furthers and pushes forward Sahaja Yoga.
As being created by the Goddess,
we worship Her, but as Her children we have
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-34.txt 
 33
Issue :I & 2 - 2006
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
The essence of human beings is their
awareness or attention that decides what one
is or what one becomes. Shri Mataji said
that where one's awareness goes, 'that' one
becomes. The seats of power in a human
being are not material or gross, but subtle
and immaterial, bound together by the subtle
filaments of the awareness. If the attention
indeed to know the absolute in human form
and to have been given the chance to
recognize HER - as SHE is. This is
opportunity and privilege so great that words
express or encompass it, and we must
place our attention and feeling on it. Initially
I thought to describe the various illnesses
separately but that would distract our
attention from the essential to the
cannot
is pure, then, the being is not affected by
gross impurity. But if impure, then any state
of gross purity is only transitional and
cannot last. There are only two
things worthy of contemplation in this
universe- Parmatma and its surrounding
Shaktis, both of which are really one and
have incarnated in the form of our Holy
Mother Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi.
non-essential, so I will not speak of it.
The attention is seated in the
stomach through the Nabhi and when centre
rise effortlessly through the smoothness of
the Sushumna to touch the Feet of Shri
Sadashiva Himself at the Sahasrara and then
to continue its ascent to the highest levels
that man can aspire to. So do not waste the
attention. Keep it pure - and no disease
can assail you - and no power in darkness
can hinder your rise to the absolute.
Let us consider our position, it is very
great indeed for we have been privileged
JAI SHRI MATAJI SHRI NIRMALA
MATREYA NAMOH NAMAH
-Dr. Rustom
Nirmala Yoga -1983
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-35.txt 
 THE MEMORIES OF OUR DIVINE MOTHER
you got the pronunciation wrong." So
throughout the pujas, She would be
directing the whole thing. "And we'll have
THE FIRST PUJAS
We had no idea about pujas.
water now. We'll have this now, We'll have
We had no idea about pujas. She had
to bring a Brahmin in to do the pujas. Mother
would give him Realization and would ask
him do this, that and the other, but we would
just sort of sit there while he went through
the mantras and do everything. And when
that now." And really, if Mother hadn't been
there directing the puja, we'd probably never
have completed it, would we?
(Gail Pottinger)
the time came for the aarti, we didn't know
it, So we had this record of one Indian movie
CAN YOU JUST COME OVER
WE'LL HAVE A PUJA
and it had a picture on the front of an Indian
girl smoking a cigarette and it was about
some Indian girl who had gone to America
She had got lost and had then realized the
error of her ways and had sort of come back
to being an Indian. And we would solemnly
get out this record and put it on the record
player and play it and clap while it played.
It was the music of "Sabko Dua Dehna," but
My first puja was a Guru Puja (in 1977)
and I remember once I was at work and then
suddenly Jane (Brown), Gavin's wife,
phoned me and said can you just come over,
We'll have a puja. I didn't know what a puja
was. So I came down. We were something
like eight or nine people and there was a
pujari, an Indian pujari. His name is Satpal.
it was the original aarti. That was a puja.
We didn't know how to do pujas. We didn't
know how to do anything.
We haven't seen him for a while now.
Anyway, this puja was I didn't know what
it was this was the first time that I was
(Pat Anslow)
seeing a puja. I just sat down and, for
someone that is coming from an Islamic
background, I guess it all feels and looks
quite new to us, you know.
Mother used to teach those protocols,
you know. She used to tell us with which
hand to do, how, you know, when we were
to put this on. So She would lead the puja,
(Djamel Metouri)
wouldn't She?
You know that Guru Puja ? That was
the first Guru Puja, in Gavin (Brown)'s flat.
There is a picture of Mother with some roses,
(Malcolm Murdoch)
holding some roses. I remember giving Her
those flowers and saying, "Mother, be
She was always stopping people and
saying, "No, the mantra's said like this and
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-36.txt 
 Issue: 1& 2 - 2006
35
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
But, in any case, there were other pujas
which took place during that summer. One
of them was in my house, when She came to
St. Albans. It was a Shri Krishna Puja and
we washed Mother's Feet and we had a puja
the way we do it today, but with perhaps not
careful, there are thorns in them." And She
said, "I have to take the thorns, too." And
She took them and then She said, "Can you
tape record this, my talk?" And that was the
first time I remember Her giving a formal
talk. And I remember thinking. "What is the
point of taping it? We are all here." Shows
all the ingredients, you know, We were
not - it was not a fully fledged puja, as we
see today.
you how aware we were of what was going on.
(Pat Anslow)
(Djamel Metouri)
We had a large piece with "Charlie
WE JUST DIDN'T HAVEA CLUE
Chakra" drawn and we were offering this rice
and flowers to each of the Chakras, saying
At Her house {near Oxted in Surrey,
England, there was a puja}. At one stage
She took us outside in the evening, into the
garden and we had a havan outside and She
mantras on each, for each charka, you know.
And that puja, interestingly enough, was just
a small puja, in a way because we were only
was trying to clear us and trying to clear us
and we all stood there and suddenly She said
nine or ten people, but there is a picture of
Mother who is holding the flowers between
Her feet.
something like, "That's it." And this huge
wind came up and disturbed all the leaves
and you just felt like the disciples gathered
around Christ. She worked so hard all the
time on us no matter what. She tried
I can't say it was the first, but I
remember it was my first Guru Puja in 1977
with just ten people as opposed to two
thousand or three thousand today. And this
everything to try and clear us out.
(Maureen Rossi)
was just happening in the lounge of Gavin
Brown's house.
And later on we had another puja in
Her house, and that was more like a real puja
with the amrit and all the elements and so
on. That took place during a seminar that
we had in Her house around September,
In fact, in a way, that puja was done
differently from the way we do it today,
which is we do the puja directly to the
Goddess and we wash Her Feet. At that time,
1977. That was in Hurst Green in Oxted. And
I remember very well because, even Kevin,
which is Pat's son, was there. He was quite
we did wash Her Feet, but at the same time
we were actually using this "Charlie Chakra"
young.
chart, actually doing offerings to the various
(Djamel Metouri)
charkas.
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-37.txt 
 Issue : 1 &
36
2-2006
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
hospitable and I remember feeling clueless
There were just halfa dozen of us at that
first puja. Kevin, my son, was there, He used
to misbehave and I used to get furious with
him and Mother used to take him away from
me and calm me down and look after Kevin.
No, Mother had to do everything for us. We
in the light of their humble Indian
hospitality and culture. She called all of us,
very new people, to do Her puja and put the
born - realised at the front. This included a
little Dutch boy and myself. She told us that
just didn't have a clue.
double responsibility. Then we
did Her puja with the other new people
behind us. They put their hand on our
ours was a
(Pat Anslow)
shoulders or upper arms, so we were all
CLOSENESS AND INTIMACY
connected. We didn't really know what we
The house in Oxted that Shri Mataji were doing and Shri Mataji instructed us step
had - I remember things attached to by step through the foot washing, the amrits,
landscapes and environments quite a lot. I the kumkum paint, the sandal oil and the
flowers. At the end, people came rushing
through, trampling over us and stepping on
our hands to get their photographs of our
remember in Cxted, the sort of closeness and
intimacy, Her relationship with the early
Sahaja Yogis. It is something that the
earlier Sahaja Yogis talk about quite a lot.
For example, we would have ajwain and She
would get under the sheet with everybody
and all the Sahaja Yogis would be coughing
and spluttering and She would say, "What's
Mother.
(Marilyn Leate)
ONE MOMENT OF GLORY FORA
wrong?" She would be completely all
GALLANT FLOWER
unaffected.
One year Mother stayed in London
for Christmas. It snowed on Christmas Eve
(Kevin Anslow)
and Mother said it was because Kevin
I REMEMBER FEELING
(Anslow), Pat's son, had wanted a white
CLUELESS
Christmas. We had planted a sunflower
outside the kitchen window at Chelsham
The first puja to Shri Mataji which I
ever attended was Guru Puja 1978. It was
Road (Ashram) and, as the months went by,
it got taller and taller, but never seemed to
form a flower. As December approached, I
performed at a hall in Finchley, North
London. Resident Indian people did most of
the preparation. They were touchingly
began to wonder because sunflowers are
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-38.txt 
 Issue : 1& 2 - 2006
37
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
frost-tender and are usually dead by
October or November and this was in 1980
She was reading us so deeply. And She gave
me three presents, three presents, and I was
amazed, but what do you do? They were
just handed to me. And I remember
walking home from there, back to where I
lived, quite late at night and feeling Her love.
She had given me these things which were
somehow so symbolic and, of course, I still
or 81, before the greenhouse summers
and climate change had started. By
mid-December the plant still wasn't dead and
started forming a flower head - again quite
extraordinary in the dark, cold depths of the
English winter. On Christmas morning it
blossomed, even though it was snowing. We
picked it and put it on the top of the
Christmas tree in the room where Mother
have them.
(John Glover)
came for the Christmas Puja - one moment
of glory for a gallant sunflower, Mother had
SHE WAS LOOKING AT THE
often passed the flower when it had been
growing as in those days She would come to
VIBRATIONS
Chelsham Road once a week or so.
There was a Christmas Puja, which
was one of the early ones. It was at the
Temple of All Faiths in Hampstead and Shri
Mataji, for myself, She gave me a picture
and some of the other older Sahaja Yogis,
She had different things. But what She had
done there were a lot of Mr. CP's old - and
(Linda Williams.)
SHE WAS READING US SO
DEEPLY
I remember there was this Christmas
I say "old" in inverted commas - ties and She
Puja and it was early on because I came at
the end of '79 and this might have been '80
and Mother gave a lot of presents. I can
remember that the puja at that time was quite
a difficult and often painful business. The
had wrapped them all up. And they were all
wrapped up in exactly the same way. They
were all different, but they were all wrapped
up the same way, so there was no way of
knowing any one from the other. So Shri
Mataji was giving these packages out. And
spirit loved it, but everything else screamed
and squealed and stamped its feet.
remember She gave these presents and
She gave one to somebody and then off he
went and She gave a couple more out and
then She said, "No, don't take that one. Give
somehow, when I went up there, it was as if
She could only see vibrations. She was so
lost. She was in such an amazing state, She
me that one back, please." And then She
gave them to this other fellow. And then She
was looking at people and it was almost as
if She didn't know who they were, but She
gave him another one and he opened it
up
and it matched the suit he was wearing
knew much more than who they were. And
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-39.txt 
 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
Issue : 1 & 2- 2006
38
I THOUGHT THERE WAS SOME-
THING WRONGWITH THE CAMERA
exactly. So it is amazing, Shri Mataji wasn't
looking at the person, She was looking at
the vibrations and She knew that the
The first puja we had at Chelsham
Road was the Bhoomi Puja, the puja to bless
the house. As the housewife, I was honoured
to be called to actually offer the different
item to Mother in the porch of the house, I
was heavily pregnant with my second child
at the time. Mother stood in the doorway
and I offered the rice and other things to Her
Feet. Everyone else crowded round in the
hallway and garden. After we had finished
the short puja, Mother told us to bury the
vibrations were incorrect, so She put them
right. That's the way it worked out.
(Doughlas Fry)
READING THE PRAISE OF
THE GODDESS
One time when we had a puja, the
puja sort of started in the morning and went
offerings on the right of the doorway, be-
tween the door and the window.
on through the whole of the day. And one
particular puja, one of the very early pujas,
About a year later I was taking some
photos of the children who were sitting on
the front door step in one photo and
standing on what was then a little lawn in
front of the window by the door in the next
we had a havan outside and we had this book
of the thousand Sanskrit names of the
Goddess. This was, I believe, actually the
first puja in praise of Shri Mataji and was at
Her house at Parklands, Hurst Green. We
one- the strange thing was that when the
were sitting round there putting stuff on the
havan and Shri Mataji was actually reading
photos were developed, there was a bright
light coming out of the ground where we
the names of Herself. As She pointed out,
She said, "This is very strange because
you've got the Goddess reading the praise of
had buried the offerings. At that time, we
did not know about miracle photos and I
thought there was something wrong with the
the Goddess, which is rather unusual."
%3D
camera.
Because She was the only one who could
(Linda Williams)
read them. But whilst we were there- and it
LIKE IT WAS A FEAST
was really cold outside, it was late in the year
- and the whole sky opened up like a great
We used to give, really, very poor
meals to Mother in those days (at the pujas
big halo above us. The sky was quite dark,
but there was a whole light patch above
in England) and She was so gracious, She
ate everything.
where we were because the vibrations that
(Kay McHugh)
were given out had sort of caused the sky to
She always said how nice they were.
open.
(Douglas Fry)
(Linda Williams)
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-40.txt 
 39
Issue :1 & 2 2006
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
And I think once when Rustum
(Bujorjee) was in the Middle East, whenever
he came back, he used to say, "Why don't
we do namaz at the end of the puja or
something? And then Mother said one day,
Yes, She did. And I used to think.
"Really?" Because it would be gluggy old
grey rice and She'd act like it was feast.
(Key McHugh)
"All right, it is good to want to do namaz,
THEIR HEARTS AND CHARKAS
WERE CLEAN
but namaz was something that you did when
you didn't know God." You know, you had
to do some practice something that would
probably bring you closer to God beacause
you didn't know God. "But now your know
God. God is in front of you. You don't
need to do namaz any more."
We had a puja. Before this I had one
of the first of many lessons. THe (Chelsham
Road} ashram was a bit of a tip and I got
everyone running around cleaning it up.
When Mother came, She took me aside and
was not pleased. She said it was just the
supra-conscious bhoots in me that were
making everyone run around and tidy up and
that whereas I was clean outside-my
charkas were filthy inside and, although the
Sahaja Yogis' ashram was a bit untidy, their
hearts and charkas were clean. But may be
one good thing can be told. After the puja,
we would all take turns to go up to Mother.
One by one we would kneel in front of Her
with our forehead on Her Feet and She would
often work on us. As I knelt at Her Feet at
that first ever puja, She told me that I would
one day give Sahaja Yoga to many, many
others. That promise, which has indeed come
out, sustained me through all the hard times
that came later.
This is not to do with what Mother said
in the very early days. It was something that
She said much later on, may be 1984, 1985.
She started talking about it. May be She
talked about it. She didn't insist on it in the
beginning. Why I said this is because
certainly events happened several years later,
then they relate to a whole period of time
where She might not say anything.
She saw us för many years in Sahaja
Yoga and, in a way, She saw our
conditioning. She saw our attachments to
various bits and pieces here and there. She
saw how we try to bring various bits and
pieces from our own country.
(Linda WiHiams)
(Djamel Metouri)
SHE SAW OUR CONDITIONING
YOU COULD FEEL HER
PRESENCE.
When you come to Sahaja Yoga, and
it happens to almost everyone, you tend to
bring your own religion with you. And you
want to sort of shift Mother's attention
towards your own religion because somehow
you want to be patted on the back and you
want Mother to say to you, "Oh, how nice of
you to talk to Me about your Islam" and so
Läter on we started to have pujas at
institutions, you know, proper, like hotels or
conference places. But in the beginning, in
I came(1979 and
those first two years, when
1980), most of it was in people's houses. I
know we had a lot of pujas in Brighton in
Pamela (Bromley)'s house and I can
on
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-41.txt 
 1 & 2-2006
40
Issue
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
foot, really sharp like a nail going through
my foot. And She said, "What's the
matter?" It was like the crucifixion, like a
nail in my foot. I somehow didn't feel guilty.
It was just recording.
remember being in the ouse with Shri
Mataji. It didn't matter if Shri Mataji was
upstaris or in a different room, you could feel
Her presence, that She was in the house and
it would make you- you would become much
more conscious of your behaviour of what
you -I felt myself - of what you said or even
what thoughts you allowed to pass through
your mind. Sometimes you would feel it
wasn't right to have a certain thought, it was
almost dangerous for you because you were
in the presence of the Goddess.
(Vicky Halperin.)
So I nipped out the back and went
down to the local corner shop and got a pot
of Gale's Honey, brought it back and that got
presenteed to Shri Mataji and She said, "Oh,
this is fine."
(Chris Marlow)
(Felcity Payment)
IT WAS JUST RECORDING
JUST TO GET HEART OUT OF THEM.
I don't know why this was. I ended
After the Ganesha Puja in Brighton, there
was quite a big gathering and Shri
Mataji was working on somebody and She
wanted some honey to vibrate for clearing
people's Agya. And someone had a very posh
pot of honey, which had been bought in a
nice health food shop.
up in the front being dressed as an Indian in
a dhoti and She had this material She wound
round and round and round me and I ended
up with these big trouser type things. What
are they called? Just dhoti, yes. She was
showing us how to do it.
(Chris Marlow)
She spent ages and ages with us
because in those days, although there were
The reason why I remember it so
strongly was that I bought the acacia honey.
I bought the food that was used for the
catering from Paul(Winter)'s house and we
had been to the wholesalers and various
places and the honey was acacia honey.
less people, it was less formal. Pujas were
quite short. Although the pujas we did
ourselves are very long, the pujas She did
were actually quite short and they still are.
But She used to spend whole evening with
us, just trying to get us to entertain ourselves
and that, I think, was one of the things She
used to do. She used to do all kinds of funny
things to make us laugh, because we were
quite miserable all the time. That was one of
(Vicky Halperin)
Shri Mataji said, "No, this is no good.
This is acacia honey and acacia is the tree
that Christ was crucified on and it's also this
horrible spiky thrn thing."
the things, dressing people up, making them
do things, just to get heart out of them.
(Chris Marlow)
(Ray Harris)
When Shri Mataji made this
comment about the honey and the acacia, I
had the most extraordinary pain thrugh my
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-42.txt 
 Music
bild Programme
ņ d
Prathisthan
On 20th Nov.2005.
 2006_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-43.txt 
 MYSTIC ULURU
