The Đivine Cool Breeze September - October 2007

 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE Published by Nirmal Transformation Pyt. Ltd. Plot No. 108, Chandragupt Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-41029 Ph. No.: 020-25285232 Printed by Krishna Printer & Designer Tri Nagar, Delhi-35 Mob.: 9212238008 For Subscription Please Write to: Nirmal Transformatiom Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 108,Chandragupt Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune- 411029 Tel.No.: 020-25285232 Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles, Miracle Photographs etc. To Shri O.P. Chandna G-11 (463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110034 Ph.: 011-65356811

 Breeze Cool Divine The SEP. - OCT. 2007 NIRMALA. NIVERSAL PURE CONTENTS Millions and millions of People Required 3. Adi Shakti Puja, Cabella-24.6.2007 4. Hermit Heart 9. 11. Expectations, (Baba Mama), Nagpur-1999 13. Resurrection-2007 15. Shri Mataji on Shri Kartikeya 19. Fatimabi Puja, Switzerland, 14.08.1988 34. Shri Hanumana Puja, Germany, 31.8.1990 DHARMA VMHSIA RELIGION

 Today, the power of raising the Kundalini of thousands and thousands and millions and milions of people is required "There is no way by which you can you're going to. I mean today I should be really feel that I am great.I am extraordinary, I am. This is a thing which people do not understand. It's alright for those who are nor realized- excused. But you have felt the vibrations and got your realize and recognize that there has to be realization through Me. I must be something. Put your attention like that to understand. Must be tremendous thing tremendous' task. And it was necessary for inside this body. It cannot be possible otherwise. It is so abvious otherwise to old; I will be and be just like you! I am not going to do anything outside..." .....You do not judge Me, becuase that's not the way you will understnad. Just %3D something tremendous. It was necessary to have someone like that to do this you to be born, to be with Me to help; 1 know those who are with Me. They'll stand by Me through out. I may judge them a little here and there, but I know they will come round. You have to stand by Me. Those who want to run away they!ll run away, today or tomorrow. I'll try: I'll try to get them round, as far as possible..." you people. This is to be understood, that so far Krishna, Christ, Rama, all of them; nobody gave Self Realisation to people en-masse. They had other powers, like Krishna had 'Samhar Shakti; He could have killed anyone like this. I have also all these powers within Me, but obviously simple, ordinary, mandane type of an Indian lady. And Christ had a power to get Himself crucified. I too have that. But I am not going to do all that. I have a power to resurrect also. Why these powers are not used? One should understand. Because, now the main attention is to raise the Kundalini and for that these powers are not required. give Realization to any number of people. What's the use of getting crucified? Who is going to raise the Kundalini? I So we come to collectivity. To understand that you are cells in My body. And I have awakened you. If you degenerate, My body degenerates. You have seen that all. When you are sick, I am sick. In the sense I emit. liberate more vibrations and 1 feel sick with that, because you can't take it. When you take vibrations i feel well. But those who have faith in I am a very ат themselves can only understand this and not those who have superiority complex or inferiority complex... Complex means no faith in yourself that you are the chosen ones. You are really the people, specially 'made' for the great work. It's a tremendous thing that you are all born. Once you realise and recognise it you would not bother about small, small things of life. It's the quality in you that has to be nurtured and looked after, through collectivity. But collectivity of the 'Sahaja Yogis'.." H.H. Shri Mataji, Plaw Hatch Seminar, would like to do it. I mean ifI were at that time l-would have said, "Keep your cross for a while, I will have it later on". What's the use, just now to destroy people? Let's see how many come round, you see. So these powers are not required. Today, the power of raising the Kundalini of thousands and thousands and million and millions of people is required. And I am going to be just like you all My life. In the sense I am going to get old as England. 15.11.1980

 ADI SHAKTI PUJA Cabella-24.6.2007 Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi but what they do is to grow them big. They are very big. Much bigger than you can find them anywhere, but there is no fragrance. While in a poor country like India the flowers have tremendous fragrance. Even the small flowers have tremendous fragrance. It is very nice to see you all again here. I think this is the first Puja we are having at this place and I hope you are all comfortable. And (it is) convenient for you to come here. Today is really a great day. It's an Adishakti to celebrate Adishakti, and what is the origin of this Adishakti? I've never talked about it. This is first time I'll tell you, that Adishakti is the Primordial Mother, is the power. Power of God that wanted to create this world and She Herself Now that is the speciality of the fragrance in India and nowhere else. NOWHERE!! Some flowers may be having little fragrance but there is no fragrance in the flowers that are grown so beautifully, full of love and care. But lots of wild flowers also in India have managed to create this great world. (Can't you all sit down?.. . as possible be comfortable..) So As far got fragrance. What is the reason? They say that the soil of India has today I'm going to tell you about fragrance. How can you have the Adishakti which is a very ancient fragrance in the soil? But it is a fact, what I'm saying, is not just a story but it is a fact that in India any flowers that you grow, mostly have, mostly, have a can imagine there was nothing but fragrance. While here that's not the case. Neither it is the case in any other country, you go either to Norway, or you go to Germany, any other country you go, you won't find any fragrance in the flowers. It is very shocking why there is no fragrance in flowers! When this world was created subject. Adishakti is the power of God Himself and She created this world to bring His kingdom on this earth. You darkness and out of this darkness She had to create all these beautiful pictures, trees, and all kinds of vegetation, that She did create. But what is the use having all these things which do not speak, do not understand? manifestation with them. Of Course, some of the trees and some of the flowers do receive beautiful vibrations and they grow very well but not all, abroad there are no flowers with some of them. For example, I must tell you that here flowers have no fragrance. All the flowers, they have no fragrance. I've been going round to see if there was flowers of fragrance, There is no there was no fragrance but in some areas there was, specially areas which we call as India and other world. It is unbelievable that here or anywhere fragrance! So now you are born here. You have brought the fragrance. You are the people who are realized souls and

 - 2007 5. Issue: 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze on, you read in the newspaper all the time you see this nonsense that countries are fighting and more they are developed better they are. In this you have got the fragrance to spread So your responsibility is double, I think, that you must spread fragrance. Fragrance is something very innate Even this soil which we should say is development of there's I hope they rise without fragrance, the people have fragrance in there character, in their behaviour, in their understanding. And there is peace which they are aspiring, I don't say they are, but they killing others, destroying the whole are aspiring to have peace. This aspiration only suggests that they are fragrant people; that they are very fragrant. and become spiritual and they develop fragrance, but this fighting spirit of human beings has come from Satan I think. That they are killing themselves, world. You read the newspaper you feel so ashamed how human beings are going on! So all the Sahaja Yogis should not support any kind of fight. They are.... They are here to bring fragrance to people, to bring happiness, to bring joy and not to over, are still not aware that you have fight. That is one of the first duties of Sahaja yogis not to join any thing aware then all wars will end, every which hates, which fights, which creates problems. These fighting that now we are all one. We do not spirits have destroyed the fragrance of soil. If people become loving and affectionate, this soil itself will become fragrant. First thing we must learn to love each other, and not to hate any way. There are so many ways of hating. This is also a human quality. belongs to God but people stupidly Animals do hate, because they are animals. Human beings can't be animals. We are human beings and as human beings what we should have is love, affection and no hatred of any kind and as you are Sahaja yogis, I would say that you should try to develop your loving capacity instead to fighting capacity or criticizing others. countries of fragrance. Won't have to It is very easy to criticize but try to understand that our soil itself has What is a fragrance in human being is his nature, his temperament. How he lives and how he behaves towards others. All the countries all to become fragrant. If they were to be thing will finish off and they will say belong to different countries or anything which we have made. God has not made, we have made.... This is your country. This is their country, and countrywise we will fight. This country belongs to no one. This fight, on the countries that this is our country, this is our country. Now I've travelled all over the worid, I wouldn't say any any any country as their own because if you own a country, you should have fragrance. You should have temperament which will make other people feel that you come from argue but one country is fighting with another country. Every where it goes no fragrance.

 6. Issue: 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze 2007 what your position is or anything, they only know that you are a Sahaja yogi and a Sahaja Yogi loves other Sahaja How are we to bring the fragrance to this soil. This is only if the people living here, have affection and love for each other. This is the most Yogis. This is a very big achievement, important thing. When creation took it was never there as there is no place it was only through affection, fragrance in the soil and no fragrance otherwise what was the need for in human beings. Now that has come, nature to create all these things? All this is for what? It is to make you feel beautiful. All these trees are beautiful to make you feel good, to feel one with the nature. In that way the human beings have not contributed. Now I'm not saying Sahaja Yogis. They are rare and they are wonderful and they have done a good job because they consider love is the highest also. But you have to show to others also, that you love them because they should also love each other. The whole world now you have a capacity to love each other and to help each other and to understand each other, not to criticize and not to insult or in any way defame them. This l'm saying because you are all rare people who are Sahaja yogis. How may people there are Sahaja yogis, you see? Very few. We have to have more Sahaja Yogis that they understand that we are part and parcel of one country, and that country is of love. This, when it happens, then we will say that Sahaja Yoga has worked out. Helping each other, understanding each other, that should be there and I think that Sahaja Yogis do understand each other and they love each other but still this should go more than their limits. Many people don't understand that Sahaja Yoga is not for them only; it is for the whole world. You have to give it to others and you have to bring forth what you Today when I was coming, I call unity of love. In love you don't see wrong things. You just enjoy love. And that is what is to be seen in today's from India. How is it possible? puja, and is that do we bear any Because you have developed that hatred for anyone? Do we have any ll love. Because you have that love that feeling for anyone or for any country? You should try to examine yourself. If where ever you meet people, they you are a real Sahaja Yogi, you'll hate no one, you'll hate no one. But you'll love and love as your own. Love is the biggest thing that God has given to is created because there was love. Otherwise what was the need to waste the energy on all these continents and all these different countries? Was not to fight, was not to hate each other or to think no end of yourself, but to love each other and to have more brothers and sisters and in Sahaja yoga you feel that way and you have brothers and sisters all over. was so happy to see there were people from all over Europe and also innate love. So where ever you go, should say that we have seen Sahaja Yogis who are nothing but love. They are not bothered as to what you are,

 - 2007 7. Issue: 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze we have to know that today we have to promise that for us love is the most human beings and that is what one has to try and to develop it. I'm so happy here, you have important. We should love. People don't even love in their own families. I come all the way to celebrate this first day-First day of your growth as Sahaja Yogis. Now if the Sahaja Yogis spread They love their own families their own out and become Sahaja Yogis and village, their surroundings and all. But Sahaja Yogis, then your job is finished because then you are enjoying the joy fighting and all kinds of trouble. The of oneness. So one has to do it in a way that we all become one. There is nothing to criticize or to hate anyone. But to love each other is the point and there I find there are so many Sahaja enjoyment you should feel and give it Yogis who have achieved that loving level and there are some still who are struggling! They haveri't come up to Yogis are doing that and you are the level, some, not many. Sahaja seeing the mistakes of others and not Yoga means we are one. We are all let any body get into trouble. Love is Sahaja Yogis but not separately, together. If one understands this fact, you have celebrated today's great day of Adishakti. am not talking to such people I know. still world is going on with the wars, whole world has to come up to love each other. There is no other solution but to love and in that love there is no selfishness but enjoyment and that to others. I'm sure that you all Sahaja the message of Adishakti. Now you think about it, one Adishakti created the whole world! How She must have done it? What She must have planned? How She must have organized it? It is not an easy thing. Only because She loved. Her love is the expression that you are all there and that is why to be one with Her, one must learn to love. Of course in that you have to know that you should forgive. If you don't know how to forgive and find mistakes of other people, you won't help in. What is now your job is that is to see that you are loving. That there is no hatred for anyone. You don't think of hating someone or hitting somebody. other. We have to have all kinds of This has to workout. I'm sure this will workout. In all the European and Indian love, it is not just a ritual, it is love. countries, those who are developed are fighting and those who are not developed are fighting. They have their Why did Adishakti create this world? Why did all this happen? Why don't we think that why so much of love, so much of prosperity has been given to us? We never realize where are we and how much we have got. It is not the money but the love and when you will understand we really love each other and there is no hatred, there is no revenge. Nothing. But just love and love and love and this is what is the message of today. We have to be loving each rituals but it is only expression of our When you have the love of the Mother, how do you express? In the same way

 Issue: 9 & 10 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze own style of fighting. That's the only difference. But there is no love. If you love for each other and we should have understanding. Look at the small want to have love then you feel sorry. children, they love each other. They haven't learnt yet how to hate. But if the children are not brought up well this country is very bad, the people they can hate each other. They can be very ridiculously funny. And so many countries today are like that. They are just fighting because they do not love. So now, Sahaja Yogis have much greater job, much greater life that they have to show that love is a very great thing. It doesn't matter whether you are Hindu, Christian, this that nonsense. We are all human beings and we have a right to love and if you manage somehow to love people, I think then Sahaja Yoga will settle down. Sahaja yoga is like a tree which requires love as the water. Try this, try around your life and you will find that how love pays itself. Not to be seen how much you spend, or what you do. It's not (that) you count all those things, it is just like an ocean soaks everything around. You become like that, a typical personality of Supposing I see some country X then it is very easy for me to criticize, that are bad, this is bad, that is bad. ButI think potentially they are all fine people and very good people. Some how or the other I shall make them understand what love is and enjoy love. There will be no problems of any kind. Only human beings know how to love, no body else. Animals also love but their love is so limited. But human beings, their love is so beautiful. They look beautiful only when they love. So I have to tell you not to make cheap love, but a love that you will enjoy and that another person will also enjoy. It is something to be understood, understand love is sometimes very ridiculous. So one has to first understand what is love, also to understand whether you love or not. If you really love the world, you really love this creation of God. There should Sahaja Yoga. So all the Sahaja Yogis be no hatered, there should be no fights. But just to see the good points as a mother would see her child, you should see the whole world as a beautiful piece that God has created for you. the way people should decide today that we are going to forgive all the people we hate and we are going to love all of them. Let us see if it works out! I am sure it will work out. Because first of all you are realized souls and secondly love is the biggest boon on human beings which you utilize. There will be no problem of any kind. This subject is so lengthy, that can talk to you for hours, but I have to just say that if you can understand little bit of it is that you all should have So thank you very much!! 00

 HERMIT HEART Life has been oscillating in the muck of ignorance. Mounting the automation wheel as divine orphan! There is a wake-up call to your slumbering soul, The ultimate cosmic fortune is knocking the door to open. 00 Don't look at the world through the mental eye, Use the window of heart to sketch the unbroken sky, Forgo the ego forthwith and go ahead to the summit, Gatecrash into the kingdom of galaxies and thousand suns. TM The drop devoid of a watershed will die in wilderness, The self surroundings are the funeral fencings of the rich, The frontiers of earth are fully open and unlimited, All planets exist in collective energy councils as such. Happiness is plural and common cosmo-chemistry, Mighty and majestic are myopic, hallow and petty, Look at the sun for the lavish lasting light, Stars can stare & twinkle as dependent destinies. Commence commonwealths of multiple diversities, Wax like moon endlessly to all mortal hives, Connect collectivity to the universal cosmopolis, Absorb the monkey mind in the native meditative drives.

 10 Issue: 9 & 10 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze The joy immortal can not be addressed any other way, You cannot unlock the paradise by the keys of time, Self realise & spread the testament of thousand crowns, Kindle the flame in the hermit-heart primitive & prime. Mother, we cannot fathom or foresee Your powers, This universe is a mere signature of Your divinity, The cosmic compositions are drawn & withdrawn at will, We cannot please or pray the omniscient, whole eternity. We can only be grateful that you have transformed us, The Nirmal Yoga has lifted us from the rampant mire, Under the shield of your blessings and singular love, The magic vibrations have salvaged your sons out of fire. Visualise the meaning of Mother's Incarnation, Her kind glance will steer out every fear and passion, The cosmic under-currents cure & convert the sick earthlings, All captivated creeds get merged into the ocean of compassion. O Mother Divine! you are the breath of the heaven & the light unlimited, Origin of all shakties & siddhies one can find, May the Absolute Truth and Glory dwell in this hermitage, And open Divine vistas to the mind of mankind! Bhaskar (Jaipur, India)

 Expectations (Baba Mama) (Chaitanya Mela, Maharashtra Sahaja Yoga Seminar, Nagpur-1999) of God's favour. The optimists will Present, Omni-Potent and All straight away blame God Himself and Pervading. In fact, you believe that He they say that this God is not good and is in every atom. As natural corollary that we should shift to some other God. In this way you keep on shifting from God-to-God, but disappointment is always there. This may even make atheist, ultimately. Now take a case where you God with any You believe that God is Omni- of this belief you must also know that God knows what you want or what your need is. If the first proposition is true, then second proposition has to be true. It would follow therefore that and an you anti-God, those who know that God is Omni- do not go to Potent, and All Pervading are bound to accept that God is All Knowledgeable and therefore is aware of all your Therefore, the expectations. expectations are zero, and let us say that you get 'B' as the reward. Therefore, 'B' minus zero is 'B' which problems. In spite of this fact, we always is always surplus, You should also distinguish between your expectations and desires, and Pure desires. Pure desire is always for the benefit of the other and therefore you are entitled to go to God with certain expectations. Expectations can be of various types, but are basically self-centered or are pertaining to people or relations you are attached to and then you pray to God that He should grant you a particular relief or a job promotion or some benefit to you or your near ones carry pure desires to the Divinity. I once remember, I was travelling with Shri Mataji from Sydney to Canberra and it was very hot and the air conditioning of the car was thoroughly disappointed, Hypothetically, speaking inadequate. Shri Mataji was sweating and I was fanning Her with a etc. When you go with this frame of mind then most of the time you are if your expectations are symbolised in 'A' and what you get is, let us say, 'B' then 'A' minus newspaper, but I somehow felt that the heat was oppressive and that the weather should give some respite to attribute this disappointment to Her. Reading my mind, She asked me a question as to what I was thinking, to which I told Her frankly that I was curse themselves of not being worthy unable to see Her suffer because of 'B' is your disappointment. And then you have to someone. The pessimists will attribute it to their bad luck and will always

 - 2007 Issue: 9 & 10 12 The Divine Cool Breeze connected to your divinity through your Self-Realization, you should feel assured that you have been admitted and made a pure desire that the to the Kingdom of God, that you are His subject and therefore He is duty- minutes, dark clouds gathered from bound to look after you irrespective of what you expect of Him. So please do not expect when you are in Sahaja. Only pray to Shri Mataji that She should make you what She wants heat. So She told me that I should make a pure desire and the weather would change. So I closed my eyes weather should change. Within five nowhere and it started raining and the intensity of heat was thus reduced and Shri Mataji said, "See, if you make a pure desire then it will always be fulfilled." you to be. With all my blessings, Coming back to expectations, mention here that once you are Baba Mama may alionu vansi

 RESURRECTION-2007 Beloved sisters and brothers, The inspiring Message of our Divine Mother, during the Easter celebrations countries) bear the seal of the power 2007 in India, has actualised the Resurrection of the modern times. and South Africa, to name some of these vibrations the dynamism of collective commitment, projecting this Through the intensity of Her talk, the love and materializing the resurrection magnitude of Her words has put of the hearts. everlasting joy in our hearts. The tender melody of Her voice has echoed in all the children of the Now it is the right appropriate moment of history to make an oath that we all desire, all over this planet, to spread Her Divine Message of Redemption through a global pledge of committing oneself to the expansion of Sahaja Yoga worldwide. sangha and the depth of Her Call has filled the Universe with new Divine Energy and vibrations. Let us listen to Her Call. Let us grasp it, integrate it, and absorb it within us. We should spread Sahaja Yoga in all the corners of the world, we should bring peace to humanity, we should raise the kundalini of the In the perspective, the WCASY will dedicate more time and energy to be at the disposal of the world sangha in order to coordinate, animate and motivate our brothers and sisters with human beings who desire it and we should give Self Realisation. In one word, we should resurrect everyone, the way She has resurrected us. relevant, adequate ideas and suggestions, but above all with its humble inner spiritual input. We will be more than joyous to intensely interact with all of you, with your national We are entering an era where it is possible for the entire humanity leaders, with their respective councils. today to reach a new level of We all lack experience, as it is a consciousness, leading unprecedented connection with the Source of all powers, the Source of Divine vibrations and energy, Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. She has granted projects with the purpose to widen our us the capacity to spread Her light, base of spiritual involvement. Her truth, Her compassion and love, through a mass Self Realisation. Lately, amazing testimonies form different parts of the world (Turkey, Morocco, novelty to coordinate on a worldwide scale, different Self Realisation actions. Gradually, we are going to come with themes and development to an The deep goal is to integrate each other in a web of love, made of mutual respect. Like climbing on a

 Issue: 9 & 10 - 2007 14 The Divine Cool Breeze mountain, we all the time need the help of the other to go higher and higher. This collective choreography, involving each one of us in a perpetual this adventure. We have to shape best extracting the process, enlightened suggestions. We are just at the Beginning of movement of attention, will elevate us by magnifying our bhakti and shraddha. these ideas, make them strong, alive and auspicious. My only goal today is Therefore, we are already to bring to you all these feelings, this desire to work together, hands in hands for a Divine purpose, the proud to announce that a European realisation day will take place througiout the continent of July 7th 2007, Such an event has taken place being who is willing to see the light of in the past and was concluded with success, leading to the birth of many new resurrected souls. The European members of the WCASY have gained and moves not on this earth. The purpose to resurrect each one human the Divine Mother in his heart. Union will transform the world, the society and everything that moves a certain experience in conducting this European Realisation Day and will be at the disposal of the world sangha to launch this auspicious day. They are over joyous to take the road again and guide us all to make this 7th July 2007, a memorable Sahaja happening. culture of the Holy Spirit has to permeate everywhere and in all beings. Only through the actualization of this togetherness we are going to be successful in allowing the cool wind of the Adi Shakti to blow in the Sahasrara of Her children. Moreover, in autumn, at the time of Diwali, we may even trigger a world realisation day, with several different targeted manifestations and events. We are going to assemble all the propositions and ideas, from the four corners of the world, make them available through a screening With eternal love and respect, Your brother Arneau The World Council for the Advancement of Sahaja Yoga, May 11th 2007 (Internet Version) (6/21/2007)

 Shri Mataji on Shri Kartikeya Kartikeya represents the great, we can can command it, means it's not that say the, captor or leader of all the ganas, of all the, like a Commander- in-Chief. Ganesha is the King but He what is Kartikeya...(1) is the Commander-in-Chief and what we have but in a position we are to command. I hope you understand The spirit of Kartikeya that because German character is to be in pure, absolute dynamism which doesn't indulge into nonsensical things and useless things; which shows results. (3) command of everything we are going to have this puja where the men will be in command of their spirits and their manly qualities and women will be in command of their womanly qualities. To be in command is different from to be a master. Master owns it, a Now in front, in the center here, is who? Kartikeya, in the center; Christ is in the center, in the center itself where the optic chiasma is. Here outside is Kartikeya. What is is also lost, we just command it. Kartikeya? Kartikeya is the protector of Christ. Around Kartikeya, they're all commander does not own it, He does not own it that is also lost. Possession And that is the state we have to come to now, from Ganesha state to the state of Kartikeya. The other way round. protectors of Christ.(4) You know Narakasura has taken his birth, and he's to be killed, the Sahaja Yogis are going to kill him. You have to come up to a point and definitely he can be killed. When Kartikeya is awakened within you, he can be killed. But for that you have to be just like gold, untarnishable. You need strong people to do that. A sword that can kill him has to come Ganesha is nice, he's the King, very nicely sitting down with all the powers, alright? In a sense He's there but Kartikeya is the one who commands innocence, gives you a power of that commandment. He commands. After the Guru Puja it's better that we should have the power out of your mettles. Then Narakasura can be killed. He is one of the worst that others and to command commanding spirit comes in the men through their talking, through their possible asuras. That is the fourteenth dynamism, through their personal day. When he was killed, the gate of achievements; for the women through hell was opened and all those where their loving power, through their his disciples or his followers or forbearance, through their gracious satanic people were put. That's the behaviour, forgiveness, compassion. only day you can sleep late and a So let us develop that today, that we good news for you. (2)

 Issue: 9 & I0 2007 16 The Divine Cool Breeze right mooladhara improves our right side also becomes better; for two About Right Mooladhara When it comes to clearing reasons: Mooladhara we usually miss out right mooladhara. Right Mooladhara is the chakra which is abode of Shri Kartikeya. He is the one who protects right mooladhara directly cures right us from the demonic forces. Right Agnya, and it also repairs the Since Mooldhara is directly associated with our Agnya chakra, so 1. Mooladhara is the chakra which weakened ego-controlling Rudra on our forehead. (Out of 11 rudras present on our forehead two are present to control our Ego and Superego) manifests Wisdom and Surrendering of Shri Ganesha. Right Mooladhara is also important as out of eleven Ekadasha Rudras two are Shri Ganesha and Shri Kartikeya. The Rudras protect us from satanic attacks and give us strength to fight negativities. develop shraddha and enlightened Therefore, right Mooladhara becomes equally important for clearing & knowledge). strengthening our left side. It is observed that when our right Mooladhara improves our catching of left Swadhishthana also reduces. As an effect of reduced ego we 2. mind (which has Divine discretion and One cannot describe how He after His mother, it's looked impossible. No words can describe the understanding of Christ for His Mother, His love, His gentleness, His care, His devotion, dedication, His 'SHRADDHA' cannot be described. Shri Kartikeya also keeps supervision over Hell. Shri Bhairavnath fighting possessions in us, touches right Mooladhara and therefore works in against spirit while And you know that He came as an evolved Shri Ganesh and at the back coordination with Shri Kartikeya to thwart the negativities from our subtle system back to Hell i.e. from where Rudras, and this, has given him the they came. The power of Shri highest position.(2) Kartikeya is also very essential in preserving our innocence. When the Kundalini ascends from the sacrum He is Shri Ganesh, front He is Kartikeya, very powerful, eleven Prayers/Affirmations/Techniques to improve Right Mooladhara bone to Sahasrara, right Mooladhar plays an important role in clearing out the blockages in the path of Kundalini. 1. Keep right hand towards Shri Mataji's photograph and left hand on Mother Earth and pray- "Mother kindly purify and improve my right It is observed that when our

 17 ·2007 Issue: 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze • Left hand toward Mother and mooladhara", "Shri Mataji verily you're the slayer of all the demons", "Shri Mataji please make me worthy of you", "Shri Mataji whatever I do is to please you", "Shri Mataji please bless me the qualities of Kartikeya", "Shri Mataji please bless me with complete surrender right hand on the ground. Put attention on Left Mooldhara. Take Shri Nirmal Ganesh mantra, say in your heart - "Mother by your grace I am Shri with innocent". Meditate for few minutes. •Then both hands on the lap, put and Divine wisdom of Shri attention on Center Mooladhara, Ganesha". Take Shri Ganesh Gauri mantra 2. We can take following mantras: and say in your heart - "Shri Mataji please Innocent". Meditate for few make me a. Shri Kartikeya Sakshat minutes. b. Shri Rakshashantri Sakshat • Then put right hand towards Mother and left hand on the c. Shri Rakshasaghani Sakshat 3. Look more towards Mother Earth. ground (just the opposite of first step), put attention on Right Mooldhara. First take Shri It is also observed that as right mooladhara improves, our useless mental activity reduces and inner- silence augments greatly. Thus right mooladhara plays an important role in balancing and establishing Thoughtless Kartikeya mantra, say in your heart - "Shri Mataji please make me worthy of you" and meditate for a few minutes, then take Shri Rakshas-Hantri mantra Awareness. and again meditate on Right Mooldhara, also say loudly in your heart "Mother you are the destroyer of all the evil in me" and meditate for a while. be this But must not understood that we need to neglect left and centre Mooladhara. In fact without awakening Shri Nirmal Ganesha and Shri Gauri Ganesha, Shri Kartikeya cannot be awakened. • The attention becomes pure and we go in Thoughtless Awareness. Following is the meditation to improve Mooladhara (as told by Shri Mataji during Shri Ganesha Puja 86): • Finish the morning meditation with 'Om Twameva Sakshat Shri

 TAL Issue: 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze 2007 18 Ganesh Gauri Sakshat, Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyei Namo Namah . After experiencing in meditation and hence realizing by heart, above described knowledge of Mooladhara can be effective. Otherwise, it will not work out properly. It is observed that after meditating like this our whole day passes very nicely. Shri Mataji has said that if we do this every or alternate morning (by heart and not mechanically) for one year, this meditation develops the entire being in such a way that all the obstacles in the path of ascent go away. Reference: 1. 1986-0713: Women Should Be Women, Shri Kartikeya Puja, Holzkirchen, Germany. 2. 1983-1106: Diwali Puja, Hampstead, UK. 3. 1996-1221: Shri Kartikeya Puja, Mumbai, India Tour 4. 1981-0904: Advice on Ekadasha Rudra, London

 FATIMABI PUJA St George, Switzerland, 14.08.1988 (Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) Gruha Lakshmi Principle We are here to do the Puja of another incarnation of Brahmadeva, who came on the earth, Ali came on this earth. He was the incarnation of Fatimabi who was the symbol of Gruha Lakshmi and so we are going to have the Puja of the Gruha Lakshmi principle within us. As a housewife has to finish every work, everything in the household and then she goes for a bath, in the same way this morning I had to do lots of things, and then I could come for your Puja because today the housewife's jobs were many, Brahmadeva, and His another incarnation was Sopandev, which you can go to Pune, you can see the temple of Sopandev there. (Pause on tape) So we have Ali and his wife, Fatima, who incarnated on the principle of the left Nabhi. She stayed so I had to finish them like a good housewife. in Her house, in Her household, and She observed what you call a kind of a purdah, or naquab as they call it, to cover Her face - is a symbol that a woman who is a housewife has to save her chastity by covering her face; because She was a beautiful woman and they were born in a country which Now, the principle of Gruha Lakshmi has been evolved and developed by the Divine: it is not a human being's creation, and as you know, it resides in the left Nabhi. The Gruha Lakshmi is the one that is represented in the life of Fatima who was the daughter of Mohammed Sahab. Now She is always born in a relationship to a guru which is of virginity, of purity. So She comes as a sister, or She comes as a daughter. Now the beauty of Fatima's life is that after the death of Mohammed-Sahab, Christ did not want anybody to know was very, very violent, and She would have been definitely attacked in case She had not lived in that kind of fashion. As you know, in the time of Christ, Mary though was Mahalakshmi's incarnation, had to be a very, very potential personality and as usual there were fanatic people who thought they can take the religion into their hands and can make it a very fanatic thing, and the the attention was not paid so much towards the ascent of the person. Even Mohammed sahab has described His son-in-law in many what She was. But though She was in the house, She was Shakti. So She allowed her sons or actually ordered them to fight those fanatics who were trying to deny the authority of Her husband and you know Hassan and Hussein, they were killed there. ways and He is the only one of

 2007 Issue: 9 & 10 20 The Divine Cool Breeze Shias. Shia word comes from Sia in It's a very beautiful thing how the Mahalakshmi tattwa of Sita took a U.P. Sita is called as Sia. Sitaji is called as Sia. They also did not realise that there are saints who are form of Vishnumaya just to establish the beautiful principle of a housewife. Now She was very powerful, no doubt, and She knew that Her children will be not socalled muslims, but they are siants. So they could not get out of it. So we have another one called Haji killed but these people are never killed, they never die, nor do they Malang who was worshipped by suffer- it's a drama they have to play Hindus, some Muslims also go there, to show people how stupid they are! But as a result of that another system quite worried about the fanaticism of started where they respected saints, like in India Shia people respect Auliyas or we can call them the people who are realised souls like the no doubt, and this Haji Malang was the Shias, so he appointed some Hindus to worship him, just to counterbalance. They did all kinds of things. There are many saints like that. Nizamuddin Sahab, then we have got I went to Bhopal, there's another big Chisti we have got in Ajmer, Hazrat saint who was buried, but his all Chisti. All these great saints were respected by Shias, but still they could not transcend the limits of the disciples were just depending on the earnings of that place, which was very bad. Even Hazrat Nizamuddin things religiosity, so they also became extremely fanatic. Firstly they would not see to another religion where they had saints, they would not respect the saints who belonged to another religion and even when we had a great saint like Sai Nath of Shirdi who was a Muslim to begin with, and it is said that Fatima Herself brought him as a child in Her lap and gave him to some lady, it is said so. are in the same way as the Hindus do. They all make an earning, I mean it's a kind of commercial business. So this saint died and was buried there and there were many people who were depending on it when I went there. 1 just by the way asked them, "What is your religion?" So they said, "We are Muslims." I said, "What was the religion of the saint who died?" They said, "Saints have no religions. So I said, "Then why do you want to follow religion, why don't you follow His religion?" "He had.(...) They have no religion. Even as it is said in Sanskrit, the Sanyasis have no religion. They are dharmatit, they go beyond the religion." But as it has happened with every incarnation, it has We did not deny, as far as the concerned, His Hindus were saintliness, but the Muslims did not accept him. There's another one called Haji Malang who is very near Bombay who was a realised soul. He too realised the fanaticisms of the

 Issue: 9 & 10 - 2007 21 The Divine Cool Breeze Lakshmi was specially created to overcome that hatred, to subdue that the Muslims and everyone that they icy stuff called hatred, to remove from the minds of the people hatred, this Lakshmi, Gruha Lakshmi, principle was created. How? In the family when you have a household the Gruha Lakshmi principle has to subdue the hatred between the children, between the husband and the children, but if She herself enjoys her hatred, then how can she subdue it? She is the happened even with the Shia people, with the Sunnis, with the Hindus, with made a fanatic group. itself is Now fanaticism absolutely against religion, against your innate religion within yourself, because it creates poison, it's a venomous thing, it makes you hate others. When you start hating others, then it reacts in you as horrible poison which eats up all that is beautiful in source of that peace which subdues hatred. Now in India we have joint families. You too have relations like uncles, aunties, this, that. The housewife's job is to smooth, smooth out all angularities of people which create friction. you. Hating anyone is the worst thing that human beings can do, but they can do it, they can do whatever they like. Animals don't hate anyone, can you imagine? They don't know how to hate. They bite someone because that is their nature, they cut someone because that is their nature. They never hate someone- they may not like someone, but this hatred which is a poison is a speciality of human conception and human absorption. Only human beings can hate. And this horrible thing hatred was settled Now the man has to worship a housewife. It's said so, "Yatra Narya Pujjyante, Tatra Ramante Devata.' Wherever the housewife is respected, there only the Gods reside. In our country I must say credit must go to the housewives because we are no good for economics, no good for politics, administration, hopeless. Men folk are useless. They don't know any household work or anything, women hatred, in every religion. Now the have kept it to themselves. But our worst part of the whole thing is that society is first class, it is maintained one part which hates thinks the other by the women of the household. So the man has to respect the housewife: that's very important. If he does not respect his housewife, there's no possibility of any Gruha Lakshmi tattwa being maintained. It's like the preservation of that principle of a between even the Muslims which was not done, this Karbala was not created for hatred but for love. Everything that was done for love was converted into part is the worst of all and the another part thinks that the first part is the worst of all. Under what rule, law or logic they decide? That is their own lookout. So they club together like that. Why this principle of the Gruha

 Issue: 9 & 10 - 2007 22 The Divine Cool Breeze respect, otherwise he's a lost case, he is finished. He is good for nothing. housewife. But some men, I mean many of them, think that it is their birthright to ill-treat their wives, to torture them, to say all kinds of things, to be angry, if she's a good woman. But if she's a nagger, if she's a bhoot then they are subdued, completely First things is that he must see that the woman in the household is respected as a Gruha Lakshmi. Then the blessings flow, but in no way he should insult her or be unkind to her and raise his voice or say things to her. But the wife has to be the one who is to be respected. I have so many times said, "If your wife is dominating, give her two slaps on the face." Of course, no doubt, she has not to be dominating; she has to remove the dominating forces of others. She is the source of peace, she is the source of joy and she is the awe or fear, and they are afraid of peacemaker. If she is the one who subdued. If the wife is a bhoot then the husband always, sort of tries to please her. I mean, extremely kind to her, he knows she's bhoot, after all, better be careful. Don't know what time how the bhoot will come like a snake on you and if she knows how to nag or to argument, then also they are afraid - there's no love. They have no love or respect for her but they have an such a woman. Now some women creates problems, then you can slap her nicely, bring her to her shape, it's alright. So the Gruha Lakshmi tattwa is mutual. It doesn't depend only on the wife or the husband, but on both of them. So once if you are making your wife suffer, your left Nabhi can never improve. Or if you are a bad think if they become flirtish then the husbands are better controlled. But their basic principle they lose, the basic Shakti that they have, they lose and they land up in difficulties. So the basic principle of a Gruha Lakshmi is to respect her chastity, to' respect her chastity outside, wife, your left Nabhi cannot improve. inside. That is the steadiness of it. Of course most of the men take advantage of it. If the wife is docile or obedient, they make it a point that they just rule the wife left and right. Alright? But this woman, the housewife, has to know that she is not docile. She is obedient to her own righteousness, to her own virtues, to her own qualities. If cheapish, childish, young, frivolous the husband is stupid, alright, he is stupid like a child, finished. But the husband has to know that he must Now in the West, the problem with the women is this, that they don't realise what is their part. An 80-year- old women also would like to look like a bride. They do not feel their dignity and enjoy their dignity within themselves: they are the queens of the house. But they want to behave like girls. They don't feel the dignity of their being. They talk too much, they behave in a manner that doesn't

 2007 23 Issue: 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze These are absolutely absurd things, they do not look like for any Sahaja Yogi or any Sahaja Yogini. All this kind of selfishness, all this kind of seclusion behove a housewife, like they'll take out their hands, talk like this as the fisher women do when they sell their fish to someone and when they have to fight. Or they shout sometimes, they is against Sahaja Yoga. But a thing of shout, also I mean, this... I've heard they shout and sometimes, they beat their husbands, that's the limit! They start always comparing themselves with the husband, to beginwith. Like, "I am such a rich man, a rich man's daughter, I am from such and such family, my husband is from such a low family, he has no money, nothing, he is might bring their friends." So she not educated, so ill treat him, treat thinks of her generosity, she enjoys a housewife is..." Oh, now, how much should I prepare for example, there will be 50 persons coming." So the husband says, "But only ten are coming, why do you want to have for 50persons?" But maybe they would like to eat more." "But then why do you have 50 plates?" "Maybe they %3D her generosity. I have known many like that, those, they are not even Sahaja him in a manner that shows no respect. Such a woman will lose all her powers. Also in her own ways she Yoginis. They'll say then, "Will you will feel guilty, she will feel guilty, because first of all nobody has the right to look down upon anyone cook too many things whatsoever, in Sahaja Yoga especially. coming. "No, no, I'll cook; come, sister-in-law, will you come for dinner?" "Oh, I'm not coming, you very few things, but please come." Then she Then to look down upon your just starts thinking immediately what husband is something unbelievable. He may not be a Sahaja Yogi . alright. He may not be up to the point but by your behaviour, by your strength, by vegetables are available in the market, what should I get, what is the best... I mean, I am not their guru, I'm not their mother, I am just a relation. But they everything, you can save him, but why are you losing yourself? By dominating food, they are the giver of food, others, by strangling others, by making 'Annada,' they are the Annapurnas and want to express their love through the your husband a very sort of a frog in the well, telling him "Oh, we both are after all, we should enjoy, let's have our house separately, nobody should come in the house", even a rat won't enter that house. Even to say "oh, these are my children, my husband, my self is the negative of Sahaja Yoga, is the negative form of understanding. this is one of the qualities, the generosity, if a woman doesn't have, she is not a Sahaja yogini by any chance, take it from Me. Husband may be a little miserly- doesn't matter, but the wife has to be very generous and sometimes she secretly gives money not to her own

 Issue: 9 & 10 - 2007 24 The Divine Cool Breeze start looking like nothing on earth, you don't know what sort of women these children, but to others. Such beautiful women have to be there in Sahaja Yoga. are with big, big muscles, without any moustaches! So these kinds of stupid ideas we have, but there is no subordination of any kind, you are subordinated to your own dignity, to But I feel so sorry sometimes, that the attack comes from the women of Sahaja Yogis, not from the men on Me, I'm a woman Myself, and I feel shocked that the women should attack your own chastity, to your sense of honour, and above all, to your righteousness, because you are incharge of that, the man who is in charge has to look after that side. How many quarrels you create? How can you be quarrelsome when you are supposed to become the peacemakers? Supposing we sent two peacemakers to some country to make peace and they cut each other's throat? What will you say to such a thing? You are the one who has to smooth down Me like this, for what? In Sahaja Yoga there is no domination of any kind but all these so called idea of servility and domination come from the false ideas you have about your own dignity, about your own understanding. You are not aware of yourself, you do not know that you are the queen, nobody can dominate you. Who can dominate the lady who rules the household? If supposing the husband says, "I don't like this colour", alright leave it for a while, then somebody will come and say, "What a nice colour!" "Ah, such a nice colour? Oh, don't change it." The woman must understand the men, they are, they have big eyes, they are not microscopic. They see everything in a big way, you see, so today they will say something, tomorrow they'll forget about it. And they have no microscope they are ... above these things. They are above these things, you must understand them as they are. everything. You are the one who has to bring such expression of love, such sweet things, that the family itself is rested in you securely because you are the mother. The family must feel secure within you, and this love is your power. This is your power that you can give love, and giving love you will find you will always enrich yourself. I mean, imagine, what presents I give compared to what I get, I don't know, I'll have to build another house. I am telling them, "don't give me individual presents, I will not take any individual presents. " Now still, despite that, I don't know, just with love if I get something; With care, that love, you know, itself manifests. It comes back to you like poetry. You are sometimes But if he sits on the horse, I %3D must also sit on the horse and fall down. If he.goes for skiing, 'll also go for skiing. If he develops his muscles, I'Il also develop my muscles. It is coming to that point. I mean, women

 25 2007 Issue: 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze this thing She doesn't know if he's Muslim, he's a Hindu. God knows, she has two husbands, one husband, like that .." you see, all kinds of things. Next morning they forgot about it. I said, "Alright, let them be there for one night, It's alright? I can't drive them out today. One night." Next morning they forgot that they were living there! That's like men. First there is such a surprised. I'll give you one simple example of My own life which will tell you how love can work it out. I was a housewife to begin with and to end with, I think, and once I was in Delhi, my daughter was to be born so I vwas making some, I was knitting something for her, sitting outside in the lawn, when three persons walked into the house-one lady and two men-and they came and said, "See now, we are (. .) I'm a housewife and these two are, one is my husband and he's a friend of my husband, and he's a Muslim and we have come to you for shelter because we are refugees. I looked at them, they looked very good to Me, they looked quite all right. I said, "Alright, you please settle down in My house." So I gave them the outside room which had a kitchen and a bathroom and the things, and for the gentleman I said, "There's another spare room, blasting, such a blasting, I said "Alright, one night. Now don't shout, they'll feel hurt. So let them stay one night, they soothed down. Next morning they went away for their work, they had no time, it was a, you see, only on a weekday they become active in the household, otherwise they are inactive. So they went away. It so happened that these people stayed with me for one month, then this lady got a job and she went away with her husband and this Muslim. But in the meanwhile there was you can stay there and the husband and wife can stay here." In the evening a big riot in Delhi, very big riot, because many Hindus and Sikh people were killed in Punjab. It had a reflection in Delhi and they started killing all the Muslims. So 3 or 4 Sikh people and one or two Hindus came to my house and they said, "We are told that you have a Muslim staying I my brother came in. He started shouting at the top of his voice. He said, "What is this? You don't know these people! They may be thieves, they may be this, they might do this... Then he joined-my husband came and also joined him because you see they were friends. So he told him (laughter). All men are just the same, you see! So he said, "You see, She doesn't understand, She's kept these three persons here who God knows what they are, they are saying are refugees, with you." I said, "No, how can have?" They said, "There is a Muslim, we have to kill him." I said, "See, I am wearing such a big teeka, can you believe it that I could have a Muslim in the house?" They thought I must be a real Hindu fanatic, you see. So they

 2007 Issue: 9 & 10 26 The Divine Cool Breeze believed Me. I said, "See now, if you have to go in my house, you will go on My dead body for I will not allow you." So they felt quite frightened, they went away. So this fellow heard my things and he came and he said, "I'm surprised, how did you risk your life?" I said, "There's nothing. Nothing." His life was saved. Now this gentleman, this Muslim gentleman, became a great poet called Sahir Ludhianvi and this lady became a great actress, Achala Sachdev who acts like a mother. I knew it was they have to become one day and all that but I "How this lady is here?" He said, "This didn't tell anybody about it. I said, now supposing they come to know am in Bombay, they will just go mad about Me and I said I have no Muhurat at least, come to the Muhurat to the beginning, Muhrat is the one where you start. So sne came, and I was there. She looked at Me, and just, you know, she couldn't believe that she had seen Me after 12 years. The tears started rolling her eyes. Absolutely, she couldn't say anything, she just came and fell into My arms. She said, "VWhere were you last, all these days? l've been trying to trace you out." And then she started describing Me, you know. And Sahir Ludhianvi was there and he said that, is Her work." "Oh God, why didn't you tell us, you see, we give our lives for Her!" And they were all amazed how they were changed! She said, "No money, nothing. I'm going to give money for this project. Nothing doing." See now, I was a housewife, just an ordinary housewife. I didn't have so many rights on my husband's property or anything, and my brother, another dominating fellow, both of them put together, just were about to kill my that night with their temper and anger. I soothed them down and then, you know, when told my husband and my brother, they were amazed. I said, time for all that. So we started a film centre for the young people to give them some good films but it all made into a farce later on. They never listened to Me, but whatever it is. So they said that we should get this Achala Sachdev to act as a mother, and I said, "Alright, but don't tell her I have said, I have anything to do with it." So, year had passed, about after I think 12 years or so. So they went and told her, so she was fussing like an actress, no, no, how much are you going to pay me, I cannot act free, everybody will ask for free, then how can I give you free, you'll have to give me a sari, you'll have to pay so much money this thing, they said, "Alright, come to the they are the ones who have become like this. And see the change, how much they have, and then they said, "No more we are going to say no to any charitable institutions. This is the last mistake we are have committed." And the whole, the whole idea of earning and money, and this and that,

 Issue: 9 & 10 - 2007 27 The Divine Cool Breeze just toppled down, and she has acted in many films for charity. And this Ludhianvi also wrote many things for charity. Ahillya Bai, we had many great women in India because of the institution. Padmini we had, Chand Bibi, there are so many women we can mention who have been great women who So a woman can make a man were housewives! a charitable personality because she herself is charitable. She has so many beautiful things, she's an artist and she can create beauty around her, in her household, in her family, in her society, everywhere... but no, women want to fight like men. They will have associations, they will have what do you call that (-) u nions, They would like to have unions to fight for their rights. I agree that some of the men have been extremely cruel, some of the laws are extremely cruel, this thing, that thing and that they have to be told. But this is not the way. There is another way of improving these men who try to destroy the So the woman's quality are like the potential of the Mother Earth, or potential of any energy like electricity has its potential somewhere else. You see the lights here, makes no difference, one light or two lights, but the potential is important. So one has to understand we have potential and to preserve our potential we must have the sense of dignity, honour and righteousness within ourselves. Now men must respect their women who are like this, but men are another stupid stuff because they will not respect a woman who loves them, who is chaste, who is good, who wants them to be collective, who wants them to give, to be charitable, who wants that Sahaja Yoga should be promoted and the one who wants that her husband should be happy and joyous and that he should come to Sahaja Yoga as well. Instead of that they run after some funny, stupid women. What is there to be so attracted towards bhootish women? Must be some unions. women, because women have one very great quality that Ganas are with them, and Shri Ganapati is with them. He will never side with men if they are chaste and do not try to show off their body, and show off their beauty and want to make sort of a capital out of it. Such women are extremely powerful, extremely powerful and they show their valour when it comes to anything. Like we had Jhansi ki rani - she was an bhoots in them, I don't know, that the way they get attracted. ordinary housewife, she fought the British. The British also were surprised at her valour and they said that we have got Jhansi alright, but the glory goes to the Queen of Jhansi. Like that we had many, Noor Jehan, we had all this As a result of misbehaviour of men, women become very insecure and they get insecure, as a result the men suffer and the women suffer. A man who neglects

 2007 Issue: 9 & 10 28 The Divine Cool Breeze is all the time running about, she doesn't want to stay in the house, then she is not a housewife, but she is maid-servant. There's a saying that there was a lady who was a maid- his wife and treats like that will consequently get blood cancer, and the woman who behaves like this, in this manner and if she ill- treats her husband will get asthma or of a very serious type of servant, and then she was made a sclerosis - could be brain damage, housewife but she could not stop her could be paralysis, could be complete dehydration of the body maid-servant. She doesn't settle in the because left Nabhi is so important. If the left Nabhi is made hectic as you know by your running about and jumping about and by being hectic, that left Nabhi becomes hectic and you develop spread all these beautiful things for running about because she was a household. Now for whom is the household? Is not for only herself, no, not for her husband, no, not for her children but for others to welcome. Like this Mother Earth has blood cancer. you to come and sit and enjoy. There's a very common thing also in the Sahaja Yoga, we find, that people after marriage become absolutely I have always seen that the women who are thin, their husbands are jittery. Why? Because the wife is all the time making him run up and engrossed into each other and lose down, do this, do that, you didn't bring Sahaja Yoga. Then their children this thing for me I had asked you to suffer: their children become fussy, bring the Coca Cola, you didn't bring, funny, and disobedient torturers. They you didn't do that ... as if he's the sinner all the time. And the man have some physical problems also. It's a punishment. Not that I punish this but it is your own nature punishing. Supposing you put your hand in the fire, it will burn. I mean, who's punishing you- you are punishing yourself. Then children become funny. Just for your family, just for your food, just for your household, the selfishness, if it crawls up into man, then God save that family. If it's a woman, it's alright, at least little bit, but if the man is a becomes jumpy, all the time jumpy. He gets something for the jumping, and she gets something for her torturing. There's no love, there's no joy, there's no happiness. This so-called figure- madness which is now subsiding, thank God, it's coming from America now, subsiding, this figure-madness makes you funny. Women have to be settled- gone case .. that I should have a house, I should have a job, I should look after my children, it's for my family. I mean, our family is not of down women. They have to be Gruhasthees, that is the one who settles in the household. She has to be satisfied with the household. If she

 2007 29 Issue: 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze such a woman. one man, one woman, but the whole universe is our family. We are not on our own, and if you wives and the leaders. The leader's become arbitrary and if you wife or a leadership is a minimal of a become secluded, I must tell you minimal of a minimal of a so-called one thing and warn you today that position: most insignificant. What you those people who start to seclude themselves, a day will come when they will have horried diseases on them, don't blame Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja Yoga has its own beautiful realm of God's kingdom, but in the think their life is service are God's kingdom you have to be collective. It's very true with the leader' have got is much higher than this. If you ask a saint to become a king, he'll say, "What? You want to put the ocean into a cup?" Is the minimal of minimal3; is the lowest of lowest. Those who another stupid people. Their life is enjoyment, not service. But that service itself is enjoyment. But if you just keep to service, "Ah-oh, I'm sacrificing, this is my tapasya" finished, then you end up as a Tapasvi But a bad wife can create problems because she's [break in tape] and she'll create a problem, she'll form a group of people, group of women, she'll go on rolling down with her bhoots to everyone. Or maybe she's very conscious of her education, maybe conscious of her position or of her money and all that, then also she'l try to keep the husband aloof. Such people have to pay for what they have done, not because it's a punishment from God. like a beanstalk thing, you can be used for a cross. So in Sahaja Yoga it is enjoyment, but unless and until you have that essence of enjoyment into everything it cannot be an enjoyment. If you take out the essence from the canesugar or what you call the sugarcane bamboo, then what is left? In the same way, all the so-called service and seva and tapasya and all that has no sweetness in it, it's finished. So all this is sweetness, and So Gruha Lakshmi tattwa in Sahaja Yoga is very important. Those people who have got problems . that is generated by women. after coming to Sahaja Yoga, most of them have neglected their Gruha Laxmi principle, because Gruha Lakshmi if goes out, then centre heart catches. Those women (Long pause in tape, then repeat of most of the last sentence.) But they are very strict, "don't spoil this, keep this nice, keep that nice!" The husband comes home like who have tried such tricks should a, as if like a criminal, you know! He has to be like a bull in a china shop, give up immediately. because that's very indignified, nobody respects

 Issue: 9 & 10 - 2007 30 The Divine Cool Breeze he has to be. It's good thing in a way. It's nice he doesn't know how to do anything, it's even better for you. But to make him all the time slave - "Do this, you didn't do this for me, do that for me" is not the job of a housewife. Her job is like the Mother Earth - does She complain? Nothing. She gives you everything so much, it's the sustenance in herself, so dignity, such powers She has, what does She care for anybody giving her anything? horried because they think they have become leaders, but this is the minimum of minimum. I mean, it's like a said the ocean coming into a little cup, and their behaviour becomes so funny and absured, I am surprised. I was married in a family where we had a hundred people living together and each one of them adores Me. If I go somewhere in Lucknow, all of them will come from all over to see Me but my husband goes, nobody comes to see him, he always complains. He's the relation, I'm not the relation and they come and see Me, not him. If I had not given them love, if I had not given them whatever they wanted they would not have come to Me. So they You'll be amazed if I tell you today, till today- till yesterday. I never asked my husband to buy me anything. For the first time I asked him to buy Me a camera and you see the result in the evening, what he said: least expected. Never in lifetime. He . was saying, "You must tell me what you want." First time I said something and see the effect because I never said to him. So such a woman has to are the preservers, preservers of others they don't have to preserve things for themselves. %3D Now we have many stupid women with us, I tell you, many stupid women. We call them buddhus in Hindi be self-satisfied, satisfied within her because She has to give. The person who has to give, how can she demand? She has to give love because she's love, she has give all the services, she has to give all the possessions, she has to soothe down: what a responsibility, ! tell you, what a responsibility! More than a Prime Minister, more than any king or anyone is the responsibility of a woman and she should feel proud of it, that such a responsibility has come to me. language, buddhus because they don't know what power they have got. They don't know what responsibility they have. I'm an example before them and this is a very big problem with Me that practically I think 60% leaders have horrible wives, I must say, horrible. And Sahaja Yoga goes (dhup) like that. They can't live in an ashram, they will have their food, the husband must see that they have their food, I mean it is they have to feed everyone, everybody has to be looked after, at the end they should eat. Everybody must get a bed, they must see everybody is A housewife has a much more responsibility than a leader of Sahaja yoga. But the wives of leaders can be

 Issue: 9 & 10 - 2007 31 The Divine Cool Breeze Gaiti means which penetrates, which moves into everything. It's the etheric qualities, etheric, into which you see we put anything into etheric you can receive it anywhere. So the raga is that, this, do that, do this." They don't the energy which goes into the know how to cook, most of them. ether, and touches your spirit. That is the raga and these ragas are, I would say, are something like a housewife. Supposing if you stand with a military band, you'll be fed up - left, right, left, right, left, right - but a beautiful melody, that's a melodious thing, melody, and this melody itself is beginning they might make mistakes, suggesting of a beauty. The way the housewife decorates the house, she sleeping now, they must cover all the children, everything, then they must sleep. But no, they sit down, the become mini-Matajis or greater than Matajis. "Get me this thing, get me Every wife of a leader has to cook or learn cooking, it's compulsory now. They have to cook, and with heart. They should be able to cook and give with love to others. That's the minimum of Annapurna. And the husband shouldn't find faults with them. In the then encourage, encourage their qualities, encourage their goodness, smoothes down everyone, makes them feel happy, then she's looking after everyone- everybody knows she's talking very active life in Sahaja Yoga, standing there. Imagine, like a modern after marriage they are lost. Husbands style would be you call some people are also supposed to be Sahaja for a birthday cake of your child and you cut the cake first because you are the housewife. How will it look? It is that ridiculous, I tell you. The way the housewife always puts forward before many of them are like that here. That everybody else- they have to be on the back because you have to look after, look after all of them. And this is what is a raga is, it caters to all your angularities. Supposing a person is very upset and worried, he comes from office, sits downs and puts on a raga - it soothes you down. It makes you settle down. Like people come home, for five days live like - I don't know what to call, not even hotels-but live in a tent-like thing and the sixth day they're out at the sea or they go encourage their niceness. Also I have seen some very good ladies who are Yogis, lost! Sometimes they appear, sometimes if I am there they come, otherwise they are not there. Today I was asking Arneau, he told me so means there is something wrong with the husbands, because before marriage they are better off. So how much it is important the Gruha Lakshmi principle within us for us to be together, for us to grow together, to feel the togetherness all the time the oneness that is within us. So yesterday as I told you that I'll tell you about the ragas we have. Ra is energy, ga is in Sanskrit language

 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 9 & 10 32 and stay in a hotel. Nobody wants to stay in the house because there's no Gruha Lakshmi principle between the doesn't eat food in the house' or he'll wash his underclothes himself on his own. That is how they show their two. But raga needs... better is sitting temper. So then she fans the husband down, settling down, unless and until slowly, and tells him good things you see, "Today, you know why, how my son got up and he said 'I love my father very much'." He said, "Really?" "Yes, yes, he said he has said so ..." and husband knows she's telling lies also, but you see all nice things, you see, and I think better is your mother is much better now, I think I'll go and look after your mother, and you settle down, you cannot enjoy raga. Imagine somebody listening to a raga when he'e jumpy. So one has to settle down and that settling down is what is the work of a woman who is a housewife and the man has to act, is to settle down. As I have told you many a times, how your left Nabhi goes out in the modern times much more, and many children are also born of the women who are your sister is coming so I am thinking of buying a sari for her .. all such hectic. Is that the wife normally in India nice, nice things she will talk to him. before, you see the husband used to get up, have his bath, all the time his go and wash his hands and go in a wife is not with him. She's cooking for bullock cart, not in a car where there him, she's looking after the children is a jam always. Alright, now the doing. All the time sticking on to husband also is a sign of boredom. Husband gets bored, wife gets bored, then they have a divorce. She must have other interests like looking after you that on the periphery of the the children, household, Sahaja Yoga, wheel you have the speed, but at things like that. Then he comes from the exis it is not, so Sahaja Yogis the bath, he sits, sits on the ground in have to be at the axis and so the India, now we are sitting on the tables, husband and wife, the left and the alright? At least sit on the tables, not right side of a chariot, have to be on on the table but on the chair, slowly. the axis, and the left is left and right is Then she doesn't tell him at this time "Why did you do like this?" or, "This lady was quarrelling" or "I met another lady, she was telling me you were this, and you were that ..." No, she says, "Let him eat his food." That's why in India if husband has a show temper he So he'll eat his food nicely then he'll bullock cart is over. The fan is over, you have to be very fast as life is fast now. In this fast thing as I have told right. Now the women always take more time to get ready, not Me, I take less than my husband, much less time than my husband but normally. So that is their habit. Forget it. The women have their own habits, they are women, women will remain women, men will

 33 Issue: 9 & 10 - 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze what you need is pure intelligence. If the husband is a dullard, he'll bring down his wife. If the wife is a dullard, she'll bring down the husband. If a woman is very smart, talks well and different, but they are women and you she knows how to talk and impress are men and God has made men and people, doesn't mean that she is very intelligent. I call that person the most intelligent who sees the benevolence, the ascent and the ultimate goal-that person is the remain men. Men must see their watches ten times. Women might see it once or maybe their watches are lost or out or order, if they are real women, they are not jumpy like men. They are women. If it was to make a unisex, He would have made a unisex. He did not. So one must accept the sex in which you are born with grace and beauty and dignity, both, and you must know this is women's party. most sensitive, is the most intelligent. All other intelligence is Avidya, is useless. Now on the subject I think I can write a book, so better leave it to the book and today let us have the Puja. May God bless you. In India we have such a thing, like you know I was married in a family, very orthodox where they used to even cover the face and all that. So one day the collector who is a friend of my husband so he told my elder brother-in-law "Now why not the wife of don't know, there's no chace, I don't my friend come and see me?" He said, "Of course, of course." So just to make it easy for me he took leave from his office and disappeared into another town, and he told his wife that, Any questions? (Silence) This means l'll be spending some money. I know when will I spend. I love to spend, I mean everybody should love to spend. That's why the money is for. One must give to others, you see why the matter is there, matter is to give see, that she goes and sees the to others, just enjoy giving others. So collector. See how beautiful it was! How beautiful it was, andI never felt that he was dominating me because after all that was the system of that family, alright, it's alright. But for this enjoyable to give something to others. May God bless you (Checked with the Audio)

 SHRI HANUMANA PUJA Schwetzingen, Germony, 31.8.1990 (Pravachan of Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi) Today we have come here to do Hanumana's Puja. Shri Hanumana is a great character in our being and he has it in His own stomach. So the runs all the way from Swadhishthana to the brain and he supplies all the stomach." Because He thought that this sun will be controlled better if He beauty of His character is that He's a child. And the child-like behaviour of Shri Hanumana has to control the right side. If there's a right-side then people don't get children, normally. If they're over-right-sided, then even they get children, but they are really not liked by the children, because they have no time for children, they all the time are very strict with the children, they shout necessary guidance we need in our futuristic planning or in our mental activities. He gives us guidance and protection. As you know that Germany is a place where people are very active, very right-sided, use their brain too much and they are very machine- oriented also. It is very surprising how at them, they don't know how to the deity like Shri Hanumana, who is an eternal child, because He was like a monkey-His head was that of a monkey, if not of an elephant. So, he handle the children. Or they are over-indulgent, because they always think that, "I never got this, so let me give it to the child." So these extreme type of people who are right-sided have got this Hanumana who is nothing but a child. He is very anxious, very anxious to do the work of Shri Rama. Now, Shri was an eternal child and He was the one who was used to run the right side of human beings. He was told that, "You must control the sun", to begin with. He has to control the sun, that the sun in the people, if there is too much sun.", then He must try to control it and make it cooler or Rama is a character, I would say, which is full of balance, absolutely. He is the benevolent king which Socrates has described. So he needed smoother. So, He was a child, after all, somebody with him all the time to do the work or to supply him or to help him, like a secretary you can call Him. And Shri Hanumana was the one who so as soon He was born, when he knew that He has to look after the sun He said "Why not eat it off?" So He went... Ran up the Virata's body and ate up the Surya. was created for this purpose for Shri Rama he was such a assistant, I There He had to be told "No, mean, you cannot have such a word for him, you can say, such a servant no, no, You have to control Him You don't have to put Him inside your

 35 2007 Issue: 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze the tail around anywhere. If He wants of Shri Rama. Even the servants, you He can just make a mountain of His tail and sit on that. He has all these monkey-tricks as you can call them, you see. And all these tricks He has within himself is to control a person who is extremely right-sided, to begin see, don't have that much of dedication for their masters. You can say, like a dog or a horse, but that also doesn't have. Such dedication for Shri Rama that by the time He grew up He got nine Siddhis, Navadha Siddhis. Nine Siddhis he got. with. Then He can fly in the air. Just He doesn't have any wings, but He can just fly in the air. That means He can become so big that the amount of air He displaces has a much more weight that his now weight. Just the same principle of Archimedes, if you know the Archimedes principle. That He becomes so big that His body starts floating in the air. Like a boat, These Siddhis are like this that He could become big; He could become so heavy that nobody could lift Him. He could become so Sukshma that nobody could see Him. He could become so subtle that nobody could see Him. There are nine Siddhis that He got. So, a person who has got the right side too much in him, He controls him with these nine Siddhis. Now, how will you control a man who is running very fast in his life? What He does is to control his movement, He makes him in such a way that he has to put down his speed. He makes his feet very heavy, now he can't do that much. Or He makes his hands very heavy so the person cannot work very much with his hands. So He can give a tremendous kind of a lethargic heaviness to a person who is a very you see, you can call it. And He can fly in the air. And by flying in the air He can carry the messages from one to another through the ether. Now, the subtle of the ether that we have is of Shri Hanumana. He is the one who controls, or is the Lord of this Ether, the subtle of the ether. Or say, the causal of the ether. And through it, it communicates. All the communications that you find like we have within ourselves also- the under command ductless glands, which the pituitary is using that ductless glands is through right-sided person. He has got another Siddhis, which are very interesting is that He does not have many weapons, He had only a Gada in his hand and He can extend His tail to any extent and He can handle people with His tail. He does not have to use His Hanumana's movement. Because he can go into a Nirakar, He can go into formless state. Also the communications... we know for this communication that we hands. Sitting down here, He can put have, maybe we can say that there is

 36 2007 Issue: 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze a, we have got a loudspeaker, but we have television, we have got radios- sulphur dioxide, if we have the sulpher and all those things where we catch on to the ether, anything is all the on pulsating like that. They are blessings of Hanumana and are available to people who are right- vibrations, you all must be knowing sided. Only the right-sided people about it. So, all these things, discover these things of the space symmetric and asymmetric vibrations which we call as a cordless telephone or a thing without... we have also telegraphs where we don't use any wires. So without any connection, through the ether He can manage. So all the ethereal connections has been you know that we get molecules like has two oxygen and the oxygen goes asymmetric, symmetric type of are created by whom? Nobody wants to know. Nobody wants to find out, because after all in an atom or imagine, in a molecule that deep, who does that job? It's done by Shri Hanumana in His subtle ways. done by this great engineer Shri Hanumana. And it is so perfect, it's so perfect that you cannot challenge it and you cannot find faults with it. Maybe your instruments may not be all right, but as far as His ethereal work is concerned He's perfectly there. Now the scientists discover it and think that So, He has another great, great siddhi, which we call as Anima. Anima, Anu, Anu, means a molecule. And that means it can enter into a molecule or Renu-is the atom-it can enter into molecule or into atom. Now, many scientists think that they have in the modern times they discovered the molecules. It's not so, because it's it is in the nature. But they never think, "How can it be?" We say something already in our oldest scriptures in the ether and how is it, it is description of Anima is there, is of received on the other hand? They just Anu, Renu is there. So, it's already take it for granted that it is so that we say something here or we relay something on the television and it is seen on the other side. But they you see the electromagnetic force is never even think or search out how it is done, what is the way. And this is what is the work of Shri Hanumana discribed there. Now, then, whatever wherever working it is worked through Hanuman's blessings. He is the one who creates electromagnetic forces. So, now we can see that as Ganesha has got the magnetic force in Him, He is the magnet, He has got the magnetic force. Then we can say the electromagnetic is the one which we call as Hanuman's force, on the who has done such a beautiful network and through that network all these things work out. So, even on the right side the vibrations we get in the molecules, as

 2007 37 Issue: 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze goes on degreeing to us, "Now, you have crossed this Chakra, that Chakra, that Chakra." And He helps us to know that what state we are in. material side of it. But from the matter He goes up to the brain. So, He rises from Swadishthana up to the brain. So, in the brain also He creates the co- relationships of different sides of our brain. So, how much He gives us, I mean, we can say, if Ganesha gives Thoughtless Awareness, and Nirvikalpa us the wisdom, then He gives us the power to think. He protects us also that we should not think of bad things. That is, we can say that, that if Ganesha gives us the wisdom then Shri Hanumana gives us the So, Ganesha gives us, say, Nirvichara Samadhi, which we can call it as the Samadhi. He gives all that and also He gives us joy. But the understanding that "this is good, this is for our benevolence", mental understanding comes to us from Shri Hanumana. And it's very important for western people, because it has to be mental otherwise they won't understand. If it is not mental they cannot come into abstract, it has to be mental. And so the mental conscience. I hope you understand the difference between the two. Wisdom is where you do not need conscience so much because you are wise: you know what is good, what is bad. But conscience is needed in a personality, where he is to be controlled and that understanding of whether it is good or bad is given to us by Shri Hanumana. Without Him, even if you become a saint, you will be, of course you are a saint and you will enjoy the saintliness- all control comes from Shri Hanumana, which is the conscience in the human being. Now, this conscience, which is Shri Hanumana, is the subtle form of Him, which gives us is in Sanskrit called as Sat-Sat-vivekbuddhi, means, but whether this saintliness is right, if you live on Himalayas, or is all right when you go across to people to give them realisation. All the scanning this Vivekabuddhi, all the scanning, all this discrimination, all this guidance, all this protection is given to us by Shri Sat means truth, Asat means untruth and Viveka means the discrimination and Buddhi means the intelligence. So, intelligence to discriminate between the truth and untruth is given to us by Shri Hanumana. Hanumana. Germany, being a country, which is very much, I should say, an essence of right side. And because of it being such an essence of right side it's important to get the protector of right side here worshipped. But in all that Vivekabuddhi, in that discrimination In the Sahaja Yoga system, if we say that Ganesha is the one who gives us, He is the Adhyaksha, means He is the, I call Him as the chancellor of the university. He is the one who

 2007 38 Issue: 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze their bosses, surrendered to their jobs, sometimes surrendered to their wives He knows one thing that He is absolutely subservient to Shri Rama. Now, what is Shri Rama? Shri Rama is the benevolent king. He works for also, - but they are subservient to wrong people, they have discretion. You'll always find that, they have. no discretion. But if you take the help of Hanumana then He tells you no the benevolence. And Shri Rama himself is a formal king, like Sankocha, we call 'it, I mean, the English words are not so good to that you have to be surrendered to explain it, but Shri Rama is the one who is - who will not push forward Himself. He keeps back and He is very balanced, He is very poised person. So the Hanumana, you see, He is the one who is always anxious to do the work of Shri Rama, always. If Shri Rama says, "All right, you go and get the..." -He told Him, "Go and get the Sanjeevani", is the kind of a herb that was needed to bring God Almighty and not to anybody else. Or to your Guru like Rama. Otherwise you are surrendered to anybody else and then you are a free bird and you have all the nine powers within yourself. Hanumana's whole thing is to antidote not to be your over-activity, to antidote your too- much-thinking, to antidote your ego. Now, how He finishes the ego of people is very sweetly shown when He burnt the whole of Lanka, is the capital of Ravana. And the way He made fun of him, because, you see, anybody who is egoistical, one must make fun of him, then he is all right. Like, first He went and when Ravana saw Him he said, "Who are you The monkey"? So He just pushed His tail Lakshmana to life. He went there and He brought the whole mountain with Him, "Now get and have it!" It's like that sort of a person, you see. So, He brought the..-that's childlike behaviour of His. And the discrimination in this is that that, if Shri Rama has asked for, whatever he'll ask for l'll do it. So, it's a relationship of, I would say, like a Guru and Shishya. But even more then that that the Shishya is just like a subservient servant, absolutely surrendered to God, absolutely towards him and tickled his nose with His tail. So, He is the one who makes fun of egoistical people, Now, if somebody egoistical tries to trouble you He's the one, He'll make such fun out of him, that he'll be amazed how this fellow was jumping like a humpty- dumpty has fallen down and has broken his crown. So, see, it is the job of Hanumana to protect you surrendered to God and His main theme is surrender. Now, see this surrender itself shows that all those who are right-sided people are surrendered to God. Not surrendered to their bosses. Mostly all those right- sided people are very surrendered to

 Issue: 9 & 10 39 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze from egoistical people. And also He become friends and become mild. So, His whole character within us acts as to see our ego, discriminate that "Oh, Saddam - in the case of Saddam I this is my ego that is working." And just asked Hanumana to do the job then to become childlike and sweet, mirthful and happy. He's always in a He has put this Saddam into different dancing mood, all the time He is dancing and before Rama he is always bowed down, and always wants to do whatever is the desire of protects the egoistical people by showing them down. Like, say, because I know He'll do it. Now, how circumstances that he doesn't know what to do. He doesn't know how to go because supposing, he says "All right, 'll have war," so the whole of Irag will be finished, he'll be finished, Kuwait will be finished, all petrol will be finished, all right, everybody will be in way I would say if Germany, as Philip trouble. But what about him? He won't be there, too. Because if the become like Hanumana, then what a Americans have to fight they'll go in his dynamic force we have, if they place and fight. They won't fight in become so subservient. And the America, he is not going to go to subservient nature of Hanumana is America to fight them. Few Americans may be dead. So now; in this know the story os Sita when She Saddam's brain also Hanumana is Shri Rama. So if Ganesha stands behind Me, Hanumana stands here at My feet. And He's there. In the same has asked Me, that if Germany can seen to such an extent that as you gave a necklace to Him and He wouldn't wear it, because inside there working and telling him, "Now see, Mister, if you do like this then this will happen." was no Ram. Once Sita felt that all the time He works into the brains of all he is around and so He is sort of cutting out Her Privacy. So She said, "Now, You can be there only for one work, You need not to do every work." He used to do every work of Shri Rama, only for one work He should be there. You choose which work you want to do. He said that "Only, you see, I would like to be with Shri Ram, that whenever He Sneezes I should do like this." You see, in India, when we sneeze, we have to do like this with this (Shri Mataji is snipping Her the politicians, all these egoistical people. And then they get sometimes stunned, sometimes they change their policies, they come round and that's how they manage. Also another great quality of Hanumana is that he makes... makes people sort of an arbitrators. He makes people meet each other and two egoistical people, He will make them meet and then He will create 1 such a situation that they both

 40 Issue: 9 & 10 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze Now, My as a Guru, My main concern is that you should learn all about go out. So we do like this, if you Sahaja Yoga. You should become experts of Sahaja Yoga and you should yawn, then also (Shri Mataji is become yourself the Gurus. This is the snipping Her fingers) we do like that - only concern I have. But for that complete surrender is required. Islam means surrender. So, you have to surrender. If you are surrendered then only you can learn what is the way you will handle Sahaja Yoga. Now, even this surrendering is done by Shri fingers). Because the sneezing, see, avoids.. to avoid all the negativity to sneeze. Or, if you feel sleepy and you mostly. So He said whenever he will yawn, You allow Me just to (Shri Mataji is snipping Her fingers) this we call as chutki, I don't know what you call this chutki. "Allow Me to do this." Hanumana. Sita said, "This is something very little work, you see, this fellow then He will be out of sight." He is the one who teaches you how to surrender or makes you surrender. Because egoistical people So He stood there. She said, don't surrender. Then He puts some sort of hurdles or some sort of miracles or some tricks by which then a disciple surrenders himself to the Otherwise he "Now, why are You standing here?" "I am waiting for that. So how can I go?" is Guru. not And that's how She granted, surrendered, he finds it difficult to surrender and the force that acts to make him surrender to the Guru is first She granted, "Alright, given to you this job." Now She can't take it back because She granted to do this job. So He is always there like this, standing, just to do this (Shri Mataji is snipping Her fingers) to Shri Ram. also that of Hanumana. So not that he is only surrendered but he makes others also to be surrendered. Because only... because of ego you cannot surrender - so He is the one So, 1 mean, the sweetness of the whole thing is that every time, who fights your ego and He puts it every minute He is subservient, He is down and makes you surrender. So, in attentive, He is there. Also in Sahaja what He has shown that there's a Yoga I have relationships with you as a Guru, as a Mother and I don't know, unlimited. But still. it is to be perfectly enjoyed then these two relationships we know that I am your Mother and l'm your Guru. His own, expression I would say that very beautiful area of right side. If completely should be you surrendered to your Guru as if you are the servant of that Guru.

 Issue: 9 & 10 - 2007 41 The Divine Cool Breeze Shri Ganesha gives Energy-Shakti, but the one who protects is Shri Hanumana. So you'll find that when Whatever you have to do for that Guru, you have to do it. Of course you must know that Shri Krishna was the charioteer of your Guru has to give you realisation minimum, otherwise that's not a Guru. But anybody who has given you the realisation you have to so surrendered that you should be just like a servant, not to feel shy about it. Like, I would have sometimes, you know, I am going by say, I'm going by aeroplane and sometimes I cannot wear my shoes, because they are so swollen up. So normally I would take the shoes in my hands and walk about. But I have seen Sahaja Yogis because He is always the messenger they pick up My shoes also and walk to Maria. And surprisingly the words with me and they don't feel shy about it. They feel so proud that they are carrying My shoes. So one should feel proud that you are doing all these things, that you have a chance to do all these things for your Guru and that you are surrendering to that Guru, you are absolutely only bothered as to how you can serve the Guru, how you can please the Guru and how you could Hanumana all Her life. That means be closer to that Guru. It doesn't mean Arjuna then on top of the chariot was sitting Hanumana, not Shri Ganesha. Hanumana was sitting there looking after Him. Also in a way that Shri Rama Himself becomes Shri Vishnu, so He has to look after him. He is an angel as you know, according to Christian, we should say, according to Bible, that He is the angel called Gabriel. Now, Gabriel is the one who brought the message, He used were "Immaculata Salve". That's my name. My first name is Nirmala, means Immaculata and surname is Salve. He said those words to Her. And today also I was surprised when it came to giving Me a present they found a tea-set and dinner-set which is called as "Maria". So, Maria has to do quite a lot with Maria is the Mahalaxmi. Mahalaxmi physical closeness but a kind of a rapport, a kind of an understanding. Even those who are away from Me can feel Me in their heart. And this is what it is that we have to get this how did you know? Mother, how power from Shri Hanumana. being the Sita. Sita, then Radha. Hanumana has to be there to serve. And that is why, you see, sometimes people say, "Mother, did you come to know? Mother, how did you send the message? Mother, how did you work it out?" Can you imagine, this is Shri Hanumana's headache, He does it. Now, He is the one who protects also all the deities, He protects. Now, there's a difference between Shri Ganesha and Him. The

 2007 42 Issue: 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze Anything passes through My mind He just takes it up and it's done, point and then it recoils. When they act stupidly it recoils and then they because as I told you that His whole know that we have done such a big mistake or it was all stupid. But these messages, from where do they sometimes it could be extremely, arrive? Many people say, "Mother, I just extremely difficult to retrace back like the diseases, as I call the "Yuppie's- gentleman whose mother was very disease" which is now impossible, because Hanumana has taken away the electromagnetic force from these So, he said, "I didn't know what to do, people and it doesn't work, it doesn't relate to your conscious mind, so your conscious mind cannot act, it just goes off. Only these people if they worship Hanumana with the same devotion, then maybe they might be saved. But it's not easy thing to convince these stupid Yuppies, you see, about anything. They say, "We don't believe, so what." So what, you die, what else? That's the only limit, that's the only life organisation is so well planned, all prayed to you." There was sick and he went to see her and she was just going to die - with cancer. so L.just prayed to you please save my mother." Now, the sincerity of that person, the depth of that person as Hanumana knows. He knows what is Mother, a Sahaja Yogi the weight of this person is. And immediately, you'll be surprised, within three days, the woman who was going to die, survived, she got all right. He brought her to Bombay and the doctor said "She has no cancer." left for you? And you do that? There are so many aspects of Hanumana which I could have told you, but for example, for His body, you see, like Shiva is covered with the Geru, Many things which you call miracles are done by Shri Hanumana. He is the one who is the doer of miracles. He does miracles also to what you call Geru is a that's a kind of a, you know what Geru is, it's a red- coloured stone which is very, very hot show how stupid you are, how foolish you are, because He is on the right side, see, He goes to the ego-side. Now, with the ego a human being is and supposing with always, become stupid and that's mean, something inevitable. With ego So, if you put Guru, those rashes are they become so stupid, "Oh, what's wrong?" And that's why you'll find many sometimes some sort of skin-diseases, people doing just stupid things, we just which are cured with Geru. Because it can't understand why they do it. They Is the one which is very hot and it say, "What's wrong?" What's wrong is that Hanumana doesn't like it, it's the cold the sometimes you develop those rashes. corrected. Or you get, due to badhas, soothes you down. On the contrary Shri Ganesha

 2007 43 Issue: 9 & 10 The Divine Cool Breeze 55 is covered with lead-oxide, with a red lead-oxide, which is extremely cold. Lead-oxide is a very cool thing. If you touch the lead, you see, it is a very cool thing. So, that lead-oxide is used to cover all His body, is to balance the heat that He has or the effects of heat hastiness, our speediness, our aggressiveness, He's the one who. does it. Now, He played a trick on Hitler. How? Hitler was using Shri Ganesha as a symbol. So this Swastika was made in a clockwise manner. Then Hanumana played a trick on him. What He did, He made the stencil, which they were using for making the what you call - making the Swastika, He put it somehow or other lot of, mean, he made it in such a way that they said, "We should use the other side." As soon as they used the other side - it's Hanumanas trick. I suggested to Him, but, I mean, He played the trick. They started using Ganesha from the other side. The He has. So, we call it, in Sanskrit language is called as Sindoora. And also in Marathi or Hindi called sindoor. We must find always, this is the colour. Luckily I got this Sari in Vienna and I have it very nice for this occasion. So He is always covered with that colour, what you call this Sindoor colour. And lead-oxide, though they say it causes cancer, people say that lead-oxide can cause you cancer, but it is the lead- oxide, which is very cool, it can cool you down so much that you can go to the left side and cancer is a same Ganesha about whom Shri Hanumana was worried, how can He surpass Shri Ganesha? Because He is the eldest and how can you go psychosomatic disease and that might be the reason, it might cause in a very far fetched way we can say - can beyond Him? And He is a deity and Hanumana is an angel. So, as soon cause cancer, too. Because if it is too cold and all that and then you go the left side and on the left side you can catch the viruses by which you winning, to as the trick was played, then both of them put together stopped Hitler from can get into troubles. So, but the same winning. This is how the trick was lead-oxide is all right for people who are very right sided. For them if it is put on their Agnya it cools them down, they are cooled down. And it's very Puja in Germany and Germany is the good for them to put on their Agnya place where these tricks are played so that they are cooled down. Their very much by Hanumana, because I've anger goes down, their temper goes down and it's a very good thing. played. So, all these little, little tricks, you see, are there. Once, I remember, I had My told you, that they are the ones who require Him the most. So, there was, in Germany, there was a Puja and in the Puja by mistake they put it the So He is the one who cures our anger, he's the one who cures our

 - 2007 Issue: 9 & 10 44 The Divine Cool Breeze other was round, by mistake. I didn't see, I... Normally, I always watch very carefully, but I don't know why that day | didn't see-it Hanumana's trick and when I sawI said, "Oh God, where is it going to now hurt? Where is it going to work right-sided people are ascetic, they out? Which country it is going to hit? It did not hit Germany, it hit England. right-sided people, they all will have Because England, I've worked so hard there and they have been so negligent about Sahaja yoga, so lethargic about it, that it just went and hit there. always a very majestic deity or a angel and that, in a place where it is so majestic and beautifully done, everything is there, and He would like that. He is not a Sanyasi type of a person, He is not an ascetic. Normally must be also become bow-hows, they'll make, everything simple, they would like to shave off their nose also, if possible, on their faces. So, you see, the other way round, Hanumana is not, Hanumana likes beauty, He likes decorativeness and makes people non-ascetic. So, Hanumana gives you this kind of thing. But many people who are worshippers of Hanumana always say that those ladies should never go and take the darshan of Hanuman, because Hanumana is a brahmachary, is the one who is... Who doesn't want So, He is the one who goes like a torrential rain or can go like a speedy, very speed tempest and destroy things. So He works out all things electromagnetic forces. So, all the matter, all the matter is under His control, all the matter is under his control. And He is the one, who His through these creates rain for you, who creates sun for you, He creates breeze for you. He is the one who does all these women to see him. Because He doesn't wear full clothes and He has very little clothes on Himself, so He doesn't want women to see him. But if women think, "He is just a child", that is just the same. But this idea - I think that people don't have that He is a child. What is for a child. How many clothes he doesn't wear, what does it For the today's thing, I mean, if matter? Then He is a monkey. I have to talk about Him I'll take hours Monkeys are not supposed to wear clothes. So whatever He wears is quite a lot and He doesn't give you the feeling at all that He is in any way nude or anything, but you just see such things, just to have a proper Puja, to have a proper meeting, everything He works out so beautifully and nobody even knows that it is Shri Hanumana who has done it, and we should thank Shri Hanumana all the time. together, but only thing I have to say that it's such a blessing I feel that we have this in this palace, Shri Hanumana's Puja, because he was

 Issue: 9 & 10 - 2007 45 The Divine Cool Breeze So that's what I feel that now Germans a sweet form of Him, such a sweet form! are becoming very gentle in handling things, in handling people. This change is coming and I think it's the blessing I wish, sometimes you get His photograph also as you have got the photographs of Shri Ganesha, then you'll really fall in love with Him, He's such a sweet thing!. And though He is so huge and so big and though he has nails, but when he caresses My feet, he pulls back His nails, He is so gentle, extremely gentle and very beautifully He caresses My feet. And i've seen Him the way he handles everything, it's extremely gentle way. of Hanumana on them. May god bless you! Now, so today we need not do Ganesha Puja though once you can wash My feet with some song. Because always before every Puja one has to do Ganesha Puja, but need not be that elaborate.

 greatest fear human beings have is that they think that they have done lots of mistakes, and these mistakes are too The many, and they can never get realisation, they will be doomed, they will be going to hell. таny, This is not true, not at all true. Nobody is going to hell, if they do not want to go. If you want to stop it, you can stop it. The time has come. You are going to be blessed and blessed forever. So may God bless you. H.H. Shri Mataji



----------------------

2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The
Đivine Cool Breeze
September - October 2007
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-1.txt 
 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
Published by
Nirmal Transformation Pyt. Ltd.
Plot No. 108, Chandragupt Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-41029
Ph. No.: 020-25285232
Printed by
Krishna Printer & Designer
Tri Nagar, Delhi-35
Mob.: 9212238008
For Subscription Please Write to:
Nirmal Transformatiom Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 108,Chandragupt Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune- 411029
Tel.No.: 020-25285232
Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles, Miracle Photographs etc.
To
Shri O.P. Chandna
G-11 (463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110034
Ph.: 011-65356811
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Breeze
Cool
Divine
The
SEP. - OCT. 2007
NIRMALA.
NIVERSAL
PURE
CONTENTS
Millions and millions of People Required
3.
Adi Shakti Puja, Cabella-24.6.2007
4.
Hermit Heart
9.
11. Expectations, (Baba Mama), Nagpur-1999
13. Resurrection-2007
15. Shri Mataji on Shri Kartikeya
19. Fatimabi Puja, Switzerland, 14.08.1988
34. Shri Hanumana Puja, Germany, 31.8.1990
DHARMA
VMHSIA
RELIGION
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Today, the power of raising the Kundalini of thousands and
thousands and millions and milions of people is required
"There is no way by which you can you're going to. I mean today I should be
really feel that I am great.I am
extraordinary, I am. This is a thing which
people do not understand. It's alright for
those who are nor realized- excused. But
you have felt the vibrations and got your realize and recognize that there has to be
realization through Me. I must be
something. Put your attention like that to
understand. Must be tremendous thing tremendous' task. And it was necessary for
inside this body. It cannot be possible
otherwise. It is so abvious otherwise to
old; I will be and be just like you! I am not
going to do anything outside..."
.....You do not judge Me, becuase
that's not the way you will understnad. Just
%3D
something tremendous. It was necessary to
have someone like that to do this
you to be born, to be with Me to help; 1
know those who are with Me. They'll stand
by Me through out. I may judge them a
little here and there, but I know they will
come round. You have to stand by Me.
Those who want to run away they!ll run
away, today or tomorrow. I'll try: I'll try to
get them round, as far as possible..."
you people.
This is to be understood, that so far
Krishna, Christ, Rama, all of them; nobody
gave Self Realisation to people en-masse.
They had other powers, like Krishna had
'Samhar Shakti; He could have killed anyone
like this. I have also all these powers
within Me, but obviously
simple, ordinary, mandane type of an
Indian lady. And Christ had a power to get
Himself crucified. I too have that. But I am
not going to do all that. I have a power to
resurrect also. Why these powers are not
used? One should understand. Because,
now the main attention is to raise the
Kundalini and for that these powers are not
required. give Realization to any number of
people. What's the use of getting crucified?
Who is going to raise the Kundalini? I
So we come to collectivity. To
understand that you are cells in My body.
And I have awakened you. If you
degenerate, My body degenerates. You
have seen that all. When you are sick, I
am sick. In the sense I emit. liberate more
vibrations and 1 feel sick with that, because
you can't take it. When you take vibrations
i feel well. But those who have faith in
I am a very
ат
themselves can only understand this and
not those who have superiority complex or
inferiority complex... Complex means no
faith in yourself that you are the chosen
ones. You are really the people, specially
'made' for the great work. It's a tremendous
thing that you are all born. Once you realise
and recognise it you would not bother
about small, small things of life. It's the
quality in you that has to be nurtured and
looked after, through collectivity. But
collectivity of the 'Sahaja Yogis'.."
H.H. Shri Mataji, Plaw Hatch Seminar,
would like to do it. I mean ifI were at that
time l-would have said, "Keep your cross
for a while, I will have it later on". What's
the use, just now to destroy people? Let's
see how many come round, you see. So
these powers are not required. Today, the
power of raising the Kundalini of
thousands and thousands and million
and millions of people is required. And I
am going to be just like you all My life.
In the sense I am going to get old as
England. 15.11.1980
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-4.txt 
 ADI SHAKTI PUJA
Cabella-24.6.2007
Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
but what they do is to grow them big.
They are very big. Much bigger than
you can find them anywhere, but there
is no fragrance. While in a poor
country like India the flowers have
tremendous fragrance. Even the small
flowers have tremendous fragrance.
It is very nice to see you all again
here. I think this is the first Puja we
are having at this place and I hope
you are all comfortable. And (it is)
convenient for you to come here.
Today is really a great day. It's
an Adishakti to celebrate Adishakti,
and what is the origin of this
Adishakti? I've never talked about it.
This is first time I'll tell you, that
Adishakti is the Primordial Mother, is
the power. Power of God that wanted
to create this world and She Herself
Now that is the speciality of the
fragrance in India and nowhere else.
NOWHERE!! Some flowers may be
having little fragrance but there is no
fragrance in the flowers that are grown
so beautifully, full of love and care. But
lots of wild flowers also in India have
managed to create this great world.
(Can't you all sit down?.. .
as possible be comfortable..) So
As far got fragrance. What is the reason?
They say that the soil of India has
today I'm going to tell you about fragrance. How can you have the
Adishakti which is a very ancient fragrance in the soil? But it is a fact,
what I'm saying, is not just a story but
it is a fact that in India any flowers that
you grow, mostly have, mostly, have a
can imagine there was nothing but fragrance. While here that's not the
case. Neither it is the case in any
other country, you go either to Norway,
or you go to Germany, any other
country you go, you won't find any
fragrance in the flowers. It is very
shocking why there is no fragrance in
flowers! When this world was created
subject. Adishakti is the power of God
Himself and She created this world to
bring His kingdom on this earth. You
darkness and out of this darkness She
had to create all these beautiful
pictures, trees, and all kinds of
vegetation, that She did create.
But what is the use having all
these things which do not speak, do
not understand?
manifestation with them. Of Course,
some of the trees and some of the
flowers do receive beautiful vibrations
and they grow very well but not all, abroad there are no flowers with
some of them. For example, I must tell
you that here flowers have no
fragrance. All the flowers, they have no
fragrance. I've been going round to
see if there was flowers of fragrance,
There
is
no
there was no fragrance but in some
areas there was, specially areas which
we call as India and other world. It is
unbelievable that here or anywhere
fragrance!
So now you are born here. You
have brought the fragrance. You are
the people who are realized souls and
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-5.txt 
 - 2007
5.
Issue: 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
on, you read in the newspaper all the
time you see this nonsense that
countries are fighting and more they
are developed better they are. In this
you have got the fragrance to spread
So your responsibility is double, I think,
that you must spread fragrance.
Fragrance is something very innate
Even this soil which we should say is development of there's I hope they rise
without fragrance, the people have
fragrance in there character, in their
behaviour, in their understanding. And
there is peace which they are
aspiring, I don't say they are, but they killing others, destroying the whole
are aspiring to have peace. This
aspiration only suggests that they are
fragrant people; that they are very
fragrant.
and become spiritual and they develop
fragrance, but this fighting spirit of
human beings has come from Satan I
think. That they are killing themselves,
world. You read the newspaper you
feel so ashamed how human beings
are going on!
So all the Sahaja Yogis should
not support any kind of fight. They
are.... They are here to bring
fragrance to people, to bring
happiness, to bring joy and not to
over, are still not aware that you have fight. That is one of the first duties of
Sahaja yogis not to join any thing
aware then all wars will end, every which hates, which fights, which
creates problems. These fighting
that now we are all one. We do not spirits have destroyed the fragrance of
soil. If people become loving and
affectionate, this soil itself will become
fragrant. First thing we must learn to
love each other, and not to hate any
way. There are so many ways of
hating. This is also a human quality.
belongs to God but people stupidly Animals do hate, because they are
animals. Human beings can't be
animals. We are human beings and
as human beings what we should have
is love, affection and no hatred of any
kind and as you are Sahaja yogis, I
would say that you should try to
develop your loving capacity instead to
fighting capacity or criticizing others.
countries of fragrance. Won't have to It is very easy to criticize but try
to understand that our soil itself has
What is a fragrance in human
being is his nature, his temperament.
How he lives and how he behaves
towards others. All the countries all
to become fragrant. If they were to be
thing will finish off and they will say
belong to different countries or
anything which we have made. God
has not made, we have made.... This
is your country. This is their country,
and countrywise we will fight. This
country belongs to no one. This
fight, on the countries that this is our
country, this is our country. Now I've
travelled all over the worid, I wouldn't
say any any any country as their own
because if you own a country, you
should have fragrance. You should
have temperament which will make
other people feel that you come from
argue but one country is fighting with
another country. Every where it goes
no fragrance.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-6.txt 
 6.
Issue: 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
2007
what your position is or anything, they
only know that you are a Sahaja yogi
and a Sahaja Yogi loves other Sahaja
How are we to bring the
fragrance to this soil. This is only if the
people living here, have affection and
love for each other. This is the most Yogis. This is a very big achievement,
important thing. When creation took it was never there as there is no
place it was only through affection, fragrance in the soil and no fragrance
otherwise what was the need for in human beings. Now that has come,
nature to create all these things? All
this is for what? It is to make you feel
beautiful. All these trees are beautiful
to make you feel good, to feel one
with the nature. In that way the human
beings have not contributed. Now I'm
not saying Sahaja Yogis. They are
rare and they are wonderful and they
have done a good job because they
consider love is the highest also. But
you have to show to others also, that
you love them because they should
also love each other. The whole world
now you have a capacity to love each
other and to help each other and to
understand each other, not to criticize
and not to insult or in any way defame
them. This l'm saying because you are
all rare people who are Sahaja yogis.
How may people there are
Sahaja yogis, you see? Very few. We
have to have more Sahaja Yogis that
they understand that we are part and
parcel of one country, and that country
is of love. This, when it happens, then
we will say that Sahaja Yoga has
worked out. Helping each other,
understanding each other, that should
be there and I think that Sahaja Yogis
do understand each other and they
love each other but still this should go
more than their limits. Many people
don't understand that Sahaja Yoga is
not for them only; it is for the whole
world. You have to give it to others
and you have to bring forth what you
Today when I was coming, I call unity of love. In love you don't see
wrong things. You just enjoy love. And
that is what is to be seen in today's
from India. How is it possible? puja, and is that do we bear any
Because you have developed that hatred for anyone? Do we have any ll
love. Because you have that love that feeling for anyone or for any country?
You should try to examine yourself. If
where ever you meet people, they you are a real Sahaja Yogi, you'll hate
no one, you'll hate no one. But you'll
love and love as your own. Love is the
biggest thing that God has given to
is created because there was love.
Otherwise what was the need to waste
the energy on all these continents and
all these different countries? Was not
to fight, was not to hate each other or
to think no end of yourself, but to love
each other and to have more brothers
and sisters and in Sahaja yoga you
feel that way and you have brothers
and sisters all over.
was so happy to see there were
people from all over Europe and also
innate love. So where ever you go,
should say that we have seen Sahaja
Yogis who are nothing but love. They
are not bothered as to what you are,
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-7.txt 
 - 2007
7.
Issue: 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
we have to know that today we have
to promise that for us love is the most
human beings and that is what one
has to try and to develop it.
I'm so happy here, you have important. We should love. People
don't even love in their own families. I
come all the way to celebrate this first
day-First day of your growth as Sahaja
Yogis. Now if the Sahaja Yogis spread They love their own families their own
out and become Sahaja Yogis and village, their surroundings and all. But
Sahaja Yogis, then your job is finished
because then you are enjoying the joy fighting and all kinds of trouble. The
of oneness. So one has to do it in a
way that we all become one. There is
nothing to criticize or to hate anyone.
But to love each other is the point and
there I find there are so many Sahaja enjoyment you should feel and give it
Yogis who have achieved that loving
level and there are some still who are
struggling! They haveri't come up to Yogis are doing that and you are
the level, some, not many. Sahaja seeing the mistakes of others and not
Yoga means we are one. We are all let any body get into trouble. Love is
Sahaja Yogis but not separately,
together. If one understands this fact,
you have celebrated today's great day
of Adishakti.
am not talking to such people I know.
still world is going on with the wars,
whole world has to come up to love
each other. There is no other solution
but to love and in that love there is no
selfishness but enjoyment and that
to others.
I'm sure that you all Sahaja
the message of Adishakti. Now you
think about it, one Adishakti created
the whole world! How She must have
done it? What She must have planned?
How She must have organized it? It is
not an easy thing. Only because She
loved. Her love is the expression that
you are all there and that is why to be
one with Her, one must learn to love.
Of course in that you have to know
that you should forgive. If you don't
know how to forgive and find mistakes
of other people, you won't help in.
What is now your job is that is to see
that you are loving. That there is no
hatred for anyone. You don't think of
hating someone or hitting somebody.
other. We have to have all kinds of This has to workout. I'm sure this will
workout. In all the European and Indian
love, it is not just a ritual, it is love. countries, those who are developed
are fighting and those who are not
developed are fighting. They have their
Why did Adishakti create this
world? Why did all this happen? Why
don't we think that why so much of
love, so much of prosperity has been
given to us? We never realize where
are we and how much we have got. It
is not the money but the love and
when you will understand we really
love each other and there is no
hatred, there is no revenge. Nothing.
But just love and love and love
and this is what is the message of
today. We have to be loving each
rituals but it is only expression of our
When you have the love of the Mother,
how do you express? In the same way
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Issue: 9 & 10
2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
own style of fighting. That's the only
difference. But there is no love. If you
love for each other and we should
have understanding. Look at the small
want to have love then you feel sorry. children, they love each other. They
haven't learnt yet how to hate. But if
the children are not brought up well
this country is very bad, the people they can hate each other. They can be
very ridiculously funny. And so many
countries today are like that. They are
just fighting because they do not love.
So now, Sahaja Yogis have much
greater job, much greater life that they
have to show that love is a very great
thing. It doesn't matter whether you are
Hindu, Christian, this that nonsense.
We are all human beings and we
have a right to love and if you
manage somehow to love people, I
think then Sahaja Yoga will settle
down. Sahaja yoga is like a tree
which requires love as the water.
Try this, try around your life and you
will find that how love pays itself. Not
to be seen how much you spend, or
what you do. It's not (that) you count all
those things, it is just like an ocean
soaks everything around. You become
like that, a typical personality of
Supposing I see some country X then
it is very easy for me to criticize, that
are bad, this is bad, that is bad. ButI
think potentially they are all fine people
and very good people. Some how or
the other I shall make them understand
what love is and enjoy love. There will
be no problems of any kind. Only
human beings know how to love, no
body else. Animals also love but their
love is so limited. But human beings,
their love is so beautiful. They look
beautiful only when they love.
So I have to tell you not to
make cheap love, but a love that you
will enjoy and that another person will
also enjoy. It is something to be
understood,
understand love is sometimes very
ridiculous. So one has to first
understand what is love, also to
understand whether you love or not. If
you really love the world, you really
love this creation of God. There should Sahaja Yoga. So all the Sahaja Yogis
be no hatered, there should be no
fights. But just to see the good points
as a mother would see her child, you
should see the whole world as a
beautiful piece that God has created
for you.
the
way people
should decide today that we are going
to forgive all the people we hate and
we are going to love all of them. Let
us see if it works out! I am sure it will
work out. Because first of all you are
realized souls and secondly love is the
biggest boon on human beings which
you utilize. There will be no problem of
any kind.
This subject is so lengthy, that
can talk to you for hours, but I have to
just say that if you can understand little
bit of it is that you all should have
So thank you very much!!
00
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-9.txt 
 HERMIT HEART
Life has been oscillating in the muck of ignorance.
Mounting the automation wheel as divine orphan!
There is a wake-up call to your slumbering soul,
The ultimate cosmic fortune is knocking the door to open.
00 Don't look at the world through the mental eye,
Use the window of heart to sketch the unbroken sky,
Forgo the ego forthwith and go ahead to the summit,
Gatecrash into the kingdom of galaxies and thousand suns.
TM
The drop devoid of a watershed will die in wilderness,
The self surroundings are the funeral fencings of the rich,
The frontiers of earth are fully open and unlimited,
All planets exist in collective energy councils as such.
Happiness is plural and common cosmo-chemistry,
Mighty and majestic are myopic, hallow and petty,
Look at the sun for the lavish lasting light,
Stars can stare & twinkle as dependent destinies.
Commence commonwealths of multiple diversities,
Wax like moon endlessly to all mortal hives,
Connect collectivity to the universal cosmopolis,
Absorb the monkey mind in the native meditative drives.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-10.txt 
 10
Issue: 9 & 10
2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
The joy immortal can not be addressed any other way,
You cannot unlock the paradise by the keys of time,
Self realise & spread the testament of thousand crowns,
Kindle the flame in the hermit-heart primitive & prime.
Mother, we cannot fathom or foresee Your powers,
This universe is a mere signature of Your divinity,
The cosmic compositions are drawn & withdrawn at will,
We cannot please or pray the omniscient, whole eternity.
We can only be grateful that you have transformed us,
The Nirmal Yoga has lifted us from the rampant mire,
Under the shield of your blessings and singular love,
The magic vibrations have salvaged your sons out of fire.
Visualise the meaning of Mother's Incarnation,
Her kind glance will steer out every fear and passion,
The cosmic under-currents cure & convert the sick earthlings,
All captivated creeds get merged into the ocean of compassion.
O Mother Divine! you are the breath of the heaven & the light unlimited,
Origin of all shakties & siddhies one can find,
May the Absolute Truth and Glory dwell in this hermitage,
And open Divine vistas to the mind of mankind!
Bhaskar
(Jaipur, India)
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Expectations
(Baba Mama)
(Chaitanya Mela, Maharashtra Sahaja Yoga Seminar, Nagpur-1999)
of God's favour. The optimists will
Present, Omni-Potent and All straight away blame God Himself and
Pervading. In fact, you believe that He they say that this God is not good and
is in every atom. As natural corollary that we should shift to some other
God. In this way you keep on shifting
from God-to-God, but disappointment
is always there. This may even make
atheist,
ultimately. Now take a case where you
God with any
You believe that God is Omni-
of this belief you must also know that
God knows what you want or what
your need is. If the first proposition is
true, then second proposition has to
be true. It would follow therefore that
and an
you anti-God,
those who know that God is Omni-
do not go to
Potent, and All Pervading are bound to
accept that God is All Knowledgeable
and therefore is aware of all your
Therefore,
the
expectations.
expectations are zero, and let us say
that you get 'B' as the reward.
Therefore, 'B' minus zero is 'B' which
problems.
In spite of this fact, we always is always surplus,
You should also distinguish
between your expectations and
desires, and Pure desires. Pure
desire is always for the benefit of the
other and therefore you are entitled to
go to God with certain expectations.
Expectations can be of various types,
but are basically self-centered or are
pertaining to people or relations you
are attached to and then you pray to
God that He should grant you a
particular relief or a job promotion or
some benefit to you or your near ones
carry pure desires to the Divinity. I
once remember, I was travelling with
Shri Mataji from Sydney to Canberra
and it was very hot and the air
conditioning of the car was thoroughly
disappointed, Hypothetically, speaking inadequate. Shri Mataji was sweating
and I was fanning Her with a
etc. When you go with this frame of
mind then most of the time you are
if your expectations are symbolised in
'A' and what you get is, let us say, 'B'
then 'A' minus
newspaper, but I somehow felt that the
heat was oppressive and that the
weather should give some respite to
attribute this disappointment to Her. Reading my mind, She asked me
a question as to what I was thinking,
to which I told Her frankly that I was
curse themselves of not being worthy unable to see Her suffer because of
'B'
is
your
disappointment. And then you have to
someone. The pessimists will attribute
it to their bad luck and will always
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-12.txt 
 - 2007
Issue: 9 & 10
12
The Divine Cool Breeze
connected to your divinity through your
Self-Realization, you should feel
assured that you have been admitted
and made a pure desire that the to the Kingdom of God, that you are
His subject and therefore He is duty-
minutes, dark clouds gathered from bound to look after you irrespective of
what you expect of Him. So please
do not expect when you are in
Sahaja. Only pray to Shri Mataji that
She should make you what She wants
heat. So She told me that I should
make a pure desire and the weather
would change. So I closed my eyes
weather should change. Within five
nowhere and it started raining and the
intensity of heat was thus reduced and
Shri Mataji said, "See, if you make a
pure desire then it will always be
fulfilled."
you to be.
With all my blessings,
Coming back to expectations,
mention here that once you are
Baba Mama
may
alionu
vansi
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-13.txt 
 RESURRECTION-2007
Beloved sisters and brothers,
The inspiring Message of our Divine
Mother, during the Easter celebrations countries) bear the seal of the power
2007 in India, has actualised the
Resurrection of the modern times.
and South Africa, to name some
of these vibrations the dynamism of
collective commitment, projecting this
Through the intensity of Her talk, the love and materializing the resurrection
magnitude of Her words has put of the hearts.
everlasting joy in our hearts. The
tender melody of Her voice has
echoed in all the children of the
Now it is the right appropriate
moment of history to make an oath
that we all desire, all over this planet,
to spread Her Divine Message of
Redemption through a global pledge of
committing oneself to the expansion of
Sahaja Yoga worldwide.
sangha and the depth of Her Call has
filled the Universe with new Divine
Energy and vibrations.
Let us listen to Her Call. Let us
grasp it, integrate it, and absorb it
within us. We should spread Sahaja
Yoga in all the corners of the world,
we should bring peace to humanity, we
should raise the kundalini of the
In the perspective, the WCASY
will dedicate more time and energy to
be at the disposal of the world sangha
in order to coordinate, animate and
motivate our brothers and sisters with
human beings who desire it and we
should give Self Realisation. In one
word, we should resurrect everyone,
the way She has resurrected us.
relevant, adequate ideas and
suggestions, but above all with its
humble inner spiritual input. We will be
more than joyous to intensely interact
with all of you, with your national
We are entering an era where
it is possible for the entire humanity leaders, with their respective councils.
today to reach a new level of We all lack experience, as it is a
consciousness, leading
unprecedented connection with the
Source of all powers, the Source of
Divine vibrations and energy, Shri
Mataji Nirmala Devi. She has granted projects with the purpose to widen our
us the capacity to spread Her light, base of spiritual involvement.
Her truth, Her compassion and love,
through a mass Self Realisation. Lately,
amazing testimonies form different
parts of the world (Turkey, Morocco,
novelty to coordinate on a worldwide
scale, different Self Realisation
actions. Gradually, we are going to
come with themes and development
to
an
The deep goal is to integrate
each other in a web of love, made of
mutual respect. Like climbing on a
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Issue: 9 & 10 - 2007
14
The Divine Cool Breeze
mountain, we all the time need the
help of the other to go higher and
higher. This collective choreography,
involving each one of us in a perpetual this adventure. We have to shape
best
extracting the
process,
enlightened suggestions.
We are just at the Beginning of
movement of attention, will elevate us
by magnifying our bhakti and shraddha.
these ideas, make them strong, alive
and auspicious. My only goal today is
Therefore, we are already to bring to you all these feelings, this
desire to work together, hands in
hands for a Divine purpose, the
proud to announce that a European
realisation day will take place
througiout the continent of July 7th
2007, Such an event has taken place being who is willing to see the light of
in the past and was concluded with
success, leading to the birth of many
new resurrected souls. The European
members of the WCASY have gained and moves not on this earth. The
purpose to resurrect each one human
the Divine Mother in his heart.
Union will transform the world,
the society and everything that moves
a certain experience in conducting this
European Realisation Day and will be
at the disposal of the world sangha to
launch this auspicious day. They are
over joyous to take the road again and
guide us all to make this 7th July
2007, a memorable Sahaja happening.
culture of the Holy Spirit has to
permeate everywhere and in all
beings. Only through the actualization
of this togetherness we are going to
be successful in allowing the cool wind
of the Adi Shakti to blow in the
Sahasrara of Her children.
Moreover, in autumn, at the time
of Diwali, we may even trigger a world
realisation day, with several different
targeted manifestations and events.
We are going to assemble all
the propositions and ideas, from
the four corners of the world, make
them available through a screening
With eternal love and respect,
Your brother Arneau
The World Council for the
Advancement of Sahaja Yoga,
May 11th 2007
(Internet Version)
(6/21/2007)
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Shri Mataji on Shri Kartikeya
Kartikeya represents the great, we can can command it, means it's not that
say the, captor or leader of all the
ganas, of all the, like a Commander-
in-Chief. Ganesha is the King but He what is Kartikeya...(1)
is the Commander-in-Chief and
what we have but in a position we are
to command. I hope you understand
The spirit of Kartikeya that
because German character is to be in
pure, absolute dynamism which doesn't
indulge into nonsensical things
and useless things; which shows
results. (3)
command of everything we are going
to have this puja where the men will be
in command of their spirits and their
manly qualities and women will be in
command of their womanly qualities.
To be in command is different from to
be a master. Master owns it, a
Now in front, in the center here,
is who? Kartikeya, in the center;
Christ is in the center, in the center
itself where the optic chiasma is. Here
outside is Kartikeya. What is
is also lost, we just command it. Kartikeya? Kartikeya is the protector
of Christ. Around Kartikeya, they're all
commander does not own it, He does
not own it that is also lost. Possession
And that is the state we have to come
to now, from Ganesha state to the
state of Kartikeya. The other way
round.
protectors of Christ.(4)
You know Narakasura has
taken his birth, and he's to be killed,
the Sahaja Yogis are going to kill him.
You have to come up to a point and
definitely he can be killed. When
Kartikeya is awakened within you, he
can be killed. But for that you have to
be just like gold, untarnishable. You
need strong people to do that. A
sword that can kill him has to come
Ganesha is nice, he's the King,
very nicely sitting down with all the
powers, alright? In a sense He's there
but Kartikeya is the one who
commands innocence, gives you a
power of that commandment. He
commands. After the Guru Puja it's
better that we should have the power
out of your mettles. Then Narakasura
can be killed. He is one of the worst
that
others and
to command
commanding spirit comes in the men
through their talking, through their possible asuras. That is the fourteenth
dynamism, through their personal day. When he was killed, the gate of
achievements; for the women through hell was opened and all those where
their loving power, through their his disciples or his followers or
forbearance, through their gracious satanic people were put. That's the
behaviour, forgiveness, compassion. only day you can sleep late and a
So let us develop that today, that we
good news for you. (2)
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Issue: 9 & I0
2007
16
The Divine Cool Breeze
right mooladhara improves our right
side also becomes better; for two
About Right Mooladhara
When it comes to clearing
reasons:
Mooladhara we usually miss out right
mooladhara. Right Mooladhara is the
chakra which is abode of Shri
Kartikeya. He is the one who protects right mooladhara directly cures right
us from the demonic forces. Right Agnya, and it also repairs the
Since Mooldhara is directly
associated with our Agnya chakra, so
1.
Mooladhara is the chakra which
weakened ego-controlling Rudra on
our forehead. (Out of 11 rudras
present on our forehead two are
present to control our Ego and
Superego)
manifests Wisdom and Surrendering
of Shri Ganesha. Right Mooladhara is
also important as out of eleven
Ekadasha Rudras two are Shri
Ganesha and Shri Kartikeya. The
Rudras protect us from satanic attacks
and give us strength to fight negativities. develop shraddha and enlightened
Therefore, right Mooladhara becomes
equally important for clearing & knowledge).
strengthening our left side. It is
observed that when our right
Mooladhara improves our catching of
left Swadhishthana also reduces.
As an effect of reduced ego we
2.
mind (which has Divine discretion and
One cannot describe how He
after His mother, it's
looked
impossible. No words can describe
the understanding of Christ for His
Mother, His love, His gentleness, His
care, His devotion, dedication, His
'SHRADDHA' cannot be described.
Shri Kartikeya also keeps
supervision over Hell. Shri Bhairavnath
fighting
possessions in us, touches right
Mooladhara and therefore works in
against spirit
while
And you know that He came as an
evolved Shri Ganesh and at the back
coordination with Shri Kartikeya to
thwart the negativities from our subtle
system back to Hell i.e. from where Rudras, and this, has given him the
they came. The power of Shri highest position.(2)
Kartikeya is also very essential in
preserving our innocence. When the
Kundalini ascends from the sacrum
He is Shri Ganesh, front He is
Kartikeya, very powerful, eleven
Prayers/Affirmations/Techniques to
improve Right Mooladhara
bone to Sahasrara, right Mooladhar
plays an important role in clearing out
the blockages in the path of Kundalini.
1. Keep right hand towards Shri
Mataji's photograph and left hand
on Mother Earth and pray- "Mother
kindly purify and improve my right
It is observed that when our
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-17.txt 
 17
·2007
Issue: 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
• Left hand toward Mother and
mooladhara", "Shri Mataji verily
you're the slayer of all the
demons", "Shri Mataji please
make me worthy of you", "Shri
Mataji whatever I do is to please
you", "Shri Mataji please bless me
the qualities of
Kartikeya", "Shri Mataji please
bless me with complete surrender
right hand on the ground. Put
attention on Left Mooldhara.
Take Shri Nirmal Ganesh
mantra, say in your heart -
"Mother by your grace I am
Shri
with
innocent". Meditate for few
minutes.
•Then both hands on the lap, put
and Divine wisdom of Shri
attention on Center Mooladhara,
Ganesha".
Take Shri Ganesh Gauri mantra
2. We can take following mantras:
and say in your heart - "Shri
Mataji please
Innocent". Meditate for few
make
me
a. Shri Kartikeya Sakshat
minutes.
b. Shri Rakshashantri Sakshat
• Then put right hand towards
Mother and left hand on the
c. Shri Rakshasaghani Sakshat
3. Look more towards Mother Earth.
ground (just the opposite of first
step), put attention on Right
Mooldhara. First take Shri
It is also observed that as right
mooladhara improves, our useless
mental activity reduces and inner-
silence augments greatly. Thus right
mooladhara plays an important role in
balancing and establishing Thoughtless
Kartikeya mantra, say in your
heart - "Shri Mataji please
make me worthy of you" and
meditate for a few minutes, then
take Shri Rakshas-Hantri mantra
Awareness.
and again meditate on Right
Mooldhara, also say loudly in
your heart "Mother you are the
destroyer of all the evil in me"
and meditate for a while.
be
this
But
must
not
understood that we need to neglect
left and centre Mooladhara. In fact
without awakening Shri Nirmal
Ganesha and Shri Gauri Ganesha,
Shri Kartikeya cannot be awakened.
• The attention becomes pure
and we go in Thoughtless
Awareness.
Following is the meditation
to improve Mooladhara (as told by
Shri Mataji during Shri Ganesha
Puja 86):
• Finish the morning meditation
with 'Om Twameva Sakshat Shri
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-18.txt 
 TAL Issue: 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
2007
18
Ganesh Gauri Sakshat, Shri Adi
Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala
Devyei Namo Namah .
After experiencing in meditation
and hence realizing by heart, above
described knowledge of Mooladhara
can be effective. Otherwise, it will not
work out properly.
It is observed that after
meditating like this our whole day
passes very nicely. Shri Mataji has
said that if we do this every or
alternate morning (by heart and not
mechanically) for one year, this
meditation develops the entire being
in such a way that all the obstacles in
the path of ascent go away.
Reference:
1. 1986-0713: Women Should Be Women,
Shri Kartikeya Puja, Holzkirchen,
Germany.
2. 1983-1106: Diwali Puja, Hampstead, UK.
3. 1996-1221: Shri Kartikeya Puja, Mumbai,
India Tour
4. 1981-0904: Advice on Ekadasha Rudra,
London
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-19.txt 
 FATIMABI PUJA
St George, Switzerland, 14.08.1988
(Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
Gruha Lakshmi Principle
We are here to do the Puja of another incarnation of Brahmadeva,
who came on the earth, Ali came on
this earth. He was the incarnation of
Fatimabi who was the symbol of
Gruha Lakshmi and so we are going
to have the Puja of the Gruha Lakshmi
principle within us. As a housewife has
to finish every work, everything in the
household and then she goes for a
bath, in the same way this morning I
had to do lots of things, and then I
could come for your Puja because
today the housewife's jobs were many,
Brahmadeva, and His another
incarnation was Sopandev, which you
can go to Pune, you can see the
temple of Sopandev there. (Pause on
tape)
So we have Ali and his wife,
Fatima, who incarnated on the
principle of the left Nabhi. She stayed
so I had to finish them like a good
housewife.
in Her house, in Her household, and
She observed what you call a kind of
a purdah, or naquab as they call it, to
cover Her face - is a symbol that a
woman who is a housewife has to
save her chastity by covering her face;
because She was a beautiful woman
and they were born in a country which
Now, the principle of Gruha
Lakshmi has been evolved and
developed by the Divine: it is not a
human being's creation, and as you
know, it resides in the left Nabhi. The
Gruha Lakshmi is the one that is
represented in the life of Fatima who
was the daughter of Mohammed
Sahab. Now She is always born in a
relationship to a guru which is of
virginity, of purity. So She comes as a
sister, or She comes as a daughter.
Now the beauty of Fatima's life is that
after the death of Mohammed-Sahab, Christ did not want anybody to know
was very, very violent, and She would
have been definitely attacked in case
She had not lived in that kind of
fashion. As you know, in the time of
Christ,
Mary
though
was
Mahalakshmi's incarnation, had to be
a very, very potential personality and
as usual there were fanatic people who
thought they can take the religion into
their hands and can make it a very
fanatic thing, and the the attention was
not paid so much towards the ascent
of the person. Even Mohammed sahab
has described His son-in-law in many
what She was. But though She was in
the house, She was Shakti. So She
allowed her sons or actually ordered
them to fight those fanatics who were
trying to deny the authority of Her
husband and you know Hassan and
Hussein, they were killed there.
ways and He is the only one of
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-20.txt 
 2007
Issue: 9 & 10
20
The Divine Cool Breeze
Shias. Shia word comes from Sia in
It's a very beautiful thing how
the Mahalakshmi tattwa of Sita took a
U.P. Sita is called as Sia. Sitaji is
called as Sia. They also did not
realise that there are saints who are
form of Vishnumaya just to establish
the beautiful principle of a housewife.
Now She was very powerful, no doubt,
and She knew that Her children will be
not socalled muslims, but they are
siants. So they could not get out of it.
So we have another one called Haji
killed but these people are never
killed, they never die, nor do they Malang who was worshipped by
suffer- it's a drama they have to play Hindus, some Muslims also go there,
to show people how stupid they are!
But as a result of that another system quite worried about the fanaticism of
started where they respected saints,
like in India Shia people respect
Auliyas or we can call them the people
who are realised souls like the
no doubt, and this Haji Malang was
the Shias, so he appointed some
Hindus to worship him, just to
counterbalance. They did all kinds of
things. There are many saints like that.
Nizamuddin Sahab, then we have got I went to Bhopal, there's another big
Chisti we have got in Ajmer, Hazrat saint who was buried, but his all
Chisti. All these great saints were
respected by Shias, but still they could
not transcend the limits of the
disciples were just depending on the
earnings of that place, which was very
bad. Even Hazrat Nizamuddin things
religiosity, so they also became
extremely fanatic. Firstly they would
not see to another religion where they
had saints, they would not respect the
saints who belonged to another
religion and even when we had a
great saint like Sai Nath of Shirdi who
was a Muslim to begin with, and it is
said that Fatima Herself brought him
as a child in Her lap and gave him to
some lady, it is said so.
are in the same way as the Hindus
do. They all make an earning, I mean
it's a kind of commercial business. So
this saint died and was buried there
and there were many people who
were depending on it when I went
there. 1 just by the way asked them,
"What is your religion?" So they said,
"We are Muslims." I said, "What was
the religion of the saint who died?"
They said, "Saints have no religions.
So I said, "Then why do you want to
follow religion, why don't you follow
His religion?" "He had.(...) They
have no religion. Even as it is said in
Sanskrit, the Sanyasis have no
religion. They are dharmatit, they go
beyond the religion." But as it has
happened with every incarnation, it has
We did not deny, as far as the
concerned,
His
Hindus
were
saintliness, but the Muslims did not
accept him. There's another one
called Haji Malang who is very near
Bombay who was a realised soul. He
too realised the fanaticisms of the
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Issue: 9 & 10 - 2007
21
The Divine Cool Breeze
Lakshmi was specially created to
overcome that hatred, to subdue that
the Muslims and everyone that they icy stuff called hatred, to remove from
the minds of the people hatred, this
Lakshmi, Gruha Lakshmi, principle
was created. How? In the family when
you have a household the Gruha
Lakshmi principle has to subdue the
hatred between the children, between
the husband and the children, but if
She herself enjoys her hatred, then
how can she subdue it? She is the
happened even with the Shia people,
with the Sunnis, with the Hindus, with
made a fanatic group.
itself is
Now fanaticism
absolutely against religion, against
your innate religion within yourself,
because it creates poison, it's a
venomous thing, it makes you hate
others. When you start hating others,
then it reacts in you as horrible poison
which eats up all that is beautiful in
source of that peace which subdues
hatred. Now in India we have joint
families. You too have relations like
uncles, aunties, this, that. The
housewife's job is to smooth, smooth
out all angularities of people which
create friction.
you. Hating anyone is the worst thing
that human beings can do, but they
can do it, they can do whatever they
like. Animals don't hate anyone, can
you imagine? They don't know how to
hate. They bite someone because that
is their nature, they cut someone
because that is their nature. They
never hate someone- they may not like
someone, but this hatred which is a
poison is a speciality of human
conception and human absorption.
Only human beings can hate. And this
horrible thing hatred was settled
Now the man has to worship a
housewife. It's said so, "Yatra Narya
Pujjyante, Tatra Ramante Devata.'
Wherever the housewife is respected,
there only the Gods reside. In our
country I must say credit must go to
the housewives because we are no
good for economics, no good for
politics, administration, hopeless. Men
folk are useless. They don't know any
household work or anything, women
hatred, in every religion. Now the have kept it to themselves. But our
worst part of the whole thing is that society is first class, it is maintained
one part which hates thinks the other by the women of the household. So
the man has to respect the housewife:
that's very important. If he does not
respect his housewife, there's no
possibility of any Gruha Lakshmi tattwa
being maintained. It's like the
preservation of that principle of a
between even the Muslims which was
not done, this Karbala was not created
for hatred but for love. Everything that
was done for love was converted into
part is the worst of all and the another
part thinks that the first part is the
worst of all. Under what rule, law or
logic they decide? That is their own
lookout. So they club together like
that. Why this principle of the Gruha
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Issue: 9 & 10 - 2007
22
The Divine Cool Breeze
respect, otherwise he's a lost case,
he is finished. He is good for nothing.
housewife. But some men, I mean
many of them, think that it is their
birthright to ill-treat their wives, to
torture them, to say all kinds of things,
to be angry, if she's a good woman.
But if she's a nagger, if she's a bhoot
then they are subdued, completely
First things is that he must see
that the woman in the household is
respected as a Gruha Lakshmi. Then
the blessings flow, but in no way he
should insult her or be unkind to her
and raise his voice or say things to
her. But the wife has to be the one
who is to be respected. I have so
many times said, "If your wife is
dominating, give her two slaps on the
face." Of course, no doubt, she has
not to be dominating; she has to
remove the dominating forces of
others. She is the source of peace,
she is the source of joy and she is the
awe or fear, and they are afraid of peacemaker. If she is the one who
subdued. If the wife is a bhoot then
the husband always, sort of tries to
please her. I mean, extremely kind to
her, he knows she's bhoot, after all,
better be careful. Don't know what time
how the bhoot will come like a snake
on you and if she knows how to nag
or to argument, then also they are
afraid - there's no love. They have no
love or respect for her but they have an
such a woman. Now some women
creates problems, then you can slap
her nicely, bring her to her shape, it's
alright. So the Gruha Lakshmi tattwa
is mutual. It doesn't depend only on
the wife or the husband, but on both
of them. So once if you are making
your wife suffer, your left Nabhi can
never improve. Or if you are a bad
think if they become flirtish then the
husbands are better controlled. But
their basic principle they lose, the
basic Shakti that they have, they lose
and they land up in difficulties.
So the basic principle of a
Gruha Lakshmi is to respect her
chastity, to' respect her chastity outside, wife, your left Nabhi cannot improve.
inside. That is the steadiness of it. Of
course most of the men take
advantage of it. If the wife is docile or
obedient, they make it a point that they
just rule the wife left and right. Alright?
But this woman, the housewife, has to
know that she is not docile. She is
obedient to her own righteousness, to
her own virtues, to her own qualities. If cheapish, childish, young, frivolous
the husband is stupid, alright, he is
stupid like a child, finished. But the
husband has to know that he must
Now in the West, the problem
with the women is this, that they don't
realise what is their part. An 80-year-
old women also would like to look like
a bride. They do not feel their dignity
and enjoy their dignity within
themselves: they are the queens of the
house. But they want to behave like
girls. They don't feel the dignity of their
being. They talk too much, they
behave in a manner that doesn't
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-23.txt 
 2007
23
Issue: 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
These are absolutely absurd things,
they do not look like for any Sahaja
Yogi or any Sahaja Yogini. All this kind
of selfishness, all this kind of seclusion
behove a housewife, like they'll take
out their hands, talk like this as the
fisher women do when they sell their
fish to someone and when they have to
fight. Or they shout sometimes, they is against Sahaja Yoga. But a thing of
shout, also I mean, this... I've heard
they shout and sometimes, they beat
their husbands, that's the limit! They
start always comparing themselves
with the husband, to beginwith. Like, "I
am such a rich man, a rich man's
daughter, I am from such and such
family, my husband is from such a low
family, he has no money, nothing, he is might bring their friends." So she
not educated, so ill treat him, treat thinks of her generosity, she enjoys
a housewife is..." Oh, now, how much
should I prepare for example, there
will be 50 persons coming." So the
husband says, "But only ten are
coming, why do you want to have for
50persons?" But maybe they would
like to eat more." "But then why do
you have 50 plates?" "Maybe they
%3D
her generosity. I have known many like
that, those, they are not even Sahaja
him in a manner that shows no
respect. Such a woman will lose all
her powers. Also in her own ways she Yoginis. They'll say then, "Will you
will feel guilty, she will feel guilty,
because first of all nobody has the
right to look down upon anyone cook too many things
whatsoever, in Sahaja Yoga especially. coming. "No, no, I'll cook;
come, sister-in-law, will you come for
dinner?" "Oh, I'm not coming, you
very few
things, but please come." Then she
Then to look down upon your just starts thinking immediately what
husband is something unbelievable. He
may not be a Sahaja Yogi . alright.
He may not be up to the point but by
your behaviour, by your strength, by
vegetables are available in the market,
what should I get, what is the best... I
mean, I am not their guru, I'm not their
mother, I am just a relation. But they
everything, you can save him, but why
are you losing yourself? By dominating food, they are the giver of food,
others, by strangling others, by making 'Annada,' they are the Annapurnas and
want to express their love through the
your husband a very sort of a frog in
the well, telling him "Oh, we both are
after all, we should enjoy, let's have
our house separately, nobody should
come in the house", even a rat won't
enter that house. Even to say "oh,
these are my children, my husband, my
self is the negative of Sahaja Yoga, is
the negative form of understanding.
this is one of the qualities, the
generosity, if a woman doesn't have,
she is not a Sahaja yogini by any
chance, take it from Me.
Husband may be a little miserly-
doesn't matter, but the wife has to be
very generous and sometimes she
secretly gives money not to her own
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Issue: 9 & 10 - 2007
24
The Divine Cool Breeze
start looking like nothing on earth, you
don't know what sort of women these
children, but to others. Such beautiful
women have to be there in Sahaja
Yoga.
are with big, big muscles, without any
moustaches! So these kinds of stupid
ideas we have, but there is no
subordination of any kind, you are
subordinated to your own dignity, to
But I feel so sorry sometimes,
that the attack comes from the women
of Sahaja Yogis, not from the men on
Me, I'm a woman Myself, and I feel
shocked that the women should attack
your own chastity, to your sense of
honour, and above all, to your
righteousness, because you are
incharge of that, the man who is in
charge has to look after that side.
How many quarrels you create? How
can you be quarrelsome when you are
supposed to become the peacemakers?
Supposing we sent two peacemakers
to some country to make peace and
they cut each other's throat? What will
you say to such a thing? You are the
one who has to smooth down
Me like this, for what? In Sahaja Yoga
there is no domination of any kind but
all these so called idea of servility and
domination come from the false ideas
you have about your own dignity, about
your own understanding. You are not
aware of yourself, you do not know
that you are the queen, nobody can
dominate you. Who can dominate the
lady who rules the household? If
supposing the husband says, "I don't
like this colour", alright leave it for a
while, then somebody will come and
say, "What a nice colour!" "Ah, such a
nice colour? Oh, don't change it." The
woman must understand the men, they
are, they have big eyes, they are not
microscopic. They see everything in a
big way, you see, so today they will
say something, tomorrow they'll forget
about it. And they have no microscope
they are ... above these things.
They are above these things, you must
understand them as they are.
everything. You are the one who has
to bring such expression of love, such
sweet things, that the family itself is
rested in you securely because you
are the mother. The family must feel
secure within you, and this love is your
power. This is your power that you can
give love, and giving love you will find
you will always enrich yourself. I mean,
imagine, what presents I give
compared to what I get, I don't know,
I'll have to build another house. I am
telling them, "don't give me individual
presents, I will not take any individual
presents. " Now still, despite that, I
don't know, just with love if I get
something; With care, that love, you
know, itself manifests. It comes back
to you like poetry. You are sometimes
But if he sits on the horse, I
%3D
must also sit on the horse and fall
down. If he.goes for skiing, 'll also go
for skiing. If he develops his muscles,
I'Il also develop my muscles. It is
coming to that point. I mean, women
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-25.txt 
 25
2007
Issue: 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
this thing She doesn't know if he's
Muslim, he's a Hindu. God knows, she
has two husbands, one husband, like
that .." you see, all kinds of things.
Next morning they forgot about it. I
said, "Alright, let them be there for one
night, It's alright? I can't drive them out
today. One night." Next morning they
forgot that they were living there!
That's like men. First there is such a
surprised. I'll give you one simple
example of My own life which will tell
you how love can work it out.
I was a housewife to begin with
and to end with, I think, and once I
was in Delhi, my daughter was to be
born so I vwas making some, I was
knitting something for her, sitting
outside in the lawn, when three
persons walked into the house-one
lady and two men-and they came and
said, "See now, we are (. .) I'm a
housewife and these two are, one is
my husband and he's a friend of my
husband, and he's a Muslim and we
have come to you for shelter because
we are refugees. I looked at them,
they looked very good to Me, they
looked quite all right. I said, "Alright,
you please settle down in My house."
So I gave them the outside room
which had a kitchen and a bathroom
and the things, and for the gentleman
I said, "There's another spare room,
blasting, such a blasting, I said
"Alright, one night. Now don't shout,
they'll feel hurt. So let them stay one
night, they soothed down. Next
morning they went away for their work,
they had no time, it was a, you see,
only on a weekday they become active
in the household, otherwise they are
inactive. So they went away. It so
happened that these people stayed
with me for one month, then this lady
got a job and she went away with her
husband and this Muslim.
But in the meanwhile there was
you can stay there and the husband
and wife can stay here." In the evening
a big riot in Delhi, very big riot,
because many Hindus and Sikh
people were killed in Punjab. It had a
reflection in Delhi and they started
killing all the Muslims. So 3 or 4 Sikh
people and one or two Hindus came
to my house and they said, "We are
told that you have a Muslim staying
I
my brother came in. He started
shouting at the top of his voice. He
said, "What is this? You don't know
these people! They may be thieves,
they may be this, they might do this...
Then he joined-my husband came and
also joined him because you see they
were friends. So he told him (laughter).
All men are just the same, you see!
So he said, "You see, She doesn't
understand, She's kept these three
persons here who God knows what
they are, they are saying are refugees,
with you." I said, "No, how can
have?" They said, "There is a Muslim,
we have to kill him." I said, "See, I am
wearing such a big teeka, can you
believe it that I could have a Muslim in
the house?" They thought I must be a
real Hindu fanatic, you see. So they
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-26.txt 
 2007
Issue: 9 & 10
26
The Divine Cool Breeze
believed Me. I said, "See now, if you
have to go in my house, you will go on
My dead body for I will not allow you."
So they felt quite frightened, they went
away. So this fellow heard my things
and he came and he said, "I'm
surprised, how did you risk your life?"
I said, "There's nothing. Nothing." His
life was saved. Now this gentleman,
this Muslim gentleman, became a
great poet called Sahir Ludhianvi
and this lady became a great
actress, Achala Sachdev who acts like
a mother. I knew it was they have to
become one day and all that but I "How this lady is here?" He said, "This
didn't tell anybody about it. I said,
now supposing they come to know
am in Bombay, they will just go
mad about Me and I said I have no
Muhurat at least, come to the Muhurat
to the beginning, Muhrat is the one
where you start. So sne came, and I
was there. She looked at Me, and just,
you know, she couldn't believe that she
had seen Me after 12 years. The
tears started rolling her eyes.
Absolutely, she couldn't say anything,
she just came and fell into My arms.
She said, "VWhere were you last, all
these days? l've been trying to trace
you out." And then she started
describing Me, you know. And Sahir
Ludhianvi was there and he said that,
is Her work." "Oh God, why didn't you
tell us, you see, we give our lives for
Her!" And they were all amazed how
they were changed! She said, "No
money, nothing. I'm going to give
money for this project. Nothing doing."
See now, I was a housewife, just an
ordinary housewife. I didn't have so
many rights on my husband's property
or anything, and my brother, another
dominating fellow, both of them put
together, just were about to kill my that
night with their temper and anger. I
soothed them down and then, you
know, when told my husband and my
brother, they were amazed. I said,
time for all that.
So we started a film centre for
the young people to give them some
good films but it all made into a farce
later on. They never listened to Me, but
whatever it is. So they said that we
should get this Achala Sachdev to act
as a mother, and I said, "Alright, but
don't tell her I have said, I have
anything to do with it." So, year had
passed, about after I think 12 years or
so. So they went and told her, so she
was fussing like an actress, no, no,
how much are you going to pay me, I
cannot act free, everybody will ask for
free, then how can I give you free,
you'll have to give me a sari, you'll
have to pay so much money this thing,
they said, "Alright, come to the
they are the ones who have become
like this. And see the change, how
much they have, and then they said,
"No more we are going to say no to
any charitable institutions. This is the
last mistake we are have committed."
And the whole, the whole idea of
earning and money, and this and that,
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Issue: 9 & 10 -
2007 27
The Divine Cool Breeze
just toppled down, and she has acted
in many films for charity. And this
Ludhianvi also wrote many things for
charity.
Ahillya Bai, we had many great women
in India because of the institution.
Padmini we had, Chand Bibi, there
are so many women we can mention
who have been great women who
So a woman can make a man
were housewives!
a charitable personality because she
herself is charitable. She has so many
beautiful things, she's an artist and
she can create beauty around her, in
her household, in her family, in her
society, everywhere... but no, women
want to fight like men. They will have
associations, they will have what do
you call that (-) u nions,
They would like to have unions to fight
for their rights. I agree that some of
the men have been extremely cruel,
some of the laws are extremely cruel,
this thing, that thing and that they have
to be told. But this is not the way.
There is another way of improving
these men who try to destroy the
So the woman's quality are like
the potential of the Mother Earth, or
potential of any energy like electricity
has its potential somewhere else. You
see the lights here, makes no
difference, one light or two lights, but
the potential is important. So one has
to understand we have potential and
to preserve our potential we must
have the sense of dignity, honour and
righteousness within ourselves. Now
men must respect their women who
are like this, but men are another
stupid stuff because they will not
respect a woman who loves them, who
is chaste, who is good, who wants
them to be collective, who wants them
to give, to be charitable, who wants
that Sahaja Yoga should be promoted
and the one who wants that her
husband should be happy and joyous
and that he should come to Sahaja
Yoga as well. Instead of that they run
after some funny, stupid women. What
is there to be so attracted towards
bhootish women? Must be some
unions.
women, because women have one
very great quality that Ganas are with
them, and Shri Ganapati is with them.
He will never side with men if they are
chaste and do not try to show off their
body, and show off their beauty and
want to make sort of a capital out of it.
Such women are extremely powerful,
extremely powerful and they show their
valour when it comes to anything. Like
we had Jhansi ki rani - she was an
bhoots in them, I don't know, that the
way they get attracted.
ordinary housewife, she fought the
British. The British also were surprised
at her valour and they said that we
have got Jhansi alright, but the glory
goes to the Queen of Jhansi. Like that
we had many, Noor Jehan, we had
all this
As a result of
misbehaviour of men, women become
very insecure and they get insecure,
as a result the men suffer and the
women suffer. A man who neglects
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-28.txt 
 2007
Issue: 9 & 10
28
The Divine Cool Breeze
is all the time running about, she
doesn't want to stay in the house, then
she is not a housewife, but she is
maid-servant. There's a saying that
there was a lady who was a maid-
his wife and treats like that will
consequently get blood cancer,
and the woman who behaves like
this, in this manner and if she ill-
treats her husband will get asthma
or of a very serious type of servant, and then she was made a
sclerosis - could be brain damage, housewife but she could not stop her
could be paralysis, could be
complete dehydration of the body maid-servant. She doesn't settle in the
because left Nabhi is so
important. If the left Nabhi is made
hectic as you know by your
running about and jumping about
and by being hectic, that left Nabhi
becomes hectic and you develop spread all these beautiful things for
running about because she was a
household. Now for whom is the
household? Is not for only herself, no,
not for her husband, no, not for her
children but for others to welcome.
Like this Mother Earth has
blood cancer.
you to come and sit and enjoy.
There's a very common thing also in
the Sahaja Yoga, we find, that people
after marriage become absolutely
I have always seen that the
women who are thin, their husbands
are jittery. Why? Because the wife is
all the time making him run up and engrossed into each other and lose
down, do this, do that, you didn't bring Sahaja Yoga. Then their children
this thing for me I had asked you to suffer: their children become fussy,
bring the Coca Cola, you didn't bring, funny, and disobedient torturers. They
you didn't do that ... as if he's the
sinner all the time. And the man
have some physical problems also. It's
a punishment. Not that I punish this
but it is your own nature punishing.
Supposing you put your hand in the
fire, it will burn. I mean, who's
punishing you- you are punishing
yourself. Then children become funny.
Just for your family, just for your food,
just for your household, the selfishness,
if it crawls up into man, then God save
that family. If it's a woman, it's alright,
at least little bit, but if the man is a
becomes jumpy, all the time jumpy. He
gets something for the jumping, and
she gets something for her torturing.
There's no love, there's no joy, there's
no happiness. This so-called figure-
madness which is now subsiding,
thank God, it's coming from America
now, subsiding, this figure-madness
makes you funny.
Women have to be settled-
gone case .. that I should have a
house, I should have a job, I should
look after my children, it's for my
family. I mean, our family is not of
down women. They have to be
Gruhasthees, that is the one who
settles in the household. She has to
be satisfied with the household. If she
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-29.txt 
 2007
29
Issue: 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
such a woman.
one man, one woman, but the
whole universe is our family. We
are not on our own, and if you wives and the leaders. The leader's
become arbitrary and if you wife or a leadership is a minimal of a
become secluded, I must tell you minimal of a minimal of a so-called
one thing and warn you today that position: most insignificant. What you
those people who start to seclude
themselves, a day will come when
they will have horried diseases on
them, don't blame Sahaja Yoga.
Sahaja Yoga has its own beautiful
realm of God's kingdom, but in the think their life is service are
God's kingdom you have to be
collective.
It's very true with the leader'
have got is much higher than this. If
you ask a saint to become a king, he'll
say, "What? You want to put the ocean
into a cup?" Is the minimal of minimal3;
is the lowest of lowest. Those who
another stupid people. Their life is
enjoyment, not service. But that
service itself is enjoyment. But if you
just keep to service, "Ah-oh, I'm
sacrificing, this is my tapasya"
finished, then you end up as a Tapasvi
But a bad wife can create
problems because she's [break in
tape] and she'll create a problem,
she'll form a group of people, group of
women, she'll go on rolling down with
her bhoots to everyone. Or maybe
she's very conscious of her education,
maybe conscious of her position or of
her money and all that, then also she'l
try to keep the husband aloof. Such
people have to pay for what they have
done, not because it's a punishment
from God.
like a beanstalk thing, you can be
used for a cross. So in Sahaja Yoga it
is enjoyment, but unless and until you
have that essence of enjoyment into
everything it cannot be an enjoyment.
If you take out the essence from the
canesugar or what you call the
sugarcane bamboo, then what is left?
In the same way, all the so-called
service and seva and tapasya and all
that has no sweetness in it, it's
finished. So all this is sweetness, and
So Gruha Lakshmi tattwa in
Sahaja Yoga is very important. Those
people who have got problems . that is generated by women.
after coming to Sahaja Yoga, most
of them have neglected their Gruha
Laxmi principle, because Gruha
Lakshmi if goes out, then centre
heart catches. Those women
(Long pause in tape, then
repeat of most of the last sentence.)
But they are very strict, "don't
spoil this, keep this nice, keep that
nice!" The husband comes home like
who have tried such tricks should
a, as if like a criminal, you know! He
has to be like a bull in a china shop,
give up immediately. because that's
very indignified, nobody respects
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Issue: 9 & 10 - 2007
30
The Divine Cool Breeze
he has to be. It's good thing in a way.
It's nice he doesn't know how to do
anything, it's even better for you. But to
make him all the time slave - "Do this,
you didn't do this for me, do that for
me" is not the job of a housewife. Her
job is like the Mother Earth - does
She complain? Nothing. She gives
you everything so much, it's the
sustenance in herself, so dignity, such
powers She has, what does She care
for anybody giving her anything?
horried because they think they have
become leaders, but this is the
minimum of minimum. I mean, it's like
a said the ocean coming into a little
cup, and their behaviour becomes so
funny and absured, I am surprised. I
was married in a family where we had
a hundred people living together and
each one of them adores Me. If I go
somewhere in Lucknow, all of them
will come from all over to see Me but
my husband goes, nobody comes to
see him, he always complains. He's
the relation, I'm not the relation and
they come and see Me, not him. If I
had not given them love, if I had not
given them whatever they wanted they
would not have come to Me. So they
You'll be amazed if I tell you
today, till today- till yesterday. I never
asked my husband to buy me
anything. For the first time I asked him
to buy Me a camera and you see the
result in the evening, what he said:
least expected. Never in lifetime. He
. was saying, "You must tell me what
you want." First time I said something
and see the effect because I never
said to him. So such a woman has to
are the preservers, preservers of
others they don't have to preserve
things for themselves.
%3D
Now we have many stupid
women with us, I tell you, many stupid
women. We call them buddhus in Hindi
be self-satisfied, satisfied within her
because She has to give. The person
who has to give, how can she
demand? She has to give love
because she's love, she has give all
the services, she has to give all the
possessions, she has to soothe down:
what a responsibility, ! tell you, what a
responsibility! More than a Prime
Minister, more than any king or anyone
is the responsibility of a woman and
she should feel proud of it, that such
a responsibility has come to me.
language, buddhus because they don't
know what power they have got. They
don't know what responsibility they
have. I'm an example before them and
this is a very big problem with Me that
practically I think 60% leaders have
horrible wives, I must say, horrible. And
Sahaja Yoga goes (dhup) like that.
They can't live in an ashram, they will
have their food, the husband must see
that they have their food, I mean it is
they have to feed everyone, everybody
has to be looked after, at the end they
should eat. Everybody must get a
bed, they must see everybody is
A housewife has a much more
responsibility than a leader of Sahaja
yoga. But the wives of leaders can be
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Issue: 9 & 10 - 2007
31
The Divine Cool Breeze
Gaiti means which penetrates, which
moves into everything. It's the etheric
qualities, etheric, into which you see
we put anything into etheric you can
receive it anywhere. So the raga is
that, this, do that, do this." They don't the energy which goes into the
know how to cook, most of them. ether, and touches your spirit. That
is the raga and these ragas are, I
would say, are something like a
housewife. Supposing if you stand
with a military band, you'll be fed up -
left, right, left, right, left, right - but a
beautiful melody, that's a melodious
thing, melody, and this melody itself is
beginning they might make mistakes, suggesting of a beauty. The way the
housewife decorates the house, she
sleeping now, they must cover all the
children, everything, then they must
sleep. But no, they sit down, the
become mini-Matajis or greater than
Matajis. "Get me this thing, get me
Every wife of a leader has to cook or
learn cooking, it's compulsory now.
They have to cook, and with heart.
They should be able to cook and give
with love to others. That's the minimum
of Annapurna. And the husband
shouldn't find faults with them. In the
then encourage, encourage their
qualities, encourage their goodness, smoothes down everyone, makes
them feel happy, then she's looking
after everyone- everybody knows she's
talking very active life in Sahaja Yoga, standing there. Imagine, like a modern
after marriage they are lost. Husbands style would be you call some people
are also supposed to be Sahaja for a birthday cake of your child and
you cut the cake first because you are
the housewife. How will it look? It is
that ridiculous, I tell you. The way the
housewife always puts forward before
many of them are like that here. That everybody else- they have to be on
the back because you have to look
after, look after all of them. And this is
what is a raga is, it caters to all your
angularities. Supposing a person is
very upset and worried, he comes
from office, sits downs and puts on a
raga - it soothes you down. It makes
you settle down. Like people come
home, for five days live like - I don't
know what to call, not even hotels-but
live in a tent-like thing and the sixth
day they're out at the sea or they go
encourage their niceness. Also I have
seen some very good ladies who are
Yogis, lost! Sometimes they appear,
sometimes if I am there they come,
otherwise they are not there. Today I
was asking Arneau, he told me so
means there is something wrong with
the husbands, because before
marriage they are better off.
So how much it is important the
Gruha Lakshmi principle within us for
us to be together, for us to grow
together, to feel the togetherness all
the time the oneness that is within us.
So yesterday as I told you that I'll tell
you about the ragas we have. Ra is
energy, ga is in Sanskrit language
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-32.txt 
 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 9 & 10
32
and stay in a hotel. Nobody wants to
stay in the house because there's no
Gruha Lakshmi principle between the
doesn't eat food in the house' or he'll
wash his underclothes himself on his
own. That is how they show their
two. But raga needs... better is sitting temper. So then she fans the husband
down, settling down, unless and until slowly, and tells him good things you
see, "Today, you know why, how my
son got up and he said 'I love my
father very much'." He said, "Really?"
"Yes, yes, he said he has said so
..." and husband knows she's telling
lies also, but you see all nice things,
you see, and I think better is your
mother is much better now, I think I'll
go and look after your mother, and
you settle down, you cannot enjoy
raga. Imagine somebody listening to a
raga when he'e jumpy.
So one has to settle down and
that settling down is what is the work
of a woman who is a housewife and
the man has to act, is to settle down.
As I have told you many a times, how
your left Nabhi goes out in the modern
times much more, and many children
are also born of the women who are
your sister is coming so I am thinking
of buying a sari for her .. all such
hectic. Is that the wife normally in India nice, nice things she will talk to him.
before, you see the husband used to
get up, have his bath, all the time his go and wash his hands and go in a
wife is not with him. She's cooking for bullock cart, not in a car where there
him, she's looking after the children is a jam always. Alright, now the
doing. All the time sticking on to
husband also is a sign of boredom.
Husband gets bored, wife gets bored,
then they have a divorce. She must
have other interests like looking after you that on the periphery of the
the children, household, Sahaja Yoga, wheel you have the speed, but at
things like that. Then he comes from the exis it is not, so Sahaja Yogis
the bath, he sits, sits on the ground in have to be at the axis and so the
India, now we are sitting on the tables, husband and wife, the left and the
alright? At least sit on the tables, not right side of a chariot, have to be on
on the table but on the chair, slowly. the axis, and the left is left and right is
Then she doesn't tell him at this time
"Why did you do like this?" or, "This
lady was quarrelling" or "I met another
lady, she was telling me you were this,
and you were that ..." No, she says,
"Let him eat his food." That's why in
India if husband has a show temper he
So he'll eat his food nicely then he'll
bullock cart is over. The fan is over,
you have to be very fast as life is fast
now.
In this fast thing as I have told
right. Now the women always take
more time to get ready, not Me, I take
less than my husband, much less time
than my husband but normally. So that
is their habit. Forget it. The women
have their own habits, they are women,
women will remain women, men will
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-33.txt 
 33
Issue: 9 & 10 - 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
what you need is pure intelligence. If
the husband is a dullard, he'll bring
down his wife. If the wife is a dullard,
she'll bring down the husband. If a
woman is very smart, talks well and
different, but they are women and you she knows how to talk and impress
are men and God has made men and people, doesn't mean that she is very
intelligent. I call that person the
most intelligent who sees the
benevolence, the ascent and the
ultimate goal-that person is the
remain men. Men must see their
watches ten times. Women might see
it once or maybe their watches are lost
or out or order, if they are real women,
they are not jumpy like men. They are
women. If it was to make a unisex, He
would have made a unisex. He did
not. So one must accept the sex in
which you are born with grace and
beauty and dignity, both, and you must
know this is women's party.
most sensitive, is the
most
intelligent. All other intelligence is
Avidya, is useless. Now on the subject
I think I can write a book, so better
leave it to the book and today let us
have the Puja. May God bless you.
In India we have such a thing,
like you know I was married in a
family, very orthodox where they used
to even cover the face and all that. So
one day the collector who is a friend
of my husband so he told my elder
brother-in-law "Now why not the wife of don't know, there's no chace, I don't
my friend come and see me?" He
said, "Of course, of course." So just to
make it easy for me he took leave
from his office and disappeared into
another town, and he told his wife that,
Any questions? (Silence) This
means l'll be spending some money. I
know when will I spend. I love to
spend, I mean everybody should love
to spend. That's why the money is for.
One must give to others, you see why
the matter is there, matter is to give
see, that she goes and sees the to others, just enjoy giving others. So
collector. See how beautiful it was!
How beautiful it was, andI never felt
that he was dominating me because
after all that was the system of that
family, alright, it's alright. But for this
enjoyable to give something to others.
May God bless you
(Checked with the Audio)
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-34.txt 
 SHRI HANUMANA PUJA
Schwetzingen, Germony, 31.8.1990
(Pravachan of Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi)
Today we have come here to do
Hanumana's Puja. Shri Hanumana is
a great character in our being and he has it in His own stomach. So the
runs all the way from Swadhishthana
to the brain and he supplies all the
stomach." Because He thought that
this sun will be controlled better if He
beauty of His character is that He's a
child. And the child-like behaviour of
Shri Hanumana has to control the right
side. If there's a right-side then people
don't get children, normally. If they're
over-right-sided, then even they get
children, but they are really not liked by
the children, because they have no
time for children, they all the time are
very strict with the children, they shout
necessary guidance we need in our
futuristic planning or in our mental
activities. He gives us guidance and
protection.
As you know that Germany is a
place where people are very active,
very right-sided, use their brain too
much and they are very machine-
oriented also. It is very surprising how at them, they don't know how to
the deity like Shri Hanumana, who is
an eternal child, because He was like
a monkey-His head was that of a
monkey, if not of an elephant. So, he
handle the children.
Or they are over-indulgent,
because they always think that, "I never
got this, so let me give it to the child."
So these extreme type of people who
are right-sided have got this
Hanumana who is nothing but a child.
He is very anxious, very anxious to do
the work of Shri Rama. Now, Shri
was an eternal child and He was the
one who was used to run the right
side of human beings. He was told
that, "You must control the sun", to
begin with. He has to control the sun,
that the sun in the people, if there is
too much sun.", then He must try to
control it and make it cooler or
Rama is a character, I would say,
which is full of balance, absolutely. He
is the benevolent king which Socrates
has described. So he needed
smoother. So, He was a child, after all,
somebody with him all the time to do
the work or to supply him or to help
him, like a secretary you can call Him.
And Shri Hanumana was the one who
so as soon He was born, when he
knew that He has to look after the sun
He said "Why not eat it off?" So He
went... Ran up the Virata's body and
ate up the Surya.
was created for this purpose for Shri
Rama he was such a assistant, I
There He had to be told "No,
mean, you cannot have such a word
for him, you can say, such a servant
no, no, You have to control Him You
don't have to put Him inside your
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-35.txt 
 35
2007
Issue: 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
the tail around anywhere. If He wants
of Shri Rama. Even the servants, you
He can just make a mountain of His
tail and sit on that. He has all these
monkey-tricks as you can call them,
you see. And all these tricks He has
within himself is to control a person
who is extremely right-sided, to begin
see, don't have that much of
dedication for their masters. You can
say, like a dog or a horse, but that
also doesn't have. Such dedication for
Shri Rama that by the time He grew up
He got nine Siddhis, Navadha
Siddhis. Nine Siddhis he got.
with.
Then He can fly in the air. Just
He doesn't have any wings, but He
can just fly in the air. That means He
can become so big that the amount of
air He displaces has a much more
weight that his now weight. Just the
same principle of Archimedes, if you
know the Archimedes principle. That
He becomes so big that His body
starts floating in the air. Like a boat,
These Siddhis are like this that
He could become big; He could
become so heavy that nobody could
lift Him. He could become so
Sukshma that nobody could see Him.
He could become so subtle that
nobody could see Him.
There are nine Siddhis that He
got. So, a person who has got the
right side too much in him, He controls
him with these nine Siddhis. Now, how
will you control a man who is running
very fast in his life? What He does is
to control his movement, He makes
him in such a way that he has to put
down his speed. He makes his feet
very heavy, now he can't do that much.
Or He makes his hands very heavy so
the person cannot work very much with
his hands. So He can give a
tremendous kind of a lethargic
heaviness to a person who is a very
you see, you can call it. And He can
fly in the air. And by flying in the air He
can carry the messages from one to
another through the ether. Now, the
subtle of the ether that we have is
of Shri
Hanumana. He is the one who controls,
or is the Lord of this Ether, the subtle
of the ether. Or say, the causal of the
ether. And through it, it communicates.
All the communications that you find
like we have within ourselves also-
the
under
command
ductless glands, which the pituitary is
using that ductless glands is through
right-sided person. He has got another
Siddhis, which are very interesting is
that He does not have many weapons,
He had only a Gada in his hand and
He can extend His tail to any extent
and He can handle people with His
tail. He does not have to use His
Hanumana's movement. Because he
can go into a Nirakar, He can go into
formless state.
Also the communications... we
know for this communication that we
hands. Sitting down here, He can put
have, maybe we can say that there is
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-36.txt 
 36
2007
Issue: 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
a, we have got a loudspeaker, but we
have television, we have got radios- sulphur dioxide, if we have the sulpher
and all those things where we catch
on to the ether, anything is all the on pulsating like that. They are
blessings of Hanumana and are
available to people who are right- vibrations, you all must be knowing
sided. Only the right-sided people about it. So, all these things,
discover these things of the space symmetric and asymmetric vibrations
which we call as a cordless telephone
or a thing without... we have also
telegraphs where we don't use any
wires. So without any connection,
through the ether He can manage. So
all the ethereal connections has been
you know that we get molecules like
has two oxygen and the oxygen goes
asymmetric, symmetric type of
are created by whom? Nobody wants
to know. Nobody wants to find out,
because after all in an atom or
imagine, in a molecule that deep, who
does that job? It's done by Shri
Hanumana in His subtle ways.
done by this great engineer Shri
Hanumana. And it is so perfect, it's so
perfect that you cannot challenge it
and you cannot find faults with it.
Maybe your instruments may not be all
right, but as far as His ethereal work
is concerned He's perfectly there. Now
the scientists discover it and think that
So, He has another great,
great siddhi, which we call as Anima.
Anima, Anu, Anu, means a molecule.
And that means it can enter into a
molecule or Renu-is the atom-it can
enter into molecule or into atom. Now,
many scientists think that they have in
the modern times they discovered the
molecules. It's not so, because it's
it is in the nature. But they never think,
"How can it be?" We say something already in our oldest scriptures
in the ether and how is it, it is description of Anima is there, is of
received on the other hand? They just Anu, Renu is there. So, it's already
take it for granted that it is so that we
say something here or we relay
something on the television and it is
seen on the other side. But they you see the electromagnetic force is
never even think or search out how it
is done, what is the way. And this is
what is the work of Shri Hanumana
discribed there.
Now, then, whatever wherever
working it is worked through
Hanuman's blessings. He is the one
who creates electromagnetic forces.
So, now we can see that as Ganesha
has got the magnetic force in Him, He
is the magnet, He has got the
magnetic force. Then we can say the
electromagnetic is the one which we
call as Hanuman's force, on the
who has done such a beautiful network
and through that network all these
things work out.
So, even on the right side the
vibrations we get in the molecules, as
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-37.txt 
 2007 37
Issue: 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
goes on degreeing to us, "Now, you
have crossed this Chakra, that Chakra,
that Chakra." And He helps us to know
that what state we are in.
material side of it. But from the matter
He goes up to the brain. So, He rises
from Swadishthana up to the brain. So,
in the brain also He creates the co-
relationships of different sides of our
brain. So, how much He gives us, I
mean, we can say, if Ganesha gives Thoughtless Awareness, and Nirvikalpa
us the wisdom, then He gives us the
power to think. He protects us also
that we should not think of bad things.
That is, we can say that, that if
Ganesha gives us the wisdom then
Shri Hanumana gives us the
So,
Ganesha gives us, say, Nirvichara
Samadhi, which we can call it as the
Samadhi. He gives all that and also
He gives us joy.
But the understanding that "this
is good, this is for our benevolence",
mental understanding comes to us
from Shri Hanumana. And it's very
important for western people, because
it has to be mental otherwise they
won't understand. If it is not mental
they cannot come into abstract, it has
to be mental. And so the mental
conscience.
I hope you understand the
difference between the two. Wisdom is
where you do not need conscience so
much because you are wise: you know
what is good, what is bad. But
conscience is needed in a personality,
where he is to be controlled and that
understanding of whether it is good or
bad is given to us by Shri Hanumana.
Without Him, even if you become a
saint, you will be, of course you are a
saint and you will enjoy the saintliness-
all
control comes from Shri Hanumana,
which is the conscience in the human
being. Now, this conscience, which is
Shri Hanumana, is the subtle form of
Him, which gives us is in Sanskrit
called as Sat-Sat-vivekbuddhi, means,
but whether this saintliness is
right, if you live on Himalayas, or is all
right when you go across to people to
give them realisation. All the scanning
this Vivekabuddhi, all the scanning, all
this discrimination, all this guidance, all
this protection is given to us by Shri
Sat means truth, Asat means untruth
and Viveka means the discrimination
and Buddhi means the intelligence.
So, intelligence to discriminate
between the truth and untruth is given
to us by Shri Hanumana.
Hanumana.
Germany, being a country,
which is very much, I should say, an
essence of right side. And because of
it being such an essence of right side
it's important to get the protector of
right side here worshipped. But in all
that Vivekabuddhi, in that discrimination
In the Sahaja Yoga system, if
we say that Ganesha is the one who
gives us, He is the Adhyaksha, means
He is the, I call Him as the chancellor
of the university. He is the one who
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-38.txt 
 2007
38
Issue: 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
their bosses, surrendered to their jobs,
sometimes surrendered to their wives
He knows one thing that He is
absolutely subservient to Shri Rama.
Now, what is Shri Rama? Shri Rama
is the benevolent king. He works for
also, - but they are subservient to
wrong people, they have
discretion. You'll always find that, they
have. no discretion. But if you take the
help of Hanumana then He tells you
no
the benevolence. And Shri Rama
himself is a formal king, like
Sankocha, we call 'it, I mean, the
English words are not so good to that you have to be surrendered to
explain it, but Shri Rama is the one
who is - who will not push forward
Himself. He keeps back and He is
very balanced, He is very poised
person. So the Hanumana, you see,
He is the one who is always anxious
to do the work of Shri Rama, always.
If Shri Rama says, "All right, you go
and get the..." -He told Him, "Go and
get the Sanjeevani", is the kind of a
herb that was needed to bring
God Almighty and not to anybody
else. Or to your Guru like Rama.
Otherwise you are
surrendered to anybody else and then
you are a free bird and you have all
the nine powers within yourself.
Hanumana's whole thing is to antidote
not to be
your over-activity, to antidote your too-
much-thinking, to antidote your ego.
Now, how He finishes the ego
of people is very sweetly shown when
He burnt the whole of Lanka, is the
capital of Ravana. And the way He
made fun of him, because, you see,
anybody who is egoistical, one must
make fun of him, then he is all right.
Like, first He went and when Ravana
saw Him he said, "Who are you The
monkey"? So He just pushed His tail
Lakshmana to life. He went there and
He brought the whole mountain with
Him, "Now get and have it!" It's like
that sort of a person, you see. So, He
brought the..-that's childlike behaviour
of His. And the discrimination in this
is that that, if Shri Rama has asked
for, whatever he'll ask for l'll do it. So,
it's a relationship of, I would say, like
a Guru and Shishya. But even more
then that that the Shishya is just like a
subservient servant, absolutely
surrendered to God, absolutely
towards him and tickled his nose with
His tail.
So, He is the one who makes
fun of egoistical people, Now, if
somebody egoistical tries to trouble
you He's the one, He'll make such fun
out of him, that he'll be amazed how
this fellow was jumping like a humpty-
dumpty has fallen down and has
broken his crown. So, see, it is the
job of Hanumana to protect you
surrendered to God and His main
theme is surrender. Now, see this
surrender itself shows that all those
who are right-sided people are
surrendered to God. Not surrendered
to their bosses. Mostly all those right-
sided people are very surrendered to
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-39.txt 
 Issue: 9 & 10
39
2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
from egoistical people. And also He become friends and become mild. So,
His whole character within us acts as
to see our ego, discriminate that "Oh,
Saddam - in the case of Saddam I this is my ego that is working." And
just asked Hanumana to do the job then to become childlike and sweet,
mirthful and happy. He's always in a
He has put this Saddam into different dancing mood, all the time He is
dancing and before Rama he is
always bowed down, and always
wants to do whatever is the desire of
protects the egoistical people by
showing them down. Like, say,
because I know He'll do it. Now, how
circumstances that he doesn't know
what to do. He doesn't know how to go
because supposing, he says "All right,
'll have war," so the whole of Irag will
be finished, he'll be finished, Kuwait
will be finished, all petrol will be
finished, all right, everybody will be in way I would say if Germany, as Philip
trouble. But what about him? He won't
be there, too. Because if the become like Hanumana, then what a
Americans have to fight they'll go in his dynamic force we have, if they
place and fight. They won't fight in become so subservient. And the
America, he is not going to go to subservient nature of Hanumana is
America to fight them. Few Americans
may be dead. So now; in this know the story os Sita when She
Saddam's brain also Hanumana is
Shri Rama. So if Ganesha stands
behind Me, Hanumana stands here at
My feet. And He's there. In the same
has asked Me, that if Germany can
seen to such an extent that as you
gave a necklace to Him and He
wouldn't wear it, because inside there
working and telling him, "Now see,
Mister, if you do like this then this will
happen."
was no Ram.
Once Sita felt that all the time
He works into the brains of all
he is around and so He is sort of
cutting out Her Privacy. So She said,
"Now, You can be there only for one
work, You need not to do every work."
He used to do every work of Shri
Rama, only for one work He should
be there. You choose which work you
want to do. He said that "Only, you
see, I would like to be with Shri Ram,
that whenever He Sneezes I should do
like this." You see, in India, when we
sneeze, we have to do like this with
this (Shri Mataji is snipping Her
the politicians, all these egoistical
people. And then they get sometimes
stunned, sometimes they change their
policies, they come round and that's
how they manage.
Also another great quality of
Hanumana is that he makes... makes
people sort of an arbitrators. He
makes people meet each other and
two egoistical people, He will make
them meet and then He will create
1
such a situation that they both
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-40.txt 
 40
Issue: 9 & 10
2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
Now, My as a Guru, My main concern
is that you should learn all about
go out. So we do like this, if you Sahaja Yoga. You should become
experts of Sahaja Yoga and you should
yawn, then also (Shri Mataji is become yourself the Gurus. This is the
snipping Her fingers) we do like that - only concern I have. But for that
complete surrender is required. Islam
means surrender. So, you have to
surrender. If you are surrendered then
only you can learn what is the way you
will handle Sahaja Yoga. Now, even
this surrendering is done by Shri
fingers). Because the sneezing, see,
avoids.. to avoid all the negativity to
sneeze. Or, if you feel sleepy and you
mostly.
So He said whenever he will
yawn, You allow Me just to (Shri Mataji
is snipping Her fingers) this we call as
chutki, I don't know what you call this
chutki. "Allow Me to do this."
Hanumana.
Sita said, "This is something
very little work, you see, this fellow
then He will be out of sight."
He is the one who teaches you
how to surrender or makes you
surrender. Because egoistical people
So He stood there. She said, don't surrender. Then He puts some
sort of hurdles or some sort of
miracles or some tricks by which then
a disciple surrenders himself to the
Otherwise he
"Now, why are You standing here?"
"I am waiting for that. So how
can I go?"
is
Guru.
not
And that's how She granted, surrendered, he finds it difficult to
surrender and the force that acts to
make him surrender to the Guru is
first She granted, "Alright, given to you
this job." Now She can't take it back
because She granted to do this job.
So He is always there like this,
standing, just to do this (Shri Mataji is
snipping Her fingers) to Shri Ram.
also that of Hanumana. So not that he
is only surrendered but he makes
others also to be surrendered.
Because only... because of ego you
cannot surrender - so He is the one
So, 1 mean, the sweetness of
the whole thing is that every time, who fights your ego and He puts it
every minute He is subservient, He is down and makes you surrender. So, in
attentive, He is there. Also in Sahaja what He has shown that there's a
Yoga I have relationships with you
as a Guru, as a Mother and I
don't know, unlimited. But still. it is to be perfectly enjoyed then
these two relationships we know that
I am your Mother and l'm your Guru.
His own, expression I would say that
very beautiful area of right side. If
completely
should
be
you
surrendered to your Guru as if you
are the servant of that Guru.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-41.txt 
 Issue: 9 & 10 - 2007
41
The Divine Cool Breeze
Shri Ganesha gives Energy-Shakti,
but the one who protects is Shri
Hanumana. So you'll find that when
Whatever you have to do for that
Guru, you have to do it.
Of course you must know that
Shri Krishna was the charioteer of
your Guru has to give you realisation
minimum, otherwise that's not a Guru.
But anybody who has given you the
realisation you have to so surrendered
that you should be just like a
servant, not to feel shy about it.
Like, I would have sometimes, you
know, I am going by say, I'm going
by aeroplane and sometimes I cannot
wear my shoes, because they are so
swollen up. So normally I would take
the shoes in my hands and walk
about. But I have seen Sahaja Yogis because He is always the messenger
they pick up My shoes also and walk to Maria. And surprisingly the words
with me and they don't feel shy about
it. They feel so proud that they are
carrying My shoes. So one should feel
proud that you are doing all these
things, that you have a chance to do
all these things for your Guru and that
you are surrendering to that Guru, you
are absolutely only bothered as to how
you can serve the Guru, how you can
please the Guru and how you could Hanumana all Her life. That means
be closer to that Guru. It doesn't mean
Arjuna then on top of the chariot was
sitting Hanumana, not Shri Ganesha.
Hanumana was sitting there looking
after Him. Also in a way that Shri
Rama Himself becomes Shri Vishnu,
so He has to look after him.
He is an angel as you know,
according to Christian, we should say,
according to Bible, that He is the angel
called Gabriel. Now, Gabriel is the
one who brought the message,
He used were "Immaculata Salve".
That's my name. My first name is
Nirmala, means Immaculata and
surname is Salve. He said those
words to Her. And today also I was
surprised when it came to giving Me a
present they found a tea-set and
dinner-set which is called as "Maria".
So, Maria has to do quite a lot with
Maria is the Mahalaxmi. Mahalaxmi
physical closeness but a kind of a
rapport, a kind of an understanding.
Even those who are away from Me
can feel Me in their heart. And this
is what it is that we have to get this how did you know? Mother, how
power from Shri Hanumana.
being the Sita. Sita, then Radha.
Hanumana has to be there to serve.
And that is why, you see,
sometimes people say, "Mother,
did you come to know? Mother,
how did you send the message?
Mother, how did you work it out?"
Can you imagine, this is Shri
Hanumana's headache, He does it.
Now, He is the one who
protects also all the deities, He
protects. Now, there's a difference
between Shri Ganesha and Him. The
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-42.txt 
 2007 42
Issue: 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
Anything passes through My mind
He just takes it up and it's done,
point and then it recoils. When they
act stupidly it recoils and then they
because as I told you that His whole know that we have done such a big
mistake or it was all stupid. But
these messages, from where do they sometimes it could be extremely,
arrive? Many people say, "Mother, I just extremely difficult to retrace back like
the diseases, as I call the "Yuppie's-
gentleman whose mother was very disease" which is now impossible,
because Hanumana has taken away
the electromagnetic force from these
So, he said, "I didn't know what to do, people and it doesn't work, it doesn't
relate to your conscious mind, so your
conscious mind cannot act, it just goes
off. Only these people if they worship
Hanumana with the same devotion,
then maybe they might be saved. But
it's not easy thing to convince these
stupid Yuppies, you see, about
anything. They say, "We don't believe,
so what." So what, you die, what else?
That's the only limit, that's the only life
organisation is so well planned, all
prayed to you." There was
sick and he went to see her and she
was just going to die - with cancer.
so L.just prayed to you
please save my mother." Now, the
sincerity of that person, the depth of
that person as
Hanumana knows. He knows what is
Mother,
a Sahaja Yogi
the weight of this person is. And
immediately, you'll be surprised, within
three days, the woman who was going
to die, survived, she got all right. He
brought her to Bombay and the doctor
said "She has no cancer."
left for you? And you do that?
There are so many aspects of
Hanumana which I could have told you,
but for example, for His body, you see,
like Shiva is covered with the Geru,
Many things which you call
miracles are done by Shri Hanumana.
He is the one who is the doer of
miracles. He does miracles also to
what you call Geru is a that's a kind
of a, you know what Geru is, it's a red-
coloured stone which is very, very hot
show how stupid you are, how foolish
you are, because He is on the right
side, see, He goes to the ego-side.
Now, with the ego a human being is and supposing with
always, become stupid and that's
mean, something inevitable. With ego So, if you put Guru, those rashes are
they become so stupid, "Oh, what's
wrong?" And that's why you'll find many sometimes some sort of skin-diseases,
people doing just stupid things, we just which are cured with Geru. Because it
can't understand why they do it. They Is the one which is very hot and it
say, "What's wrong?" What's wrong is
that Hanumana doesn't like it, it's the
cold
the
sometimes you develop those rashes.
corrected. Or you get, due to badhas,
soothes you down.
On the contrary Shri Ganesha
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-43.txt 
 2007
43
Issue: 9 & 10
The Divine Cool Breeze
55
is covered with lead-oxide, with a red
lead-oxide, which is extremely cold.
Lead-oxide is a very cool thing. If you
touch the lead, you see, it is a very
cool thing. So, that lead-oxide is used
to cover all His body, is to balance the
heat that He has or the effects of heat
hastiness, our speediness, our
aggressiveness, He's the one who.
does it.
Now, He played a trick on Hitler.
How? Hitler was using Shri Ganesha
as a symbol. So this Swastika was
made in a clockwise manner. Then
Hanumana played a trick on him.
What He did, He made the stencil,
which they were using for making the
what you call - making the Swastika,
He put it somehow or other lot of,
mean, he made it in such a way that
they said, "We should use the other
side." As soon as they used the other
side - it's Hanumanas trick. I
suggested to Him, but, I mean, He
played the trick. They started using
Ganesha from the other side. The
He has. So, we call it, in Sanskrit
language is called as Sindoora. And
also in Marathi or Hindi called sindoor.
We must find always, this is the colour.
Luckily I got this Sari in Vienna and I
have it very nice for this occasion. So
He is always covered with that colour,
what you call this Sindoor colour. And
lead-oxide, though they say it causes
cancer, people say that lead-oxide can
cause you cancer, but it is the lead-
oxide, which is very cool, it can cool
you down so much that you can go to
the left side and cancer is a
same Ganesha about whom Shri
Hanumana was worried, how can He
surpass Shri Ganesha? Because He is
the eldest and how can you go
psychosomatic disease and that might
be the reason, it might cause in a very
far fetched way we can say - can
beyond Him? And He is a deity and
Hanumana is an angel. So, as soon
cause cancer, too. Because if it is too
cold and all that and then you go
the left side and on the left side you
can catch the viruses by which you winning,
to
as the trick was played, then both of
them put together stopped Hitler from
can get into troubles. So, but the same winning. This is how the trick was
lead-oxide is all right for people who
are very right sided. For them if it is
put on their Agnya it cools them down,
they are cooled down. And it's very Puja in Germany and Germany is the
good for them to put on their Agnya place where these tricks are played
so that they are cooled down. Their very much by Hanumana, because I've
anger goes down, their temper goes
down and it's a very good thing.
played. So, all these little, little tricks,
you see, are there.
Once, I remember, I had My
told you, that they are the ones who
require Him the most. So, there was,
in Germany, there was a Puja and in
the Puja by mistake they put it the
So He is the one who cures
our anger, he's the one who cures our
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-44.txt 
 - 2007
Issue: 9 & 10
44
The Divine Cool Breeze
other was round, by mistake. I didn't
see, I... Normally, I always watch very
carefully, but I don't know why that day
| didn't see-it
Hanumana's trick and when I sawI
said, "Oh God, where is it going to
now hurt? Where is it going to work right-sided people are ascetic, they
out? Which country it is going to hit? It
did not hit Germany, it hit England. right-sided people, they all will have
Because England, I've worked so
hard there and they have been so
negligent about Sahaja yoga, so
lethargic about it, that it just went and
hit there.
always a very majestic deity or a
angel and that, in a place where it is
so majestic and beautifully done,
everything is there, and He would like
that. He is not a Sanyasi type of a
person, He is not an ascetic. Normally
must be also
become bow-hows, they'll make,
everything simple, they would like to
shave off their nose also, if possible,
on their faces.
So, you see, the other way
round, Hanumana is not, Hanumana
likes beauty, He likes decorativeness
and makes people non-ascetic. So,
Hanumana gives you this kind of
thing. But many people who are
worshippers of Hanumana always say
that those ladies should never go and
take the darshan of Hanuman,
because Hanumana is a brahmachary,
is the one who is... Who doesn't want
So, He is the one who goes
like a torrential rain or can go like a
speedy, very speed tempest and
destroy things. So He works out all
things
electromagnetic forces. So, all the
matter, all the matter is under His
control, all the matter is under his
control. And He is the one, who
His
through
these
creates rain for you, who creates sun
for you, He creates breeze for you.
He is the one who does all these
women to see him. Because He
doesn't wear full clothes and He has
very little clothes on Himself, so He
doesn't want women to see him. But if
women think, "He is just a child", that
is just the same. But this idea - I think
that people don't have that He is a
child. What is for a child. How many
clothes he doesn't wear, what does it
For the today's thing, I mean, if matter? Then He is a monkey.
I have to talk about Him I'll take hours Monkeys are not supposed to wear
clothes. So whatever He wears is
quite a lot and He doesn't give you
the feeling at all that He is in any way
nude or anything, but you just see such
things, just to have a proper Puja, to
have a proper meeting, everything He
works out so beautifully and nobody
even knows that it is Shri Hanumana
who has done it, and we should thank
Shri Hanumana all the time.
together, but only thing I have to say
that it's such a blessing I feel that we
have this in this palace, Shri
Hanumana's Puja, because he was
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-45.txt 
 Issue: 9 & 10 - 2007
45
The Divine Cool Breeze
So that's what I feel that now Germans
a sweet form of Him, such a sweet
form!
are becoming very gentle in handling
things, in handling people. This change
is coming and I think it's the blessing
I wish, sometimes you get His
photograph also as you have got the
photographs of Shri Ganesha, then
you'll really fall in love with Him, He's
such a sweet thing!. And though He is
so huge and so big and though he has
nails, but when he caresses My feet,
he pulls back His nails, He is so
gentle, extremely gentle and very
beautifully He caresses My feet. And
i've seen Him the way he handles
everything, it's extremely gentle way.
of Hanumana on them.
May god bless you!
Now, so today we need not do
Ganesha Puja though once you can
wash My feet with some song.
Because always before every Puja one
has to do Ganesha Puja, but need not
be that elaborate.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_V.pdf-page-47.txt 
 greatest fear human beings have is that they think
that they have done lots of mistakes, and these mistakes are too
The
many, and they can never get realisation, they will be doomed,
they will be going to hell.
таny,
This is not true, not at all true. Nobody is going to hell, if
they do not want to go. If you want to stop it, you can stop it. The
time has come. You are going to be blessed and blessed forever.
So may God bless you.
H.H. Shri Mataji
