The Divine Cool Breeze May-June : 2007

 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE Published by Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 108, Chandragupt Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411029 Ph. No. : 020-25285232 Printed by Krishna Printer & Designer Tri Nagar, Delhi-35 Mob.: 9212238008 For Subscription Please Write to: Nirmal Transformatiom Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 108,Chandragupt Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune- 411029 Tel.No.: 020-25285232 Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles, Miracle Photographs ete. To Shri O.P. Chandna G-11 (463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110034 Ph.: 011-65356811

 The Cool Divine Breeze MAY - JUN. - 2007 SHWA NIRMALA. UNIVERSAL PURE CONTENTS Easter Puja, Pune - 8.4.2007 2. 4. Four Days Seminar in Nirmal Nagri Pune, March-2007 Shri Ganesha Puja, Australia-1.3.1983 8. 12. Shri Mataji's Speech, Maharashtra-11-12-1983 16. Mother Earth-21.8.1983 25. The Essence of Sahaja Yoga 30. Shri Mataji's Advice- Switzerland-1983 32. Ritambhara-Pragnya- Lodge Hill Seminar-23.7.1983 36. 108 Names of Lord Vishnu The Fourth Dimension and the Parasympathetic-26.7.1984 39. 44. An Experience DHARMA RELIGION

 Easter Puja Pune - 8.4.2007 (Report by Chris k) many years She spoke in a clear lucid tones, words of power, awakening the kundalini, affirming, reassuring, joyous revelation. Tears ofjoy again began to flow around the room, and through many water filled eyes were we Easter Sunday- the day of resurrection, ifever there was a truer reflection of a day of great spiritual import, a day which lived out in events its own true meaning, it was to be this day. privileged to again sit as humble devotes before the Feet of our Guru, and listen to Easter Puja Coming to the end of an incredible weekend here in Pune, the 60th Anniversary celebrations. discourse. Please forgive any inaccuracies in their re-telling for this humble instrument is full of faults. Today was an incredible day, we were meeting with Sir CP discussing ISPS, plans, buildings, and the future, then word came that Shri Mataji began by saying that it is a very important day, the day of Christ's resurrection. He resurrected so that he could Shri Mataji wanted to see us. When we entered the room Our Mother was sitting in Her chair a broad smile beaming and we were ushered in and we began discussing the ISPS plans. transform people, but now we can do that work and we should not be afraid, and have no doubts about yourselfand your Self Realisation, you should respect your Self Realisation, it is something very special, something unique. Shri Mataji was incredible, She was asking about the buildings, their sizes, where the children would be playing, safety issue with heights, teachers, staff accommodation. Then She said to come tomorrow with larger plans and to have a think about the size of the buildings which She said was too small. Shri Mataji said if you have any doubts. then you should come in front, in fact come now and talk to me, you should not have any doubts, for you are all special beautiful people, when 1 look out I see so many beautiful faces in front of me, you are all so beautiful. Many of us came out of the room with tears of joy in our eyes, the emotions were such. Sir said it was probably the longest conversation in five years. Totally amazing, transformating, We have to confirm our Self Realisation, we have to respect our Self Realisation and we bave to pass on what we have received to the incredible. world, we have to give what we have achieved in Sahaja Yoga to many more people who are waiting, there are so many good people who have not received their Self Realisation, they are all waiting, you have to take up this work. If possible this day was to become even more incredible. We meet a few hours later for an impromptu Easter Puja. We were fortunate to perform Puja to Shri Mataji, the auspicious offerings were made, the vibrations incredible. Shri Mataji said you should all go out and take a lead, spread Sahaja Yoga so that we can give a chance to other people who have Shri Mataji asked for the microphone, and She smiled at us all and for the first time in

 Issue: 5 & 6 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze all be happy. We answered we are not sad, just very, very, happy to hear Her voice again. not received their Self Realisation. There is nothing more important to do. There are many good people in the world who have not received their SelfRealisation and if you see around the world, it is in chaos. There is a lot of chaos, the world needs this. We then performedAarti and the music began. Some gifts were given, one being a silver chariot drawn by seven horses which was presented. Shri Mataji said it was very symbolic, the seven horses, and the chariot, but the horses were not drawing a chariot they were pulling the Sahaja Yogis, everywhere the Sahaja Yogis are being helped. Sahaja Yoga is the only solution. Shri Mataji ended with something reduced all the tears again, She said: "I am sorry if I have not helped you all enough to finish this job, in many things perhaps I have not finished off what I have started ... so far' When we presented the Australian gift She commented that Australia is a very cut off place geographically and it was good that Her children had not forgotten Her, to which we responded not only Her Australian children, but all Her children all over the world had never left Her side, and certainly not forgotten Her. That was the moment, the beaming smile, the words of encouragement, tear filled eyes, all around faces wet with tears of joy. Sir CP was continually wiping tears from his eyes, and through the talk his hands were raised in supplication, he bowed to Shri Mataji, and to God Almightly in heaven above. Of us all he was by far the happiest and most joyous. Shri Mataji left but said there should be music and dancing, we should be in joy, the music played and we all danced and danced and danced. Shri Mataji looked around at us all and asked if there was anything wrong, we should Sincerely Chris

 Four Days Seminar in Nirmal Nagari Pune, March-2007 experiences were also shared by city coordinators from India. The four days Intemational Sahaja Yoga Seminar that started from 18th March and concluded on 21st March was hosted by seven countries (collectivity of Turkey, Dubai, Israel, Tunisia, Greece, Morocco and Iran with India) in Nirmal Nagri, Pune. This four days International Sahaja Yoga seminar marked yet another milestone in expressing a collective sense of harmony through performance of various arts and plays through staging of unique cultural programme amidst eight to nine thousand Sahaja Yogis who had congregated in this Holy place of Pune. The occasion marked offering puja at Her Holy Lotus Feet of Shri Mataji in Her Shri Shiva Form on one hand and celebrating the joy of Her 84th Birthday. There were many noteworthy classical presentations during these four days. Especially the Yuvas from all over the globe had a magical performance that spoke of the high quality of art and culture that Sahaja Yoga promises to the humanity to serve. Entire four days seminar and the individual and collective performance expressed joy from within. Marvelous performance was rendered by the NGO children from Vishwa Nirmal Prem Ashram as the little ones performed dances and bhajans in the praise of the Goddess. The melodious voices of the established Sahaja artists made the musical programme lively that included singers like Pt. Arun Apte, Smt.Surekha Apte, Pt. Subramanium, Sanjay Talwar, Mukhi Ram, Deepak Verma, Rajesh Universe and many others from India. This was probably for the first time in India that it had the privilege of welcoming such a large gathering of realized souls from overseas Almost one thousand to one thousand four hundred Sahaja Yogi brothers and sisters had come from various parts of the globe to pay Australian Sahaja Yogis rendered some of the most beautiful bhajans followed by their respect and prayers to our most Holy Mother Shri Mataji on Her 84th Birthday and the Shiva Puja. marvelous and awesome performances by the Iranian collective. The music programme was all very good, but the musical highlight came after the large number of Iranians presented themselves on stage to sing beautiful bhajans. They were just wonderful, as they played on their local instruments. the collectivity witnessed some extraordinary performance from tiny tot artist from Australia on Kuchipudi dance recital -Satyabhama Kapla. While, in another performance little girls performed Bharatnatyam in great synchronous movements which one may witness only on professional type of show. The musical programme and seminar in between the two Pujas projected a very joyous yet very serious event. Amidst a collectivity of 8-9 thousand the various Sahaja artists performed with very professional like talents. A very powerful seminar was conducted by the Pune Sahaja Yogis on subject of Experiences in spreading Sahaja Yoga in their respective countries. Coordinators from the hosting countries like Turkey, Israel, Iran, Morocco, and Dubai shared their experience. The

 Issue: 5 & 6 - 2007 5. The Divine Cool Breeze Mother has arrived. there is joy of celebrating the Shiva Ratri (night) all around), The Devi Puja concluded with Bolo Shiv Shiv Shambho Bam Shri Shiva Puja 19th March 2007 This day witnessed three events in series that played very significant role in their own place. At the first place there was a unique solar eclipse (visible over India). On the other hand as per the India calender this day marked the first day of the nine days Navaratri festival celebrated to mark the Birthday of Shri Rama. while, on another plane this day also celebrates a very popular Hindu festival called Gudi Padwa in Maharashtra, India. Overall it was indeed an eventful day as the collectivity awaited for the very powerful Shiva Puja in the evening at her Holy Lotus Feet. Bam Bam ( Sing in Praise of the Lord the Shambho...). Next was the preparation for the Shiva Puja as the puja was being offered with the anointing with geru and other fragrant powder on the Mother's face. It was a very powerful puja as the night also grew cooler, It was almost nine in the evening the collectivity was witnessing our most Holy Mother in Her Shiva Form adorning the white robe of Shri Shiva with geru application on Her forehead. .it was such brilliance... There was an element of serenity One could feel the divine presence on this celestial evening piercing the emotions in the collectivity with element of silence within. It could be felt within heart for most of the realized souls who were witnessing this heavenly bliss. prevailing all around as the collective heart grew deeper with sensitivity to accept the power of transformation. As if that power within every one of us was reverberating with the chant of Shivoham Shivoham. (I am Shiva... I am Shiva)..It was like a thoughtless emotion projecting a different dimension that could tangibly be felt within hearts which was trying to express in form of collective gratitude to our Mother Who blessed the collective to be so The stage wore a very powerful look with the eave design and Shiva Lingam to appear like the abode of Shri Shiva in Kailasha. It was almost at eight in the evening that the collectivity was blessed with the Holy darshan (Holy sight) of our most beloved Mother H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in the Nirmal Nagri. Spontaneously the musical choir took off with prayer bhajan Vinati Suniye AdiShakti.. (Please accept our prayers..) and the little Ganeshas were seen rushing around to offer flowers at Her Holy Lotus Feet as the Shri Ganesha Puja was being offered. near to Shri Shiva Himself. The Shiva Puja concluded with Vishwa Vandita. followed by Arti and Mahamantras. Throughout Mother looked very comfortable and was alert all the time and at times could be seen keenly observing and instructing yogis around or Kalpana didi who was quite near to Her. The unique International gift that was offered to Her Holiness on the stage Then it was the turn for the Devi Puja that started with the shrinagar bhajans like Tere Hi Gun Gate Hain. (Singing in praise of You...) .Mano Buddhi Ahankar... Shivoham Shivoham (I am not the Mind neither the Intellect...I am the Shiva...I am the Shiva...) Aya Mata ka Pujan Din Aya.. Shiv Ratri ka Anand Chhaya (The day of worshipping of was eleven sarees in one tray, probably most befittingly symbolizing the eleven Powers of Ekadesha Rudras. As the Puja concluded it was almost half past nine when the collectivity was addressed by the most beloved Sir CP. He

 2007 1ssue: 5 & 6 6. The Divine Cool Breeze spoke very clearly outlining the objectives that we must resolve to undertake as vows. It was being referred to the collective subtly in the wake of the current scenario of taking everything for granted. He spoke each and every word and sentence with great humility. He reminded the collective that it was over 35 years that he had been witnessing Mother's relentless works and love for the entire humanity transgressing all nations, language, religion, caste and creed without any distinction... and now that the love must flow. This was Her main purpose of teaching Sahaja Yoga to the world. He confided in the collectivity that the time has arrived to beautiful fire crakers.the fragrance engulfed the entire atmosphere..as the bhajans continued amidst the impatient collectivity standing with their palms open joining the choir with Shri Jagadamba Aye re.... Mahakali. sung in his typical modulated voice of Mukhiram from India. It was probably at quarter to eight that the curtains were opened to the collective for the Holy Darshan of Shri Mataji amidst thunderous applause and excitement. ....Mahamaya It was very next moment that Shri Ganesha Atharvashirsham was heard being recited by the choiras the little Ganeshas flocked express our deep concern and gratitude to our beloved Mother for the love She has given us to grow and Her tireless works to transform human. It is indeed our turn now and we must return that love to the world shouldering the responsibility to cary forward Her message of Sahaja Yoga. around on the stage to offer flowers at her Holy Lotus Feet with the Shri Ganesha Puja. Mother was seen complacent with Her gesture. She was alert throughout and very keenly watching Her children deep into their hearts.. The Shrinagar bhajans continued with the ongoing Shringar of our Most Holy Mother with Jago Savera Aya... Janam Din Ayo AdiShakti Ka... Chhindwara mein Janam Birth Day Celebrations on 21st March 2007 Although, the day was hot yet the evening was pleasant sporting full of joy and coolness around hosting nine thousand yogis in the open air waiting to celebrate the Birthday of their most beloved Mother. The stage wore a nicely decorated place like look. There was beautiful fragrant flowers and bunch of colourful Hua. At quarter past nine the Arti was offered at Her Holy Lotus feet and later the collectivity was blessed to witness the most exciting moment when the cake was being graced and cut by Mother and Sir CP being helped by their grandson with a knife to celebrate her 84th Birthday. balloons here and there. At seven in the evening the meditation started with bandhan and mahamantras The atmosphere was filled with joy as the fire crackers and balloons were being released in high air as the Shri Raj Laxmi would have desired for the collectivity to enjoy that moment in Her Holy presence of Shri Mataji. Janam Din Ayo... (the Birthday has arrived.. was again being sung... followed by a very powerful bhajan Naam Na Jane.., Tum Asha Vishwas Hamare... by Surekha Apte. With the news of Shri Mataji's holy arrival following into the Nirmal Nagri the cloudless sky was filled with sparklers and

 2007 Issue: 5 & 6 7. The Divine Cool Breeze all parts of the world travelling in bullock cart to buses to trains etc, and now, he said, I request all of you, I urge you and I beg of you to kindly take the responsibilities to spread the Sahaja Yoga and please let Her have the rest while you work to take her mission forward. A series of felicitation messages received from high level dignitaries across the globe were read out by Rajesh Shah. They came from The President of India and other important dignitaries from Turkey, the hosting country... followed by Texas and Oklahoma ..the messages were flocking from all corners of Earth to greet our most beloved Mother on Her 84th Birthday. At times it was from Governors and other times from various Mayors.. with all words of praise and humility for Her contribution to the humanity at large that were read out in her Holy praise of our Mother. Although Mother did not speak but it could loudly be felt as Her vibrations through Her Para Vaani (speech of God) had a direct contact within our Madhyama (Heart region). Just before the departure Sir CP once again took over the mike to congratulate the Later Sir C.P. was requested to address the collectivity and he spoke with great humility to convey the holy messages of our Holy Mother. Our beloved Papaji opened up addressing the collectivity with 'Jai Shri Matai'...The words emerged like prayers that we would be humbly submitting. There was a resolution taken by Sir CP on behalf of all of us and the world to Mother as he said today is our tumand may be it will be the tum of your children or their grandchildren or their children, who will love to celebrate Her birthday with Mother sitting in front and be privileged to have Her darshan. And now on this day may we all request Shri Mataji that.. stupendous works undertaken by the Pune collectivity and also Mr. Pugalia in person who had helped transform this part of the Earth into Heaven compared to the last year scenario. The collectivity expressed their heartfelt gratitude to our most beloved Mother for blessing Her children to be worthy of celebrating Her Birthday in Her Holy presence and this large family. It was as if Mother was enacting the play as Sir CP like our father stood up to convey the words of our beloved Mother as She would have desired him to convey to all of Her realized Children on Her 84th Birthday, As the joy was heightening with the night growing cooler with vibrations there was one last request that came for Pune collectivity to sing the quwwali Number... Mata Ka Karam Hai"...that activated every Kundalini to dance joyfully. Sir CPcould not help clapping and keeping a pace with the moments with nods and smiles at the comer of his lips and conveying certain personal notes to Mother as if saying.Look how joyous are Your children on Your Birthday...Just bless them...and at last She raises Her right arm in air to bless all Her "Mother please maintain the throne on this Earth until every human being in transformed." Sir C P spoke on behalf of Mother requesting all the Yogis to take over the responsibility to spread Sahaja wherever possible. He said your Mother is the source of unending love. She made this beautiful world of Sahaja Yoga and being Her children now it's our responsibility to spread this message of love. In his speech Sir CP emphasized that Shri Mataji had undoubtely been the source of joy and had worked a lot for transforming the humanity in children. Jai Shri Mataji

 SHRI GANESHA PUJA PERTH, WESTERN AUSTRALIA - 1-3-1983 Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi I think it is the quality of wisdom which is still manifesting in many Australians, which many have lost because they have taken to the gross side of materialism. Shri Ganesha is the tremendous purifying power, because it cannot be contaminated by anyone, whatever you may try, it cannot be contaminated. Only thing is, it may recede back, it may not manifest, but whatever it is, it is in its Absolute Form. If you know how to use it, you can purify everyone. So the responsibility of Australians, one must understand is very clear, because they are living in a country which is ruled by Shri Ganesha; so first they have to maintain their purity. Purity of their being. Many people sometimes think that purity is only limited to the gross side, that purity of their sex life is sufficient, it is not so. That is we can say that this attention that's coming in, goes into a parallelogram of forces, because we have two types of densities in our brain. There is also refraction, and because of refraction this parallelogram of forces acts in such a way that your attention goes out, and the attention that goes out, reacts. And when it reacts, the thought waves start coming in to us. You must have seen a lake. If you drop a stone in a lake, the waves start and they come to the shores of the lake, and then it is the shore that gives it another wave which goes back. In the same way, when human beings look at anything they put attention to it, there is always a reaction that comes to you. o Now according to Christ we have to have non-adulterous eyes, there should be no adultery. The word adultery in the pure sense is why Christ has said "Thou shalt not have not so bad. Adultery means there should not be adulterous eyes", meaning, your eyes should be clear, and as you know, eyes represent both any mixture of what it exists, simple as that. When we say there is adulteration in the milk, we mean that it's not purely milk but there's your ego and super-ego. So when He said that your eyes should be clear, He meant that your thoughts should be clear. something else in it. So when you look at things, say this is a wall, a wall is a wall that's all, what is there to think about? But a person who is not a realised soul will immediately start thinking about a wall even. Now depending upon the conditioning of a person, if a person is a very perverted soul, I don't know what he would think of the wall because I can't go to every limit of thinking also-I'm sorry I have certain limitation. But a person who is say a normal person, also may start thinking about the wall, how much it will cost and what will happen and this and that and all sorts of conditionings according to the money point of view, if he is Now, what is the generator of your power, we have to go deep into it and see how thoughts are created. The brainofhuman beings as you know, is like a pyramid. It's elevated through a central point in a conical way, it's the epitome, it's the Brahmarandhra, and when this mind elevates to that stage in human beings it goes into a tremendous change of its reactions to its environment. For example, an animal, if it sees a thing, it doesn't think about it, there's no reaction created. But only in human beings this reaction takes place because ofits conical brain,

 Issue: 5 & 6 - 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze money oriented. If he is ego oriented, then his thoughts would go reacting that same way. This is the adulteration, that when you look at things as we understand, is that we should not have there is nothing to think about-what is there to lust in our eyes. But I would go still further to think? Whatever is, it is, but we think that by say that our attention has to be so pure that we thinking we solve the problems. Also this kind ofamyth exists among human beings, that when from a particular thing, but just enjoying it, just you look at something or you think about the joy part of it. IfI see a beautiful thing, then I something then you solve the problem. It's not amjust enjoying it, not that I should possess it, true. It's a myth, because thinking is just an nor should I think about it, nor do I need that I empty process of the mind. It's like a wave should repeat it. Just enjoy it as it is. Maybe if passing toward the shore and thinks that it can you just enjoy it you will just create it again. just engulf it or dissolve it completely. So the thought is just an empty vessel which carries nothing. It cannot do anything, it cannot bring forth any fruit whatsoever. Now when He said, "Thou shalt not have adulterous eyes", -of course the adultery should not have any idea of return coming to us That's the capacity one should have of purification. So sometimes people think that Sahaja Yoga is a very Victorian sort of a System in which you can't lead a life like this and the freedom we have achieved and the Sometimes this statement might look very big and you might think how can that be Mother, we've done so much by thinking and this and that. But you've not, whatever you have done is though spontaneity because the Unconscious has helped you, has given you the ideas, the inspiration, you have done everything through inspiration and not by your own thinking. Now there we do not want to agree, because we have to give up our ego because we think we have achieved it through our thinking. But when you think too much, too much, too much, like that, then what happens? The Unconscious gives you the necessary abandonment we have achieved we cannot enjoy in Sahaja Yoga. But the virtue or this righteousness that we have condemned so far, is really the sustainer of life, is our quality, is our gold, is our wealth, is our property, is our security which we have lost, and we have to just again have acleansing. It is there because if it is fundamentally enternal it cannot be lost, it cannot be permanently destroyed. It is like you have seen a brass metal or something like that, which gets covered with atmosphere, is black, red, yellow, every sort of a colour and ruined. But again you polish it out, it comes back to it. But ifitis gold, it is untamishable, but if gold is allowed to rust in the dirty gutter or something, you cannot see it, it is covered with all kinds of things and you think it is just finished now, it's not there, It exists all the time, our innocence exists within us. It's not lost, it's there, only it's covered. Just like the sky can be covered with clouds, it is covered now because of the information, because it has compassion, it has love for you and suddenly you find something there. You are just pushed into that comer where you find it. And for this you must know it is Einstein is the person who says that the Theory of Relativity dawned upon him from somewhere unknown, because whatever isknown is already there. And whatever is unknown you cannot find out by this brain which is thinking, but by the brain which is enlightened.

 - 2007 10 Issue: 5 & 6 The Divine Cool Breeze He enjoys joy, the way He manifests joy. He is source of all the joys of the world. Now in English language there are no names given to joys, there is only one word joy' and I find it sometimes difficult to describe the different kinds of joy that you can have at different levels ofour evolution. But when you get to your atmosphere, because of the way we try to dent it and do all kinds of things to it. That's why I say don't feel guilty, because if you feel guilty then you have a hand which is weak, a mind which is weak, a mind which is wobbly, and then you don't want to cleanse yourself. But it exists all the time within us, untamishable itexists within. You have to just get to it. Sahasrara the joy is called Nirananda. Now Now Shri Ganesha is the one who does Nira is my name, you know that. Ananda means that job for us. He is the one who cleanses it. joy. Nira means that there is nothing else but Not that He is the embodiment of purity, but joy. There is complete joy, no reaction, nothing He does that job. Only a person, or only the just submerged in joy. That quality also evolves Deity which is embodiment of purity can do it. through the quality of Shri Ganesha. It's the Shri As like you can see a soap. Soap is the one within us. He goes into evolution gradually as which is in a quality, is a pure thing and it purifies too. Supposing it is not pure, it can become you see up to Agnya Chakra he becomes Christ. contaminated. In the same way our innocence That doesn't mean that he goes into evolution, is absolutely pure, so it is our innocence itself but we can see a seed growing into the tree and cures ourselves. Just see this. The One which is ultimately what we find that we are sitting on lying under, which we have always repressed, top of that tree in joy like children. The joy that which we have undermined, which we have not our heavenly Father has bestowed upon us at respected, comes to our help, and shines within us. It's such a great blessing that we have so many etemal things existing within us, otherwise understand. It is very important in Sahaja Yoga, human beings would have been finished a long but everybody should not be exposed to Puja time back. There would have been no trace of to begin with, from two points of view. human beings the way they have been playing Sometimes the people who come to puja about with their chastity, with their real power actually are not really worthy of it and then of their character. So when it is very much they react, they react to puja. They think why always impressed inevery religion that you have this puja and this is subservient and all sorts of to lead a proper life, a sane life, the reason is things because they are not worthy of it, they this gold that is within you must be made to shine have to find out some excuse to justify their and the brilliance of such a face you can see. Ganesha who evolves that quality of Nirananda the Sahasrara. Now the puja part of it one should unworthiness. So we have to first find out if the person is worthy of puja or not. If the You can see a person who leads a very fast life. as you call it, this sallow face,the sad life, and all kinds of unhappy lines on his face. But a person who starts shining one's own being with that wisdom and that purity beams, absolutely beams with the lustre of Shri Ganesha, the innocence of Shri Ganesha, His joy, the way person is not worthy, it is better to leave the person alone till he becomes worthy of the puja because doubts and all those things can obstruct the flow of vibrations to other people and such a person can create a

 2007 11 Issue: 5 & 6 The Divine Cool Breeze it's not so easy as you think, because it has worked out since ages in a very deep way, and even your Mother has worked very hard to achieve it. So somebody has done the job. So if it is easy you should thank your stars that it's not difficult for you instead of doubting why is it so easy that you want to contribute something to it, alright you can, but first take advantage of what is available and then you can contribute something more to it. If you have not known an ordinary aeroplane, how are you going to build acomplicated one? So first know that whatever is achieved is Selfrealisation and the cleansing power of Shri Ganesha. Establish Shri Ganesha within you. First of all you must establish Him and then you can use it for others, for yourself and for bettering and bettering the methods of problem for others. So it is not civil of that person also to be in the puja-if the person has not got an open heart and understanding of what puja is. Doing puja to any Deity as suchis not an easy thing, especially to Shri Ganesha. Those people who do puja to Shri Ganesha should know that of course it has to be a Swayambhu -means the one that is created by Mother Earth. No other than Ganesha should be worshipped, and if they are not realised souls they can never worship Shri Ganesha. They cannot even think of him, they cannot even take His name, it is so difficult to reach Shri Ganesha. But after realisation the first thing you have to do is to worship Shri Ganesha because that's the base on which you got your realisation. He's the One first who got His crucifixion then His resurrection and it is the One who opened the path of realisation for you. So Sahaja Yoga that you have learnt. That's how you have to worship Him before any other Deity with the greatest sacrifices. The greatest evolutionary ascent He achieved for your sake to become a human being to die and to suffer like a human being so that you should not find it to understand in all its aspects is not an difficult to get your realisation. Today when we say it's so easy, how do you get it, we forget that people have done a lot of work to achieve it for you, to create the path. Like supposing I come to Perth. Say, when I was studying in that's how it works out. But if you use your schools I used to read the word Perth, and I brains to understand it, your brain cannot could not imagine that Indians could easily reach Perth from sayjust fly out and you are just there. But it's possible today that we have achieved just to try to become One with it, and those this kind of an ascent from India to Perth so easily because people have worked for it. People have sacrificed. How many people must have died creating an aeroplane, how many must which they just give bliss and peace to others. have had shocks and things like that? We are so privileged to use their sacrifices for our benefit. We take it all for granted. In the same way in spiritual ascent when we say it's easy, Shri Ganesha is so important for all the Sahaja Yogis-to be understood in all its aspects, but this principle is very enormous I should say. The principle is very spread out, it's very subtle, so easy thing. The only thing you can do is to become One with it, like the ocean. If you become One with the ocean you become the ocean. Just become One with it and even capture a wink of it. So the best thing is that you just be humble about the whole process, who can achieve that will realise that they have become joy themselves and they have those joy- giving qualities, they have those qualities by Just them being there itselfis sufficient to create this feeling. I always have great hopes on Australia and I'm sure that one day it will happen (Contd on page no.15)

 Speech delivered by Shri Mataji at the site of the proposed School at Chowk (near Khopoli) Maharashtra on Saturday, the 11th December, 1983 In the past many great Saints and Sadhus were born in Maharashtra. They have shown the correct way to us. They taught about religion and of the practice of religion. They spread the knowledge of the soul and always emphasized that without realisation of the Self, everything in this life is unstable and unreal. understand many things about discipline, moral etc. without specifically being taught. In the schools the teachers have to threaten the use of cane and only then the students learn matters of importance. In Sahaja Yoga it is entirely different. Many newsmen wonder and ask me as to how Sahaja Yoga has produced so many scholars. They say whenever they discuss with any sahaja yogi, he talks like a pundit. They are surprised as to how you are all transformed into the image of Sant Kabirdas. The answer is simple, In Sahaja Yoga the intellect becomes sharp and pointed like the needle. Not only that, See all, Everyone of you have come to Sahaja Yoga and have got your SelfRealisation. You are realised souls. You are Saints and Sadhus. The Saints and Sadhus of the by-gone days may not have assembled together as you have done here today. This land has been sanctified by your presence. On two sides of this land are the abodes of front there is a temple of Shri Shankar known as Baijnath, and at the back there is the abode of Shri Dattatreya. The thought of having a school in such beautiful surroundings has been engaging my attention since long. Now Shri Bharwani has graciouly donated this land, I feel that the school project should come up at an but the whole store of knowledge itself is wide open before you. If so, someone may ask what is the necessity for a school? I will give an example. Aperson may have no knowledge of painting. He can even then tell you the different Shri Ganesha. In the colours or the colour combination in the painting. But unless you have to special skill, you cannot produce the different combinations and give form to the painting. You may call it the technique. Unless you know that technique, you cannot give proper shape to your work. Without the technique it remains without any shape. Therefore, in order to give your work the proper shape, you ought to know the technique. The students of our school wvill be taught the proper technique. early date. Sahaja Yogis are industrious and hardworking. They cannot sit idle. They have to work for this school. Even in the Trust Deed (of the Life Eternal Trust) it has beenmentioned that we shall establish and run schools. There is a great difference between a Sahaja Yoga school of our concept and the other schools. Our school will lay stress mainly on religion. It is not that in our school we will merely explain what is the Hindu religion or what is Muslim religion etc. Our school will teach the true religion. Not ly that but the people should be convinced and imbibed with the true religion. You In the first place, the knowledgeof Shri Vidya or pure knowledge will be imparted to the students of this school. Pure knowledge means knowledge which enables you to stabilize the Kundalini, the knowledge of giving bandhans, as also the knowledge of giving self-realisation to others. Such knowledge will be imparted here.

 2007 13 Issue: 5 & 6 The Divine Cool Breeze fees may be kept at some higher level in proportion to the higher eamings oftheir parents. Of course, there will not be disproportionately high fees. We are not here for business. You may be surprised that many realised people and great Gurus I have met, are not aware of Shri Vidya. They are great realised souls and yet they are unawvare of They do not even know how to raise the Kundalini. They do not know the Chakras or the process of cleansing the chakras. The vibrations do their work. What is however Shri Vidya. One thing to remember is that nobody shall make any recommendation for admission to the school. This rule should be strictly observed. So also any interference in this behalf necessary, is the control over their movement on the ground that the student is the son of your of the manoeuvring. This will be the principal subject in our School. This knowledge will be imparted to every student of the school from his early childhood. aunt or your nephew or such other relation, would not be tolerated. Someone may say he has paid so much money and therefore his son should be admitted. This reason will also not beaccepted. Admission will depend on merit. How is the boy? Are there any vibrations? Is he 'paar' (realised)? How is his conduct? The answers will determine the issue. In the second place education is necessary for earning a livelihood. In Sahaja Yoga there is no sanyas or renunciation of worldly ties. You have to achieve your object while leading anormal life. There has to be non- attachment to worldly pleasures while leading a normal life. Therefore, education is also necessary for leading a worldly life. Moreover, in order to convey your knowledge to others, you must know the science ofthe alphabets and the language. Therefore, arrangements for imparting such knowledge are also to be made. We are going to admit students who are pure and innocent. Whether they are children of the rich or of poor, will not make any difference. The main consideration would be innocence of the student, his innate goodness, his humility and his willingness to learn. A careful scrutiny of the parents would also be made. What is the use of admitting a student whose father is a drunkard and mother a quarrelsome woman? Sucha student will follow his parents and even if admitted, he will have to be returned to his parents the very next day. Therefore, it is in their interest that the parents come to Sahaja Yoga and get self realisation. No person who is imperfect or silly has any place in Sahaja Yoga. Then how can such students be admitted? Taking all these matters into consideration, ve are going to establish a highly cultured school. For that purpose after reverential bowing to the eldest brother Shri Ganesha, let us worship him. It is Shri Ganesha who gives wisdom to all. It is Shri Ganesha who shows the way to use that wisdom and to remain immersed in that wisdom. Therefore after the worship of Shri Ganesha is over, you may consider that we have started the school today. The parents also will have to come upto certain expectations. It is immaterial whether they are farmers or labourers. They should be gentle, pious and religious-minded. I am again telling you that any recommendation for admission will be considered as a There is a great demand for the School. People staying in foreign countries are very anxious to send their children to this school. Then there are Indian students also. In the case of local students the fees to be charged shall be at a lower rate. In the case of foreign students the disqualification. We are going to admit students who possess the purest mind. We are not here

 14 Issue: 5 & 6 - 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze no respect for the mother. The people coming here will, of course, be having deep roots in Sahaja Yoga and highly cultured ones. I know that. But those of you who are Sahaja Yogis should not behave in a trivial manner or jokingly. All work should be done with due solemnity and in a thoughtful manner. Any person devoid of these qualities will not be eligible for Guruhood. For Guruhood you shall have to inculcate gravity and solemnity. You should then pass on the qualities to the students. But in no case should the element of fear or awe be introduced to achieve this objective. for politics or for fighting an election. We are going to extend the best possible help only to deserving students. Those who are poor will be helped and nobody would know about the help. Man becomes great by his character. Keep this in mind always and work with unselfish and pure motives. Even some of the parents will have to be given Sahaja Yoga treatment. Otherwise we will have to work again and again on the students every time they return to the school after visiting their parents. The work will continue day and night. Another thing I want to impress upon you is that the use of a cane in the school shall be totally prohibited. Tell the teachers who are habituated to use the cane that this school is not the proper place for them. The emoluments here will be good; so,also the other conditions of service. The teather here shall in no case use the cane or shout at the students to make his point. He should rely entirely on love for his work and not violence. If any erring student does not mend or behave properly, his name shall be removed, But in no case should the teacher beat the students or shout at them. We are going to provide here an ideal and altogether unique system of education. The students are going to be model citizens of tomorrow of this and other countries. We will make every effort to provide the requisite facilities on this land. If necessary we will arrange for additional land. Where the students study in those pleasant surroundings, there will be noticeable change in them. The residents of the village Chowk will also feel the improvement. They will get jobs. They will become orderly and systematic. Not only this, but they will also experience the power of God. Once our school is established. in Maharashtra, it will have repercussions everywhere outside. Let us first start the school here first. All other projects will be started later on. The attitude towards the students should be one of respect for them. If you extend to the student courteous behaviour as you would towards a Maharaja (Great King) or a Maharani (Great Queen), the students would start behaving likewise. If you behave with courteousness and respect, the students will behave accordingly. What is wanted is the development of the students and you have to be careful about that. You cannot expect all the students to reciprocate the behaviour. Some of them may try to vilify others. Many have this habit. Ifany mother ridicules the father, the child will have no respect for his father. So also ifany man ridicules his wife, then the children will have Many people have given donations for this school. The money should be utilised with the greatest care. It is meant for the work of God and not one paise should be spent without due consideration. The continuous work should be neat and nice. It should be done with great care and attention. Our children behave as we do. We say that there is corruption everywhere. But the origin thereof is in the home, in the school and it then spreads elsewhere. Therefore the

 2007 15 Issue: 5 & 6 The Divine Cool Breeze They are very straightforward about money matters. That quality is rather difficult for us to acquire. This is one good thing you can learn from them. school should be constructed and run so that the students develop a sterling moral character. It should be noticeable in them. We do not desire to produce businessmen or politicians. We want good children here. It is these children who will rule over the world tomorrow. You go Everybody, therefore, should offer prayers to Shri Ganesha- "That our school shall and tell the people in the surrounding villages to help us in this project. Assure them that we intend to help them. We will educate their children, particularly those of the Chowk village. They have a right to be admitted to this school. they are connected with this land, You shall also keep the rights of all others in view and do this work thoughtfully and with love. be established and conducted on the lines of the ideal pattern as desired by Shri Mataji; that the school shall be blessed with ideal students, ideal teachers and also ideal parents of the students and that the school should gather such students and teachers and parents from all over the world". This should be your prayer to Shri Many experienced teachers have offered their services to this school. Two of them Ganesha and when He sends all this, a great work will get accomplished. We want to are from Singapore and one from Australia. There is one Head Mistress of International fame, who has also shown her willingness. They will come here to guide the school in the beginning. You see how they work. They are very strict about cleanliness. They may not be as loveable as you are; but their sense of cleanliness is such that you cannot but admire. establish and run an ideal school which will be the only school ofits kind in whole of the country, Everybody should pray to Shri Ganesha with complete devotion. (Marathi speech translated by Sahajyogi Shri T.Y. Chaudhari) (Contd from page no. 11) here in a big way. And when it happens here we'll achieve greater results in other places. I have to work hard, and you all have to work very hard to understand the importance of this country, your importance as Australians. So a great message to Perth, and this centre is the door. This is the door of Shri Ganesha and you have to find more people who are true seekers, and don't quarrel with people who are doubting Sahaja Yoga, just don't quarrel. Gradually all of them have to come and if they don't come don't despair, that's alright, that's their luck. So youjust don't argue on that point. Don't waste your energy arguing with them. We have other methods of convincing them: of giving them bandhan, of all the Nirmala Vidyas that you use. So you don't despair and you don't get angry with them, because they're ignorant and you must know your past also, how you behaved towards Sahaja Yoga in the beginning and then you will be kind to them. Be kind. Gradually everyone has to come, those who are seekers. We'll see that they're all in before we close the doors. May God bless you (Nirmal Yoga)

 MOTHER EARTH Surbiton Ashram, 21st August 1983 Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Nirmala Devi of Christ where light was worshipped. But today when we are in this modern Sahaja Yoga, we are actually at the level ofthe Mother Earth, because this is the age of the Aquarius. And Aquarius is the same as the Kumbha- is the Mother Earth. So we are at the level of the To say something about the connection of Sahaja Yoga with this Mother Earth. It is very important, that we must understand the value of the Mother Earth. She has been very kind to all of you, She has been sucking your vibrations. She has been, otherwise also-She has given you everything that you see around. So today, we have to understand the connection, and the symbolic expression of the Mother Earth within ourselves. Mother Earth. You can also see in the consciousness of humanbeings-I'm saying not only men, but women also and men. The consciousness is moving more towards the feminine expression of life. But as stupid as I have told you before also that Kundalini, which is in three and a half coils is human beings are, the feminists have also been very stupid, that they are fighting on the level of rationality, of economics, of politics- all useless things. Equality on all these things if they are to be sought, you become men, you become just placed within a triangular bone. Now this abode e of the Kundalini is called as Mooldhara, and is represented in this universe as Mother Earth. Or in the puja it is represented as the Kumbha. So far, in the movement of our consciousness, we have been trying to understand the GodAlmighty and all other five elements that we call as important. And also, the consciousness has been moving towards the understanding of all these four other elements "but' the Mother Earth. That had to be such. because unless and until the understanding of all these four other elements are brought to a certain degree, the Mother Earth cannot like men. If you are argumentative, if you are rational, if you talk like a man, it's a masculine development. But the Mother's development, the feminine development, is not equality in the way the men have been stupid. No use competing with men in their stupidity, the amount of stupidity has been created for us quite sufficiently. The whole world is today, is expressing that nonsense that they have-the competition, the aggression, the oppression. So the other side of the woman, express itself. Like if all your chakras, four chakras, are caught up, you cannot raise the Kundalini, you cannot give Self-Realisation. You cannot have a mass evolutionary process. That's why we had yagyas, all other methods of exciting the four elements. They worshipped the water and they worshipped air, the sky, the firmament- the light. which was called as the dominated-one, the dark side, the oppressed, all that has to express itselfin a different way. The whole mode, the style, has to change. See now in Christianity one should understand; why Christianity, even Judaism, any religion, even Hinduism and all that but its more in Christianity, 'surprisingly'-they just had no place for Mary. And Muslims even crowned it by "completely' cancelling Fatima. And that's how they came up to the time

 17 Issue: 5 & 6 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze But earth is 'very' different from this dynamic power that is flowing through those wires which are zero, which mean nothing. In And on top of that, you will see that among Christians, I think that ordination, or what you call that, is not given to the ladies, to women, while Christ was not bornof a man. But that *does not' in any way mean that you compete with men in their foolish enterprises by which they have practically brought this world to such a ruinous state. the same way, in a woman, the womb of a woman is the Kundalini. Now what is a womb? If that is the Kundalini, that expresses the Kundalini is the gross; that means the Mother Earth is also like the womb. Now what does a womb do? It receives the sperm. It is just a frivolous act of man or you can say just aggression, and She then nourishes it and looks after it, corrects it and allows it to grow, not in an aggressive way but in a very compassionate and sensible way, till it is expelled out of the womb when it is grown up. So the idea of womb So today we have to understand that it is the time for the Motherly' qualities to develop. Even a man, when he becomes motherly only, becomes a great man. Like Christ, when he had compassion, he was called as a saint. So the quality of a woman as a Mother-Goddess is always as a Mother-and She is the power most important to ignite Sahaja Yoga. is that the expression has to be in such a manner that it does not dominate. It does not dominate the embryo. If it dominates, how can it grow? So it nourishes it and makes it grow. Nowhow She ignites, I'll tell you. I give an analogy, but analogy should not be carried too far-as wise Sahaja Yogis you should not carry it too far. Say there is a zero, it has no meaning. In the same way God Almighty has no meaning, 'till, you put some sort of one or two before it. It's a zero. It 'has' an existence but it has no capacity or a power This is what today's Sahaja Yoga is. That now the Mother Earth is the one, who is symbolised within you as the Mooldhara, symbolised as the Adi Shakti here, is sitting down before you to nourish you, to make you grow into new personalities-into mature personalities. This concept we must understand. to express itself. So it's zero. Like that we should say the masculine growth is a zero. So the women of the West must understand that the nonsensical ideas they have taken from menmust be "completely' discarded, they have to become "women.' Those women who just are talking like men, can 'never' help in Sahaja Yoga. They have to be like this Mother Earth who allows you to do what you like with Her. I mean you human beings have been so stupid to exploit Her to the maximum, not only that but also She bears a lot of nonsense upon Another analogy I will give you to understand it. That if you see very high power wires, going over your head, they are absolutely hamless, there's no trouble. In Delhi there was a suggestion that there is a very big plot of land available where there are high power wires going and we can have it for free. I asked "What is the problem?" They said 'only', if earth is connected with that, then you will have problem. So till' these-this high power thing, whatever it is-is not connected with the earth, it has no it. But then a time reaches where She becomes explosive, then She starts consuming people inside Herself. And when She is consuming people then you see the earthquake; droughts, meaning at all.

 Issue: 5 & 6 - 2007 18 The Divine Cool Breeze this and that; all these things start coming in and people get engulfed into these problems which they blame Mother Earth for. The problems that human beings have created out of aggressive nature-even aggression towards Mother Earth, they have to pay dividend for that. And they are paying. become One with the Whole and to feel that you are One with the Whole, you should try to give up all your individualistic attitudes. That's very common now to hear "Yes, I like this, I like that." It's very common: "I like it." Very common. But it doesn't behove a Sahaja Yogi to say such a thing. You see, how can I say that I like some thing? Think of a mother who has to Now, to stop this kind of a movement of aggressiveness which brings all kinds of disturbances, one has to recede back and should develop a sense of 'totality', of *compassion'. Unless and until you understand totality, the "total' the 'complete', the 'whole- that's the womb that's your Mother, As long as you try to be individualistic you 'cannot' be a good Sahaja Yogi. You have to become One with the Whole. bear the child, has to give birth to a child, has to look after a child, the needs of the child, protect the child, to train the child! How can she say: "Ilike this" and "I like that"! Where is the time? To think what you like and what you don't like, "I like this food, I like that food". Where is the time? Where is the energy left for that? Where is the attention? The attention is on the upbringing of the child. Now in the same way a Sahja Yogi must know that the child within him is bom- the spirit. Spirit is the child which has been born within him, now he has to nourish it, through the Kundalini. He has to water it, he has to look after it. It has to make it grow. Now where is the time for other nonsensical things? You have a child in hand. You are all mothers Now we have to face ourselves for that, very important it is. Specially in the West, I would say, we have to face ourselves very clearly-what are we up to? That's a 'very important thing. First of all let us see "where is our attention?" Ask a question. We are Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yogis within our fold and I am sometimes surprised that even now, the attention can be very funny. Like, simple thing, like we can have attention on material things: "this is mine, this is yours; that I should have "my' privacy." Then you are gone to another realm of aggressiveness. If you try to have your own privacy, then you are depriving others of *their' privacy. looking after the child-that's your Spirit. So where do you have time for all these things? What attention should be : "What can I do to make this child happy, to make this child grow, to make this child completely manifest myself." The mother replaces herself as soon as the child becomes a mature child. So now in you, the Motherhood must take over than the Fatherhood. Motherhood towards youself. The It was alright when you were not Sahaia Yogis, to have your privacy, because you have to grow in your privacy at that time. But after Sahaja Yoga you have to become One with 'everyone else'-that is 'very' important. Before Sahaja Yoga you were different and after Sahaja Yoga you are different. The whole concept must change after Sahaja Yoga. That now you have attitude should be like a Mother towards the child. How her attention is towards the child? You can see in day-to-day life how we behave. Ihave seen people very much interested, even now, in food. Now where is the time?

 - 2007 19 Issue: 5 & 6 The Divine Cool Breeze I am still possessed, I have worked with lemons and chillies, I am coming to You for this and that." It is a very low grade business, I think even after so many years you are possessed, then I think you should beat yourselfevery day hundred and eight times. It's a very low grade behaviour, I personally think, that after your Mother has worked so hard on you, you are still just the same, coming back with the horrible idea of bringing all kinds of problems to your Mother. That means you have not looked after Where is the attention? How can you be so much worried about your food? Worried about your sleep. Worried about your health, Worried about this that? I mean, here you are to worry about your child which you have got now within. And that's why the child is neglected and sometimes you find the child becomes sick or sometimes goes into a coma or may die away also. So the situation is very different 'now for Sahaja Yogis: "how to treat themselves. Those who are still running after food and all these nonsensical things, I mean I have seen Sahaja Yogis, all their attention is on food all the time! How dedication can come in a person who is so much dedicated to food habits? your child. Now in Sahaja Yoga it's not a child which is an individual child you have to look after. This is, one should understand, this is where we miss very much, especially the intellectuals. They think it is their "own' child which should be alright, doesn't matter about Like, we have seen, you might have also seen-some of you-Ajanta caves were built. In ten generations they built Ajanta caves-ten generations! And they built in a place where there was noteven water available-to begin with. And day in and day out thousands of people, without getting any payment, without getting anything, built it. No food, -no question! They used to eat some fruits somewhere here, there, but their dedication gave them power to do it. other's children. Or, doesn't matter if you have connection with others or not. It's very common. Because, you know: rationality which gives them that sense, "Oh! My Spirit is alright, my vibrations are alright, so it is alright if I do not go to puja, or if I do not go to any collective thing or ifI donot support in any collective work or if I do not take any responsibility of Sahaja Yoga." But this dedication can only be developed if you realise that you have to Mother your child. That, if the mother is ugly, the child will be ugly too. Because it is the mother who is expressed in the child. She does not dominate the child alright, but she definitely can corrupt the image of the child. And that's what exactly happens when we, the Sahaja Yogis, are not bothered as to look after our Spirit and our spiritual growth. Because once you become collective you take responsibility. So you are never- satisfied with yourselfthat "It is good, that I need not take up any responsibility. All the Sahaja Yogis are bad, or some of them are bad. I have nothing to do with them and this is that and that and that. But in Sahaja Yoga, as it is, the Motherhood is universal. Because if you are nose, say, then somebody is the eye; if you are the ears, somebody is the lips. So, it is 'essential' Even now, you will be surprised, fifty percent people write letters to Me: "Mother

 - 2007 20 Issue: 5 & 6 The Divine Cool Breeze in Sahaja Yoga, that you can manoeuvre the Kundalini, but not the Spirit. You can raise your hand, the Kundalini will move. You can manocuvre it. You can give ita bandhan, it will go round and round and round. for you to understand that'anybody' who is a Sahaja Yogi is in trouble, you are in trouble. A threat to your growth; it is a threat to your growth, because it is the 'Whole' that is growing. Of course, those who are absolutely useless will be thrown away, gradually. That's what Mother does. They can be thrown away, absolutely, so much far away that they will never return. But you don't have to worry about such people, they will be thrown away. They will be given some chances, some more credits will be given, some graces will be given, but ultimately they will be thrown away. So you don't have to worry. But you 'must' worry about the Whole. And you have to take up the responsibility. Those who do not take up the responsibility, But what about the Spirit? You cannot manoeuvre it. There is only one mantra to awaken the Spirit, in the sense that to please Him you have to say you are the Spirit. But you cannot manoeuvre it. You have to bring in Kundalini to look after it, you have to take Kundalini there, to the heart, so that this child which is the little offspring just now has to be carefully developed and matured. So on both sides, of men and women. we have to understand, that if you are a man, are not the people who have yet matured their child-that's the Spirit. Every type of responsibility that you can take, think' of what responsibilities you can take. and if you are a dominating man, it's alright. But ifyou are a woman and if you are dominating, then it's difficult thing for Sahaja Yoga to cure you, because you have lost your quality of being a woman. At least you have to be a woman to begin with. If you are not even a woman, then what can you do with these third persons who That is why most of us have bad Vishuddhis, because we do not take the responsibilities, and whatever responsibility we do take we have to be 'much', 'much', 'much more' responsible than ordinary government are neither man nor woman? Now the men, when they are servants are. Sometimes we hear from one ear and throw it away from the same-don't even allow it to come into the head. So, one has to understand that the child is your responsibility, you have to look after the child. And the"Whole is also your responsibility. dominating, they have to understand, that they have to be 'compassionate'. They have to be kind', they have to be "considerate', but 'never' subservient, never subservient. This is, one should understand, that you should not be subservient. Now the women, what do they have to be is to be 'great', "large', "receptive', recieving and nourishing all that. Now, how to establish the connection between your Spirit, or keep the connection on between the Spirit and the womb, or the Kundalini, is the biggest problem we all face: Now the way husbands are told sometimes in this West-I am shocked! Wife that our connections are very loose and that's why this Kundalini cannot look after the Spirit. says this to Mr. X, 'X'! you haven't done this. 'X'! you haven't done that. How have you put this? Do this, do that, do that!" It's not woman's I wonder if you have noticed one thing

 Issue: 5 & 6 The Divine Cool Breeze 2007 21 simple thing in life that if you are a hybrid stuff, you can't have the quality of a Sahaja Yogi! If you mix it up, it's a very funny thing, isn't it? So wish to do it, its absolutely wrong to tell him to do it, to tell him to do something. You are becoming a male! And then we lose completely that power of giving that nourishment of a woman's love, which is the power of a woman, which women don't understand. woman must try to be a woman and a man must try to be a man. Now see, what is the situation, ofaman, as a masculine effect on the development of consciousness? So, as the manliness was I tell you a simple example of my own grand daughter. She wants to be an air hostess all the time, she wants. She says, "You must have thought of being an air hostess." I said, "Why? What is so great about air hostess?" She says, "That's the only line you can give food to expressed we have developed science. We have developed all this knowledge, all these things which are outside. Now everything is ready. Now the woman has to come up. I mean, Iam saying in the very abstract way; don't think of woman, but you can say the feminine. The feminine 'nature' has to rise. Noweverything is ready, it has to just work. All the chakras are ready, now awaken the Kundalini. Kundalini is as important as the other chakras are. So now someone. You see a 'natural' instinet ofa Mother that let me see them eat' you see. They don't eat themselves, they want others to eat. But this is not in the conception of the Westem women, I tell you. They can't understand this. "Why?I have done this, so why not he does this, this. It's your 'privilege' to do these things properly, in a proper way. But supposing somebody is a very good mechanic, the woman will also become a mechanic, "I'll do the mechanical awaken the Kundalini. Now Kundalini's behaviour and mode of action is 'very' different from the mode of action of the chakras. If the Kundalini becomes the chakras and the chakras become the Kundalini, how will you manage Sahaja Yoga? things". She is not there for doing mechanical work! She is there for the mechanics of the emotions. On the contrary it's just the other way round. Like a man comes home; she goes on ordering, "You have to put that right, why did you spoil my carpet? Why did you do this? Clean it up, get that thing, do that." All his mechanics of emotions are finished. Once his mechanics of emotions are finished, he is useless and you are useless as it is! And men also should not do their jobs. Let them do their own jobs. I think this is one of the "biggest' problems of the West today 'that men are neither But we must 'assume' our own nature in all dignity and in all right; not to feel in any way low down. Because a man sits on a horse, the woman wants to sit on a horse. What is the need for a woman to sit on a horse? I can't understand. Here all the women are sitting ona horse. They will become like horses! Already I think half of your royal family looks like horses, don't they? I think so. Their faces look like horses. See, so there is no need for women to do all the things that men have already done. Say, for example, there's one personality of masculine personality, that has to come and do a certain job. Now you've done it. Alright; now the other personality has to do men, and women are not women.' I find this quality so horrid, that I don't know how to deal with the mixture. You 'must'understand this very

 Issue: 5 & 6 - 2007 22 The Divine Cool Breeze this job. Now see the situation of the Divine also. Now the whole complication comes in that once a kind of a thing has been done, the that' time the Kundalini has to rise and ignite, in such a way that the completion of the whole work takes place-it is simple. Do you understand now? another one that comes wants to do the same. Do you follow my point? So there's no competition between men or women, but the 'style' of work is different. If you understand that, then only this kind of revolution will take place and not turn out a rebellion. Actually women are rebelling against men, and anonsense it is! It is such a headache, that you create something, allow them to grow, and the another party comes which has to complete the job starts rebelling. So the whole energy is completely wasted. The whole preparation has been made for this Aquarius age to come in to bring in the Kundalini upward and to make the whole thing work out in such a way that the left and right meet and you all become ignited, enlightened, It was a question ofour being, sharing the whole job in a proper understanding. So the revolution has to take place and the revolution is only possible when we understand that "what part is leftout is now to be done'. Are you getting me alright? (Creation of Mother Earth) Now see how Mother Earth herself was created. It is also a very simple thing. First, the movement of the energy started flowing. Now this is a combined energy went round and round and round like that, and when it consolidated So "that' part is now Realisation, our awakening of the Kundalini. For that your feminine qualities are going to help you, not your there was this "big bang". When big bang took place-now this is the manly work, I should say in a way; manly style, because still the Mother masculine qualities. So aggressiveness must be eiven up by men. Also, because they are Sahaja earth is not produced- so then these little fragments again went round and round. With the momentum, they became roundish. Out of them Mother Earth was selected for one job - Yogis now, they have to take feminine qualities. Not of fighting If women fight they are not women see, women are told that "you are good for nothing", So now they are trying to show, "No, we are also alright. If you have eaten one crow we will eat three." Now, this understanding and the wise perception would be such that "what do we have to 'do' now to On the Mother Earth out of the water came the life- the carbon came in. Everybody helped there and a human being was created. Then the men went round, to improve their societies and whatever they have done to it, whatever was possible with their ego is done, finished now, Now they have done their job. Now they are on dole. change the 'mode' and the "style' of our lives? What's wrong here? A turning point has come. Now the evolution is not rebellion at all by any chance. It's a wrong idea people have. It's not rebellion, that you hit me and I hit you- go on hitting each other, like a pendulum you move; you see the movement of a pendulum. It's not like a boom, Now the woman, or we can say the Kundalini whichhas been waiting all these years, was resting, waiting for that time, isn't it? So we call it "the blossom time has now come". At

 Issue: 5 & 6 - 2007 23 The Divine Cool Breeze people who never get alright with their behaviour, She has to be shouting, punishing, and sometimes She also destroys! It's alright. But that is sometimes, not all the time. Sojust now one has to accept that to be like the Mother Earth they have to be forbearing -'Dhara'. She is the Sunstenance of 'everything.' She takes this thing- that today you are bom as a Muslim, tomorrow you are born as a Jew, then you are born as a Jew, then you are born as a Hindu, then you are born as- it's not pendulum. It is spiral movement. So every time you achieve any evolution you are at a higher level than before. So the movement is spiral-see my point? everything, the vibrations are sucked in. And now for the 'first' time after realisation, you can give Her back what you have got it, from Her. Now to achieve the 'higher' position in our whole being what should we do? Is to understand that from this point to that point we have to rise - we have to rise in a way that we move in such a way that it is not in a pendulum way, but in a spiral way. You can give vibrations to Her trees that are created, you can make them beautiful. You can transform a flower into a more beautiful flower. Now whateveryou have to give what you have got from the Mother Earth you can give because "your' Mother Earth is awakened within you now. So you return Her back everything that you got from Her and give it to others. "Generosity, the greatness of heart, nobility, forgiveness, love, affection, bearing 'everything' for love." And for the Mother, to save her child, she'll 'starve' herself, she'l do 'everything' to save her child-' complete dedication, she has for her child. That's a real Mother-I mean the kind of mothersyou see these days, neither they are mothers nor women. But what I am saying, that's the real image of a mother, and you have a Image before you. And to move spirally, you have to use another kind of force. Whatever you have used so far has to be endowed with another kind of force and that's the 'feminine' qualities of women. But where are the feminine women? They dress up like women, they will try to be feminine and all that. That's not the way. From inside, from the heart. A feminine heart Christ showed that in His life- He forgave. Only a woman can forgive, man cannot, because he is aggressive. Howcan he forgive? Krishna never forgave anyone. He used to kill. Right royal fashion. "So, alright, if you are so, alright.' Done. He forgave to such an extent to show that He is now giving a turn to the spiral and now a 'feminine' quality has to be developed among human beings. But that doesn't mean that you start walking like women or developing waistlines. Because that's another stupidity. But to be 'Motherly'. Not to be fatherly, but to be Motherly. That kindness', 'that gentleness' should be in your behaviour towards each other. So, this is what one has to develop now, whether you are men or women; as Sahaja Yogis you must develop a new consciousness of affection, love and compassion. Getting angry, getting into a temper, shouting at people- this is not going to help you much. If you have to help the Whole, the growth ofthe Whole, try to make yourselfa milder person-be angry with yourself that you are losing tempers and you are so unkind to others. All the problems have come out of the overgrowth of the masculinity- over-growth. It reaches a certain point, you see, Of course this force also corrects, sometimes also gets angry also. Mother also has to get angry sometimes, specially with

 6 - 2007 24 Issue:S & The Divine Cool Breeze it's reached such a wretched point now, that it what to do. In the beginning you will hurt, no doubt, because you are used to that. I've seen people here, just barking at each other, as soon as they see each other they start barking. You go anywhere in the whole country. you go anywhere, they start barking for nothing at all. I was surprised. In a school, I went there, there also everybody is barking at each other, you know. Whether they are drunk or not drunk, makes no difference-in the same state. has to come down. But also femininity, at a lower level, without realisation could be very, very small hearted, chicken hearted, could be all the time worried about her 'own' child. That's what one has to change-is to be; have love and affection for 'every' Sahaja Yogi, for 'every person'. When it comes to fighting others you are all One but among yourselves you can look after each other, tell them- say for example, something is paining in my nose here, I will just try to rubit in the same way. But I won't try to cut my nose will I? Or bang my nose? So the feeling that *Other is Myself, be kind and gentle-try to improve and help in that manner. I hope you have understood the whole thing. But after realisation, you "do' so. Because you feel concerned and worried. But you say in sucha way that you achieve the result. See my point is - that is the criteria: "that you should achieve the result". But, supposing a man has come for the first time, and tell him that "you are a bhoot", then naturally he will be hurt! First, say, he walks in and you say "you are a bhoot". Thank God if he does not understand the meaning of the word 'bhoot'-then its alright! In nutshell it is that : we have to change the whole-mode-a radical change has come in the society of Sahaja Yogis. But first you think of being gentle, nice, embalming, sweet. Let's think, find out ways and means. There's a very good way-in the evening, to write down "how many sweet things I've said today?" Not like this, sweet things we say-"You're looking beautiful" and all that. Not the superficial ones. That may If there is any question I will answer it before we start the puja. Q. (Sahaja Yogi) : Is it alright to hurt people for their own good, Mother? Shri Mataji : This problem comes in when you are not the Whole. Alright? Now supposing, as I told you, if you are the Whole, then who is the *other'? Then you will, even ifyou have to hurt. Say, for example, if there is blood coming out of my thumb, I press it hard to stop the blood. It will hurt the thumb. But the discrimination must be used, that I'm using my blood which is precious, much more precious than this finger it will hurt. But that discretion must be used. In pamper the ego. But they re so sweet you know, things are. There are so many words, you can say, like- "Are you warm enough?"- very sweet way of asking a question. It's very simple; but you can see now you can't just-its very difficult for people to say that even, I've seen. Looking after other's comforts. Somebody is sitting, he wants water. You just go rush and give him water. "Oh ! that's too much to expect. Oh God! you gave water!" (Contd. Sahaja Yoga, you're all free to develop your sense of discretion. And once you develop your sence of discretion, gradually you will know Page-35)

 The Essence of Sahaja Yoga Pravachan of H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi In today's talk I will dwell on the essence of Sahaja Yoga. I am sure that it has been explained to you before. Besides, most of you are from Sahaja Yoga itself. So I need not go into details. In fact, it is only very few who take a keen interest in their evolutionary process and would like to come out of their ignorance in which they have been living. Inall the ego-oriented countries it is very difficult to bring home the truth that we are still ignorant. We have to know a lot. It is First of all we need to understand that very difficult because they think they know everything, because they have been to the we are passing through an extremely serious time pregnant with unpredictable consequences, When we look at life we do not seem to moon. The Russians, for instance, still say that they saw no God when they orbited in space, understand that if wemiss this opportunity which has come our way, for our evolution, we will not only be depriving ourselves of it or this country, England, but also it will be a stupendous loss for the whole of creation. The trouble, however, is that in the name of God, of evolution and of higher life, a plethora of spurious people have come out making it well-nigh difficult to convince anyone of the existence of truth. which is like saying that one has been to the third floor but hasn't seen the top. Where does God reside? Where does He manifest within us? In what manner does He manifest? We do not know what to see. What we want to see is possible only through our effort. 'If we have not been able to see God, then He does not exist," This is how we develop our attitude in this matter. But better say 'no'to all that we did not know through our effort. Because we have not known about Him. So He does not exist. You turn round in a cave. So when you see a shadow of yourself you believe in that only and say, 'nothing else existed. The Under the circumstances one has to talk about truth. But mere talking about truth rarely leads to the experience of truth. It is altogether a different realm, a new awareness which you will have to get to understand the truth for which I do not know how many of you are really prepared or how many of you would like to know, Or even if you would like to, yet how many of you will really achieve it. But the problem is the other way round. It is not a problem that we have only a few people, nor that I cannot give realisation. It is also not a problem that you cannot know the truth. The irony is that whatever is false, spurious or silly finds quick acceptance among the light does not exist. That kind of attitude I have persistently been facing. And sometimes I do not know how to give them realisation. Now you have to start the other way round. You have to seek. You have to ask for it. Nobody is going to fall at your feet and say "Well, you get your realisation. You have this, for heaven's sake, please have it". Because nothing is selling here. You are used to salesmanship, that is, if anything is selling you have to be pursuaded or requested. You can save pounds fora sale and all that. But nothing is for sale here. This is a very difficult thing for people to understand. masses. Sometimes I feel that I have developed aunique method by which I can give realisation enmasse all over the world. But it really poses a problem forme if the masses are not interested.

 Issue: 5 & 6 -2007 26 The Divine Cool Breeze with it. It is like a stuck up stanmp which refuses to come off. And when such a thing happens you feel O, God'! The whole creation has been created, the whole working has taken place and the human beings have grown so well having reached this stage. But now in this modem life In this present day atmosphere, we do not know if we can get anything which is not for sale. However, I hope, slowly and steadily all of us have to get our realisation. Somehow, we have to work very hard. Sometimes it is very frustrating and sometimes so stupid-the way people react. Like the other day when we had a meeting at Brighton I was laughing all the while. It is so sad. Agentleman who came to our programme made complaints. Look, who has got time to put him on a video; who is interested in taking his photograph. He says he is a managing director. So what? In the presence of the Divine what is a managing director or what is even a King? Just think of it. Who is he? What does he think of himself? He has complained against us. Even the laws are so stupid sometimes that one can hardly understand. Has he got any right to complain if he comes to a programme which is being conducted with a video on me or if you are which they are leading, you find them so stupid and foolish that they have begun deluding others with their stupidity and foolishness. How are we to approach those people who are true seekers? Those who have been seekers for ages? All their lives before have been lost. Sometimes it is very disappointing. But still hoping against hopes, I hope we reach all the corners of the universe where we find all people who are true seekers. It is their power to know the Divine; know the Divine. It is not for those who are managing directors or kings or something! What does it matter in the presence of God. They would be pushed out. They will not be allowed to enter the Kingdom of God. That kingdom is only for those who have known not for those who simply talk about God. Those who say that we are worshippers of God and we have learnt so much, it will be said, "that is well, then go back to the place where from you have come". Whatever you have known is through your awareness, and in your awareness you have come to know. The awareness has to be enlightened. It is not what you know but human awareness which has still to grow. It involves such a lot of journey even after our realisation. photographed? How can you complain? On one side,I find such stupid people and on the othera host of genuine seekers. How to reach them? They are like a diamond covered with mud. So much mud! To find out the diamond in the mud, one has to dive into a mine of ignorance, to get that diamond which is lost. It concerns me so much that I feel this mud is going to cover their brains and their eyes, whatever else they have, so that they may not receive their realisation. They may miss it. Actually the Divine does not know what human beings have created. Really, I tell you, the Divine is in the dark as to all the nonsenses that you have created around you. All kinds of nonsenses you have created out of your ignorance, out of your ego and out of the choice that you had. I can'texplain why people have created this kind of ignorance which cannot be broken or removed. Because you are so much identified It takes no time sometimes to give realisation to so many people. I know it has happened with so many. But they do not know what they have to achieve. The ego is such a horrible stuff that people do not want to see what they haven't got with them, what they have to have and what they deserve. They do not want to see that beauty, that light, that is the Spirit. The reflection of God's love is the most

 - 2007 27 Issue: 5 & 6 The Divine Cool Breeze precious thing that you could think of. I do not know how many times I have delivered lectures in England, apart from the hard work I have put in. Of course there are results, but progress has been slow. Compared to the fake and artificial people who have made so much money out of you, Sahaja Yoga is working slowly. this awareness is enlightened you cannot see. It is like describing the nature of colours to a blind man. You have to open your eyes. But even this simple thing people find difficult to accept. The reason is that they have become very naive. They don't know what it is, and also they do not have any inclination to understand. Nowyou see a tree standing there I would not have been disappointed if it was at the time of Christ because then there and you must know, that they are rooted. were very few seekers. Actually even the close Somebody has told you there are roots but you disciples that Christ collected were not true, do not believe it because they are not visible. It seekers. You are seekers of truth. So many of is as simple as that. But why don't you try to you have taken to this path just to pursue the truth. But where are we going about it all? What somebody says "whatever are outside, that are our ideas about the truth? Is it that our ideas much more are inside." So why not you try to are but a by-product of our ego? Is it that we see into it? This is the simple question we should do not want to seek the truth? I have met all ask ourselves "why should I put any barrier to kinds of people in this country including those seeing", if that is going to give the best in the who occupy important positions at various levels-public and private life-lords, ladies and beautiful thing called the Spirit, why should we host of others. They ask "Who want to change"? I say "Really?" That is true, because they think they are the greatest. Born thus, they anything. hope to carry their lordship and possessions with them to heaven? When they say "who wants to change" what can be said except that they have reached the dead-end, the full-stop from which feet, imploring "please desire me". And if you no further journey is possible. find out if the trees have roots or not. Supposing world, if it is going to give an inkling of that not have it? You don't have to pay for it, not even to exert for it. You don't have to do But you must desire. This is the Point I am trying to make. If you do not desire it from your own heart, God is not going to fall at your understand that you have to really desire it because it is such a desirous thing that I must tell you that this Kundalini is the 'pure desire' within you. It is not yet manifested, not yet awakened, in the sense that it has not yet acted. Imagine how important it is. You should have the desire to be one with the Divine, to be one with your Spirit. Now, this, I must say, can work out only with people who are, seekers who want to know through their awareness what is the truth. You have to know your Spirit, for, without knowing your Spirit you cannot know the truth and whatever I may talk to you is a waste of time-a complete waste of time. Because you haven't got the awareness, today, to know the truth I am talking about. So, I must earnestly ask you to become the Spirit. Why should you hesitate to do what you are told to, so that you will get your realisation, which means that you have to become the Spirit first. Until and unless The desire has to be strong, if not, then you would be challenging the Kundalini, that is, you turn anti-Kundalini. Then the Kundalini would not rise. But what has this brain achieved so far? Just look at it. You must understand. What have we achieved by this brain? For

 - 2007 Issue: 5 & 6 28 The Divine Cool Breeze head against the wall. So it is important to understand that you must have that desire which isthe highest. But if you are satisfied with things which are useless and nonsensical, then what am I to do about it? There is no psychology which can do that, because you have to have the desire to be alright. But this is something innate and does not work with people who do not have pure desire. This has been written down since long; it cannot be changed; it cannot be forced, explained, discussed or argued about. Nothing can be done; it has to work out from within. Even if you have worked it out on example, ask this stupid managing director- "what good has he done for anybody. What does he know about the spiritual life? What does he understand about Christ's life?" But ifhe sends a letter, any newspaper is willing to publish it! Look at the stupidity of the whole thing. They do not understand that anything that has to go to the masses must be sensible; from a sensible man who is said to be an authority on spiritual life. What good has this fellow done to anybody. But if write something or any Sahaja Yogi says that by coming to Sahaja Yoga he has given up his bad habits or has got cured his cancer or diseases, then nobody wants to listen to you. Nor does it make any news. On the other hand they think you are mad. But a man like him, if he writes, they publish it. So it shows clearly we are not only contending with people who are not only mad but also absolutelyfoolish. Who have no sense at all as to how they have to live and how they have to conduct themselves. someone, you may not achieve the results. So, when the situation is difficult and the children are also so adamant what can Mother do? Push them in ! I am very much concerned because this ego which sometimes is selfishand conceited, satisfies itselfand is very happy. It will not allow you to get to the point where you really stand, where you have all your powers and where you are the master of being. The identification with the ego is so much that it is easy to take a bull by the horns but to take an ego-oriented man to the practices of Sahaja Yoga is very difficult. Sometimes you have to take it upon yourself for going into and discovering the truth. It is you who have to find it out. Forexample, I say that this is a place where there are lots of diamonds or this is a cave in which there is a lot of gold. The gold is not going to come to you. You have to go to the cave and get it. It is as simple. I am not saying you walk towards anything or do anything like that. You have to desire and desire from you heart. It is impossible for me to raise your Kundalini if you do not desire it, because Kundalini itself is the pure desire. What can I do about it? Can I force it? You cannot push it out. If you want to have a seed sprouted, you have to plant it in the mother earth. You cannot take it out in bits and Today I am rather disgusted but other moods also come-the moods of compassion and tremendous love. Ishould do something to bring sense to these people. Something should happen to them otherwise what I see is a complete disaster. It is going to happen. I do not want to frighten you like Mrs Thatcher does about the Russians. That might be imaginary. But this is real. I am warning you that the disaster is going to come as destruction itself. But the greatest thing is the failure of the desire that it could not communicate with you who are chosen specially in order to bring the Kingdom of Heaven. But suddenly you will find that they all have fallen into a sieve without a way out. The pieces. You have to have a pure desire. And if that desire is not there, then I am breaking my

 Issue: 5 & 6 - 2007 29 The Divine Cool Breeze everything else evenif you are managing director ora king. Keep all your shoes outside and just desire your Spirit. Sahaja Yogis too feel frustrated at times. Whatever it is, as far as I am concerned they have tremendous desire. But I am so desireless that the desire may not always work out. You see, I am a desireless person. So I ask the Sahaja Yogis to desire, so that people will have the great desire to become the Spirit. This is the greatest thing that we can give to our brothers and sisters, to the people, to the children, to this beautiful world we live in, to the beautiful light and to the beautiful time they all have to enjoy. I hope those who come for the first time will understand my difficulty and try to see that you should desire only your Self-realisation and nothing else. Just desire that, and forget about You see the difference between me and Christ. He got so fed up that he cried out "let me be crucified". Of course it was in the plan that he should die on the cross. I have to see that you all get your realisation somehow. It is like a Mother's desire to give a bath to the baby and get him cleansed. So whichever you like- whether to be desolute or like to receive a rebuke-I am willing to work it out. But at least ensure that you desire to get your realisation. May God bless you. 'Ma' When the Chitta returns to Sushumna and ascends to Sahasrara, "Ma" is the sound of that Sacred Shakti. When I take refuge in the golden-red shaft of security that is the path of Kundalini, "Ma" is the sound of my inward-turning. When the Maya recedes and the tree of Reality blossoms joyfully within, "Ma" is the sound of that silence. When my courage spontaneously surges forth like the gathering wave on the ocean of Dharma, "Ma" is the sound of the enlightened motion. When the pain of attachment falls away to reveal the purest sweet compassion and joy, "Ma" is the sound of the ecstatic release. "Ma" is the sound of my folded hands, rising and saluting Thee 95 "Ma" is the sound of my head bowing in reverence to thee. "Ma" is the sound my being, blissfully vibrating and resting in Thee. Jai Shri Mataji (Nirmala Yoga)

 Her Holiness Shri Mataji's Advice Talk to Sahaja Yogis in Switzerland 1983 is there to surrender-the force that itselfis flowing toward you and nourishing? Do we say the lotus has surrendered itself to its fragrance? Do we say that the sun has surrendered itself to its brilliance? Do we say that the moon has surrendered itself to its coolness? It would be absured to say like that. The word "surrender" sometimes can mean only, at the most, in the context of Sahaja Yoga that we surrendered our egos, our limitations, our shallowness, what we have achieved is... our own. We have ...Even when you get your realisation you are sometimes in a growing stage up to a point. Like you're nourished by the Mother Earth all the time but you're not aware of it. In the same way the womb of Sahaja Yoga nourishes you to grow up into beautiful beings. Still you have to come up to a point when it has to click in such a way that you start feeling the awareness of that unbounding love. In the small children it clicks very fast because they're so innocent and uncomplicated and in some people also I've seen it click very fast-as soon as they get their realisation. surrendered all that is useless for something that is great and eternal. This weight of the ignorance has to drop out. But, in some people they have some more ego trip left to be finished. So, they come to me. I find they are flying in the air like bubbles and as if blown by the nourishing Mother-blown out-like the bubbles on the surface of the sea. And there are many who are suffering from superego. They get mixed up with the sand and become very heavy and all the time weeping and crying about personal things. But, once the thing clicks they become one with the spirit of the ocean. Then they feel that deep, joyous force of the sea which nourishes them, guides them, and elevates them every moment. Like deep down in the sea they go and there they find the beautiful pearls of eternal experiences. And when they find these pearls they bring to me as poems, as dances, as smiles, as laughter, as enjoyment. These are all within you, and they lie there away from your consciousness. I don't know what to do. I don't think I do anything, because I'm really doing nothing. Sometimes I think this is not my due to be praised like this, because whatever is my nature that is what I am, and I haven't achieved anything-I just exist with my nature because I can't do anything else. While you have achieved. It's great credit to you, very great credit to you- that you have achieved this enlightenment to see yourself, your True Self, which is sojoy-giving. Actually, I should compose poem in praise of you. And I do my best to show by my own methods how the Divine is pleased. And that you see everywhere, every time, every moment. So tonight we all should only say one thing in our heart that this bountiful nature of motherhood should be brought into our consciousness, which I have told you is called Ritambhara Pragya. Means your consciousness gets enlightened to that nature of this Mother Earth which fills it up with different seasons that is Pragya'. That happens to everyone I said, but it happens more to people who try to be in the centre and don't go on ego trips. Though your consciousness is enlightened by Self-Realisation, it is not yet enlightened by joy. That is, something happens to all of you gradually, as I told you, and should happen to all of you as soon as possible. What

 31 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 5 & 6 witnessing of the drama, and which gives you understanding that the Whole is a partand parcel of you, and you are part und parcel of the Whole. Some Sahaja Yogis I've known have been boasting that "I'm the onewho is going to establish Sahaja Yoga here and I'm this and I'm that. I'm a separate person and Mother is specially selecting me." Anyone who thinks like that is no more a Sahaja So you belong to the great ocean of love and generosity. So this great tree of life Yogi. has everything integrated within itself. This is the tree of life that has been discribed in the Bible, the tree of fire they call it. Now, you have become One with it. You are blessed by it. You are loved by it. You are gently guided by it. It's so gentle that you do not even feel the guidance like a leaf when it falls on the ground it doesn't make any sound. Try to become identified with that power-that is what you are. Like the meaning of the word is identified with the word, like the moonlight is identified with moon, sunlight is identified with the sun. Let that identification be that oneness, that integration so that you become the light ofGod's love, that people know God through integration so that It's like he is holding onto a tree and thinking that by holdiing onto one leaf he is going to dominate the whole tree. Such a person will just have that little leaf in his hand which will also die out after some time. You have to run in the way of the roots, of the branches, of the leaves, of the flowers and of the fruits. You have to be the essence of the tree that nourishes and not just the outward leaves with wrong ideas about yourself. And the people with superego, who are limited by their small personal problems also must know that they will have the same fate in Sahaja Yoga. Put the problems of the tree always ahead of the problem of a leaf. you become the light of God's love, that people know God through your depths and your fruits. Now it is high time to jump from that little area to the vast area which has no bounds. And once that happens you will be surprised all these petty little problems will drop out in the ocean of greatness. Don't indulge into them, and leave them in the hands of the tree. So that all your small petty problems will be looked after by that nourishing force. Because you belong to a tree of great wisdom, tree of great sustenance and religion, and tree of great mastery, the mastery that you can never know how great it is. You belong to a tree that has complete security for you, and you belong to a very great tree which gives you complete Is the most fulfilling job, highest paid in every way, the most satisfying, energy-giving and dynamic. You don't have to give up anything- just be organised in the light of your Spirit yourself. Imust thank you very much for the nice entertainment you had for me. It really was a surprise, a great surprise, of tremendous joy. Thank you very much. (Nirmala Yoga)

 RITAMBHARA- PRAGNYA Lodge Hill Seminar 23-7-83 Pravachan of H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi formless. But you are so fortunate that the formless has become a form for you. No problem, you don't have to go from form to formless, from formless to form; it's all there, in It is my immense joy to see all of you here from various parts of this world. When your heart is so full, the words are too poor to carry the intensity. I wish you could understand that intensity, through your heart. It's all been arranged, I think, by the Divine, that we should meet here all of us in such a wonderful a bundle. So you concentrate, or think of some Deity, or some point for Nirakar, for the formless, or of Nirakar itself. It's all a mental projection as long as you are not a realized soul. But once you're realized, you have to just think of Dhayana, whom you are going to surrounding, in the Nature; that something great should happen to all of us. That we should achieve really something great this time. Now as the time is short, I will tell you first of all a few things about meditation now, then we'll have two more talks; I hope so. concentrate, or you can say, meditate on. But once you start meditating on a person your attention starts moving. That is also possible after realization, though it is in a bundle; but some people have it part of it, part of it, like that. So when you meditate, still your attention can get disturbed every moment. It can happen, depending on the intensity of yourconcentration. So there are some Sahaja Yogis I've seen, they are cooking., and there's another one is Meditation is a very general word. It is not a word that explains ail the three steps one has to take for meditating. But in Sanskrit language they have very clearly said, how you have to move in your meditation. First is called as Dhyana, and second is called as Dharana, and the third meditating. The meditating one will say: Oh1 can smell it is burning. is called as Samadhi. Luckily Sahaja Yoga is such a thing that you get everything in a bundle. You avoided everything else, and you got the Samadhi part. That's the beauty of it. First see the Dhyana. First when you have seeking, you put your attention towards the object of your worship. That is called as Dhyana.And the Dharana is the one in which you put all your effort. Concentrate all your effort. But this is all drama for people who are not realized. For them it's just a sort of an acting that they do. But for a realized soul, it is a reality. So there is no Dharana. Dhar means a flow, a continuous flow. So there is no Dharana. Dhyana is there, but not Dharana. The second part of it is very important, that you have to putyou attention continuously on to your Deity. Then you develop a state which is called as Dharana in which your attention becomes one, with the Deity. But when these mature, the third stage, of Samadhi, comes in. Now for people who think that without realization they can do it, I think they are absolutely mistaken. But after realization also, So the first, the Dhyana, you have to do. Some do it of the form, another of the

 33 2007 Issue: 5 & 6 The Divine Cool Breeze when the Dharana is established, you have to get to the position where you become Smadhistha. Now, what is that state? When that state comes into your mind, then whatever you do, the Deity that you worship you see that Deity in your work; whatever you see, you see the Deity giving you the show; you can put it like that. Whatever youhear, you find the Deity telling you the Truth. Whatever you read, you find there what the Deity would tell you. So in that state, whatever you do with your eyes, nose, and all these organs, all that, becomes a kind of a manifestation of the Deity whom you worship3B automatically. You don't have to think now I beautiful name, Ritambhara Pragnya, which is a very difficult name. Ritambhara is the name of the Nature, and that the whole Nature, one feels, is enlightened. I'll give an example: when a child is to be bon, the mothers start lactating, automatically. The Nature itself works out for the birth of the child. In the same way, when this Ritambhara Pragnya (TI VE) starts expressing itself, only for Sahaja Yoga, nobody else, you are amazed how things work out suddenly! Now the time is very short, but I'll give you an example. I came to Brighton, and Jason said "Mother let's have Guru Puja in Brighton."I must concentrate, alright, I will not have these thoughts, I have to now think about this. It becomes automatically there; you read a book, in the book immediately you find what is good for Sahaja Yoga. Ifthere is a book which is anti said, "Alright have it. But you find out the place." So he went to the university, said the university people will help, but it's rather small, and I said, "but ask them," but no, it's booked on Guru Puja" then I said : then what can you do? He God you discard it. said then, what to do Mother? I said, you try somewhere else just now, telephone to somebody else. So went through yellow pages, Idon't know what, and he telephoned, and they said we have a place, a beautiful place, and you come along, have lunch with us. Just he went there. He had a very nice lunch, they were very happy; they were to accomodate everyone, they were very nice, and he was amazed how everything has worked out so well. But if you have a problem, you see that "it must be for some lesson to me. That is to teach me some experience." It is the manifestation of the Diety itself. For example a lady feels she is going to have an abortion, take a position : So one person who is not yet in Samadhi Avastha, or conditioned, will say "Oh GodI'm such a Sahaja Yogi, I've done so much for Mother; I went all the way to Pulborough thing, and despite that, see, this is the problem." But another would say that "alright let me try. I'll go and tell Mother," on the photograph, or may be telephone, something, and he will find, to his surprise, that it's all done, it's perfectly So the Ritambhara Pragnya has started working in your favour. You all tell me: this is a miracle, that has happened Mother, and we don't know how it has happened. I'll give you an example; yesterday we were doing alright. something with cement and the Italian boy said that we will need two bags of cement. I said, you carry on, it won't finish. Even before I was leaving, they were carrying on, still not finished. Now cement ofall the things, imagine! This is only possible if you are a realized soul, otherwise it is not possible; so the state that is awakened within you is called, is a new state of mind, in Sanskrit language it has a very

 - 2007 34 Issue: 5 & 6 The Divine Cool Breeze I mean, there are thousand and one examples like that. Today like some were trying to push the bed. The three of them were trying, it would not push. I said, alright, I'll push. Ijust put my Nabhi there, just, I didn't push anything, it just pushed; because of the Ritambhara Pragnya. But this is not the Chamatkar or anything. It exists in the Divine the capacity to manifest its love, to show that you are the saints, you are chosen one of God. But you accept that situation first; but if you behave like all other normal people Oh God, shops are closed, and that man is so difficult, and I don't think it will happen. Never happen. But you must know you are saints, chosen, and given birth by Me The Form and the Formless. So this Pragnya is going to manifest, is manifesting every moment. Be prepared. Be happy. Welcome it. And accept that you are there. The level is different. (Hester, time? "fiveminites") Fiveminutes more. So this special thing is your own state, where you are feeling the oneness with the Nature and the Nature is feeling oneness with you. So the Divine itselfis expressing through Nature, through various happenings, through various incidents- the Love, the protection, the attention that the Divine is giving. And there's no end to it. It just happens, and people don't know how it happens. But that is what is the state of Samadhi. But there could be people if I tell them, will you do this? "Oh no Mother, the shop will be closed. Oh, they won't do it, that's not alright". They go on like that. And there are people who say-- "no! let's see, if Mother has said, may be." I'il give you another simple example, very simple, absolutely gross, but it's there. One day Mr. Srivastava, he takes one type of tea, very English, and he would't like other tea, you see, so he told me, "oh God, we are finished with the tea and what to do tomorrow Now the time has come for Sahaja Yoga to change it's level. We have to change. We have to go higher. The level has to come up. But Sahaja Yoga is such a cosmopolitan thing that we have got the worst bhoots to the highest, on the same plate. Now, some of them are round ones which are the Ego-Oriented ones, who roll all the time. We don't know how to raise the plate. If you raise the plate they'll morning?" So I said alright let us go to the tea shop. So he said, "it is eight o'clock in the night and what do you mean? They will all laugh at us and there is no shop at eight o'clock open, that tea centre." I said let's go, what's the harm, I'm just saying let's go; but he said "what absurd things you are saying !I said alright, absured whatever it is, let's go. He wouldn't listen. Sol told the driver, alright, let's drive down. We went there, and the lights were on. We said why? How is it the lights are on? So we walked in, roll down. So you are frightened, you have to hold them. And there are some who are square ones you see very peevishly, and they all were there standing "Oh we've been waiting for you such a long time, you know, and you are the last to come". Just imagine ! So I asked my husband. He said, "I forgot we had a reception here". And they said, you are the last to arrive. And they said, doesn't matter but you'll have your presents. So they gave us two tins each of tea. are carrying other squares on their heads, like bhoots, so if you raise them they may all topple down, or may, the bhoots might fall off, God knows. But there are third type who are prisms, more like pyramids, who are nicely settled down, whatever level you raise them, they are stuck there.

 Issue: 5 & 6 - 2007 35 The Divine Cool Breeze We have to raise the level of people who are well settled in Sahaja Yoga. So everybody must try to settle down and come up to minimum standards at least. Otherwise. I'm sorry many will be seived out. That's for the five minutes ! I'll have another. I think, one hour or so, one and a half hour later on today. Thank you very much. So those who are at the periphery are a problem, definitely, for me. Because in my compassion I cannot throw them out. And we have to help them to come out, by really now, telling them, that they have to rise. How long are we to wait for them? Everyone has to see that the peripheral people are brought in properly, so that they don't go out of Sahaja Yoga. Compassion is alright. But not at the cost of keeping the level of Sahaja Yoga lower, Thank You. Mother." Sahaja Yogis say (Nimala Yoga) never! (Contd. From Page- 24) "I'm not your servant"- immediately the question comes into the head. Little bit trying to do something here and there. Or sometimes thinking-going in the market, you find something. "Oh ! let me take it for him". Well, then 'do'. I've seen children, 'all' the time they think of their friends-what they can buy for others. "This is good for my friend, this is good for..". "He's very fond of things, he likes this".All these little- little things, you know. Sometimes even small thing like : Early in the morning you get up, you find the another person is sleeping on one side, his blanket on the third side and his pillow on the fourth side. So you just put his head on the pillow and cover him with the blanket. That's Mother's job. But women have lost now, that sense. Not the fighting, but thinking what sweet thing you can do. And also, sometimes teasing is alright. Sometimes tickling what sweet thing you can do. And also, sometimes teasing is alright. Sometimes tickling is alright. But a kind of a you see, rapport' between each other; even the feeling, that we can do that. It's a master's job. The one who is a master can do it, those who are not, will not do like this. They'll again come back to hurt. Ultimately, they'll land up hurting or biting or coming to blows. But those who are masters will be so beautifully doing the job, that., you see a kind of a very sweet relationship-it's called Madhurya. Without any lust, without any money-business. And the joy would be 'bubbling. All these perversions and all these things will drop off. But a very sweet. Not out of fear, but out of sheer' love. Like even if it is cold and buttons are open, you can button up a person. Little-little things, you know. Women have very little-sweet things which they do, which make men very happy. relationship-Alright? Even saying that, you are feeling happy! May God bless you.

 108 Names of Lord Vishnu Foreward The 108 names of Shri Mataji Nimala Devi, of Shri Mahakali, of Shri Shiva are based on the Sahaja Yoga Shastras and thus have a definite capacity of sustaining our meditation. Soma, Ishwara) while others refer to the Brahmadeva-tatwa (Hiranyagarbha, Prajapati). Therefore it was felt useful to propose here 108 names of Shri Vishnu which bring a But the 108 names of Shri Vishnu in some sense, are a rather descriptive, more random selection of the Sahasranama; they do not, as such, typically reflect the teachings of Sahaja Yoga. For instance some of these names correspond rather to the Shivatatva (Swayambhu, Ugra, more specific focus on those aspects of the Lord of Shri Lakshmi which have been highlighted in Nirmala Vidya, that is, in the teachings of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nimala Devi. The list starts with those famous names which correspond to the nadis within the Sushumna. JAI SHRI MATAJI ! VICTORY TO THE LORD OF OUR ASCENT! (Gregoire-9-1-84) Sayanambudhau Nirmale Travaiva Narayanakyam pranatosmi rupan (O Nirmala! I bow to Your form named Narayana lying in the sea) Om Tvameva Sakshat Shri.. .... Namoh Namaha Having all power the refuge of men the honey-like spring lord of the cows Keshava Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Narayana Madhava Govinda Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha all pervading Vishnave killer of Madhu Namoh Namaha Madhusudana who measured the world with three steps Namoh Namaha Trivikrana incamated as short man Namoh Namaha Vamana bearing Shrimata on his chest controlling the senses his nabhi is the cause of universes attained by disciplines drawing everything together residing everywhere (as Maya) infinite, enlightened wealth never obstructed nor overcome Shridhara Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Hrishikesha Padmanabha Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Damodara Namoh Namaha Sankarsha Namoh Namaha Vasudeva Pradyumna Aniruddha Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha highest among the Purushas known by turning inwards incarnated as man-lion Namoh Namaha Purushottama Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Aghoksha Narasimha above Indra Namoh Namaha Upendra

 - 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze 37 Issue: 5 & 6 Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha unchanging oppressor of evil, saviour Achyuta Janardana Haraya Krishna Vishnu remover dark one his splendour pervades the firmament and beyond charming in His darshan, speech, action and mind his eyes are like lotuses bearing a yellow garb, or, liquidating samsara master of the discus, the Sudarshana chakra holding the sword called Nandaka having the boy called Sharnga bearing the conch called Panchajanya bearing the club called Kaumodaki wearing the garland called Vaijayanti lying on the belly of Shri Shesha his flag bears the emblem of Garuda Shri Lakshmi resides in His chest Heknows the origin and dissolutions of all beings Lord of Vaikuntha Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Peshala Pushkaraksha Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Hari Chakri Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Nandaki Namoh Namaha Shamgadhanva Shankhabhrt Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Gadadhara Namoh Namaha Vanamali Kuvaleshaya Garudadhvaja Lakshmivan Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Bhagavan Vaikunthapati Dharmagum Dharmadhyaksha Niyanta Naikaja Namoh Namaha Hesafeguards Dharma He presides over Dharma Heestablishes men in their respective functions born many times for the preservation of Dharma His nature is auspiciousness Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Svasti Namoh Namaha the witness Sakshi Namoh Namaha the truth Satya Dharanidhara Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha the support of the earth everything is based on Him He sees and knows what is done by all creatures He has knowledge of all Vyavasthana Sarvadarshi Namoh Namaha Namoh Namalha Namoh Namaha Namoh Nanmaha Sarvagya Ghana Nahusha He is inscrutable He binds all creatures by His power of Maya Supreme creator of illusions knowledge of Him arises only when the attention goes inwards the protector, enjoyer and lord of all sacrifices endowed with great speed He bears the duality of cold and heat etc, (ida, pingala) Taking His stand on sattwa guna He protects the 3 worlds The lord of wealth Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Mahamaya Adhokshaja Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Yagyapati Vegavan Sahishnu Rakshana Dhaneshwara Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha

 38 2007 Issue: 5 & 6 The Divine Cool Breeze He whose navel is auspicious like gold sustenance and food Namoh Namaha Hiranyanabha Sharirabhrata Namoh Namaha He cause all beings to eat the one who grants release Namoh Namaha Annam Namoh Namaha Mukunda He leads the seekers of salvation to the foremost abode Namoh Namaha Agrani Amogha Varada Namoh Namaha He who blesses His worshippers He bestows the desired boons breaking all knots the refuge of the seekers He endows righteous people with happiness He is cherished by His devotees He destroys the various life styles of Kali Yuga Skilled in action The lord of the immortals Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Subhekshana Satamgati Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Sukhada Namoh Namaha Vatsala Viraha Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Prabhu Namoh Namaha Amaraprabhu Suresha The lord of the devas Namoh Namaha He destroys the cities of the enemies of the devas Victorious in war Namoh Namaha Purandara Namoh Namaha Samitim-jaya Amitavikrama of enormous valour He kills the enemies of the davas OfHimeverything is afraid Exceeding in prowess of the greatest heroes He punishes and torments the evil doers The giver of the fruits of actions Knower ofthe field Devoid of all attachments Detached lord of the yogis He moves in the form of wind He makes the wind blow, or, the wind is His vehicle In the form of the breath oflife Manifesting by His own free will Standing in the form of time He who makes things to evolve Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Shatrughana Bhima Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Surajaneshvara Sampramardana Bhavana Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Kshetragya Sarvayogavinissrta Namoh Namaha Yogeshwara Chala Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Vayuvahana Jivana Namoh Namaha Sambhava Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Samvatsara Vardhana He is One Namoh Namaha Eka He is not only one as He has many forms All beings abide in Him Controller ofall things The chief supervisory witness of all the worlds Namoh Namaha Naika Namoh Namaha Vasu Namoh Namaha Ishana Namoh Namaha Lokadhyaksha Trilokesha The lord of the three worlds the master of the universe Namoh Namaha Jagatswami Yugavarta Namoh Namaha He who makes the Yugas turn Namoh Namaha (Contd. on Page- 43)

 The Fourth Dimension and the Parasympathetic Brighton, 26.7.84 Pravachan of H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi (Specially for Doctors) Now when he controls the ...The Fourth dimension that they mention about, what do they mean by that?.. (They call that Transcendental State).. But what? - They cannot describe it. Parasympathetic he controls the supply to all the centres through certain movements, through certain kind of techniqe. For example, some person is suffering from a disease of the heart. Now, a normal person who does not have this Fourth Dimension will not know that he is suffering from some heart trouble. He will have no idea. He will never feel his heart of anything till he suddenly gets the attack, and then he dies. But at the very onset of it a person who is in the Fourth Dimension, that is, a realised soul, can feel that something is going wrong with his heart. Also he knows how to cure himself-The Supposing somebody has a low heart- beat, low pulse-rate, or has a low consumption of oxygen or anything, that's not a transcendental state because you are still in a state where your attention is on your body. So it is not transcendental. You have to "trans' - transcendental means you have to jump on to the parasympathetic. You see, we have four dimensions, you can say. One is the dimension of the Left Sympathetic, another is of the Right Sympathetic, then we have got the Central Nervous System, which is our conscious mind, and the fourth one is the Technique of (curing) Himself. Also he knows that he is the source of the medicines that he has to give, - is a vital thing. So this is the Fourth Dimension, is a great potential becoming a kinetic force, like an egg becoming a bird. So the egg, - we can see the egg has no way of flying out. But a bird can. There's a tremendous difference between an Parasympathetic. In Sahaja Yoga we jump on to the parasympathetic - means, your attention starts controlling the parasympathetic nervous system. egg and a bird. So such a person who gets realization and gets established, is no more a Now how do we prove it, that we become the 4th dimension? person who can be tested with these machines and all that, because these machines deal only with the physical side. But it is he who can test. Even a child who is a realised soul can test First thing is, the person who becomes the controller ofthe Parasympathetic becomes the Auto. He can do things. He can do things, like he can tell that another person is suffering on these centres. Without going to any laboratory, without going to any medical check- up. On the fingertips. So the person who becomes the 4th dimension, he becomes the Auto, which is the Autonomous Nervous System, you see, the auto part of it. He controls the parasympathetic. another person. You don't use any machine for that. He becomes the one who diagnoses, he becomes the one who cures, he becomes the person who can soothe. Not only that, on physical level. But somebody who is emotionally disturbed, then such a person knows precisely which centre is disturbed. He also knows how to put that centre right. You do not have to go

 6 - 2007 Issue: 5 & 40 The Divine Cool Breeze himself, cheating other people, is cruel to others or say a person like Hitler- he cannot exist. He has gone beyond that state, where we cannot Cure hirn; wecan cure animals, we cancure human beings, but not people who are abnormal. There is no word for that, but satanic people. So that's how it does not work out in some people. Also to the lunatic asylum to get cured. But a person who has Forth Dimension can cure that person of that sickness, because he precisely knows where the trouble is, and how to put it right. So all the diseases which are also Physical can be cured, which are Psychosomatic can be cured, the combination of both can be cured. Any combination of these the cases which have gone very down, onto the state where we can say now absolutely out of order, then Sahaja Yoga allows such a body to take another birth, and try. things can be cured by a person who is an established Sahaja Yogi. But in case a disease has gone so far that it is irrepairable, or something artificial has been introduced in the body, as they put steel- sticks and all that, - then Sahaja Yoga does not work on dead things, it works on living. If the organ is still living, it can work out. But if it is not living, then it does not work out. So, because it is a Fourth Dimension, we cannot take medical science as a vehicle to express everything, because this is higher than that. But in many ways we can medically shoow that people have been cured of Asthma, of Cancer, of Leukaemia, of everything, through the vehicle of Parasympathetic Nervous System, which doctors cannot handle. Because they have their own limitaton, - they cannot jump on to the Parasympathetic Nervous System. And that is why they cannot cure a patient who has problems of parasympathetic. It works out on 80% of people. But the 20% of people on whom it cannot work out are the people who do not have the basic foundation to be a human being. They are like animals. Their attitudes are like animals, - even worse than animals. All problems can be solved through parasympathetic in case the basic conditions, if they are fulfilled. In medical science, people will So a state that could be the 'so-called" Fourth Dimension, would be where a person would be no more a human being. He becomes either a devil, or Saintly person. This has to be accepted by medical science that there are people who can be very devilish, and they cannot ascend any further into the 4th even treat Hitler. There is no discrimination. But as you grow higher and higher, even in evolution, you become more discreet. And at this stage you cannot treat a person who is a hypocrite, or who is a cruel man, or who is aggressive to others, or who is practising methods to subvert people-as we have many gurus who take money and destroy many people, just for money's sake. Such people cannot go to 4th Dimension. The Fourth Dimension is not a mecharical process, but it is a living process of the evolution by which you evolve to a higher being. But for that you have to have some basic foundations. Dimension, why should they talk about the 4th Dimension? Such people have to be something so extraordinary that they become righteous. A person who is an alcoholic, can be cured of alcohol, but a person who is cheating

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 5 & 6 2007 41 established Sahaja Yogi, you can cure people. But with medical science you can prove that it has been cured. So medical science also has virtuous, compassionate, and very dynamic people. They have the greatest quality, is of compassion, which though we accept in our ordinary life, in medical science we do not accept. But on what basis is medical science? There's no compassion. So you 'become' the compassion. This is the point, is to be seen when we talk of the Fourth Dimension, we talk of the beyond. And when we talk of the beyond, we have to project our mind, to see what we expect ourselves to be when we become something of the 'beyond'. Are you going to be the same mean, aggressive, complicated human being? Or are we going to be something like a Saint? it's own purpose. And the basis of medical science, that is the compassion, is now expressed through the human being who now becomes the embodiment ofcompassion. It's not poetry, it's not some sort of an abstract thing, but is a happening of evolution that has to take place, and this is in the last breakthrough about which 'many' people, scientists and also doctors, - we can say psychologists have talked about; though they are not taken seriously. So this projection is to be brought into the minds of the doctors. Unless and until they project their mind to that extent to see that if we have to be at a higher position we have to accept that we have to be better people. Now Sahaja Yoga is the synthesis of all the three powers that are within us. The first is the physical power, second is the emotional power. and third is the evolutionary power. You become the synthesis of all these three powvers. It's not the analysis. So now there is time for us to think seriously about it, and to know that we are not only this body, mind and ego, but we are something beyond. That is the Fourth Dimension. And what are we there? We are the Auto, and the Auto is called as Self. Unless and until you project your mind higher, and do not get contented with what discoveries you have made, on a physical gross level, you cannot see the point of Sahaja Yoga. And what is there to argue about when Sahaja Yoga is curing people? Why do you argue? Why don't you see how it is curing? But medical science is the analysis. So it just analysis physical side, goes on analysing. so that you have one doctor for one eye and another doctor for another eye. Supposing a doctor is practising, and people go and argue with him "How do you cure?" You will tell them, "What do you mean, I'm not supposed to tell that, but I do cure." But a doctor has to understand that there is no solution for many problems that we have. So, they have to raise their eyes higher to see that there must be something missing that we have to look for. Now you havea certificate, say from a Medical College or somewhere, so you think you are a doctor. But supposing somebody has acertificate from the Divine itself, then why not see? Why not keep your eyes open like a Of course, medical science is very important because once you get your realization, even you may not be doctor and you become

 42 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 5 & 6 2007 scientist? Why close them by whatever you have known so far? Why to make a barrier from the scientific research you have done? Why not be a research student in Sahaja Yoga also, and see for yourself that you really achieve that state, you have to become that state. should not have fears about it. How many people can be helped by Sahaja Yoga, cannot be said. But those who come to Sahaja Yoga can be helped. So it should be at least accepted as a higher type of redemption or a curing power, which must be accepted. And those who 'can' be cured by that must be given a chance. And there should be no barrier about it. o: What is this parasympathetic in fact ? Ifit's described in the medical sciences as a thing Now, those who talk of the fourth dimension otherwise make people mad. They make them lunatics. They end up as lost cases. So how can that be a Fourth Dimension? There are so many cases of these people, one can show that doing those horrible courses and which balances, brings everything back into balance. things, they have become really mad. And they are good for nothing, they are cheats. They are doing all the bad things that one can do. So how can you say that this meditation helps anyone to be a better person, or a better person Shri Mata Ji : It depends on, it depend on. It is actually the evolutionary process. You see parasympathetic works at different in health? levels of our evolution. Say, at the state where you are the matter, it organizes you in the periodic table. Who does that organization? It is parasympathetic. Then, when you rise higher, as an animal, then it gives you the understanding of eating food, seeking food-by which animals seek food. Then as it rises higher, it gives you another feeling of protection. You seek protection. Animals also seek protection. That is how the evolution goes on, by giving these feelings within us. Or we can say, as the parasympathetic starts manifesting higher and higher the seeking starts becoming higher and higher. Moreover to be only alright in health is not sufficient. One must also see that point. One should not be so much attached to the body, because supposing you have all wrestlers or boxers in this country -now take a position like that- then what will happen? As it is we have too many of them. Now what we need are the Saints. Not physically overhealthy people, who will try to boss over others, but people who are saints, who help-without charging any money, without any aggression, out of compassion, effortlessly - those who are suffering. But there is another barrier, which must be told very frankly. That when you become a Sahaja Yogi, the vital forces of new dimension start pouring, effortlessly. And you do not charge Then it comes up to the human stage, where people seek food, protection. Then when they achieve that, they seek money, they seek possession, they seek the possession of other people, you see, - sometimes called as love. Seek all kind of such things, but still their seeking in not finished. Still they are seeking. Then the same parasympathetic creates an urge within us that we have to seek something higher. This any money for that - you enjoy your own compassion. Compassion, that is the basis of medical science. So that state, may be, doctors may not like to have. But there are many, many people who cannot be cured by Sahaja Yoga, and they can come to doctors, so doctors

 - 2007 43 Issue: 5 & 6 The Divine Cool Breeze people knew about it - and then when this force rises through the various centres, and pierces through the fontanelle bone area, you actualy get the cool breeze coming out of your head. For that you do not need any medical science, any laboratory, - just put your hand on top of such a person and you get the cool breeze coming out of his head and after sometime he feels it coming out of his own hands. last feeling after the human stage is to be manifested, and for that there isa residual force placed within us called as the Kundalini; which is actually the power of desire within us, which has manifested everything but it is still residual because it has not yet manifested itself, because this is the power of desire to be one with that divine vital force. And that's why it rests in the sacrum bone - sacrum: meaning sacred; so (Contd. From Page- 38) He in whom all worlds are expanded Form of the Totality Infinite are His forms, or, form of infinity The pervasive inner Ruler of all Whose glory is greatest He envelops the universe pervading it everywhere He stands in the great form of Virata He who manifested His evolved form as Lord Jesu Christ The immaculate rider of the last days Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Namoh Namaha Vistara Vishvarupa Anantarupa Avishishta Maharddhi Paryavasthita Sthavishtha Mahavishnu Kalki Shantakaram Bhujagashayanam Padmanabham Suresham Vishvadharam Gaganasadrusham Meghavamam Shubhangam Lakshmikantam Kamalanayanam Yogibhir Dhyanagamyam Vande Vishnum Bhava Bhaya Haram Sarvalokaikanatham Amen ! Jai Shri Nirmala Vishnu! (Nimala Yoga) (Contd. From Page- 44) the fable goes.. one man complained to god, "at the time ofenjoyment I noticed two pairs of Footprints on sand but at the time of difficulties it was only one". Godreplied, "at the time of difficulties it was Me who used to carry you". Similarly have I got the Divine For my family it was a great relief. Financially we were in bad shape. I had no money even to get framed the photograph of Shri Mataji. Istill remember, that evening my father gave me money forthe framing ofthe photographand asked me to go to Sahaj Yoga Centre regularly. blessings of Shri Mataji. Medical Science has no remedy for Psychosomatic diseases. Sahaj Yoga is the only remedy. I got cured only because of Sahaj Yoga. There was real transformation. Our financial condition improved miraculously. It was difficult for me to cuntinue mystudies after Xth standard but today I am about to complete my PhD. As Not that we, the Sahaj Yogis, have absolutely no difficulties in life, we do have sometimes. But the intensity ofthe affect is very low and solution comes just by praying to The Divine Mother! M.K.Gupta (ASahaj Yogi)

 An Experience It looks funny if the writer himself claims that he is writing a great piece, but I am proud to say that. I am quite sure that after reading this many of us will definitely desire to experience this new world...new world of Miracles, new world of Divine protection which is open to all human beings. I was asked to pray for my Self- Relization.....the awakening of The Kundalini...the most impossible thing according to Hatha Yoga I was practicing and teaching. As long as it was Self- Realization it was fine, but the moment we were told to pray for Kundalini awakening, all my friends stood up and went home. It began in 1992 when I was just 17 years...the only son of my orthodox, Hindu parents,I had been undergoing Psychiatric treatment since last 7 years and if I can recall correctly, it was Epilepsy, Anxiety, Hypertension and what not. A very strict drug schedule, which was very costly also, was prescribed. My doctor told that I shall have to continue these drugs for next 15 years: Frequent liver pain, Jaundice with 106 fever, were the side effects of these medicines! I felt the Cool Breeze and thoughtlessness then and there. No ritual was taught to me...except Prayers. I found it difficult, because when you pray you become inactive. However I tried to do that... and my intention was only to cure my Liver problem. And to my surprise the problem began to subside! Both, parents and the doctor were astonished. Fifteen days after getting my Self-Realization and regular meditation, I went to the psychiatrist for routine check up. He was shocked to see my face.. "Ithink you should reduce your medicines, " He said. I asked him why does he want to take chance, I have to appear for my university exams. I was told about Sahaj In my college Yoga. My immediate question was how helpful Sahaj Yoga would be in curing my liver problem. The immediate answer was, "All these things are the byproduets of Sahaj Yoga Meditation. He said, "Ok, but go to lab for your EEG". After 40 minutes I came back with a report which was more shocking to him. It was absolutely normal. It was difficult for me to digest. My only intention was to cure my liver so that I could start my normal life. It was beyond my imagination that psychosomatic diseases can also be cured with Sahaj Yoga Meditation. For me my doctor was my God, who used to guide my every move. He was not convinced. I was told to get it done from another private lab. Result was again the same. Medicines were stopped with immediate effect. Next day Doctor was more worried. He called up at least twenty times to inquire about my health! Sunday morning 10.30AM with my eight friends I went to a Sahaj Yoga Meditation Centre close to my place. (Contd. on Page- 49)

 PRATISHTHAN SRIVASTAVA 



----------------------

2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The
Divine Cool Breeze
May-June : 2007
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-1.txt 
 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
Published by
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 108, Chandragupt Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411029
Ph. No. : 020-25285232
Printed by
Krishna Printer & Designer
Tri Nagar, Delhi-35
Mob.: 9212238008
For Subscription Please Write to:
Nirmal Transformatiom Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 108,Chandragupt Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune- 411029
Tel.No.: 020-25285232
Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles, Miracle Photographs ete.
To
Shri O.P. Chandna
G-11 (463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110034
Ph.: 011-65356811
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-2.txt 
 The
Cool
Divine
Breeze
MAY - JUN. - 2007
SHWA NIRMALA.
UNIVERSAL PURE
CONTENTS
Easter Puja, Pune - 8.4.2007
2.
4. Four Days Seminar in Nirmal Nagri Pune, March-2007
Shri Ganesha Puja, Australia-1.3.1983
8.
12. Shri Mataji's Speech, Maharashtra-11-12-1983
16. Mother Earth-21.8.1983
25. The Essence of Sahaja Yoga
30. Shri Mataji's Advice- Switzerland-1983
32. Ritambhara-Pragnya- Lodge Hill Seminar-23.7.1983
36. 108 Names of Lord Vishnu
The Fourth Dimension and the Parasympathetic-26.7.1984
39.
44. An Experience
DHARMA
RELIGION
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Easter Puja
Pune - 8.4.2007
(Report by Chris k)
many years She spoke in a clear lucid tones,
words of power, awakening the kundalini,
affirming, reassuring, joyous revelation. Tears
ofjoy again began to flow around the room,
and through many water filled eyes were we
Easter Sunday- the day of resurrection,
ifever there was a truer reflection of a day of
great spiritual import, a day which lived out in
events its own true meaning, it was to be this
day.
privileged to again sit as humble devotes before
the Feet of our Guru, and listen to Easter Puja
Coming to the end of an incredible
weekend here in Pune, the 60th Anniversary
celebrations.
discourse. Please forgive any inaccuracies in
their re-telling for this humble instrument is full
of faults.
Today was an incredible day, we were
meeting with Sir CP discussing ISPS, plans,
buildings, and the future, then word came that
Shri Mataji began by saying that it is a
very important day, the day of Christ's
resurrection. He resurrected so that he could
Shri Mataji wanted to see us. When we entered
the room Our Mother was sitting in Her chair a
broad smile beaming and we were ushered in
and we began discussing the ISPS plans.
transform people, but now we can do that work
and we should not be afraid, and have no doubts
about yourselfand your Self Realisation, you
should respect your Self Realisation, it is
something very special, something unique.
Shri Mataji was incredible, She was
asking about the buildings, their sizes, where
the children would be playing, safety issue with
heights, teachers, staff accommodation. Then
She said to come tomorrow with larger plans
and to have a think about the size of the buildings
which She said was too small.
Shri Mataji said if you have any doubts.
then you should come in front, in fact come now
and talk to me, you should not have any doubts,
for you are all special beautiful people, when 1
look out I see so many beautiful faces in front
of me, you are all so beautiful.
Many of us came out of the room with
tears of joy in our eyes, the emotions were such.
Sir said it was probably the longest conversation
in five years. Totally amazing, transformating,
We have to confirm our Self Realisation,
we have to respect our Self Realisation and we
bave to pass on what we have received to the
incredible.
world, we have to give what we have achieved
in Sahaja Yoga to many more people who are
waiting, there are so many good people who
have not received their Self Realisation, they
are all waiting, you have to take up this work.
If possible this day was to become even
more incredible. We meet a few hours later for
an impromptu Easter Puja. We were fortunate
to perform Puja to Shri Mataji, the auspicious
offerings were made, the vibrations incredible.
Shri Mataji said you should all go out
and take a lead, spread Sahaja Yoga so that
we can give a chance to other people who have
Shri Mataji asked for the microphone,
and She smiled at us all and for the first time in
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Issue: 5 & 6
2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
all be happy. We answered we are not sad, just
very, very, happy to hear Her voice again.
not received their Self Realisation. There is
nothing more important to do. There are many
good people in the world who have not received
their SelfRealisation and if you see around the
world, it is in chaos. There is a lot of chaos, the
world needs this.
We then performedAarti and the music
began.
Some gifts were given, one being a
silver chariot drawn by seven horses which was
presented. Shri Mataji said it was very
symbolic, the seven horses, and the chariot, but
the horses were not drawing a chariot they were
pulling the Sahaja Yogis, everywhere the Sahaja
Yogis are being helped.
Sahaja Yoga is the only solution. Shri
Mataji ended with something reduced all the
tears again, She said:
"I am sorry if I have not helped you
all enough to finish this job, in many things
perhaps I have not finished off what I have
started ... so far'
When we presented the Australian gift
She commented that Australia is a very cut off
place geographically and it was good that Her
children had not forgotten Her, to which we
responded not only Her Australian children, but
all Her children all over the world had never left
Her side, and certainly not forgotten Her.
That was the moment, the beaming
smile, the words of encouragement, tear filled
eyes, all around faces wet with tears of joy. Sir
CP was continually wiping tears from his eyes,
and through the talk his hands were raised in
supplication, he bowed to Shri Mataji, and to
God Almightly in heaven above. Of us all he
was by far the happiest and most joyous.
Shri Mataji left but said there should
be music and dancing, we should be in joy, the
music played and we all danced and danced
and danced.
Shri Mataji looked around at us all and
asked if there was anything wrong, we should
Sincerely Chris
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Four Days Seminar in Nirmal Nagari
Pune, March-2007
experiences were also shared by city
coordinators from India.
The four days Intemational Sahaja Yoga
Seminar that started from 18th March and
concluded on 21st March was hosted by seven
countries (collectivity of Turkey, Dubai, Israel,
Tunisia, Greece, Morocco and Iran with India)
in Nirmal Nagri, Pune. This four days
International Sahaja Yoga seminar marked yet
another milestone in expressing a collective
sense of harmony through performance of
various arts and plays through staging of unique
cultural programme amidst eight to nine thousand
Sahaja Yogis who had congregated in this Holy
place of Pune. The occasion marked offering
puja at Her Holy Lotus Feet of Shri Mataji in
Her Shri Shiva Form on one hand and
celebrating the joy of Her 84th Birthday.
There were many noteworthy classical
presentations during these four days. Especially
the Yuvas from all over the globe had a magical
performance that spoke of the high quality of
art and culture that Sahaja Yoga promises to
the humanity to serve. Entire four days seminar
and the individual and collective performance
expressed joy from within. Marvelous
performance was rendered by the NGO
children from Vishwa Nirmal Prem Ashram as
the little ones performed dances and bhajans in
the praise of the Goddess. The melodious voices
of the established Sahaja artists made the
musical programme lively that included singers
like Pt. Arun Apte, Smt.Surekha Apte,
Pt. Subramanium, Sanjay Talwar, Mukhi Ram,
Deepak Verma, Rajesh Universe and many
others from India.
This was probably for the first time in
India that it had the privilege of welcoming such
a large gathering of realized souls from overseas
Almost one thousand to one thousand four
hundred Sahaja Yogi brothers and sisters had
come from various parts of the globe to pay
Australian Sahaja Yogis rendered some
of the most beautiful bhajans followed by
their respect and prayers to our most Holy
Mother Shri Mataji on Her 84th Birthday and
the Shiva Puja.
marvelous and awesome performances by the
Iranian collective. The music programme was
all very good, but the musical highlight came
after the large number of Iranians presented
themselves on stage to sing beautiful bhajans.
They were just wonderful, as they played on
their local instruments. the collectivity witnessed
some extraordinary performance from tiny tot
artist from Australia on Kuchipudi dance recital
-Satyabhama Kapla. While, in another
performance little girls performed Bharatnatyam
in great synchronous movements which one may
witness only on professional type of show.
The musical programme and seminar in
between the two Pujas projected a very joyous
yet very serious event. Amidst a collectivity of
8-9 thousand the various Sahaja artists
performed with very professional like talents. A
very powerful seminar was conducted by the
Pune Sahaja Yogis on subject of Experiences
in spreading Sahaja Yoga in their respective
countries. Coordinators from the hosting
countries like Turkey, Israel, Iran, Morocco,
and Dubai shared their experience. The
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Issue: 5 & 6 - 2007
5.
The Divine Cool Breeze
Mother has arrived. there is joy of celebrating
the Shiva Ratri (night) all around), The Devi Puja
concluded with Bolo Shiv Shiv Shambho Bam
Shri Shiva Puja 19th March 2007
This day witnessed three events in series
that played very significant role in their own
place. At the first place there was a unique solar
eclipse (visible over India). On the other hand
as per the India calender this day marked the
first day of the nine days Navaratri festival
celebrated to mark the Birthday of Shri Rama.
while, on another plane this day also celebrates
a very popular Hindu festival called Gudi Padwa
in Maharashtra, India. Overall it was indeed an
eventful day as the collectivity awaited for the
very powerful Shiva Puja in the evening at her
Holy Lotus Feet.
Bam Bam ( Sing in Praise of the Lord the
Shambho...).
Next was the preparation for the Shiva
Puja as the puja was being offered with the
anointing with geru and other fragrant powder
on the Mother's face. It was a very powerful
puja as the night also grew cooler, It was almost
nine in the evening the collectivity was witnessing
our most Holy Mother in Her Shiva Form
adorning the white robe of Shri Shiva with geru
application on Her forehead. .it was such
brilliance... There was an element of serenity
One could feel the divine presence on
this celestial evening piercing the emotions in
the collectivity with element of silence within. It
could be felt within heart for most of the realized
souls who were witnessing this heavenly bliss.
prevailing all around as the collective heart grew
deeper with sensitivity to accept the power of
transformation. As if that power within every
one of us was reverberating with the chant of
Shivoham Shivoham. (I am Shiva... I am
Shiva)..It was like a thoughtless emotion
projecting a different dimension that could
tangibly be felt within hearts which was trying
to express in form of collective gratitude to our
Mother Who blessed the collective to be so
The stage wore a very powerful look
with the eave design and Shiva Lingam to appear
like the abode of Shri Shiva in Kailasha. It was
almost at eight in the evening that the collectivity
was blessed with the Holy darshan (Holy sight)
of our most beloved Mother H.H. Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi in the Nirmal Nagri.
Spontaneously the musical choir took off with
prayer bhajan Vinati Suniye AdiShakti..
(Please accept our prayers..) and the little
Ganeshas were seen rushing around to offer
flowers at Her Holy Lotus Feet as the Shri
Ganesha Puja was being offered.
near to Shri Shiva Himself. The Shiva Puja
concluded with Vishwa Vandita. followed by
Arti and Mahamantras.
Throughout Mother looked very
comfortable and was alert all the time and at
times could be seen keenly observing and
instructing yogis around or Kalpana didi who
was quite near to Her. The unique International
gift that was offered to Her Holiness on the stage
Then it was the turn for the Devi Puja
that started with the shrinagar bhajans like Tere
Hi Gun Gate Hain. (Singing in praise of You...)
.Mano Buddhi Ahankar... Shivoham
Shivoham (I am not the Mind neither the
Intellect...I am the Shiva...I am the Shiva...)
Aya Mata ka Pujan Din Aya.. Shiv Ratri ka
Anand Chhaya (The day of worshipping of
was eleven sarees in one tray, probably most
befittingly symbolizing the eleven Powers of
Ekadesha Rudras.
As the Puja concluded it was almost
half past nine when the collectivity was
addressed by the most beloved Sir CP. He
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-7.txt 
 2007
1ssue: 5 & 6
6.
The Divine Cool Breeze
spoke very clearly outlining the objectives that
we must resolve to undertake as vows. It was
being referred to the collective subtly in the
wake of the current scenario of taking everything
for granted. He spoke each and every word
and sentence with great humility. He reminded
the collective that it was over 35 years that he
had been witnessing Mother's relentless works
and love for the entire humanity transgressing
all nations, language, religion, caste and creed
without any distinction... and now that the love
must flow. This was Her main purpose of
teaching Sahaja Yoga to the world. He confided
in the collectivity that the time has arrived to
beautiful fire crakers.the fragrance engulfed the
entire atmosphere..as the bhajans continued
amidst the impatient collectivity standing with
their palms open joining the choir with Shri
Jagadamba Aye re....
Mahakali. sung in his typical modulated voice
of Mukhiram from India. It was probably at
quarter to eight that the curtains were opened
to the collective for the Holy Darshan of Shri
Mataji amidst thunderous applause and
excitement.
....Mahamaya
It was very next moment that Shri
Ganesha Atharvashirsham was heard being
recited by the choiras the little Ganeshas flocked
express our deep concern and gratitude to our
beloved Mother for the love She has given us
to grow and Her tireless works to transform
human. It is indeed our turn now and we must
return that love to the world shouldering the
responsibility to cary forward Her message of
Sahaja Yoga.
around on the stage to offer flowers at her Holy
Lotus Feet with the Shri Ganesha Puja. Mother
was seen complacent with Her gesture.
She was alert throughout and very
keenly watching Her children deep into their
hearts.. The Shrinagar bhajans continued with
the ongoing Shringar of our Most Holy Mother
with Jago Savera Aya... Janam Din Ayo
AdiShakti Ka... Chhindwara mein Janam
Birth Day Celebrations on 21st March 2007
Although, the day was hot yet the
evening was pleasant sporting full of joy and
coolness around hosting nine thousand yogis in
the open air waiting to celebrate the Birthday
of their most beloved Mother. The stage wore
a nicely decorated place like look. There was
beautiful fragrant flowers and bunch of colourful
Hua.
At quarter past nine the Arti was offered
at Her Holy Lotus feet and later the collectivity
was blessed to witness the most exciting
moment when the cake was being graced and
cut by Mother and Sir CP being helped by their
grandson with a knife to celebrate her 84th
Birthday.
balloons here and there.
At seven in the evening the meditation
started with bandhan and mahamantras
The atmosphere was filled with joy as
the fire crackers and balloons were being
released in high air as the Shri Raj Laxmi would
have desired for the collectivity to enjoy that
moment in Her Holy presence of Shri Mataji.
Janam Din Ayo... (the Birthday has arrived..
was again being sung...
followed by a very powerful bhajan Naam Na
Jane.., Tum Asha Vishwas Hamare... by
Surekha Apte.
With the news of Shri Mataji's holy
arrival following into the Nirmal Nagri the
cloudless sky was filled with sparklers and
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-8.txt 
 2007
Issue: 5 & 6
7.
The Divine Cool Breeze
all parts of the world travelling in bullock cart
to buses to trains etc, and now, he said, I request
all of you, I urge you and I beg of you to kindly
take the responsibilities to spread the Sahaja
Yoga and please let Her have the rest while you
work to take her mission forward.
A series of felicitation messages
received from high level dignitaries across the
globe were read out by Rajesh Shah. They
came from The President of India and other
important dignitaries from Turkey, the hosting
country... followed by Texas and Oklahoma
..the messages were flocking from all corners
of Earth to greet our most beloved Mother on
Her 84th Birthday. At times it was from
Governors and other times from various
Mayors.. with all words of praise and humility
for Her contribution to the humanity at large that
were read out in her Holy praise of our Mother.
Although Mother did not speak but
it could loudly be felt as Her vibrations
through Her Para Vaani (speech of God)
had a direct contact within our Madhyama
(Heart region).
Just before the departure Sir CP once
again took over the mike to congratulate the
Later Sir C.P. was requested to address
the collectivity and he spoke with great humility
to convey the holy messages of our Holy
Mother. Our beloved Papaji opened up
addressing the collectivity with 'Jai Shri
Matai'...The words emerged like prayers that
we would be humbly submitting. There was a
resolution taken by Sir CP on behalf of all of us
and the world to Mother as he said today is our
tumand may be it will be the tum of your children
or their grandchildren or their children, who will
love to celebrate Her birthday with Mother
sitting in front and be privileged to have Her
darshan. And now on this day may we all
request Shri Mataji that..
stupendous works undertaken by the Pune
collectivity and also Mr. Pugalia in person who
had helped transform this part of the Earth into
Heaven compared to the last year scenario. The
collectivity expressed their heartfelt gratitude to
our most beloved Mother for blessing Her
children to be worthy of celebrating Her
Birthday in Her Holy presence and this large
family. It was as if Mother was enacting the play
as Sir CP like our father stood up to convey the
words of our beloved Mother as She would
have desired him to convey to all of Her realized
Children on Her 84th Birthday,
As the joy was heightening with the
night growing cooler with vibrations there was
one last request that came for Pune collectivity
to sing the quwwali Number... Mata Ka
Karam Hai"...that activated every Kundalini
to dance joyfully. Sir CPcould not help clapping
and keeping a pace with the moments with nods
and smiles at the comer of his lips and conveying
certain personal notes to Mother as if
saying.Look how joyous are Your children on
Your Birthday...Just bless them...and at last She
raises Her right arm in air to bless all Her
"Mother please maintain the
throne on this Earth until every human
being in transformed."
Sir C P spoke on behalf of Mother
requesting all the Yogis to take over the
responsibility to spread Sahaja wherever
possible. He said your Mother is the source of
unending love. She made this beautiful world of
Sahaja Yoga and being Her children now it's
our responsibility to spread this message of love.
In his speech Sir CP emphasized that Shri Mataji
had undoubtely been the source of joy and had
worked a lot for transforming the humanity in
children.
Jai Shri Mataji
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-9.txt 
 SHRI GANESHA PUJA
PERTH, WESTERN AUSTRALIA - 1-3-1983
Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
I think it is the quality of wisdom which
is still manifesting in many Australians, which
many have lost because they have taken to the
gross side of materialism. Shri Ganesha is the
tremendous purifying power, because it cannot
be contaminated by anyone, whatever you may
try, it cannot be contaminated. Only thing is, it
may recede back, it may not manifest, but
whatever it is, it is in its Absolute Form. If you
know how to use it, you can purify everyone.
So the responsibility of Australians, one must
understand is very clear, because they are living
in a country which is ruled by Shri Ganesha; so
first they have to maintain their purity. Purity of
their being. Many people sometimes think that
purity is only limited to the gross side, that purity
of their sex life is sufficient, it is not so. That is
we can say that this attention that's coming in,
goes into a parallelogram of forces, because we
have two types of densities in our brain. There
is also refraction, and because of refraction this
parallelogram of forces acts in such a way that
your attention goes out, and the attention that
goes out, reacts. And when it reacts, the thought
waves start coming in to us. You must have seen
a lake. If you drop a stone in a lake, the waves
start and they come to the shores of the lake,
and then it is the shore that gives it another wave
which goes back. In the same way, when human
beings look at anything they put attention to it,
there is always a reaction that comes to you.
o
Now according to Christ we have to
have non-adulterous eyes, there should be no
adultery. The word adultery in the pure sense is
why Christ has said "Thou shalt not have
not so bad. Adultery means there should not be
adulterous eyes", meaning, your eyes should
be clear, and as you know, eyes represent both
any mixture of what it exists, simple as that.
When we say there is adulteration in the milk,
we mean that it's not purely milk but there's
your ego and super-ego. So when He said that
your eyes should be clear, He meant that your
thoughts should be clear.
something else in it. So when you look at things,
say this is a wall, a wall is a wall that's all, what
is there to think about? But a person who is not
a realised soul will immediately start thinking
about a wall even. Now depending upon the
conditioning of a person, if a person is a very
perverted soul, I don't know what he would
think of the wall because I can't go to every
limit of thinking also-I'm sorry I have certain
limitation. But a person who is say a normal
person, also may start thinking about the wall,
how much it will cost and what will happen and
this and that and all sorts of conditionings
according to the money point of view, if he is
Now, what is the generator of your
power, we have to go deep into it and see how
thoughts are created. The brainofhuman beings
as you know, is like a pyramid. It's elevated
through a central point in a conical way, it's the
epitome, it's the Brahmarandhra, and when this
mind elevates to that stage in human beings it
goes into a tremendous change of its reactions
to its environment. For example, an animal, if it
sees a thing, it doesn't think about it, there's no
reaction created. But only in human beings this
reaction takes place because ofits conical brain,
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Issue: 5 & 6 - 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
money oriented. If he is ego oriented, then his
thoughts would go reacting that same way. This
is the adulteration, that when you look at things as we understand, is that we should not have
there is nothing to think about-what is there to lust in our eyes. But I would go still further to
think? Whatever is, it is, but we think that by say that our attention has to be so pure that we
thinking we solve the problems. Also this kind
ofamyth exists among human beings, that when from a particular thing, but just enjoying it, just
you look at something or you think about the joy part of it. IfI see a beautiful thing, then I
something then you solve the problem. It's not amjust enjoying it, not that I should possess it,
true. It's a myth, because thinking is just an nor should I think about it, nor do I need that I
empty process of the mind. It's like a wave should repeat it. Just enjoy it as it is. Maybe if
passing toward the shore and thinks that it can you just enjoy it you will just create it again.
just engulf it or dissolve it completely. So the
thought is just an empty vessel which
carries nothing. It cannot do anything, it
cannot bring forth any fruit whatsoever.
Now when He said, "Thou shalt not
have adulterous eyes", -of course the adultery
should not have any idea of return coming to us
That's the capacity one should have of
purification.
So sometimes people think that Sahaja
Yoga is a very Victorian sort of a System in
which you can't lead a life like this and the
freedom we have achieved and the
Sometimes this statement might look
very big and you might think how can that be
Mother, we've done so much by thinking and
this and that. But you've not, whatever you have
done is though spontaneity because the
Unconscious has helped you, has given you the
ideas, the inspiration, you have done everything
through inspiration and not by your own
thinking. Now there we do not want to agree,
because we have to give up our ego because
we think we have achieved it through our
thinking. But when you think too much, too
much, too much, like that, then what happens?
The Unconscious gives you the necessary
abandonment we have achieved we cannot
enjoy in Sahaja Yoga. But the virtue or this
righteousness that we have condemned so far,
is really the sustainer of life, is our quality, is our
gold, is our wealth, is our property, is our
security which we have lost, and we have to
just again have acleansing. It is there because if
it is fundamentally enternal it cannot be lost, it
cannot be permanently destroyed. It is like you
have seen a brass metal or something like that,
which gets covered with atmosphere, is black,
red, yellow, every sort of a colour and ruined.
But again you polish it out, it comes back to it.
But ifitis gold, it is untamishable, but if gold is
allowed to rust in the dirty gutter or something,
you cannot see it, it is covered with all kinds of
things and you think it is just finished now, it's
not there, It exists all the time, our innocence
exists within us. It's not lost, it's there, only it's
covered. Just like the sky can be covered with
clouds, it is covered now because of the
information, because it has compassion, it has
love for you and suddenly you find something
there. You are just pushed into that comer where
you find it. And for this you must know it is
Einstein is the person who says that the Theory
of Relativity dawned upon him from somewhere
unknown, because whatever isknown is already
there. And whatever is unknown you cannot
find out by this brain which is thinking, but
by the brain which is enlightened.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-11.txt 
 - 2007
10
Issue: 5 & 6
The Divine Cool Breeze
He enjoys joy, the way He manifests joy. He is
source of all the joys of the world. Now in
English language there are no names given to
joys, there is only one word joy' and I find it
sometimes difficult to describe the different
kinds of joy that you can have at different levels
ofour evolution. But when you get to your
atmosphere, because of the way we try to dent
it and do all kinds of things to it. That's why I
say don't feel guilty, because if you feel guilty
then you have a hand which is weak, a mind
which is weak, a mind which is wobbly, and
then you don't want to cleanse yourself. But it
exists all the time within us, untamishable itexists
within. You have to just get to it.
Sahasrara the joy is called Nirananda. Now
Now Shri Ganesha is the one who does Nira is my name, you know that. Ananda means
that job for us. He is the one who cleanses it. joy. Nira means that there is nothing else but
Not that He is the embodiment of purity, but joy. There is complete joy, no reaction, nothing
He does that job. Only a person, or only the just submerged in joy. That quality also evolves
Deity which is embodiment of purity can do it. through the quality of Shri Ganesha. It's the Shri
As like you can see a soap. Soap is the one within us. He goes into evolution gradually as
which is in a quality, is a pure thing and it purifies
too. Supposing it is not pure, it can become you see up to Agnya Chakra he becomes Christ.
contaminated. In the same way our innocence That doesn't mean that he goes into evolution,
is absolutely pure, so it is our innocence itself but we can see a seed growing into the tree and
cures ourselves. Just see this. The One which is ultimately what we find that we are sitting on
lying under, which we have always repressed, top of that tree in joy like children. The joy that
which we have undermined, which we have not our heavenly Father has bestowed upon us at
respected, comes to our help, and shines within
us. It's such a great blessing that we have so
many etemal things existing within us, otherwise understand. It is very important in Sahaja Yoga,
human beings would have been finished a long but everybody should not be exposed to Puja
time back. There would have been no trace of to begin with, from two points of view.
human beings the way they have been playing Sometimes the people who come to puja
about with their chastity, with their real power actually are not really worthy of it and then
of their character. So when it is very much they react, they react to puja. They think why
always impressed inevery religion that you have this puja and this is subservient and all sorts of
to lead a proper life, a sane life, the reason is things because they are not worthy of it, they
this gold that is within you must be made to shine have to find out some excuse to justify their
and the brilliance of such a face you can see.
Ganesha who evolves that quality of Nirananda
the Sahasrara.
Now the puja part of it one should
unworthiness. So we have to first find out if
the person is worthy of puja or not. If the
You can see a person who leads a very fast life.
as you call it, this sallow face,the sad life, and
all kinds of unhappy lines on his face. But a
person who starts shining one's own being with
that wisdom and that purity beams, absolutely
beams with the lustre of Shri Ganesha, the
innocence of Shri Ganesha, His joy, the way
person is not worthy, it is better to leave
the person alone till he becomes worthy of
the puja because doubts and all those things
can obstruct the flow of vibrations to other
people and such a person can create a
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-12.txt 
 2007
11
Issue: 5 & 6
The Divine Cool Breeze
it's not so easy as you think, because it has
worked out since ages in a very deep way, and
even your Mother has worked very hard to
achieve it. So somebody has done the job. So
if it is easy you should thank your stars that it's
not difficult for you instead of doubting why is it
so easy that you want to contribute something
to it, alright you can, but first take advantage of
what is available and then you can contribute
something more to it. If you have not known an
ordinary aeroplane, how are you going to build
acomplicated one? So first know that whatever
is achieved is Selfrealisation and the cleansing
power of Shri Ganesha. Establish Shri Ganesha
within you. First of all you must establish Him
and then you can use it for others, for yourself
and for bettering and bettering the methods of
problem for others. So it is not civil of that
person also to be in the puja-if the person
has not got an open heart and
understanding of what puja is. Doing puja to
any Deity as suchis not an easy thing, especially
to Shri Ganesha. Those people who do puja to
Shri Ganesha should know that of course it has
to be a Swayambhu -means the one that is
created by Mother Earth. No other than
Ganesha should be worshipped, and if they are
not realised souls they can never worship Shri
Ganesha. They cannot even think of him, they
cannot even take His name, it is so difficult to
reach Shri Ganesha. But after realisation the first
thing you have to do is to worship Shri Ganesha
because that's the base on which you got your
realisation. He's the One first who got His
crucifixion then His resurrection and it is the One
who opened the path of realisation for you. So Sahaja Yoga that you have learnt. That's how
you have to worship Him before any other Deity
with the greatest sacrifices. The greatest
evolutionary ascent He achieved for your sake
to become a human being to die and to suffer
like a human being so that you should not find it to understand in all its aspects is not an
difficult to get your realisation. Today when we
say it's so easy, how do you get it, we forget
that people have done a lot of work to achieve
it for you, to create the path. Like supposing I
come to Perth. Say, when I was studying in that's how it works out. But if you use your
schools I used to read the word Perth, and I brains to understand it, your brain cannot
could not imagine that Indians could easily reach
Perth from sayjust fly out and you are just there.
But it's possible today that we have achieved just to try to become One with it, and those
this kind of an ascent from India to Perth so
easily because people have worked for it.
People have sacrificed. How many people must
have died creating an aeroplane, how many must which they just give bliss and peace to others.
have had shocks and things like that? We are
so privileged to use their sacrifices for our
benefit. We take it all for granted. In the same
way in spiritual ascent when we say it's easy,
Shri Ganesha is so important for all the Sahaja
Yogis-to be understood in all its aspects, but
this principle is very enormous I should say. The
principle is very spread out, it's very subtle, so
easy thing. The only thing you can do is to
become One with it, like the ocean. If you
become One with the ocean you become
the ocean. Just become One with it and
even capture a wink of it. So the best thing is
that you just be humble about the whole process,
who can achieve that will realise that they have
become joy themselves and they have those joy-
giving qualities, they have those qualities by
Just them being there itselfis sufficient to create
this feeling. I always have great hopes on
Australia and I'm sure that one day it will happen
(Contd on page no.15)
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Speech delivered by Shri Mataji at the site of the proposed
School at Chowk (near Khopoli) Maharashtra
on Saturday, the 11th December, 1983
In the past many great Saints and
Sadhus were born in Maharashtra. They have
shown the correct way to us. They taught about
religion and of the practice of religion. They
spread the knowledge of the soul and always
emphasized that without realisation of the Self,
everything in this life is unstable and unreal.
understand many things about discipline, moral
etc. without specifically being taught. In the
schools the teachers have to threaten the use of
cane and only then the students learn matters of
importance. In Sahaja Yoga it is entirely
different.
Many newsmen wonder and ask me as
to how Sahaja Yoga has produced so many
scholars. They say whenever they discuss with
any sahaja yogi, he talks like a pundit. They are
surprised as to how you are all transformed into
the image of Sant Kabirdas. The answer is
simple, In Sahaja Yoga the intellect becomes
sharp and pointed like the needle. Not only that,
See all, Everyone of you have come to
Sahaja Yoga and have got your SelfRealisation.
You are realised souls. You are Saints and
Sadhus. The Saints and Sadhus of the by-gone
days may not have assembled together as you
have done here today. This land has been
sanctified by your presence. On two sides of
this land are the abodes of
front there is a temple of Shri Shankar known
as Baijnath, and at the back there is the abode
of Shri Dattatreya. The thought of having a
school in such beautiful surroundings has been
engaging my attention since long. Now Shri
Bharwani has graciouly donated this land, I feel
that the school project should come up at an
but the whole store of knowledge itself is wide
open before you. If so, someone may ask what
is the necessity for a school? I will give an
example. Aperson may have no knowledge of
painting. He can even then tell you the different
Shri Ganesha. In the
colours or the colour combination in the painting.
But unless you have to special skill, you cannot
produce the different combinations and give
form to the painting. You may call it the
technique. Unless you know that technique, you
cannot give proper shape to your work. Without
the technique it remains without any shape.
Therefore, in order to give your work the
proper shape, you ought to know the technique.
The students of our school wvill be taught the
proper technique.
early date.
Sahaja Yogis are industrious and
hardworking. They cannot sit idle. They have
to work for this school. Even in the Trust Deed
(of the Life Eternal Trust) it has beenmentioned
that we shall establish and run schools. There is
a great difference between a Sahaja Yoga school
of our concept and the other schools. Our
school will lay stress mainly on religion. It is not
that in our school we will merely explain what is
the Hindu religion or what is Muslim religion
etc. Our school will teach the true religion. Not
ly that but the people should be convinced
and imbibed with the true religion. You
In the first place, the knowledgeof Shri
Vidya or pure knowledge will be imparted to the
students of this school. Pure knowledge means
knowledge which enables you to stabilize the
Kundalini, the knowledge of giving bandhans, as
also the knowledge of giving self-realisation to
others. Such knowledge will be imparted here.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-14.txt 
 2007
13
Issue: 5 & 6
The Divine Cool Breeze
fees may be kept at some higher level in
proportion to the higher eamings oftheir parents.
Of course, there will not be disproportionately
high fees. We are not here for business.
You may be surprised that many
realised people and great Gurus I have met, are
not aware of Shri Vidya. They are great realised
souls and yet they are unawvare of
They do not even know how to raise the
Kundalini. They do not know the Chakras or
the process of cleansing the chakras. The
vibrations do their work. What is however
Shri Vidya.
One thing to remember is that nobody
shall make any recommendation for admission
to the school. This rule should be strictly
observed. So also any interference in this behalf
necessary, is the control over their movement
on the ground that the student is the son of your
of the manoeuvring. This will be the principal
subject in our School. This knowledge will be
imparted to every student of the school from
his early childhood.
aunt or your nephew or such other relation,
would not be tolerated. Someone may say he
has paid so much money and therefore his son
should be admitted. This reason will also not
beaccepted. Admission will depend on merit.
How is the boy? Are there any vibrations? Is
he 'paar' (realised)? How is his conduct? The
answers will determine the issue.
In the second place education is
necessary for earning a livelihood. In Sahaja
Yoga there is no sanyas or renunciation of
worldly ties. You have to achieve your object
while leading anormal life. There has to be non-
attachment to worldly pleasures while leading a
normal life. Therefore, education is also
necessary for leading a worldly life. Moreover,
in order to convey your knowledge to others,
you must know the science ofthe alphabets and
the language. Therefore, arrangements for
imparting such knowledge are also to be made.
We are going to admit students who are
pure and innocent. Whether they are children
of the rich or of poor, will not make any
difference. The main consideration would be
innocence of the student, his innate goodness,
his humility and his willingness to learn. A careful
scrutiny of the parents would also be made.
What is the use of admitting a student whose
father is a drunkard and mother a quarrelsome
woman? Sucha student will follow his parents
and even if admitted, he will have to be returned
to his parents the very next day. Therefore, it is
in their interest that the parents come to Sahaja
Yoga and get self realisation. No person who
is imperfect or silly has any place in Sahaja
Yoga. Then how can such students be admitted?
Taking all these matters into
consideration, ve are going to establish a highly
cultured school. For that purpose after
reverential bowing to the eldest brother Shri
Ganesha, let us worship him. It is Shri Ganesha
who gives wisdom to all. It is Shri Ganesha who
shows the way to use that wisdom and to remain
immersed in that wisdom. Therefore after the
worship of Shri Ganesha is over, you may
consider that we have started the school today.
The parents also will have to come upto
certain expectations. It is immaterial whether
they are farmers or labourers. They should be
gentle, pious and religious-minded. I am again
telling you that any recommendation for
admission will be considered as a
There is a great demand for the School.
People staying in foreign countries are very
anxious to send their children to this school. Then
there are Indian students also. In the case of
local students the fees to be charged shall be at
a lower rate. In the case of foreign students the
disqualification. We are going to admit students
who possess the purest mind. We are not here
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-15.txt 
 14
Issue: 5 & 6 - 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
no respect for the mother. The people coming
here will, of course, be having deep roots in
Sahaja Yoga and highly cultured ones. I know
that. But those of you who are Sahaja Yogis
should not behave in a trivial manner or jokingly.
All work should be done with due solemnity
and in a thoughtful manner. Any person devoid
of these qualities will not be eligible for
Guruhood. For Guruhood you shall have to
inculcate gravity and solemnity. You should then
pass on the qualities to the students. But in no
case should the element of fear or awe be
introduced to achieve this objective.
for politics or for fighting an election. We are
going to extend the best possible help only to
deserving students. Those who are poor will
be helped and nobody would know about the
help. Man becomes great by his character.
Keep this in mind always and work with unselfish
and pure motives. Even some of the parents
will have to be given Sahaja Yoga treatment.
Otherwise we will have to work again and again
on the students every time they return to the
school after visiting their parents. The work will
continue day and night.
Another thing I want to impress upon
you is that the use of a cane in the school shall
be totally prohibited. Tell the teachers who are
habituated to use the cane that this school is not
the proper place for them. The emoluments here
will be good; so,also the other conditions of
service. The teather here shall in no case use
the cane or shout at the students to make his
point. He should rely entirely on love for his
work and not violence. If any erring student
does not mend or behave properly, his name
shall be removed, But in no case should the
teacher beat the students or shout at them.
We are going to provide here an ideal
and altogether unique system of education. The
students are going to be model citizens of
tomorrow of this and other countries. We will
make every effort to provide the requisite
facilities on this land. If necessary we will arrange
for additional land. Where the students study in
those pleasant surroundings, there will be
noticeable change in them. The residents of the
village Chowk will also feel the improvement.
They will get jobs. They will become orderly
and systematic. Not only this, but they will also
experience the power of God. Once our school
is established. in Maharashtra, it will have
repercussions everywhere outside. Let us first
start the school here first. All other projects will
be started later on.
The attitude towards the students should
be one of respect for them. If you extend to the
student courteous behaviour as you would
towards a Maharaja (Great King) or a Maharani
(Great Queen), the students would start
behaving likewise. If you behave with
courteousness and respect, the students will
behave accordingly. What is wanted is the
development of the students and you have to
be careful about that. You cannot expect all the
students to reciprocate the behaviour. Some of
them may try to vilify others. Many have this
habit. Ifany mother ridicules the father, the child
will have no respect for his father. So also ifany
man ridicules his wife, then the children will have
Many people have given donations for
this school. The money should be utilised with
the greatest care. It is meant for the work of
God and not one paise should be spent without
due consideration. The continuous work should
be neat and nice. It should be done with great
care and attention. Our children behave as we
do. We say that there is corruption everywhere.
But the origin thereof is in the home, in the school
and it then spreads elsewhere. Therefore the
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-16.txt 
 2007
15
Issue: 5 & 6
The Divine Cool Breeze
They are very straightforward about money
matters. That quality is rather difficult for us to
acquire. This is one good thing you can learn
from them.
school should be constructed and run so that
the students develop a sterling moral character.
It should be noticeable in them. We do not
desire to produce businessmen or politicians.
We want good children here. It is these children
who will rule over the world tomorrow. You go
Everybody, therefore, should offer
prayers to Shri Ganesha- "That our school shall
and tell the people in the surrounding villages to
help us in this project. Assure them that we
intend to help them. We will educate their
children, particularly those of the Chowk village.
They have a right to be admitted to this school.
they are connected with this land, You shall also
keep the rights of all others in view and do this
work thoughtfully and with love.
be established and conducted on the lines of
the ideal pattern as desired by Shri Mataji; that
the school shall be blessed with ideal students,
ideal teachers and also ideal parents of the
students and that the school should gather such
students and teachers and parents from all over
the world".
This should be your prayer to Shri
Many experienced teachers have
offered their services to this school. Two of them
Ganesha and when He sends all this, a great
work will get accomplished. We want to
are from Singapore and one from Australia.
There is one Head Mistress of International
fame, who has also shown her willingness. They
will come here to guide the school in the
beginning. You see how they work. They are
very strict about cleanliness. They may not be
as loveable as you are; but their sense of
cleanliness is such that you cannot but admire.
establish and run an ideal school which will be
the only school ofits kind in whole of the country,
Everybody should pray to Shri Ganesha with
complete devotion.
(Marathi speech translated by
Sahajyogi Shri T.Y. Chaudhari)
(Contd from page no. 11)
here in a big way. And when it happens here
we'll achieve greater results in other places. I
have to work hard, and you all have to work
very hard to understand the importance of this
country, your importance as Australians.
So a great message to Perth, and this centre is
the door. This is the door of Shri Ganesha and
you have to find more people who are true
seekers, and don't quarrel with people who are
doubting Sahaja Yoga, just don't quarrel.
Gradually all of them have to come and if they
don't come don't despair, that's alright, that's
their luck. So youjust don't argue on that point.
Don't waste your energy arguing with them. We
have other methods of convincing them: of giving
them bandhan, of all the Nirmala Vidyas that
you use. So you don't despair and you don't
get angry with them, because they're ignorant
and you must know your past also, how you
behaved towards Sahaja Yoga in the beginning
and then you will be kind to them. Be kind.
Gradually everyone has to come, those who are
seekers. We'll see that they're all in before we
close the doors.
May God bless you
(Nirmal Yoga)
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-17.txt 
 MOTHER EARTH
Surbiton Ashram, 21st August 1983
Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Nirmala Devi
of Christ where light was worshipped. But
today when we are in this modern Sahaja Yoga,
we are actually at the level ofthe Mother Earth,
because this is the age of the Aquarius. And
Aquarius is the same as the Kumbha- is the
Mother Earth. So we are at the level of the
To say something about the
connection of Sahaja Yoga with this Mother
Earth. It is very important, that we must
understand the value of the Mother Earth. She
has been very kind to all of you, She has been
sucking your vibrations. She has been,
otherwise also-She has given you everything that
you see around. So today, we have to
understand the connection, and the symbolic
expression of the Mother Earth within ourselves.
Mother Earth. You can also see in the
consciousness of humanbeings-I'm saying not
only men, but women also and men. The
consciousness is moving more towards the
feminine expression of life. But as stupid as
I have told you before also that
Kundalini, which is in three and a half coils is
human beings are, the feminists have also been
very stupid, that they are fighting on the level of
rationality, of economics, of politics- all useless
things. Equality on all these things if they are to
be sought, you become men, you become just
placed within a triangular bone. Now this abode
e
of the Kundalini is called as Mooldhara, and is
represented in this universe as Mother Earth.
Or in the puja it is represented as the Kumbha.
So far, in the movement of our
consciousness, we have been trying to
understand the GodAlmighty and all other five
elements that we call as important. And also,
the consciousness has been moving towards the
understanding of all these four other elements
"but' the Mother Earth. That had to be such.
because unless and until the understanding of
all these four other elements are brought to a
certain degree, the Mother Earth cannot
like men. If you are argumentative, if you are
rational, if you talk like a man, it's a masculine
development. But the Mother's development,
the feminine development, is not equality in the
way the men have been stupid.
No use competing with men in their
stupidity, the amount of stupidity has been
created for us quite sufficiently. The whole world
is today, is expressing that nonsense that they
have-the competition, the aggression, the
oppression. So the other side of the woman,
express itself. Like if all your chakras, four
chakras, are caught up, you cannot raise the
Kundalini, you cannot give Self-Realisation. You
cannot have a mass evolutionary process. That's
why we had yagyas, all other methods of exciting
the four elements. They worshipped the water
and they worshipped air, the sky, the firmament-
the light.
which was called as the dominated-one, the
dark side, the oppressed, all that has to express
itselfin a different way. The whole mode, the
style, has to change. See now in Christianity
one should understand; why Christianity, even
Judaism, any religion, even Hinduism and all that
but its more in Christianity, 'surprisingly'-they
just had no place for Mary. And Muslims even
crowned it by "completely' cancelling Fatima.
And that's how they came up to the time
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-18.txt 
 17
Issue: 5 & 6
2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
But earth is 'very' different from this
dynamic power that is flowing through those
wires which are zero, which mean nothing. In
And on top of that, you will see that among
Christians, I think that ordination, or what you
call that, is not given to the ladies, to women,
while Christ was not bornof a man. But that
*does not' in any way mean that you compete
with men in their foolish enterprises by which
they have practically brought this world to such
a ruinous state.
the same way, in a woman, the womb of a
woman is the Kundalini. Now what is a womb?
If that is the Kundalini, that expresses the
Kundalini is the gross; that means the Mother
Earth is also like the womb. Now what does a
womb do? It receives the sperm. It is just a
frivolous act of man or you can say just
aggression, and She then nourishes it and looks
after it, corrects it and allows it to grow, not in
an aggressive way but in a very compassionate
and sensible way, till it is expelled out of the
womb when it is grown up. So the idea of womb
So today we have to understand that it
is the time for the Motherly' qualities to
develop. Even a man, when he becomes
motherly only, becomes a great man. Like
Christ, when he had compassion, he was called
as a saint. So the quality of a woman as a
Mother-Goddess is always as a Mother-and
She is the power most important to ignite Sahaja
Yoga.
is that the expression has to be in such a manner
that it does not dominate. It does not dominate
the embryo. If it dominates, how can it grow?
So it nourishes it and makes it grow.
Nowhow She ignites, I'll tell you. I give
an analogy, but analogy should not be carried
too far-as wise Sahaja Yogis you should not
carry it too far. Say there is a zero, it has no
meaning. In the same way God Almighty
has no meaning, 'till, you put some sort of
one or two before it. It's a zero. It 'has' an
existence but it has no capacity or a power
This is what today's Sahaja Yoga is.
That now the Mother Earth is the one, who is
symbolised within you as the Mooldhara,
symbolised as the Adi Shakti here, is sitting
down before you to nourish you, to make you
grow into new personalities-into mature
personalities. This concept we must understand.
to express itself. So it's zero. Like that we
should say the masculine growth is a zero.
So the women of the West must
understand that the nonsensical ideas they have
taken from menmust be "completely' discarded,
they have to become "women.' Those women
who just are talking like men, can 'never' help
in Sahaja Yoga. They have to be like this Mother
Earth who allows you to do what you like with
Her. I mean you human beings have been so
stupid to exploit Her to the maximum, not only
that but also She bears a lot of nonsense upon
Another analogy I will give you to
understand it. That if you see very high power
wires, going over your head, they are absolutely
hamless, there's no trouble. In Delhi there was
a suggestion that there is a very big plot of land
available where there are high power wires
going and we can have it for free. I asked "What
is the problem?" They said 'only', if earth is
connected with that, then you will have problem.
So till' these-this high power thing, whatever it
is-is not connected with the earth, it has no
it. But then a time reaches where She becomes
explosive, then She starts consuming people
inside Herself. And when She is consuming
people then you see the earthquake; droughts,
meaning at all.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Issue: 5 & 6 - 2007
18
The Divine Cool Breeze
this and that; all these things start coming in and
people get engulfed into these problems which
they blame Mother Earth for. The problems that
human beings have created out of aggressive
nature-even aggression towards Mother Earth,
they have to pay dividend for that. And they
are paying.
become One with the Whole and to feel that
you are One with the Whole, you should try to
give up all your individualistic attitudes. That's
very common now to hear "Yes, I like this, I
like that." It's very common: "I like it." Very
common. But it doesn't behove a Sahaja Yogi
to say such a thing. You see, how can I say that
I like some thing? Think of a mother who has to
Now, to stop this kind of a movement
of aggressiveness which brings all kinds of
disturbances, one has to recede back and
should develop a sense of 'totality', of
*compassion'. Unless and until you understand
totality, the "total' the 'complete', the 'whole-
that's the womb that's your Mother, As long as
you try to be individualistic you 'cannot' be a
good Sahaja Yogi. You have to become One
with the Whole.
bear the child, has to give birth to a child, has to
look after a child, the needs of the child, protect
the child, to train the child! How can she say:
"Ilike this" and "I like that"! Where is the time?
To think what you like and what you
don't like, "I like this food, I like that food".
Where is the time? Where is the energy left for
that? Where is the attention? The attention is
on the upbringing of the child.
Now in the same way a Sahja Yogi must
know that the child within him is bom- the spirit.
Spirit is the child which has been born within
him, now he has to nourish it, through the
Kundalini. He has to water it, he has to look
after it. It has to make it grow. Now where is
the time for other nonsensical things? You
have a child in hand. You are all mothers
Now we have to face ourselves for that,
very important it is. Specially in the West, I
would say, we have to face ourselves very
clearly-what are we up to? That's a 'very
important thing. First of all let us see "where is
our attention?" Ask a question. We are Sahaja
Yogis and Sahaja Yogis within our fold and I
am sometimes surprised that even now, the
attention can be very funny. Like, simple thing,
like we can have attention on material things:
"this is mine, this is yours; that I should have
"my' privacy." Then you are gone to another
realm of aggressiveness. If you try to have your
own privacy, then you are depriving others of
*their' privacy.
looking after the child-that's your Spirit. So
where do you have time for all these
things? What attention should be : "What
can I do to make this child happy, to make
this child grow, to make this child
completely manifest myself." The mother
replaces herself as soon as the child
becomes a mature child. So now in you, the
Motherhood must take over than the
Fatherhood. Motherhood towards youself. The
It was alright when you were not Sahaia
Yogis, to have your privacy, because you have
to grow in your privacy at that time. But after
Sahaja Yoga you have to become One with
'everyone else'-that is 'very' important. Before
Sahaja Yoga you were different and after Sahaja
Yoga you are different. The whole concept must
change after Sahaja Yoga. That now you have
attitude should be like a Mother towards the
child. How her attention is towards the child?
You can see in day-to-day life how we behave.
Ihave seen people very much interested,
even now, in food. Now where is the time?
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-20.txt 
 - 2007
19
Issue: 5 & 6
The Divine Cool Breeze
I am still possessed, I have worked with lemons
and chillies, I am coming to You for this and
that." It is a very low grade business, I think
even after so many years you are possessed,
then I think you should beat yourselfevery day
hundred and eight times. It's a very low grade
behaviour, I personally think, that after your
Mother has worked so hard on you, you are
still just the same, coming back with the horrible
idea of bringing all kinds of problems to your
Mother. That means you have not looked after
Where is the attention? How can you be so
much worried about your food? Worried about
your sleep. Worried about your health, Worried
about this that? I mean, here you are to worry
about your child which you have got now within.
And that's why the child is neglected and
sometimes you find the child becomes sick or
sometimes goes into a coma or may die away
also.
So the situation is very different 'now
for Sahaja Yogis: "how to treat themselves.
Those who are still running after food and all
these nonsensical things, I mean I have seen
Sahaja Yogis, all their attention is on food all
the time! How dedication can come in a person
who is so much dedicated to food habits?
your child.
Now in Sahaja Yoga it's not a child
which is an individual child you have to look
after. This is, one should understand, this is
where we miss very much, especially the
intellectuals. They think it is their "own' child
which should be alright, doesn't matter about
Like, we have seen, you might have also
seen-some of you-Ajanta caves were built. In
ten generations they built Ajanta caves-ten
generations! And they built in a place where
there was noteven water available-to begin with.
And day in and day out thousands of people,
without getting any payment, without getting
anything, built it. No food, -no question! They
used to eat some fruits somewhere here, there,
but their dedication gave them power to do it.
other's children. Or, doesn't matter if you have
connection with others or not. It's very common.
Because, you know: rationality which gives them
that sense, "Oh! My Spirit is alright, my
vibrations are alright, so it is alright if I do not
go to puja, or if I do not go to any collective
thing or ifI donot support in any collective work
or if I do not take any responsibility of Sahaja
Yoga."
But this dedication can only be
developed if you realise that you have to Mother
your child. That, if the mother is ugly, the child
will be ugly too. Because it is the mother who is
expressed in the child. She does not dominate
the child alright, but she definitely can corrupt
the image of the child. And that's what exactly
happens when we, the Sahaja Yogis, are not
bothered as to look after our Spirit and our
spiritual growth.
Because once you become collective
you take responsibility. So you are never-
satisfied with yourselfthat "It is good, that I need
not take up any responsibility. All the Sahaja
Yogis are bad, or some of them are bad. I have
nothing to do with them and this is that and that
and that.
But in Sahaja Yoga, as it is, the
Motherhood is universal. Because if you are
nose, say, then somebody is the eye; if you are
the ears, somebody is the lips. So, it is 'essential'
Even now, you will be surprised, fifty
percent people write letters to Me: "Mother
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-21.txt 
 - 2007
20
Issue: 5 & 6
The Divine Cool Breeze
in Sahaja Yoga, that you can manoeuvre the
Kundalini, but not the Spirit. You can raise your
hand, the Kundalini will move. You can
manocuvre it. You can give ita bandhan, it will
go round and round and round.
for you to understand that'anybody' who is a
Sahaja Yogi is in trouble, you are in trouble. A
threat to your growth; it is a threat to your
growth, because it is the 'Whole' that is growing.
Of course, those who are absolutely
useless will be thrown away, gradually. That's
what Mother does. They can be thrown away,
absolutely, so much far away that they will never
return. But you don't have to worry about such
people, they will be thrown away. They will be
given some chances, some more credits will be
given, some graces will be given, but ultimately
they will be thrown away. So you don't have to
worry. But you 'must' worry about the Whole.
And you have to take up the responsibility.
Those who do not take up the responsibility,
But what about the Spirit? You cannot
manoeuvre it. There is only one mantra to
awaken the Spirit, in the sense that to please
Him you have to say you are the Spirit. But you
cannot manoeuvre it. You have to bring in
Kundalini to look after it, you have to take
Kundalini there, to the heart, so that this child
which is the little offspring just now has to be
carefully developed and matured.
So on both sides, of men and women.
we have to understand, that if you are a man,
are not the people who have yet matured their
child-that's the Spirit. Every type of
responsibility that you can take, think' of what
responsibilities you can take.
and if you are a dominating man, it's alright. But
ifyou are a woman and if you are dominating,
then it's difficult thing for Sahaja Yoga to cure
you, because you have lost your quality of being
a woman. At least you have to be a woman to
begin with. If you are not even a woman, then
what can you do with these third persons who
That is why most of us have bad
Vishuddhis, because we do not take the
responsibilities, and whatever responsibility we
do take we have to be 'much', 'much', 'much
more' responsible than ordinary government
are neither man nor woman?
Now the men, when they are
servants are. Sometimes we hear from one ear
and throw it away from the same-don't even
allow it to come into the head. So, one has to
understand that the child is your responsibility,
you have to look after the child. And the"Whole
is also your responsibility.
dominating, they have to understand, that they
have to be 'compassionate'. They have to be
kind', they have to be "considerate', but
'never' subservient, never subservient. This is,
one should understand, that you should not be
subservient. Now the women, what do they
have to be is to be 'great', "large', "receptive',
recieving and nourishing all that.
Now, how to establish the connection
between your Spirit, or keep the connection on
between the Spirit and the womb, or the
Kundalini, is the biggest problem we all face:
Now the way husbands are told
sometimes in this West-I am shocked! Wife
that our connections are very loose and that's
why this Kundalini cannot look after the Spirit.
says this to Mr. X, 'X'! you haven't done this.
'X'! you haven't done that. How have you put
this? Do this, do that, do that!" It's not woman's
I wonder if you have noticed one thing
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Issue: 5 & 6
The Divine Cool Breeze
2007
21
simple thing in life that if you are a hybrid stuff,
you can't have the quality of a Sahaja Yogi! If
you mix it up, it's a very funny thing, isn't it? So
wish to do it, its absolutely wrong to tell him to
do it, to tell him to do something. You are
becoming a male! And then we lose completely
that power of giving that nourishment of a
woman's love, which is the power of a woman,
which women don't understand.
woman must try to be a woman and a man
must try to be a man.
Now see, what is the situation, ofaman,
as a masculine effect on the development of
consciousness? So, as the manliness was
I tell you a simple example of my own
grand daughter. She wants to be an air hostess
all the time, she wants. She says, "You must
have thought of being an air hostess." I said,
"Why? What is so great about air hostess?" She
says, "That's the only line you can give food to
expressed we have developed science. We
have developed all this knowledge, all these
things which are outside. Now everything is
ready. Now the woman has to come up. I mean,
Iam saying in the very abstract way; don't think
of woman, but you can say the feminine. The
feminine 'nature' has to rise. Noweverything is
ready, it has to just work. All the chakras are
ready, now awaken the Kundalini. Kundalini is
as important as the other chakras are. So now
someone.
You see a 'natural' instinet ofa Mother
that let me see them eat' you see. They don't
eat themselves, they want others to eat. But this
is not in the conception of the Westem women,
I tell you. They can't understand this. "Why?I
have done this, so why not he does this, this.
It's your 'privilege' to do these things properly,
in a proper way. But supposing somebody is a
very good mechanic, the woman will also
become a mechanic, "I'll do the mechanical
awaken the Kundalini. Now Kundalini's
behaviour and mode of action is 'very' different
from the mode of action of the chakras. If the
Kundalini becomes the chakras and the chakras
become the Kundalini, how will you manage
Sahaja Yoga?
things". She is not there for doing mechanical
work! She is there for the mechanics of the
emotions. On the contrary it's just the other way
round. Like a man comes home; she goes on
ordering, "You have to put that right, why did
you spoil my carpet? Why did you do this?
Clean it up, get that thing, do that." All his
mechanics of emotions are finished. Once his
mechanics of emotions are finished, he is useless
and you are useless as it is! And men also should
not do their jobs. Let them do their own jobs.
I think this is one of the "biggest'
problems of the West today 'that men are neither
But we must 'assume' our own nature
in all dignity and in all right; not to feel in any
way low down. Because a man sits on a horse,
the woman wants to sit on a horse. What is the
need for a woman to sit on a horse? I can't
understand. Here all the women are sitting ona
horse. They will become like horses! Already I
think half of your royal family looks like horses,
don't they? I think so. Their faces look like
horses. See, so there is no need for women to
do all the things that men have already done.
Say, for example, there's one
personality of masculine personality, that has to
come and do a certain job. Now you've done
it. Alright; now the other personality has to do
men, and women are not women.' I find this
quality so horrid, that I don't know how to deal
with the mixture. You 'must'understand this very
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Issue: 5 & 6 - 2007
22
The Divine Cool Breeze
this job. Now see the situation of the Divine
also. Now the whole complication comes in that
once a kind of a thing has been done, the
that' time the Kundalini has to rise and ignite,
in such a way that the completion of the whole
work takes place-it is simple. Do you
understand now?
another one that comes wants to do the same.
Do you follow my point?
So there's no competition between men
or women, but the 'style' of work is different. If
you understand that, then only this kind of
revolution will take place and not turn out a
rebellion. Actually women are rebelling against
men, and anonsense it is! It is such a headache,
that you create something, allow them to grow,
and the another party comes which has to
complete the job starts rebelling.
So the whole energy is completely
wasted. The whole preparation has been made
for this Aquarius age to come in to bring in the
Kundalini upward and to make the whole thing
work out in such a way that the left and right
meet and you all become ignited, enlightened,
It was a question ofour being, sharing the whole
job in a proper understanding.
So the revolution has to take place and
the revolution is only possible when we
understand that "what part is leftout is now to
be done'. Are you getting me alright?
(Creation of Mother Earth)
Now see how Mother Earth herself was
created. It is also a very simple thing. First, the
movement of the energy started flowing. Now
this is a combined energy went round and round
and round like that, and when it consolidated
So "that' part is now Realisation, our
awakening of the Kundalini. For that your
feminine qualities are going to help you, not your
there was this "big bang". When big bang took
place-now this is the manly work, I should say
in a way; manly style, because still the Mother
masculine qualities. So aggressiveness must be
eiven up by men. Also, because they are Sahaja
earth is not produced- so then these little
fragments again went round and round. With
the momentum, they became roundish. Out of
them Mother Earth was selected for one job -
Yogis now, they have to take feminine qualities.
Not of fighting If women fight they are not
women see, women are told that "you are good
for nothing", So now they are trying to show,
"No, we are also alright. If you have eaten one
crow we will eat three." Now, this
understanding and the wise perception would
be such that "what do we have to 'do' now to
On the Mother Earth out of the water
came the life- the carbon came in. Everybody
helped there and a human being was created.
Then the men went round, to improve their
societies and whatever they have done to it,
whatever was possible with their ego is done,
finished now, Now they have done their job.
Now they are on dole.
change the 'mode' and the "style' of our lives?
What's wrong here?
A turning point has come. Now the
evolution is not rebellion at all by any chance.
It's a wrong idea people have. It's not rebellion,
that you hit me and I hit you- go on hitting each
other, like a pendulum you move; you see the
movement of a pendulum. It's not like a boom,
Now the woman, or we can say the
Kundalini whichhas been waiting all these years,
was resting, waiting for that time, isn't it? So
we call it "the blossom time has now come". At
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Issue: 5 & 6 - 2007
23
The Divine Cool Breeze
people who never get alright with their behaviour,
She has to be shouting, punishing, and sometimes
She also destroys! It's alright. But that is
sometimes, not all the time. Sojust now one
has to accept that to be like the Mother Earth
they have to be forbearing -'Dhara'. She is the
Sunstenance of 'everything.' She takes
this thing- that today you are bom as a Muslim,
tomorrow you are born as a Jew, then you are
born as a Jew, then you are born as a Hindu,
then you are born as- it's not pendulum. It is
spiral movement. So every time you achieve any
evolution you are at a higher level than before.
So the movement is spiral-see my point?
everything, the vibrations are sucked in. And
now for the 'first' time after realisation, you can
give Her back what you have got it, from Her.
Now to achieve the 'higher' position in
our whole being what should we do? Is to
understand that from this point to that point we
have to rise - we have to rise in a way that we
move in such a way that it is not in a pendulum
way, but in a spiral way.
You can give vibrations to Her trees that are
created, you can make them beautiful. You can
transform a flower into a more beautiful flower.
Now whateveryou have to give what you have
got from the Mother Earth you can give because
"your' Mother Earth is awakened within you
now. So you return Her back everything that
you got from Her and give it to others.
"Generosity, the greatness of heart, nobility,
forgiveness, love, affection, bearing 'everything'
for love." And for the Mother, to save her child,
she'll 'starve' herself, she'l do 'everything' to
save her child-' complete dedication, she has
for her child. That's a real Mother-I mean the
kind of mothersyou see these days, neither they
are mothers nor women. But what I am saying,
that's the real image of a mother, and you have
a Image before you.
And to move spirally, you have to use
another kind of force. Whatever you have used
so far has to be endowed with another kind of
force and that's the 'feminine' qualities of
women. But where are the feminine women?
They dress up like women, they will try to be
feminine and all that. That's not the way. From
inside, from the heart. A feminine heart Christ
showed that in His life- He forgave. Only a
woman can forgive, man cannot, because he is
aggressive. Howcan he forgive? Krishna never
forgave anyone. He used to kill. Right royal
fashion. "So, alright, if you are so, alright.' Done.
He forgave to such an extent to show
that He is now giving a turn to the spiral and
now a 'feminine' quality has to be developed
among human beings. But that doesn't mean
that you start walking like women or developing
waistlines. Because that's another stupidity. But
to be 'Motherly'. Not to be fatherly, but to be
Motherly. That kindness', 'that gentleness'
should be in your behaviour towards each other.
So, this is what one has to develop now,
whether you are men or women; as Sahaja
Yogis you must develop a new consciousness
of affection, love and compassion. Getting
angry, getting into a temper, shouting at people-
this is not going to help you much. If you have
to help the Whole, the growth ofthe Whole, try
to make yourselfa milder person-be angry with
yourself that you are losing tempers and you
are so unkind to others. All the problems have
come out of the overgrowth of the masculinity-
over-growth. It reaches a certain point, you see,
Of course this force also corrects,
sometimes also gets angry also. Mother also
has to get angry sometimes, specially with
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-25.txt 
 6 - 2007
24
Issue:S &
The Divine Cool Breeze
it's reached such a wretched point now, that it
what to do. In the beginning you will hurt, no
doubt, because you are used to that. I've seen
people here, just barking at each other, as soon
as they see each other they start barking. You
go anywhere in the whole country. you go
anywhere, they start barking for nothing at all. I
was surprised. In a school, I went there, there
also everybody is barking at each other, you
know. Whether they are drunk or not drunk,
makes no difference-in the same state.
has to come down.
But also femininity, at a lower level,
without realisation could be very, very small
hearted, chicken hearted, could be all the time
worried about her 'own' child. That's what one
has to change-is to be; have love and affection
for 'every' Sahaja Yogi, for 'every person'.
When it comes to fighting others you are all One
but among yourselves you can look after each
other, tell them- say for example, something is
paining in my nose here, I will just try to rubit in
the same way. But I won't try to cut my nose
will I? Or bang my nose? So the feeling that
*Other is Myself, be kind and gentle-try to
improve and help in that manner. I hope you
have understood the whole thing.
But after realisation, you "do' so.
Because you feel concerned and worried. But
you say in sucha way that you achieve the result.
See my point is - that is the criteria: "that you
should achieve the result". But, supposing a man
has come for the first time, and tell him that "you
are a bhoot", then naturally he will be hurt!
First, say, he walks in and you say "you are a
bhoot". Thank God if he does not understand
the meaning of the word 'bhoot'-then its alright!
In nutshell it is that : we have to change
the whole-mode-a radical change has come in
the society of Sahaja Yogis.
But first you think of being gentle, nice,
embalming, sweet. Let's think, find out ways
and means. There's a very good way-in the
evening, to write down "how many sweet
things I've said today?" Not like this, sweet
things we say-"You're looking beautiful" and
all that. Not the superficial ones. That may
If there is any question I will answer it
before we start the puja.
Q. (Sahaja Yogi) : Is it alright to hurt
people for their own good, Mother?
Shri Mataji :
This problem comes in when you are
not the Whole. Alright? Now supposing, as I
told you, if you are the Whole, then who is the
*other'? Then you will, even ifyou have to hurt.
Say, for example, if there is blood coming out
of my thumb, I press it hard to stop the blood.
It will hurt the thumb. But the discrimination
must be used, that I'm using my blood which is
precious, much more precious than this finger it
will hurt. But that discretion must be used. In
pamper the ego. But they re so sweet you
know, things are. There are so many words,
you can say, like- "Are you warm enough?"-
very sweet way of asking a question. It's very
simple; but you can see now you can't just-its
very difficult for people to say that even, I've
seen.
Looking after other's comforts.
Somebody is sitting, he wants water. You just
go rush and give him water. "Oh ! that's too
much to expect. Oh God! you gave water!"
(Contd.
Sahaja Yoga, you're all free to develop your
sense of discretion. And once you develop your
sence of discretion, gradually you will know
Page-35)
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-26.txt 
 The Essence of Sahaja Yoga
Pravachan of H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
In today's talk I will dwell on the
essence of Sahaja Yoga. I am sure that it has
been explained to you before. Besides, most of
you are from Sahaja Yoga itself. So I need not
go into details.
In fact, it is only very few who take a keen
interest in their evolutionary process and would
like to come out of their ignorance in which they
have been living. Inall the ego-oriented countries
it is very difficult to bring home the truth that we
are still ignorant. We have to know a lot. It is
First of all we need to understand that
very difficult because they think they know
everything, because they have been to the
we are passing through an extremely serious
time pregnant with unpredictable consequences,
When we look at life we do not seem to
moon. The Russians, for instance, still say that
they saw no God when they orbited in space,
understand that if wemiss this opportunity which
has come our way, for our evolution, we will
not only be depriving ourselves of it or this
country, England, but also it will be a stupendous
loss for the whole of creation. The trouble,
however, is that in the name of God, of evolution
and of higher life, a plethora of spurious people
have come out making it well-nigh difficult to
convince anyone of the existence of truth.
which is like saying that one has been to the
third floor but hasn't seen the top.
Where does God reside? Where does
He manifest within us? In what manner does
He manifest? We do not know what to see.
What we want to see is possible only through
our effort. 'If we have not been able to see God,
then He does not exist," This is how we develop
our attitude in this matter. But better say 'no'to
all that we did not know through our effort.
Because we have not known about Him. So
He does not exist. You turn round in a cave. So
when you see a shadow of yourself you believe
in that only and say, 'nothing else existed. The
Under the circumstances one has to talk
about truth. But mere talking about truth rarely
leads to the experience of truth. It is altogether
a different realm, a new awareness which you
will have to get to understand the truth for which
I do not know how many of you are really
prepared or how many of you would like to
know, Or even if you would like to, yet how
many of you will really achieve it. But the
problem is the other way round. It is not a
problem that we have only a few people, nor
that I cannot give realisation. It is also not a
problem that you cannot know the truth. The
irony is that whatever is false, spurious or
silly finds quick acceptance among the
light does not exist. That kind of attitude I have
persistently been facing. And sometimes I do
not know how to give them realisation.
Now you have to start the other way
round. You have to seek. You have to ask for it.
Nobody is going to fall at your feet and say
"Well, you get your realisation. You have this,
for heaven's sake, please have it". Because
nothing is selling here. You are used to
salesmanship, that is, if anything is selling you
have to be pursuaded or requested. You can
save pounds fora sale and all that. But nothing
is for sale here. This is a very difficult thing for
people to understand.
masses.
Sometimes I feel that I have developed
aunique method by which I can give realisation
enmasse all over the world. But it really poses
a problem forme if the masses are not interested.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Issue: 5 & 6 -2007
26
The Divine Cool Breeze
with it. It is like a stuck up stanmp which refuses
to come off. And when such a thing happens
you feel O, God'! The whole creation has been
created, the whole working has taken place and
the human beings have grown so well having
reached this stage. But now in this modem life
In this present day atmosphere, we do
not know if we can get anything which is not for
sale. However, I hope, slowly and steadily all
of us have to get our realisation.
Somehow, we have to work very hard.
Sometimes it is very frustrating and sometimes
so stupid-the way people react. Like the other
day when we had a meeting at Brighton I was
laughing all the while. It is so sad. Agentleman
who came to our programme made complaints.
Look, who has got time to put him on a video;
who is interested in taking his photograph. He
says he is a managing director. So what? In the
presence of the Divine what is a managing
director or what is even a King? Just think of it.
Who is he? What does he think of himself? He
has complained against us. Even the laws are
so stupid sometimes that one can hardly
understand. Has he got any right to complain if
he comes to a programme which is being
conducted with a video on me or if you are
which they are leading, you find them so stupid
and foolish that they have begun deluding others
with their stupidity and foolishness. How are
we to approach those people who are true
seekers? Those who have been seekers for
ages? All their lives before have been lost.
Sometimes it is very disappointing. But still
hoping against hopes, I hope we reach all the
corners of the universe where we find all people
who are true seekers. It is their power to know
the Divine; know the Divine. It is not for those
who are managing directors or kings or
something! What does it matter in the presence
of God. They would be pushed out. They will
not be allowed to enter the Kingdom of God.
That kingdom is only for those who have known
not for those who simply talk about God. Those
who say that we are worshippers of God and
we have learnt so much, it will be said, "that is
well, then go back to the place where from you
have come". Whatever you have known is
through your awareness, and in your awareness
you have come to know. The awareness has to
be enlightened. It is not what you know but
human awareness which has still to grow. It
involves such a lot of journey even after our
realisation.
photographed? How can you complain?
On one side,I find such stupid people
and on the othera host of genuine seekers. How
to reach them? They are like a diamond covered
with mud. So much mud! To find out the
diamond in the mud, one has to dive into a mine
of ignorance, to get that diamond which is lost.
It concerns me so much that I feel this mud is
going to cover their brains and their eyes,
whatever else they have, so that they may not
receive their realisation. They may miss it.
Actually the Divine does not know what human
beings have created. Really, I tell you, the Divine
is in the dark as to all the nonsenses that you
have created around you. All kinds of nonsenses
you have created out of your ignorance, out of
your ego and out of the choice that you had. I
can'texplain why people have created this kind
of ignorance which cannot be broken or
removed. Because you are so much identified
It takes no time sometimes to give
realisation to so many people. I know it has
happened with so many. But they do not know
what they have to achieve. The ego is such a
horrible stuff that people do not want to see
what they haven't got with them, what they have
to have and what they deserve. They do not
want to see that beauty, that light, that is the
Spirit. The reflection of God's love is the most
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-28.txt 
 - 2007
27
Issue: 5 & 6
The Divine Cool Breeze
precious thing that you could think of. I do not
know how many times I have delivered lectures
in England, apart from the hard work I have
put in. Of course there are results, but progress
has been slow. Compared to the fake and
artificial people who have made so much money
out of you, Sahaja Yoga is working slowly.
this awareness is enlightened you cannot see. It
is like describing the nature of colours to a blind
man. You have to open your eyes.
But even this simple thing people find
difficult to accept. The reason is that they have
become very naive. They don't know what it
is, and also they do not have any inclination to
understand. Nowyou see a tree standing there
I would not have been disappointed if
it was at the time of Christ because then there and you must know, that they are rooted.
were very few seekers. Actually even the close Somebody has told you there are roots but you
disciples that Christ collected were not true, do not believe it because they are not visible. It
seekers. You are seekers of truth. So many of is as simple as that. But why don't you try to
you have taken to this path just to pursue the
truth. But where are we going about it all? What somebody says "whatever are outside, that
are our ideas about the truth? Is it that our ideas much more are inside." So why not you try to
are but a by-product of our ego? Is it that we see into it? This is the simple question we should
do not want to seek the truth? I have met all ask ourselves "why should I put any barrier to
kinds of people in this country including those seeing", if that is going to give the best in the
who occupy important positions at various
levels-public and private life-lords, ladies and beautiful thing called the Spirit, why should we
host of others. They ask "Who want to
change"? I say "Really?" That is true, because
they think they are the greatest. Born thus, they anything.
hope to carry their lordship and possessions with
them to heaven? When they say "who wants to
change" what can be said except that they have
reached the dead-end, the full-stop from which feet, imploring "please desire me". And if you
no further journey is possible.
find out if the trees have roots or not. Supposing
world, if it is going to give an inkling of that
not have it? You don't have to pay for it, not
even to exert for it. You don't have to do
But you must desire. This is the Point I
am trying to make. If you do not desire it from
your own heart, God is not going to fall at your
understand that you have to really desire it
because it is such a desirous thing that I must
tell you that this Kundalini is the 'pure desire'
within you. It is not yet manifested, not yet
awakened, in the sense that it has not yet acted.
Imagine how important it is. You should have
the desire to be one with the Divine, to be one
with your Spirit.
Now, this, I must say, can work out
only with people who are, seekers who want
to know through their awareness what is the
truth. You have to know your Spirit, for, without
knowing your Spirit you cannot know the truth
and whatever I may talk to you is a waste of
time-a complete waste of time. Because you
haven't got the awareness, today, to know the
truth I am talking about. So, I must earnestly
ask you to become the Spirit. Why should you
hesitate to do what you are told to, so that you
will get your realisation, which means that you
have to become the Spirit first. Until and unless
The desire has to be strong, if not, then
you would be challenging the Kundalini, that is,
you turn anti-Kundalini. Then the Kundalini
would not rise. But what has this brain achieved
so far? Just look at it. You must understand.
What have we achieved by this brain? For
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-29.txt 
 - 2007
Issue: 5 & 6
28
The Divine Cool Breeze
head against the wall. So it is important to
understand that you must have that desire which
isthe highest. But if you are satisfied with things
which are useless and nonsensical, then what
am I to do about it? There is no psychology
which can do that, because you have to have
the desire to be alright. But this is something
innate and does not work with people who do
not have pure desire. This has been written down
since long; it cannot be changed; it cannot
be forced, explained, discussed or argued
about. Nothing can be done; it has to work out
from within. Even if you have worked it out on
example, ask this stupid managing director-
"what good has he done for anybody. What does
he know about the spiritual life? What does he
understand about Christ's life?" But ifhe sends a
letter, any newspaper is willing to publish it!
Look at the stupidity of the whole thing.
They do not understand that anything that has
to go to the masses must be sensible; from a
sensible man who is said to be an authority on
spiritual life. What good has this fellow done to
anybody. But if write something or any Sahaja
Yogi says that by coming to Sahaja Yoga he
has given up his bad habits or has got cured his
cancer or diseases, then nobody wants to listen
to you. Nor does it make any news. On the
other hand they think you are mad. But a man
like him, if he writes, they publish it. So it shows
clearly we are not only contending with people
who are not only mad but also absolutelyfoolish.
Who have no sense at all as to how they have
to live and how they have to conduct
themselves.
someone, you may not achieve the results.
So, when the situation is difficult and
the children are also so adamant what can
Mother do? Push them in ! I am very much
concerned because this ego which sometimes
is selfishand conceited, satisfies itselfand is very
happy. It will not allow you to get to the point
where you really stand, where you have all your
powers and where you are the master of being.
The identification with the ego is so much
that it is easy to take a bull by the horns
but to take an ego-oriented man to the
practices of Sahaja Yoga is very difficult.
Sometimes you have to take it upon
yourself for going into and discovering the truth.
It is you who have to find it out. Forexample, I
say that this is a place where there are lots of
diamonds or this is a cave in which there is a lot
of gold. The gold is not going to come to you.
You have to go to the cave and get it. It is as
simple. I am not saying you walk towards
anything or do anything like that. You have to
desire and desire from you heart. It is impossible
for me to raise your Kundalini if you do not
desire it, because Kundalini itself is the pure
desire. What can I do about it? Can I force it?
You cannot push it out. If you want to have a
seed sprouted, you have to plant it in the mother
earth. You cannot take it out in bits and
Today I am rather disgusted but other
moods also come-the moods of compassion and
tremendous love. Ishould do something to bring
sense to these people. Something should
happen to them otherwise what I see is a
complete disaster. It is going to happen. I do
not want to frighten you like Mrs Thatcher does
about the Russians. That might be imaginary.
But this is real. I am warning you that the disaster
is going to come as destruction itself. But the
greatest thing is the failure of the desire that it
could not communicate with you who are chosen
specially in order to bring the Kingdom of
Heaven. But suddenly you will find that they all
have fallen into a sieve without a way out. The
pieces. You have to have a pure desire. And if
that desire is not there, then I am breaking my
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Issue: 5 & 6 - 2007
29
The Divine Cool Breeze
everything else evenif you are managing director
ora king. Keep all your shoes outside and just
desire your Spirit.
Sahaja Yogis too feel frustrated at times.
Whatever it is, as far as I am concerned they
have tremendous desire. But I am so desireless
that the desire may not always work out. You
see, I am a desireless person. So I ask the
Sahaja Yogis to desire, so that people will have
the great desire to become the Spirit. This is
the greatest thing that we can give to our brothers
and sisters, to the people, to the children, to
this beautiful world we live in, to the beautiful
light and to the beautiful time they all have to
enjoy. I hope those who come for the first time
will understand my difficulty and try to see that
you should desire only your Self-realisation and
nothing else. Just desire that, and forget about
You see the difference between me and
Christ. He got so fed up that he cried out "let
me be crucified". Of course it was in the plan
that he should die on the cross. I have to see
that you all get your realisation somehow. It is
like a Mother's desire to give a bath to the baby
and get him cleansed. So whichever you like-
whether to be desolute or like to receive a
rebuke-I am willing to work it out. But at least
ensure that you desire to get your realisation.
May God bless you.
'Ma'
When the Chitta returns to Sushumna and ascends to Sahasrara,
"Ma" is the sound of that Sacred Shakti.
When I take refuge in the golden-red shaft of security that is the path of Kundalini,
"Ma" is the sound of my inward-turning.
When the Maya recedes and the tree of Reality blossoms joyfully within,
"Ma" is the sound of that silence.
When my courage spontaneously surges forth like the gathering wave on the ocean of Dharma,
"Ma" is the sound of the enlightened motion.
When the pain of attachment falls away to reveal the purest sweet compassion and joy,
"Ma" is the sound of the ecstatic release.
"Ma" is the sound of my folded hands, rising and saluting Thee
95
"Ma" is the sound of my head bowing in reverence to thee.
"Ma" is the sound my being, blissfully vibrating and resting in Thee.
Jai Shri Mataji
(Nirmala Yoga)
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Her Holiness Shri Mataji's Advice
Talk to Sahaja Yogis in Switzerland 1983
is there to surrender-the force that itselfis flowing
toward you and nourishing? Do we say the lotus
has surrendered itself to its fragrance? Do we
say that the sun has surrendered itself to its
brilliance? Do we say that the moon has
surrendered itself to its coolness? It would be
absured to say like that. The word "surrender"
sometimes can mean only, at the most, in the
context of Sahaja Yoga that we surrendered our
egos, our limitations, our shallowness, what we
have achieved is... our own. We have
...Even when you get your realisation
you are sometimes in a growing stage up to a
point. Like you're nourished by the Mother
Earth all the time but you're not aware of it. In
the same way the womb of Sahaja Yoga
nourishes you to grow up into beautiful beings.
Still you have to come up to a point when it has
to click in such a way that you start feeling the
awareness of that unbounding love. In the small
children it clicks very fast because they're so
innocent and uncomplicated and in some people
also I've seen it click very fast-as soon as they
get their realisation.
surrendered all that is useless for
something that is great and eternal. This
weight of the ignorance has to drop out.
But, in some people they have some
more ego trip left to be finished. So, they come
to me. I find they are flying in the air like bubbles
and as if blown by the nourishing Mother-blown
out-like the bubbles on the surface of the sea.
And there are many who are suffering from
superego. They get mixed up with the sand and
become very heavy and all the time weeping
and crying about personal things. But, once the
thing clicks they become one with the spirit of
the ocean. Then they feel that deep, joyous force
of the sea which nourishes them, guides them,
and elevates them every moment. Like deep
down in the sea they go and there they find the
beautiful pearls of eternal experiences. And
when they find these pearls they bring to me as
poems, as dances, as smiles, as laughter, as
enjoyment. These are all within you, and they
lie there away from your consciousness.
I don't know what to do. I don't think
I do anything, because I'm really doing nothing.
Sometimes I think this is not my due to be
praised like this, because whatever is my nature
that is what I am, and I haven't achieved
anything-I just exist with my nature because I
can't do anything else. While you have achieved.
It's great credit to you, very great credit to you-
that you have achieved this enlightenment to see
yourself, your True Self, which is sojoy-giving.
Actually, I should compose poem in praise of
you. And I do my best to show by my own
methods how the Divine is pleased. And that
you see everywhere, every time, every moment.
So tonight we all should only say one thing in
our heart that this bountiful nature of motherhood
should be brought into our consciousness,
which I have told you is called Ritambhara
Pragya. Means your consciousness gets
enlightened to that nature of this Mother Earth
which fills it up with different seasons that is
Pragya'. That happens to everyone I said, but
it happens more to people who try to be in the
centre and don't go on ego trips.
Though your consciousness is
enlightened by Self-Realisation, it is not yet
enlightened by joy. That is, something happens
to all of you gradually, as I told you, and should
happen to all of you as soon as possible. What
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-32.txt 
 31
2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 5 & 6
witnessing of the drama, and which gives you
understanding that the Whole is a partand parcel
of you, and you are part und parcel of the
Whole.
Some Sahaja Yogis I've known have
been boasting that "I'm the onewho is going
to establish Sahaja Yoga here and I'm this
and I'm that. I'm a separate person and
Mother is specially selecting me." Anyone
who thinks like that is no more a Sahaja
So you belong to the great ocean of
love and generosity. So this great tree of life
Yogi.
has everything integrated within itself. This is the
tree of life that has been discribed in the Bible,
the tree of fire they call it. Now, you have
become One with it. You are blessed by it. You
are loved by it. You are gently guided by it. It's
so gentle that you do not even feel the guidance
like a leaf when it falls on the ground it doesn't
make any sound. Try to become identified with
that power-that is what you are. Like the
meaning of the word is identified with the word,
like the moonlight is identified with moon,
sunlight is identified with the sun. Let that
identification be that oneness, that integration
so that you become the light ofGod's love, that
people know God through integration so that
It's like he is holding onto a tree and
thinking that by holdiing onto one leaf he is going
to dominate the whole tree. Such a person will
just have that little leaf in his hand which will
also die out after some time. You have to run in
the way of the roots, of the branches, of the
leaves, of the flowers and of the fruits. You have
to be the essence of the tree that nourishes and
not just the outward leaves with wrong ideas
about yourself. And the people with superego,
who are limited by their small personal problems
also must know that they will have the same
fate in Sahaja Yoga. Put the problems of the
tree always ahead of the problem of a leaf.
you become the light of God's love, that people
know God through your depths and your fruits.
Now it is high time to jump from that
little area to the vast area which has no bounds.
And once that happens you will be surprised all
these petty little problems will drop out in the
ocean of greatness. Don't indulge into them, and
leave them in the hands of the tree. So that all
your small petty problems will be looked after
by that nourishing force. Because you belong
to a tree of great wisdom, tree of great
sustenance and religion, and tree of great
mastery, the mastery that you can never know
how great it is. You belong to a tree that has
complete security for you, and you belong to a
very great tree which gives you complete
Is the most fulfilling job, highest paid in every
way, the most satisfying, energy-giving and
dynamic. You don't have to give up anything-
just be organised in the light of your Spirit
yourself.
Imust thank you very much for the nice
entertainment you had for me. It really was a
surprise, a great surprise, of tremendous joy.
Thank you very much.
(Nirmala Yoga)
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-33.txt 
 RITAMBHARA- PRAGNYA
Lodge Hill Seminar 23-7-83
Pravachan of H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
formless. But you are so fortunate that the
formless has become a form for you. No
problem, you don't have to go from form to
formless, from formless to form; it's all there, in
It is my immense joy to see all of you
here from various parts of this world. When your
heart is so full, the words are too poor to carry
the intensity. I wish you could understand that
intensity, through your heart. It's all been
arranged, I think, by the Divine, that we should
meet here all of us in such a wonderful
a bundle. So you concentrate, or think of some
Deity, or some point for Nirakar, for the
formless, or of Nirakar itself. It's all a mental
projection as long as you are not a realized soul.
But once you're realized, you have to just think
of Dhayana, whom you are going to
surrounding, in the Nature; that something great
should happen to all of us. That we should
achieve really something great this time. Now
as the time is short, I will tell you first of all a
few things about meditation now, then we'll have
two more talks; I hope so.
concentrate, or you can say, meditate on.
But once you start meditating on a
person your attention starts moving. That is also
possible after realization, though it is in a bundle;
but some people have it part of it, part of it, like
that. So when you meditate, still your attention
can get disturbed every moment. It can happen,
depending on the intensity of yourconcentration.
So there are some Sahaja Yogis I've seen, they
are cooking., and there's another one is
Meditation is a very general word. It is
not a word that explains ail the three steps one
has to take for meditating. But in Sanskrit
language they have very clearly said, how you
have to move in your meditation.
First is called as Dhyana, and
second is called as Dharana, and the third
meditating. The meditating one will say: Oh1
can smell it is burning.
is called as Samadhi. Luckily Sahaja Yoga is
such a thing that you get everything in a bundle.
You avoided everything else, and you got the
Samadhi part. That's the beauty of it. First see
the Dhyana. First when you have seeking, you
put your attention towards the object of your
worship. That is called as Dhyana.And the
Dharana is the one in which you put all your
effort. Concentrate all your effort. But this is all
drama for people who are not realized. For them
it's just a sort of an acting that they do. But for
a realized soul, it is a reality.
So there is no Dharana. Dhar means a
flow, a continuous flow. So there is no Dharana.
Dhyana is there, but not Dharana. The second
part of it is very important, that you have to
putyou attention continuously on to your
Deity. Then you develop a state which is called
as Dharana in which your attention becomes
one, with the Deity. But when these mature, the
third stage, of Samadhi, comes in.
Now for people who think that without
realization they can do it, I think they are
absolutely mistaken. But after realization also,
So the first, the Dhyana, you have to
do. Some do it of the form, another of the
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-34.txt 
 33
2007
Issue: 5 & 6
The Divine Cool Breeze
when the Dharana is established, you have to
get to the position where you become
Smadhistha. Now, what is that state? When that
state comes into your mind, then whatever you
do, the Deity that you worship you see that Deity
in your work; whatever you see, you see the
Deity giving you the show; you can put it like
that. Whatever youhear, you find the Deity telling
you the Truth. Whatever you read, you find there
what the Deity would tell you. So in that state,
whatever you do with your eyes, nose, and all
these organs, all that, becomes a kind of a
manifestation of the Deity whom you worship3B
automatically. You don't have to think now I
beautiful name, Ritambhara Pragnya, which
is a very difficult name. Ritambhara is the name
of the Nature, and that the whole Nature, one
feels, is enlightened. I'll give an example: when
a child is to be bon, the mothers start lactating,
automatically. The Nature itself works out for
the birth of the child.
In the same way, when this Ritambhara
Pragnya (TI VE) starts expressing itself,
only for Sahaja Yoga, nobody else, you are
amazed how things work out suddenly! Now
the time is very short, but I'll give you an
example. I came to Brighton, and Jason said
"Mother let's have Guru Puja in Brighton."I
must concentrate, alright, I will not have these
thoughts, I have to now think about this. It
becomes automatically there; you read a book,
in the book immediately you find what is good
for Sahaja Yoga. Ifthere is a book which is anti
said, "Alright have it. But you find out the place."
So he went to the university, said the university
people will help, but it's rather small, and I said,
"but ask them," but no, it's booked on Guru
Puja" then I said : then what can you do? He
God you discard it.
said then, what to do Mother? I said, you try
somewhere else just now, telephone to
somebody else. So went through yellow pages,
Idon't know what, and he telephoned, and they
said we have a place, a beautiful place, and you
come along, have lunch with us. Just he went
there. He had a very nice lunch, they were very
happy; they were to accomodate everyone, they
were very nice, and he was amazed how
everything has worked out so well.
But if you have a problem, you see that
"it must be for some lesson to me. That is to
teach me some experience." It is the
manifestation of the Diety itself. For example a
lady feels she is going to have an abortion, take
a position : So one person who is not yet in
Samadhi Avastha, or conditioned, will say "Oh
GodI'm such a Sahaja Yogi, I've done so much
for Mother; I went all the way to Pulborough
thing, and despite that, see, this is the problem."
But another would say that "alright let me try.
I'll go and tell Mother," on the photograph, or
may be telephone, something, and he will find,
to his surprise, that it's all done, it's perfectly
So the Ritambhara Pragnya has started
working in your favour. You all tell me: this is a
miracle, that has happened Mother, and we
don't know how it has happened. I'll give you
an example; yesterday we were doing
alright.
something with cement and the Italian boy said
that we will need two bags of cement. I said,
you carry on, it won't finish. Even before I was
leaving, they were carrying on, still not finished.
Now cement ofall the things, imagine!
This is only possible if you are a realized
soul, otherwise it is not possible; so the state
that is awakened within you is called, is a new
state of mind, in Sanskrit language it has a very
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-35.txt 
 - 2007
34
Issue: 5 & 6
The Divine Cool Breeze
I mean, there are thousand and one
examples like that. Today like some were trying
to push the bed. The three of them were trying,
it would not push. I said, alright, I'll push. Ijust
put my Nabhi there, just, I didn't push anything,
it just pushed; because of the Ritambhara
Pragnya. But this is not the Chamatkar or
anything. It exists in the Divine the capacity to
manifest its love, to show that you are the saints,
you are chosen one of God. But you accept
that situation first; but if you behave like all other
normal people Oh God, shops are closed,
and that man is so difficult, and I don't think it
will happen. Never happen. But you must know
you are saints, chosen, and given birth by Me
The Form and the Formless. So this Pragnya is
going to manifest, is manifesting every moment.
Be prepared. Be happy. Welcome it. And
accept that you are there. The level is different.
(Hester, time? "fiveminites") Fiveminutes more.
So this special thing is your own state,
where you are feeling the oneness with the
Nature and the Nature is feeling oneness with
you. So the Divine itselfis expressing through
Nature, through various happenings, through
various incidents- the Love, the protection, the
attention that the Divine is giving. And there's
no end to it. It just happens, and people don't
know how it happens. But that is what is the
state of Samadhi. But there could be people if I
tell them, will you do this? "Oh no Mother, the
shop will be closed. Oh, they won't do it, that's
not alright". They go on like that. And there are
people who say-- "no! let's see, if Mother has
said, may be."
I'il give you another simple example,
very simple, absolutely gross, but it's there. One
day Mr. Srivastava, he takes one type of tea,
very English, and he would't like other tea, you
see, so he told me, "oh God, we are finished
with the tea and what to do tomorrow
Now the time has come for Sahaja
Yoga to change it's level. We have to change.
We have to go higher. The level has to come
up. But Sahaja Yoga is such a cosmopolitan
thing that we have got the worst bhoots to the
highest, on the same plate. Now, some of them
are round ones which are the Ego-Oriented
ones, who roll all the time. We don't know how
to raise the plate. If you raise the plate they'll
morning?" So I said alright let us go to the tea
shop. So he said, "it is eight o'clock in the night
and what do you mean? They will all laugh at us
and there is no shop at eight o'clock open, that
tea centre." I said let's go, what's the harm, I'm
just saying let's go; but he said "what absurd
things you are saying !I said alright, absured
whatever it is, let's go. He wouldn't listen. Sol
told the driver, alright, let's drive down. We went
there, and the lights were on. We said why?
How is it the lights are on? So we walked in,
roll down.
So you are frightened, you have to hold
them. And there are some who are square ones
you see very peevishly, and they all were there
standing "Oh we've been waiting for you such
a long time, you know, and you are the last to
come". Just imagine ! So I asked my husband.
He said, "I forgot we had a reception here".
And they said, you are the last to arrive. And
they said, doesn't matter but you'll have your
presents. So they gave us two tins each of tea.
are carrying other squares on their heads, like
bhoots, so if you raise them they may all topple
down, or may, the bhoots might fall off, God
knows. But there are third type who are prisms,
more like pyramids, who are nicely settled
down, whatever level you raise them, they are
stuck there.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-36.txt 
 Issue: 5 & 6 - 2007
35
The Divine Cool Breeze
We have to raise the level of people
who are well settled in Sahaja Yoga. So
everybody must try to settle down and come
up to minimum standards at least. Otherwise.
I'm sorry many will be seived out. That's for
the five minutes ! I'll have another. I think, one
hour or so, one and a half hour later on today.
Thank you very much.
So those who are at the periphery are
a problem, definitely, for me. Because in my
compassion I cannot throw them out. And we
have to help them to come out, by really now,
telling them, that they have to rise. How long
are we to wait for them? Everyone has to see
that the peripheral people are brought in
properly, so that they don't go out of Sahaja
Yoga. Compassion is alright. But not at the cost
of keeping the level of Sahaja Yoga lower,
Thank You. Mother." Sahaja Yogis say
(Nimala Yoga)
never!
(Contd. From Page- 24)
"I'm not your servant"- immediately the question
comes into the head. Little bit trying to do
something here and there. Or sometimes
thinking-going in the market, you find something.
"Oh ! let me take it for him". Well, then 'do'.
I've seen children, 'all' the time they think of
their friends-what they can buy for others. "This
is good for my friend, this is good for..". "He's
very fond of things, he likes this".All these little-
little things, you know. Sometimes even small
thing like : Early in the morning you get up, you
find the another person is sleeping on one side,
his blanket on the third side and his pillow on
the fourth side. So you just put his head on the
pillow and cover him with the blanket. That's
Mother's job.
But women have lost now, that sense. Not the
fighting, but thinking what sweet thing you can
do. And also, sometimes teasing is alright.
Sometimes tickling what sweet thing you can
do. And also, sometimes teasing is alright.
Sometimes tickling is alright. But a kind of a
you see, rapport' between each other; even
the feeling, that we can do that. It's a master's
job. The one who is a master can do it, those
who are not, will not do like this. They'll again
come back to hurt. Ultimately, they'll land up
hurting or biting or coming to blows. But those
who are masters will be so beautifully doing the
job, that., you see a kind of a very sweet
relationship-it's called Madhurya. Without any
lust, without any money-business. And the joy
would be 'bubbling. All these perversions and
all these things will drop off. But a very sweet.
Not out of fear, but out of sheer' love.
Like even if it is cold and buttons are open, you
can button up a person. Little-little things, you
know. Women have very little-sweet things
which they do, which make men very happy.
relationship-Alright? Even saying that, you are
feeling happy!
May God bless you.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-37.txt 
 108 Names of Lord Vishnu
Foreward
The 108 names of Shri Mataji Nimala
Devi, of Shri Mahakali, of Shri Shiva are based
on the Sahaja Yoga Shastras and thus have a
definite capacity of sustaining our meditation.
Soma, Ishwara) while others refer to the
Brahmadeva-tatwa (Hiranyagarbha, Prajapati).
Therefore it was felt useful to propose
here 108 names of Shri Vishnu which bring a
But the 108 names of Shri Vishnu in some sense,
are a rather descriptive, more random selection
of the Sahasranama; they do not, as such,
typically reflect the teachings of Sahaja Yoga.
For instance some of these names correspond
rather to the Shivatatva (Swayambhu, Ugra,
more specific focus on those aspects of the Lord
of Shri Lakshmi which have been highlighted in
Nirmala Vidya, that is, in the teachings of Her
Holiness Mataji Shri Nimala Devi. The list starts
with those famous names which correspond to
the nadis within the Sushumna.
JAI SHRI MATAJI !
VICTORY TO THE LORD OF OUR ASCENT!
(Gregoire-9-1-84)
Sayanambudhau Nirmale Travaiva Narayanakyam pranatosmi rupan (O Nirmala! I bow to Your
form named Narayana lying in the sea) Om Tvameva Sakshat Shri.. ....
Namoh Namaha
Having all power
the refuge of men
the honey-like spring
lord of the cows
Keshava
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Narayana
Madhava
Govinda
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
all pervading
Vishnave
killer of Madhu
Namoh Namaha
Madhusudana
who measured the world with three steps
Namoh Namaha
Trivikrana
incamated as short man
Namoh Namaha
Vamana
bearing Shrimata on his chest
controlling the senses
his nabhi is the cause of universes
attained by disciplines
drawing everything together
residing everywhere (as Maya)
infinite, enlightened wealth
never obstructed nor overcome
Shridhara
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Hrishikesha
Padmanabha
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Damodara
Namoh Namaha
Sankarsha
Namoh Namaha
Vasudeva
Pradyumna
Aniruddha
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
highest among the Purushas
known by turning inwards
incarnated as man-lion
Namoh Namaha
Purushottama
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Aghoksha
Narasimha
above Indra
Namoh Namaha
Upendra
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-38.txt 
 - 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
37
Issue: 5 & 6
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
unchanging
oppressor of evil, saviour
Achyuta
Janardana
Haraya
Krishna
Vishnu
remover
dark one
his splendour pervades the firmament and beyond
charming in His darshan, speech, action and mind
his eyes are like lotuses
bearing a yellow garb, or, liquidating samsara
master of the discus, the Sudarshana chakra
holding the sword called Nandaka
having the boy called Sharnga
bearing the conch called Panchajanya
bearing the club called Kaumodaki
wearing the garland called Vaijayanti
lying on the belly of Shri Shesha
his flag bears the emblem of Garuda
Shri Lakshmi resides in His chest
Heknows the origin and dissolutions of all beings
Lord of Vaikuntha
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Peshala
Pushkaraksha
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Hari
Chakri
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Nandaki
Namoh Namaha
Shamgadhanva
Shankhabhrt
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Gadadhara
Namoh Namaha
Vanamali
Kuvaleshaya
Garudadhvaja
Lakshmivan
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Bhagavan
Vaikunthapati
Dharmagum
Dharmadhyaksha
Niyanta
Naikaja
Namoh Namaha
Hesafeguards Dharma
He presides over Dharma
Heestablishes men in their respective functions
born many times for the preservation of Dharma
His nature is auspiciousness
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Svasti
Namoh Namaha
the witness
Sakshi
Namoh Namaha
the truth
Satya
Dharanidhara
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
the support of the earth
everything is based on Him
He sees and knows what is done by all creatures
He has knowledge of all
Vyavasthana
Sarvadarshi
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namalha
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Nanmaha
Sarvagya
Ghana
Nahusha
He is inscrutable
He binds all creatures by His power of Maya
Supreme creator of illusions
knowledge of Him arises only when the
attention goes inwards
the protector, enjoyer and lord of all sacrifices
endowed with great speed
He bears the duality of cold and heat etc, (ida, pingala)
Taking His stand on sattwa guna He protects the 3 worlds
The lord of wealth
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Mahamaya
Adhokshaja
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Yagyapati
Vegavan
Sahishnu
Rakshana
Dhaneshwara
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-39.txt 
 38
2007
Issue: 5 & 6
The Divine Cool Breeze
He whose navel is auspicious like gold
sustenance and food
Namoh Namaha
Hiranyanabha
Sharirabhrata
Namoh Namaha
He cause all beings to eat
the one who grants release
Namoh Namaha
Annam
Namoh Namaha
Mukunda
He leads the seekers of salvation to the foremost abode
Namoh Namaha
Agrani
Amogha
Varada
Namoh Namaha
He who blesses His worshippers
He bestows the desired boons
breaking all knots
the refuge of the seekers
He endows righteous people with happiness
He is cherished by His devotees
He destroys the various life styles of Kali Yuga
Skilled in action
The lord of the immortals
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Subhekshana
Satamgati
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Sukhada
Namoh Namaha
Vatsala
Viraha
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Prabhu
Namoh Namaha
Amaraprabhu
Suresha
The lord of the devas
Namoh Namaha
He destroys the cities of the enemies of the devas
Victorious in war
Namoh Namaha
Purandara
Namoh Namaha
Samitim-jaya
Amitavikrama
of enormous valour
He kills the enemies of the davas
OfHimeverything is afraid
Exceeding in prowess of the greatest heroes
He punishes and torments the evil doers
The giver of the fruits of actions
Knower ofthe field
Devoid of all attachments
Detached lord of the yogis
He moves in the form of wind
He makes the wind blow, or, the wind is His vehicle
In the form of the breath oflife
Manifesting by His own free will
Standing in the form of time
He who makes things to evolve
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Shatrughana
Bhima
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Surajaneshvara
Sampramardana
Bhavana
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Kshetragya
Sarvayogavinissrta Namoh Namaha
Yogeshwara
Chala
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Vayuvahana
Jivana
Namoh Namaha
Sambhava
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Samvatsara
Vardhana
He is One
Namoh Namaha
Eka
He is not only one as He has many forms
All beings abide in Him
Controller ofall things
The chief supervisory witness of all the worlds
Namoh Namaha
Naika
Namoh Namaha
Vasu
Namoh Namaha
Ishana
Namoh Namaha
Lokadhyaksha
Trilokesha
The lord of the three worlds
the master of the universe
Namoh Namaha
Jagatswami
Yugavarta
Namoh Namaha
He who makes the Yugas turn
Namoh Namaha
(Contd. on Page- 43)
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-40.txt 
 The Fourth Dimension and the Parasympathetic
Brighton, 26.7.84
Pravachan of H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi (Specially for Doctors)
Now when he controls the
...The Fourth dimension that they
mention about, what do they mean by that?..
(They call that Transcendental State).. But
what? - They cannot describe it.
Parasympathetic he controls the supply to all
the centres through certain movements, through
certain kind of techniqe. For example, some
person is suffering from a disease of the heart.
Now, a normal person who does not have this
Fourth Dimension will not know that he is
suffering from some heart trouble. He will have
no idea. He will never feel his heart of anything
till he suddenly gets the attack, and then he dies.
But at the very onset of it a person who is in the
Fourth Dimension, that is, a realised soul, can
feel that something is going wrong with his heart.
Also he knows how to cure himself-The
Supposing somebody has a low heart-
beat, low pulse-rate, or has a low consumption
of oxygen or anything, that's not a
transcendental state because you are still in a
state where your attention is on your body. So
it is not transcendental. You have to "trans' -
transcendental means you have to jump
on to the parasympathetic. You see, we have
four dimensions, you can say. One is the
dimension of the Left Sympathetic, another is
of the Right Sympathetic, then we have got the
Central Nervous System, which is our
conscious mind, and the fourth one is the
Technique of (curing) Himself. Also he knows
that he is the source of the medicines that he
has to give, - is a vital thing.
So this is the Fourth Dimension, is a
great potential becoming a kinetic force, like an
egg becoming a bird. So the egg, - we can see
the egg has no way of flying out. But a bird can.
There's a tremendous difference between an
Parasympathetic.
In Sahaja Yoga we jump on to the
parasympathetic - means, your attention starts
controlling the parasympathetic nervous system.
egg and a bird. So such a person who gets
realization and gets established, is no more a
Now how do we prove it, that we
become the 4th dimension?
person who can be tested with these machines
and all that, because these machines deal only
with the physical side. But it is he who can test.
Even a child who is a realised soul can test
First thing is, the person who becomes
the controller ofthe Parasympathetic becomes
the Auto. He can do things. He can do things,
like he can tell that another person is suffering
on these centres. Without going to any
laboratory, without going to any medical check-
up. On the fingertips. So the person who
becomes the 4th dimension, he becomes the
Auto, which is the Autonomous Nervous
System, you see, the auto part of it. He controls
the parasympathetic.
another person. You don't use any machine for
that. He becomes the one who diagnoses, he
becomes the one who cures, he becomes the
person who can soothe. Not only that, on
physical level. But somebody who is emotionally
disturbed, then such a person knows precisely
which centre is disturbed. He also knows how
to put that centre right. You do not have to go
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-41.txt 
 6 - 2007
Issue: 5 &
40
The Divine Cool Breeze
himself, cheating other people, is cruel to others
or say a person like Hitler- he cannot exist. He
has gone beyond that state, where we cannot
Cure hirn; wecan cure animals, we cancure human
beings, but not people who are abnormal. There
is no word for that, but satanic people. So that's
how it does not work out in some people. Also
to the lunatic asylum to get cured. But a person
who has Forth Dimension can cure that person
of that sickness, because he precisely knows
where the trouble is, and how to put it right.
So all the diseases which are also
Physical can be cured, which are
Psychosomatic can be cured, the combination
of both can be cured. Any combination of these
the cases which have gone very down, onto the
state where we can say now absolutely out of
order, then Sahaja Yoga allows such a body to
take another birth, and try.
things can be cured by a person who is an
established Sahaja Yogi.
But in case a disease has gone so far
that it is irrepairable, or something artificial has
been introduced in the body, as they put steel-
sticks and all that, - then Sahaja Yoga does not
work on dead things, it works on living. If the
organ is still living, it can work out. But if it is
not living, then it does not work out.
So, because it is a Fourth Dimension,
we cannot take medical science as a vehicle to
express everything, because this is higher than
that. But in many ways we can medically shoow
that people have been cured of Asthma, of
Cancer, of Leukaemia, of everything, through
the vehicle of Parasympathetic Nervous System,
which doctors cannot handle. Because they have
their own limitaton, - they cannot jump on to
the Parasympathetic Nervous System. And that
is why they cannot cure a patient who has
problems of parasympathetic.
It works out on 80% of people. But
the 20% of people on whom it cannot work
out are the people who do not have the basic
foundation to be a human being. They are like
animals. Their attitudes are like animals, - even
worse than animals.
All problems can be solved through
parasympathetic in case the basic conditions, if
they are fulfilled. In medical science, people will
So a state that could be the 'so-called"
Fourth Dimension, would be where a person
would be no more a human being. He becomes
either a devil, or Saintly person. This has to be
accepted by medical science that there are
people who can be very devilish, and they
cannot ascend any further into the 4th
even treat Hitler. There is no discrimination. But
as you grow higher and higher, even in evolution,
you become more discreet. And at this stage
you cannot treat a person who is a hypocrite,
or who is a cruel man, or who is aggressive to
others, or who is practising methods to subvert
people-as we have many gurus who take
money and destroy many people, just for
money's sake. Such people cannot go to 4th
Dimension.
The Fourth Dimension is not a
mecharical process, but it is a living process of
the evolution by which you evolve to a higher
being. But for that you have to have some basic
foundations.
Dimension, why should they talk about the 4th
Dimension?
Such people have to be something so
extraordinary that they become righteous.
A person who is an alcoholic, can be
cured of alcohol, but a person who is cheating
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-42.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 5 & 6
2007
41
established Sahaja Yogi, you can cure people.
But with medical science you can prove that it
has been cured. So medical science also has
virtuous, compassionate, and very dynamic
people. They have the greatest quality, is of
compassion, which though we accept in our
ordinary life, in medical science we do not
accept. But on what basis is medical science?
There's no compassion. So you 'become' the
compassion. This is the point, is to be seen when
we talk of the Fourth Dimension, we talk of the
beyond. And when we talk of the beyond, we
have to project our mind, to see what we expect
ourselves to be when we become something of
the 'beyond'. Are you going to be the same
mean, aggressive, complicated human
being? Or are we going to be something like a
Saint?
it's own purpose.
And the basis of medical science, that
is the compassion, is now expressed through
the human being who now becomes the
embodiment ofcompassion.
It's not poetry, it's not some sort of an
abstract thing, but is a happening of evolution
that has to take place, and this is in the last
breakthrough about which 'many' people,
scientists and also doctors, - we can say
psychologists have talked about; though they
are not taken seriously.
So this projection is to be brought into
the minds of the doctors. Unless and until they
project their mind to that extent to see that if
we have to be at a higher position we have to
accept that we have to be better people. Now
Sahaja Yoga is the synthesis of all the three
powers that are within us. The first is the physical
power, second is the emotional power. and third
is the evolutionary power. You become the
synthesis of all these three powvers. It's not the
analysis.
So now there is time for us to think
seriously about it, and to know that we are not
only this body, mind and ego, but we are
something beyond. That is the Fourth
Dimension. And what are we there?
We are the Auto, and the Auto is called
as Self. Unless and until you project your mind
higher, and do not get contented with what
discoveries you have made, on a physical gross
level, you cannot see the point of Sahaja Yoga.
And what is there to argue about when Sahaja
Yoga is curing people? Why do you argue? Why
don't you see how it is curing?
But medical science is the analysis. So
it just analysis physical side, goes on analysing.
so that you have one doctor for one eye and
another doctor for another eye.
Supposing a doctor is practising, and
people go and argue with him "How do you
cure?" You will tell them, "What do you mean,
I'm not supposed to tell that, but I do cure."
But a doctor has to understand that
there is no solution for many problems that we
have. So, they have to raise their eyes higher to
see that there must be something missing that
we have to look for.
Now you havea certificate, say from a
Medical College or somewhere, so you think
you are a doctor. But supposing somebody has
acertificate from the Divine itself, then why not
see? Why not keep your eyes open like a
Of course, medical science is very
important because once you get your realization,
even you may not be doctor and you become
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-43.txt 
 42
The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 5 & 6
2007
scientist? Why close them by whatever you have
known so far? Why to make a barrier from the
scientific research you have done? Why not be
a research student in Sahaja Yoga also, and see
for yourself that you really achieve that state,
you have to become that state.
should not have fears about it.
How many people can be helped by
Sahaja Yoga, cannot be said. But those who
come to Sahaja Yoga can be helped. So it
should be at least accepted as a higher type of
redemption or a curing power, which must be
accepted. And those who 'can' be cured by
that must be given a chance. And there should
be no barrier about it.
o: What is this parasympathetic in fact ? Ifit's
described in the medical sciences as a thing
Now, those who talk of the fourth
dimension otherwise make people mad. They
make them lunatics. They end up as lost cases.
So how can that be a Fourth Dimension? There
are so many cases of these people, one can
show that doing those horrible courses and
which balances, brings everything back into
balance.
things, they have become really mad. And they
are good for nothing, they are cheats. They are
doing all the bad things that one can do. So
how can you say that this meditation helps
anyone to be a better person, or a better person
Shri Mata Ji : It depends on, it depend on.
It is actually the evolutionary process.
You see parasympathetic works at different
in health?
levels of our evolution. Say, at the state where
you are the matter, it organizes you in the
periodic table. Who does that organization? It
is parasympathetic. Then, when you rise higher,
as an animal, then it gives you the understanding
of eating food, seeking food-by which animals
seek food. Then as it rises higher, it gives you
another feeling of protection. You seek
protection. Animals also seek protection. That
is how the evolution goes on, by giving these
feelings within us. Or we can say, as the
parasympathetic starts manifesting higher and
higher the seeking starts becoming higher and
higher.
Moreover to be only alright in health is
not sufficient. One must also see that point. One
should not be so much attached to the body,
because supposing you have all wrestlers or
boxers in this country -now take a position like
that- then what will happen? As it is we have
too many of them. Now what we need are the
Saints. Not physically overhealthy people, who
will try to boss over others, but people who are
saints, who help-without charging any money,
without any aggression, out of compassion,
effortlessly - those who are suffering.
But there is another barrier, which must
be told very frankly. That when you become a
Sahaja Yogi, the vital forces of new dimension
start pouring, effortlessly. And you do not charge
Then it comes up to the human stage,
where people seek food, protection. Then when
they achieve that, they seek money, they seek
possession, they seek the possession of other
people, you see, - sometimes called as love.
Seek all kind of such things, but still their seeking
in not finished. Still they are seeking. Then the
same parasympathetic creates an urge within
us that we have to seek something higher. This
any money for that - you enjoy your own
compassion. Compassion, that is the basis of
medical science. So that state, may be, doctors
may not like to have. But there are many, many
people who cannot be cured by Sahaja Yoga,
and they can come to doctors, so doctors
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-44.txt 
 - 2007
43
Issue: 5 & 6
The Divine Cool Breeze
people knew about it - and then when this force
rises through the various centres, and pierces
through the fontanelle bone area, you actualy
get the cool breeze coming out of your head.
For that you do not need any medical science,
any laboratory, - just put your hand on top of
such a person and you get the cool breeze
coming out of his head and after sometime he
feels it coming out of his own hands.
last feeling after the human stage is to be
manifested, and for that there isa residual force
placed within us called as the Kundalini; which
is actually the power of desire within us, which
has manifested everything but it is still residual
because it has not yet manifested itself, because
this is the power of desire to be one with that
divine vital force. And that's why it rests in the
sacrum bone - sacrum: meaning sacred; so
(Contd. From Page- 38)
He in whom all worlds are expanded
Form of the Totality
Infinite are His forms, or, form of infinity
The pervasive inner Ruler of all
Whose glory is greatest
He envelops the universe pervading it everywhere
He stands in the great form of Virata
He who manifested His evolved form as Lord Jesu Christ
The immaculate rider of the last days
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Namoh Namaha
Vistara
Vishvarupa
Anantarupa
Avishishta
Maharddhi
Paryavasthita
Sthavishtha
Mahavishnu
Kalki
Shantakaram Bhujagashayanam Padmanabham Suresham
Vishvadharam Gaganasadrusham Meghavamam Shubhangam
Lakshmikantam Kamalanayanam Yogibhir Dhyanagamyam
Vande Vishnum Bhava Bhaya Haram Sarvalokaikanatham
Amen ! Jai Shri Nirmala Vishnu!
(Nimala Yoga)
(Contd. From Page- 44)
the fable goes.. one man complained to god,
"at the time ofenjoyment I noticed two pairs
of Footprints on sand but at the time of
difficulties it was only one". Godreplied, "at
the time of difficulties it was Me who used
to carry you". Similarly have I got the Divine
For my family it was a great relief.
Financially we were in bad shape. I had no money
even to get framed the photograph of Shri Mataji.
Istill remember, that evening my father gave me
money forthe framing ofthe photographand asked
me to go to Sahaj Yoga Centre regularly.
blessings of Shri Mataji.
Medical Science has no remedy for
Psychosomatic diseases. Sahaj Yoga is the only
remedy. I got cured only because of Sahaj Yoga.
There was real transformation. Our financial
condition improved miraculously. It was difficult
for me to cuntinue mystudies after Xth standard
but today I am about to complete my PhD. As
Not that we, the Sahaj Yogis, have
absolutely no difficulties in life, we do have
sometimes. But the intensity ofthe affect is very
low and solution comes just by praying to The
Divine Mother!
M.K.Gupta
(ASahaj Yogi)
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-45.txt 
 An Experience
It looks funny if the writer himself
claims that he is writing a great piece, but I
am proud to say that. I am quite sure that
after reading this many of us will definitely
desire to experience this new world...new
world of Miracles, new world of Divine
protection which is open to all human
beings.
I was asked to pray for my Self-
Relization.....the awakening of The
Kundalini...the most impossible thing
according to Hatha Yoga I was practicing
and teaching. As long as it was Self-
Realization it was fine, but the moment we
were told to pray for Kundalini awakening,
all my friends stood up and went home.
It began in 1992 when I was just
17 years...the only son of my orthodox,
Hindu parents,I had been undergoing
Psychiatric treatment since last 7 years and
if I can recall correctly, it was Epilepsy,
Anxiety, Hypertension and what not. A
very strict drug schedule, which was very
costly also, was prescribed. My doctor told
that I shall have to continue these drugs for
next 15 years: Frequent liver pain, Jaundice
with 106 fever, were the side effects of
these medicines!
I felt the Cool Breeze and
thoughtlessness then and there. No ritual
was taught to me...except Prayers. I found
it difficult, because when you pray you
become inactive. However I tried to do
that... and my intention was only to cure
my Liver problem. And to my surprise the
problem began to subside! Both, parents
and the doctor were astonished. Fifteen
days after getting my Self-Realization and
regular meditation, I went to the psychiatrist
for routine check up. He was shocked to
see my face.. "Ithink you should reduce
your medicines, " He said. I asked him
why does he want to take chance, I have
to appear for my university exams.
I was told about Sahaj
In my college
Yoga. My immediate question was how
helpful Sahaj Yoga would be in curing my
liver problem. The immediate answer was,
"All these things are the byproduets of
Sahaj Yoga Meditation.
He said, "Ok, but go to lab for your
EEG". After 40 minutes I came back with
a report which was more shocking to him.
It was absolutely normal.
It was difficult for me to digest. My
only intention was to cure my liver so that I
could start my normal life. It was beyond
my imagination that psychosomatic diseases
can also be cured with Sahaj Yoga
Meditation. For me my doctor was my
God, who used to guide my every move.
He was not convinced. I was told
to get it done from another private lab.
Result was again the same. Medicines were
stopped with immediate effect. Next day
Doctor was more worried. He called
up at
least twenty times to inquire about my
health!
Sunday morning 10.30AM with my
eight friends I went to a Sahaj Yoga
Meditation Centre close to my place.
(Contd. on Page- 49)
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-47.txt 
 PRATISHTHAN
SRIVASTAVA

