Lapadrisht Vol 8 Dec Issue 4 2007 2'5 "I think it's a very great blessing, because these days our young children, our young people, are getting astray. They are not so badly off as in other countries, but quite a big trend is going on to spoil them and to make them a, what you can call a very westernized, spoiled personality. But now I saw so many of these dancing together, forgetting their caste, creed, everything and enjoying each other's company...." H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 21 Mar 99, Delhi

 NSYS LENS Shri Mataji & Sir CP CE

 INDEX 1. ESSENCE OF THE PUJA उपवन आत्मसाक्षात्कार 2. 3. EXPRESSION OF HEART I AM THE SHEPHERD 4. 8 11 SWAYAMBHU QUIZ क्षाप या अभिशाप 6. 13 स्वरशाला 7. 15 MOTHER'S RECIPE 8. 16 DEVI SWAYAMBHU 9. 17 THIS HAPPENED 10. 18 THE KEYS OF WISDOM 11. 20 संतों ने कहा है - संत दादू दयाल 12. 22 KIDSHAKTI PAGE 13. 24 5.

 YUVADRISHTI Published by Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 8, Chandragupta Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 029 Tel : 020-25286537, Fax : 020-25286722 Printed by Shrada Printary Pune Please mail your experiences, poems, articles, suggestions, comments, etc. to: Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 8, Chandragupta Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 029 yuvadrishti@gmail.com For queries regarding delay in receiving the magazine, please call: Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd., Tel : 020-25286537 We solemnly thank our article writers, editors, designers/professionals etc. for their help in making this issue.

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007 ESSENCE OF THE PUJA Now what we call the Chranamrut, meaning the Ambrosia of My Feet, is not meant for everyone. Neither are the blessings of the Puja meant for everyone. So try to avoid people who are not yet fully equipped. First thing they will start is doubting. Also there will be a problem with the protocol. They won't be able to accept it with that protocol. It is a very great privilege to be here and this privilege cannot be granted to every person. Significance of the Puja Adi Shankaracharya has said Puja is very conducive to spiritual progress and evokes the blessings of Adi Shakti. When our Holy Mother is ever present how can we invoke Her to come and receive the Puja? What can we offer Her when the Universe is within Herbeing? You are the Mind, You are the Ether, You are the Air, You are Fire and Water and Earth. You manifest Yourself as the Universe, There exists nothing other than You. To transform Yourself, who are consciousness And bliss into the Universal body, you deem the Young bride of the Auspicious One. Verse 35, Saundarya Lahari As Sahaja Yogis we are privileged to be allowed to worship Shri Adi Shakti in person or through Her photograph. APuja is received by Her grace, in person or through Herall pervading presence. Sahaja Yogis have responsibility when they worship Shri Mataji for She is with us when we meditate and pray to Her. Hence the Puja must be performed with attention completely on the Lotus Feet of Shri Mataji, Distraction from the Puja, although not intended, may amount to showing disrespect. Mantras are recited in the praise of the Supreme Goddess and are a form of prayer asking Her acceptance of the offerings, which are made with our devotion. How grateful we all Sahaja Yogis of the world should be to our Mother for taking the finite form, for allowing us, who are unable to visualize Her infinite form, to worship Her. satisfies lots of demands of the past habits, that you feel that you are doing something about it. Then you start giving whatever you think God has given you, the blessings. And the Rishi and Muni have found out - they're very clever people- they have found out how to please the Deities, how to please the Mother. So they have told you, as they have told you even in this lifetime of mine, how to please Her. They say She is 'Stuti-priya' - that means She likes praises, It's not that. But when you praise someone from the heart that means you are accepting it. And that is the time the Chakras start creating ..Now, for Puja one has to understand that without Realization, Puja has no meaning. Because you are not "Ananya", means you have to become aware of whole. Krishna's description of Bhakti is "Ananya". He says, "I will give you Ananya Bhakti", He wants Ananya Bhakti, means when there is not the other, means when you are realized. Otherwise He says, "Pushpam phalam toyam-a flower, a fruit and the water, whatever you give Me-laccept."But when it comes to giving, He says, "You have to come to Me with Ananya Bhakti, means when you have become one with Me." Then you should have the devotion, not before that, Before that, you are not connected..."(3) your a force by which you are thrown, you are triggered, into that realm of God... ... If you could receive whatever I am emitting, in balance, with your Puja, then only it helps better. That means, when you are doing Puja, also receive it. Be in thoughtless awareness when you are doing Puja, completely concentrated in receiving..."(1) "...The other method we employ is of Puja. I've found that works very well with human beings: Puja - because it ...Puja really is the triggering thing, triggers you. It %3D

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007 these people. You also have to think of all of them and know that they are part and parcel of my Being, as you all are and you are the alert ones.."(2) triggers you into another realm, it's really miraculous. Once you have done the Puja then you can project out much more, in your silence only. Your silence itseif becomes so powerful.."(3) So at this time in this Puja you are not only daing Puja for yourself, for London people but for the whole world. Not only for Sahaja Yogis who are all over, (of course for them also) but in this Puja you are expressing yourself as Sahaja Yogis who have recognized Me and are requesting to bless the rest of the people so that they also recognize Me as you have recognized. By this Puja I hope recognition will be much clearer. By My recognition only you will recognize yourself and the whole thing will work out in a very very beautiful manner..."(2) "...So first, your vibrations must improve, to receive. If the reception is not good, what's the use of any Puja of projection? So first of all, we sort of, prepare-prepare our instrument, or prepare our projecting instrument. That preparation done by praying to different Deities, as we call Worshiping the Supreme Goddess "..Now when we do the Puja, first of all you will praise Shri Ganesha. By that, in you, Shri Ganesha will be awakened and established. By worshipping Me as Shri Ganesha your innocence will be established and you will see, the vibration wise also, your vibrations will increase and you will feel very stable within yourself. Now when you will take Shri Ganesha's names you will know what qualities He has, what powers He gives you. When you praise those qualities, those powers of those qualities will start emitting through you. This is how the Divine works, as if you get charged with those qualities. Then you pralse the Goddess, the Adi Shakti. Now the Adi Shakti has all the seven chakras within Her awakened, and She has to work with all these seven chakras... that a Kundalini Puja. By praying to My Kundalini you improve your reflection. Because then the vibrations from Me start flowing into yours, and they awaken it.. "(3) *.So these Puja methods and prayer methods and the Mantra methods have been devised and found out by great thinkers of Sahaja Yoga, the great masters of Sahaja Yoga, and it is the effort- or you can say the effortless effort-of the Sahaja Yogis that makes my body vibrate. Extracts the essence from my body, I should say. They make... It makes the infinite release itself through this finite being and it works, it clicks - I have seen it -it works out very weil.."(1) ...So when you offer Me say, fiowers or anything like water or anything, then the elements are happy and the deities are happy in the chakras. And then they emit their vibrations of their quality and of their blessings on you. They give you their quality and their blessings. That is how the Divine acts and gradually after Puja you will feel it that the whole thing is working out..."(4) By worshipping the Goddess as the Protector of the whole universe, praising Herdifferent attributes, even Her Face, Her Hands everything has a meaning. Praising Her powers. By saying that, by repeating that, you echo in your projection Her powers, and then your projection becomes that powerful. It's a very subtle happening that takes place. It's miraculous. These things look so simple like - just washing my Feet. Simple thing is washing my Feet. Now see, this Foot, I don't know if you see the whole universe I see there, and I really get stunned by them. When you wash My Feet, what do you do? Actually, My Feet have been working very hard. And then you put a little water to soothe them, to suggest that you can feel the effort put in by these Feet. And a kind of a very sweet, melodious love flows out of these Feet then..."(3) ...Today I am to tell you a few more secrets about Sahaja Yoga-it is that for the Puja you should not get people of mediocre nature, because to bear a Puja is very difficult. People have not yet understood the value of My being, of My Feet, of My Hands. They cannot, they do not deserve to be here. So do not get anybody because he is your friend or a sisterora brother Is wrong. You are spoiling the chances of the person, because it is too much for him. He cannot bear it. It is meant for very few people. So remember that it is not meant for many people. If you could understand this is the secret of Sahaja Yoga and in this secret you have to get very few people to begin with. Everything is going to be exposed one day but not to everyone. If you can recognize this that you are privileged, then you will behave in a way that you have been given this privilege. Today there are many people in the whole world who are meditating. I am thinking of all Absorbing the Vibrations of the Puja Now you must meditate also after the Puja because my vibrations you do not suck in without meditation. Always it happens so far I have had very few Pujas in which all my whole vibrations were sucked in. If you have sincerity

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007 about it, itis really the sincerity part of it you will suck all my vibrations. Tell your mind not to ask questions and misbehave but to suck the vibrations clearly. This is for your own nourishment, for your own growth, for your own enjoyment..."(2) !!! REQUEST TO ALL THE READERS !! To dearest sons and daughters of the Holy Mother, As you take this last issue of 2007 in your hand, there is a small tale which we would reveal to you. It's about your beloved Yuvadrishti. About a year and half back Divine leela played and due to lack of writers it seemed that 2005 would be the last year of the Sahaja Yoga youth magazine, The Nirmal Shakti Yuva Sangh, or Yuvashakti is one of the most important assets of Sahaja Yoga - and Yesl This magazine was about to be closed because of lack of articles. Then prayers to the Divine Mother worked and a tiny group of dedicated volunteers lovingly shouldered the responsibility of the magazine in Nirmal Bhakti & Shakti. So with grace of Shri Mataji we all are still reading the Yuvadrishti and would continue to do so over many yugas. But we wish to invite you the yuvashakti of Sahaja Yoga - in making this magazine even more beautiful and relevant for our collective ascent. ". But you know that after Puja I get little tired because if you cannot receive it, that force, I want to sleep and get rid of that additional vibrations into 'Sushupti' by entering into the infinite state..."(1) And this body has to bear lots of things to make you understand Sahaja Yoga and your own powers. For example, if you're rude to Me, if you're not respectful, Christ gets very angry because He has said that anything against Holy Ghost, He won't tolerate. So the white chakra, the Agnya starts, you see, starts throwing ariger, and moving very fast. Now I have to bear it, I cannot tell you the way Christ wants Me to tell you because He's very direct, and I have to little bit be careful so that you don't get upset. Moreover while doing the Puja, supposing you are a doubting type, or you are opposing it, then you don't absorb the vibrations and I have problems, because the vibrations are flowing and you are not receiving it. So I don't know how to contain within myself, you don't suck in the vibrations, soltake time to take them out..."(4) Our beloved Mother has time and again stressed the importance of a spiritually rich and dynamic young Sahaja yogi and yoginis as they are the ones who will be the future light-bearers of this great divine work. We are unique, because we are young. The issues in our spiritual growth are different and we need to share the knowledge that we believe would be helpful in ascent of our Sahaja brothers & sisters. What could be an easier and informal platform than the Yuvadrishti Magazinell. References: 1. 1976-0330: Meditation being in Thoughtless Awareness, Gudi Padwa, Delhi. 2. 1980-0505: The Sahasrara Day, Switzerland. 3. 1980-0719: The Meaning of Puja, Brighton, UK. 4. 1986-0524: Meaning and Importance of Puja, Puja Address in Madrid, Spain. So, send us the articles on any Sahaja Yoga topic- from collected words of Shri Mataji on important topics for yuvas, lesser known Sahaja knowledge from all over the world, anecdotes from the lives of realized souls, entertaining stories with a Sahaja perspective, music & culture, poems, humor and do-it-yourself activity pages or any enlightened knowledge which you would like to see in this magazine. Don't hesitate as our strong editing team will work with you to bring your article in good shape if you don't have any experience. You are also requested to help us in increasing subscriptions of Yuvadrishti. You can organize Collective subscriptions for your center or just gift a subscription to your brother or sister. Note: Dear Reader, you are requested to read-Protocols of the Puja, published in Yuvadrishti September 07 Issue, for the So let's move in the next year and next phase of our ascent with a collective voice of the Sahaja youth the Yuvadrishti. May the Source of Knowledge and All quests-The Adishakti of all the Universes grant all Her little Ganeshas eternal abode at Her holy feet.-Om-Amen. Regards, Yuavdrishti Team yuvadrishti@gmail.com %3D

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007 उपवन आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्रश्न हो तो यथासंभव उत्तर दिया जाता है। साथ ही साथ ध्यान केन्द्र का पता देकर वहाँ आने ले लिए आमंत्रित तथा प्रोत्साहित किया जाता है। आज के व्यस्त समय में व्यक्ति को ध्यान-योग बताने के लिए उसके आराम के पलों में से ही कुछ पल चुराने की आवश्यकता प्रतीत हुयी और इसी आवश्यकता का प्रतिफलन उपवनों में, जब व्यक्ति आराम से होता है, आत्मसाक्षात्कार पर चर्चा करने की विद्या के रूप में हुआ। यही वह समय होता है, जब व्यक्ति स्वयं के साथ होता है। श्रीमाँ की कृपा से हमें इस अवसर को परम ज्ञान के अवसर में परिवर्तित करने का क्षण प्राप्त हो जाता है। इसी सोच को लेकर पिछले कुछ वर्षों से दिल्ली में उपवन आत्मसाक्षात्कार जनसामान्य तक श्रीमाताजी के संदेश को प्रसारित करने का एक अत्यंत सुविधा जनक मार्ग बनकर सामने आया है। उपवन आत्मसाक्षात्कार का विचार सन २००२ के आस पास उत्तरी दिल्ली की युवाशक्ति के मन में आया और श्रीमाताजी की कृपा तो देखिए थोड़े ही समय में यह प्रकिया सर्वव्यापी एवं सर्वसुलभ हो गयी। प्रारंभिक दौर में यह कार्य करने हेतु कभी दो तो कभी चार ही सहजयोगी जुट पाते थे, किंतु श्रीमाताजी की असीम अनुकंपा से यह कार्य आज हाथों हाथ लिया जाता है तथा आज इस कार्य हेतु दिल्ली की युवाशक्ति तथा अन्य सहजयोगी आस पास के लगभग २०० कि.मी. के क्षेत्र में बहुधा जाते रहते हैं। उत्तरी दिल्ली के दिल्ली विश्वविधालय के आस-पास का कोई भी पार्क इस कार्यक्रम से अछूता न रहा और श्री आदिशक्ति की कृपा से यह कार्य आगे ही बढ़ता रहा। दिल्ली के रोहिणी क्षेत्र में स्वर्ण जयंति उद्यान ( जो कि जापानी पार्क के नाम से भी जाना जाता है) में तो स्थिति ऐसी है कि यदि किसी शनिवार अथवा रविवार को पूजा पड़ने अथवा किसी अन्य कारण से यह कार्यक्रम नहीं हो पाता तो वहाँ के साधक विहवल हो उठते हैं। सामूहिक चेतना का ऐसा अप्रतिम प्रभाव सहजयोग के अतिरिक्त दुर्लभ है स्व्वण जयंति उद्यान में उसके मनोरम वातावरण का आनंद उठाने के लिए प्रतिदिन हजारों की संख्या में लोग आते हैं, और इन हजारों में निश्चित तौर पर हमें बीस पचास साधक मिल ही जाते हैं। आज केवल दिल्ली में ही नहीं अपितु कई स्थानों पर इस कार्यक्रम का आयोजन हो रहा है। हमारा सभी पाठकों से अनुरोध है कि वे भी इस प्रकार के कार्यक्रम को करके माँ के उपवन आत्मसाक्षात्कार में श्रीमाताजी के आशीर्वाद से संदेश को जन-जन तक पहुँचाने का प्रयास करें ताकि सहजयोगी किसी एक उपवन का चुनाव करके वहाँ पर श्रीमाताजी को दिए गए वचन पर हम खरे उतर सकें। श्रीमाताजी का संदेश प्रसारित करने का निश्चय करते हैं। फिर प्रातः काल अथवा संध्याकाल में जब लोगों की संख्या अनुभवः- अधिकाधिक रहती है, तब वहाँ पर चयनित स्थान पर दिल्ली के गुजरावाला टाऊन के उद्यान में जब आत्मसाक्षात्कार श्रीमाताजी का आसन लगाकर उसके सामने सभी सहजयोगी की इस पद्धति का श्री गणेश किया गया तब सहज योगियों के ध्यान हेतु बैठ जाते हैं। ५.१० मिनट ध्यान में बैठने के बाद अतिरिक्त मात्र दो नये साधक थे। श्रीमाताजी नें उन्हें परम उनमें से कुछ योगी सहजयोग का परिचय-पत्र (चंउचीसमज) चैतन्य की पावन धारा में इस प्रकार स्नान कराया कि उन्होंने ले कर, उपवन में घूमने वाले लोगों को वितरित करते हैं, जोर देकर इस कार्यक्रम हेतु उद्यान में पुनः आने का निरमंत्रण दे अर्थात् सहजयाग के इस कायकम के बारे में सूचित करते हैं। डाला। यह उनके निरंत्रण का प्रेम था या कुछ और देखते ही सामान्य व्यक्ति उत्सुक्ता वश पूछने अवश्य आते हैं और इन्हीं देखते एक के बाद एक सोलह कार्यक्रम के विषय में केंदीय सामान्य व्यक्तियों में साधक छिपे होते हैं, जो वास्तव में संयोजकों को पता चला और उन्होंने ने भी इस कार्यक्रम को श्रीमाताजी अर्थात् परमात्मा को ही ढूंड रहे हैं। ऐसे साधकों की खूब सराहा । खोज वहाँ समाप्त हो है। सभी साधकों को बैठाकर आत्मसाक्षात्कार कराय जाता है। यदि संख्या कम हो तो कई साधकों ने तो कहा है कि माँ ने हमें सहज योग की मुख्य व्यक्तिगत रूप से अथवा सामूहिक रुप से आत्मसाक्षात्कार धारा से जोड़ने के लिए ही, इस कार्यक्रम का आयोजन करवाया कराया जाता है। आत्मसाक्षात्कार के बाद यदि किसी का कोई था।

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007 EXPRESSIONS OF HEART Mother Durga, Devi of life Why Don't You Find Her We experience your thunderous might, Which washes away in seconds all our difficulties and strife, Only your darshan gives eternity, which is an aim of a seeker's life, Receiving you in our hearts open the way to paradise You teach us to follow a beautiful path, which tells to love each and all Why don't you just find her, Why should you act like a blind, for the sake you don't want to find Why should you wear the outer covering, which will never bear you the Earning Why should you seek in physical, when you know it's not feasible Why should you take a wrong turn, when you know its going to burn Why should you be so mental, when you know it has to be central, Why should you follow without feeling, when you know its not healing Why should you go to false teacher, when you find it's just a preacher Why should you not seek, when you know that you are not weak Why should you not find her, when you know that life is because of her But those who fear you cannot believe how extraordinary simplicity can be, These being your creation Some see you in eruptions, mountains, quakes or storms Some see you in thunderous form It is to correct all the wrongs And thank you mother for making us sahajyogi we have been pampered to see the formless divine personified in a human form. - Shridevi Angurala Purity and Innocence plays a big role, where angels take you to the goal She works on your desire, that's the only thing you've to aspire Then, why shall you not desire? The Spirit - Manish Nageet Let my Spirit act... Through my devotional tract. The spirit which is detached, The spirit which is Shiva, The spirit which is light in darkness, The spirit which is joy in unhappiness. Today-The Day Yet again the majestic morning urges the senses as the Master of the Golden chariot submitted to his regal discipline, stands knocking just like every day since eternity. Neither mind nor brain, It's the spirit which train.. The ever-lasting, the ever-loving, It's all ever pervading... Through me shines the spirit, Through me shines it's glory, It's the ocean of love in which one truly develops, Let the spirit guides us from all the worldly fuss. A glance at my hands overwhelm the praying heart. Innocent, loving, working hands...uniquely obedient. Creation's beautiful gift to Her beloved mankind. Toil- Sweat, Love- Spread, Receive- Give live this day. The SPIRIT, the Pure Desire, The SPIRIT which we truly admire. The SPIRIT, the AIM For which we have come, For which we have come. Fingers of flesh and blood symbolizing the flicker of hope encore the message of redemption. Transcendence from worldly to the other the eternal passage to (through) the qualities - Divine. Yes, it is, once again Morning Time. -Rajan Rawat - Kavita Navlani

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007 I AM THE SHEPHERD "John has revealed so many things about chakras and this, but of course, in a very mystic language. He calis chakras as the plug, in his Genesis and the deities as the angels. He has also described the Realization. It is so wonderful to read it, but only after Realization you'll understand, because it's a very, very deep writing and you cannot read much from it-mystical, sounding vague words." - Public Program, 10 Aug, 1979, Caxton Hall, London In the Holy book of Bible, many spiritual truths are hidden in form of symbolism and parables. A very beautiful symbolism of the relationship between seekers and their Supreme Master is presented in the Chapter 10 of St. John's Gospel (a Gospel is the four books in the New Testament (Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John) that tell the story of Christ's life and teachings). sheep and runs away. So the wolf attacks the sheep and scatters them. 10:13 Because he is a hired hand and is not concemed about the sheep, he runs away. 10:14 lam the good shepherd. I know my own and my own knows me- The Gospel says: 10:15 -andI lay down my life for the sheep. Just as the father knows me and I know the father "I tell you the solemn truth, the one who does not 10:1 enter the sheepfold by the door, but climbs in some other way, is a thief and a robber. 10:16 I have other sheep that do not come from this The one who enters by the door is the shepherd 10:2 of the sheep. sheepfold. 1 must bring them too, and they will listen to my voice, so that there will be one flock and one shepherd. 10:3 sheep hear his voice. He calls his own sheep by name and leads them out. The doorkeeper opens the door for him, and the When he has brought all his own sheep out, he 10:4 goes ahead of them, and the sheep follow him because they recognize his voice. 10:5 They will never follow a stranger, but will run away from him, because they do not recognize the stranger's voice." 10:17 This is why the father loves me because I lay down my life, so that I may take it back again. 10:6 Jesus told them this parable, but they did not understand what he was saying to them. So Jesus said to them again, "I tell you the 10:7 solemn truth, lam the door for the sheep. 10:18 No one takes it away from me, but i lay it down of my own free will. I have the authority to lay it down, and i have the authority to take it back again. This commandmentireceived from my father." All who came before me were thieves and 10:8 robbers, but the sheep did not listen to them. / am the door, If anyone enters through me, he will 10:9 be saved, and will come in and go out, and find pasture. In this teaching of Shri Jesus, the sheep waiting for their shepherd in the yard, that has a doorkeeper, symbalise kundalini of innocent seekers waiting for their self- realization. A warning is given regarding the misdeeds and deceptions of all Kuguru & Aguru who try to misguide the innocent seeker. They are thieves and robbers. By using spiritual words crafted artfully and playing tricks they try to entice his mind and lead him to a false & dangerous spiritual journey through the regions of subconscious (Left Side) and supraconscious (Right 10:10 The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy; Ihave come so that they may have life, and may have it abundantly. 10:11 I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep. 10:12 The hired hand, who is not a shepherd and does not own sheep, sees the wolf coming and abandons the 8.

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007 own live and leave the sheep unprotected. So, if the seekers submit to these unauthorized religious gurus who are only aftera seeker's money, they will have to face the attack of negative forces (wolf) all by them and these false gurus will not be able to protect them from any disease, mis-happening, miseries etc. On the contrary, Shri Jesus reveals that He is a Good Shepherd who is always ready to lay down His own life to save His people. Side) and also attempt to damage the Kundalini of the seeker (the sheep). But there is a doorkeeper who is guarding the sheep. He, as we all know, is Shri Ganesha, who protects the Kundalini, His Mother, from all invasions till the True Master or Shepherd comes. The Sadguru or the True Master & Shepherd is recognized by the doorkeeper (Shri Ganesha) who is guarding the sheep (Kundalini). Shri Ganesha opens the door for him and allows him to raise the Kundalini, the individual Mother of all seekers, to give self-realization to the seeker. The Kundalini also recognizes Sadguru (Shri Mataji), just as the sheep recognize their Shepherd, and as he directs them, the Kundalini's of all seekers rise at his command. The Kundalini will never rise before a stranger (unauthorized or false person), however exalted he or she might seem, but will only follow the Sadguru (who is a Divine personality) and rise. The true incarnation is deeply concerned with ail seekers of God and tries to bring together all the saintly people. Shri Jesus mentions that there are many other lost sheep (lost seekers) whom He has to take care of and bring all the flock (collective of seekers) under one Shepherd (God Almighty). This is the work which our Divine Mother has been doing, raising the Kundalini of the seekers around the world and through an inner cleansing making them part of a Pure, Nirmal, Sufi collective - The Universal Pure Religion - Vishwa Nirmala Dharma, which is not any organization but essence of all the Shri Jesus also mentions that He is the power of the Agnya Chakra. He tells that He is the door through which the sheep can pass and reach the green pasture (the Kingdom of God, the Sahasrara). He further says that false people came before Him to misguide the seekers and rob them of their ability to have self-realization (by damaging their kundalini). But His role is to lead the way to attain immortality the eternal life of Spirit by opening the door for Moksha at Sahasrara. religions. This Gospel also reveals that Shri Jesus was aware of the work He has to do in order to open the Agnya charka at the collective level. He says that His Father, God Almighty, loves Him because He can sacrifice for the highest, i.e., Shri Jesus can sacrifice His life and resurrect Himself. He can do this because He has the power and this power no one can take it from Him as He has received it from His Father, God Alimghty. Shri Jesus also says this to the seekers that He is the true incamation- the Good Shepherd- who will care for the seekers in all times of difficulty. The priests, pandits and other religious leaders who speak without authority of God and try to direct the seekers are like the hired hands, who work for money and take out the sheep to graze. As soon as the wolf will come they will run away to save their May we all always remember this divine event in the history of mankind and affirm to ourselves to continually watch our ego and super-ego and surrender them at the lotus feet of Shri Mataji so that the Divine Desire of one flock and one Shepherd become a reality. KARTIK POORNIMA The holy month of Kartik (November-December) is often compared to a manimala, a necklace of precious jewels, because it is studded with holy events. Kartik Poornima is cherished as Guru Nanak Jayanti While the Trayodashi (thirteen day) of kartik Krishna paksh (dark half) is the day that saint Dnyaneshwar, Whose verses are enshrined in the guru granth sahib, took Samadhi. His hometown, Alandi, in Maharashtra, commemorates its saintly son with Pujas. Kartik Poornima's oldest aura is from the 'Tripura dahan' myth: it's the anniversary of when Shiva is believed to have destroyed the triple cities of a demon. They whirled in space and had to be destroyed together, so Shiva had to burn them in that split second when three were in alignment-way before Stars Wars! And that's why we're meant to light a diya on night: after all, it's Dev-Dipavali, the Dipavali of the gods. 9.

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007 YUVA SHAKTI SEMINAR Noida, 10th November 2007: The Yuva Shakti seminar began with three Mahamantras and bhajans in Sahajayoga Mahotsav on the 2nd day of 3-day Diwali Puja celebrations in Noida. Its session started off with Manoj Kumar bhaiya from Hyderabad, speaking to yuvas about the guidelines laid down by Shri Mataji for the Nirmal Shakti Yuva Sangh (NSYS) in 1987. He also said that youngsters in Sahaja Yoga are different from other societies because they meditate and introspect ourselves daily. Then Anish Kohli bhaiya from Delhi talked in detail about spreading Sahaja Yoga in corporate sector (MNCS and IT firms). Since people spend most part of the day at the place of work and with our colleagues, therefore, it is an ideal place where they must spread Sahaja Yoga either by granting Self-Realization or organising Sahaja Yoga program. "Stress Management Through Sahaja Yoga" is the name given to the program for spreading of Sahaja Yoga in corporate sectors. After that, Rajiv Khosla bhaiya from Delhi shared his knowledge on spreading Sahaja Yoga among Muslim community. While talking about Sahaja Yoga or giving realization to Muslims we must refer to God as 'Allah' because Allah is the God of Muslims. Further, Mohammad Sahib was their only guru and teacher and not. He emphasised that while talking to Muslims, Knowledge about their dharma is of utmostimportance. Sahaja Yogis should to be polite and try to use Urdu words while conversing with them (so they can understand better). Yogis must refer Sahastrara as 'Seventh Heaven' or 'Saatva Asmaan'. Further, Mohammad Sahib has called the Kundalini as 'Asas' and Param Chaitanya as 'Ruh' in Holy Quran (Shri Mataji has also mentioned this in Her lectures.) Next, Spreading Sahaja Yoga on Internet was covered by Vivek Sagar from Noida. He mentioned everyone especially the yuvas to exercise absolute discretion while spreading Sahaja Yoga on the Internet. For this, he requested everyone to register themselves to SITA India group (www.groups.yahoo.com/group/sitaindia). He advised that instead of forwarding the messages (like quotes of Shri Mataji and other news) directly to people, it must be sent to SITA India, which can check the message (for any unauthentic information) and then forward it to others. Special precaution was also advised for people using online community Orkut. It was emphasized that several false messages spread easily on such forums. Further, since it's a public forum, yogis must put information on their profiles/scrapbook/albums with utmost care and discretion. Any debates (among Sahaja Yogis and Non-Sahaja Yogis), putting up miracle photographs etc. must be avoided. All these steps are necessary to maintain dignified image of Sahaja Yoga in public. Yuvas were also asked to register themselves at SWAN-(www.sahajayoga.org/swan). Last Dr. Nigam talked about protocols. He mentioned that all the protocois and discipline spontaneously come in our behaviour when we recognize Shri Mataji as ShriAdishakti. There is a myth also in Sahaja Yoga: that senior, he is a very senior Sahaja yogi. I mean, I don't understand. What is this? How can there be seniority in Sahaja yoga? Cannot be seniority. No question. Somebody is say, enters into the sea. Some are there for ages standing near the edge of the sea holding on to the earth because they are afraid to swim and some peaple who have come only yesterday might be jumping and going ahead and doing, enjoying the sea. So how is it he is the senior, he is the. We do not have this seniority business in Sahaja yoga. There's no seniority. And there's also another myth. Maybe this is an excuse. I don't know what to say but it is a very common thing to say that he is a senior Sahaja yogi or he is a, after all he is a senior Sahaja yogi. Can't understand. Like saying a donkey, "This donkey is senior. Another donkey is not." Then another thing that you suffer from very much, very common is this that "Mother said so."Anybody will say, "Oh, Mother said to me. She called me and She said it." "What did She say?" "Oh you are a very great Sahaja yogi. You are this. You are that. You are that." Now there are two possibilities. One, I might have sald it just to befool him. I am Mahamaya. Ormaybe I must have said all this just to see "that" pampers his ego so that he gets to Sahaja Yoga and does something substantial than to eat my head. So, "Mother said so." Such a great Sahaja yogi, I am such and such, very bonbastic words, very bombastic language he would use. And then people, "Ah, what a Sahaja yogi!" So the judgment of a Sahaja yogi doesn't come from what he claims but what he achieves. I have seen some Sahaja yogis are extremely arrogant also. Extremely arrogant, think no end of themselves. All that is there. So many Sahaja yogis I have seen of that kind, that they are very, very arrogant and that they try to make a big show out of what great people they are. Humpty Dumpties, as they call them. 1993-10-24 : Navratri Puja, Re-Introspect yourself, Cabella 10

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007 Can You Find The Word The following quiz is on Swayambhus around the globe. You can see the picture of these divine monuments in the book Nirmal Fragrance, but complete the game first. Try and find the location of the following Swayambhus on the word block below. Z. H. S. X. H. L. P. H. K. L. K A. H. P H D. L. K H. R. H. H. M G HH H. J H. C. I C. A. L. K R. K. H. T. K LF н H. G. I. B K H. R. A R R. N. R. R. R. large rocks set in a circular formation. Later on, realized saints decorated them with smaller stones on top as 1. Shri Ganesha's statue at the place where the Nabhi of the whole universe and the Temple of Athena, The Adishakti is situated. crown. 5. These are two mountain peaks guard the Vancouver city of Canada. The Native Indians call them The Two Sisters who gave birth to two offsprings, Peace and Brotherhood uniting two powerful tribes and hold them in high spiritual regard. 2. This name means 'Chaitnaya' and is also called Ayers' Rock. It is Shri Ganesha's swayambhu in Australia. 3. Swayambhu of Shri Gauri and very near to Ayers' Rock. The local aboriginals call it the Kata Tjuta. A mythical rainbow serpent, Wanambi is said to live on its summit. 6. Mountain that is the Shri Ganesha's Swayambhu in Switzerland. There is a beautiful photograph with Mother standing in front of Shri Ganesha Swayambhu. Mother gave it the name - Ganaraj. 4. World-famous Monument in England. It was created by Mother Earth for emitting vibrations and consists of 7. One of the most sacred places of Muslims who 11 NT T. R. R. A. ID R. %24

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007 century. It is an unusual place where a plateau rises in the middle of a plain which, when viewed from the west, resembles a petrified waterfall. At a height of 23 meters the figure of a horseman has been hewn into the sheer rock, piercing a lion with his spear. circumambulate at this place around a Black Stone, a swayambhu of Shiva to achieve Shiva's blessing. 8. This is a swayambhu in USA where many Saakar Pujas where held. The name of the swayambhu means "the Clean Pot" in Native language of Indians i.e The place where we get cleaned. Shri Mataji found this place through vibrations coming out of a newspaper. When the Red Indians were driven out by whites, they came here to hide themselves in this spiritual place so that they should not be crushed and destroyed forever. 10.This swyambhu in France is a famous mountain and is an expression of ego. It is also the name of a luxury writing pen brand. Answers on Page 14 9. This is swayambhu of Shri Adishakti in Bulgaria. This is only monumental stone relief in Europe from 8th THE BULLY guarantee that nothing will happen to you after all. My holy Mother's powers are bigger than any power you have ever seen in your life. So be aware." He turned around and walked away, leaving the boys in silent confusion. He turned around after a couple of steps and said "Oh, but if you want to get your Self Realisation after all, just come to me. lam happy to give it to you!!" Josh was 15 when he came to his new school. His class was well known for bullying and difficult pupils. Already on the second day, two boys cornered him in the court yard and held their hands on his throat. "Hey, new boy, so tell us, what is the most valuable item you have at hame!" "It is a little pendant I got from Shri Mataji last year" Josh replied. "Pendant. That can hardly be worth any money. What else would you treasure?" The big photograph of my holy Mother in the meditation room of course" Josh replied. "Photograph? I think I have to ask differently, fella! What is the most amazing present you ever got?" "My Self Realisation of coursel" Josh answered truthfully. "Are you taking us seriously here? I mean you must be afraid of us?" "Notreally." Josh replied calmly. A couple of days after this incident, one of the boys took Josh aside after class and said "This stuff that you were telling us about. That sounded amazing, dude! I have not heard a kid reply in that manner before either. You were so...so totally cool. I mean, you are not big, we could have beaten you black and blue. But you somehow scared us all a bit there with this talk. So this Self Realistation thing. What is that about?" Josh led the boy in an empty classroom, sat him down and raised his Kundalini. The boys felt they were not getting anywhere with this strange little boy and sat down to ask him more questions: "So, what is your biggest fear then?" "Not to live my life to my fullest potential that was given to me by Shri Mataji. Not to make the best out of my self realisation! To miss an opportunity to give someone whatI have experienced" "Oh dear" the boys answered. "What a load of rubbish! I don't understand a word he is saying! One last question. What are you going to do about it, about us if we kick you now!" the boy with the missing front tooth laughed. Josh stood up and replied "Me? Nothing! But I cannot "Cool. Cool stuff you are doing" the boy said after. "I really feel chilled." They left the class room and ended up chatting for hours. The boy told Josh everything about his family, all those complications he had with his parents. Josh just listened and told him that all his worries could be sorted if he just meditated a couple of minutes a day. Needless to say that he was never bothered again by the crowd. He even made friends with the boy he gave realisation to...who turned out to be the gang leader. 12

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007 क्षाप या आशीर्वाद बहुत समय पहले की बात है, एक योगी था जो एक हुए छप्पर के नीचे आपको बेठना पड़ेगा। * जंगल में रहता था। प्रत्येक दो वर्षों में वह अकेला किसी पवित्र स्थान पर जाते समय प्रतिष्ठान नामक शहर से योगी ने उसकी झोंपडी में घुसते हुए कहा, "अगली ऑधी तुम्हारे छप्पर को उड़ा ले जाए। गुज़रता था। ऐसी ही एक यात्रा के दौरान, गर्मी की एक दोपहर में वह गरीब आदमी बोला, "धन्यवाद बाबा! लेकिन मेरे पास एक बड़ी हवेली के सामने खड़ा होकर भोजन के लिए आपको देने के लिए केवल एक गिलास पानी और मेरे आवाज दे रहा था। तभी, हवेली का मालिक (जो किसी मिट्टी के बर्तन में रखे हुए थोड़े से चावल ही हैं। महत्त्वपूर्ण अतिथी की प्रतीक्षा कर रहा था) बरामदे में आया। योगी (जो एक साधारण साधु लग रहा था) को योगी बोला, "तुम्हारा कुआँ बिलकुल सूख जाए और अपने अतिथी के रास्ते में खड़ा हुआ योगी बिलकुल भी कल तक तुम्हारा बतन टूट जाए।" फिर उसने चावल अच्छा नहीं लगा। मालिक ने बहुत बेचैन होकर अपना खाया और पानी पिया। थोड़ी देर बाद वह उठा और हाथ जोर से हिलाते हुए कहा, "भाग जाओ ! जल्दी!" गरीब आदमी के सिर पर अपना हाथ रखकर उसे बिना योगी ने दूर जाते हुए कहा, "तुम अभी लाखों के स्वामी शब्दों के आर्शीवाद दिया और चला गया। हो, ईश्वर तुम्हें करोड़ों का स्वामी बनाए।" माली, जिसने योगी का अब तक पीछा किया था, उसमें अब और पीछे जाने की क्षमता नहीं रह गई थी। उसे योगी से डर लगने लगा था कि यह किस तरह का पवित्र आदमी है! जो लालची और स्वार्थी अमीर आदमी को तो आशीर्वाद देता है और एक करूणापूर्ण गरीब आदमी को छप्पर के बिना रहने का क्षाप देता है? उसके इन शब्दों ने अमीर आदमी को बहुत प्रसन्न किया और उसने अपने मुनीम को एक चाँदी का सिक्का देकर योगी के पीछे भेजा। लेकिन मुनीम को योगी कहीं भी नहीं दिखा। एक माली जो हवेली के पास ही रहता था, उसने सोचा अमीर आदमी तो योगी के प्रति बहुत ही अशिष्ट और असभ्य था, फिर भी योगी ने उसे और समृद्ध होने का आर्शीवाद दिया। यह योगी कुछ अनूठा है। इसके पीछे चल कर देखना चाहिए।" उसने गरीब आदमी से कहा, "तुम्हें पता है?उस योगी ने एक अमीर आदमी को, जिसने उसे एक टुकड़ा रोटी भी देने के लिए मना कर दिया था, आर्शीवाद दिया कि वह और अमीर हो जाए।" गरीब आदमी ने कहा, "क्या उन्होंनें ऐसा किया? बेचारा!" माली ने और अधिक उत्सुकता से पूछा, "तुमने किसे बेचारा कहा?" गरीब आदमी ने कहा, "अमीर आदमी को! और किसे?" योगी थोड़ी दूर जाकर एक निर्धन आदमी की झोंपड़ी के सामने जाकर खड़ा हो गया, उसने पूछा, "क्या तुम मुझे कुछ खाने को दे सकते हो?" गरीब आदमी ने बाहर आकर योगी को प्रणाम किया और कहा, अन्दर आइए बाबा। लेकिन मेरी झोंपड़ी टूटी-फूटी है और इसके फटे माली ने उसे घूर कर देखा। उसे योगी के पागल होने की कोई शंका नहीं थी और अब उसे गरीब आदमी भी 13 समममस सस

 ्न Yuvadrishti Dec 2007 पागल लगने लगा। उसे समझ नहीं आया कि वह क्या कहे? भय काय तया यह भजन श्रीमाताजी के एक पूर्वज ने लिखा है, जो कि एक आत्मसाक्षात्कारी व्यक्ति थे। यह भजन श्रीमाताजी अपने बचपन में गाया करते थे जब उन्हें किसी बात से निराशा होती थी। गरीब आदमी उसके मन की बात समझ गया और उसे अपने पास बैठने के लिए कहा और बोला, "तु्हें लग रहा है कि योगी ने कुछ गलत कहा है। नहीं ऐसा नहीं है। मुझे बहुत समय से लग रहा था कि मेरा इन तुच्छ मोह की वस्तुओं से दूर जानेका समय आ गया है लेकिन अज्ञान ने मुझे अभी भी उनसे बाध रखा था। योगी की बातों ने यह बताया कि जल्दी ही मेरे पास कुछ नहीं बचेगा और केवल ईश्वर ही मेरा आश्राय रह जाएँगे।" भय काय तयाँ प्रभू ज्याची रे ।। धृ।। जिनके साभ भगवान है उनको डर किस बात का! सर्व विसरली प्रभूमय झाली, पूर्ण जयाची वाचा रे ।। १। सब कुछ भूलकर जिनकी वाणी प्रमू के गुणगान में लीन हो गई ह उनको डर किस बात का। "लेकिन अमीर आदमी को और अमीर बनने का आर्शीवाद देने का क्या अर्थ?और इस पर तुम उस अमीर आदमी पर दया क्यों कर रहे हो ?" माली ने जगल विचरे उपकारास्तव, परीनज जो जगताचा रे ।। २॥ जो लोग सारे विश्व में जनकल्याण के लिए भूमण करते है लेकिन फिर भी सारे विश्व से अलिप्त रहते हैं उनको डर किस बात का। पूछा। गरीब आदमी ने उत्तर दिया, "ईश्वर अलग-अलग लोगों की अलग-अलग इच्छाएँ पूरी करते हैं। अमीर आदमी की इच्छा और अधिक अमीर बनने की थी। उसकी यह इच्छा पूरी होगी। लेकिन अधिक दौलत अपने साथ अधिक परेशानियाँ और दुख लाएगी और इससे दौलत से उसका मोहभंग हो जाएगा। मैंने उस पर दया इसलिए करी क्योंकि वह कठीन रास्ते से प्रकाश की ओर जाएगा। इति निर्धन परसू ज्याजा, सर्व धनाचा साचा रे ।। ३।। जिनके पास पैसा नहीं है, जो निर्घन है लेकिन सारी धनदौलत जिनके अंदर हो यानी जो सर्वगुणसंपन्न है उनको डर किस बात का। आधी व्याधी मरणा वरती, पाय अशा पुरूषाचा रे ।। ४ |। सारे दुख, दर्द व्याधी नष्ट हो जाते है जहाँ पर साक्षात भगवान का वास होता है उनको डर किस माली ने उसे प्रणाम किया और घर लौट गया। बात का ४ ० wwwwMMww wwwww जो जाने वो सिकन्दर Answers of quiz on page 12: 1. Delphi 4. Stonehenge 7. Mecca 10. Mont Blanc 3. Olga 2. Uluru 5. Lions (Peak) 6. Matterhorn 8. Canajoharie 9. Madara श्री आदिशक्ति माताजी श्री निर्मला देवी जी कैसे प्रसन्न होतीं हैं? wwww wwww 14 %3D

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007 40JAS स्वरशाला हारमोनियम पर आरती बजाना सीखिए भजनी 8 मात्रा) घिन ना धिन धिन ना तिन ना तिन - तिन ना - ( भजनी ठेका) 2 34 5 6 ताल 7 8 12 345 6 7 8 1. स ब को दु आ SS दे S ना S माँ S स ब को दु आ S दे S ना S से स स स स रेस नि स रे रे रे ग म प प प ध प म ग म रे ज य नि र म ल मा S ताS S जी S ज य नि र म ल मा S ताS S जी S रे ग रे ग म म म ग रेग रे स स रे ग रे ग म म म ग रेगु रे स स दि ल में स दा S र ह ना S माँ S स ब को दु आ S दे S ना स रे रे रे ग रे स नि धु स रे रे रे रे रे रे ग रे स नि स पाम अंतरा (सभी अंतरों के लिए धून एक समान है) - ज ग में S सं S क ट का S र ण कि त ने लि ऐ -- अ व ता र रे स स नि रे स स नि रे स स स प धूप म पम ग मगू रे स रे स माँ- कि त ने लि ऐ अ व ता र प प प धप म पम ग मग रे स रे स स स वि-- श्व में ते - री S म हि मा- रे ग रे ग म स म ग रेग- रे स स रे ग रे वि--- श्व में ते - री S म हि मा ग म स म ग रेग -रे स स - ना तू - गं - गा स रे रे रे ग रे स नि ध स रे - स ब को आ - दे - य मु ना - माँ दु - रे रे रे रे ग रे स नि स काी 15 ० ० ा

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007 THE USE OF WEALTH BY A SAHAJA YOGI MOTHER'S RECIPE Mutter Keema (Minced Meat Curry With Peas) (For 4 People) When a Sahaja Yogi becomes prosperous, he should know that he has been blessed by God. The wealth he has is not his, but belongs to God. He is only its trustee. The responsibility is then given to him to use it wisely, with discretion and discrimination, to increase the auspiciousness of the world. It is not there for self- indulgence of ego-pampering. A well-to-do Sahaja Yogi must be exceptionally disciplined and self-restrained. He should keep his attention always constantly on the Ascent and the Sushumna. He should not be distracted by matter and self-indulgence on the Left, or power and ego aggrandizement on the Right, but always remain in the center and use his money wisely for the advancement of Sahaja Yoga and the Glory of God. The only person in the world with absolute command and discretion over Her wealth is our Divine Mother, Shri Nirmala Mataji Namo Namaha. Ingredients: • 500 gr. Minced meat of lamb or pork 2 table spoon ghee or oil • 3-4 bay leaves • 3 big onions chopped • 100 gr. Peas in tin, washed and drained .4 fresh tomatoes cut in cubes • 6 sticks cinnamon • 2 masala cardamoms •4-5 pieces of cloves 1 teaspoon black pepper 2.5 cm ginger, finely cut • 3 claves garlic, finely cut • 1 teaspoon coriander powder •1 teaspoon cumin powder (jeera) • ½ teaspoon red chilli powder There is no room however, for meanness; if any object has beauty enhanced by vibrations and enhances the meaning of your life by its vibrations and your dignity as a human being, a realized soul and child of god, then it should be bought regardless of cost and vice-versa - one that is merely fashionable or comfortable,, avoided. Wealth is not for comfort but for honor and dignity, self- respect and Glory of God and to protect the victims of injustices. • Fresh coriander leaves Preparation: • Heat the ghee or oil in a pan. Matter in one's bank account enhances nothing, not even oneself; but in the service of God - the whole universe. We are fortunate that by Shri Mataji's presence on this earth, we can with ease and confidence spend our wealth for the Glory of God, the work of God. We are not blinded as others who give their wealth to priests and other useless causes. When hot add bay leaves and let it splutter Add all preparation (A) in it. Fry 20-30 seconds or until you smell the spices - Add onions and fry them golden brown and until oil separates. If one considers it, this is a very great and enormous blessing and privilege to turn matter into vibrations! It is only Shri Mataji's presence that makes it possible - it is indeed very great! One should be aware of it and give thanks constantly to God for this special privilege and blessing. * Add all preparation (B) and fry 30 seconds. Add minced meat, fry until all water from the meat has evaporated. - While the meatis frying, boil % liter water in another pan When meat is fried, add the boiling water Amen, again and again! * Add salt, tomatoes, and peas, and simmer for 10 more minutes on low heat JAI SHRI MATAJI NAMO NAMAH - Dr Rustom - When ready garnish with coriander leaves * This dish can be made without adding water in the meat Matter Keema is served with rice or nan or any other Indian bread. 16

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007 SHRI ADISHAKTI SWAYAMBHU Shakti, who is the God, he prayed to Her. She appeared there and her face is just like Me. It is Saptashringi because She has seven charkas on Her head. Shringa means on the head, like what you call the Shikara, (peak)- Seven Peaks. She was born with seven peaks. She came there, appeared from the Mother Earth, She just came out and he prayed to Her. He prayed to Her and then the whole place became so vibrated that Shiva could not touch him". A swayambhu is the manifestation of a divine principle created by mother earth and literally means- Swayam (on its own) and bhu (from earth). All over the world mother earth has thrown out these stone images and stones which have been found and worshipped for centuries. According to Shri Mataji, when these stones were discovered and worshipped by saints, the vibrations of the Images increased manifold, which in turn have vibrated the whole area. Countries across the globe have witnessed such miracles of the mother earth. Nepal has a swayambhu of Shri Bhairava, Delphi at Greece has Shri Ganesha's swayambhu, Australia's sacred rock, the Uluru, is a manifestation of Shri Ganesha itself. India also has several swayambhus of Shri Shiva, Shri Hanuman, Shri Ganesha and Shakti In Maharashtra, the three and a half coils of the Kundalini are manifested through the swayambhus. While, the first three coils are manifested in swayambhus of Shri Mahakali, Shri Mahalakshmi, Shri Mahasaraswati, the swayambhu of Shri Adi Shakti is the half coil of Kundalini and their temples/swayambhus are present in Tulsapur (Tuljapur), Kholapur, Mahor (Mahur) and Vani (near Nashik) respectively. It is on the Saptashringi hill (in Vani district), that Shri Adi Shakti has left Her imprints and it was Markandeya who realised the existence of this divine principle. He shot an arrow into the mountain to reveal the location of the Shri Adi Shakti's Swayambhu. The Swayambhu looks like a sculpture, a carved sculpture of the Goddess with Her many arms. It looks like it might have been carved by man, but it was not. It was created by the Mother Earth and emits the vibrations of the Adi Shakti. Markandeya sat on a hill opposite the Saptashringi hill to meditate and wrote the Devi Mahatmayam describing Shri Mataji in all Her glory. He was the first one to talk about the Kundalini and self realisation. He was also the first one to describe Her in detail, before him there was no idea of how Adi Shakti will look when She comes. Until Markandeya's She had come only once in Gokul and that too as a cow with all the deities sitting inside Her during the times of Shri Krishna. Shri Mataji has said, "...She never came on this earth and he is the one who gave the form, in what form She has to come, with thousand hands, the face like Mine and seven charkas", The dedication with which Markandeya prayed to Shri Mataji, She had to take hirm up, She had to bestow upon him the gift of being chiranjeev. In earlier times, people had to go through a gap between two hills in a bullock cart: the bullock cart was carried over to the other side easily by Adi Shakti Herself. It is here at Saptashringi that Adi Shakti is complete...because all the three Shakti's-Shri Mahakali, Shri Mahalakshmi, and Shri Maha Saraswati are present in Maharashtra. Shri Mahakali's temple at Tuljapur is located on a hill known as Yamunachala, on the slopes of the Sahayadri range in Maharashtra near Sholapur. While Shri Maha Saraswati's abode is at Mahor is which is at situated at a distance of 40 km north-west of Kinwat town in Nanded district of the Marathawada division of Maharashtra. The history of Shri Adi Shakti's swayambhu can be traced through the story of the great sage Markandeya. In Vienna in 1988, in a gathering of Sahaja Yogis Shri Mataji told the story of Markandeya, She said, "You know the story of Markandeya or not? I (will) tell you the story of Markandeya. You see, his father had no children and the father and mother were unhappy. So they prayed to Shiva and they said that we want to have a son. Shiva said, 'I'll give you the son, but Iwill have to take him back after eight years. So he will only exist till he is about eight years of age'. So he gave that boon to him plus this kind of a curse. The parents were very upset that "our child will die after eight years of age, very upset. But they found the child very bright, brilliant and also shining and very religious. The seven peaks of Saptashringi represent the seven chakras on the limbic area. Shri Mataji has said, "is the Sahastrara of Maharashtra and of the universe in a way, though the Himalayas are regarded as real abode of Shri Sadashiva, which is on top. But the Sahastrara part, which is the limbic area should be here, because we have three and a half coils settled here and as Saptashringi has come out of Mother Earth, this the place where we can say resides the Sahastrara, Then on the top is the Himalayas and the Himalayas are beyond the Sahastrara. This is the ADI SHAKTI Herself". One day he asked his father, Why do you always so worry, I mean, after all I am your son?!' So they said that it is said so, eight years or sixteen years, something like that. Now I will be losing you very soon. Who can surpass Shiva? He said it, so I cannot think we can really ask anyone to neutralize the curse upon us. If you are not born to us we would not have been so attached to you. Now you are born to us, we are so much attached to you". ... Shri Mataji References: 1.05-05-1980, Dollis Hills Ashram. 2.09-06-1988, Vienna Ashram. 3. 18-01-1983, Ganesha Puja, Nashik. He was a very wise person, he said, "No, 1 know someone, I know Adi Shakti. And he went to this place where you got to see this Saptashringi." There he prayed 17

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007 THIS HAPPENED Divine Protection Powerover the Elements - Fire Once in Shri Mataji's house in Brompton Square, She was A number of Sahaja Yogis have had the experience of walking around and directing people who were helping being saved from imminent disaster through their out there. She would tell us where decorations were to go connection with the unconscious. and what colour this door or that window frame was to be was driving through Vienna and absent-mindedly went painted. It was a mess to begin with. One always has to make a when the light went red, traffic from the other direction mess to create a house. One day Shri Mataji was wearing would come through for some minutes, filling the whole a highly inflammable synthetic nylon sari and walking tunnel. The when the light went green from my end, all the around amid the rubble and dust. Some other people had traffic would be going the other way, and oncoming traffic been working in the room too and someone had left a blowtorch burning. It was pointing into the middle of the was traffic coming through, and secondly, once I had room and Shri Mataji walked in. Shri Mataji walked towards the blowtorch and did not appear to notice it. As the oncoming traffic would not be expecting a car to be She passed very close to it, the flame leapt right out of coming towards it. So it was a very dangerous situation. nozzle and went completely around Shri Mataji two or three times, at the height of Her knees, forming a blue ring the other direction.' There was a car at the other end of the of fire a few centimetres away from the sari, then back into tunnel, the first to cross the green light. At the further the torch. through a red light into a tunnel. This tunnel was such that would wait. Firstly, it was a busy road and there always entered the tunnel I could not turn round or back out, Also, I prayed to Shri Mataji for help, 'Please stop the traffic in entrance to the tunnel it suddenly broke down, thereby blocking all the other traffic entering the tunnel and stopping any vehicle from driving into me. Istopped my car to give hima hand, as I was by now out of danger and out of the tunnel. His car, for some reason, started straight away. He thanked me and we both drove off. While all this was happening I was horrified and took a dive across the room to move the torch. I landed in an undignified heap on my stomach at Shri Mataji's feet, having grabbed the blowtorch in order to point it away from Her. When we realized what had happened, we looked up in amazement to find Shri Mataji smiling down at us. - Dr. Hamid Mylany 'lam the fire, how could it hurt me?'said Shri Mataji. She calmly went on Her way to supervise putting in some pipes in the next room. Thad consulted a Higher Authority Some years ago in my work I had to develop a new type of radio antenna. I was at first unable to make much headway in improving on older designs. One morning as I sat in meditation, I asked in my heart the question to Shri Mataji: -Linda Williams Only felt a prickle Shri Mataji's compassionate attention is everywhere, and not just on those individuals with whom She appears to be speaking or dealing at a particular moment. In summer 1985, Shri Mataji went by train from Paris to Den Haag, Holland. The Sahaja Yogis welcomed Her at the station and escorted Her to a car, which was waiting outside. 'Mother, are You the telecommunications expert of the universe?' I started to feel cool vibrations. Then an idea came to me of electromagnetic waves spreading through the universe like the vibrations which we experience in Sahaja Yoga and being helped in their radiation through the use of certain auspicious shapes and forms. In Sahaja Yoga we find that certain shapes, for instance the bandhan or horseshoe, attract and channel vibrations, hence they are said to be auspicious, and pleasing to the divine. While Shri Mataji and three other persons were seated in Her Mercedes, my friend Engelbert stood next to me near the right front wheel of the car. It started to move backwards, turning to the left at the same time. My attention was fully on Shri Mataji and suddenly I saw Her face go tense for two seconds, afterwards She relaxed and smiled again. During this time, Engelbert, still standing next. to me, started to laugh too at this point. After the car with Shri Mataji had gone, he told me that just now the Mercedes had driven over his right foot. Although his foot should have been completely crushed, he had only felt a prickle. Later that day, I began to design my new antenna taking these forms as a base. The antenna we built to this design worked extremely well and the company went on to win orders worth many millions of pounds. When they asked me for information about the theoretical basis of the new design, I just told them that I had consulted a Higher Authority. -Hari Jairam - Werner Steindl 18

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007 catering business from her home. One of Devibehn's customers knocked at her front door and went into the Going to the game park Once Shri Mataji took Her grandchildren, and also my two, to a game park near London. We had a picnic lunch and it was a wonderful day. As we were driving around the park and looking at the animals, we were going past some said to Devibehn, 'She had such a lovely smile and I felt so giraffes, which were not too close, and as we drove past warm and comforted, it was as if it was my own mother they turned their backs to us. Mother explained that the smiling at me.'Then the visitor saw the photo of Shri Mataji animals felt the vibrations as a cool wind, and in the way of which Devibehn had in the house. animals, turned their backs to shield themselves from the cold. Mother explained that animals are one with the universal consciousness, whereas unrealised humans are split off from it. Mother also said that when She first married, they went to Her husband's family palace. The family owned some elephants, and in India that was not unusual at the time. But what was very unusual was that when they saw Mother, they all knelt down in obeisance to Her, in recognition. The other thing I remember about the visit to the game park was that we were passing by some monkeys on a rock, and they were all preening each other. They sat looking at us, and I laughed because they looked quite funny. "You were all like that, (i.e. were monkeys) not so long When Brompton Square was more or less finished, one ago, Mother said. That put me in my place! house. "Who is that lady in the red sari who I saw outside?' She "That is the lady I saw outsidel'she said. "Are you sure?" asked Devibehn. Devibehn went to have a look, but there was no one there. Then she told her visitor how special Shri Mataji is, but that She had never been to South Africa. Devibehn sald the visitor was so lucky to have seen her outside the hOuse, but the lady agreed, but said to Devibehn that she was so very fortunate to have this wonderful lady as her DeviMa. She also said she had seen Shri Mataji walking round the house as if She was looking after it. - Devibehn Kalam They feel the vibrations night some of us slept there with Shri Mataji. I had slept a night in Her flat at Ashley Gardens, and on both occasions noticed the same thing. Outside both houses were gardens - the private gardens so often found behind London houses and also the shared gardens, in the case of Brompton Square a garden in the middle of the long - Auriol Purdie The first mobile phone In 1986 there was the first New Year Puja at Alibagh. A miracle took place in the house. Shri Mataji reached there around 7.00pm from Ganapatipule, and many other Western yogis too. When Mother stepped out of the car She was so surprised. narrow square. Often if one wakes early in London in the summer, before the traffic noise drowns out everything else, one can hear the birds singing. However, in all my years in London- over ten in all-Il only heard the birds singing all through the night on the two occasions I was staying in a house where Shri Mataji was sleeping. I asked Her about it and She said that they feel the vibrations. Shri Mataji has often told us to meditate in the early morning just before the sun gets up, because the vibrations are good then, and of course this is just the moment the birds start to sing. "This place is so beautiful. I always wanted to come here,' She said. Mother went into the bedroom and said to the other yogis, I must tell Sir CP about this place and he must come and visit it.' She asked one of the yogis if somebody could get Her a phone as She wanted to call Mumbai. Since it was not a developed village there were no phones. Then She asked Mr Koli for a coconut. He asked Shri Mataji if She wanted to eat one and She said She did not, but She wanted a fresh one from the tree. A village boy climbed up and got Mother, one in ten minutes and gave it to Her. She went into Her room and closed the door. - Anonymous Engish Sahaja Yogi Many country leaders were sitting in the hall outside, and after an hour one of the leaders came and said that Shri Mataji was using the coconut as a phone and they had heard She was speaking to Sir CP for nearly an hour. Later the yogis found out that this was the year that mobile phones first came out. II PLEASE NOTE III If anyone has any miracle stories like these to contribute, you can you emal them at- hhsmrecollections@yahoo.com - Lena Koli The lady who was protecting Devibehn's house Devibehn is an Indian lady who lives in Rylands, in Cape Town, South Africa, in a beautiful house and she runs a 19

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007 KEYS OF WISDOM-A fantasy of reality (Book Review) "The Keys of Wisdom", a fantasy adventure story, is written by an English Sahaja Yogini named Linda Williams who worked for more than twenty years on this story. the workings of the different energy centers. The Keys of It is all about seven children who find an old prophecy and who go on a difficult journey to fulfill the prophecy. They go on this joumey because they are being ruled by these horrible sorcerers who misguide everyone in their city. On this journey they learn a lot about themselves and their inner "tree of life". They meet a lot of people who help and guide them, but also nasty people who betray and trouble them. Isdom The Sagu of Nene Sestinu The Oe It's a battle of good over evil, positivity over negativity. LANTAY REALEES Asha is one of the main characters who is telling the story of their adventure. She has a younger brother named Derwin whom she loves dearly and always takes proper care of. They have a very strong brother and sister relationship, making her Vishuddhi chakra very strong. In one part Derwin gets badly hurt and Asha is really worried and would do anything to cure him. She has a very strong desire to seek for freedom and for truth. She can see inside people's chakras, which is not a very good thing because her Agnya chakra gets blocked up. She gets a bit of an ego because she thinks she is great as none of the other seven children can do this. Tandi, another of the seven children, works on a farm. She has a very pure heart, as she is always joyful, smiling and joking. She is very polite and humble and a very creative person. To the other six children she is just like a mother, as she cooks for them and gives care when they get hurt. At one point of the story Tandi separates from the group, as she gets tempted from all the gems and other nice things on the Emperor's Island. This is mainly because she had never seen such beauties in her life and just wanted to enjoy. Otherwise she is mostly in balance. This book is filled with many spiritual themes. One of the many is that they are seeking Truth and can't go onto their destination unless they maintain collectivity among themselves. The sorcerers are very evil, mean, dominating and extremely power-hungry. They will do anything to get power and get rid of anyone or anything that comes in the way of that power. I feel that Shri Mataji would really love this wonderful book as it has very many good spiritual meanings in it. Mother wanted all the children from ISPS to read this book and She had said that Raynor is another main character who is very intelligent and brainy. Once, he and Ahren had to kill a horse to keep it from suffering. He was scared to do it and thought he was not very brave, as the younger Ahren was able to do it. At this point he felt troubled. He also thought that he was not taking proper care of everyone and his left Vishuddhi was catching. He later on gets a stronger heart and takes proper decisions. He also forgives easily and shows good leadership. many people would come to Sahaja Yoga because of this book. I have learnt so much from this book and while I was reading this book I felt tremendous vibrations. This is the best bookl have ever read. - Divya Renard, 12 years old, Indian/Rumanian Class VII student of Dharamshala School The Author Herself about the Book: When I read this book, I saw seven children going on a journey to save their country from the clutches of the sorcerers who blind the people and do not let them see reality. The seven children free their country and help the people see reality. These children go on an outer journey, as well as an inner journey to discover who they are and Many years ago I had the idea to write a fantasy novel that would tell people about Sahaja Yoga, without overtly calling it that. It has finally happened. Where some of the ideas came from: 20

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007 I grew up on The Lord of the Rings and the Narnia books, and they were my initial inspiration. At the beginning of the book, you learn that the seven main characters, aged between nine and eighteen, live in a pretty awful country called Teletsia. Well, the rulers are pretty awful. the UK book of Eternally Inspiring Recollections) In the book, the young people go to visit an ancient stone temple, somewhat like Stonehenge. I asked Shri Mataji what I should call a place like this which represented the Kundalini and the Mooladhara. 'Call it the Temple of Support,' She said, so that is on the front cover of the book. On one occasion, many years ago, I asked Shri Mataji what ancient Atlantis was like. (Atlantis was a legendary country in the Atlantic Ocean which, according to Socrates, went under the sea twelve thousand years ago) 'Atlantis was like Nazi Germany but worse,' Shri Mataji replied, so that is what Teletsia is - outwardly orderly but nasty things going on if you look a bit closer. The sort of place you'd want to get out of, fast. There is one story in the book about a Prince Zarko, who does not want to share his room with a lot of other boys, with disastrous consequences. That is based on an incident which occurred when Shri Mataji was at Mahatma Gandhi's ashram. She went there when She was a little girl, and graciously related it to me. Afew pages later you read that some of the young people find an ancient prophecy. We all love prophecies, and many years ago, when Shri Mataji owned Brompton Square, and Chelsham Road was our ashram in London, Shri Mataji explained some of William Blake's prophetic works as being about Sahaja Yoga in England, and that some lines referred to those very houses. So that was where that idea came from. (Those stories are coming in An innocent child's fantasy? A fantasy of reality? That is the subtitle, and it hopefully will bring a glimpse of reality to the non Sahaja reader, and some chuckles of recognition to the Sahaja Yogis, who will see through the satire. Donation Request For NGO 4. Kindly Speed Post (ONLY)your Cheque/DD at: Mrs. Gisela Matzer, c/o Vishwa Nirmal Prem Ashram, Plot No.9, Institutional Area, Near Park Knowledge l, Greater Nolda, UP-201308, Ph: (0120)2322023, (0120)2230681 Jai Shri Mataj Dear Sahaja Yogis, We all know that Shri Mataji founded Vishwa Nimal Prem Ashram, Greater Noida (an NGO for destitute women and children) in 2000. For upbringing & care taking of the children/women and running & maintenance of the Ashram the NGO regularly needs funds. Following is the information for people who may wish to donate: Contacts: () Mrs Gisela -09810774865. email-gisela_oma 7@yahoo.com (1I) Mr. Jaswant Singh-09891924990 The Cheque/DD must be made in favour of HH Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Foundation. 2. If the donation is greater than or equal to Rs.5000 then please mention your PAN number. If donation amount is less than Rs.500 then please mention () Rs.1700-School and Food (anly) your postal address. 5. Donation options for a child (permonth): )Rs. 3000-Includes food, school, dress, maintenance (ii) Rs. 500-Schooling (only) 3. Donation can also be given in form of kinds like cotton dress, shoes, undergarments (all NEW and NOT old and used ones). We request readers to announce this in their collectives, so as to spread the awareness among people. Forfurther details: www.nirmalprem.org 21

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007 संतो ने कहा है सन्त दादू दयाल दाद दयाल जी के अनुसार - सन्त दादू दयाल भी सन्त कबीर की तरह कवि थे | जिन्होंने अपने अन्तिम तत्व मोक्ष है, जो परमात्मा से साक्षात्कार होने पर प्राप्त होता है। सामान्य जन मुख्यतः चर्म चक्षुओं से देखता है जबकि ज्ञानी आत्मदृष्टि से देखता है। ऐसा ज्ञानी अपने ज्ञान के दार्शनिक विवेचन, व्याख्यान या वाद-विवाद में नही पडता। ज्ञान से अहंकार की संभावना होती है परन्तु भक्ति इससे रहित है। भक्त कर्ता नहीं होता, भक्त वही काम करता है जो भगवान उससे करवाते हैं। काव्य के माध्यम से जनसाधारण को परम् का मार्ग दिखाने की कोशिश की । इनका जन्म दादू दयाल जी द्वारा की गयी काव्य रचनाओं के कुछ चुने हुए पद नीचे दिय हैं। जिनमें जी ने सहज योग या उससे सम्बत् 1601 में गु जरात के अहमदाबाद में हुआ संत कबीर की तरह इनके जन्म को लेकर भी कई पुरम को प्राप्त करने के लिए प्ररित किया है भ्रान्तियाँ हैं । इनमें जहाँ कुछ लोग इन्हे ब्राह्मण समुदाय का मानते हैं तो लोग धुनिया (मुसलमान) मानते हैं। इन्होंने भाई रे औसा पन्थ हमारा, दोइ पष रहित पन्थ गहि पूरा, अवरन वृद्वानन्द नामक गुरू से दीक्षा ली थी। कहते हैं कि एक बार बादशाह अकबर ने इन्हे फतेहपुर सीकरी, अपने महल में बुलवाया था और वे इनके उपदेशों व कविताओं से बुहत सम दाष्टि सुभाई सहज में, आप ही आप विचारा ।। प्रभावित हुए थे । दादू जी ने जगह-जगह जाकर लोगों में जागृती लाने को प्रसास किया। इसी कारण उनके काव्यों में मैं ते मेरी यह मत नाहीं, निबेरी निकारा । अलग-अलग भाषाओं का (राजस्थानी, गुजराती सिंधी, पंजाबी, मराठी और उर्दू-फारसी आदि) के शब्दों का मिश्रण मिलता है। इनकी कई काव्य रचनाओं में सहज योग का स्पष्ट वर्णन काह के संगि मोह न ममिता, संगी सिरजनहारा । मिलता है । इन्होने सहज को केन्द्र बनाकर काव्य के माध्यम से मुनही मन सौं समझी सयाना, आनन्द एक अपारा दादू सम्बन्धित विवरणों का विवेचन अपनी मिश्रित भाषा में उस समय के समाज व जन साधारण की स्थिति के अनुरूप किया है उन्हें कुछ | एक अधारा वाद-विवाद काहसौं नाहीं, माहीं जगत थैं न्यारा । र ? पूरण सवै देषि आया पर, निरालंब निराधारा ।। सरल, मिश्रित व आम बोजचाल की भाषा में काव्य रचनायें की ताकि आम जनसाधारण भी उनकी बात को समझ सके । इनका रचनाओं का संग्रह इनके दो शिष्यों ने किया था। यह सग्रह "हरडे वाणी" के नाम से किया गया है । इनकी अन्य रचनायें हैं 'काया बेलि', 'पद और 'साखी' । इनकी समस्त रचनाओं का संकलन 'दादू की बानी' के नाम से हुआ है । काम कल्पना कदै न कीजै, परम ब्रह्म प्यारा । इहि पथि पहुंचि पार गहि दाद, सो तंत सहजि संभारा ।। यह पद दाद जी द्वारा रचित राग गौडी' से लिया गया है। इन पंक्तियों में दादू दयाल जी ने सहज संगत की बात की है । वे कहते हैं - भाई हमारा पन्थ ऐसा है जिसमें कोई दोष नहीं, 22 ेर

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007 जिसका एक ही आधार है । जिसमें किसी से हमारा कोई सतगुरू पसु माणस करें, माणस थे सिद्ध सोइ वाद-विवाद नहीं है, इस प्रकार का मेरा अलग संसार है। हमने दादू सिद्धतैं देवता, देव निरन्जण होइ ।| सहज के ही सन्तुलित दृष्टि पाई है अर्थात् सन्तुलन प्राप्त किया | जिसमें हम अपने ही आप को देखते हैं । मेरे-तेरे की सतगुरू द्वारा पशु को भी मानव बनाने की बात कही गई है। भावना नहीं रहती, सब अहन्कार छूट जाता है। दादू जी कहते मनुष्य सतगुरू के बतायें मार्ग पर चल कर सिद्ध पुरूष या देवत्व हैं कि यह निराकार वही है जो सब जगह व्याप्त है किन्तु प्राप्त कर सकता है। यहि नही, यहाँ तक कि वह मनुष्य स्वयं दिखाई नहीं देता, वह निराधार है। इसमें किसी को किसी से निंरजन (निर्गुण) देवत्व को प्राप्त हो सकता है। यदि वह मोह, ममता नहीं है क्योंकि सबका एक वही परमात्मा है । जो सतगुरू के द्वारा दर्शय मार्ग का आचरण परमात्मा लोग मन ही मन अपने को बुद्धिमान समझते हैं उनके लिए यह प्राप्त कर सकता है । करे तो को সपा अपार आनन्द देने वाला है । निराधार है। इसमें किसी को किसी से मोह, ममता नहीं है दादू स्वांगि साधु बहु अंतरा, जता धरनी अकास। क्योंकि सबका एक वही परमात्मा है । जो लोग मन ही मन साधु राता राम सौं, स्वांग जगत की आस ।। अपने को बुद्धिमान समझते हैं उनके लिए यह अपार आनन्द देने दादू स्वांगि सब संसार है, साधु बिरला कोई । जैसे चन्दन बावनां, बनि बनि कही न होई।। वाला है । दादू जी कहते हैं काम और कल्पना अर्थात विचार कभी मत करो, केवल पराबह्म को प्राप्त करो जो सबसे प्यारा है। इसी पंथ दादू जी की ये पंक्तियाँ उनकी रचना 'भेश को अंग' का हिस्सा पर पहुँच कर सब पार हो सकते हैं, जो सभी लोगों को संभालने है । इन पंक्त्यों में दादू जी ने कुगुरूओं, पाखंडी, ढोंगी बाबाओं के बारे में बताते हैं की ये लोग तरह-तरह का स्वाग (नाटक) करते हैं। इनके कई रूप हैं जिस तरह आकाश अनेक रूपों को धारण करता है - जैसे कभी धुप, कभी छाया। उसी प्रकार ये साधु बाबा हैं जो विभिन्न रूपों को धारण करते हैं। वैसे तो दिन रात राम नाम का जाप करते हैं, अपने आप को वैरागी सिद्ध करते हैं और वहीं दूसरी तरफ इस संसार से बड़ी बडी आशाएँ करते हैं। दादुजी बताते हैं कि यह सारा संसार ही स्वांगी (बहरूपिया) है। कोई ही यहाँ सही मायने में साधु मिलता साधु वाला है । दादू दयाल जी गुरू के विषय में - दादू सतगुर सौं सहजैं मिल्या, लीया कंवि लगाइ । दया भई दयाल की, तब दीपक दीपा जलाई ।। यह पद दादू जी के 'गुरूदेव जी को अंग' (प्रथम साषी) से है इसमें सन्त दादू दयाल जी के सतगुरू के बारे में बताया है। इन है। जिस प्रकार चन्दन हर स्थान पर न तो बोया जाता है और न पक्तियों के अनुसार अर्थ यह है कि यह सच्चा गुरू (जो ही वनो में दूर-दूर तक मिलता है, यह तो किसी-किसी स्थान परमात्मा से मिला दे) आसानी से मिल जाए तो उसे गले से पर ही प्राप्त होता है। उसी प्रकार साधु जन संसार में बड़ी लगा लेना चाहिए अर्थात् अपने से नहीं होने देना चाहिए। कठिनाई से मिलते हैं। वही हमारा सच्चे अर्थों में मार्ग-दर्शन कर सकता है। यदि गुरू की दया हो जाए तो हमारे जीवन का अन्धकार मिट जाएगा, हमें ज्ञान की प्राप्ति हो जाएगी। अतः हम सतगुरू की दया के बिना भव से पार नहीं हो सकते। । दूर 23 ৩ প প প্

 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007 Kid Shakti Page паkti MATCH THE COLUMNS SYMBOLS NAMES OF INCARNATIONS XX 1 Raja Janaka Lao Tse 32 Guru Nanaka Mohammed Shirdi Sai Baba 6. Moses 7 Socrates 8. H. Confucious TL 9. Abraham 10 Zarathustra 24 F. 2. 3. 4.

 THIS IS LEADERSHIP If you go to another country, you know immediately who is the leader and who are the followers. [In Australia] you come, you look around, you don't know who is the leader because the leader here is a wonderful person. He does not lead. He invites every other person to lead and that is howa collective should work. So there is a very, very good example of how Her idea of collective leadership should be implemented... the wonderful way you are implementing Her view of Sahaja Yoga... This is leadership. This is what She wants. She wants everyone to participate in the same way/ That is the meaning of collective leadership and, I tell you really, this is a glorious example, a beautiful example... You are all the same. Nobody is the leader here. Everyone is together. It is the real meaning of collective leadership and this is what She wanted. She wants this kind leadership and I assure you l've seen this only here so far, but this is Her dream and I'll carry this message. This is how Sahaja Yoga relates- collectively. Sir CP Shrivastava, On the occasion of the 59th wedding anniversary, Australia, April 7th 2006.

 Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi gave all her blessings to the Sahaja Yoga youth organization in 1987. She christened it Nirmal Shakti Yuva Sangha nARII of Yuva Shakti is the development of the personality in order to make it much The purp purpose more complete, so that such developed individuals will prove to be great assets to Sahaja Yoga and serve as shining ideals for others to emulate and derive inspiration Members of the Yuva Shakti should know o The complete story of the Divine life of Shri Mataji. a Everything about the genesis and growth of Sahaja Yoga. a Everything that has been told by Shri Mataji about the subtle system. Everything about meditation as a way of keeping oneself in balance and purity. o Everything about the prophecies heralding the advent of Shri Mataji and Sahaja Yoga. Knowledge of the great swayambhus and manifestations of India. Knowledge of the Adi Gurus and Saints. They should also know Đ The heritage and great cultural traditions of India. a Indian classical music and the ability to play at least one instrument. 9 Classical dance and drama. a The great historical personalities of India. The social, political and economic climate and current affairs. The ability to speak and understand Hindi and English and the ability to communicate through writing and public speaking. pue ThE YUVA SHAlkui is AN Absolutely fNTEGRAl PART TELY of SAHAJA YOQA The Yuva Shakti is One. Its members should not claim affiliation or special attachment to any centre, city, state of country. Wherever they mạy go in the world, they should always volunteer their services to the collective. Yuva Shakti members have to be polite and respectful to senior Sahaja Yogis. Their hallmark should be "madhurya" means sweetness. Boys and girls of the Yuva Shakti should not neglect their studies in the name of Sahaja Yoga work. Self-respect and self-esteem of Yuva Shakti members has to be maintained. The Yuva shakti is an integral part of this Divine Tree of Sahaja Yoga. It is our sacred duty to ensure that we pass on this great legacy to the future generations. Jai Shri Mataji Nothing precludes the use of common sense.



----------------------

2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Lapadrisht
Vol 8
Dec
Issue 4
2007
2'5
"I think it's a very great blessing, because these days our young children, our
young people, are getting astray. They are not so badly off as in other
countries, but quite a big trend is going on to spoil them and to make them a,
what you can call a very westernized, spoiled personality. But now I saw so
many of these dancing together, forgetting their caste, creed, everything and
enjoying each other's company...."
H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 21 Mar 99, Delhi
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-1.txt 
 NSYS LENS
Shri Mataji & Sir CP
CE
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 INDEX
1.
ESSENCE OF THE PUJA
उपवन आत्मसाक्षात्कार
2.
3.
EXPRESSION OF HEART
I AM THE SHEPHERD
4.
8
11
SWAYAMBHU QUIZ
क्षाप या अभिशाप
6.
13
स्वरशाला
7.
15
MOTHER'S RECIPE
8.
16
DEVI SWAYAMBHU
9.
17
THIS HAPPENED
10.
18
THE KEYS OF WISDOM
11.
20
संतों ने कहा है - संत दादू दयाल
12.
22
KIDSHAKTI PAGE
13.
24
5.
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 YUVADRISHTI
Published by
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 8, Chandragupta Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 029
Tel : 020-25286537, Fax : 020-25286722
Printed by
Shrada Printary
Pune
Please mail your experiences, poems,
articles, suggestions, comments, etc. to:
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 8, Chandragupta Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 029
yuvadrishti@gmail.com
For queries regarding delay in receiving
the magazine, please call:
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.,
Tel : 020-25286537
We solemnly thank our article writers, editors,
designers/professionals etc. for their help in making this issue.
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007
ESSENCE OF THE PUJA
Now what we call the Chranamrut, meaning the Ambrosia of My Feet, is not meant for everyone. Neither
are the blessings of the Puja meant for everyone. So try to avoid people who are not yet fully equipped.
First thing they will start is doubting. Also there will be a problem with the protocol. They won't be able to accept it
with that protocol. It is a very great privilege to be here and this privilege cannot be granted to every person.
Significance of the Puja
Adi Shankaracharya has said Puja is very conducive to
spiritual progress and evokes the blessings of Adi Shakti.
When our Holy Mother is ever present how can we invoke
Her to come and receive the Puja? What can we offer Her
when the Universe is within Herbeing?
You are the Mind, You are the Ether, You are the Air,
You are Fire and Water and Earth.
You manifest Yourself as the Universe,
There exists nothing other than You.
To transform Yourself, who are consciousness
And bliss into the Universal body, you deem the
Young bride of the Auspicious One.
Verse 35, Saundarya Lahari
As Sahaja Yogis we are privileged to be allowed to
worship Shri Adi Shakti in person or through Her
photograph. APuja is received by Her grace, in person or
through Herall pervading presence.
Sahaja Yogis have responsibility when they worship Shri
Mataji for She is with us when we meditate and pray to
Her. Hence the Puja must be performed with attention
completely on the Lotus Feet of Shri Mataji, Distraction
from the Puja, although not intended, may amount to
showing disrespect. Mantras are recited in the praise of
the Supreme Goddess and are a form of prayer asking
Her acceptance of the offerings, which are made with our
devotion. How grateful we all Sahaja Yogis of the world
should be to our Mother for taking the finite form, for
allowing us, who are unable to visualize Her infinite form,
to worship Her.
satisfies lots of demands of the past habits, that you feel
that you are doing something about it. Then you start
giving whatever you think God has given you, the
blessings. And the Rishi and Muni have found out -
they're very clever people- they have found out how to
please the Deities, how to please the Mother. So they
have told you, as they have told you even in this lifetime of
mine, how to please Her. They say She is 'Stuti-priya' -
that means She likes praises, It's not that. But when you
praise someone from the heart that means you are
accepting it. And that is the time the Chakras start creating
..Now, for Puja one has to understand that without
Realization, Puja has no meaning. Because you are not
"Ananya", means you have to become aware of
whole. Krishna's description of Bhakti is "Ananya". He
says, "I will give you Ananya Bhakti", He wants Ananya
Bhakti, means when there is not the other, means when
you are realized. Otherwise He says, "Pushpam phalam
toyam-a flower, a fruit and the water, whatever you give
Me-laccept."But when it comes to giving, He says, "You
have to come to Me with Ananya Bhakti, means when you
have become one with Me." Then you should have the
devotion, not before that, Before that, you are not
connected..."(3)
your
a force by which you are thrown, you are triggered, into
that realm of God...
... If you could receive whatever I am emitting, in
balance, with your Puja, then only it helps better. That
means, when you are doing Puja, also receive it. Be in
thoughtless awareness when you are doing Puja,
completely concentrated in receiving..."(1)
"...The other method we employ is of Puja. I've found that
works very well with human beings: Puja - because it
...Puja really is the triggering thing, triggers you. It
%3D
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007
these people. You also have to think of all of them and
know that they are part and parcel of my Being, as you all
are and you are the alert ones.."(2)
triggers you into another realm, it's really miraculous.
Once you have done the Puja then you can project out
much more, in your silence only. Your silence itseif
becomes so powerful.."(3)
So at this time in this Puja you are not only daing Puja
for yourself, for London people but for the whole world.
Not only for Sahaja Yogis who are all over, (of course for
them also) but in this Puja you are expressing yourself as
Sahaja Yogis who have recognized Me and are
requesting to bless the rest of the people so that they also
recognize Me as you have recognized. By this Puja I hope
recognition will be much clearer. By My recognition only
you will recognize yourself and the whole thing will work
out in a very very beautiful manner..."(2)
"...So first, your vibrations must improve, to receive. If the
reception is not good, what's the use of any Puja of
projection? So first of all, we sort of, prepare-prepare our
instrument, or prepare our projecting instrument. That
preparation done by praying to different Deities, as we call
Worshiping the Supreme Goddess
"..Now when we do the Puja, first of all you will praise Shri
Ganesha. By that, in you, Shri Ganesha will be awakened
and established. By worshipping Me as Shri Ganesha
your innocence will be established and you will see, the
vibration wise also, your vibrations will increase and you
will feel very stable within yourself. Now when you will
take Shri Ganesha's names you will know what qualities
He has, what powers He gives you. When you praise
those qualities, those powers of those qualities will start
emitting through you. This is how the Divine works, as if
you get charged with those qualities. Then you pralse the
Goddess, the Adi Shakti. Now the Adi Shakti has all the
seven chakras within Her awakened, and She has to work
with all these seven chakras...
that a Kundalini Puja. By praying to My Kundalini you
improve your reflection. Because then the vibrations from
Me start flowing into yours, and they awaken it.. "(3)
*.So these Puja methods and prayer methods and the
Mantra methods have been devised and found out by
great thinkers of Sahaja Yoga, the great masters of
Sahaja Yoga, and it is the effort- or you can say the
effortless effort-of the Sahaja Yogis that makes my body
vibrate. Extracts the essence from my body, I should say.
They make... It makes the infinite release itself through
this finite being and it works, it clicks - I have seen it -it
works out very weil.."(1)
...So when you offer Me say, fiowers or anything like water
or anything, then the elements are happy and the deities
are happy in the chakras. And then they emit their
vibrations of their quality and of their blessings on you.
They give you their quality and their blessings. That is how
the Divine acts and gradually after Puja you will feel it that
the whole thing is working out..."(4)
By worshipping the Goddess as the Protector of the
whole universe, praising Herdifferent attributes, even Her
Face, Her Hands everything has a meaning. Praising
Her powers. By saying that, by repeating that, you echo in
your projection Her powers, and then your projection
becomes that powerful. It's a very subtle happening that
takes place. It's miraculous. These things look so simple
like - just washing my Feet. Simple thing is washing my
Feet. Now see, this Foot, I don't know if you see the whole
universe I see there, and I really get stunned by them.
When you wash My Feet, what do you do? Actually, My
Feet have been working very hard. And then you put a
little water to soothe them, to suggest that you can feel the
effort put in by these Feet. And a kind of a very sweet,
melodious love flows out of these Feet then..."(3)
...Today I am to tell you a few more secrets about Sahaja
Yoga-it is that for the Puja you should not get people of
mediocre nature, because to bear a Puja is very difficult.
People have not yet understood the value of My being, of
My Feet, of My Hands. They cannot, they do not deserve
to be here. So do not get anybody because he is your
friend or a sisterora brother Is wrong. You are spoiling the
chances of the person, because it is too much for him. He
cannot bear it. It is meant for very few people. So
remember that it is not meant for many people.
If you could understand this is the secret of Sahaja Yoga
and in this secret you have to get very few people to begin
with. Everything is going to be exposed one day but not to
everyone. If you can recognize this that you are
privileged, then you will behave in a way that you have
been given this privilege. Today there are many people in
the whole world who are meditating. I am thinking of all
Absorbing the Vibrations of the Puja
Now you must meditate also after the Puja because my
vibrations you do not suck in without meditation. Always it
happens so far I have had very few Pujas in which all my
whole vibrations were sucked in. If you have sincerity
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007
about it, itis really the sincerity part of it you will suck all my
vibrations. Tell your mind not to ask questions and
misbehave but to suck the vibrations clearly. This is for
your own nourishment, for your own growth, for your own
enjoyment..."(2)
!!! REQUEST TO ALL THE READERS !!
To dearest sons and daughters of the Holy Mother,
As you take this last issue of 2007 in your hand,
there is a small tale which we would reveal to you.
It's about your beloved Yuvadrishti. About a year
and half back Divine leela played and due to lack of
writers it seemed that 2005 would be the last year of
the Sahaja Yoga youth magazine, The Nirmal Shakti
Yuva Sangh, or Yuvashakti is one of the most
important assets of Sahaja Yoga - and Yesl This
magazine was about to be closed because of lack of
articles. Then prayers to the Divine Mother worked
and a tiny group of dedicated volunteers lovingly
shouldered the responsibility of the magazine in
Nirmal Bhakti & Shakti. So with grace of Shri Mataji
we all are still reading the Yuvadrishti and would
continue to do so over many yugas. But we wish to
invite you the yuvashakti of Sahaja Yoga - in
making this magazine even more beautiful and
relevant for our collective ascent.
". But you know that after Puja I get little tired because if
you cannot receive it, that force, I want to sleep and get rid
of that additional vibrations into 'Sushupti' by entering into
the infinite state..."(1)
And this body has to bear lots of things to make you
understand Sahaja Yoga and your own powers. For
example, if you're rude to Me, if you're not respectful,
Christ gets very angry because He has said that anything
against Holy Ghost, He won't tolerate. So the white
chakra, the Agnya starts, you see, starts throwing ariger,
and moving very fast. Now I have to bear it, I cannot tell
you the way Christ wants Me to tell you because He's very
direct, and I have to little bit be careful so that you don't get
upset. Moreover while doing the Puja, supposing you are
a doubting type, or you are opposing it, then you don't
absorb the vibrations and I have problems, because the
vibrations are flowing and you are not receiving it. So I
don't know how to contain within myself, you don't suck in
the vibrations, soltake time to take them out..."(4)
Our beloved Mother has time and again stressed
the importance of a spiritually rich and dynamic
young Sahaja yogi and yoginis as they are the ones
who will be the future light-bearers of this great
divine work. We are unique, because we are young.
The issues in our spiritual growth are different and
we need to share the knowledge that we believe
would be helpful in ascent of our Sahaja brothers &
sisters. What could be an easier and informal
platform than the Yuvadrishti Magazinell.
References:
1. 1976-0330: Meditation being in Thoughtless
Awareness, Gudi Padwa, Delhi.
2. 1980-0505: The Sahasrara Day, Switzerland.
3. 1980-0719: The Meaning of Puja, Brighton, UK.
4. 1986-0524: Meaning and Importance of Puja, Puja
Address in Madrid, Spain.
So, send us the articles on any Sahaja Yoga topic-
from collected words of Shri Mataji on important
topics for yuvas, lesser known Sahaja knowledge
from all over the world, anecdotes from the lives of
realized souls, entertaining stories with a Sahaja
perspective, music & culture, poems, humor and
do-it-yourself activity pages or any enlightened
knowledge which you would like to see in this
magazine. Don't hesitate as our strong editing team
will work with you to bring your article in good
shape if you don't have any experience. You are
also requested to help us in increasing
subscriptions of Yuvadrishti. You can organize
Collective subscriptions for your center or just gift
a subscription to your brother or sister.
Note: Dear Reader, you are requested to read-Protocols
of the Puja, published in Yuvadrishti September 07 Issue,
for the
So let's move in the next year and next phase of our
ascent with a collective voice of the Sahaja youth
the Yuvadrishti. May the Source of Knowledge and
All quests-The Adishakti of all the Universes grant
all Her little Ganeshas eternal abode at Her holy
feet.-Om-Amen.
Regards,
Yuavdrishti Team
yuvadrishti@gmail.com
%3D
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007
उपवन आत्मसाक्षात्कार
प्रश्न हो तो यथासंभव उत्तर दिया जाता है। साथ ही साथ ध्यान
केन्द्र का पता देकर वहाँ आने ले लिए आमंत्रित तथा प्रोत्साहित
किया जाता है।
आज के व्यस्त समय में व्यक्ति को ध्यान-योग बताने के लिए
उसके आराम के पलों में से ही कुछ पल चुराने की आवश्यकता
प्रतीत हुयी और इसी आवश्यकता का प्रतिफलन उपवनों में,
जब व्यक्ति आराम से होता है, आत्मसाक्षात्कार पर चर्चा करने
की विद्या के रूप में हुआ। यही वह समय होता है, जब व्यक्ति
स्वयं के साथ होता है। श्रीमाँ की कृपा से हमें इस अवसर को
परम ज्ञान के अवसर में परिवर्तित करने का क्षण प्राप्त हो
जाता है। इसी सोच को लेकर पिछले कुछ वर्षों से दिल्ली में
उपवन आत्मसाक्षात्कार जनसामान्य तक श्रीमाताजी के संदेश
को प्रसारित करने का एक अत्यंत सुविधा जनक मार्ग बनकर
सामने आया है। उपवन आत्मसाक्षात्कार का विचार सन
२००२ के आस पास उत्तरी दिल्ली की युवाशक्ति के मन में
आया और श्रीमाताजी की कृपा तो देखिए थोड़े ही समय में यह
प्रकिया सर्वव्यापी एवं सर्वसुलभ हो गयी। प्रारंभिक दौर में यह
कार्य करने हेतु कभी दो तो कभी चार ही सहजयोगी जुट पाते
थे, किंतु श्रीमाताजी की असीम अनुकंपा से यह कार्य आज
हाथों हाथ लिया जाता है तथा आज इस कार्य हेतु दिल्ली की
युवाशक्ति तथा अन्य सहजयोगी आस पास के लगभग २००
कि.मी. के क्षेत्र में बहुधा जाते रहते हैं।
उत्तरी दिल्ली के दिल्ली विश्वविधालय के आस-पास का कोई
भी पार्क इस कार्यक्रम से अछूता न रहा और श्री आदिशक्ति
की कृपा से यह कार्य आगे ही बढ़ता रहा। दिल्ली के रोहिणी
क्षेत्र में स्वर्ण जयंति उद्यान ( जो कि जापानी पार्क के नाम से भी
जाना जाता है) में तो स्थिति ऐसी है कि यदि किसी शनिवार
अथवा रविवार को पूजा पड़ने अथवा किसी अन्य कारण से
यह कार्यक्रम नहीं हो पाता तो वहाँ के साधक विहवल हो उठते
हैं। सामूहिक चेतना का ऐसा अप्रतिम प्रभाव सहजयोग के
अतिरिक्त दुर्लभ है स्व्वण जयंति उद्यान में उसके मनोरम
वातावरण का आनंद उठाने के लिए प्रतिदिन हजारों की संख्या
में लोग आते हैं, और इन हजारों में निश्चित तौर पर हमें बीस
पचास साधक मिल ही जाते हैं।
आज केवल दिल्ली में ही नहीं अपितु कई स्थानों पर इस
कार्यक्रम का आयोजन हो रहा है। हमारा सभी पाठकों से
अनुरोध है कि वे भी इस प्रकार के कार्यक्रम को करके माँ के
उपवन आत्मसाक्षात्कार में श्रीमाताजी के आशीर्वाद से संदेश को जन-जन तक पहुँचाने का प्रयास करें ताकि
सहजयोगी किसी एक उपवन का चुनाव करके वहाँ पर श्रीमाताजी को दिए गए वचन पर हम खरे उतर सकें।
श्रीमाताजी का संदेश प्रसारित करने का निश्चय करते हैं। फिर
प्रातः काल अथवा संध्याकाल में जब लोगों की संख्या अनुभवः-
अधिकाधिक रहती है, तब वहाँ पर चयनित स्थान पर दिल्ली के गुजरावाला टाऊन के उद्यान में जब आत्मसाक्षात्कार
श्रीमाताजी का आसन लगाकर उसके सामने सभी सहजयोगी की इस पद्धति का श्री गणेश किया गया तब सहज योगियों के
ध्यान हेतु बैठ जाते हैं। ५.१० मिनट ध्यान में बैठने के बाद अतिरिक्त मात्र दो नये साधक थे। श्रीमाताजी नें उन्हें परम
उनमें से कुछ योगी सहजयोग का परिचय-पत्र (चंउचीसमज) चैतन्य की पावन धारा में इस प्रकार स्नान कराया कि उन्होंने
ले कर, उपवन में घूमने वाले लोगों को वितरित करते हैं, जोर देकर इस कार्यक्रम हेतु उद्यान में पुनः आने का निरमंत्रण दे
अर्थात् सहजयाग के इस कायकम के बारे में सूचित करते हैं। डाला। यह उनके निरंत्रण का प्रेम था या कुछ और देखते ही
सामान्य व्यक्ति उत्सुक्ता वश पूछने अवश्य आते हैं और इन्हीं देखते एक के बाद एक सोलह कार्यक्रम के विषय में केंदीय
सामान्य व्यक्तियों में साधक छिपे होते हैं, जो वास्तव में संयोजकों को पता चला और उन्होंने ने भी इस कार्यक्रम को
श्रीमाताजी अर्थात् परमात्मा को ही ढूंड रहे हैं। ऐसे साधकों की खूब सराहा ।
खोज वहाँ समाप्त हो है। सभी साधकों को बैठाकर
आत्मसाक्षात्कार कराय जाता है। यदि संख्या कम हो तो कई साधकों ने तो कहा है कि माँ ने हमें सहज योग की मुख्य
व्यक्तिगत रूप से अथवा सामूहिक रुप से आत्मसाक्षात्कार धारा से जोड़ने के लिए ही, इस कार्यक्रम का आयोजन करवाया
कराया जाता है। आत्मसाक्षात्कार के बाद यदि किसी का कोई था।
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007
EXPRESSIONS OF HEART
Mother Durga, Devi of life
Why Don't You Find Her
We experience your thunderous might,
Which washes away in seconds all our difficulties and
strife,
Only your darshan gives eternity,
which is an aim of a seeker's life,
Receiving you in our hearts open the way to paradise
You teach us to follow a beautiful path,
which tells to love each and all
Why don't you just find her,
Why should you act like a blind, for the sake you don't
want to find
Why should you wear the outer covering,
which will never bear you the Earning
Why should you seek in physical,
when you know it's not feasible
Why should you take a wrong turn,
when you know its going to burn
Why should you be so mental,
when you know it has to be central,
Why should you follow without feeling,
when you know its not healing
Why should you go to false teacher,
when you find it's just a preacher
Why should you not seek,
when you know that you are not weak
Why should you not find her,
when you know that life is because of her
But those who fear you cannot believe
how extraordinary simplicity can be,
These being your creation
Some see you in eruptions, mountains, quakes or
storms
Some see you in thunderous form
It is to correct all the wrongs
And thank you mother for making us sahajyogi
we have been pampered to see the formless
divine personified in a human form.
-
Shridevi Angurala
Purity and Innocence plays a big role,
where angels take you to the goal
She works on your desire,
that's the only thing you've to aspire
Then, why shall you not desire?
The Spirit
- Manish Nageet
Let my Spirit act...
Through my devotional tract.
The spirit which is detached,
The spirit which is Shiva,
The spirit which is light in darkness,
The spirit which is joy in unhappiness.
Today-The Day
Yet again the majestic morning urges the senses
as the Master of the Golden chariot
submitted to his regal discipline,
stands knocking just like every day since eternity.
Neither mind nor brain,
It's the spirit which train..
The ever-lasting, the ever-loving,
It's all ever pervading...
Through me shines the spirit,
Through me shines it's glory,
It's the ocean of love in which one truly develops,
Let the spirit guides us from all the worldly fuss.
A glance at my hands overwhelm the praying heart.
Innocent, loving, working hands...uniquely obedient.
Creation's beautiful gift to Her beloved mankind.
Toil- Sweat, Love- Spread, Receive- Give
live this day.
The SPIRIT, the Pure Desire,
The SPIRIT which we truly admire.
The SPIRIT, the AIM
For which we have come,
For which we have come.
Fingers of flesh and blood
symbolizing the flicker of hope
encore the message of redemption.
Transcendence from worldly to the other
the eternal passage to (through) the qualities - Divine.
Yes, it is, once again Morning Time.
-Rajan Rawat
- Kavita Navlani
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007
I AM THE SHEPHERD
"John has revealed so many things about chakras and this, but of course, in a very mystic language. He calis
chakras as the plug, in his Genesis and the deities as the angels. He has also described the Realization. It is so
wonderful to read it, but only after Realization you'll understand, because it's a very, very deep writing and you
cannot read much from it-mystical, sounding vague words."
- Public Program, 10 Aug, 1979, Caxton Hall, London
In the Holy book of Bible, many spiritual truths are hidden
in form of symbolism and parables. A very beautiful
symbolism of the relationship between seekers and their
Supreme Master is presented in the Chapter 10 of St.
John's Gospel (a Gospel is the four books in the New
Testament (Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John) that tell the
story of Christ's life and teachings).
sheep and runs away. So the wolf attacks the sheep and
scatters them.
10:13 Because he is a hired hand and is not concemed
about the sheep, he runs away.
10:14 lam the good shepherd. I know my own and my
own knows me-
The Gospel says:
10:15
-andI lay down my life for the sheep.
Just as the father knows me and I know the father
"I tell you the solemn truth, the one who does not
10:1
enter the sheepfold by the door, but climbs in some other
way, is a thief and a robber.
10:16 I have
other sheep that
do not come
from this
The one who enters by the door is the shepherd
10:2
of the sheep.
sheepfold. 1
must bring them
too, and they will
listen to my
voice, so that
there will be one
flock and one
shepherd.
10:3
sheep hear his voice. He calls his own sheep by name and
leads them out.
The doorkeeper opens the door for him, and the
When he has brought all his own sheep out, he
10:4
goes ahead of them, and the sheep follow him because
they recognize his voice.
10:5 They will never follow a stranger, but will run away
from him, because they do not recognize the stranger's
voice."
10:17 This is
why the father
loves me
because I lay
down my life, so
that I may take it
back again.
10:6 Jesus told them this parable, but they did not
understand what he was saying to them.
So Jesus said to them again, "I tell you the
10:7
solemn truth, lam the door for the sheep.
10:18 No one
takes it away
from me, but i lay
it down of my own free will. I have the authority to lay it
down, and i have the authority to take it back again. This
commandmentireceived from my father."
All who came before me were thieves and
10:8
robbers, but the sheep did not listen to them.
/ am the door, If anyone enters through me, he will
10:9
be saved, and will come in and go out, and find pasture.
In this teaching of Shri Jesus, the sheep waiting for their
shepherd in the yard, that has a doorkeeper, symbalise
kundalini of innocent seekers waiting for their self-
realization. A warning is given regarding the misdeeds
and deceptions of all Kuguru & Aguru who try to misguide
the innocent seeker. They are thieves and robbers. By
using spiritual words crafted artfully and playing tricks
they try to entice his mind and lead him to a false &
dangerous spiritual journey through the regions of
subconscious (Left Side) and supraconscious (Right
10:10 The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy;
Ihave come so that they may have life, and may have it
abundantly.
10:11 I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd
lays down his life for the sheep.
10:12 The hired hand, who is not a shepherd and does
not own sheep, sees the wolf coming and abandons the
8.
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007
own live and leave the sheep unprotected. So, if the
seekers submit to these unauthorized religious gurus who
are only aftera seeker's money, they will have to face the
attack of negative forces (wolf) all by them and these false
gurus will not be able to protect them from any disease,
mis-happening, miseries etc. On the contrary, Shri Jesus
reveals that He is a Good Shepherd who is always ready
to lay down His own life to save His people.
Side) and also attempt to damage the Kundalini of the
seeker (the sheep). But there is a doorkeeper who is
guarding the sheep. He, as we all know, is Shri Ganesha,
who protects the Kundalini, His Mother, from all invasions
till the True Master or Shepherd comes.
The Sadguru or the True Master & Shepherd is
recognized by the doorkeeper (Shri Ganesha) who is
guarding the sheep (Kundalini). Shri Ganesha opens the
door for him and allows him to raise the Kundalini, the
individual Mother of all seekers, to give self-realization to
the seeker. The Kundalini also recognizes Sadguru (Shri
Mataji), just as the sheep recognize
their Shepherd, and as he directs them,
the Kundalini's of all seekers rise at his
command. The Kundalini will never rise
before a stranger (unauthorized or
false person), however exalted he or
she might seem, but will only follow the
Sadguru (who is a Divine personality)
and rise.
The true incarnation is deeply concerned with ail seekers
of God and tries to bring together all the saintly people.
Shri Jesus mentions that there are many other lost sheep
(lost seekers) whom He has to take
care of and bring all the flock
(collective of seekers) under one
Shepherd (God Almighty). This is
the work which our Divine Mother
has been doing, raising the
Kundalini of the seekers around the
world and through an inner
cleansing making them part of a
Pure, Nirmal, Sufi collective - The
Universal Pure Religion - Vishwa
Nirmala Dharma, which is not any
organization but essence of all the
Shri Jesus also mentions that He is the
power of the Agnya Chakra. He tells
that He is the door through which the
sheep can pass and reach the green
pasture (the Kingdom of God, the
Sahasrara). He further says that false
people came before Him to misguide
the seekers and rob them of their ability
to have self-realization (by damaging
their kundalini). But His role is to lead
the way to attain immortality the
eternal life of Spirit by opening the door
for Moksha at Sahasrara.
religions.
This Gospel also reveals that Shri
Jesus was aware of the work He has
to do in order to open the Agnya
charka at the collective level. He
says that His Father, God Almighty,
loves Him because He can sacrifice
for the highest, i.e., Shri Jesus can
sacrifice His life and resurrect
Himself. He can do this because He
has the power and this power no one can take it from Him
as He has received it from His Father, God Alimghty.
Shri Jesus also says this to the seekers that He is the true
incamation- the Good Shepherd- who will care for the
seekers in all times of difficulty. The priests, pandits and
other religious leaders who speak without authority of
God and try to direct the seekers are like the hired hands,
who work for money and take out the sheep to graze. As
soon as the wolf will come they will run away to save their
May we all always remember this divine event in the
history of mankind and affirm to ourselves to continually
watch our ego and super-ego and surrender them at the
lotus feet of Shri Mataji so that the Divine Desire of one
flock and one Shepherd become a reality.
KARTIK POORNIMA
The holy month of Kartik (November-December) is often compared to a manimala, a necklace of precious jewels,
because it is studded with holy events. Kartik Poornima is cherished as Guru Nanak Jayanti While the Trayodashi
(thirteen day) of kartik Krishna paksh (dark half) is the day that saint Dnyaneshwar, Whose verses are enshrined in
the guru granth sahib, took Samadhi. His hometown, Alandi, in Maharashtra, commemorates its saintly son with
Pujas.
Kartik Poornima's oldest aura is from the 'Tripura dahan' myth: it's the anniversary of when Shiva is believed to have
destroyed the triple cities of a demon. They whirled in space and had to be destroyed together, so Shiva had to burn
them in that split second when three were in alignment-way before Stars Wars! And that's why we're meant to light a
diya on night: after all, it's Dev-Dipavali, the Dipavali of the gods.
9.
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007
YUVA SHAKTI SEMINAR
Noida, 10th November 2007: The Yuva Shakti seminar began with three Mahamantras and bhajans in Sahajayoga
Mahotsav on the 2nd day of 3-day Diwali Puja celebrations in Noida. Its session started off with Manoj Kumar bhaiya
from Hyderabad, speaking to yuvas about the guidelines laid down by Shri Mataji for the Nirmal Shakti Yuva Sangh
(NSYS) in 1987. He also said that youngsters in Sahaja Yoga are different from other societies because they meditate
and introspect ourselves daily.
Then Anish Kohli bhaiya from Delhi talked in detail about spreading Sahaja Yoga in corporate sector (MNCS and IT
firms). Since people spend most part of the day at the place of work and with our colleagues, therefore, it is an ideal
place where they must spread Sahaja Yoga either by granting Self-Realization or organising Sahaja Yoga program.
"Stress Management Through Sahaja Yoga" is the name given to the program for spreading of Sahaja Yoga in
corporate sectors.
After that, Rajiv Khosla bhaiya from Delhi shared his knowledge on spreading Sahaja Yoga among Muslim community.
While talking about Sahaja Yoga or giving realization to Muslims we must refer to God as 'Allah' because Allah is the
God of Muslims. Further, Mohammad Sahib was their only guru and teacher and not. He emphasised that while talking
to Muslims, Knowledge about their dharma is of utmostimportance. Sahaja Yogis should to be polite and try to use Urdu
words while conversing with them (so they can understand better). Yogis must refer Sahastrara as 'Seventh Heaven' or
'Saatva Asmaan'. Further, Mohammad Sahib has called the Kundalini as 'Asas' and Param Chaitanya as 'Ruh' in Holy
Quran (Shri Mataji has also mentioned this in Her lectures.)
Next, Spreading Sahaja Yoga on Internet was covered by Vivek Sagar from Noida. He mentioned everyone especially
the yuvas to exercise absolute discretion while spreading Sahaja Yoga on the Internet. For this, he requested everyone
to register themselves to SITA India group (www.groups.yahoo.com/group/sitaindia). He advised that instead of
forwarding the messages (like quotes of Shri Mataji and other news) directly to people, it must be sent to SITA India,
which can check the message (for any unauthentic information) and then forward it to others. Special precaution was
also advised for people using online community Orkut. It was emphasized that several false messages spread easily on
such forums. Further, since it's a public forum, yogis must put information on their profiles/scrapbook/albums with
utmost care and discretion. Any debates (among Sahaja Yogis and Non-Sahaja Yogis), putting up miracle photographs
etc. must be avoided. All these steps are necessary to maintain dignified image of Sahaja Yoga in public. Yuvas were
also asked to register themselves at SWAN-(www.sahajayoga.org/swan).
Last Dr. Nigam talked about protocols. He mentioned that all the protocois and discipline spontaneously come in our
behaviour when we recognize Shri Mataji as ShriAdishakti.
There is a myth also in Sahaja Yoga: that senior, he is a very senior Sahaja yogi. I mean, I don't understand. What is
this? How can there be seniority in Sahaja yoga? Cannot be seniority. No question. Somebody is say, enters into the
sea. Some are there for ages standing near the edge of the sea holding on to the earth because they are afraid to
swim and some peaple who have come only yesterday might be jumping and going ahead and doing, enjoying the
sea. So how is it he is the senior, he is the. We do not have this seniority business in Sahaja yoga. There's no
seniority. And there's also another myth. Maybe this is an excuse. I don't know what to say but it is a very common
thing to say that he is a senior Sahaja yogi or he is a, after all he is a senior Sahaja yogi. Can't understand. Like
saying a donkey, "This donkey is senior. Another donkey is not."
Then another thing that you suffer from very much, very common is this that "Mother said so."Anybody will say, "Oh,
Mother said to me. She called me and She said it." "What did She say?" "Oh you are a very great Sahaja yogi. You
are this. You are that. You are that." Now there are two possibilities. One, I might have sald it just to befool him. I am
Mahamaya. Ormaybe I must have said all this just to see "that" pampers his ego so that he gets to Sahaja Yoga and
does something substantial than to eat my head. So, "Mother said so." Such a great Sahaja yogi, I am such and
such, very bonbastic words, very bombastic language he would use. And then people, "Ah, what a Sahaja yogi!" So
the judgment of a Sahaja yogi doesn't come from what he claims but what he achieves. I have seen some Sahaja
yogis are extremely arrogant also. Extremely arrogant, think no end of themselves. All that is there. So many Sahaja
yogis I have seen of that kind, that they are very, very arrogant and that they try to make a big show out of what great
people they are. Humpty Dumpties, as they call them.
1993-10-24 : Navratri Puja, Re-Introspect yourself, Cabella
10
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007
Can You Find The Word
The following quiz is on Swayambhus around the globe. You can see the picture of these divine monuments in the
book Nirmal Fragrance, but complete the game first. Try and find the location of the following Swayambhus on the
word block below.
Z.
H.
S.
X.
H.
L.
P.
H.
K.
L.
K
A.
H.
P H
D.
L.
K
H.
R.
H.
H.
M G
HH
H.
J
H.
C.
I
C.
A.
L.
K
R.
K.
H.
T.
K
LF
н
H.
G.
I.
B
K
H.
R.
A
R
R.
N.
R.
R.
R.
large rocks set in a circular formation. Later on, realized
saints decorated them with smaller stones on top as
1. Shri Ganesha's statue at the place where the Nabhi
of the whole universe and the Temple of Athena, The
Adishakti is situated.
crown.
5. These are two mountain peaks guard the Vancouver
city of Canada. The Native Indians call them The Two
Sisters who gave birth to two offsprings, Peace and
Brotherhood uniting two powerful tribes and hold them
in high spiritual regard.
2. This name means 'Chaitnaya' and is also called
Ayers' Rock. It is Shri Ganesha's swayambhu in
Australia.
3. Swayambhu of Shri Gauri and very near to Ayers'
Rock. The local aboriginals call it the Kata Tjuta. A
mythical rainbow serpent, Wanambi is said to live on its
summit.
6. Mountain that is the Shri Ganesha's Swayambhu in
Switzerland. There is a beautiful photograph with
Mother standing in front of Shri Ganesha Swayambhu.
Mother gave it the name - Ganaraj.
4. World-famous Monument in England. It was created
by Mother Earth for emitting vibrations and consists of
7. One of the most sacred places of Muslims who
11
NT
T.
R.
R.
A.
ID
R.
%24
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007
century. It is an unusual place where a plateau rises in
the middle of a plain which, when viewed from the
west, resembles a petrified waterfall. At a height of 23
meters the figure of a horseman has been hewn into the
sheer rock, piercing a lion with his spear.
circumambulate at this place around a Black Stone, a
swayambhu of Shiva to achieve Shiva's blessing.
8. This is a swayambhu in USA where many Saakar
Pujas where held. The name of the swayambhu means
"the Clean Pot" in Native language of Indians i.e The
place where we get cleaned. Shri Mataji found this
place through vibrations coming out of a newspaper.
When the Red Indians were driven out by whites, they
came here to hide themselves in this spiritual place so
that they should not be crushed and destroyed forever.
10.This swyambhu in France is a famous mountain and
is an expression of ego. It is also the name of a luxury
writing pen brand.
Answers on Page 14
9. This is swayambhu of Shri Adishakti in Bulgaria. This
is only monumental stone relief in Europe from 8th
THE BULLY
guarantee that nothing will happen to you after all. My holy
Mother's powers are bigger than any power you have ever
seen in your life. So be aware."
He turned around and walked away, leaving the boys in
silent confusion.
He turned around after a couple of steps and said "Oh, but
if you want to get your Self Realisation after all, just come
to me. lam happy to give it to you!!"
Josh was 15 when he came to his new school. His class
was well known for bullying and difficult pupils. Already on
the second day, two boys cornered him in the court yard
and held their hands on his throat.
"Hey, new boy, so tell us, what is the most valuable item
you have at hame!"
"It is a little pendant I got from Shri Mataji last year" Josh
replied.
"Pendant. That can hardly be worth any money. What else
would you treasure?"
The big photograph of my holy Mother in the meditation
room of course" Josh replied. "Photograph? I think I have
to ask differently, fella! What is the most amazing present
you ever got?"
"My Self Realisation of coursel" Josh answered truthfully.
"Are you taking us seriously here? I mean you must be
afraid of us?"
"Notreally." Josh replied calmly.
A couple of days after this incident, one of the boys took
Josh aside after class and said "This stuff that you were
telling us about. That sounded amazing, dude! I have not
heard a kid reply in that manner before either. You were
so...so totally cool. I mean, you are not big, we could have
beaten you black and blue. But you somehow scared us
all a bit there with this talk. So this Self Realistation thing.
What is that about?"
Josh led the boy in an empty classroom, sat him down and
raised his Kundalini.
The boys felt they were not getting anywhere with this
strange little boy and sat down to ask him more questions:
"So, what is your biggest fear then?"
"Not to live my life to my fullest potential that was given to
me by Shri Mataji. Not to make the best out of my self
realisation! To miss an opportunity to give someone whatI
have experienced"
"Oh dear" the boys answered. "What a load of rubbish! I
don't understand a word he is saying! One last question.
What are you going to do about it, about us if we kick you
now!" the boy with the missing front tooth laughed.
Josh stood up and replied "Me? Nothing! But I cannot
"Cool. Cool stuff you are doing" the boy said after. "I really
feel chilled."
They left the class room and ended up chatting for hours.
The boy told Josh everything about his family, all those
complications he had with his parents. Josh just listened
and told him that all his worries could be sorted if he just
meditated a couple of minutes a day. Needless to say that
he was never bothered again by the crowd. He even made
friends with the boy he gave realisation to...who turned
out to be the gang leader.
12
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007
क्षाप या आशीर्वाद
बहुत समय पहले की बात है, एक योगी था जो एक हुए छप्पर के नीचे आपको बेठना पड़ेगा। *
जंगल में रहता था। प्रत्येक दो वर्षों में वह अकेला किसी
पवित्र स्थान पर जाते समय प्रतिष्ठान नामक शहर से योगी ने उसकी झोंपडी में घुसते हुए कहा, "अगली
ऑधी तुम्हारे छप्पर को उड़ा ले जाए।
गुज़रता था।
ऐसी ही एक यात्रा के दौरान, गर्मी की एक दोपहर में वह गरीब आदमी बोला, "धन्यवाद बाबा! लेकिन मेरे पास
एक बड़ी हवेली के सामने खड़ा होकर भोजन के लिए आपको देने के लिए केवल एक गिलास पानी और मेरे
आवाज दे रहा था। तभी, हवेली का मालिक (जो किसी मिट्टी के बर्तन में रखे हुए थोड़े से चावल ही हैं।
महत्त्वपूर्ण अतिथी की प्रतीक्षा कर रहा था) बरामदे में
आया। योगी (जो एक साधारण साधु लग रहा था) को योगी बोला, "तुम्हारा कुआँ बिलकुल सूख जाए और
अपने अतिथी के रास्ते में खड़ा हुआ योगी बिलकुल भी कल तक तुम्हारा बतन टूट जाए।" फिर उसने चावल
अच्छा नहीं लगा। मालिक ने बहुत बेचैन होकर अपना खाया और पानी पिया। थोड़ी देर बाद वह उठा और
हाथ जोर से हिलाते हुए कहा, "भाग जाओ ! जल्दी!" गरीब आदमी के सिर पर अपना हाथ रखकर उसे बिना
योगी ने दूर जाते हुए कहा, "तुम अभी लाखों के स्वामी शब्दों के आर्शीवाद दिया और चला गया।
हो, ईश्वर तुम्हें करोड़ों का स्वामी बनाए।"
माली, जिसने योगी का अब तक पीछा किया था, उसमें
अब और पीछे जाने की क्षमता नहीं रह गई थी। उसे
योगी से डर लगने लगा था कि यह किस तरह का पवित्र
आदमी है! जो लालची और स्वार्थी अमीर आदमी को
तो आशीर्वाद देता है और एक करूणापूर्ण गरीब आदमी
को छप्पर के बिना रहने का क्षाप देता है?
उसके इन शब्दों ने अमीर आदमी को बहुत प्रसन्न किया
और उसने अपने मुनीम को एक चाँदी का सिक्का देकर
योगी के पीछे भेजा। लेकिन मुनीम को योगी कहीं भी
नहीं दिखा।
एक माली जो हवेली के पास ही रहता था, उसने सोचा
अमीर आदमी तो योगी के प्रति बहुत ही अशिष्ट और
असभ्य था, फिर भी योगी ने उसे और समृद्ध होने का
आर्शीवाद दिया। यह योगी कुछ अनूठा है। इसके पीछे
चल कर देखना चाहिए।"
उसने गरीब आदमी से कहा, "तुम्हें पता है?उस योगी ने
एक अमीर आदमी को, जिसने उसे एक टुकड़ा रोटी भी
देने के लिए मना कर दिया था, आर्शीवाद दिया कि वह
और अमीर हो जाए।" गरीब आदमी ने कहा, "क्या
उन्होंनें ऐसा किया? बेचारा!" माली ने और अधिक
उत्सुकता से पूछा, "तुमने किसे बेचारा कहा?" गरीब
आदमी ने कहा, "अमीर आदमी को! और किसे?"
योगी थोड़ी दूर जाकर एक निर्धन आदमी की झोंपड़ी के
सामने जाकर खड़ा हो गया, उसने पूछा, "क्या तुम मुझे
कुछ खाने को दे सकते हो?" गरीब आदमी ने बाहर
आकर योगी को प्रणाम किया और कहा, अन्दर आइए
बाबा। लेकिन मेरी झोंपड़ी टूटी-फूटी है और इसके फटे
माली ने उसे घूर कर देखा। उसे योगी के पागल होने की
कोई शंका नहीं थी और अब उसे गरीब आदमी भी
13
समममस
सस
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 ्न
Yuvadrishti Dec 2007
पागल लगने लगा। उसे समझ नहीं आया कि वह क्या
कहे?
भय काय तया
यह भजन श्रीमाताजी के एक पूर्वज ने लिखा है,
जो कि एक आत्मसाक्षात्कारी व्यक्ति थे। यह
भजन श्रीमाताजी अपने बचपन में गाया करते थे
जब उन्हें किसी बात से निराशा होती थी।
गरीब आदमी उसके मन की बात समझ गया और उसे
अपने पास बैठने के लिए कहा और बोला, "तु्हें लग
रहा है कि योगी ने कुछ गलत कहा है। नहीं ऐसा नहीं
है। मुझे बहुत समय से लग रहा था कि मेरा इन तुच्छ
मोह की वस्तुओं से दूर जानेका समय आ गया है लेकिन
अज्ञान ने मुझे अभी भी उनसे बाध रखा था। योगी की
बातों ने यह बताया कि जल्दी ही मेरे पास कुछ नहीं
बचेगा और केवल ईश्वर ही मेरा आश्राय रह जाएँगे।"
भय काय तयाँ प्रभू ज्याची रे ।। धृ।।
जिनके साभ भगवान है उनको डर किस बात
का!
सर्व विसरली प्रभूमय झाली, पूर्ण जयाची वाचा रे ।। १।
सब कुछ भूलकर जिनकी वाणी प्रमू के गुणगान
में लीन हो गई ह उनको डर किस बात का।
"लेकिन अमीर आदमी को और अमीर बनने का
आर्शीवाद देने का क्या अर्थ?और इस पर तुम उस
अमीर आदमी पर दया क्यों कर रहे हो ?" माली ने
जगल विचरे उपकारास्तव, परीनज जो जगताचा रे
।। २॥
जो लोग सारे विश्व में जनकल्याण के लिए भूमण
करते है लेकिन फिर भी सारे विश्व से अलिप्त रहते
हैं उनको डर किस बात का।
पूछा।
गरीब आदमी ने उत्तर दिया, "ईश्वर अलग-अलग
लोगों की अलग-अलग इच्छाएँ पूरी करते हैं। अमीर
आदमी की इच्छा और अधिक अमीर बनने की थी।
उसकी यह इच्छा पूरी होगी। लेकिन अधिक दौलत अपने
साथ अधिक परेशानियाँ और दुख लाएगी और इससे
दौलत से उसका मोहभंग हो जाएगा। मैंने उस पर दया
इसलिए करी क्योंकि वह कठीन रास्ते से प्रकाश की
ओर जाएगा।
इति निर्धन परसू ज्याजा, सर्व धनाचा साचा रे ।। ३।।
जिनके पास पैसा नहीं है, जो निर्घन है लेकिन
सारी धनदौलत जिनके अंदर हो यानी जो
सर्वगुणसंपन्न है उनको डर किस बात का।
आधी व्याधी मरणा वरती, पाय अशा पुरूषाचा रे
।। ४ |।
सारे दुख, दर्द व्याधी नष्ट हो जाते है जहाँ पर
साक्षात भगवान का वास होता है उनको डर किस
माली ने उसे प्रणाम किया और घर लौट गया।
बात का
४
०
wwwwMMww wwwww
जो जाने वो सिकन्दर
Answers of quiz on page 12:
1. Delphi
4. Stonehenge
7. Mecca
10. Mont Blanc
3. Olga
2. Uluru
5. Lions (Peak) 6. Matterhorn
8. Canajoharie 9. Madara
श्री आदिशक्ति माताजी श्री निर्मला
देवी जी कैसे प्रसन्न होतीं हैं?
wwww wwww
14
%3D
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007
40JAS
स्वरशाला
हारमोनियम पर आरती बजाना सीखिए
भजनी 8 मात्रा)
घिन ना धिन धिन ना तिन ना तिन - तिन ना - ( भजनी ठेका)
2 34 5 6
ताल
7 8 12 345 6 7 8
1.
स ब को दु आ SS दे S ना S माँ S स ब को दु आ S दे S ना S
से स स स स रेस नि स रे रे रे ग म प प प ध प म ग म रे
ज य नि र म ल मा S ताS S जी S ज य नि र म ल मा S ताS S जी S
रे ग रे ग म म म ग रेग रे स स रे ग रे ग म म म ग रेगु रे स स
दि ल में स दा S र ह ना S माँ S स ब को दु आ S दे S ना
स रे रे रे ग रे स नि धु स रे रे रे रे रे रे ग रे स नि स
पाम
अंतरा (सभी अंतरों के लिए धून एक समान है) -
ज ग में S सं S क ट का S र ण कि त ने लि ऐ -- अ व ता र
रे स स नि रे स स नि रे स स स प धूप म पम ग मगू रे स रे स
माँ- कि त ने लि ऐ
अ व ता र
प प प धप म पम ग मग रे स रे स स स
वि-- श्व में ते - री S म हि मा-
रे ग रे ग म स म ग रेग- रे स स रे ग रे
वि--- श्व में ते - री S म हि मा
ग म स म ग रेग -रे स स
- ना
तू - गं - गा
स रे रे रे ग रे स नि ध स रे
- स ब को
आ - दे
- य मु ना - माँ
दु
- रे रे रे रे ग रे स नि स
काी
15
०
०
ा
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007
THE USE OF WEALTH BY A
SAHAJA YOGI
MOTHER'S RECIPE
Mutter Keema (Minced Meat Curry With Peas)
(For 4 People)
When a Sahaja Yogi becomes prosperous, he should
know that he has been blessed by God. The wealth he has
is not his, but belongs to God. He is only its trustee. The
responsibility is then given to him to use it wisely, with
discretion and discrimination, to increase the
auspiciousness of the world. It is not there for self-
indulgence of ego-pampering. A well-to-do Sahaja Yogi
must be exceptionally disciplined and self-restrained. He
should keep his attention always constantly on the Ascent
and the Sushumna. He should not be distracted by matter
and self-indulgence on the Left, or power and ego
aggrandizement on the Right, but always remain in the
center and use his money wisely for the advancement of
Sahaja Yoga and the Glory of God. The only person in the
world with absolute command and discretion over Her
wealth is our Divine Mother, Shri Nirmala Mataji Namo
Namaha.
Ingredients:
• 500 gr. Minced meat of lamb or pork
2 table spoon ghee or oil
• 3-4 bay leaves
• 3 big onions chopped
• 100 gr. Peas in tin, washed and drained
.4 fresh tomatoes cut in cubes
• 6 sticks cinnamon
• 2 masala cardamoms
•4-5 pieces of cloves
1 teaspoon black pepper
2.5 cm ginger, finely cut
• 3 claves garlic, finely cut
• 1 teaspoon coriander powder
•1 teaspoon cumin powder (jeera)
• ½ teaspoon red chilli powder
There is no room however, for meanness; if any object has
beauty enhanced by vibrations and enhances the
meaning of your life by its vibrations and your dignity as a
human being, a realized soul and child of god, then it
should be bought regardless of cost and vice-versa - one
that is merely fashionable or comfortable,, avoided.
Wealth is not for comfort but for honor and dignity, self-
respect and Glory of God and to protect the victims of
injustices.
• Fresh coriander leaves
Preparation:
• Heat the ghee or oil in a pan.
Matter in one's bank account enhances nothing, not even
oneself; but in the service of God - the whole universe.
We are fortunate that by Shri Mataji's presence on this
earth, we can with ease and confidence spend our wealth
for the Glory of God, the work of God. We are not blinded
as others who give their wealth to priests and other
useless causes.
When hot add bay leaves and let it splutter
Add all preparation (A) in it. Fry 20-30 seconds or until
you smell the spices
- Add onions and fry them golden brown and until oil
separates.
If one considers it, this is a very great and enormous
blessing and privilege to turn matter into vibrations! It is
only Shri Mataji's presence that makes it possible - it is
indeed very great! One should be aware of it and give
thanks constantly to God for this special privilege and
blessing.
* Add all preparation (B) and fry 30 seconds.
Add minced meat, fry until all water from the meat has
evaporated.
- While the meatis frying, boil % liter water in another pan
When meat is fried, add the boiling water
Amen, again and again!
* Add salt, tomatoes, and peas, and simmer for 10 more
minutes on low heat
JAI SHRI MATAJI NAMO NAMAH
- Dr Rustom
- When ready garnish with coriander leaves
* This dish can be made without adding water in the meat
Matter Keema is served with rice or nan or any other
Indian bread.
16
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007
SHRI ADISHAKTI SWAYAMBHU
Shakti, who is the God, he prayed to Her. She appeared
there and her face is just like Me. It is Saptashringi
because She has seven charkas on Her head. Shringa
means on the head, like what you call the Shikara, (peak)-
Seven Peaks. She was born with seven peaks. She came
there, appeared from the Mother Earth, She just came out
and he prayed to Her. He prayed to Her and then the
whole place became so vibrated that Shiva could not
touch him".
A swayambhu is the manifestation of a divine principle
created by mother earth and literally means- Swayam (on
its own) and bhu (from earth). All over the world mother
earth has thrown out these stone images and stones
which have been found and worshipped for centuries.
According to Shri Mataji, when these stones were
discovered and worshipped by saints, the vibrations of the
Images increased manifold, which in turn have vibrated
the whole area. Countries across the globe have
witnessed such miracles of the mother earth. Nepal has a
swayambhu of Shri Bhairava, Delphi at Greece has Shri
Ganesha's swayambhu, Australia's sacred rock, the
Uluru, is a manifestation of Shri Ganesha itself. India also
has several swayambhus of Shri Shiva, Shri Hanuman,
Shri Ganesha and Shakti
In Maharashtra, the three and a half coils of the Kundalini
are manifested through the swayambhus. While, the first
three coils are manifested in swayambhus of Shri
Mahakali, Shri Mahalakshmi, Shri Mahasaraswati, the
swayambhu of Shri Adi Shakti is the half coil of Kundalini
and their temples/swayambhus are present in Tulsapur
(Tuljapur), Kholapur, Mahor (Mahur) and Vani (near
Nashik) respectively.
It is on the Saptashringi hill (in Vani district), that Shri Adi
Shakti has left Her imprints and it was Markandeya who
realised the existence of this divine principle. He shot an
arrow into the mountain to reveal the location of the Shri
Adi Shakti's Swayambhu. The Swayambhu looks like a
sculpture, a carved sculpture of the Goddess with Her
many arms. It looks like it might have been carved by man,
but it was not. It was created by the Mother Earth and
emits the vibrations of the Adi Shakti.
Markandeya sat on a hill opposite the Saptashringi hill to
meditate and wrote the Devi Mahatmayam describing
Shri Mataji in all Her glory. He was the first one to talk
about the Kundalini and self realisation. He was also the
first one to describe Her in detail, before him there was no
idea of how Adi Shakti will look when She comes. Until
Markandeya's She had come only once in Gokul and that
too as a cow with all the deities sitting inside Her during
the times of Shri Krishna. Shri Mataji has said, "...She
never came on this earth and he is the one who gave the
form, in what form She has to come, with thousand hands,
the face like Mine and seven charkas", The dedication
with which Markandeya prayed to Shri Mataji, She had to
take hirm up, She had to bestow upon him the gift of being
chiranjeev. In earlier times, people had to go through a
gap between two hills in a bullock cart: the bullock cart
was carried over to the other side easily by Adi Shakti
Herself. It is here at Saptashringi that Adi Shakti is
complete...because all the three Shakti's-Shri Mahakali,
Shri Mahalakshmi, and Shri Maha Saraswati are present
in Maharashtra.
Shri Mahakali's temple at Tuljapur is located on a hill
known as Yamunachala, on the slopes of the Sahayadri
range in Maharashtra near Sholapur. While Shri Maha
Saraswati's abode is at Mahor is which is at situated at a
distance of 40 km north-west of Kinwat town in Nanded
district of the Marathawada division of Maharashtra.
The history of Shri Adi Shakti's swayambhu can be traced
through the story of the great sage Markandeya. In
Vienna in 1988, in a gathering of Sahaja Yogis Shri Mataji
told the story of Markandeya, She said, "You know the
story of Markandeya or not? I (will) tell you the story of
Markandeya. You see, his father had no children and the
father and mother were unhappy. So they prayed to Shiva
and they said that we want to have a son. Shiva said, 'I'll
give you the son, but Iwill have to take him back after eight
years. So he will only exist till he is about eight years of
age'. So he gave that boon to him plus this kind of a curse.
The parents were very upset that "our child will die after
eight years of age, very upset. But they found the child
very bright, brilliant and also shining and very religious.
The seven peaks of Saptashringi represent the seven
chakras on the limbic area. Shri Mataji has said, "is the
Sahastrara of Maharashtra and of the universe in a way,
though the Himalayas are regarded as real abode of Shri
Sadashiva, which is on top. But the Sahastrara part,
which is the limbic area should be here, because we have
three and a half coils settled here and as Saptashringi has
come out of Mother Earth, this the place where we can say
resides the Sahastrara, Then on the top is the Himalayas
and the Himalayas are beyond the Sahastrara. This is the
ADI SHAKTI Herself".
One day he asked his father, Why do you always so
worry, I mean, after all I am your son?!' So they said that it
is said so, eight years or sixteen years, something like
that. Now I will be losing you very soon. Who can surpass
Shiva? He said it, so I cannot think we can really ask
anyone to neutralize the curse upon us. If you are not born
to us we would not have been so attached to you. Now you
are born to us, we are so much attached to you".
... Shri Mataji
References:
1.05-05-1980, Dollis Hills Ashram.
2.09-06-1988, Vienna Ashram.
3. 18-01-1983, Ganesha Puja, Nashik.
He was a very wise person, he said, "No, 1 know
someone, I know Adi Shakti. And he went to this place
where you got to see this Saptashringi." There he prayed
17
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007
THIS HAPPENED
Divine Protection
Powerover the Elements - Fire
Once in Shri Mataji's house in Brompton Square, She was A number of Sahaja Yogis have had the experience of
walking around and directing people who were helping being saved from imminent disaster through their
out there. She would tell us where decorations were to go connection with the unconscious.
and what colour this door or that window frame was to be was driving through Vienna and absent-mindedly went
painted.
It was a mess to begin with. One always has to make a when the light went red, traffic from the other direction
mess to create a house. One day Shri Mataji was wearing would come through for some minutes, filling the whole
a highly inflammable synthetic nylon sari and walking tunnel. The when the light went green from my end, all the
around amid the rubble and dust. Some other people had traffic would be going the other way, and oncoming traffic
been working in the room too and someone had left a
blowtorch burning. It was pointing into the middle of the was traffic coming through, and secondly, once I had
room and Shri Mataji walked in. Shri Mataji walked
towards the blowtorch and did not appear to notice it. As the oncoming traffic would not be expecting a car to be
She passed very close to it, the flame leapt right out of coming towards it. So it was a very dangerous situation.
nozzle and went completely around Shri Mataji two or
three times, at the height of Her knees, forming a blue ring the other direction.' There was a car at the other end of the
of fire a few centimetres away from the sari, then back into tunnel, the first to cross the green light. At the further
the torch.
through a red light into a tunnel. This tunnel was such that
would wait. Firstly, it was a busy road and there always
entered the tunnel I could not turn round or back out, Also,
I prayed to Shri Mataji for help, 'Please stop the traffic in
entrance to the tunnel it suddenly broke down, thereby
blocking all the other traffic entering the tunnel and
stopping any vehicle from driving into me.
Istopped my car to give hima hand, as I was by now out of
danger and out of the tunnel. His car, for some reason,
started straight away. He thanked me and we both drove
off.
While all this was happening I was horrified and took a
dive across the room to move the torch. I landed in an
undignified heap on my stomach at Shri Mataji's feet,
having grabbed the blowtorch in order to point it away
from Her. When we realized what had happened, we
looked up in amazement to find Shri Mataji smiling down
at us.
- Dr. Hamid Mylany
'lam the fire, how could it hurt me?'said Shri Mataji.
She calmly went on Her way to supervise putting in some
pipes in the next room.
Thad consulted a Higher Authority
Some years ago in my work I had to develop a new type of
radio antenna. I was at first unable to make much
headway in improving on older designs. One morning as I
sat in meditation, I asked in my heart the question to Shri
Mataji:
-Linda Williams
Only felt a prickle
Shri Mataji's compassionate attention is everywhere, and
not just on those individuals with whom She appears to be
speaking or dealing at a particular moment.
In summer 1985, Shri Mataji went by train from Paris to
Den Haag, Holland. The Sahaja Yogis welcomed Her at
the station and escorted Her to a car, which was waiting
outside.
'Mother, are You the telecommunications expert of the
universe?' I started to feel cool vibrations. Then an idea
came to me of electromagnetic waves spreading through
the universe like the vibrations which we experience in
Sahaja Yoga and being helped in their radiation through
the use of certain auspicious shapes and forms. In Sahaja
Yoga we find that certain shapes, for instance the
bandhan or horseshoe, attract and channel vibrations,
hence they are said to be auspicious, and pleasing to the
divine.
While Shri Mataji and three other persons were seated in
Her Mercedes, my friend Engelbert stood next to me near
the right front wheel of the car. It started to move
backwards, turning to the left at the same time. My
attention was fully on Shri Mataji and suddenly I saw Her
face go tense for two seconds, afterwards She relaxed
and smiled again. During this time, Engelbert, still
standing next. to me, started to laugh too at this point.
After the car with Shri Mataji had gone, he told me that just
now the Mercedes had driven over his right foot. Although
his foot should have been completely crushed, he had
only felt a prickle.
Later that day, I began to design my new antenna taking
these forms as a base. The antenna we built to this design
worked extremely well and the company went on to win
orders worth many millions of pounds. When they asked
me for information about the theoretical basis of the new
design, I just told them that I had consulted a Higher
Authority.
-Hari Jairam
- Werner Steindl
18
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007
catering business from her home. One of Devibehn's
customers knocked at her front door and went into the
Going to the game park
Once Shri Mataji took Her grandchildren, and also my
two, to a game park near London. We had a picnic lunch
and it was a wonderful day. As we were driving around the
park and looking at the animals, we were going past some said to Devibehn, 'She had such a lovely smile and I felt so
giraffes, which were not too close, and as we drove past warm and comforted, it was as if it was my own mother
they turned their backs to us. Mother explained that the smiling at me.'Then the visitor saw the photo of Shri Mataji
animals felt the vibrations as a cool wind, and in the way of which Devibehn had in the house.
animals, turned their backs to shield themselves from the
cold. Mother explained that animals are one with the
universal consciousness, whereas unrealised humans
are split off from it.
Mother also said that when She first married, they went to
Her husband's family palace. The family owned some
elephants, and in India that was not unusual at the time.
But what was very unusual was that when they saw
Mother, they all knelt down in obeisance to Her, in
recognition. The other thing I remember about the visit to
the game park was that we were passing by some
monkeys on a rock, and they were all preening each
other. They sat looking at us, and I laughed because they
looked quite funny.
"You were all like that, (i.e. were monkeys) not so long When Brompton Square was more or less finished, one
ago, Mother said. That put me in my place!
house.
"Who is that lady in the red sari who I saw outside?' She
"That is the lady I saw outsidel'she said.
"Are you sure?" asked Devibehn. Devibehn went to have a
look, but there was no one there. Then she told her visitor
how special Shri Mataji is, but that She had never been to
South Africa. Devibehn sald the visitor was so lucky to
have seen her outside the hOuse, but the lady agreed, but
said to Devibehn that she was so very fortunate to have
this wonderful lady as her DeviMa. She also said she had
seen Shri Mataji walking round the house as if She was
looking after it.
- Devibehn Kalam
They feel the vibrations
night some of us slept there with Shri Mataji. I had slept a
night in Her flat at Ashley Gardens, and on both occasions
noticed the same thing. Outside both houses were
gardens - the private gardens so often found behind
London houses and also the shared gardens, in the case
of Brompton Square a garden in the middle of the long
- Auriol Purdie
The first mobile phone
In 1986 there was the first New Year Puja at Alibagh. A
miracle took place in the house. Shri Mataji reached there
around 7.00pm from Ganapatipule, and many other
Western yogis too. When Mother stepped out of the car
She was so surprised.
narrow square.
Often if one wakes early in London in the summer, before
the traffic noise drowns out everything else, one can hear
the birds singing. However, in all my years in London-
over ten in all-Il only heard the birds singing all through the
night on the two occasions I was staying in a house where
Shri Mataji was sleeping. I asked Her about it and She
said that they feel the vibrations. Shri Mataji has often told
us to meditate in the early morning just before the sun gets
up, because the vibrations are good then, and of course
this is just the moment the birds start to sing.
"This place is so beautiful. I always wanted to come here,'
She said. Mother went into the bedroom and said to the
other yogis, I must tell Sir CP about this place and he
must come and visit it.' She asked one of the yogis if
somebody could get Her a phone as She wanted to call
Mumbai. Since it was not a developed village there were
no phones. Then She asked Mr Koli for a coconut. He
asked Shri Mataji if She wanted to eat one and She said
She did not, but She wanted a fresh one from the tree. A
village boy climbed up and got Mother, one in ten minutes
and gave it to Her. She went into Her room and closed the
door.
- Anonymous Engish Sahaja Yogi
Many country leaders were sitting in the hall outside, and
after an hour one of the leaders came and said that Shri
Mataji was using the coconut as a phone and they had
heard She was speaking to Sir CP for nearly an hour.
Later the yogis found out that this was the year that mobile
phones first came out.
II PLEASE NOTE III
If anyone has any miracle stories like these
to contribute, you can you emal them at-
hhsmrecollections@yahoo.com
- Lena Koli
The lady who was protecting Devibehn's house
Devibehn is an Indian lady who lives in Rylands, in Cape
Town, South Africa, in a beautiful house and she runs a
19
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007
KEYS OF WISDOM-A fantasy of reality
(Book Review)
"The Keys of Wisdom", a fantasy adventure story, is
written by an English Sahaja Yogini named Linda Williams
who worked for more than twenty years on this story.
the workings of the different energy centers.
The Keys of
It is all about seven children who find an old prophecy and
who go on a difficult journey to fulfill the prophecy. They
go on this joumey because they are being ruled by these
horrible sorcerers who misguide everyone in their city.
On this journey they learn a lot about themselves and their
inner "tree of life". They meet a lot of people who help and
guide them, but also nasty people who betray and trouble
them.
Isdom
The Sagu of Nene Sestinu
The Oe
It's a battle of good over evil, positivity over negativity.
LANTAY REALEES
Asha is one of the main characters who is telling the story
of their adventure. She has a younger brother named
Derwin whom she loves dearly and always takes proper
care of. They have a very strong brother and sister
relationship, making her Vishuddhi chakra very strong. In
one part Derwin gets badly hurt and Asha is really worried
and would do anything to cure him. She has a very strong
desire to seek for freedom and for truth. She can see
inside people's chakras, which is not a very good thing
because her Agnya chakra gets blocked up. She gets a
bit of an ego because she thinks she is great as none of
the other seven children can do this.
Tandi, another of the seven children, works on a farm.
She has a very pure heart, as she is always joyful, smiling
and joking. She is very polite and humble and a very
creative person. To the other six children she is just like a
mother, as she cooks for them and gives care when they
get hurt. At one point of the story Tandi separates from
the group, as she gets tempted from all the gems and
other nice things on the Emperor's Island. This is mainly
because she had never seen such beauties in her life and
just wanted to enjoy. Otherwise she is mostly in balance.
This book is filled with many spiritual themes. One of the
many is that they are seeking Truth and can't go onto their
destination unless they maintain collectivity among
themselves.
The sorcerers are very evil, mean,
dominating and extremely power-hungry. They will do
anything to get power and get rid of anyone or anything
that comes in the way of that power. I feel that Shri Mataji
would really love this wonderful book as it has very many
good spiritual meanings in it. Mother wanted all the
children from ISPS to read this book and She had said that
Raynor is another main character who is very intelligent
and brainy. Once, he and Ahren had to kill a horse to keep
it from suffering. He was scared to do it and thought he
was not very brave, as the younger Ahren was able to do
it. At this point he felt troubled. He also thought that he
was not taking proper care of everyone and his left
Vishuddhi was catching. He later on gets a stronger heart
and takes proper decisions. He also forgives easily and
shows good leadership.
many people would come to Sahaja Yoga because of this
book. I have learnt so much from this book and while I
was reading this book I felt tremendous vibrations. This is
the best bookl have ever read.
- Divya Renard, 12 years old, Indian/Rumanian
Class VII student of Dharamshala School
The Author Herself about the Book:
When I read this book, I saw seven children going on a
journey to save their country from the clutches of the
sorcerers who blind the people and do not let them see
reality. The seven children free their country and help the
people see reality. These children go on an outer journey,
as well as an inner journey to discover who they are and
Many years ago I had the idea to write a fantasy novel that
would tell people about Sahaja Yoga, without overtly
calling it that. It has finally happened. Where some of the
ideas came from:
20
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007
I grew up on The Lord of the Rings and the Narnia books,
and they were my initial inspiration. At the beginning of the
book, you learn that the seven main characters, aged
between nine and eighteen, live in a pretty awful country
called Teletsia. Well, the rulers are pretty awful.
the UK book of Eternally Inspiring Recollections)
In the book, the young people go to visit an ancient stone
temple, somewhat like Stonehenge. I asked Shri Mataji
what I should call a place like this which represented the
Kundalini and the Mooladhara. 'Call it the Temple of
Support,' She said, so that is on the front cover of the
book.
On one occasion, many years ago, I asked Shri Mataji
what ancient Atlantis was like. (Atlantis was a legendary
country in the Atlantic Ocean which, according to
Socrates, went under the sea twelve thousand years ago)
'Atlantis was like Nazi Germany but worse,' Shri Mataji
replied, so that is what Teletsia is - outwardly orderly but
nasty things going on if you look a bit closer. The sort of
place you'd want to get out of, fast.
There is one story in the book about a Prince Zarko, who
does not want to share his room with a lot of other boys,
with disastrous consequences. That is based on an
incident which occurred when Shri Mataji was at
Mahatma Gandhi's ashram. She went there when She
was a little girl, and graciously related it to me.
Afew pages later you read that some of the young people
find an ancient prophecy. We all love prophecies, and
many years ago, when Shri Mataji owned Brompton
Square, and Chelsham Road was our ashram in London,
Shri Mataji explained some of William Blake's prophetic
works as being about Sahaja Yoga in England, and that
some lines referred to those very houses. So that was
where that idea came from. (Those stories are coming in
An innocent child's fantasy? A fantasy of reality? That is
the subtitle, and it hopefully will bring a glimpse of reality to
the non Sahaja reader, and some chuckles of recognition
to the Sahaja Yogis, who will see through the satire.
Donation Request For NGO
4. Kindly Speed Post (ONLY)your Cheque/DD at:
Mrs. Gisela Matzer,
c/o Vishwa Nirmal Prem Ashram,
Plot No.9, Institutional Area,
Near Park Knowledge l,
Greater Nolda, UP-201308,
Ph: (0120)2322023, (0120)2230681
Jai Shri Mataj Dear
Sahaja Yogis,
We all know that Shri Mataji founded Vishwa Nimal
Prem Ashram, Greater Noida (an NGO for destitute
women and children) in 2000. For upbringing & care
taking of the children/women and running &
maintenance of the Ashram the NGO regularly needs
funds. Following is the information for people who may
wish to donate:
Contacts:
() Mrs Gisela -09810774865.
email-gisela_oma 7@yahoo.com
(1I) Mr. Jaswant Singh-09891924990
The Cheque/DD must be made in favour of HH Shri
Mataji Nirmala Devi Foundation.
2. If the donation is greater than or equal to Rs.5000
then please mention your PAN number. If donation
amount is less than Rs.500 then please mention () Rs.1700-School and Food (anly)
your postal address.
5. Donation options for a child (permonth):
)Rs. 3000-Includes food, school, dress, maintenance
(ii) Rs. 500-Schooling (only)
3. Donation can also be given in form of kinds like cotton
dress, shoes, undergarments (all NEW and NOT old
and used ones).
We request readers to announce this in their collectives,
so as to spread the awareness among people.
Forfurther details: www.nirmalprem.org
21
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007
संतो ने कहा है
सन्त दादू दयाल
दाद दयाल जी के अनुसार -
सन्त दादू दयाल
भी सन्त कबीर
की तरह कवि थे
| जिन्होंने अपने
अन्तिम तत्व मोक्ष है, जो परमात्मा से साक्षात्कार होने पर प्राप्त
होता है। सामान्य जन मुख्यतः चर्म चक्षुओं से देखता है जबकि
ज्ञानी आत्मदृष्टि से देखता है। ऐसा ज्ञानी अपने ज्ञान के
दार्शनिक विवेचन, व्याख्यान या वाद-विवाद में नही पडता।
ज्ञान से अहंकार की संभावना होती है परन्तु भक्ति इससे रहित
है। भक्त कर्ता नहीं होता, भक्त वही काम करता है जो भगवान
उससे करवाते हैं।
काव्य के माध्यम
से जनसाधारण
को परम् का मार्ग
दिखाने की
कोशिश की ।
इनका जन्म
दादू दयाल जी द्वारा की गयी काव्य रचनाओं के कुछ चुने हुए
पद नीचे दिय हैं। जिनमें जी ने सहज योग या उससे
सम्बत् 1601 में
गु जरात के
अहमदाबाद में
हुआ संत कबीर की तरह इनके जन्म को लेकर भी कई पुरम को प्राप्त करने के लिए प्ररित किया है
भ्रान्तियाँ हैं । इनमें जहाँ कुछ लोग इन्हे ब्राह्मण समुदाय का
मानते हैं तो लोग धुनिया (मुसलमान) मानते हैं। इन्होंने भाई रे औसा पन्थ हमारा, दोइ पष रहित पन्थ गहि पूरा, अवरन
वृद्वानन्द नामक गुरू से दीक्षा ली थी। कहते हैं कि एक बार
बादशाह अकबर ने इन्हे फतेहपुर सीकरी, अपने महल में
बुलवाया था और वे इनके उपदेशों व कविताओं से बुहत सम दाष्टि सुभाई सहज में, आप ही आप विचारा ।।
प्रभावित हुए थे । दादू जी ने जगह-जगह जाकर लोगों में
जागृती लाने को प्रसास किया। इसी कारण उनके काव्यों में मैं ते मेरी यह मत नाहीं, निबेरी निकारा ।
अलग-अलग भाषाओं का (राजस्थानी, गुजराती सिंधी, पंजाबी,
मराठी और उर्दू-फारसी आदि) के शब्दों का मिश्रण मिलता है।
इनकी कई काव्य रचनाओं में सहज योग का स्पष्ट वर्णन काह के संगि मोह न ममिता, संगी सिरजनहारा ।
मिलता है । इन्होने सहज को केन्द्र बनाकर काव्य के माध्यम से मुनही मन सौं समझी सयाना, आनन्द एक अपारा
दादू
सम्बन्धित विवरणों का विवेचन अपनी मिश्रित भाषा में उस समय
के समाज व जन साधारण की स्थिति के अनुरूप किया है उन्हें
कुछ
|
एक अधारा
वाद-विवाद काहसौं नाहीं, माहीं जगत थैं न्यारा ।
र ?
पूरण सवै देषि आया पर, निरालंब निराधारा ।।
सरल, मिश्रित व आम बोजचाल की भाषा में काव्य रचनायें की
ताकि आम जनसाधारण भी उनकी बात को समझ सके । इनका
रचनाओं का संग्रह इनके दो शिष्यों ने किया था। यह सग्रह
"हरडे वाणी" के नाम से किया गया है । इनकी अन्य रचनायें हैं
'काया बेलि', 'पद और 'साखी' । इनकी समस्त रचनाओं का
संकलन 'दादू की बानी' के नाम से हुआ है ।
काम कल्पना कदै न कीजै, परम ब्रह्म प्यारा ।
इहि पथि पहुंचि पार गहि दाद, सो तंत सहजि संभारा ।।
यह पद दाद जी द्वारा रचित राग गौडी' से लिया गया है। इन
पंक्तियों में दादू दयाल जी ने सहज संगत की बात की है । वे
कहते हैं - भाई हमारा पन्थ ऐसा है जिसमें कोई दोष नहीं,
22
ेर
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007
जिसका एक ही आधार है । जिसमें किसी से हमारा कोई सतगुरू पसु माणस करें, माणस थे सिद्ध सोइ
वाद-विवाद नहीं है, इस प्रकार का मेरा अलग संसार है। हमने दादू सिद्धतैं देवता, देव निरन्जण होइ ।|
सहज के ही सन्तुलित दृष्टि पाई है अर्थात् सन्तुलन प्राप्त किया
| जिसमें हम अपने ही आप को देखते हैं । मेरे-तेरे की सतगुरू द्वारा पशु को भी मानव बनाने की बात कही गई है।
भावना नहीं रहती, सब अहन्कार छूट जाता है। दादू जी कहते मनुष्य सतगुरू के बतायें मार्ग पर चल कर सिद्ध पुरूष या देवत्व
हैं कि यह निराकार वही है जो सब जगह व्याप्त है किन्तु प्राप्त कर सकता है। यहि नही, यहाँ तक कि वह मनुष्य स्वयं
दिखाई नहीं देता, वह निराधार है। इसमें किसी को किसी से निंरजन (निर्गुण) देवत्व को प्राप्त हो सकता है। यदि वह
मोह, ममता नहीं है क्योंकि सबका एक वही परमात्मा है । जो सतगुरू के द्वारा दर्शय मार्ग का आचरण परमात्मा
लोग मन ही मन अपने को बुद्धिमान समझते हैं उनके लिए यह प्राप्त कर सकता है ।
करे तो
को
সपा
अपार आनन्द देने वाला है ।
निराधार है। इसमें किसी को किसी से मोह, ममता नहीं है दादू स्वांगि साधु बहु अंतरा, जता धरनी अकास।
क्योंकि सबका एक वही परमात्मा है । जो लोग मन ही मन साधु राता राम सौं, स्वांग जगत की आस ।।
अपने को बुद्धिमान समझते हैं उनके लिए यह अपार आनन्द देने
दादू स्वांगि सब संसार है, साधु बिरला कोई ।
जैसे चन्दन बावनां, बनि बनि कही न होई।।
वाला है ।
दादू जी कहते हैं काम और कल्पना अर्थात विचार कभी मत
करो, केवल पराबह्म को प्राप्त करो जो सबसे प्यारा है। इसी पंथ दादू जी की ये पंक्तियाँ उनकी रचना 'भेश को अंग' का हिस्सा
पर पहुँच कर सब पार हो सकते हैं, जो सभी लोगों को संभालने है । इन पंक्त्यों में दादू जी ने कुगुरूओं, पाखंडी, ढोंगी बाबाओं
के बारे में बताते हैं की ये लोग तरह-तरह का स्वाग
(नाटक) करते हैं। इनके कई रूप हैं जिस तरह आकाश अनेक
रूपों को धारण करता है - जैसे कभी धुप, कभी छाया। उसी
प्रकार ये साधु बाबा हैं जो विभिन्न रूपों को धारण करते हैं। वैसे
तो दिन रात राम नाम का जाप करते हैं, अपने आप को वैरागी
सिद्ध करते हैं और वहीं दूसरी तरफ इस संसार से बड़ी बडी
आशाएँ करते हैं। दादुजी बताते हैं कि यह सारा संसार ही
स्वांगी (बहरूपिया) है। कोई ही यहाँ सही मायने में साधु मिलता
साधु
वाला है ।
दादू दयाल जी गुरू के विषय में -
दादू सतगुर सौं सहजैं मिल्या, लीया कंवि लगाइ ।
दया भई दयाल की, तब दीपक दीपा जलाई ।।
यह पद दादू जी के 'गुरूदेव जी को अंग' (प्रथम साषी) से है
इसमें सन्त दादू दयाल जी के सतगुरू के बारे में बताया है। इन है। जिस प्रकार चन्दन हर स्थान पर न तो बोया जाता है और न
पक्तियों के अनुसार अर्थ यह है कि यह सच्चा गुरू (जो ही वनो में दूर-दूर तक मिलता है, यह तो किसी-किसी स्थान
परमात्मा से मिला दे) आसानी से मिल जाए तो उसे गले से पर ही प्राप्त होता है। उसी प्रकार साधु जन संसार में बड़ी
लगा लेना चाहिए अर्थात् अपने से नहीं होने देना चाहिए। कठिनाई से मिलते हैं।
वही हमारा सच्चे अर्थों में मार्ग-दर्शन कर सकता है। यदि गुरू
की दया हो जाए तो हमारे जीवन का अन्धकार मिट जाएगा, हमें
ज्ञान की प्राप्ति हो जाएगी। अतः हम सतगुरू की दया के बिना
भव से पार नहीं हो सकते।
।
दूर
23
৩
প
প
প্
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Dec 2007
Kid Shakti
Page
паkti
MATCH THE COLUMNS
SYMBOLS
NAMES OF
INCARNATIONS
XX
1
Raja Janaka
Lao Tse
32
Guru Nanaka
Mohammed
Shirdi Sai Baba
6.
Moses
7
Socrates
8.
H.
Confucious
TL
9.
Abraham
10
Zarathustra
24
F.
2.
3.
4.
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-26.txt 
 THIS IS LEADERSHIP
If you go to another country, you know immediately who is the leader and who are the followers. [In
Australia] you come, you look around, you don't know who is the leader because the leader here is a
wonderful person. He does not lead. He invites every other person to lead and that is howa collective
should work.
So there is a very, very good example of how Her idea of collective leadership should be
implemented... the wonderful way you are implementing Her view of Sahaja Yoga...
This is leadership.
This is what She wants.
She wants everyone to participate in the same way/
That is the meaning of collective leadership and, I tell you really, this is a glorious example, a
beautiful example...
You are all the same.
Nobody is the leader here.
Everyone is together.
It is the real meaning of collective leadership and this is what She wanted. She wants this kind
leadership and I assure you l've seen this only here so far, but this is Her dream and I'll carry this
message.
This is how Sahaja Yoga relates- collectively.
Sir CP Shrivastava,
On the occasion of the 59th wedding anniversary,
Australia, April 7th 2006.
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi gave all her blessings to the
Sahaja Yoga youth organization in 1987. She christened it
Nirmal Shakti Yuva Sangha
nARII
of Yuva Shakti is the development of the personality in order to make it much
The purp
purpose
more complete, so that such developed individuals will prove to be great assets to
Sahaja Yoga and serve as shining ideals for others to emulate and derive inspiration
Members of the Yuva Shakti should know
o The complete story of the Divine life of Shri Mataji.
a Everything about the genesis and growth of Sahaja Yoga.
a Everything that has been told by Shri Mataji about the subtle system.
Everything about meditation as a way of keeping oneself in balance and purity.
o Everything about the prophecies heralding the advent of Shri Mataji and Sahaja Yoga.
Knowledge of the great swayambhus and manifestations of India.
Knowledge of the Adi Gurus and Saints.
They should also know
Đ The heritage and great cultural traditions of India.
a Indian classical music and the ability to play at least one instrument.
9 Classical dance and drama.
a The great historical personalities of India.
The social, political and economic climate and current affairs.
The ability to speak and understand Hindi and English and the ability to communicate
through writing and public speaking.
pue
ThE YUVA SHAlkui is
AN Absolutely fNTEGRAl PART
TELY
of SAHAJA YOQA
The Yuva Shakti is One.
Its members should not claim affiliation or special attachment to any
centre, city, state of country.
Wherever they mạy go in the world, they should always volunteer their
services to the collective.
Yuva Shakti members have to be polite and respectful to senior Sahaja
Yogis. Their hallmark should be "madhurya" means sweetness.
Boys and girls of the Yuva Shakti should not neglect their studies in the
name of Sahaja Yoga work.
Self-respect and self-esteem of Yuva Shakti members has to be maintained.
The Yuva shakti is an
integral part of this Divine
Tree of Sahaja Yoga.
It is our sacred duty to ensure that
we pass on this great legacy to the
future generations.
Jai Shri Mataji
Nothing precludes the use of common sense.
