The Đivine Cool Breeze November - December 2007

 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE Published by Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 108, Chandragupt Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411029 Ph. No.: 020-25285232 Printed by Krishna Printer & Designer Tri Nagar, Delhi-35 Mob.: 9212238008 For Subscription Please Write to: Nirmal Transformatiom Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 108,Chandragupt Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune -411029 Tel.No.: 020-25285232 Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles, Miracle Photographs etc. To Shri O.P. Chandna G-11 (463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110034 Ph.: 011-65356811

 ed Navratri Puja, Australia-2007

 The Divine Cool Breeze NOV. - DEC. - 2007 VISHWA NIRMALA, UNIVERSAL PURE RELIGION CONTENTS 3 Shri Mataji in Dubai-10.8.07 4 Who I Am? A Poem 5 Conversation with the Divine Part-I, Cabella-June-2007 Conversation with the Divine Part II, July, August 2007 12 Raksha Bandhan and Maryadas for Sahaja Yogis - London- 11-8-1984 26 When the Kundalini Rises, It makes sounds London-14.10.1978 34 Maha Kali Puja, France- 1990 DHARMA

 Conversations with the Divine Part I, June 2007, Cabella Ligure, Italy During the last ten days of June 2007, it was an extraordinary blessing to be in the presence of Shri Mataji in Her castle in Cabella Ligure, Italy, and to have experienced truly blissful moments in Her Divine company. as to why growth remains limited in the US, none of which are stated in this report. Shri Mataji completely or partly accepted these 'reasons' with the love and patience that only She can convey. superbly summarized the situation and offered some solutions which are reported herein. She However, These moments, which were marked by extraordinary conversations, occurred on different days over varying lengths of time. However, there was a Shri Mataji's expressions The US was the first place She visited outside of India, due to Her 1. predominant theme running through all of these meetings. This theme was Her concern regarding a clear absence growth of Sahaja Yoga amongst 2. concern and love for the seekers in this country. VET Sahaja Yogis number approx. individuals born and raised in the United States. One ought to interpret this to mean 1200 in the US with a population of 300 million, which is almost the exact amount of yogis in a place like Italy whose population is approx. 30 million. In ratio terms, we should have at least 10 times our present number to be even at par with a country like Italy. 'mainstream'American society. The conversations took place in the form of questions and answers, a gestalt of which I shall endeavor to summarize hereafter. Basically, Shri Mataji was and Although spiritual heritage is missing in the US, it is not exactly in 3. remains clear in Her opinion that unless Sahaja spreads in the US (hereafter to be interpreted as 'mainstream' US), there is a clear and present danger that this country would end up destroying itself. Given its prominence on the world stage, the consequences of such an eventuality for the rest of the world would be equally worrisome. There was a lot of discussion as to why individuals, after getting their Realization, attend a few follow-up programs but thereafter tend to drop off. One tried to put forward some 'reasons' abundance in places like Western Europe and Russia, where the growth of

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 11 & 12-2007 Shri Mataji. Mother was very pleased with the floral patterns and spent over an hour examining various sarees. She spoke to the Sahajayogis present about various cultures in India and the different styles of can have, sang the initial bhajans in praise of Ganesha. Sahajayogis from the main visiting countries, Bahrain and Iran, also performed and entertained the crowed with their musical prowess. In just a few minutes, most of the Sahajayogis in the hall were dancing in joy. The Sahajayogis from Iran were particular favourites of the crowd, who called for an encore after a particularly energetic dance song Sarees they prefer. 8:00pm : A musical programme had been arranged, with the hope that Shri Mataji would be able to attend and bless everyone. Unfortunately, Mother was not able to be present at the event, although it was clear that. her attention was on it The Sahajayogis of Dubai also received an unexpected blessing when it was announced that Shri Mataji has decided to extend her stay in Dubai by as vibrations filled the place and the cool breeze was strong enough to leave many hands numb. The programme started off with a few songs by children, who, with the open heart and innocence only a child approximately a week. जना .I am Who.. I look back; I see that once I knew who I was and now I know that I am not. I look ahead; I see aayie that I do not yet know who I am and now I know that yet I am not. Then who I am I know not, But for this moment I know I am. Melissa Richard

 Shri Mataji in Dubai 10th August 2007 12:30am : Shri Mataji arrived at quickly made it clear that her presence had filled them with energy. She then spoke to a few of the children, asking them where they were from. After a few minutes, Shri Mataji said they should go to bed, the Dubai International Airport, with a beautiful, benevolent smile on Her face. While the immigration formalities were completed, Shri Mataji waited in the VIP lounge at the airport, where She was served refreshments by the welcoming committee. She was joyous and full of life inspite of the long fl ight. and so the children left the room elated at having met their Holy Mother. One of the children was heard exclaiming, "Shri Mataji spoke to me!". 2:30am : Dinner was served to 1:00am: The immigration process was complete, and the travelling group moved out of the airport. Shri Mataji was escorted to the vehicle that would transport Shri Mataji, and after dinner She retired for the night. 5:00am: The Sahajayogis of Dubai conducted morning meditation via conference call, and the visiting Sahajayogis from Fujeirah and Bahrain joined in. It was a calm summer morning, and the vibrations flowed strongly due to Shri Mataji's presnece. Amusical program will take place later today, and practise sessions are underway. Her to the hotel. Outside the airport, about two hundred Sahajayogis had turned up to get darshan of Shri Mataji. She blessed them all as She got into the vehicle, and it slowly moved away towards the hotel. 1:50am : Shri Mataji and Sir C.P. arrived at the hotel, and were welcomed 11:00am : Shri Mataji had a late breakfast, while discussing various topics with the Sahaja yoginis serving breakfast. by a few young children. She was very pleased with the room and decorations within. After a few minutes, all the young Among the things discussed were the Burj Dubai, the building that aims to be the tallest on earth, and other sights visible children of the collective were allowed to enter the room to get darshan of Shri Mataji. The children were overjoyed at this opportunity to meet Shri Mataji, and smiling faces filled the room. At Mother's from the window of her suite. 2:00pm: Shri Mataji emerged from her room, and spoke to the Sahajayogis present for a few minutes, asking them asking, the children sang 'Ganesha, Ganesha' and Shri Mataji liked the performance very much. She expressed where they were from, and so on. After a while, some cloth merchants came concern at the fact that the children were forward and arranged to offer sarees to staying up so late, but their smiling faces

 Issue: 11 & 12 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze 7. seekers of a higher truth, perhaps due to an abundance of material prosperity. However this is in contrast to a place like India, where even well-off individuals seek a higher truth. Americans by nature are not Sahaja Yoga is far more satisfactory. Most importantly, She has been accepted by mainstream populations of all of these nations relative to the US, where for the most part, growth is non-organic and clearly excludes mainstream Americans. Growth through immigration does not truly count, for exactly the same reason i.e. it excludes American natives. American yogis (not immigrants) have to examine and elucidate the 8. reasons why they were attracted to and have continued to remain in Sahaja Yoga. They should ask themselves a key question: 'What is it about Shri Mataji and Sahaja Yoga that makes it so unique and important for me in my life?' They should then try and reach out to mainstream Americans with the same messages. In the 70's and 80's, the US was visited by approx. 12 false gurus from India, who deceived the population and let them astray in terms of spiritual guidance. This has worked to the tremendous detriment of all things 'Indian', particularly in the sphere of spirituality, and therefore in all likelihood has made 4. Ordinary Americans have to see and identify with their 'own kind', in order 9. Americans wary of Sahaja Yoga. The fact that in the process these false gurus built personal fortunes worth hundreds of millions by taking full advantage of their na?vet?, further reinforces a deeply established mistrust of all aspects spiritual emanating from India. to recognize the benefits of Sahaja Yoga. This will not easily happen if they only see Indians propagating Sahaja Yoga. 10. American yogis have thus to take center stage and lead this endeavor. All other ethnicities, including Indians, can play a truly supportive role in helping out Although Americans may look at 5. most things in life through a materialistic lens, they have to realize that most things in life which are essential for survival are in fact free! For example, the air we breathel with this grand venture. Opening Sahaja schools in various American cities, in order to get in more children, would be an ideal way to propagate Sahaja. Children attending Sahaja schools are completely happy within that environment, and if that can be replicated to attract children from non-yogi families, that would be a wonderful way of getting Sahaja into American families. If parents notice that their children are very happy and content with a Sahaja school Contd. to Page 11 11. Americans do not seem to get as 6. much love and understanding from their families as compared to other cultures, e.g. India. It would be essential for the growth of Sahaja in the US that they feel and experience this love and compassion, which they may have so far missed in their personal lives

 Conversations with the Divine PartII, July, August 2007 The days following Guru Puja saw a gradual shift in the attention of Shri Mataji to the land of Shri Krishna and the issues of America and I as well as others were extremely fortunate to be able to have the tremendous blessing of being in Her presence in Cabella during this time. tell them to "Know Thyself". Once they have felt the existence of the instrument within, they should be told that they can diagnose their own problems through some knowledge of the centers and that they can correct them without anyone telling them. This ability to clear their own problems at the level of the centers will allow them to become independent of the During these days leading up to Shri Krishna Puja, Shri Mataji spoke on topics ranging from how to reach the seekers of America, to the corporate doctors and psychiatrists and the outreach of CEL, to Her experiences during the time of Indian independence, and at every moment She was full of encouragement and enthusiasm for the tasks ahead of us. medications they prescribe and will save the money that is wasted on these dependencies. Shri Mataji suggested that seekers begin immediately to work on themselves and others, and in that way will feel that they have something. Even if they cannot feel it and the person that they are working on does, this will encourage Recorded below is a humble attempt to summarize the main points of these conversations, some of which I was not present for but received a detailed summary of that are included below. These moments are precious and Her guidance to us as well as the stories of Her past are of inestimable value now and for the generations to come. them. Shri Mataji went on to address general topics about America that came up and these are summarized below. Shri Mataji said that She was very happy with the spread of Sahaja Yoga in Russia and that maybe communism is a good thing. She said democracy in America is hopeless if the result is what is happening today with the seekers and America Because the seekers of America are very independent and self reliant, Shri Mataji had specific advice on topics to convey to them in a manner that will appeal to this aspect of their nature. their materialistic focus. She said She has been very kind and patient with them, but that She is going to tell them, and hopefully this will work. Shri Mataji said that She Tell the seekers that true freedom and independence comes from self knowledge, and that they should know that they have this instrument within themselves and it is their own. We should wants to come to America. 12 false gurus came to America from India and looted the seekers of all of

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007 8 The Divine Cool Breeze said that it should be called "Know Thyself" but should not be given at the beginning, but rather at a secondary stage. their wealth and built big ashrams and now who is going to stay in them? Shri Mataji said that the Americans were stupid to listen to them and that you have to be intelligent to understand Sahaj Yoga. These gurus are finished but their effects linger on. CEL (Center for Evolutionary Learning) Shri Mataji was presented an Shri Mataji explained that Americans teach their children a love for money by paying them to do things for the parents that they should do out of love such as washing the car and chores in the house. She expressed hope that their children will put them right. She said that you have to love your children and that if you don't Sahaja Yoga will not love you. Not only your own children, but all children. You must love and respect them, as they do not care if you are a saint. They just care for your love. She said that if this happens this world will change. update on the efforts of CEL, which has been reaching out to the corporate world to give training on enlightened management principles and the manifestation of a positive and balanced working environment through the practice of meditation. Abranch of this international organization has just been established in America and when Shri Mataji was informed of their progress in Europe, She offered the comments below. -Now I have hope that my incarnation is not wasted! God has put you in your positions and you are responsible. That's why God out you on this earth. I am only a housewife. The world is looking for your leadership. Shri Mataji was informed about the existence of the Kubera fund in America and was asked about the priority to be given to the disbursement of the funds i.e. towards the establishment of centers or There is no light in organisations. They have buildings and offices but they don't have light. more direct forms of outreach to the seekers. Shri Mataji first asked how many centers could really be obtained with these funds and when it was explained that the fund is making down payments on mortgages that are then paid by the centers, She said to prioritize the centers but balance with some outreach also. Stty The Islamic world failed because of bad management, particularly on the woman's side. Now you bring vibrations to management. Don't be afraid. This time nobody can kill you. The laws are supporting truth. Nowadays everything is recorded - you can look things up what was said, nobody can change it. In the past it was easy for religions to be turned around, but not today. You can say what you want as long Shri Mataji was presented with a beginners bookon Sahaja Yoga designed to take seekers remote from centers through the whole process of Sahaja Yoga and asked for Her advice for a title. She

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007 9. The Divine Cool Breeze Look at me, I am just a housewife (of the universe Gregoire said), but I am not afraid of anyone. No one can do this job other than you. You are fully responsible! Be courageous. The time has come! You all know the truth, but now the Big Johnnies as it is the truth. Italians are very good people but they are ignorant. Iraqis are not bad people but they have been stupid. Two mayors (Albera and Cabella) recongnized me as the Mother of Christ, so they were wise. Even if I am that, so what? What matters is what you have to get from me. Now I am the mother of Sahaja Yogis. First they were thinking to send a man, but you needed a mother. Christ could not have done this. have to find it... Money cannot buy joy, but you can use money for loving. Direct it towards Jove. The whole world is changing. Go ahead. Expand, expand! Do anything you need. That is why God put you on this earth. You don't need to be afraid. Go ahead. You should get good positions. God has put you in these positions. Kurta and Sari Distribution Shri Mataji was distributing kurtas to all of the leaders who were present one afternoon and was asking each person who arrived where they got the kurtas they were wearing. She would offer each new arrival several colors to choose from and This is a day of celebration. What nice vibrations, nice kundalinis. If trees can feel love even managers can feel it. Managers, I will take care of that. Are you satisfied now? have those who had already received a gift of a kurta from Her were asked to show the new arrivals what they had Speak the truth and give love. You have no idea of the power behind you. received. In Her classic style, She made sure everyone got the color best suited to them and asked numerous times if they were sure they liked the final selection, often switching the colors around to arrive at something "just right." If you hate, really hate, then actually you love because you are putting so much attention on a person. That's today's way of loving. Selfishness leads to love. Love cannot be defined because it is a feeling. At one point Shri Mataji began to distribute saris for the wives of the leaders present and explained that these were Paitani saris, which were the best saris that came from an area south of Pune Looking at you my heart is filled with hope. I thought my incarnation would be wasted. You are responsible now! Have faith in your self. When asked by the CEL representatives if they had Her blessings, Shri Mataji replied Yes go full ahead! What other job do you have to do? What other job would you like to do? The Big Johnnies in business and politics have to accept it because it's the truth. called Paitan. Shri Mataji explained that they were once fairly scarce, but that now they were manufacturing more and that they are 7 yard saris with 1 yard that should be saved for the blouse. In vintage

 10 Issue: 11 & 12 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze Shri Mataji went on to say that the fashion, Shri Mataji again went through the process of finding just the right sari for each person remembering how they looked and described why each selection would be perfect for them. English were wise to withdraw, but that She still didn't fully understand why because this has never happened before. She said there was no war or conflict and that without this, occupying countries do not leave, so the English had some wisdom. Shri Mataji said that the Nehru It was a window in time seeing the Goddess in this mode as the one who has everything including the planets as Her ornaments, but is not content unless She is distributing gifts to everyone in an expression of Her boundless love. dynasty had not been good for India, and that had Gandhi become the president, India would be a very different country today. Shri Mataji explained that in the early days she wore khadi saris, but Her mother told her once she got married that she should wear some colored saris. She Cabella & Prathistan Shri Mataji described Her first visit to Cabella and how no one except Her really saw its true potential. She said that Sir C.P. felt that the place was not good and was quite upset when he left saying "How can we live here?" Sir C.P. then quipped "And now we live here!" to the great amusement of Shri Mataji and everyone then began to talk about the Indian independence movement and Gandhis efforts to get the people to wear home spun. Indian Independence Shri Mataji reminisced about Her time with Gandhi in his ashram and said that he was such a simple, disciplined and straight forward man. She explained that his khadi movement killed the textile present. Even though standing in Her present bedroom at the time you could see the sky through the walls, she felt that with its thick walls and strong foundation, the house had great potential. She said that She seems to have a "knack" for seeing this potential and that even though the house was almost 500 years old, She could tell that it would be worthy to be her abode. She said that She had never been trained in architecture, but that She had somehow always been able to see these things. At that point I said to Shri Mataji that "You are the architect of all the industry in Manchester, England and that they used to even have a song that if we use home spun, the factories will stop. Dr. Spiro who was present at the time is from Machester and confirmed that in fact there is no textile industry in Manchester today. Shri Mataji explained that when Her father was jailed for 6 months during the struggle for independence, She knew true poverty for the first time because he was the primary earner. Her father was the only prominent Christian jailed at the time. architects!" and She just smiled. Aldo explained that the house had been

 Issue: 11 & 12 2007 11 The Divine Cool Breeze owned by the Dorias, who were a family associated with shipping who used the palazzo as a country residence and built it in 1641. today in 24 hours. All of the yogis were concerned that the approvals from the authorities had been given based upon the original design, but when they took the new plans in to submit them the original plans had been lost, so they accepted Shri Shri Mataji described how she had added another floor of bedrooms above Hers because of the high ceilings and the strong foundations and was able to create a great deal of extra space. She said that She was surprised that the authorities allowed Her to do this in such a historical Mataji's new design as a replacement and they were allowed to proceed! Saturday Evening At the culmination of the Saturday entertainment evening after seeing the yuva shakti and yogis of America perform and thoroughly enjoying the program, Shri Mataji stated that Her disappointment about America had gone and She felt confident that it would work out! property, but they had recognised Her and were wise. Shri Mataji said that the older houses are unique because they usually have high ceilings, larger windows and doors, and are more elegant in many ways than newer houses. She then explained that Pratishthan had originally been conceived as a series of bungalows on the site in more traditional fashion by yogis, but that when She saw the plans She threw them away and designed the grand and very elegant house we see Let us take this as an implicit promise and become Her instruments for the emancipation of the seekers of America and the complete manifestation of the powers of the Vishuddhi upon this earth! Via USA Sahajnet (The Light of Sahaja Yoga) Contd. from Page No. 6 (and its attendant culture), the probability of success of their acceptance of Sahaja automatically becomes very high. Finally, Shri Mataji said that She will come to America. She said that She will not give up yet. However, She repeatedly asked this question, "You tell Me what it is that I should tell the American public, that will make them accept Sahaja Yoga?" That in essence is the challenge for all of us. Shri Mataji wants to come to America, not necessarily for us but for all those who have yet to see Her light.

 Raksha-Bandhan and Maryadas for Sahaja Yogis Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Hounslow, London 11th Aug. 1984 most of the marriages which were done like that, are 'very' successful than the marriages that were selected and were done. It's very wrong to do such a thing as to arrange your marriage with a Sahaja Yogi by yourself. It will be dangerous. I don't want to say anything; but it wouldn't turn out to be good because it is anti- God activity. Absolutely anti-God. You are supposed to develop your brahmacharya, of Today is a very great day of Raksha Bandhan. So I have to tell you something about Raksha-bandhan. Before that we have to talk about the maryadas (boundaries of pure relationships) that have to be observed by Sahaja Yogis. One of the things I discovered here, in the West, that though we have understood Mooladhara, which is a very important thing, that unless and until we establish our Mooladhara fully we are not going to have speediest ascent. Despite all that, there are lingering things you see around. Like, people start choosing their life- partners in Sahaja Yoga. That is not allowed. That is not allowed. importance the you are supposed to develop your Mooladhara. Instead of that if you start using a Sahaja Yogini or a Sahaja Yogi for the selection of your married life, it's going to be very very troublesome, your Mooladhara is not going to settle down. I mean that's a bad stroke for your development. Because of the background and the kind of the conditioning you have had, you people don't understand that it is important to maintain the purity of the centres. And of every place. So any such relationship in one city is a very very wrong thing. It spoils everyone. To add up to the trouble, it's a habit of people, I have You are not to spoil your Ashrams, your centres - using them for a marriage searching society. You must respect this point, you must respect. If you have to marry, then you can find your life partners 'outside' Sahaja Yoga to begin with But if you want to marry 'in' Sahaja Yoga, then you should not go on searching people in Sahaja Yoga. It is 'very dangerous' thing for Sahaja Yoga itself, and for you people. That is one thing one should 'never' try to do with Sahaja Yoga. For all practical purposes you are brothers and sisters. And that's why I always encouraged marriage between people who belong to another country or another centres. heard, that they try to tease that "you look better together", "you're nice together". They 'tease' and enjoy. It's a kind of a very perverted enjoyment of mooladhara. To tease others, "You are looking very nice with him, and you better marry him." It's a kind of a romantic non-sense. Of course, for all this, yogis - they have to have a Brahmacharya. But even if you can't have brahmacharya. You must As we are now having a big marriage programme, I would say that

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007 13 The Divine Cool Breeze have 'Maryadas.' Not to tease each other and enjoy that kind of a non-sense, when the marriage is not settled; - if marriage is settled it is alright. And this kills completely the joy of marriage. because there is no curiosity left. And many a times | find that 'absurd' relations are much, what is so important? So many are married and what has happened to them. Even' with the Sahaja Yoga marriage, some have failed because of these bad habits. So you 'better' get rid of these bad habits before marriage. Because after marriage also they go on like this, and searching for boys and girls. Because if these habits are not curbed, 'before' marriage, then they go on lingering on. So, one should not try to do all these things before marriage. And I have seen such marriages are never, never successful so far. And even if they are, it is a sort of make-believe thing. It doesn't give real established. Some of them are really no good. And they will really be detrimental and some of them are never established. So if they are established, they are wrong, and if they are not established, they are heartbreaking. So all this kind of thing you should not do. You have got experiences of people who married outside and brought "wonderful' people to Sahaja Yoga. If you can do it, you should do it. If you have to joy, it's a joyless pursuit. May be in one case - may be - successful, that does not mean that you take help from such difficult things, but have 'normal' marriage which marry Sahaja Yogi, you should not marry them at the cost of destroying the purity and the idealism it has. For your own sake, for your 'own' pleasures you should not spoil the name of Sahaja Yoga. are enjoyable, which have created permanent bondages between people. Now we have to understand about the 'Maryadas', about which I have told you before also. The relationships between men and women are pure only if a certain amount of boundaries are kept. Like supposing you have milk in one container and you have got something That is one thing I have seen, so l would say that today, as it is the day of purity between relationships, let us know that you have to treat each other as brothers and sisters. No such play should be followed. Don't allow your mind to drift into this. Because if you allow, then there's no end to it. As it is, you know how hard it is to bring you back to normalcy. else in another container. To keep the purity of one container, you have to keep it in its bounds, in the cup. If you allow them to mix up, if they fall together and mix up, then there is no purity left. It's a simple thing like that. One should understand. That we have to understand When Christ had said, "Thou shalt not have adulterous eyes", He did not say it because it was not practical. It is quite practical for Sahaja Yogis. And there is nothing to worry about marriages so that how to keep our relationships proper in respect to eacn other's modesty and chastity. Now, for example, there is a girl

 14 Issue: 11 & 12 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze "Mother we want to marry". Now what anm I to say? "Alright, marry." But it creates a problem for me, for the rest of the people. They will say, "Alright. If he has married a girl who is twenty years younger, why not I marry a girl who is thirty years younger?" who is younger to you. You must keep al the distance from such a person. If she is much older than you, then it's alright; you can talk, laugh, joke, she's 'much' older than you. But normally with a girl who is younger to you, even 'much'younger, you should try to keep away, after all if she is a young girl; not with the children, but still. - You must learn these things: how to maintain a distance. You must understand my problems. If you ask me something, "Mother, should I do it ?" You really force me into it; I say, "Yes". Because I can't be very strict with you, because 1 am your Mother. But you should be sensible what to ask me, how far to go. This is the "biggest' Maryada you have to learn. Now, there is a man, who's younger to you. Then you 'must not' have any funny ideas about sucha person - is absolutely absurd. If some gentleman is younger to you, it is only in perversion you do such things. See, you should not have any funny ideas about that person. It's only done when there are emergencies, when there is no possibility of a marriage, when there are so many women or so many men - or under perverted conditions. We don't have; none of these conditions are here, so we have to behave like normal people.And when the proper atmosphere is given to us, why not make use of it? Why should we create absurd things? Then they come out saying to me, "Mother, we have decided to marry; let us marry.'. I have to say, 'yes.' To many things I don't want to say 'yes', but I have to say "yes,'. That creates a very bad precedent. 'May be' that in certain cases, as an exceptional case, I might have chosen somebody to Suddenly you will come, "Mother should I sit here ?" What do I say? "Should I make this gentleman sit here ?" What should I say ?- "Alright". You 'yourself should not ask such a question. Because sometimes you give undue importance to somebody, who is "my brother," who is "my sister," - something.And make that person sit on my head. Sometimes you telephone to me, "Mother she would like to talk to you". Who is she ? Is she alright ? Should we take her to Mother ? Is she capable of talking to Mother ? What is her condition ? Will she trouble Mother ? - Nobody thinks about it. So you must first establish your relationship with me on proper understanding that you should not try to trouble me ! - But this is something not yet in my hands. I think because people do not understand what they are doing. marry like that. But that does not mean 'you' should take things into your hands and just start doing things like that, so that I will have problems later. Because once you do that, everybody starts doing it. It's a kind of an aggressiveness, that you arrange something, come to me, say, So first try to see that you don't take advantage of me. And second thing, you don't bring people to me who do not

 15 Issue: 11 & 12 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze we will do this", then what am I to say ?"Alright, go ahead". If it pleases me l will just spontaneously say, "Alright, it pleases me. Go ahead with it". deserve it. There is no need to waste my time with them. I have so much things to be done; so many ideas to be formulated. I have to work so hard. You know, I am working harder than any one of you, those who are doing Sahaja Yoga. And at this age if you try to trouble me like that I don't know that how to tell you that you do not trouble me. In the 'presence' of the person you will come, you will bring the person on my head," Oh, that person has come from Timbuktu, and I have brought her". Just you do it. It is aggressiveness only. Please do not try to do that. This is the wrong thing to do. Like that so many things are there that people just try to force on me and I say, "Yes". But I am very cunning and clever in that, because I tell in a way that you realise that it is not joy-giving. Alright. Now the second thing is that Maryadas of relationships between you, is relationship of 'Pure' Love. Of Purity. Unless and until you develop 'pure' relationship, you are going to be ruined. See, this finger has to have pure relationship with the hand. Supposing if this finger has some dirty feelings about So the Maryadas are to be established first with me; that understanding that you should not try to this hand, it may dirty it. It may spoil it. In trouble me 'at all'. the same way we must have 'extremely pure'relationship with each other. Means we should try to give our heart to another person without any lust or greed in it, - that, we should try to do. Try to help each other. Secondly, you should try to please me by being good people. I hear that somebody is trying to be very egoistical. He does not even put on my tapes, he just gives his own lectures. This kind of a thing is very 'surprising'; how can people do like that? Try to bring down your egos, super-egos. You must Learn to 'please I find when they feel in a lusty way, or a greedy way attached to others - this is not for the Sahaja Yogis, but non Sahaja Yogis - they get so much interested in that me (Prasanna bhava He Devi, Prasanna bhava.) If you cannot make the Devi Prasanna (pleased), what will be your achievement? As Rustom says, I am Mahamaya. Alright. But don't you know that I am that ? So try to keep to it. And keep that understanding that if we have to grow, we 'must' have 'proper' relationship with Mother. And we must understand what would displease Her the 'most'. "Am I pleasing Her by doing this ?" But if you force me; "If it pleases You person. It's a very 'baser' way of attachment.. But in Sahaja Yoga, your attachment is with your Spirit, your Atma. And Atma is the 'purest form of our being. We have to keep it absolutely pure. And then the enjoyment is higher than any romance, any marriage, any worldly thing. It's the highest and the top-most. First achieve that. First of all you should 'arise' and 'achieve' that. 'Achieve' that purity.

 16 Issue: 11 & 12 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze towards women, how to be dignified. That is very important. I have seen one lady going from England to India. And she just went and put a big slap on the back of Mr. Modi "HELLO" Modi, how are you ?" And Modi got such a shock ! She did not mean; she was innocent, but that's not the way in Sahaja Yoga we are going to behave. Like some sort of a debonair or some sort of a fantastic - what you call Now the relationship between men and women. I have told you that you should not try to enter into any bedroom, where the ladies are. It's not proper. Nor the women should enter into men's thing. But it is very common. Women should not behave in the way other women behave. Like I was told in a wedding in Maharashtra that the women went and took out all their clothes. I mean that is not England, they got a shock, you know. Some of them lost their appetite for 3-4 days. They have never seen such women in their lifetime. They went and took out their clothes suddenly all of them. I mean they were shocked, so much shocked that 3-4 days they did not eat their food. So you had no business to shock them also, and beautiful. Because if you go to somebody's country, you must know in what way they live. It's never done. Nobody becomes nude like that. And 20 girls, if they suddenly become nude like that, what will happen? modern woman. One must understand one must have a sense of shame; how do you talk. Even with me they will talk with a hand like that "MOTHER! you see this thing is happening." But there's no need to do all that, you see. Talk in a way that is gentle The other dayI met a very nice taxi fellow. And I tell you, his gestures and things were 'so' beautiful, 'immediately I said he is a realised soul ! He would not say anything without putting his hand like this, and with his eyes down below. He would not say something like that, nothing of the kind. So sweet he was, his whole gesture. He is an Englishman ! Brought up and bred here. Not a single vulgar word he said. Like one of your players was so stupid. When Princess Anne went to meet him he said all kinds of things, you see. It's kind of an ego, or stupidity-I don't know. So the sense of shame must be developed. Among men and women. It looks nice, it looks beautiful. It gives you an additional charm. If you have the sense of shame, a little bashfulness. See your Princess of Wales is regarded as something beautiful. She is bashful! Her bashfulness is so natural. That bashfulness is not there, like a - I don't know what animal does that, but somebody who has no shame. I mean I just don't know which one is that. Everybody has a sense of shame even animals. So why not we have that sense of shame; how to behave Because, how you talk, how you speak, everything should be saintly. You are 'saints' now! Do you realize? You are all 'saints'. So how you behave with dignity towards each other, how you respect their

 17 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze elders. But when the leader also is not dignity, how you live, is 'very' important. And that you should try to maintain in a way that looks like a 'saintly' behaviour. You have to be a 'saint' ! And that is not difficult for you, to take to that, that you behave in a manner that you are saints. respected, what is the question of it ?1 have seen little boys calling big, married people with 3-4 children, by name. That's not our style. You should never do it. I saw this - even my husband's office has this problem. Because when I came, you see, - they always called you by name. - Tom. This is very important. It would be killing, absolutely killing Sahaja Yoga, it He's such a big man, he's called as Tom you do not keep your Maryadas. That one of the 'Most' essential things one has to understand. I have told you again and again how you dress up, how you bear yourself up, how you talk, how you listen So we could not understand why is it like to others more than you talk yourself, how you become non-aggressive, - is the best way to impress people and to express Sahaja Yoga. I tell you, as it is people have We 'must' respect. We 'must' respect started saying, "They are very beautiful people, you can see they are very beautiful. You can see they are very different type. It's something different. They are something great."- People have "started' saying that. But 'still' we lack in certain things, like we start going on a plane which is not suitable to our stature, children, you see, I am their Mother. But to our dignity, to our position as saints. We are all prophets, and prophets have to behave like prophets. They can not behave like cheap-type people. So, in that we have to understand the Maryadas. and all that. So C.P. looked at it. . And we always call them -even the drivers, we call them by the name Mr.-, you see. this. You see, it being 'democratic' or something. You see that's how you become 'demonocratic'. each other, must call them by higher names. Specially when in a meeting where there are people, you should call them - each other, even your friends - by Mr. so and so. It's alright for me to call you. It would look very funny if I call Mr. Brown or Mr. Reeves; because they are my for 'you' because you are equal, at least call them Mr. - And say something in a way which is beautiful. Like the English language has many words as "please", "thank you"-All these must be used 'profusely. "Profusely'. We are going 'back' a little bit. We are now becoming much more modern. That, we should give up and become less modern and more elevating. Now the whole idea of this Maryada is such that when you have called somebody as a sister or a brother then it is not only lipservice, "You are my sister". It is Now the Maryada to your leader also; you should be respectful. I have seen that nobody calls any body - even the children will call somebody, say, elderly person also - never they, say, call them uncle or anything like that; - it's a wrong thing. You must teach your children to call elders by the name as brother or uncle or someone. Give some respect to the

 18 Issue: 11 & 12 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze people don't have to solve. And don't interfere with their married life. Let them something 'innate', and very deep. You have to develop that feeling of a sister. be as they are, I will find out how they are, I will try to help them. But it's 'very' wrong to play with their married life or with their marriage problems, and suddenly jump on somebody, - is a very wrong thing. Which is very common here. A woman is in distress, you see, a man will come to help her. Even if she is married, he will elope with her. This is how he comes to help her in the distress. - To create another distress for her. So this is how one should understand that this kind of a cheap heart giving business is not for Sahaja Yoga. Because that's how your sublimity will go up, your left-Vishuddhi will improve, your Vishnumaya will be satisfied. If you call somebody a sister, the sisterly and daughterly relationships, and motherly relationships, always bring down the so-called ego, which is hiding in the left Vishuddhi. So try to be kind and gentle with the person whom you call the sister. Stand by her. Look after her. If somebody you call your brother, you have to pray for his protection; then you must know that you have a right to ask him for 'his' protection also. But you must also 'give' something to him, and you must try to look after him, welcome him to your house, and treat him as a part and parcel of your being, beçause he is 'very much' near to you because he is your brother, and he's very much closer to you. In our heart resides the Spirit. We are dignified people, and in that dignity, we have to rise, and live with that dignity. Not to cheaply allow the Spirit to be insulted or dominated or subjugated to anyone'. Now the relationship with children also one should understand. I have seen some people have a habit of getting a child very much closer, and pampering them, "Oh! this child is this thing", "Oh I that child..." Let the parents handle the child, 'you' just don't interfere with other's children. Don't interfere much with them. If you find any child is such and such, inform me, I will cure the child. But if a child is being spoilt by you, it's the worst thing to do-to harm that child, is to spoil. But such a brother should not try to dominate the wife, - this is the Maryada, again. Like somebody is very friendly with the brother. Ora lady is friendly as a sister, then she should not try to put a wedge between husband and wife. That is the "worst' thing to do, is to put a wedge between husband and wife. Anybody who tries to do that must know that he is a mean person. One should 'never'try to put a wedge between husband and wife. Children here are 'very' clever and intelligent, you must know. They are 'very good' at manipulating. They will, because they are extremely precocious. They are realised souls, they are born in this country. What a combination !At that time I know there are problems between husband and wife, I will put them right. But you don't try to put any wedge between them. And don't try to create a problem. If it is problematic, it is for 'me' to solve, you

 Issue: I & 12-2007 19 The Divine Cool Breeze you should be 'very' careful as to their training. whom you think can look after, to look after - and see that the child is put righ "Nip in the bud" is the best way, because we don't From the first five years all the parents should be 'extremely' strict with children. 'Extremely strict'. Don't allow them to overpower you or manipulate you. It's "very' important. If you allow them to overpower you or to dominate you, they will sit on your head. Tell them not to do like that. And one day you will come and say "Mother, what to do, these are realised souls and you see we were want to have children who are spoilt, who are spoiling other children, nor we want children who are subjected to such children. So, you can have proper children, well-behaved children, sensible, wise children. Because they can really be a drag on you, on me, on everyone, if you do not properly bring them up. And they are our liabilities, we have to look after them. looking after them." They are not deities. They are not deities to be worshipped. They are 'only' realised souls. So keep them at that point. And you are my trustees of these children. And if you spoil them, it is 'you' who will he held responsible. You have no business to spoil the lives of these children as Sahaja Yogis, and their chances of ascent. So if they are born- realised, they are not deities; this you must understand. They are not 'beyond' corruption, they are not beyond all kinds of things So the relationship between father and children, mother and children, is important. Actually the mother should look after the child much more. And the child must respect; father should never scold the mother in the presence of the child. That's one thing one must understand. That if the father starts scolding the mother in the presence of the child, the child will have no respect for the mother. But the respect must be maintained, because if the wife respects the husband then the child will know how to respect her and the husband too. So the whole thing is built up like that. Is a kind of a pattern for the children to follow. One should not try to dominate the husband, at least in the So this if you understand, this little point, that dealing with your children, you have to be 'really' strict. They must know how to meditate, they must know how to pray, they must know how to respect; and all the good things you must teach your children - and don't allow them to sit on presence of children. That's very wrong. Because then the children learn that trick and they start dominating 'you. So it flows from you to children. So try to see, if you have to do anything then you do it yourself. And respect the husband and in a way that is very obvious to the child that the father your head. Many people have ruined the lives of their children like this. Now will you see such child is brought into proper level? If the child is trying to take liberties with you, and cheeky, and does not listen, please give that child to some other Sahaja Yogi, is respected by..nother. And they are just like monkeys.

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007 20 The Divine Cool Breeze In money matters also, I have seen allow them to behave in a particular that peopie should be very-very sensible and should have proper Maryadas. Now, you put a good pattern of behaviour, they with me, whatever Maryadas you want to keep, you must understand! It is very embarrassing to talk about it. But so far, as you know, I had to shell-out lot of money to manage many funds, many things.. And last time also we had many people who The way you behave, they behave. So you manner, they will behave that way. But if will imbibe it. The other day I was thinking, how Indian children are so obedient, so sensible. They will never ask for it, "I want this, I want that". They never manipulate. What happens? What happens, how do they do it ? The reason is, I think, the good pattern in the house. Everybody knows whom to respect, how to respect. how to came to eat-does not matter. At the time, now, when we are talking about Maryadas, we must know that in any case Mother should not be made to pay any more. Because we are so many, we should try to manage, it possible. Like yesterday, I had a person from BBC, and he said, "It is 'wrong' of you, not to take any money from them." | said where is the money ! No question of taking, I have to pay myself ! I said it is so invaluable that how can you charge for it ? They are not charged for it, it is very invaluable. The Spirit is very invaluable, and you cannot charge for it. So he was insisting. I mean, he took half an hour on this subject only. He said, "This Anglo- Saxon brain would not understand unless behave. The relationship in Sahaja Yoga has to be even more than this, much more subtler. For example, if - this I have said before also - if we are in a room try to give another person always try to do 'for' them. If you have to pay, better pay yourself. Not that wait for another person. Try to do it yourself. Run 'forward' to do it. You see, if someone is carrying the luggage, 'you' run, 'you' do it. That is the way a Sahaja Yogi should be. Mostly, children are like that; they will say. "T will get it; 'I' will do it; T will receive." May be ego, you might call it, but whatever it is, but that is the sign you all have to achieve by organising a proper type of an image for the 'whole society'. That if somebody needs something, you run; "You want water, alright ..", "you want something, you take mine". Food also, same thing. First let other's have, not that you should first have anything. How you eat your food is very important, everything is very important for the children to see, and to behave like that. and until you make it a little more money- oriented or something. I said, "I can not. Tell me how much is to be paid." Just to shut him down, I said, "What about Christ ? How much money did 'He' take ? By God's grace I am quite well off and I really do not need either. But He 'needed' still Henever took any money from anyone Then he kept quiet. But this is, you see' That people think that you are getting it easy, cheap and that is why you want to take advantage, - which is wrong. You must 'respect'. You must respect and

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007 21 The Divine Cool Breeze in a person who is helped by us and his is challenged, and he tries to behave understand, that it is 'never' good to take any advantage of it. ego in a manner, which was never known before. And he starts behaving in such a 'funny' manner that he does not talk to anyone, he keeps out and he becomes mad, which is ego. So, his ego is hurt. There's nothing to feel hurt. Because if you On the contrary, whenever it is possible you should try to do whatever is possible for Sahaja Yoga., It is very important. Try to surrender. Not that I will take any money from you; you know that, I do not want any money or anything. But surrender' yourself absolutely to Sahaja Yoga. That is the best way people have risen and have done so well. have no money and if it is one part and one body, if somebody's helping you out, does not matter. You can help somebody else, when you are well off. But when it comes to 'you', you give up. So it's a very absurd type of a behaviour of one individual or two or three or may be five Now the relationship among yourselves, among different groups, among different nations. We should try to help people. Supposing there is a couple now, wants to go to India to get married. Now if they do not have money, of course I am there. I said, "Alright they need not pay any money, I will pay for them". But Warren has put down his foot, he says, or ten. Doesn't matter. But still we must not forget that we have to 'help". We have to help as many as possible. And we must try to do, whatever is possible for us, for others. This is important. If we cannot do for a group, like "Why not the people or the centre help them out, for the time being ?" You see because, now supposing they have helped somebody, he had no money. He went to India, he got married and then he got lost. See, he misbehaved, in the sense, that he does not talk to anyone, he thinks no end of himself. Then he started Sahaja Yogis, whom are we going to help? So we have to give that help. Now, in Sahaja Yoga itself, on the subtle basis we should not try to judge anybody's vibrations. It is very common in people; "Oh, you are caught-up on your let Agnya". "Oh you have got this wrong, let me clear you out". You sit down. Morning till evening, without meditating, they are clearing each other's chakras and catching on yourself. It's an absolutely wrong idea. 'Everybody', individually, should sit before the photograph get the vibrations. 'Every' morning, there should be a discipline. You must know that the system of Sahaja Yoga has worked out this way that I have given you realization just to say that "Let your light be behaving in a funny manner. So a kind of a feeling came into their mind that "Why should we do it ? You see, you do it for somebody, he behaved like that. If you try to help somebody... Is this a natural reaction that if you try to do something for someone then people try to misbehave?" That's not so. Must be one person has done it, that does not mean that everybody has done it. That's what it is. They say there's a kind of a barrier built

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007 22 The Divine Cool Breeze It is not so. You are my hands. Now, supposing, my hands have to lift this, I should say that "Nirmala will do it." Now which is Nirmala ?- These hands are the Nirmala at this point! enlightened." Now you have to see your lamp, it's clean or not; - only possible when the light is enlightened. See your lamp, if it is enlightened or not. See, if somebody is over-aggressive, then its alright, you make a joint attack on that person. And tell-off that person. Or there are leaders who will do it. But everybody must not judge others. You better judge yourself, cleanse yourself, look after yourself. And also try to see how your lamp is. Is it clean ? Mother has given us the light to see; and why not see ? So, many people drift like that, so to Sahaja Yoga also your attitude should be of respect. You should not try to put yourself into bandhan before others, you should not try to do these things, but in a dignified way you should respect Sahaja Yoga.And foremosť of all, to Sahaja Yoga your relationship should be that you should 'know' "Sahaja Yoga" what it is." Otherwise every time if you have to talk So if you work it out on these lines, you will go 'very' fast. And you have to, now, perfect yourself. We have so many Sahaja Yogis, but how many are perfect. This is the point. about Sahaja, Gavin must come or somebody. Why? Gavin did not know a word about Sahaja Yoga, he did not know a word about Indian mythology, he did not know'anything', he did not know what is Now your relationship to Sahaja Yoga is also very important. There's a Maryada about it very much. Sahaja yoga should not be taken for granted. Anybody Realization. He studied. He even studied Sanskrit. Like many of you have done it. But 'all' of you, 'one and all', should who thinks he has got realisation and now he is sitting on top of the world - is not so. You must work it out, you have to have discipline. The same gentleman the BBC fellow - was saying that it was before, for years together you had to live in celibacy and wash - and sweep steps of the temple and do all kinds of things, work hard, do this do that, - and then they would raise it to one chakra. I said, "Now we do it the other way round". First build the dome, and then the foundation. Sahaja Yoga is like that. So that, with the dome you understand you are protected, you are looked after. But people take for granted. Like : "Mother will do it." "Leave it to Mother." No. become a big pandit. But you get lost in your marriage problems. Then your children's problems. Then my mother, then my sister. I mean it will take too much time for you. First of all you must see, I am a Sahaja Yogi. let me get to work.' And it creates problems for us also. Because your wife will sue you, your children will come round, this that. You should say "I have nothing to do, I am going to study Sahaja Yoga." I was surprised that many people have taken "Advent" just like as a Bible. Just as a Bible. They 'never' read it. I was surprised that some people do not know what I have written in the Advent.

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007 23 The Divine Cool Breeze "But that detachment is not there ! Not at all a detachment. And it is something surprising, that if you have to go to Himalayas and make insurance policy; then what's the use of coming to Sahaja Yoga ? It is as absurd as that ! We are writing two insurance policies, that, "I have gone to Himalayas, if I die, give my property to this one. If I don't die, I will come back after that"...! -And nicely So it's like the Jews, you see, having a Golden Bible tied up here. They keep the "Advent" in a very good cover near the photograph, worship it, - finished. And the knowledge goes into them !" You 'must read' some chapters-at least of "Advent", if not anything else. There are so many books you can read. I have told you. Try to make your own library. Try to improve on it. 'Everybody packing up in a nice plastic bag so that must try to get perfection. Perfectionism. You should never be a liability on Sahaja Yoga, but a 'great asset of Sahaja Yoga. ice does not spoil it ! It's as absurd as that ! So you should not have anything. Now some people have a habit That's what everybody should try to be: That, 'your' problems I will solve. But you solve your ascent. That is very important. You 'must' ascend' otherwise whatever problems I solve, you get into another problem, then you get into another problem. "Oh, I will get a house for myself. Get my wife there, children there." Finished-All such people, for a change, should leave their houses, come to Ashram, put some other people in their house. Because they are getting attached, you see, how will you get detached? Is there any way out ? Because that is very important in Sahaja Yoga: "Unless and until you are detached, you cannot ascend." Supposing you have all the tentacles down here on the Mother Earth, and you say "Let this plane fly"- how will it move? So those people who have houses of their own, or buildings of their Now the relationship, say, you have anAshram. Somebody has bought it. Now nobody should think that "this is my house." Now this is the best way to get out of this idea of possession. Because thenI trouble you; that's the place where Mahamaya plays. If you say, "This is my house"-then you will have it!And you will have it for ever. So such things you should 'never' develop, the feeling that this (is my house)." Now I have seen people going to an Ashram. And then they think this is their house. They live there. They manipulate all the money that they save and this and that, and develop this, want to make everything comfortable. They never think: "This is not my Ashram, I am doing it becausel am a Sahaja Yogi, This is the Ashram of Mother. I have to do it own or anything flats -'should' give up their houses, not to be that comfortable; get out of it. Ask some other people to shift, and you shift to the Ashram. Go on shifting, training your mind to shift, to live with everyone, to be able to share and to do things. Ihave changed 40 houses after my marriage. You can imagine ! And the kind of a house I have to carry on with is a very multipurpose house. And I have changed

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007 24 The Divine Cool Breeze so far forty houses, and if I change now this house, it will be the forty-first. You can imagine, I have been married forty years and forty houses I have changed. So the relationship of purity must be understood, in everything. "Is it 'pure' relationship? Am I living in this Ashram in 'pure'relationship? Because this is a house that is a house that is giving me comfort that's why I am living in this house, or am I just living here, just because it is an abode, I am here today, and I will be there tomorrow?." You will be amazed you will enjoy 'every' part of life. unity for purity, no use. So this light should give you complete wisdom that you enjoy a 'pure' good life. You are married; alright, you have life of enjoyment with your wife - that Thave already described to you. And with your wife how to behave also I have described many a times, Or with your husband. But when it comes to others, you should have absolutely 'Pure' relationship of no exploitation. Even there are flirting exploitations as the same as money exploitations. Here if you exploit somebody by money it's called a 'Thug' But flirting is not called anything. I think it is a much worse crime according to Christ. So you have to be careful on this point, and understand that relationship with each other has to be pure. Now there are people who have, say, horrible wives or horrible husbands. I don't mind, they can give them up. If they are 'absolutely impossible, if they are spoiling their purity, if they are torturing their lives, then the best is to get rid of them. I don't mind. Because if they are 'so' bad that you cannot use them - just like this body, if it is so bad, it's better to give up and die, so that let that relationship die out. But that death should come to you as a very forceful help, otherwise after that if you become a nervous personality, what's the use? "As soon as' you are attached, you are doomed. It's a 'headache', to be attached to some one. Then you hanker: "My wife has not arrived. Oh God, what to do now. I must telephone to her, get her here". But if you are detached, "What's it, she'll come in time." Not only that, but you will enjoy her company; otherwise you will shout at her:" Why did not you come in time, I was waiting for you." Then why were you waiting to scold her, and shout at her and spoil all the relationship? Just see, the absurdity of the whole thing is the 'attachment.' You should get completely "DETACHED' about everything and you will enjoy, just ENJOY! But in that also, one has to judge you are really enjoying or you are just making a drama out of it. Try to be sincere. PURITY is brought forth by SlINCERITY. If you are not sincere to yourself and to others, you can not, be pure. And purity is the 'main' thing you have to achieve in Sahaja Yoga, apart from the unity, which I have given you. But if you do not use this So what you have to do after such a thing has happened, is to solve all your problems solve your divorce problems, solve your court problems, then come to Sahaja Yoga. We do not want to get involved into this sort of a thing 'at all' that

 (Issue: 11 & 12 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze T 25 the one which surrounds Shri Krishna; and She was born as Draupadi who, you know, was later humiliated by Duryodhana and it was Shri Krishna who came and we have broken any family or anything. If you cannot carry on with your wife, Sahaja Yoga should not be any excuse. Because 'you' can not carry on with your wife, you should have this thing - go out of Sahaja Yoga, do what you like with your wife, finish it off once for all. And you should tell her,"l am no more a Sahaja Yogi." Get it out, and then' come to Sahaja Yoga. But by coming to Sahaja Yoga you will be 'really' troubling me too much. helped her. So it's a very sweet relationship of purity, of help. A very delicate relationship is to be maintained of a brother and a sister. And that is a special relationship. Today, those who want to tie the Rakhis to a sister should tie today before me, it will be a good idea. It is a greater relationship than any other relationship Because here somebody is your 'own' sister, is alright. But if she is not your own sister you should know that you all are So I have to make a humble request to you, that if you have any such problem, do not allow any child who is younger thana proper age- sixteen years - to be kept in the Ashram without taking a full permission, 'written' permission from the parents. Or a wife who has made problems with the husband, should 'not' be allowed to come and stay in the Ashram with the children. We are not responsible for all kinds of problems. born of 'One' Mother. So the brother and sister relationship should be alright. In that also one should not have preferences Because some would like to have a rich sister! Or some sort of a nonsense like that. Or somebody would like to have the most miserable one. This Then people who are sick or mentally deranged should not be kept in the Ashram. That is also quite a 'sympathetic' attitude of so many Sahaja Yogis. Ashram is for the 'best' people, not for the lunatics. So please do not get such people who are no good. We do not want such people to come in the Ashram who for people, something like that could be are going to ruin the reputation of the Ashram. Now, brother sister relationship tie the things. Which ever way you like you - the relationship of Vishnumaya is, that choose it. But I have got some nice Rakhis Vishnumaya is the one who is the Sister, for you; that should be done today. And I Sister of Shri Krishna. She is the one who is all but a relationship with a person with whom you would like to be happy, you should tie the Rakhi. And if there is anybody left out, I would say that best thing would be to have your lucky dips. I think done so that they choose their sisters and will be very happy. And then we will do this little havana for the Vishnumaya. announced the Coming of Shri Krishna. She is the one who sacrificed her life to save Shri Krishna's life. Vishnumaya is May God Bless you

 When the Kundalini Rises, It Makes Sounds Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi (London-14.10.1978) When the kundalini rises it makes sounds and the sounds that are heard At the Vishudhi, where there are sixteen petels, it makes the sounds of all the vowels: in the different chakras can be pronounced in the following way :- GA, Aa, E, Ee, U, Oo, Ree, Lru, Lroo, É, Ai, O, Au, Am, Áha. These pronuciations are being used in the phonetic language of DEVA NAGARI, which means the language spoken by the Devas. अ आ इ ई उ ऊ त् ऋ लू लू ए ऐ ओ औ अं अः At the Agya Chakra it makes At the Mooladhara where there Ha -5, Ksh -8T are four petals the sounds are (व-va, श-sha, ष-sh, स-sa). Out of which last ( and #) Sh and Sa sounds are very close but the difference is when the snake At the Sahastrara one becomes Thoughtless and no sound is made, but the pure 'Ana-Hata' (3Ea) meaning the throbbing in the purest form - as in the heart is of Lap-Tap, Lap-Tap, Lap-Tap (लप-टप, लप-टप, लप-टप,) hisses it makes this (#) sa, the third sound. So Va, Sha, Sh, Sa (व, श, ष, स) At the Swadhishthana where When, all these sounds are sounded together and pass through the spiral of the body, if the body is made a conch, the sound that comes out of this synthesis is...o...000. Like the seven colours of the sun ultimately become white rays or you can say the golden colour rays. there are six petals it makes six sounds- Ba, Bha, Ma, Ya, Ra, La (ब, भ, म, य, र, ल) • Manipur- It has ten petals. It makes the sounds Da, Dh, Na (UT), Ta, Tha, Da, Dha, Na, Pa, Pha (ड, ढ, ण, त, थ, द, ध, • There are three Granthis (T-efi) means the knots-The Brahma Granthi (ब्रह्मग्रन्थी) The Vishnu Granthi (विष्णु ग्रन्थी) and the Rudra Granthi (hget). With न, प फ) • At Anahata there are twelve petals. It makes the sounds : Ka, Kha, Ga, Gh, Ng, Ch, Chh, Ja, Jha, Yan, Ta, Tha. (क, ख, ग, घ, ड०, च, छ, ज, झ, अ ट ठ) Agni, means fire (31f) when the Brahma Granthi meets, between the Kundalini, Chakra, Mooldhara Swadhishthana means Mooladhara and the

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007 27, The Divine Cool Breeze Chakra, Mooldhara and Swadhishtana Chakra then Agni-Brahma Granthi is established (अग्नि बरह्मग्रन्थी) Anahata. Chakra, Vishudhi Chakra, Lambika Chakra, this is also called Hamsa Chakra, Agya Chakra. Between Agya Chakra and Shasrara there are two other sub chakras Vishnu Granthi (विष्णु ग्रन्थी) when mixes up with the Surya (), that is between Nabhi and the Hridaya Chakra (नाभी, हृदय) Surya-Vishnu Granthi (सूर्य-विष्णु ग्रन्थी) is 'established. When Vishudhi and Agnya auras meet then Chandra Rudra Granthi (चन्द्र-रुद्र ग्रन्थी) is established. known as Nada Bindu (नॉद बिन्दु), So we have: 1. Mooldhara (मूलाधार) (स्वाधिष्ठान ) 2. Swadhishthana (मणिपुर) 3. Manipur 4. Anahat (अनाहत) • Altogether there are fourteen Nadis (ifsai). The Name are: 5. Vishudhi (विशुद्धि) Lambika (Hamsa) (लम्बिका)। 6. (अलम्बुसी) 1. Alambusi 7. Agya (आज्ञा) 2. Kuhulon कुहू) 3. Yashodhari (यशोधरी) (नॉद) 8. Nada (बिन्दु) 9. Bindu 4. Varuna (वरुणा) (सहस्रार) 10. Sahasrara (हस्तजिह्वा) 5. Hastajihva Apart from that there are nine chakras on the sides, like Shri Lalita and 6. Yashasavati (यशस्वती) (अश्विनी) 7. Ashwani T) they have different (a (गान्धारी) 8. Gandhari Yoginis, means the powers, the Shaktis guiding those Nine Shakti Pithas (V or you can call them as Avarak Nama Chakra (आवरक नाम चक्र) (उषा) 9. Usha (शह्खिनी) 10. Shankhini 11. Saraswati (सरस्वती) (a) The first one is Shri Lalita, The goddess Shri Lalita, which is the Goddess of beauty; She is the joy giving, Sarvanandamaya (aaa), gives the joy from everything. In every created world, in every particle, in every form, there is a power which gives us joy. This power is the joy, is the power of Shri Lalita. She is called as Maha Tripura Sundari (ईड़़ा) 12. Ida (पिंगला) 13. Pingla 14. Sushumna (सुषुम्ना) Apart from two chakras which are Surya and Chandra (, a), there are nine other chakras : Mooldhara Chakra, Swadishthana Chakra, Manipur Chakra,

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze 28 2. Kameshwari (कामेश्वरी) which (महात्रिपुर सुन्दरी), excities. Para-Para Atirahasya Yogini (T परा अतिरहस्यायोगिनी) means Para-Para- Ati-Rahasya, परा- परा अतिरहस्या one who knows the secrets. The Para, 'Par' means the one that is beyond of the beyond; the secrets of that area, the one who knows is Shri Lalita, who is the yogini. 3. Modini (Hife) which makes you happy. 4. Vimla (fauet) which makes you clean. 5. Aruna (3TRUI) which gives you colour on the face. 6. Jayini (afa which gives you a feeling of victory. At this stage She is Bindu- Saryangandamayi (बिन्दुस्वानन्दमयी). She is the dot, which is joy giving. 7. Sarveshi (Hayit) which connects you with every one. (b) Second power or (3raRUT) Avaran is the enclosure, is like a triangle. She is Sarva-Siddhi-Prada (Hd f She is the one who gives all the Siddhis (fafgat). She has got three sides. She is called as Tripuramba (f , Kameshwari ( कामेश्वरी), Buddheshwari (बुद्धेश्वरी), Bhag Malini ( भगमालिनी ) are the three yoginis. Kaulini (कौलिनी) is the one which 8. gives you boons. (d) The fourth Enclosure is called Antardashar (अन्तर्दशार ). The Chakra of this enclosure is called as Sarva Raksha Kar (Ha T&ITCH)- the one that protects. The goodess is called as Tripur- Malini ( त्रिपुर मालिनी ). (c) Third one is called as Ashtaar Sarva Rog Hara (अष्टार सर्व रोगहर). This is another enclosure. The name of the goddess is Tripursiddha, Ati Rahasaya (त्रिपुर सिद्धा, अति रहस्या), meaning this goddess knows the deep screts of all the siddhis. The Chakra is called as Sarva The Powers Are :- the one which Sarvagnya ( is all knowing. 1. Sarva Shakti (सर्वशक्ति)- is all Rog Hara (सर्व रोगहर) and Enclosure is called Ashtaar (3). powerful. Sarva Aishwarya Prada (Haya- Ya1)- giver of all the bounties. 3. The eight powers are called as Vagdevta (वाग्देवता) means the power of the speech: First is: Sarvagyanmai (सर्वज्ञानमयी)- knower of all the knowledge. 4. 1. Vashini (a ) means which 5. Sarva Vyadhi Vinashini (Hd aiAttracts 2.

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze 29 Sarva Mangala Karini ( ae chifu)- She is the one who gives all that is auspicious. व्याधिविनाशिनी)-the destroyer of all 4. the diseases. 6. Sarvadhar Swaroopa (ate Sarva Kama Prada (सर्वकामप्रदा)- the one who gives all our desires. the support of all. ta 5. Sarva Pap Hara (सर्व पाप हरा)- the destroyer of all the sins. 7. 6. Sarva Dukh Vimochini ( विमोचिनी)- the one who is destroyer of all our pains. 8. Sarvanandmayi ( सर्वानन्दमयी)- The one who makes every one joyous. 7. Sarva Mrityu Shamani (d YIH)- the one who pacifies the 9. Sarva Raksha Swaroopini ( रक्षा स्वरूपिणी) - the one who protects all of them. death. Sarva Vighna Nivarini (a fa निवारिणी)- She is the one who is 8. 10. Sarvpekshit Phala Prada (सर्वपेक्षित फलप्रदा)- the giver of all the phalas means-fruits, rewards. the remover of all these hurdles. Sarvanga Sundari (सर्वांग सुन्दरी)- the one who makes every side of life happy. 9. (e) The fifth enclosure is called Bahir- deshar-Sarvartha-Sadhaka (afec सर्वाथ साधक). 10. Sarva Saubhagya Dayini ( सौभाग्य दायिनी)- the one who is the giver of good fortunes. Bahir Dashar (बहिर्दशार) is the name of the enclosure and Sarvartha Sadhak (सर्वार्थ साधक) is the Chakra's Name. (f) The sixth enclosure is know as Chaturdashar Sarva Saubhagya (चतुर्दशा सर्व सौभाग्य). Tripura-Shri (त्रिपुराश्री) is the name of Goddess. Dinige She has powers :- Tripur Vasini ( त्रिपुरवासिनी) is the name 1. Sarva Siddhi Prada (सर्व सिद्धिप्रद)- She gives all the siddhis. of Goddess. Chaturdashar (aadyr) is the name of Sampat 2. Sarva Prada the enclosure. (सर्वसम्पत्प्रदा)-She is the one, giver And the Chakra's name is Sarva of all wealth. Saubhagya Dayaka. (सर्व सौभाग्य दायकः) Sarva Priyankari (सर्व प्रियंकारी)- 3. The Goddess's name is Tripur-vasini (त्रिपुरवासिनी). She is the one who is beloved of all.

 Issue: 11 & 12 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze 30 The Powers Are: destroys all the dualities of life. 1. Sarva Sankshobhini (a संक्षोभिणी)- the one who burns off everything. 2. Sarva Vidravini (सर्व विद्राविणी)- the one who can perverse. (g) The seventh avaran (31a) or enclosure is called (31 अष्टदल) And the Chakra of this Avarn is called Sarva-Sankshobhan- karka (सर्वसंक्षोभनकारक ). Sarvakarshini (सर्वाकर्षिणी)- the one which attracts. 3. Here She is called as Tripursundri (fii, She is the one who gives beauty to women to be attractive wives. Sarva Ahladini (सर्व आहुलादिनी)- the one who is the giver of joy. 4. 1. Ananga Kusuma Devi (3 कुसुमा देवी)- She smells of many flowers. Sarva Sammohini (सर्व सम्मोहिनी) 5. the one who can entice. 6. Sarva Stambhini (सर्व स्तम्भिनी)- the one who makes every one alerted. Y 2. Ananga Maekhala Devi (r मेखला देवी)- who is the solid like a rock in the family. 7. Sarva Jambhini (सर्व जम्भिनी) Ananga Madna Devi (अनंग मदना at)- the one who is attractive. 3. Sarvavashankari (सर्ववशंकरी ) - the one who is the controller of all. 8. 4. Ananga Madana Tura Devi (अनंग मदनातुरा देवी)- the one who gives desire to meet. 9. Sarva Ranjini (सर्व रजञ्जिनी)- the one who entertains all. 10. Sarva Unmadini (सर्वोन्मादिनी)- She is the one who gives all the special joys. 5. Ananga Rekha Devi ( अनंग रेखा aat)- the one which draws the different boundaries. 11. Sarvartha Sadhini (सर्वार्थसाधिनी)- the one who gives meaning of all the things. 6. Ananga Vegini Devi (अनंग वेगिनी aat)- the one which gives you speed. 12. Sarva Sampatti Poorni (सर्वसम्पत्तिपूर्णी)- the one who gives all the well being. 7. Anagankusha Devi (3ri aat)- the one, who gives power of Ankusha, means the controlling of man. 13. Sarva Mantramayee (सर्वमन्त्रमयी) the one who is residing in all the mantras. 8. Ananga Malini Devi ( अनंग मालिनी aat)- the one which is very 14. Sarva Dwanda Kshyankri (सर्वद्वन्दक्षयंकरी)- the one who gracious.

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 11 & 12 2007 31 (h) The eighth enclosure is called as Shodasha Dala (बोडशदल). 13. Beeja (ar:)- attraction through the seed 14. Atma (3HT)- attraction by spirit The name of the Chakra is Sarvasha- PariPurak (सर्वाशापरिपूरक). 15. Amruta (3a:)- attraction by eternity The Goddess's name is Tripureshwari (त्रिपुरेश्वरी). 16. Sharira ( ) attraction by the form of the body She is the one who has got sixteen powers. The first is..... These are the attractions which are subtler and are in the Goddess which 1. Kamaa )- means the mattraction of body act in a way that the Sadhaka is attracted towards Her. )-is the attraction Buddhya ( by brain 2. (i) Bhupur () is the enclosure, while the Chakra's name is Trailokya Mohan त्रैलोक्यमोहन). The ninth one is called as the Ahamkara (अहंकारा)-attraction by 3. ego Name of the Goddess is Tripura (fa). 4. Shabada (:)- attraction by word There are ten powers in this Chakra. The first is :- Sparsha (- attraction by touch 5. Sarva Sankshobhini (सर्वसंक्षोभिणी)- the one who burns off every thing. 1. 6. Roopa (4:)- attraction by beauty Sarva Vidravini ( सर्वविद्राविणी)-the one who can perverse. Rasa(T:)-attraction by aesthetics 7. 2. 8. Gandha (T-)- attraction by fragrance Sarva Akarshini (सर्वाकर्षिणी)- the 3. one which attracts. Chitta (fari)- attraction by 9. 4. Sarva Vashankari (सर्ववशकरी). attention the one who is the controller of all. 10. Dhairya ()- attraction by Sarva Unmadini (सर्वोन्मादिनी)-the 5. courage one who excites as well. 11. Smrutya ( ) attraction by 6. Sarva Mahankusha (सर्वमहन्कुशा)- the one who controls, here the ankusha means the weapon that memory 12. Nama (7I4:)- attraction by name

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 11 & 12 2007 32 u is used by the elephant driver. So how he controls the elephant, in the same way She controls all. इच्छा, प्राप्ति, मुक्ति) 1. Anima (3rfurHT)- is to become like a Small Particle Sarva Khaechari (सर्व खेचरी)- the 7. - is to become 2. Laghima ( Small one who attracts all. 8. Sarva Beeja (Hdai:)- the one who is the seed you know. Mahima (महिमा)-is to have a Big 3. Form 9. Sarva Yoni ( - the one who exists in all the..ah..all the yonis. 4. Ishatva (ईशत्व)- is to create Thoughts out of human beings. 10. Sarva Trikhanda (सर्व त्रिखंड)- 5. Vashitva (a is Attraction which exists in all the three dimensions. The Yoni means the 6. Prakramya (प्रक्रम्या)- is the Manifestation ellipse - which is the power of the Mother. 7. Bhukti (ufa)- is the Enjoyment Apart from that, there are other goddesses, which exist as yellow line known as (मुक्त शक्तया) Mukta Shaktaya. 8. Ichachha (FT)- Fulfilment of Desire 9. Prapti (9Tfa)- is the Attainment The Mother Goddess are called as Mahendri, Chamunda and 10. Mukti (gfaa)- is the Salvation Mahalakshmi ( महेन्द्री, चामुण्डा और Haa . The siddhis that people can achieve are Anima, Laghima, Mahima, Ishatva, Vashitva, Prakramya, Bhukti, Ichchha, Prapti, Mukti (a , लघिमा, महिमा, ईशत्व, वशित्व, प्राक्राम्य, मुक्ति, These are all the Siddhis that Sahaja Yogis can have". H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi 14.10.1978, London einlo

 Beej Mantra & Musical Notes on Chakra Plexus ी । IDI sahasrara Climbic area) NI/N (nishad) ह,क्ष agnya (optic chiasma) | Chandra | Rudra | Granthi KSHA HA AUM HAM-SUPER EGO KSHAM-EG0 DHA D (dhalvat)→ अ vishuddhi- (cervical plexus) 3 30 5 A' 31 00 HAM AU AL न्सू लु लु REE LRLLR PA/P. AH AH RI REE LALLA (pancha m)-→ क anahat (cardiac plexus) के ख ग KA KHA' GA GHA NG | Surya | Vishnu I Granthi YAM CHA' CHHA' JA JHA YAN' AMAIM TA' THA (madhyam)→ manipur (nabhi) (coeliac plexus) PA PHA NA' TÀ' THA RAM DA DHA NA PA' PHA GAG (gandhar)→ swadhishthan (aortic plexus) | Agni | Braham | Granthi VAM BA' BHA MA' YA RA' LA RAR (rishabh)→ व mooladhar (pelvic plexus WA, SHA SHA SA' VA LAM SA/S (shadja) -> Ref. H.H. Shri Mataji, 3 Feb. 1978 delhi; 18 dec1978 london. Devi Bhagvat; Book-7 chp-35; Nirmala Yoga : March-April 1983, Ibid Jan-Feb-1984 (Hindi) Music and Sahaj Yoga: Apte, drarun, 1997 Divine Knowledge through Vibrations : Rajeshekharan, p.t.etal.1992 (shushunaj Itotal- smell taste sight y0ch hearing(word) puiw

 MAHAKALI PUJA France-1990 Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi We have had Bhairava Puja in they don't understand one thing that you Delhi and nowI thought today let us have Mahakali Puja. Because yesterday's collective then you are thrown out experience, last night's experience was gradually. the work of Mahakali. She has a double role all the time, she is at two extremes. seven strings, you can say, and these On one side She is full of joy, giver of joy, is very happy, tends to see Her disciples strings are there to throw you out into are joyous. Joy is her quality, it is Her in Sitar you have seen for the resonance energy. Yesterday you must have been amazed to see so many middle aged ladies of France smiling and laughing! I start getting out of the collectivity it is had never seen them smiling. It is very starts throwing you out, slowly, surprising how they were so joyous and sở very happy! This is the energy of slowly to the sub-conscious area and Mahakali that gives you all that joy after where you just disappear. And all kind Realization and the joy you enjoy among this happening in every country that have to be collective. If you are not Now this Mahakali power has got collective sub-conscious area. Like as there are other strings also. So once you the Mahakali herself picks you out and of problems start with that. I have seen yourselves. All these are the qualities of Mahakali and when they will read out the names of Mahakali, you will know how Her powers manifest in Sahaja Yoga and how it has helped you all to get drenched into the ocean of joy. people do not attend the collective meditation. Of France, I have the same report. And I think, the people who do not grow will be thrown out. Sahaja Yoga, as you know, has a double action as the Mahakali has the double action. She is extremely loving, full of joy, full of happiness, but She is the one who is extremely cruel, wrathful. She is the one who is the slayer of all the demons and the evils and those people who try to do mischief. So once you are thrown out into left side, then you can imagine, you can develop any kind of left side diseases to begin with. Mooladhara diseases are the worst. We develop diseases like Malaitis, you must have heard of the disabilities caused by the muscles getting degenerated. All muscular degeneration comes from this factor. So at any cost To begin with I have to tell you one thing that Mahakali's puja, when you are doing, you have to feel the joy within yourselves and joy from other Sahaja Yogis. If you cannot feel that, that means you are not yet grown and there is some problem, may be with your parents, may be with your children, may be your family, may be your country. Whatever it is, but there is some sort of a conditioning which is working out that doesn't give you that joy. And to grow into Sahaja Yoga is very important which I think people do not understand; even if they live in Ashrams,

 35 Issue: 11 & 12 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze quality of the Goddess, that She is on one side extremely loving, extremely kind, extremely soft. She goes up to a point and then She throws you on the other side. And that is why in these countries where people always fall in love, they don't marry otherwise, unless and until they are fallen in love. And in that they cross all the maryadas also. In falling in love, they will marry somebody who's already married or who is carrying on with somebody who that must be avoided. But if you are not in the collective, if you do not understand the collective, and if you are out of the collective, you will be surprised, that negative forces will join you and they will pull you out. So this is one of the things that happens. So be very careful that don't avoid the collective programmes. The another problem about Mahakali is that She is the one who gives you the feeling for your wife, for your husband. She is the one. Now there also Is not divorced, or also they will have the same problem. If both of them are alright, She is airight. But if She finds anyone of them going astray, She will throw that person out and out and out young man or an old man marrying a and the another person if that person is attached to that person also will be thrown out. So this business of falling in love, this non-sense that we have here that you fall in love, but the word is alright because you fall really in love. That is the real falling happens. So what happens not keep, then this Mahakali gets into it. when you start falling in love, there is a kind of Maya of this Mahakali. And you The ones who are not collective, who do just get infatuated, your ego gets pampered or something like that or you have certain ideas of a wife or something that you would like to come for such and and then your think, 'O, that's the one for such thing. For example, I have already me.' So in these cases only two things can explained that you should not talk, put my happen; either you can be lost completely tape; there are so many tapes they have because of your wife or your husband never heard, just let them listen to my whom you adore and admire and you're tapes, and go into meditation, and then finished. I mean your personality is finished. Or else the another thing, which tapes are to be heard again and again. is even more serious, is that that you'll Now those who get any questions out of completely break forever and hate each other. That's why they say that there's a love and hate relationship. How can love be hate? But it becomes because of this marriages amongst themselves in the same household or something. All kind of things they do. Old woman marrying a young girl like that, all nonsensical things, without any maryada. And they do not stick together. They have no maryada. "The Marriage is to create a maryada maryada of your behaviour. And this is the maryada which if you do "So first of all, one has to be collective. not attend every time a collective programme, you might give suggestions do the Aarti, finish it up. Because these those tapes can next time discuss it before starting the tape. That is very good thing and that works. In India, nobody speaks. They just put my tapes on or show

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007 36 The Divine Cool Breeze my vedio, after that they just have meditation and Aarti. Finished. After that nobody talks. But before starting what they Ganpatipule. I mean, you go for a do is to talk to each other and discuss the pilgrimage! It is like you have to go to problems or discuss anything that they felt buy a Sari and you end up with a shaving about the previous programme. Because stick. It is that true. You are coming to you have not come here to marry Ganpatipule for what? You are coming someone or to fall in love into something, there for your ascent. It is a pilgrimage, you have not come here to get after some but in the pilgrimage, I have never heard, woman because she's your wife or some man because he is your husband. You goes to marriage. have had so many husbands and wives in previous lives. But you have come here for your ascent. And if you have come for be given up in Sahaja Yoga. That is one your ascent, you have to keep a watch. of the biggest loads. And one must how is your mind working. Supposing I say Innocence means chastity not only that you should have a good married life, physical, also mental chastity. You have ofcourse I do say, you should have good married life, but not at the cost of losing your ascent. It has happened with people. We have lost a complete, I should say, a city like that, some stupidity comes up is why their brains have gone out and they overly. relations with each other are pure. Like I was told that somebody fell in love in anybody falls in love with each other and So this bhoot of falling in love must understand that purity means chastity. to have mental chastity. If you don't have mental chastity, you cannot ascend. Actually, in the West it is more mental than physical. It is a fact. And that are becoming just like potatoes. Because, if you go on mentally imagining and playing around and working it out this way, it's going to be absolutely dangerous because it's all imagination. It has nothing to do with reality. The more you get into this kind of a nonsense, the more you become away from reality. That never means you should be dry, it never means you should be negligent of your responsibility. Does not. "So be careful not to get lost. You have not come here just to have only a happy married life, but happy married life is just one step. But if that step is taking you away from the real path of your ascent, it's better to be careful." "Also we must understand the innocence means purity, purity of thought. As I explained yesterday, I hope you understood the meaning of purity. Purity is to be understood much more by the Europeans, very important. Specially French. Because the whole society is suffering. Society can only be pure if the family life is pure, not only that but your "As I've said, that the sap in the tree rises, all right? Then it purifies, it nourishes every part of the plant separately in a different way. Like it's a mother, so mother. Father is a father. Sister is a sister. Brother is a brother. The brother-

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007 37 The Divine Cool Breeze His mother because He's like a guard. And He's the one who tells whether She can ascend or not. Unless and until He gives permission, She cannot ascend. So Shri Ganesha gives, ascending sort of OK, alright you can go ahead. And he stops all His work. You have seen Me sitting for hours together, I don't have to go even to the bathroom or anywhere because Ganesha stops everything. He's only worried now about the ascent. And on every chakra He checks your purity and then, accordingly, the Kundalini tries to purify it. But when it reaches the mental level, mental level has all these funny ideas of romance, this nonsense, that nonsense. I was surprised, the other day, there was a girl who was having trouble with her husband, of expressing her love to her husband, after marriage. Before sister relations cannot become husband- wife relations. How can it be? Now what happens is really is that such a confusion in the mind! And it has created tremendous problems for them. Then the sap nourishes all these things and comes back. It doesn't get attached to something. Oh! She is 'my wife'. So the first priority is my wife. Because I have seen, "Of course, family life has to be all right. You must look after your family. But that doesn't mean that you make everything suffer. That doesn't mean that your ascent should be finished. It cannot be that. You're not like ordinary people. You are saints and for the saints the main thing is their ascent, not their family life, not their material possessions, nothing; nor their children, but their ascent. Once they ascend, everything will ascend with it." marriage she was alright. So I told her, "Now the understanding of chastity should be there. It can come to you very easily if you ascend. It is such a vicious circle! It is such a vicious circle! Now first of all, you get your Realization, all right. Now you must know that Kundalini itself is the Mahakali Shakti because She's the primordial. Mahakali Shakti is the primordial Shakti within us and the Kundalini is Mahakali. And She remains read some book where they have described the romance between husband and wife. But she said there is no such book available. Then I asked a professor to find out. He said there is no such book. "In Sahaja Yoga the romance starts after the marriage, but also with maryadas, not at the cost of Sahaja Yoga, not at the cost of your ascent. So all these ideas people have in the west, I know you are so much conditioned about it. So they say, let us see, this is Samyachara, after all. You have to give all the benefit to that. Now we select people who do everything. It is all the work of Mahakali because you have to work on the vibrations, it is all the work of Mahakali. And after marriage also some marriages do fail. The reason being they do not know what is the purpose of as a virgin within you, which is purity. She has a power to purify. All that happens when you get your Realization. She starts manifesting Her all-beautiful aspects on you. "Now, the one who is sitting there is Shri Ganesha. Now people don't understand what is innocence. Shri Ganesha is sitting there and He is the one who resides over Mooladhara, even over

 Issue: 11 & 12 2007 38 The Divine Cool Breeze work all right, despite the fact that they've their marriage is. been insulted, they've been neglected, we "So the first and foremost thing of Mahakali is that She is 'purity. have misbehaved. Whatever we might absolute purity'. And that purity, if we have done, they are doing their jobs all cannot imbibe within us, we cannot be Sahaja Yogis. "Now this mind is so much conditioned, I know. Our children would be about it? We cannot be even collective! much better off than ourselves. They won't We cannot attend collective things. I look have these conditionings, as we have had. at them, how generous they are! They're "And so many problems can be just extremely collective, they are extremely avoided if you really become pure people. collective, to such an extent that if I have seen in the other societies, which I have known, no body seems to be safe. Somebody's wife is running with Because you must also worship Shiva. somebody's husband and somebody's They are so collective and so much daughter is running with somebody's father, a boy is running with somebody's mother! Next day you find somebody else standing there. or sometimes it is as should be collective. As soon as you husband and wife! So funny that you can't become collective, all these nonsensical believe it, how can it be! And everybody things will drop out. All these ideas will is in danger! The man goes to the house drop out. You do not become collective and finds his wife has run away with another man! Ora man goes for his work and he runs away with another women! dropping them out. So she is the one who gives you sthiti, right. You can see it - so many people getting Realization. But what are we doing somebody, supposing, worships Shri Krishna, his heart will catch. Why? connected with Me. "So they are all collective. In the same way, you are also Devas, you also because you have not dropped out all these things, or else you're afraid of "So let us know what is our the state. Sthiti means 'consolidation. purpose is. Our purpose is to ascend. And what is the Mahakali power is doing for us? She's giving you your ascent-through Kundalini. She is purifying. She's giving you all the "Without proper your consolidation, into your purity, not into your romantic life, you cannot rise. Like when we make the aeroplane, first we have to consolidate it, fix it up properly, work it out, so that when it goes in the air, all it parts do not fly away with the passengers. In the same way when we are ascending, Shri Ganesha does that. He just stops the action of excretion completely and the ascent starts. powers. She is protecting you all the time. She is giving you joy. But what are we doing for Her? Her only, only desire is that My children should be saintly, that they should have beautiful qualities of a saint, that he doesn't fall at every woman, fall at every man. He's not so cheap, you see. And They are (The deities) doing their

 Issue: 11 & 12 2007 39 The Divine Cool Breeze Sort of a confidence they develop. 'O, we are old Sahaja Yogis! We have had horrible results in London, of this consciousness that we are old, we will do mentally specially... "I mean, if the Sahasrara is spoiled, how can Sahaja Yoga work out? The whole play is of the Sahasrara and that purity should manifest. Through you, we are going to change the world, through no one else. It is the Sahaja Yogis who are going to change the world. "Now look at the generosity. Even My body is so generous"! Yesterday one lady came and she had terribly bad liver. whatever we like. We may attend the collective or not. Akind of an ego! Please be careful. Christ has clearly said, 'First will be the last". And I have seen so many of them just getting out like that! Even I do not know how they get out! In such stupid way that I cannot even imagine for anyone! Like one gentleman, in Italy, was a known Sahaja yogi just got caught up and said, 'I am Mahamataji. Everybody started looking at him! What do you mean, lam Mahamataji? And I am going to do all that myself. They said, it's alright, so we are all going out of Ashram. No, no, no, I cannot manage the ashram. Iam She came down stairs and my liver started pumping vibrations! Terrible! She had a very bad liver problem. She had taken drugs and all the suffering was done to me by this liver of mine. It didn't think that O, Mother she has come all the way, it started just pumping for that woman, It is so generous! And they are so generous themselves, the way they bestow blessings on you. How they are hard working, how they're running about! What are we giving them? They give us joy. They look after us. They look after our children. They look after everything. They manage everything. Now what are we doing for them?" getting out. And he went and stayed with someone, that lady who heard against Me, got cancer and died. "In the collectivity, supposing you have one problem, another one has some problem, it just works out, balances. As one finger is cut out, it is useless. Or a nail which is taken out is useless. It dies. So that is how we are organizing our spiritual death and, ultimately, I don't Also I have heard that people don't help in postering, very few people come up. "This is being ungrateful, very ungrateful." All the deities are present when you are having those collective programmes. And surprisingly the old Sahaja yogis are more difficult than the new ones! I mean this is just surprising. I mean are they coming now, out of date or something? Christ has said, 'First will be the last. Thope that is not going to happen. know what else! And then they come back and say Mother I have got this trouble, so I have come back. I was out of Sahaja yoga for three years. I say what do you mean by out of Sahaja Yoga? I did not attend any collective programme. "I am thinking of the collectivity of the whole world. That's My vision. And if Sahaja Yogis cannot be coilective, who

 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007 40 The Divine Cool Breeze the matter carries the love, expresses. So many times I have seen how very sweetly they gave me something. I really do not ask anything and need anything. Certain things show such concern, such understanding, such love. "How will you express your love to those people who are so far away? We just try, try to give, try to give for Sahaja Yoga also and you will be amazed how it will work out. For is going to be collective? Who is going to fulfill My vision? "So all of you, those who call themselves Sahaja Yogis, must attend the programmes..And the second thing is that there was a little problem of generosity of people. "Of course, that's also a character of Mahalakshmi. She's very generous and when you are generous in giving vibrations and looking after people, this and that, then Mahalakshmi's principle works out. Those who are not generous, they can never enjoy. So if there is need, people have to give money to Sahaja Yoga. I have been supplying lot of money, as you know, from the very beginning. Those who are early Sahaja Yogis know how much I have been able to pay. But now we are growing and everybody should know that we have to pay. After all it is our responsibility. collectivity, we have to know and see for Bhairavnath and Shri Hanumana and Shri Ganesha; these three principles that work within us, all of them have parallel work to do, parallel. They do not interfere for each other. But, if it comes to help, they'll go all out. There's no quarrel, no quarrel with each other, no. If Hanuman needs Bhairava, He's there, if Bhairava needs Hanumana, He's there - all out! "So this collectivity comes only by understanding one thing - what a great work we are doing today! People are not conscious of that. They take it just by the way. In the war, you have seen how people fight, even if they have the fear of dying. Formerly, nobody was paid also in the military, but they went and fought, maybe for their country, for anything. And they used to join together to fight. They allowed themselves to be killed. They helped each other. They did this. All these qualities are there when we want to hate someone! But when we want "Where are we going to spend our money, in what? My family feels that whatever money I'm spending for Sahaja Yoga is the best. They get punyas. It is the best for them. Only with punyas, you get more wealth, health and prosperity. If you do not have punyas, you cannot get it. It will come and go away. It will disappear into thin air. So I was surprised that people are not generous! to love someone, why shouldn't we have those qualities emerging out of us? "These are the qualities of Mahakali because She's the expert of war affairs. She is the one who makes people work and She's the one who makes them fight because it's the desire. They have "We have to know that we are so much better off people than many others are. We have to think, 'Can we send something to them as presents. Can we do something for them?' The matter has the value, which is again Mahakali's power. It is the power of Mahakali that

 Issue: 11 & 12-2007 41 The Divine Cool Breeze nothing there, just a desire to do something and then they join together and then the Mahasaraswati helps them to act. But first the desire has to be strong. Now the desire has to be very, very strong within us that we have to be for the emancipation of the whole world. We are the people. We are the special people. We are in the foundation. Nothing is more important than our own personality being completely dedicated for Sahaja Yoga. enjoyment is not there now, that enjoyment is lost.' Otherwise Indians are mad after cricket. Even in the forest if you go, they will be listening to the cricket. It is a game played by the English, who are not so much interested but Indians are! Now if you ask them, they say, 'No, we are not interested,' So many people who used to read seven eight newspapers, say we never read newspapers, never read news, finished. I have seen there are many; because the whole focus of your attention is now on Sahaja Yoga because you only enjoy Sahaja Yoga. You like to be Sahaja Yogis, you have to be with Sahaja Yogis. We had a puja in India. It was really quite a vibrant puja of Shri Ganesha. But nobody was bothered. It started pouring down through the Pandal. They had put up, but no body was bothered. All right water has come, let the water pass this way, that way. Everybody adjusted, because first thing was to enjoy. They didn't want to give up joy at any cost. And it continued, the whole night! One was worried because somebody said that the police will come. I made the police sleep also and the man who was to report was also sleeping. So the whole night we enjoyed all. This desire has to be extremely strong and very pure. Those [who] actually desire it - actually, they get their Realization like that. They reach their depth like that. And they enjoy doing the work of Sahaja Yoga. All the time they enjoy it. For them, nothing else is more important. There's a saying that, 'When you get water of Ganges to drink, why should you take water from dirty rivers? So the whole attention is that side. All the joy you get out of this romance and this love and this and that becomes zero before it. Because it's Nirananda, only joy. In the marriage etc. all this is so conditioning, any joy. You have different joys on different centers. They are all given by Mahakali, but the greatest of all you have got after Realization is the Nirananda. That state you must reach, to 'Nirananda State'. If you are in that state of Nirananda, then all other pleasures and joys are zero. There are so many people who told me they were very fond of cricket. They said, Mother, nowadays we do not see cricket' I said 'why'? Because Now this enjoyment cannot come to you if you do not have purity of your mind. Nirananda. You can get other anand, of other other things, other chakras. How to bring the purity? Just by developing thoughtless awareness and looking at things without thinking. For that, you have to be collective. If you are collective, I am there. Wherever you are collective, wherever

 42 Issue: 11 & 12 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze you gather, I am there. And nothing gives Me greater pleasure [than] to hear that all of you are attending these programmes. You will be amazed that in Australia we have so many centres in every city, but they all attend the programme of collective, because they know collectivity is the ocean of nourishment. This is the simplest thing you have to do, but the bhoots are much more collective. Bhoots can Pune, there he gathered all the bhoots, immediately. Then he came here and he is gathering all the bhoots. People are getting friendly with him, exactly who are bhoots you can make it out by just seeing a bhoot sitting there and who is sitting next to that person. They are so attracted, like a magnet! But the Magnet is the quality of Mahakali. "Bhoots know Me better than go to such a length of fraternity that anybody else can know because they you will be amazed. There was a lady in know My past. They are in the past and France. She was an old lady and her they attract each other, and how they act daughter was in Sahaja Yoga. She had become absolutely mad, so she put her on a bhootish person. That is why the in the elderly home. She was absolutely when it comes to positivity, they do not get bhootish. In the elderly home she only knew how to go to church on Sundays, collective. All those who do not get She will dress up and go to church. That collective will gradually go into the was only sensibility she had (She was put are talking about the Mahakali, She is the in elderly home). Her daughter told me that one who knows everything about these it was very amazing that all of them get up bhootish things. She's in charge, I mean. in the morning, dress up and go to church. She's the lord of all these bhoots and She Inside the Church there are graves of the people who have died, out of those who knows and She looks after them and She are half mad or full mad elderly people. Otherwise they will not know how to wear to do? She has locked them up on one their dresses! They did not know how to side, but if Sahaja Yogis want to go there, eat their food, they did not knowanything. But when it came to going to the Church, to that Bhootish place, where all the area, what can you do? Of course, She bhoots were there, they all will get up in protects. She doesn't want anyone to go the morning, dress up properly and go to the bhoots not to come this side. But the church, sit down, sing hymns and came back, as if like possession. Such a fraternity of bhoots there is! As soon as one bhoot comes in; one bhoot came now, recently from Australia, now he is gathering Sahaja Yoga has gone very far, very much, all the bhoots around him. He went to they know who has got bhoots and how positive collectivity has to be there. But fraternity of bhoots. Because today we manages them. But when a Sahaja Yogi wants to go into that realm, what has She iust enter through back doors into that there. She's just kept them out, and told Sahaja Yogis only go there. That is being reported. Under these circumstances, in so many other countries. In France you

 43 Issue: 11 & 12 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze saw yesterday how this Anand Shakti of the Mother acted on people. That's wonderful to see that. Everybody came to Me and they were full of smiles. I have never never seen any French woman of that age smiling! Never. No question, even if you tickle them, even if you certify that there is a joke, they will not smile at that. I have never seen their teeth. Yesterday their whole face was lit up. So many of them, something so miraculous happened! This Anand giving Shakti, the Mahakali was acting so beautifully!. "And you are the people who will now guide or misguide them. If you become, all of you absolutely pure, they will say, 'Now look at these people, how beautiful they look!" You already look very beautiful. Your faces shine, but it will all disappear and the effects of disappearance are not very simple. "So be careful. I, of course, bless you with all the qualities of Bhairava, as he is the greatest disciple of Mahakali. And he's the one who is running up and down, morning till evening, every time, specially in the night, he is working so very hard, killing those horrible Rakshasa, this, that and achieving such results! We have to join him, all of us and work it out. become, higher personalities, if you become collective, all of you, and if you become generous and if you become "May God bless you." (Checked with Audio) Inll

 Navratri Puja, Australia-2007

 ंडि सहजयोग के्द्र त-जनपद (बागपत), आ से पूजा के पयंत लिया गया फोटो ि

 Now, we have to understand that we are carrying the light in our hands. And the light should not shake; we have to hold the light tight. And we should have a concentrated attention towards the maintenance of the light. And then to tell yourself that we have to see not just to understand mentally is to be actually aware. Because you are complete otherwise you are part and parcel of the whole you are! But the only thing is that you have not yet seen that. You have mentally accepted, but you have not become that, because That means you are at the level of mental projection comes from thought. the thought. You have to become thoughtless. But if you live on the basis of thought, you are still below the Agnya chakra. So all the thought waves must be stopped to begin with and you should say that alright let us see now. H.H. Shri Mataji



----------------------

2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The
Đivine Cool Breeze
November - December 2007
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-1.txt 
 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
Published by
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 108, Chandragupt Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411029
Ph. No.: 020-25285232
Printed by
Krishna Printer & Designer
Tri Nagar, Delhi-35
Mob.: 9212238008
For Subscription Please Write to:
Nirmal Transformatiom Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 108,Chandragupt Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune -411029
Tel.No.: 020-25285232
Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles, Miracle Photographs etc.
To
Shri O.P. Chandna
G-11 (463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110034
Ph.: 011-65356811
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-2.txt 
 ed
Navratri Puja, Australia-2007
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-3.txt 
 The
Divine
Cool
Breeze
NOV. - DEC. - 2007
VISHWA NIRMALA,
UNIVERSAL PURE RELIGION
CONTENTS
3
Shri Mataji in Dubai-10.8.07
4
Who I Am? A Poem
5
Conversation with the Divine Part-I, Cabella-June-2007
Conversation with the Divine Part II, July, August 2007
12 Raksha Bandhan and Maryadas for
Sahaja Yogis - London- 11-8-1984
26 When the Kundalini Rises, It makes sounds
London-14.10.1978
34 Maha Kali Puja, France- 1990
DHARMA
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Conversations with the Divine
Part I, June 2007, Cabella Ligure, Italy
During the last ten days of June
2007, it was an extraordinary blessing to
be in the presence of Shri Mataji in Her
castle in Cabella Ligure, Italy, and to have
experienced truly blissful moments in Her
Divine company.
as to why growth remains limited in the
US, none of which are stated in this report.
Shri Mataji completely or partly accepted
these 'reasons' with the love and patience
that only She can convey.
superbly
summarized the situation and offered
some solutions which are reported herein.
She
However,
These moments, which were
marked by extraordinary conversations,
occurred on different days over varying
lengths of time. However, there was a
Shri Mataji's expressions
The US was the first place She
visited outside of India, due to Her
1.
predominant theme running through all of
these meetings. This theme was Her
concern regarding a clear absence
growth of Sahaja Yoga amongst
2.
concern and love for the seekers in this
country.
VET
Sahaja Yogis number approx.
individuals born and raised in the United
States. One ought to interpret this to mean
1200 in the US with a population of 300
million, which is almost the exact amount
of yogis in a place like Italy whose
population is approx. 30 million. In ratio
terms, we should have at least 10 times
our present number to be even at par with
a country like Italy.
'mainstream'American society.
The conversations took place in
the form of questions and answers, a
gestalt of which I shall endeavor to
summarize hereafter.
Basically, Shri Mataji was and
Although spiritual heritage is
missing in the US, it is not exactly in
3.
remains clear in Her opinion that unless
Sahaja spreads in the US (hereafter to
be interpreted as 'mainstream' US), there
is a clear and present danger that this
country would end up destroying itself.
Given its prominence on the world stage,
the consequences of such an eventuality
for the rest of the world would be equally
worrisome.
There was a lot of discussion as
to why individuals, after getting their
Realization, attend a few follow-up
programs but thereafter tend to drop off.
One tried to put forward some 'reasons'
abundance in places like Western
Europe and Russia, where the growth of
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-5.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 11 & 12-2007
Shri Mataji. Mother was very pleased with
the floral patterns and spent over an hour
examining various sarees. She spoke to
the Sahajayogis present about various
cultures in India and the different styles of
can have, sang the initial bhajans in praise
of Ganesha.
Sahajayogis from the main visiting
countries, Bahrain and Iran, also
performed and entertained the crowed
with their musical prowess. In just a few
minutes, most of the Sahajayogis in the
hall were dancing in joy. The Sahajayogis
from Iran were particular favourites of the
crowd, who called for an encore after a
particularly energetic dance song
Sarees they prefer.
8:00pm : A musical programme
had been arranged, with the hope that Shri
Mataji would be able to attend and bless
everyone. Unfortunately, Mother was not
able to be present at the event, although
it was clear that. her attention was on it
The Sahajayogis of Dubai also
received an unexpected blessing when it
was announced that Shri Mataji has
decided to extend her stay in Dubai by
as vibrations filled the place and the cool
breeze was strong enough to leave many
hands numb. The programme started off
with a few songs by children, who, with
the open heart and innocence only a child
approximately a week.
जना
.I am
Who..
I look back; I see
that once I knew who I was
and now I know that I am not.
I look ahead; I see
aayie
that I do not yet know who I am
and now I know that yet I am not.
Then who I am I know not,
But for this moment
I know I am.
Melissa Richard
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Shri Mataji in Dubai
10th August 2007
12:30am : Shri Mataji arrived at
quickly made it clear that her presence
had filled them with energy. She then
spoke to a few of the children, asking them
where they were from. After a few minutes,
Shri Mataji said they should go to bed,
the Dubai International Airport, with a
beautiful, benevolent smile on Her face.
While the immigration formalities were
completed, Shri Mataji waited in the VIP
lounge at the airport, where She was
served refreshments by the welcoming
committee. She was joyous and full of life
inspite of the long fl ight.
and so the children left the room elated at
having met their Holy Mother. One of the
children was heard exclaiming, "Shri
Mataji spoke to me!".
2:30am : Dinner was served to
1:00am: The immigration process
was complete, and the travelling group
moved out of the airport. Shri Mataji was
escorted to the vehicle that would transport
Shri Mataji, and after dinner She retired
for the night.
5:00am: The Sahajayogis of
Dubai conducted morning meditation via
conference call, and the visiting
Sahajayogis from Fujeirah and Bahrain
joined in. It was a calm summer morning,
and the vibrations flowed strongly due to
Shri Mataji's presnece. Amusical program
will take place later today, and practise
sessions are underway.
Her to the hotel. Outside the airport, about
two hundred Sahajayogis had turned up
to get darshan of Shri Mataji. She
blessed them all as She got into the
vehicle, and it slowly moved away towards
the hotel.
1:50am : Shri Mataji and Sir C.P.
arrived at the hotel, and were welcomed
11:00am : Shri Mataji had a late
breakfast, while discussing various topics
with the Sahaja yoginis serving breakfast.
by a few young children. She was very
pleased with the room and decorations
within. After a few minutes, all the young
Among the things discussed were the Burj
Dubai, the building that aims to be the
tallest on earth, and other sights visible
children of the collective were allowed to
enter the room to get darshan of Shri
Mataji. The children were overjoyed at this
opportunity to meet Shri Mataji, and
smiling faces filled the room. At Mother's
from the window of her suite.
2:00pm: Shri Mataji emerged from
her room, and spoke to the Sahajayogis
present for a few minutes, asking them
asking, the children sang 'Ganesha,
Ganesha' and Shri Mataji liked the
performance very much. She expressed
where they were from, and so on. After a
while, some cloth merchants came
concern at the fact that the children were
forward and arranged to offer sarees to
staying up so late, but their smiling faces
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
7.
seekers of a higher truth, perhaps due to
an abundance of material prosperity.
However this is in contrast to a place like
India, where even well-off individuals seek
a higher truth.
Americans by nature are not
Sahaja Yoga is far more satisfactory. Most
importantly, She has been accepted by
mainstream populations of all of these
nations relative to the US, where for the
most part, growth is non-organic and
clearly excludes mainstream Americans.
Growth through immigration does not truly
count, for exactly the same reason i.e. it
excludes American natives.
American yogis (not immigrants)
have to examine and elucidate the
8.
reasons why they were attracted to and
have continued to remain in Sahaja Yoga.
They should ask themselves a key
question: 'What is it about Shri Mataji and
Sahaja Yoga that makes it so unique and
important for me in my life?' They should
then try and reach out to mainstream
Americans with the same messages.
In the 70's and 80's, the US was
visited by approx. 12 false gurus from
India, who deceived the population and
let them astray in terms of spiritual
guidance. This has worked to the
tremendous detriment of all things 'Indian',
particularly in the sphere of spirituality, and
therefore in all likelihood has made
4.
Ordinary Americans have to see
and identify with their 'own kind', in order
9.
Americans wary of Sahaja Yoga. The fact
that in the process these false gurus built
personal fortunes worth hundreds of
millions by taking full advantage of their
na?vet?, further reinforces a deeply
established mistrust of all aspects
spiritual emanating from India.
to recognize the benefits of Sahaja Yoga.
This will not easily happen if they only see
Indians propagating Sahaja Yoga.
10. American yogis have thus to take
center stage and lead this endeavor. All
other ethnicities, including Indians, can
play a truly supportive role in helping out
Although Americans may look at
5.
most things in life through a materialistic
lens, they have to realize that most things
in life which are essential for survival are
in fact free! For example, the air we
breathel
with this grand venture.
Opening Sahaja schools in
various American cities, in order to get in
more children, would be an ideal way to
propagate Sahaja. Children attending
Sahaja schools are completely happy
within that environment, and if that can be
replicated to attract children from non-yogi
families, that would be a wonderful way
of getting Sahaja into American families.
If parents notice that their children are very
happy and content with a Sahaja school
Contd. to Page 11
11.
Americans do not seem to get as
6.
much love and understanding from their
families as compared to other cultures,
e.g. India. It would be essential for the
growth of Sahaja in the US that they feel
and experience this love and compassion,
which they may have so far missed in their
personal lives
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Conversations with the Divine
PartII, July, August 2007
The days following Guru Puja saw
a gradual shift in the attention of Shri
Mataji to the land of Shri Krishna and the
issues of America and I as well as others
were extremely fortunate to be able to
have the tremendous blessing of being in
Her presence in Cabella during this time.
tell them to "Know Thyself".
Once they have felt the existence
of the instrument within, they should be
told that they can diagnose their own
problems through some knowledge of the
centers and that they can correct them
without anyone telling them.
This ability to clear their own
problems at the level of the centers will
allow them to become independent of the
During these days leading up to
Shri Krishna Puja, Shri Mataji spoke on
topics ranging from how to reach the
seekers of America, to the corporate doctors and psychiatrists and the
outreach of CEL, to Her experiences
during the time of Indian independence,
and at every moment She was full of
encouragement and enthusiasm for the
tasks ahead of us.
medications they prescribe and will save
the money that is wasted on these
dependencies.
Shri Mataji suggested that
seekers begin immediately to work on
themselves and others, and in that way
will feel that they have something. Even if
they cannot feel it and the person that they
are working on does, this will encourage
Recorded below is a humble
attempt to summarize the main points of
these conversations, some of which I was
not present for but received a detailed
summary of that are included below.
These moments are precious and Her
guidance to us as well as the stories of
Her past are of inestimable value now and
for the generations to come.
them.
Shri Mataji went on to address
general topics about America that came
up and these are summarized below.
Shri Mataji said that She was very
happy with the spread of Sahaja Yoga in
Russia and that maybe communism is a
good thing. She said democracy in
America is hopeless if the result is what
is happening today with the seekers and
America
Because the seekers of America
are very independent and self reliant, Shri
Mataji had specific advice on topics to
convey to them in a manner that will
appeal to this aspect of their nature.
their materialistic focus. She said She has
been very kind and patient with them, but
that She is going to tell them, and hopefully
this will work. Shri Mataji said that She
Tell the seekers that true freedom
and independence comes from self
knowledge, and that they should know that
they have this instrument within
themselves and it is their own. We should
wants to come to America.
12 false gurus came to America
from India and looted the seekers of all of
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007
8
The Divine Cool Breeze
said that it should be called "Know
Thyself" but should not be given at the
beginning, but rather at a secondary
stage.
their wealth and built big ashrams and
now who is going to stay in them? Shri
Mataji said that the Americans were
stupid to listen to them and that you have
to be intelligent to understand Sahaj
Yoga. These gurus are finished but their
effects linger on.
CEL (Center for
Evolutionary Learning)
Shri Mataji was presented an
Shri Mataji explained that
Americans teach their children a love for
money by paying them to do things for the
parents that they should do out of love
such as washing the car and chores in the
house. She expressed hope that their
children will put them right. She said that
you have to love your children and that if
you don't Sahaja Yoga will not love you.
Not only your own children, but all children.
You must love and respect them, as they
do not care if you are a saint. They just
care for your love. She said that if this
happens this world will change.
update on the efforts of CEL, which has
been reaching out to the corporate world
to give training on enlightened
management principles and the
manifestation of a positive and balanced
working environment through the practice
of meditation. Abranch of this international
organization has just been established in
America and when Shri Mataji was
informed of their progress in Europe, She
offered the comments below.
-Now I have hope that my incarnation is
not wasted! God has put you in your
positions and you are responsible. That's
why God out you on this earth. I am only a
housewife. The world is looking for your
leadership.
Shri Mataji was informed about the
existence of the Kubera fund in America
and was asked about the priority to be
given to the disbursement of the funds i.e.
towards the establishment of centers or
There is no light in organisations.
They have buildings and offices but they
don't have light.
more direct forms of outreach to the
seekers. Shri Mataji first asked how many
centers could really be obtained with
these funds and when it was explained
that the fund is making down payments
on mortgages that are then paid by the
centers, She said to prioritize the centers
but balance with some outreach also.
Stty
The Islamic world failed because
of bad management, particularly on the
woman's side. Now you bring vibrations
to management.
Don't be afraid. This time nobody
can kill you. The laws are supporting truth.
Nowadays everything is recorded - you
can look things up what was said, nobody
can change it. In the past it was easy for
religions to be turned around, but not
today. You can say what you want as long
Shri Mataji was presented with a
beginners bookon Sahaja Yoga designed
to take seekers remote from centers
through the whole process of Sahaja Yoga
and asked for Her advice for a title. She
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007
9.
The Divine Cool Breeze
Look at me, I am just a housewife (of the
universe Gregoire said), but I am not
afraid of anyone. No one can do this job
other than you. You are fully responsible!
Be courageous. The time has come! You
all know the truth, but now the Big Johnnies
as it is the truth.
Italians are very good people but
they are ignorant. Iraqis are not bad
people but they have been stupid.
Two mayors (Albera and Cabella)
recongnized me as the Mother of Christ,
so they were wise. Even if I am that, so
what? What matters is what you have to
get from me. Now I am the mother of
Sahaja Yogis. First they were thinking to
send a man, but you needed a mother.
Christ could not have done this.
have to find it...
Money cannot buy joy, but you can
use money for loving. Direct it towards
Jove. The whole world is changing. Go
ahead. Expand, expand! Do anything you
need. That is why God put you on this
earth.
You don't need to be afraid. Go
ahead. You should get good positions.
God has put you in these positions.
Kurta and Sari Distribution
Shri Mataji was distributing kurtas
to all of the leaders who were present one
afternoon and was asking each person
who arrived where they got the kurtas they
were wearing. She would offer each new
arrival several colors to choose from and
This is a day of celebration. What
nice vibrations, nice kundalinis.
If trees can feel love even
managers can feel it. Managers, I will take
care of that. Are you satisfied now?
have those who had already received a
gift of a kurta from Her were asked to
show the new arrivals what they had
Speak the truth and give love. You
have no idea of the power behind you.
received. In Her classic style, She made
sure everyone got the color best suited to
them and asked numerous times if they
were sure they liked the final selection,
often switching the colors around to arrive
at something "just right."
If you hate, really hate, then actually
you love because you are putting so much
attention on a person. That's today's way
of loving. Selfishness leads to love. Love
cannot be defined because it is a feeling.
At one point Shri Mataji began to
distribute saris for the wives of the leaders
present and explained that these were
Paitani saris, which were the best saris
that came from an area south of Pune
Looking at you my heart is filled
with hope. I thought my incarnation would
be wasted. You are responsible now!
Have faith in your self. When asked by the
CEL representatives if they had Her
blessings, Shri Mataji replied Yes go full
ahead! What other job do you have to do?
What other job would you like to do? The
Big Johnnies in business and politics
have to accept it because it's the truth.
called Paitan. Shri Mataji explained that
they were once fairly scarce, but that now
they were manufacturing more and that
they are 7 yard saris with 1 yard that should
be saved for the blouse. In vintage
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-11.txt 
 10
Issue: 11 & 12 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
Shri Mataji went on to say that the
fashion, Shri Mataji again went through the
process of finding just the right sari for
each person remembering how they
looked and described why each selection
would be perfect for them.
English were wise to withdraw, but that
She still didn't fully understand why
because this has never happened before.
She said there was no war or conflict and
that without this, occupying countries do
not leave, so the English had some
wisdom. Shri Mataji said that the Nehru
It was a window in time seeing the
Goddess in this mode as the one who has
everything including the planets as Her
ornaments, but is not content unless She
is distributing gifts to everyone in an
expression of Her boundless love.
dynasty had not been good for India, and
that had Gandhi become the president,
India would be a very different country
today.
Shri Mataji explained that in the
early days she wore khadi saris, but Her
mother told her once she got married that
she should wear some colored saris. She
Cabella & Prathistan
Shri Mataji described Her first visit to
Cabella and how no one except Her really
saw its true potential. She said that Sir
C.P. felt that the place was not good and
was quite upset when he left saying "How
can we live here?" Sir C.P. then quipped
"And now we live here!" to the great
amusement of Shri Mataji and everyone
then began to talk about the Indian
independence movement and Gandhis
efforts to get the people to wear home
spun.
Indian Independence
Shri Mataji reminisced about Her
time with Gandhi in his ashram and said
that he was such a simple, disciplined and
straight forward man. She explained that
his khadi movement killed the textile
present.
Even though standing in Her
present bedroom at the time you could
see the sky through the walls, she felt that
with its thick walls and strong foundation,
the house had great potential. She said
that She seems to have a "knack" for
seeing this potential and that even though
the house was almost 500 years old, She
could tell that it would be worthy to be her
abode. She said that She had never been
trained in architecture, but that She had
somehow always been able to see these
things. At that point I said to Shri Mataji
that "You are the architect of all the
industry in Manchester, England and that
they used to even have a song that if we
use home spun, the factories will stop. Dr.
Spiro who was present at the time is from
Machester and confirmed that in fact there
is no textile industry in Manchester today.
Shri Mataji explained that when
Her father was jailed for 6 months during
the struggle for independence, She knew
true poverty for the first time because he
was the primary earner. Her father was
the only prominent Christian jailed at
the time.
architects!" and She just smiled.
Aldo explained that the house had been
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 2007
11
The Divine Cool Breeze
owned by the Dorias, who were a family
associated with shipping who used the
palazzo as a country residence and built
it in 1641.
today in 24 hours. All of the yogis were
concerned that the approvals from the
authorities had been given based upon
the original design, but when they took the
new plans in to submit them the original
plans had been lost, so they accepted Shri
Shri Mataji described how she had
added another floor of bedrooms above
Hers because of the high ceilings and the
strong foundations and was able to create
a great deal of extra space. She said that
She was surprised that the authorities
allowed Her to do this in such a historical
Mataji's new design as a replacement
and they were allowed to proceed!
Saturday Evening
At the culmination of the Saturday
entertainment evening after seeing the
yuva shakti and yogis of America perform
and thoroughly enjoying the program, Shri
Mataji stated that Her disappointment
about America had gone and She felt
confident that it would work out!
property, but they had recognised Her and
were wise.
Shri Mataji said that the older
houses are unique because they usually
have high ceilings, larger windows and
doors, and are more elegant in many
ways than newer houses. She then
explained that Pratishthan had originally
been conceived as a series of bungalows
on the site in more traditional fashion by
yogis, but that when She saw the plans
She threw them away and designed the
grand and very elegant house we see
Let us take this as an implicit
promise and become Her instruments for
the emancipation of the seekers of
America and the complete manifestation
of the powers of the Vishuddhi upon this
earth!
Via USA Sahajnet
(The Light of Sahaja Yoga)
Contd. from Page No. 6
(and its attendant culture), the probability of success of their acceptance of Sahaja
automatically becomes very high. Finally, Shri Mataji said that She will come to America.
She said that She will not give up yet. However, She repeatedly asked this question,
"You tell Me what it is that I should tell the American public, that will make them accept
Sahaja Yoga?"
That in essence is the challenge for all of us. Shri Mataji wants to come to
America, not necessarily for us but for all those who have yet to see Her light.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Raksha-Bandhan and Maryadas for Sahaja Yogis
Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Hounslow, London 11th Aug. 1984
most of the marriages which were done
like that, are 'very' successful than the
marriages that were selected and were
done. It's very wrong to do such a thing
as to arrange your marriage with a Sahaja
Yogi by yourself. It will be dangerous. I
don't want to say anything; but it wouldn't
turn out to be good because it is anti-
God activity. Absolutely anti-God. You are
supposed to develop your brahmacharya,
of
Today is a very great day of
Raksha Bandhan. So I have to tell you
something about Raksha-bandhan.
Before that we have to talk about the
maryadas (boundaries of pure
relationships) that have to be observed
by Sahaja Yogis.
One of the things I discovered
here, in the West, that though we have
understood
Mooladhara, which is a very important
thing, that unless and until we establish
our Mooladhara fully we are not going to
have speediest ascent. Despite all that,
there are lingering things you see around.
Like, people start choosing their life-
partners in Sahaja Yoga. That is not
allowed. That is not allowed.
importance
the
you are supposed to develop your
Mooladhara. Instead of that if you start
using a Sahaja Yogini or a Sahaja Yogi
for the selection of your married life, it's
going to be very very troublesome, your
Mooladhara is not going to settle down. I
mean that's a bad stroke for your
development.
Because of the background and
the kind of the conditioning you have had,
you people don't understand that it is
important to maintain the purity of the
centres. And of every place. So any such
relationship in one city is a very very
wrong thing. It spoils everyone. To add up
to the trouble, it's a habit of people, I have
You are not to spoil your Ashrams,
your centres - using them for a marriage
searching society. You must respect this
point, you must respect. If you have to
marry, then you can find your life partners
'outside' Sahaja Yoga to begin with
But if you want to marry 'in' Sahaja Yoga,
then you should not go on searching
people in Sahaja Yoga. It is 'very
dangerous' thing for Sahaja Yoga itself,
and for you people. That is one thing one
should 'never' try to do with Sahaja Yoga.
For all practical purposes you are
brothers and sisters. And that's why I
always encouraged marriage between
people who belong to another country or
another centres.
heard, that they try to tease that "you look
better together", "you're nice together".
They 'tease' and enjoy. It's a kind of a very
perverted enjoyment of mooladhara. To
tease others, "You are looking very nice
with him, and you better marry him." It's a
kind of a romantic non-sense.
Of course, for all this, yogis - they
have to have a Brahmacharya. But even
if you can't have brahmacharya. You must
As we are now having a big
marriage programme, I would say that
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007
13
The Divine Cool Breeze
have 'Maryadas.' Not to tease each other
and enjoy that kind of a non-sense, when
the marriage is not settled; - if marriage
is settled it is alright. And this kills
completely the joy of marriage. because
there is no curiosity left. And many a times
| find that 'absurd' relations are
much, what is so important? So many are
married and what has happened to them.
Even' with the Sahaja Yoga marriage,
some have failed because of these bad
habits.
So you 'better' get rid of these bad
habits before marriage. Because after
marriage also they go on like this, and
searching for boys and girls. Because if
these habits are not curbed, 'before'
marriage, then they go on lingering on. So,
one should not try to do all these things
before marriage. And I have seen such
marriages are never, never successful so
far. And even if they are, it is a sort of
make-believe thing. It doesn't give real
established.
Some of them are really no good.
And they will really be detrimental and
some of them are never established. So
if they are established, they are wrong,
and if they are not established, they are
heartbreaking.
So all this kind of thing you should
not do. You have got experiences of
people who married outside and brought
"wonderful' people to Sahaja Yoga. If you
can do it, you should do it. If you have to
joy, it's a joyless pursuit. May be in one
case - may be - successful, that does not
mean that you take help from such difficult
things, but have 'normal' marriage which
marry Sahaja Yogi, you should not marry
them at the cost of destroying the purity
and the idealism it has. For your own sake,
for your 'own' pleasures you should not
spoil the name of Sahaja Yoga.
are enjoyable, which have created
permanent bondages between people.
Now we have to understand about
the 'Maryadas', about which I have told
you before also. The relationships
between men and women are pure only if
a certain amount of boundaries are kept.
Like supposing you have milk in one
container and you have got something
That is one thing I have seen, so l
would say that today, as it is the day of
purity between relationships, let us know
that you have to treat each other as
brothers and sisters. No such play should
be followed. Don't allow your mind to drift
into this. Because if you allow, then there's
no end to it. As it is, you know how hard it
is to bring you back to normalcy.
else in another container. To keep the
purity of one container, you have to keep
it in its bounds, in the cup. If you allow
them to mix up, if they fall together and
mix up, then there is no purity left. It's a
simple thing like that. One should
understand. That we have to understand
When Christ had said, "Thou shalt
not have adulterous eyes", He did not say
it because it was not practical. It is quite
practical for Sahaja Yogis. And there is
nothing to worry about marriages so
that how to keep our relationships proper
in respect to eacn other's modesty and
chastity. Now, for example, there is a girl
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-15.txt 
 14
Issue: 11 & 12 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
"Mother we want to marry". Now what anm
I to say? "Alright, marry." But it creates a
problem for me, for the rest of the people.
They will say, "Alright. If he has married a
girl who is twenty years younger, why not I
marry a girl who is thirty years younger?"
who is younger to you. You must keep al
the distance from such a person. If she is
much older than you, then it's alright; you
can talk, laugh, joke, she's 'much' older
than you. But normally with a girl who is
younger to you, even 'much'younger, you
should try to keep away, after all if she is
a young girl; not with the children, but still.
- You must learn these things: how to
maintain a distance.
You must understand my
problems. If you ask me something,
"Mother, should I do it ?" You really force
me into it; I say, "Yes". Because I can't be
very strict with you, because 1 am your
Mother. But you should be sensible what
to ask me, how far to go. This is the
"biggest' Maryada you have to learn.
Now, there is a man, who's
younger to you. Then you 'must not' have
any funny ideas about sucha person - is
absolutely absurd. If some gentleman is
younger to you, it is only in perversion you
do such things. See, you should not have
any funny ideas about that person. It's only
done when there are emergencies, when
there is no possibility of a marriage, when
there are so many women or so many
men - or under perverted conditions. We
don't have; none of these conditions are
here, so we have to behave like normal
people.And when the proper atmosphere
is given to us, why not make use of it?
Why should we create absurd things?
Then they come out saying to me, "Mother,
we have decided to marry; let us marry.'. I
have to say, 'yes.' To many things I don't
want to say 'yes', but I have to say "yes,'.
That creates a very bad precedent. 'May
be' that in certain cases, as an exceptional
case, I might have chosen somebody to
Suddenly you will come, "Mother
should I sit here ?" What do I say? "Should
I make this gentleman sit here ?" What
should I say ?- "Alright". You 'yourself
should not ask such a question. Because
sometimes you give undue importance to
somebody, who is "my brother," who is "my
sister," - something.And make that person
sit on my head. Sometimes you telephone
to me, "Mother she would like to talk to
you". Who is she ? Is she alright ? Should
we take her to Mother ? Is she capable of
talking to Mother ? What is her condition
? Will she trouble Mother ? - Nobody
thinks about it.
So you must first establish your
relationship with me on proper
understanding that you should not try to
trouble me ! - But this is something not
yet in my hands. I think because people
do not understand what they are doing.
marry like that. But that does not mean
'you' should take things into your hands
and just start doing things like that, so that
I will have problems later. Because once
you do that, everybody starts doing it. It's
a kind of an aggressiveness, that you
arrange something, come to me, say,
So first try to see that you don't
take advantage of me. And second thing,
you don't bring people to me who do not
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-16.txt 
 15
Issue: 11 & 12 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
we will do this", then what am I to say
?"Alright, go ahead". If it pleases me l will
just spontaneously say, "Alright, it pleases
me. Go ahead with it".
deserve it. There is no need to waste my
time with them. I have so much things to
be done; so many ideas to be formulated.
I have to work so hard. You know, I am
working harder than any one of you, those
who are doing Sahaja Yoga. And at this
age if you try to trouble me like that I don't
know that how to tell you that you do not
trouble me. In the 'presence' of the person
you will come, you will bring the person
on my head," Oh, that person has come
from Timbuktu, and I have brought her".
Just you do it. It is aggressiveness only.
Please do not try to do that. This is the
wrong thing to do.
Like that so many things are there
that people just try to force on me and I
say, "Yes". But I am very cunning and
clever in that, because I tell in a way that
you realise that it is not joy-giving. Alright.
Now the second thing is that
Maryadas of relationships between you,
is relationship of 'Pure' Love. Of Purity.
Unless and until you develop 'pure'
relationship, you are going to be ruined.
See, this finger has to have pure
relationship with the hand. Supposing if
this finger has some dirty feelings about
So the Maryadas are to be
established first with me; that
understanding that you should not try to
this hand, it may dirty it. It may spoil it. In
trouble me 'at all'.
the same way we must have 'extremely
pure'relationship with each other. Means
we should try to give our heart to another
person without any lust or greed in it, - that,
we should try to do. Try to help each other.
Secondly, you should try to please
me by being good people. I hear that
somebody is trying to be very egoistical.
He does not even put on my tapes, he just
gives his own lectures. This kind of a thing
is very 'surprising'; how can people do
like that? Try to bring down your egos,
super-egos. You must Learn to 'please
I find when they feel in a lusty way,
or a greedy way attached to others - this
is not for the Sahaja Yogis, but non Sahaja
Yogis - they get so much interested in that
me (Prasanna bhava He Devi, Prasanna
bhava.) If you cannot make the Devi
Prasanna (pleased), what will be your
achievement? As Rustom says, I am
Mahamaya. Alright. But don't you know
that I am that ? So try to keep to it. And
keep that understanding that if we have
to grow, we 'must' have 'proper'
relationship with Mother. And we must
understand what would displease Her the
'most'. "Am I pleasing Her by doing this
?" But if you force me; "If it pleases You
person. It's a very 'baser' way of
attachment..
But in Sahaja Yoga, your
attachment is with your Spirit, your Atma.
And Atma is the 'purest form of our being.
We have to keep it absolutely pure. And
then the enjoyment is higher than any
romance, any marriage, any worldly thing.
It's the highest and the top-most. First
achieve that. First of all you should 'arise'
and 'achieve' that. 'Achieve' that purity.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-17.txt 
 16
Issue: 11 & 12 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
towards women, how to be dignified.
That is very important.
I have seen one lady going from
England to India. And she just went and
put a big slap on the back of Mr. Modi
"HELLO" Modi, how are you ?" And Modi
got such a shock ! She did not mean; she
was innocent, but that's not the way in
Sahaja Yoga we are going to behave.
Like some sort of a debonair or some
sort of a fantastic - what you call
Now the relationship between men
and women. I have told you that you
should not try to enter into any bedroom,
where the ladies are. It's not proper. Nor
the women should enter into men's thing.
But it is very common. Women should not
behave in the way other women behave.
Like I was told in a wedding in
Maharashtra that the women went and
took out all their clothes. I mean that is not
England, they got a shock, you know.
Some of them lost their appetite for 3-4
days. They have never seen such women
in their lifetime. They went and took out
their clothes suddenly all of them. I mean
they were shocked, so much shocked that
3-4 days they did not eat their food. So
you had no business to shock them also, and beautiful.
Because if you go to somebody's country,
you must know in what way they live. It's
never done. Nobody becomes nude like
that. And 20 girls, if they suddenly become
nude like that, what will happen?
modern woman.
One must understand one must
have a sense of shame; how do you talk.
Even with me they will talk with a hand like
that "MOTHER! you see this thing is
happening." But there's no need to do all
that, you see. Talk in a way that is gentle
The other dayI met a very nice taxi
fellow. And I tell you, his gestures and
things were 'so' beautiful, 'immediately I
said he is a realised soul ! He would not
say anything without putting his hand like
this, and with his eyes down below. He
would not say something like that, nothing
of the kind. So sweet he was, his whole
gesture. He is an Englishman ! Brought
up and bred here. Not a single vulgar
word he said. Like one of your players was
so stupid. When Princess Anne went to
meet him he said all kinds of things,
you see. It's kind of an ego, or stupidity-I
don't know.
So the sense of shame must be
developed. Among men and women. It
looks nice, it looks beautiful. It gives you
an additional charm. If you have the sense
of shame, a little bashfulness.
See your Princess of Wales is
regarded as something beautiful. She is
bashful! Her bashfulness is so natural.
That bashfulness is not there, like a - I
don't know what animal does that, but
somebody who has no shame. I mean I
just don't know which one is that.
Everybody has a sense of shame
even animals. So why not we have that
sense of shame; how to behave
Because, how you talk, how you
speak, everything should be saintly. You
are 'saints' now! Do you realize? You are
all 'saints'. So how you behave with dignity
towards each other, how you respect their
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-18.txt 
 17
Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
elders. But when the leader also is not
dignity, how you live, is 'very' important.
And that you should try to maintain in a
way that looks like a 'saintly' behaviour.
You have to be a 'saint' ! And that is not
difficult for you, to take to that, that you
behave in a manner that you are saints.
respected, what is the question of it ?1
have seen little boys calling big, married
people with 3-4 children, by name. That's
not our style. You should never do it. I saw
this - even my husband's office has this
problem. Because when I came, you see,
- they always called you by name. - Tom.
This is very important. It would be
killing, absolutely killing Sahaja Yoga, it He's such a big man, he's called as Tom
you do not keep your Maryadas. That
one of the 'Most' essential things one has
to understand. I have told you again and
again how you dress up, how you bear
yourself up, how you talk, how you listen So we could not understand why is it like
to others more than you talk yourself, how
you become non-aggressive, - is the best
way to impress people and to express
Sahaja Yoga. I tell you, as it is people have We 'must' respect. We 'must' respect
started saying, "They are very beautiful
people, you can see they are very
beautiful. You can see they are very
different type. It's something different.
They are something great."- People have
"started' saying that. But 'still' we lack in
certain things, like we start going on a
plane which is not suitable to our stature, children, you see, I am their Mother. But
to our dignity, to our position as saints.
We are all prophets, and prophets have
to behave like prophets. They can not
behave like cheap-type people. So, in
that we have to understand the Maryadas.
and all that. So C.P. looked at it. . And
we always call them -even the drivers, we
call them by the name Mr.-, you see.
this. You see, it being 'democratic' or
something. You see that's how you
become 'demonocratic'.
each other, must call them by higher
names. Specially when in a meeting
where there are people, you should call
them - each other, even your friends - by
Mr. so and so. It's alright for me to call you.
It would look very funny if I call Mr. Brown
or Mr. Reeves; because they are my
for 'you' because you are equal, at least
call them Mr. - And say something in a
way which is beautiful.
Like the English language has
many words as "please", "thank you"-All
these must be used 'profusely. "Profusely'.
We are going 'back' a little bit. We are
now becoming much more modern. That,
we should give up and become less
modern and more elevating. Now the
whole idea of this Maryada is such that
when you have called somebody as a
sister or a brother then it is not only
lipservice, "You are my sister". It is
Now the Maryada to your leader
also; you should be respectful. I have seen
that nobody calls any body - even the
children will call somebody, say, elderly
person also - never they, say, call them
uncle or anything like that; - it's a wrong
thing. You must teach your children to call
elders by the name as brother or uncle or
someone. Give some respect to the
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-19.txt 
 18
Issue: 11 & 12 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
people don't have to solve. And don't
interfere with their married life. Let them
something 'innate', and very deep. You
have to develop that feeling of a sister.
be as they are, I will find out how they are,
I will try to help them. But it's 'very' wrong
to play with their married life or with their
marriage problems, and suddenly jump on
somebody, - is a very wrong thing. Which
is very common here. A woman is in
distress, you see, a man will come to help
her. Even if she is married, he will elope
with her. This is how he comes to help her
in the distress. - To create another distress
for her. So this is how one should
understand that this kind of a cheap heart
giving business is not for Sahaja Yoga.
Because that's how your sublimity
will go up, your left-Vishuddhi will improve,
your Vishnumaya will be satisfied.
If you call somebody a sister, the
sisterly and daughterly relationships, and
motherly relationships, always bring down
the so-called ego, which is hiding in the
left Vishuddhi. So try to be kind and gentle
with the person whom you call the sister.
Stand by her. Look after her. If somebody
you call your brother, you have to pray for
his protection; then you must know that you
have a right to ask him for 'his' protection
also. But you must also 'give' something
to him, and you must try to look after him,
welcome him to your house, and treat him
as a part and parcel of your being,
beçause he is 'very much' near to you
because he is your brother, and he's very
much closer to you.
In our heart resides the Spirit. We
are dignified people, and in that dignity,
we have to rise, and live with that dignity.
Not to cheaply allow the Spirit to be
insulted or dominated or subjugated to
anyone'.
Now the relationship with children
also one should understand. I have seen
some people have a habit of getting a
child very much closer, and pampering
them, "Oh! this child is this thing", "Oh I
that child..." Let the parents handle the
child, 'you' just don't interfere with other's
children. Don't interfere much with them.
If you find any child is such and such,
inform me, I will cure the child. But if a child
is being spoilt by you, it's the worst thing
to do-to harm that child, is to spoil.
But such a brother should not try
to dominate the wife, - this is the Maryada,
again. Like somebody is very friendly with
the brother. Ora lady is friendly as a sister,
then she should not try to put a wedge
between husband and wife. That is the
"worst' thing to do, is to put a wedge
between husband and wife. Anybody who
tries to do that must know that he is a
mean person. One should 'never'try to put
a wedge between husband and wife.
Children here are 'very' clever and
intelligent, you must know. They are 'very
good' at manipulating. They will, because
they are extremely precocious. They are
realised souls, they are born in this
country. What a combination !At that time
I know there are problems between
husband and wife, I will put them right. But
you don't try to put any wedge between
them. And don't try to create a problem. If
it is problematic, it is for 'me' to solve, you
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Issue: I & 12-2007
19
The Divine Cool Breeze
you should be 'very' careful as to their
training.
whom you think can look after, to look after
- and see that the child is put righ "Nip in
the bud" is the best way, because we don't
From the first five years all the parents
should be 'extremely' strict with children.
'Extremely strict'. Don't allow them to
overpower you or manipulate you. It's
"very' important. If you allow them to
overpower you or to dominate you, they
will sit on your head. Tell them not to do
like that. And one day you will come and
say "Mother, what to do, these are
realised souls and you see we were
want to have children who are spoilt, who
are spoiling other children, nor we want
children who are subjected to such
children. So, you can have proper children,
well-behaved children, sensible, wise
children. Because they can really be a
drag on you, on me, on everyone, if you
do not properly bring them up. And they
are our liabilities, we have to look after
them.
looking after them." They are not deities.
They are not deities to be worshipped.
They are 'only' realised souls. So keep
them at that point. And you are my trustees
of these children. And if you spoil them, it
is 'you' who will he held responsible. You
have no business to spoil the lives of these
children as Sahaja Yogis, and their
chances of ascent. So if they are born-
realised, they are not deities; this you must
understand. They are not 'beyond'
corruption, they are not beyond all kinds
of things
So the relationship between father
and children, mother and children, is
important. Actually the mother should look
after the child much more. And the child
must respect; father should never scold
the mother in the presence of the child.
That's one thing one must understand.
That if the father starts scolding the mother
in the presence of the child, the child will
have no respect for the mother. But the
respect must be maintained, because if
the wife respects the husband then the
child will know how to respect her and the
husband too. So the whole thing is built
up like that. Is a kind of a pattern for the
children to follow. One should not try to
dominate the husband, at least in the
So this if you understand, this little
point, that dealing with your children, you
have to be 'really' strict. They must know
how to meditate, they must know how to
pray, they must know how to respect; and
all the good things you must teach your
children - and don't allow them to sit on
presence of children. That's very wrong.
Because then the children learn that trick
and they start dominating 'you. So it flows
from you to children. So try to see, if you
have to do anything then you do it yourself.
And respect the husband and in a way that
is very obvious to the child that the father
your head.
Many people have ruined the lives
of their children like this. Now will you see
such child is brought into proper level? If
the child is trying to take liberties with you,
and cheeky, and does not listen, please
give that child to some other Sahaja Yogi,
is respected by..nother.
And they are just like monkeys.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007
20
The Divine Cool Breeze
In money matters also, I have seen
allow them to behave in a particular that peopie should be very-very sensible
and should have proper Maryadas. Now,
you put a good pattern of behaviour, they with me, whatever Maryadas you want to
keep, you must understand! It is very
embarrassing to talk about it. But so far,
as you know, I had to shell-out lot of money
to manage many funds, many things.. And
last time also we had many people who
The way you behave, they behave. So you
manner, they will behave that way. But if
will imbibe it.
The other day I was thinking, how
Indian children are so obedient, so
sensible. They will never ask for it, "I want
this, I want that". They never manipulate.
What happens? What happens, how do
they do it ? The reason is, I think, the good
pattern in the house. Everybody knows
whom to respect, how to respect. how to
came to eat-does not matter.
At the time, now, when we are
talking about Maryadas, we must know
that in any case Mother should not be
made to pay any more. Because we are
so many, we should try to manage, it
possible. Like yesterday, I had a person
from BBC, and he said, "It is 'wrong' of
you, not to take any money from them." |
said where is the money ! No question of
taking, I have to pay myself ! I said it is so
invaluable that how can you charge for it
? They are not charged for it, it is very
invaluable. The Spirit is very invaluable,
and you cannot charge for it. So he was
insisting. I mean, he took half an hour on
this subject only. He said, "This Anglo-
Saxon brain would not understand unless
behave.
The relationship in Sahaja Yoga
has to be even more than this, much more
subtler. For example, if - this I have said
before also - if we are in a room try to give
another person always try to do 'for'
them. If you have to pay, better pay
yourself. Not that wait for another person.
Try to do it yourself. Run 'forward' to do it.
You see, if someone is carrying the
luggage, 'you' run, 'you' do it. That is the
way a Sahaja Yogi should be. Mostly,
children are like that; they will say. "T will
get it; 'I' will do it; T will receive." May be
ego, you might call it, but whatever it is,
but that is the sign you all have to achieve
by organising a proper type of an image
for the 'whole society'. That if somebody
needs something, you run; "You want
water, alright ..", "you want something, you
take mine". Food also, same thing. First
let other's have, not that you should first
have anything. How you eat your food is
very important, everything is very
important for the children to see, and to
behave like that.
and until you make it a little more money-
oriented or something. I said, "I can not.
Tell me how much is to be paid." Just to
shut him down, I said, "What about Christ
? How much money did 'He' take ? By
God's grace I am quite well off and I really
do not need either. But He 'needed' still
Henever took any money from anyone
Then he kept quiet. But this is, you see'
That people think that you are getting it
easy, cheap and that is why you want to
take advantage, - which is wrong. You
must 'respect'. You must respect and
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007
21
The Divine Cool Breeze
in a person who is helped by us and his
is challenged, and he tries to behave
understand, that it is 'never' good to take
any advantage of it.
ego
in a manner, which was never known
before. And he starts behaving in such a
'funny' manner that he does not talk to
anyone, he keeps out and he becomes
mad, which is ego. So, his ego is hurt.
There's nothing to feel hurt. Because if you
On the contrary, whenever it is
possible you should try to do whatever is
possible for Sahaja Yoga., It is very
important. Try to surrender. Not that I will
take any money from you; you know that, I
do not want any money or anything. But
surrender' yourself absolutely to Sahaja
Yoga. That is the best way people have
risen and have done so well.
have no money and if it is one part and
one body, if somebody's helping you out,
does not matter. You can help somebody
else, when you are well off. But when it
comes to 'you', you give up. So it's a very
absurd type of a behaviour of one
individual or two or three or may be five
Now the relationship among
yourselves, among different groups,
among different nations. We should try to
help people. Supposing there is a couple
now, wants to go to India to get married.
Now if they do not have money, of course
I am there. I said, "Alright they need not
pay any money, I will pay for them". But
Warren has put down his foot, he says,
or ten. Doesn't matter. But still we must
not forget that we have to 'help".
We have to help as many as
possible. And we must try to do, whatever
is possible for us, for others. This is
important. If we cannot do for a group, like
"Why not the people or the centre help
them out, for the time being ?" You see
because, now supposing they have
helped somebody, he had no money. He
went to India, he got married and then he
got lost. See, he misbehaved, in the
sense, that he does not talk to anyone, he
thinks no end of himself. Then he started
Sahaja Yogis, whom are we going to
help? So we have to give that help.
Now, in Sahaja Yoga itself, on the
subtle basis we should not try to judge
anybody's vibrations. It is very common
in people; "Oh, you are caught-up on your
let
Agnya". "Oh you have got this wrong, let
me clear you out". You sit down. Morning
till evening, without meditating, they are
clearing each other's chakras and
catching on yourself. It's an absolutely
wrong idea. 'Everybody', individually,
should sit before the photograph get the
vibrations. 'Every' morning, there should
be a discipline. You must know that the
system of Sahaja Yoga has worked out
this way that I have given you realization
just to say that "Let your light be
behaving in a funny manner. So a kind of
a feeling came into their mind that "Why
should we do it ? You see, you do it for
somebody, he behaved like that. If you try
to help somebody... Is this a natural
reaction that if you try to do something
for someone then people try to
misbehave?" That's not so. Must be one
person has done it, that does not mean
that everybody has done it. That's what it
is. They say there's a kind of a barrier built
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007
22
The Divine Cool Breeze
It is not so. You are my hands. Now,
supposing, my hands have to lift this, I
should say that "Nirmala will do it." Now
which is Nirmala ?- These hands are the
Nirmala at this point!
enlightened." Now you have to see your
lamp, it's clean or not; - only possible when
the light is enlightened. See your lamp, if
it is enlightened or not. See, if somebody
is over-aggressive, then its alright, you
make a joint attack on that person. And
tell-off that person. Or there are leaders
who will do it. But everybody must not
judge others. You better judge yourself,
cleanse yourself, look after yourself. And
also try to see how your lamp is. Is it clean
? Mother has given us the light to see; and
why not see ?
So, many people drift like that, so
to Sahaja Yoga also your attitude should
be of respect. You should not try to put
yourself into bandhan before others, you
should not try to do these things, but in a
dignified way you should respect Sahaja
Yoga.And foremosť of all, to Sahaja Yoga
your relationship should be that you
should 'know' "Sahaja Yoga" what it is."
Otherwise every time if you have to talk
So if you work it out on these lines,
you will go 'very' fast. And you have to,
now, perfect yourself. We have so many
Sahaja Yogis, but how many are perfect.
This is the point.
about Sahaja, Gavin must come
or
somebody. Why? Gavin did not know a
word about Sahaja Yoga, he did not know
a word about Indian mythology, he did not
know'anything', he did not know what is
Now your relationship to Sahaja
Yoga is also very important. There's a
Maryada about it very much. Sahaja yoga
should not be taken for granted. Anybody
Realization. He studied. He even studied
Sanskrit. Like many of you have done it.
But 'all' of you, 'one and all', should
who thinks he has got realisation and now
he is sitting on top of the world - is not so.
You must work it out, you have to have
discipline. The same gentleman the
BBC fellow - was saying that it was before,
for years together you had to live in
celibacy and wash - and sweep steps of
the temple and do all kinds of things, work
hard, do this do that, - and then they would
raise it to one chakra. I said, "Now we do
it the other way round". First build the
dome, and then the foundation. Sahaja
Yoga is like that. So that, with the dome
you understand you are protected, you are
looked after. But people take for granted.
Like : "Mother will do it." "Leave it to
Mother." No.
become a big pandit. But you get lost in
your marriage problems. Then your
children's problems. Then my mother, then
my sister. I mean it will take too much time
for you.
First of all you must see, I am a
Sahaja Yogi. let me get to work.' And it
creates problems for us also. Because
your wife will sue you, your children will
come round, this that. You should say "I
have nothing to do, I am going to study
Sahaja Yoga." I was surprised that many
people have taken "Advent" just like as a
Bible. Just as a Bible. They 'never' read
it. I was surprised that some people do
not know what I have written in the Advent.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007
23
The Divine Cool Breeze
"But that detachment is not there ! Not at
all a detachment. And it is something
surprising, that if you have to go to
Himalayas and make insurance policy;
then what's the use of coming to Sahaja
Yoga ? It is as absurd as that ! We are
writing two insurance policies, that, "I have
gone to Himalayas, if I die, give my
property to this one. If I don't die, I will
come back after that"...! -And nicely
So it's like the Jews, you see, having a
Golden Bible tied up here. They keep the
"Advent" in a very good cover near the
photograph, worship it, - finished. And the
knowledge goes into them !" You 'must
read' some chapters-at least of "Advent",
if not anything else.
There are so many books you can
read. I have told you. Try to make your own
library. Try to improve on it. 'Everybody
packing up in a nice plastic bag so that
must try to get perfection. Perfectionism.
You should never be a liability on Sahaja
Yoga, but a 'great asset of Sahaja Yoga.
ice does not spoil it ! It's as absurd as
that ! So you should not have anything.
Now some people have a habit
That's what everybody should try
to be: That, 'your' problems I will solve.
But you solve your ascent. That is very
important. You 'must' ascend' otherwise
whatever problems I solve, you get into
another problem, then you get into another
problem.
"Oh, I will get a house for myself. Get my
wife there, children there." Finished-All
such people, for a change, should leave
their houses, come to Ashram, put some
other people in their house. Because they
are getting attached, you see, how will you
get detached? Is there any way out ?
Because that is very important in Sahaja
Yoga: "Unless and until you are detached,
you cannot ascend." Supposing you have
all the tentacles down here on the Mother
Earth, and you say "Let this plane fly"- how
will it move? So those people who have
houses of their own, or buildings of their
Now the relationship, say, you have
anAshram. Somebody has bought it. Now
nobody should think that "this is my house."
Now this is the best way to get out of this
idea of possession. Because thenI
trouble you; that's the place where
Mahamaya plays. If you say, "This is my
house"-then you will have it!And you will
have it for ever. So such things you should
'never' develop, the feeling that this (is my
house)." Now I have seen people going
to an Ashram. And then they think this is
their house. They live there. They
manipulate all the money that they save
and this and that, and develop this, want
to make everything comfortable. They
never think: "This is not my Ashram, I am
doing it becausel am a Sahaja Yogi, This
is the Ashram of Mother. I have to do it
own or anything flats -'should' give up their
houses, not to be that comfortable; get out
of it. Ask some other people to shift, and
you shift to the Ashram. Go on shifting,
training your mind to shift, to live with
everyone, to be able to share and to do
things.
Ihave changed 40 houses after my
marriage. You can imagine ! And the kind
of a house I have to carry on with is a very
multipurpose house. And I have changed
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007
24
The Divine Cool Breeze
so far forty houses, and if I change now
this house, it will be the forty-first. You can
imagine, I have been married forty years
and forty houses I have changed. So the
relationship of purity must be understood,
in everything. "Is it 'pure' relationship? Am
I living in this Ashram in 'pure'relationship?
Because this is a house that is a house
that is giving me comfort that's why I am
living in this house, or am I just living here,
just because it is an abode, I am here
today, and I will be there tomorrow?." You
will be amazed you will enjoy 'every' part
of life.
unity for purity, no use.
So this light should give you
complete wisdom that you enjoy a 'pure'
good life. You are married; alright, you
have life of enjoyment with your wife - that
Thave already described to you. And with
your wife how to behave also I have
described many a times, Or with your
husband.
But when it comes to others, you
should have absolutely 'Pure' relationship
of no exploitation. Even there are flirting
exploitations as the same as money
exploitations. Here if you exploit
somebody by money it's called a 'Thug'
But flirting is not called anything. I think it
is a much worse crime according to
Christ. So you have to be careful on this
point, and understand that relationship
with each other has to be pure. Now there
are people who have, say, horrible wives
or horrible husbands. I don't mind, they
can give them up. If they are 'absolutely
impossible, if they are spoiling their purity,
if they are torturing their lives, then the best
is to get rid of them. I don't mind. Because
if they are 'so' bad that you cannot use
them - just like this body, if it is so bad, it's
better to give up and die, so that let that
relationship die out. But that death should
come to you as a very forceful help,
otherwise after that if you become a
nervous personality, what's the use?
"As soon as' you are attached, you
are doomed. It's a 'headache', to be
attached to some one. Then you hanker:
"My wife has not arrived. Oh God, what to
do now. I must telephone to her, get her
here". But if you are detached, "What's it,
she'll come in time." Not only that, but you
will enjoy her company; otherwise you will
shout at her:" Why did not you come in
time, I was waiting for you." Then why were
you waiting to scold her, and shout at her
and spoil all the relationship? Just see,
the absurdity of the whole thing is the
'attachment.' You should get completely
"DETACHED' about everything and you
will enjoy, just ENJOY!
But in that also, one has to judge
you are really enjoying or you are just
making a drama out of it. Try to be sincere.
PURITY is brought forth by SlINCERITY. If
you are not sincere to yourself and to
others, you can not, be pure. And purity is
the 'main' thing you have to achieve in
Sahaja Yoga, apart from the unity, which I
have given you. But if you do not use this
So what you have to do after such
a thing has happened, is to solve all your
problems solve your divorce problems,
solve your court problems, then come to
Sahaja Yoga. We do not want to get
involved into this sort of a thing 'at all' that
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-26.txt 
 (Issue: 11 & 12 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze T
25
the one which surrounds Shri Krishna; and
She was born as Draupadi who, you
know, was later humiliated by Duryodhana
and it was Shri Krishna who came and
we have broken any family or anything. If
you cannot carry on with your wife, Sahaja
Yoga should not be any excuse. Because
'you' can not carry on with your wife, you
should have this thing - go out of Sahaja
Yoga, do what you like with your wife,
finish it off once for all. And you should tell
her,"l am no more a Sahaja Yogi." Get it
out, and then' come to Sahaja Yoga. But
by coming to Sahaja Yoga you will be
'really' troubling me too much.
helped her.
So it's a very sweet relationship of
purity, of help. A very delicate relationship
is to be maintained of a brother and a
sister. And that is a special relationship.
Today, those who want to tie the Rakhis
to a sister should tie today before me, it
will be a good idea. It is a greater
relationship than any other relationship
Because here somebody is your 'own'
sister, is alright. But if she is not your own
sister you should know that you all are
So I have to make a humble
request to you, that if you have any such
problem, do not allow any child who is
younger thana proper age- sixteen years
- to be kept in the Ashram without taking
a full permission, 'written' permission from
the parents. Or a wife who has made
problems with the husband, should 'not'
be allowed to come and stay in the
Ashram with the children. We are not
responsible for all kinds of problems.
born of 'One' Mother. So the brother and
sister relationship should be alright.
In that also one should not have
preferences Because some would like to
have a rich sister! Or some sort of a
nonsense like that. Or somebody would
like to have the most miserable one. This
Then people who are sick or
mentally deranged should not be kept in
the Ashram. That is also quite a
'sympathetic' attitude of so many Sahaja
Yogis. Ashram is for the 'best' people, not
for the lunatics. So please do not get such
people who are no good. We do not want
such people to come in the Ashram who for people, something like that could be
are going to ruin the reputation of the
Ashram. Now, brother sister relationship tie the things. Which ever way you like you
- the relationship of Vishnumaya is, that choose it. But I have got some nice Rakhis
Vishnumaya is the one who is the Sister, for you; that should be done today. And I
Sister of Shri Krishna. She is the one who
is all but a relationship with a person with
whom you would like to be happy, you
should tie the Rakhi. And if there is
anybody left out, I would say that best thing
would be to have your lucky dips. I think
done so that they choose their sisters and
will be very happy. And then we will do this
little havana for the Vishnumaya.
announced the Coming of Shri Krishna.
She is the one who sacrificed her life to
save Shri Krishna's life. Vishnumaya is
May God Bless you
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-27.txt 
 When the Kundalini Rises, It Makes Sounds
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
(London-14.10.1978)
When the kundalini rises it makes
sounds and the sounds that are heard
At the Vishudhi, where there are
sixteen petels, it makes the
sounds of all the vowels:
in the different chakras can be
pronounced in the following way :-
GA, Aa, E, Ee, U, Oo, Ree, Lru,
Lroo, É, Ai, O, Au, Am, Áha.
These pronuciations are being
used in the phonetic language of DEVA
NAGARI, which means the language
spoken by the Devas.
अ आ इ ई उ ऊ त् ऋ लू लू
ए ऐ ओ औ अं अः
At the Agya Chakra it makes
At the Mooladhara where there
Ha -5, Ksh -8T
are four petals the sounds are
(व-va, श-sha, ष-sh, स-sa). Out
of which last ( and #) Sh and
Sa sounds are very close but the
difference is when the snake
At the Sahastrara one becomes
Thoughtless and no sound is
made, but the pure 'Ana-Hata'
(3Ea) meaning the throbbing in
the purest form - as in the heart
is of Lap-Tap, Lap-Tap, Lap-Tap
(लप-टप, लप-टप, लप-टप,)
hisses it makes this (#) sa, the
third sound. So Va, Sha, Sh, Sa
(व, श, ष, स)
At the Swadhishthana where
When, all these sounds are
sounded together and pass through the
spiral of the body, if the body is made
a conch, the sound that comes out of this
synthesis is...o...000. Like the seven
colours of the sun ultimately become white
rays or you can say the golden colour rays.
there are six petals it makes six
sounds- Ba, Bha, Ma, Ya, Ra, La
(ब, भ, म, य, र, ल)
• Manipur- It has ten petals. It
makes the sounds Da, Dh,
Na (UT), Ta, Tha, Da, Dha, Na, Pa,
Pha (ड, ढ, ण, त, थ, द, ध,
• There are three Granthis (T-efi)
means the knots-The Brahma Granthi
(ब्रह्मग्रन्थी) The Vishnu Granthi (विष्णु ग्रन्थी)
and the Rudra Granthi (hget). With
न, प फ)
• At Anahata there are twelve
petals. It makes the sounds : Ka,
Kha, Ga, Gh, Ng, Ch, Chh, Ja,
Jha, Yan, Ta, Tha. (क, ख, ग,
घ, ड०, च, छ, ज, झ, अ ट ठ)
Agni, means fire (31f) when the Brahma
Granthi meets, between the Kundalini,
Chakra,
Mooldhara
Swadhishthana means Mooladhara
and
the
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007
27,
The Divine Cool Breeze
Chakra, Mooldhara and Swadhishtana
Chakra then Agni-Brahma Granthi is
established (अग्नि बरह्मग्रन्थी)
Anahata. Chakra, Vishudhi Chakra,
Lambika Chakra, this is also called
Hamsa Chakra, Agya Chakra.
Between Agya Chakra and
Shasrara there are two other sub chakras
Vishnu Granthi (विष्णु ग्रन्थी) when
mixes up with the Surya (), that is
between Nabhi and the Hridaya Chakra
(नाभी, हृदय) Surya-Vishnu Granthi
(सूर्य-विष्णु ग्रन्थी) is 'established. When
Vishudhi and Agnya auras meet then
Chandra Rudra Granthi (चन्द्र-रुद्र ग्रन्थी)
is established.
known as Nada Bindu (नॉद बिन्दु), So we
have:
1. Mooldhara
(मूलाधार)
(स्वाधिष्ठान )
2. Swadhishthana
(मणिपुर)
3. Manipur
4. Anahat
(अनाहत)
• Altogether there are fourteen
Nadis (ifsai). The Name are:
5. Vishudhi
(विशुद्धि)
Lambika (Hamsa) (लम्बिका)।
6.
(अलम्बुसी)
1. Alambusi
7. Agya
(आज्ञा)
2. Kuhulon
कुहू)
3. Yashodhari (यशोधरी)
(नॉद)
8. Nada
(बिन्दु)
9. Bindu
4. Varuna
(वरुणा)
(सहस्रार)
10. Sahasrara
(हस्तजिह्वा)
5. Hastajihva
Apart from that there are nine
chakras on the sides, like Shri Lalita and
6. Yashasavati (यशस्वती)
(अश्विनी)
7. Ashwani
T)
they have different (a
(गान्धारी)
8. Gandhari
Yoginis, means the powers, the
Shaktis guiding those Nine Shakti Pithas
(V or you can call them as Avarak
Nama Chakra (आवरक नाम चक्र)
(उषा)
9. Usha
(शह्खिनी)
10. Shankhini
11. Saraswati
(सरस्वती)
(a) The first one is Shri Lalita, The
goddess Shri Lalita, which is the
Goddess of beauty; She is the joy giving,
Sarvanandamaya (aaa), gives the
joy from everything. In every created world,
in every particle, in every form, there is
a power which gives us joy. This power
is the joy, is the power of Shri Lalita. She
is called as Maha Tripura Sundari
(ईड़़ा)
12. Ida
(पिंगला)
13. Pingla
14. Sushumna
(सुषुम्ना)
Apart from two chakras which are
Surya and Chandra (, a), there are
nine other chakras : Mooldhara Chakra,
Swadishthana Chakra, Manipur Chakra,
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-29.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
28
2. Kameshwari (कामेश्वरी) which
(महात्रिपुर सुन्दरी),
excities.
Para-Para Atirahasya Yogini (T
परा अतिरहस्यायोगिनी) means Para-Para-
Ati-Rahasya, परा- परा अतिरहस्या one who
knows the secrets. The Para, 'Par' means
the one that is beyond of the beyond; the
secrets of that area, the one who knows
is Shri Lalita, who is the yogini.
3. Modini (Hife) which makes you
happy.
4. Vimla (fauet) which makes you
clean.
5. Aruna (3TRUI) which gives you
colour on the face.
6. Jayini (afa which gives you a
feeling of victory.
At this stage She is Bindu-
Saryangandamayi (बिन्दुस्वानन्दमयी). She
is the dot, which is joy giving.
7. Sarveshi (Hayit) which connects
you with every one.
(b) Second power or (3raRUT) Avaran
is the enclosure, is like a triangle. She
is Sarva-Siddhi-Prada (Hd f
She is the one who gives all the Siddhis
(fafgat). She has got three sides. She
is called as Tripuramba (f ,
Kameshwari ( कामेश्वरी), Buddheshwari
(बुद्धेश्वरी), Bhag Malini ( भगमालिनी ) are
the three yoginis.
Kaulini (कौलिनी) is the one which
8.
gives you boons.
(d) The fourth Enclosure is called
Antardashar (अन्तर्दशार ).
The Chakra of this enclosure is
called as Sarva Raksha Kar (Ha
T&ITCH)- the one that protects.
The goodess is called as Tripur-
Malini ( त्रिपुर मालिनी ).
(c) Third one is called as Ashtaar
Sarva Rog Hara (अष्टार सर्व रोगहर). This
is another enclosure. The name of the
goddess is Tripursiddha, Ati Rahasaya
(त्रिपुर सिद्धा, अति रहस्या), meaning this
goddess knows the deep screts of all the
siddhis. The Chakra is called as Sarva
The Powers Are :-
the one which
Sarvagnya (
is all knowing.
1.
Sarva Shakti (सर्वशक्ति)- is all
Rog Hara (सर्व रोगहर) and Enclosure is
called Ashtaar (3).
powerful.
Sarva Aishwarya Prada (Haya-
Ya1)- giver of all the bounties.
3.
The eight powers are called as
Vagdevta (वाग्देवता) means the
power of the speech: First is:
Sarvagyanmai (सर्वज्ञानमयी)-
knower of all the knowledge.
4.
1. Vashini (a
) means which
5. Sarva Vyadhi Vinashini (Hd
aiAttracts
2.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
29
Sarva Mangala Karini ( ae
chifu)- She is the one who gives
all that is auspicious.
व्याधिविनाशिनी)-the destroyer of all
4.
the diseases.
6. Sarvadhar Swaroopa (ate
Sarva Kama Prada (सर्वकामप्रदा)-
the one who gives all our desires.
the support of all.
ta
5.
Sarva Pap Hara (सर्व पाप हरा)- the
destroyer of all the sins.
7.
6. Sarva Dukh Vimochini (
विमोचिनी)- the one who is
destroyer of all our pains.
8. Sarvanandmayi ( सर्वानन्दमयी)-
The one who makes every one
joyous.
7. Sarva Mrityu Shamani (d
YIH)- the one who pacifies the
9. Sarva Raksha Swaroopini (
रक्षा स्वरूपिणी) - the one who
protects all of them.
death.
Sarva Vighna Nivarini (a fa
निवारिणी)- She is the one who is
8.
10. Sarvpekshit Phala Prada
(सर्वपेक्षित फलप्रदा)- the giver of all
the phalas means-fruits, rewards.
the remover of all these hurdles.
Sarvanga Sundari (सर्वांग सुन्दरी)-
the one who makes every side of
life happy.
9.
(e) The fifth enclosure is called Bahir-
deshar-Sarvartha-Sadhaka (afec
सर्वाथ साधक).
10. Sarva Saubhagya Dayini (
सौभाग्य दायिनी)- the one who is the
giver of good fortunes.
Bahir Dashar (बहिर्दशार) is the name of
the enclosure and Sarvartha Sadhak
(सर्वार्थ साधक) is the Chakra's Name.
(f) The sixth enclosure is know as
Chaturdashar Sarva Saubhagya
(चतुर्दशा सर्व सौभाग्य).
Tripura-Shri (त्रिपुराश्री) is the name of
Goddess.
Dinige
She has powers :-
Tripur Vasini ( त्रिपुरवासिनी) is the name
1. Sarva Siddhi Prada (सर्व सिद्धिप्रद)-
She gives all the siddhis.
of Goddess.
Chaturdashar (aadyr) is the name of
Sampat
2. Sarva
Prada
the enclosure.
(सर्वसम्पत्प्रदा)-She is the one, giver
And the Chakra's name is Sarva
of all wealth.
Saubhagya Dayaka. (सर्व सौभाग्य दायकः)
Sarva Priyankari (सर्व प्रियंकारी)-
3.
The Goddess's name is Tripur-vasini
(त्रिपुरवासिनी).
She is the one who is beloved
of all.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
30
The Powers Are:
destroys all the dualities of life.
1. Sarva Sankshobhini (a
संक्षोभिणी)- the one who burns off
everything.
2. Sarva Vidravini (सर्व विद्राविणी)-
the one who can perverse.
(g) The seventh avaran (31a) or
enclosure is called (31
अष्टदल)
And the Chakra of this Avarn is
called Sarva-Sankshobhan- karka
(सर्वसंक्षोभनकारक ).
Sarvakarshini (सर्वाकर्षिणी)- the
one which attracts.
3.
Here She is called as Tripursundri
(fii, She is the one who gives
beauty to women to be attractive wives.
Sarva Ahladini (सर्व आहुलादिनी)-
the one who is the giver of joy.
4.
1. Ananga Kusuma Devi (3
कुसुमा देवी)- She smells of many
flowers.
Sarva Sammohini (सर्व सम्मोहिनी)
5.
the one who can entice.
6. Sarva Stambhini (सर्व स्तम्भिनी)-
the one who makes every one
alerted. Y
2. Ananga Maekhala Devi (r
मेखला देवी)- who is the solid like
a rock in the family.
7. Sarva Jambhini (सर्व जम्भिनी)
Ananga Madna Devi (अनंग मदना
at)- the one who is attractive.
3.
Sarvavashankari (सर्ववशंकरी ) -
the one who is the controller of all.
8.
4. Ananga Madana Tura Devi
(अनंग मदनातुरा देवी)- the one who
gives desire to meet.
9. Sarva Ranjini (सर्व रजञ्जिनी)- the
one who entertains all.
10. Sarva Unmadini (सर्वोन्मादिनी)- She
is the one who gives all the special
joys.
5. Ananga Rekha Devi ( अनंग रेखा
aat)- the one which draws the
different boundaries.
11. Sarvartha Sadhini (सर्वार्थसाधिनी)-
the one who gives meaning of all
the things.
6. Ananga Vegini Devi (अनंग वेगिनी
aat)- the one which gives you
speed.
12. Sarva Sampatti Poorni
(सर्वसम्पत्तिपूर्णी)- the one who gives
all the well being.
7. Anagankusha Devi (3ri
aat)- the one, who gives power
of Ankusha, means the controlling
of man.
13. Sarva Mantramayee (सर्वमन्त्रमयी)
the one who is residing in all the
mantras.
8. Ananga Malini Devi ( अनंग मालिनी
aat)- the one which is very
14. Sarva Dwanda Kshyankri
(सर्वद्वन्दक्षयंकरी)- the one who
gracious.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-32.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 11 & 12 2007
31
(h) The eighth enclosure is called as
Shodasha Dala (बोडशदल).
13. Beeja (ar:)- attraction through
the seed
14. Atma (3HT)- attraction by spirit
The name of the Chakra is Sarvasha-
PariPurak (सर्वाशापरिपूरक).
15. Amruta (3a:)- attraction by
eternity
The Goddess's name is Tripureshwari
(त्रिपुरेश्वरी).
16. Sharira ( ) attraction by the
form of the body
She is the one who has got sixteen
powers. The first is.....
These are the attractions which
are subtler and are in the Goddess which
1. Kamaa )- means the
mattraction of body
act in a way that the Sadhaka is attracted
towards Her.
)-is the attraction
Buddhya (
by brain
2.
(i)
Bhupur () is the enclosure, while the
Chakra's name is Trailokya Mohan
त्रैलोक्यमोहन).
The ninth one is called as the
Ahamkara (अहंकारा)-attraction by
3.
ego
Name of the Goddess is Tripura (fa).
4. Shabada (:)- attraction by
word
There are ten powers in this Chakra. The
first is :-
Sparsha (- attraction by touch
5.
Sarva Sankshobhini (सर्वसंक्षोभिणी)-
the one who burns off every thing.
1.
6. Roopa (4:)- attraction by beauty
Sarva Vidravini ( सर्वविद्राविणी)-the
one who can perverse.
Rasa(T:)-attraction by aesthetics
7.
2.
8. Gandha (T-)- attraction by
fragrance
Sarva Akarshini (सर्वाकर्षिणी)- the
3.
one which attracts.
Chitta (fari)- attraction by
9.
4. Sarva Vashankari (सर्ववशकरी).
attention
the one who is the controller of all.
10. Dhairya ()- attraction by
Sarva Unmadini (सर्वोन्मादिनी)-the
5.
courage
one who excites as well.
11. Smrutya (
) attraction by
6. Sarva Mahankusha (सर्वमहन्कुशा)-
the one who controls, here the
ankusha means the weapon that
memory
12. Nama (7I4:)- attraction by name
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-33.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 11 & 12 2007
32
u is used by the elephant driver. So
how he controls the elephant, in
the same way She controls all.
इच्छा, प्राप्ति, मुक्ति)
1. Anima (3rfurHT)- is to become like
a Small Particle
Sarva Khaechari (सर्व खेचरी)- the
7.
- is to become
2. Laghima (
Small
one who attracts all.
8. Sarva Beeja (Hdai:)- the one
who is the seed you know.
Mahima (महिमा)-is to have a Big
3.
Form
9. Sarva Yoni ( - the one who
exists in all the..ah..all the yonis.
4. Ishatva (ईशत्व)- is to create
Thoughts out of human beings.
10. Sarva Trikhanda (सर्व त्रिखंड)-
5. Vashitva (a
is Attraction
which exists in all the three
dimensions. The Yoni means the
6. Prakramya (प्रक्रम्या)- is the
Manifestation
ellipse - which is the power of the
Mother.
7. Bhukti (ufa)- is the Enjoyment
Apart from that, there are other
goddesses, which exist as yellow line
known as (मुक्त शक्तया) Mukta Shaktaya.
8. Ichachha (FT)- Fulfilment of
Desire
9. Prapti (9Tfa)- is the Attainment
The Mother Goddess are called as
Mahendri,
Chamunda
and
10. Mukti (gfaa)- is the Salvation
Mahalakshmi ( महेन्द्री, चामुण्डा और
Haa . The siddhis that people can
achieve are Anima, Laghima, Mahima,
Ishatva, Vashitva, Prakramya,
Bhukti, Ichchha, Prapti, Mukti (a ,
लघिमा, महिमा, ईशत्व, वशित्व, प्राक्राम्य, मुक्ति,
These are all the Siddhis that
Sahaja Yogis can have".
H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
14.10.1978, London
einlo
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Beej Mantra & Musical Notes on Chakra Plexus
ी ।
IDI
sahasrara
Climbic area)
NI/N
(nishad)
ह,क्ष
agnya
(optic chiasma)
| Chandra
| Rudra
| Granthi
KSHA
HA
AUM
HAM-SUPER EGO
KSHAM-EG0
DHA D
(dhalvat)→
अ
vishuddhi-
(cervical plexus)
3 30 5
A'
31
00
HAM
AU
AL
न्सू लु लु
REE LRLLR
PA/P.
AH AH RI REE LALLA
(pancha m)-→
क
anahat
(cardiac plexus)
के ख ग
KA KHA' GA GHA NG
| Surya
| Vishnu
I Granthi
YAM
CHA' CHHA' JA JHA YAN'
AMAIM
TA' THA
(madhyam)→
manipur (nabhi)
(coeliac plexus)
PA PHA NA' TÀ' THA
RAM
DA DHA NA PA' PHA
GAG
(gandhar)→
swadhishthan
(aortic plexus)
| Agni
| Braham
| Granthi
VAM
BA' BHA MA' YA RA' LA
RAR
(rishabh)→
व
mooladhar
(pelvic plexus
WA, SHA SHA SA'
VA
LAM
SA/S
(shadja) ->
Ref.
H.H. Shri Mataji, 3 Feb. 1978 delhi; 18 dec1978 london.
Devi Bhagvat; Book-7 chp-35; Nirmala Yoga : March-April 1983, Ibid Jan-Feb-1984 (Hindi)
Music and Sahaj Yoga: Apte, drarun, 1997
Divine Knowledge through Vibrations : Rajeshekharan, p.t.etal.1992
(shushunaj
Itotal-
smell taste
sight
y0ch
hearing(word)
puiw
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-35.txt 
 MAHAKALI PUJA
France-1990
Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
We have had Bhairava Puja in they don't understand one thing that you
Delhi and nowI thought today let us have
Mahakali Puja. Because yesterday's collective then you are thrown out
experience, last night's experience was gradually.
the work of Mahakali. She has a double
role all the time, she is at two extremes. seven strings, you can say, and these
On one side She is full of joy, giver of joy,
is very happy, tends to see Her disciples strings are there to throw you out into
are joyous. Joy is her quality, it is Her in Sitar you have seen for the resonance
energy. Yesterday you must have been
amazed to see so many middle aged
ladies of France smiling and laughing! I start getting out of the collectivity it is
had never seen them smiling. It is very starts throwing you out, slowly,
surprising how they were so joyous and
sở very happy! This is the energy of slowly to the sub-conscious area and
Mahakali that gives you all that joy after where you just disappear. And all kind
Realization and the joy you enjoy among this happening in every country that
have to be collective. If you are not
Now this Mahakali power has got
collective sub-conscious area. Like as
there are other strings also.
So once you
the Mahakali herself picks you out and
of problems start with that. I have seen
yourselves. All these are the qualities of
Mahakali and when they will read out the
names of Mahakali, you will know how Her
powers manifest in Sahaja Yoga and how
it has helped you all to get drenched into
the ocean of joy.
people do not attend the collective
meditation. Of France, I have the same
report. And I think, the people who do
not grow will be thrown out. Sahaja
Yoga, as you know, has a double action
as the Mahakali has the double action.
She is extremely loving, full of joy, full of
happiness, but She is the one who is
extremely cruel, wrathful. She is the one
who is the slayer of all the demons and
the evils and those people who try to do
mischief. So once you are thrown out into
left side, then you can imagine, you can
develop any kind of left side diseases to
begin with. Mooladhara diseases are the
worst. We develop diseases like
Malaitis, you must have heard of the
disabilities caused by the muscles getting
degenerated. All muscular degeneration
comes from this factor. So at any cost
To begin with I have to tell you one
thing that Mahakali's puja, when you are
doing, you have to feel the joy within
yourselves and joy from other Sahaja
Yogis. If you cannot feel that, that means
you are not yet grown and there is some
problem, may be with your parents, may
be with your children, may be your family,
may be your country. Whatever it is, but
there is some sort of a conditioning which
is working out that doesn't give you that
joy. And to grow into Sahaja Yoga is very
important which I think people do not
understand; even if they live in Ashrams,
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-36.txt 
 35
Issue: 11 & 12 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
quality of the Goddess, that She is on one
side extremely loving, extremely kind,
extremely soft. She goes up to a point and
then She throws you on the other side. And
that is why in these countries where
people always fall in love, they don't marry
otherwise, unless and until they are fallen
in love. And in that they cross all the
maryadas also. In falling in love, they will
marry somebody who's already married
or who is carrying on with somebody who
that must be avoided. But if you are not
in the collective, if you do not understand
the collective, and if you are out of the
collective, you will be surprised, that
negative forces will join you and they will
pull you out. So this is one of the things
that happens. So be very careful that
don't avoid the collective programmes.
The another problem about
Mahakali is that She is the one who gives
you the feeling for your wife, for your
husband. She is the one. Now there also Is not divorced, or also they will have
the same problem. If both of them are
alright, She is airight. But if She finds
anyone of them going astray, She will
throw that person out and out and out young man or an old man marrying a
and the another person if that person
is attached to that person also will be
thrown out. So this business of falling
in love, this non-sense that we have here
that you fall in love, but the word is alright
because you fall really in love. That is the
real falling happens. So what happens not keep, then this Mahakali gets into it.
when you start falling in love, there is a
kind of Maya of this Mahakali. And you The ones who are not collective, who do
just get infatuated, your ego gets
pampered or something like that or you
have certain ideas of a wife or something that you would like to come for such and
and then your think, 'O, that's the one for such thing. For example, I have already
me.' So in these cases only two things can explained that you should not talk, put my
happen; either you can be lost completely tape; there are so many tapes they have
because of your wife or your husband never heard, just let them listen to my
whom you adore and admire and you're tapes, and go into meditation, and then
finished. I mean your personality is
finished. Or else the another thing, which tapes are to be heard again and again.
is even more serious, is that that you'll Now those who get any questions out of
completely break forever and hate each
other. That's why they say that there's a
love and hate relationship. How can love
be hate? But it becomes because of this
marriages amongst themselves in the
same household or something. All kind
of things they do. Old woman marrying a
young girl like that, all nonsensical things,
without any maryada. And they do not
stick together. They have no maryada.
"The Marriage is to create a
maryada maryada of your behaviour.
And this is the maryada which if you do
"So first of all, one has to be collective.
not attend every time a collective
programme, you might give suggestions
do the Aarti, finish it up. Because these
those tapes can next time discuss it
before starting the tape. That is very good
thing and that works. In India, nobody
speaks. They just put my tapes on or show
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-37.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007
36
The Divine Cool Breeze
my vedio, after that they just have
meditation and Aarti. Finished. After that
nobody talks. But before starting what they Ganpatipule. I mean, you go for a
do is to talk to each other and discuss the pilgrimage! It is like you have to go to
problems or discuss anything that they felt buy a Sari and you end up with a shaving
about the previous programme. Because stick. It is that true. You are coming to
you have not come here to marry Ganpatipule for what? You are coming
someone or to fall in love into something, there for your ascent. It is a pilgrimage,
you have not come here to get after some but in the pilgrimage, I have never heard,
woman because she's your wife or some
man because he is your husband. You goes to marriage.
have had so many husbands and wives
in previous lives. But you have come here
for your ascent. And if you have come for be given up in Sahaja Yoga. That is one
your ascent, you have to keep a watch. of the biggest loads. And one must
how is your mind working. Supposing I say Innocence means chastity not only
that you should have a good married life, physical, also mental chastity. You have
ofcourse I do say, you should have good
married life, but not at the cost of losing
your ascent. It has happened with people.
We have lost a complete, I should say, a
city like that, some stupidity comes up is why their brains have gone out and they
overly.
relations with each other are pure. Like I
was told that somebody fell in love in
anybody falls in love with each other and
So this bhoot of falling in love must
understand that purity means chastity.
to have mental chastity. If you don't
have mental chastity, you cannot
ascend. Actually, in the West it is more
mental than physical. It is a fact. And that
are becoming just like potatoes.
Because, if you go on mentally imagining
and playing around and working it out this
way, it's going to be absolutely dangerous
because it's all imagination. It has nothing
to do with reality. The more you get into
this kind of a nonsense, the more you
become away from reality. That never
means you should be dry, it never means
you should be negligent of your
responsibility. Does not.
"So be careful not to get lost.
You have not come here just to have
only a happy married life, but happy
married life is just one step. But if that
step is taking you away from the real
path of your ascent, it's better to be
careful."
"Also we must understand the
innocence means purity, purity of thought.
As I explained yesterday, I hope you
understood the meaning of purity. Purity
is to be understood much more by the
Europeans, very important. Specially
French. Because the whole society is
suffering. Society can only be pure if the
family life is pure, not only that but your
"As I've said, that the sap in the tree
rises, all right? Then it purifies, it nourishes
every part of the plant separately in a
different way. Like it's a mother, so
mother. Father is a father. Sister is a
sister. Brother is a brother. The brother-
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-38.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007
37
The Divine Cool Breeze
His mother because He's like a guard.
And He's the one who tells whether She
can ascend or not. Unless and until He
gives permission, She cannot ascend. So
Shri Ganesha gives, ascending sort of
OK, alright you can go ahead. And he
stops all His work. You have seen Me
sitting for hours together, I don't have to
go even to the bathroom or anywhere
because Ganesha stops everything. He's
only worried now about the ascent. And
on every chakra He checks your purity and
then, accordingly, the Kundalini tries to
purify it. But when it reaches the mental
level, mental level has all these funny ideas
of romance, this nonsense, that
nonsense. I was surprised, the other day,
there was a girl who was having trouble
with her husband, of expressing her love
to her husband, after marriage. Before
sister relations cannot become husband-
wife relations. How can it be? Now what
happens is really is that such a confusion
in the mind! And it has created
tremendous problems for them. Then the
sap nourishes all these things and comes
back. It doesn't get attached to something.
Oh! She is 'my wife'. So the first priority
is my wife. Because I have seen, "Of
course, family life has to be all right. You
must look after your family. But that
doesn't mean that you make everything
suffer. That doesn't mean that your ascent
should be finished. It cannot be that.
You're not like ordinary people. You are
saints and for the saints the main thing is
their ascent, not their family life, not their
material possessions, nothing; nor their
children, but their ascent. Once they
ascend, everything will ascend with it."
marriage she was alright. So I told her,
"Now the understanding of chastity
should be there. It can come to you very
easily if you ascend. It is such a vicious
circle! It is such a vicious circle! Now
first of all, you get your Realization, all right.
Now you must know that Kundalini itself
is the Mahakali Shakti because She's the
primordial. Mahakali Shakti is the
primordial Shakti within us and the
Kundalini is Mahakali. And She remains
read some book where they have
described the romance between husband
and wife. But she said there is no such
book available. Then I asked a professor
to find out. He said there is no such book.
"In Sahaja Yoga the romance starts
after the marriage, but also with maryadas,
not at the cost of Sahaja Yoga, not at the
cost of your ascent. So all these ideas
people have in the west, I know you are
so much conditioned about it. So they say,
let us see, this is Samyachara, after all.
You have to give all the benefit to that.
Now we select people who do everything.
It is all the work of Mahakali because you
have to work on the vibrations, it is all the
work of Mahakali. And after marriage also
some marriages do fail. The reason being
they do not know what is the purpose of
as a virgin within you, which is purity. She
has a power to purify. All that happens
when you get your Realization. She starts
manifesting Her all-beautiful aspects
on you.
"Now, the one who is sitting there
is Shri Ganesha. Now people don't
understand what is innocence. Shri
Ganesha is sitting there and He is the one
who resides over Mooladhara, even over
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-39.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 2007
38
The Divine Cool Breeze
work all right, despite the fact that they've
their marriage is.
been insulted, they've been neglected, we
"So the first and foremost thing
of Mahakali is that She is 'purity. have misbehaved. Whatever we might
absolute purity'. And that purity, if we have done, they are doing their jobs all
cannot imbibe within us, we cannot be
Sahaja Yogis. "Now this mind is so much
conditioned, I know. Our children would be about it? We cannot be even collective!
much better off than ourselves. They won't We cannot attend collective things. I look
have these conditionings, as we have had. at them, how generous they are! They're
"And so many problems can be just extremely collective, they are extremely
avoided if you really become pure people. collective, to such an extent that if
I have seen in the other societies, which I
have known, no body seems to be safe.
Somebody's wife is running with Because you must also worship Shiva.
somebody's husband and somebody's They are so collective and so much
daughter is running with somebody's
father, a boy is running with somebody's
mother! Next day you find somebody else
standing there. or sometimes it is as should be collective. As soon as you
husband and wife! So funny that you can't become collective, all these nonsensical
believe it, how can it be! And everybody things will drop out. All these ideas will
is in danger! The man goes to the house drop out. You do not become collective
and finds his wife has run away with
another man! Ora man goes for his work
and he runs away with another women! dropping them out.
So she is the one who gives you sthiti,
right. You can see it - so many people
getting Realization. But what are we doing
somebody, supposing, worships Shri
Krishna, his heart will catch. Why?
connected with Me.
"So they are all collective. In the
same way, you are also Devas, you also
because you have not dropped out all
these things, or else you're afraid of
"So let us know what is our
the state. Sthiti means 'consolidation.
purpose is. Our purpose is to ascend.
And what is the Mahakali power is
doing for us? She's giving you your
ascent-through Kundalini. She is
purifying. She's giving you all the
"Without
proper
your
consolidation, into your purity, not
into your romantic life, you cannot
rise. Like when we make the aeroplane,
first we have to consolidate it, fix it up
properly, work it out, so that when it goes
in the air, all it parts do not fly away with
the passengers. In the same way when
we are ascending, Shri Ganesha does
that. He just stops the action of excretion
completely and the ascent starts.
powers. She is protecting you all the
time. She is giving you joy. But what
are we doing for Her? Her only, only
desire is that My children should be
saintly, that they should have beautiful
qualities of a saint, that he doesn't fall
at every woman, fall at every man.
He's not so cheap, you see. And
They are (The deities) doing their
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-40.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 2007
39
The Divine Cool Breeze
Sort of a confidence they develop. 'O, we
are old Sahaja Yogis! We have had
horrible results in London, of this
consciousness that we are old, we will do
mentally specially...
"I mean, if the Sahasrara is
spoiled, how can Sahaja Yoga work
out? The whole play is of the
Sahasrara and that purity should
manifest. Through you, we are going
to change the world, through no one
else. It is the Sahaja Yogis who are
going to change the world.
"Now look at the generosity. Even
My body is so generous"! Yesterday one
lady came and she had terribly bad liver.
whatever we like. We may attend the
collective or not. Akind of an ego! Please
be careful. Christ has clearly said, 'First
will be the last". And I have seen so many
of them just getting out like that! Even I
do not know how they get out! In such
stupid way that I cannot even imagine for
anyone! Like one gentleman, in Italy, was
a known Sahaja yogi just got caught up
and said, 'I am Mahamataji. Everybody
started looking at him! What do you
mean, lam Mahamataji? And I am going
to do all that myself. They said, it's alright,
so we are all going out of Ashram. No,
no, no, I cannot manage the ashram. Iam
She came down stairs and my liver started
pumping vibrations! Terrible! She had a
very bad liver problem. She had taken
drugs and all the suffering was done to
me by this liver of mine. It didn't think that
O, Mother she has come all the way, it
started just pumping for that woman, It is
so generous! And they are so generous
themselves, the way they bestow
blessings on you. How they are hard
working, how they're running about! What
are we giving them? They give us joy. They
look after us. They look after our children.
They look after everything. They manage
everything. Now what are we doing for
them?"
getting out. And he went and stayed with
someone, that lady who heard against Me,
got cancer and died.
"In the collectivity, supposing you
have one problem, another one has some
problem, it just works out, balances. As
one finger is cut out, it is useless. Or a
nail which is taken out is useless. It dies.
So that is how we are organizing
our spiritual death and, ultimately, I don't
Also I have heard that people don't
help in postering, very few people come
up. "This is being ungrateful, very
ungrateful." All the deities are present
when you are having those collective
programmes. And surprisingly the old
Sahaja yogis are more difficult than the
new ones! I mean this is just surprising. I
mean are they coming now, out of date or
something? Christ has said, 'First will be
the last. Thope that is not going to happen.
know what else! And then they come back
and say Mother I have got this trouble, so
I have come back. I was out of Sahaja
yoga for three years. I say what do you
mean by out of Sahaja Yoga? I did not
attend any collective programme.
"I am thinking of the collectivity of
the whole world. That's My vision. And if
Sahaja Yogis cannot be coilective, who
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-41.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12 - 2007
40
The Divine Cool Breeze
the matter carries the love, expresses. So
many times I have seen how very sweetly
they gave me something. I really do not
ask anything and need anything. Certain
things show such concern, such
understanding, such love. "How will you
express your love to those people who
are so far away? We just try, try to give,
try to give for Sahaja Yoga also and you
will be amazed how it will work out. For
is going to be collective? Who is going to
fulfill My vision?
"So all of you, those who call
themselves Sahaja Yogis, must attend the
programmes..And the second thing is that
there was a little problem of generosity of
people. "Of course, that's also a character
of Mahalakshmi. She's very generous
and when you are generous in giving
vibrations and looking after people,
this and that, then Mahalakshmi's
principle works out. Those who are not
generous, they can never enjoy. So if there
is need, people have to give money to
Sahaja Yoga. I have been supplying lot of
money, as you know, from the very
beginning. Those who are early Sahaja
Yogis know how much I have been able
to pay. But now we are growing and
everybody should know that we have to
pay. After all it is our responsibility.
collectivity, we have to know and see for
Bhairavnath and Shri Hanumana and Shri
Ganesha; these three principles that work
within us, all of them have parallel work to
do, parallel. They do not interfere for each
other. But, if it comes to help, they'll go all
out. There's no quarrel, no quarrel with
each other, no. If Hanuman needs
Bhairava, He's there, if Bhairava needs
Hanumana, He's there - all out! "So this
collectivity comes only by understanding
one thing - what a great work we are doing
today! People are not conscious of that.
They take it just by the way. In the war, you
have seen how people fight, even if they
have the fear of dying. Formerly, nobody
was paid also in the military, but they went
and fought, maybe for their country, for
anything. And they used to join together
to fight. They allowed themselves to be
killed. They helped each other. They did
this. All these qualities are there when we
want to hate someone! But when we want
"Where are we going to spend our
money, in what? My family feels that
whatever money I'm spending for Sahaja
Yoga is the best. They get punyas. It is
the best for them. Only with punyas,
you get more wealth, health and
prosperity. If you do not have punyas,
you cannot get it. It will come and go
away. It will disappear into thin air. So
I was surprised that people are not
generous!
to love someone, why shouldn't we have
those qualities emerging out of us?
"These are the qualities of
Mahakali because She's the expert of war
affairs. She is the one who makes people
work and She's the one who makes them
fight because it's the desire. They have
"We have to know that we are so
much better off people than many others
are. We have to think, 'Can we send
something to them as presents. Can we
do something for them?' The matter has
the value, which is again Mahakali's
power. It is the power of Mahakali that
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-42.txt 
 Issue: 11 & 12-2007
41
The Divine Cool Breeze
nothing there, just a desire to do
something and then they join together and
then the Mahasaraswati helps them to act.
But first the desire has to be strong.
Now the desire has to be very, very
strong within us that we have to be
for the emancipation of the whole
world. We are the people. We are the
special people. We are in the
foundation. Nothing is more
important than our own personality
being completely dedicated for Sahaja
Yoga.
enjoyment is not there now, that
enjoyment is lost.' Otherwise Indians are
mad after cricket. Even in the forest if you
go, they will be listening to the cricket. It is
a game played by the English, who are
not so much interested but Indians are!
Now if you ask them, they say, 'No, we
are not interested,' So many people who
used to read seven eight newspapers,
say we never read newspapers, never
read news, finished. I have seen there
are many; because the whole focus of
your attention is now on Sahaja Yoga
because you only enjoy Sahaja Yoga. You
like to be Sahaja Yogis, you have to be
with Sahaja Yogis. We had a puja in India.
It was really quite a vibrant puja of Shri
Ganesha. But nobody was bothered. It
started pouring down through the Pandal.
They had put up, but no body was
bothered. All right water has come, let the
water pass this way, that way. Everybody
adjusted, because first thing was to enjoy.
They didn't want to give up joy at any cost.
And it continued, the whole night! One
was worried because somebody said that
the police will come. I made the police
sleep also and the man who was to report
was also sleeping. So the whole night we
enjoyed all.
This desire has to be extremely
strong and very pure. Those [who] actually
desire it - actually, they get their
Realization like that. They reach their
depth like that. And they enjoy doing the
work of Sahaja Yoga. All the time they
enjoy it. For them, nothing else is more
important. There's a saying that, 'When
you get water of Ganges to drink, why
should you take water from dirty rivers?
So the whole attention is that side.
All the joy you get out of this romance and
this love and this and that becomes zero
before it. Because it's Nirananda, only joy.
In the marriage etc. all this is so
conditioning, any joy. You have different
joys on different centers. They are all
given by Mahakali, but the greatest of all
you have got after Realization is the
Nirananda. That state you must reach, to
'Nirananda State'. If you are in that state
of Nirananda, then all other pleasures and
joys are zero. There are so many people
who told me they were very fond of cricket.
They said, Mother, nowadays we do not
see cricket' I said 'why'? Because
Now this enjoyment cannot come
to you if you do not have purity of your
mind. Nirananda. You can get other
anand, of other other things, other
chakras. How to bring the purity? Just
by developing thoughtless awareness
and looking at things without thinking.
For that, you have to be collective. If
you are collective, I am there.
Wherever you are collective, wherever
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-43.txt 
 42
Issue: 11 & 12 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
you gather, I am there. And nothing
gives Me greater pleasure [than] to
hear that all of you are attending these
programmes. You will be amazed that
in Australia we have so many centres
in every city, but they all attend the
programme of collective, because
they know collectivity is the ocean of
nourishment. This is the simplest
thing you have to do, but the bhoots
are much more collective. Bhoots can
Pune, there he gathered all the bhoots,
immediately. Then he came here and he
is gathering all the bhoots. People are
getting friendly with him, exactly who are
bhoots you can make it out by just seeing
a bhoot sitting there and who is sitting next
to that person. They are so attracted, like
a magnet! But the Magnet is the quality
of Mahakali.
"Bhoots know Me better than
go to such a length of fraternity that anybody else can know because they
you will be amazed. There was a lady in know My past. They are in the past and
France. She was an old lady and her they attract each other, and how they act
daughter was in Sahaja Yoga. She had
become absolutely mad, so she put her on a bhootish person. That is why the
in the elderly home. She was absolutely when it comes to positivity, they do not get
bhootish. In the elderly home she only
knew how to go to church on Sundays, collective. All those who do not get
She will dress up and go to church. That collective will gradually go into the
was only sensibility she had (She was put are talking about the Mahakali, She is the
in elderly home). Her daughter told me that one who knows everything about these
it was very amazing that all of them get up bhootish things. She's in charge, I mean.
in the morning, dress up and go to church. She's the lord of all these bhoots and She
Inside the Church there are graves of the
people who have died, out of those who knows and She looks after them and She
are half mad or full mad elderly people.
Otherwise they will not know how to wear to do? She has locked them up on one
their dresses! They did not know how to side, but if Sahaja Yogis want to go there,
eat their food, they did not knowanything.
But when it came to going to the Church,
to that Bhootish place, where all the area, what can you do? Of course, She
bhoots were there, they all will get up in protects. She doesn't want anyone to go
the morning, dress up properly and go to the bhoots not to come this side. But
the church, sit down, sing hymns and
came back, as if like possession. Such
a fraternity of bhoots there is! As soon as
one bhoot comes in; one bhoot came now,
recently from Australia, now he is gathering Sahaja Yoga has gone very far, very much,
all the bhoots around him. He went to
they know who has got bhoots and how
positive collectivity has to be there. But
fraternity of bhoots. Because today we
manages them. But when a Sahaja Yogi
wants to go into that realm, what has She
iust enter through back doors into that
there. She's just kept them out, and told
Sahaja Yogis only go there. That is being
reported.
Under these circumstances,
in so many other countries. In France you
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-44.txt 
 43
Issue: 11 & 12 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
saw yesterday how this Anand Shakti of
the Mother acted on people. That's
wonderful to see that. Everybody came to
Me and they were full of smiles. I have
never never seen any French woman of
that age smiling! Never. No question,
even if you tickle them, even if you certify
that there is a joke, they will not smile at
that. I have never seen their teeth.
Yesterday their whole face was lit up. So
many of them, something so miraculous
happened! This Anand giving Shakti, the
Mahakali was acting so beautifully!. "And
you are the people who will now guide or
misguide them. If you become, all of you
absolutely pure, they will say, 'Now look
at these people, how beautiful they look!"
You already look very beautiful. Your faces
shine, but it will all disappear and the
effects of disappearance are not very
simple.
"So be careful. I, of course, bless
you with all the qualities of Bhairava, as
he is the greatest disciple of Mahakali.
And he's the one who is running up and
down, morning till evening, every time,
specially in the night, he is working so very
hard, killing those horrible Rakshasa, this,
that and achieving such results! We have
to join him, all of us and work it out.
become, higher personalities, if you
become collective, all of you, and if you
become generous and if you become
"May God bless you."
(Checked with Audio)
Inll
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-45.txt 
 Navratri Puja, Australia-2007
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-46.txt 
 ंडि
सहजयोग के्द्र त-जनपद (बागपत), आ
से पूजा के पयंत लिया गया फोटो
ि
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-47.txt 
 Now, we have to understand that we are carrying the light in our
hands. And the light should not shake; we have to hold the light tight.
And we should have a concentrated attention towards the maintenance of
the light. And then to tell yourself that we have to see not just to
understand mentally is to be actually aware.
Because you are complete otherwise you are part and parcel of
the whole you are! But the only thing is that you have not yet seen that.
You have mentally accepted, but you have not become that, because
That means you are at the level of
mental projection comes from thought.
the thought.
You have to become thoughtless. But if you live on the basis of
thought, you are still below the Agnya chakra. So all the thought waves
must be stopped to begin with and you should say that alright let us see now.
H.H. Shri Mataji
