Vol 8 June 2007 Issue 2 "Yuva Shakti are first class, because they are very innocent. Yuvashakti are strong and solid Sahaja Yogis. The Yuvashakti are the best. They are deep." H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 28 May 07, Cabella

 NSYS LENS Shri Mataji with children

 INDEX NIRMAL VANI : LETHARGY, MOST ANTI-GOD 1. CORPORATE REALIZATION 6. 2. 8 EXPRESSION OF HEART 3. YUVASHAKTI REPORTER 9. 4. 12 5. DEVAI NAMO NAMAH: SHRI KARTIKEYA शब्दांजली - अल्लाह हूँ 14 6. ब्रह्माण्डीय सहज परिवार के लिये अन्तर-अवलोकन 16 7. वर्तमान का महत्त्व 18 8. स्वरशाला 20 9. MOTHER'S RECIPE 21 10. THIS HAPPENED 22 11. KIDSHAKTI PAGE 24 12. PAPAJI'S WORDS OF WISDOM 13. 25

 YUVADRISHTI Published by Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 8, Chandragupta Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 029 Tel : 020-25286537, Fax : 020-25286722 Printed by Sharada Printary Pune Please mail your experiences, poems, articles, suggestions, comments, etc. to: Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 8, Chandragupta Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 029 yuvadrishti@gmail.com For queries regarding delay in receiving The magazine, please call: Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd., Tel : 020-25286537 We solemnly thank our article writers, editors, designers/professionals etc. for their help in making this issue.

 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007 NIRMAL VANI LETHARGY, MOST ANTI-GOD Some priceless jewels on selected topics, extracted from the treasure trove of our Mother's eternal words of wisdom, have been strung into exquisite necklace called "Nirmal Vani". This issue, lets focus on Mother's advice, on how to remove the gross and subtle lethargy within us. Lethargy is something we have to overcome somehow and this lethargy is a, actually a satanic force. It's not lethargy only of the matter that comes from material domination on the Spirit, but it is really satanic because it stops your progress and is to be avoided. And to get out of it one has to be really alert about it, how It crawls onto you (2). really throw away and get out of it. Because it explains everything, you like it, because it gives you little comfort, and you want to rely on your Sloth. But Krishna has said in Gita, that Sloth is the worst thing that can happen to human beings. If they take to Sloth, if they accept Sloth, they will have all explanations for being Slothful. (1) Krishna has put, the worst vice in the whale world is 'aalasya', means lethargy. 'Aalasyso Bijayate' everything comes out of aalasya. According to Him, first thing lethargy comes in and because of lethargy we get into vices and then we go to the right side also because of lethargy. Because just to avoid the lethargy WE go to the right side too much. So according to Him everything start with lethargy and then the person loses the essence of life through lethargy and this is our special quality and that is our real problem is It (Sloth or Laziness) is the curse of the Sahaja Yoga also. Sloth is something, is like a devil that can keep you very much glued to your own positions and will not allow you to move out. For example in the moming you get up and you think that "Oh, it's alright, what's the need to getup early in the morning? There is no need to do any meditation. I'l do it tomorrow". Otherwise you start thinking that "It can be done after a month, do esn't matter, Mataji is here and everything will be alright". But you must know that there are so the lethargy. many imperfections within you, and if you do no meditate now, seriously, take it up as a very serious thing, you may lag behind so much that you may be dropped out. Because Sahaja Yoga is a thing where we say there is 'akriya'. We don't have to do anything. It is effortless. Everything works out effortIess, spontaneously. So we think that everything is going to work out for us spontaneously. Only the Kundalini Jagruti is spontaneous for the first time, not for the second time, only for the fist time. That is I have to do it or My photograph has to do it but afterwards you have to work, you have to keep your Kundalini atloat. You have to understand what are your problems, what are you getting into. I mean, individually everyone of you is a masterpiece, individually. Because of lethargy you are Meditation is very important after Sahaja Yoga. You have slept and slept all your life. Sleeping is not so important. You have to today promise Me that, from tomorrow, you all are going to get up in the morning and meditate. I was suggesting that if you take your baths in the moning would be beter, so that you won't have your sleepy condition. Sloth is such a devious thing that you do not see it. It explains everything. If you say "Ohlam sick" it will say "Oh you are so sick you should go to the hospital". If you say "I'm tired" it will say "You are extremely tired". Why should you be so tired? It is nothing but your Sloth is telling you that "You are extremely tired, you better not do meditation now you are extremely tired. You better take some rest, is important". clouded. Secondly because of lethargy you are secluded, lethargy gives you also ego. Because anything that challenges lethargy you get on top of that person, you don't like such a person but the lethargy. Also those do not have, are the people, their attention is on spiritual development. Theirs Is, as I told you yesterday, on other things, which are not important to spiritual life. (2) Sloth is worse than super-ego and ego. Is a kind of an inertia which pulls you down, and that inertia you have to 3

 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007 very childish butl have to tell you because I have seen this is the problem, that "The day I don't get up, I'll have to pay 10 pence (Rs 8)", let's keep it like that. If you are getting much more pay then put it at 10 pounds (Rs 800). But something like that. Or you can say that "That day l'll give up one sweater of mine". Start it like that. It's very easy. People will say that "No Mother, when I meditate, you know, something goes wrong with me' wrong, there's something wrong with you. So you better sit down and meditate. You may think that, "You see l'm not well now" or anything, Sloth can give you any ideas, Because I don't have that so I don't know what ideas it gives you. But it can give you any kind of idea that would be very, very appealing to you. Because it knows how to please your ego. Sloth is an ego- satisfying thing, ego-pampering stuff, and it make you feel that "Oh you are very tired". What are you tired about? You are all young people, why should you be tired? You get tired so soon, is nothing but your Mr. Sloth telling you, you are tired. You will be surprised, after feeling tired, you run for two miles, you can run. - means you are Now, I must say, if you do not meditate, you are very selfish. That's the main point is. Because when you come here, scorpions come out of you to bite My feet. There are snakes coming out of you to bite My feet. Do you want to do that to Me? Or else to others also. Now why Sloth works on Sahaja Yoga so adversely? Why Sloth works out against Sahaja Yoga so much? The reason is, because we are not yet identified with our wellbeing. We do not think that "We have to be better, we have to improve, we have to go further, there's a big gap, we have to do it". We are not identified with our progress. Supposing if I tell you, that if you run two miles, every day in the morning you will get a beauty prize. 99.9% of people, of women would be running early in the moming. Supposing if somebody tells men that you will get Mr. Universe if you run every day five miles in the morning there will be, I don't know, 99.999% people may be running like that. Because we are identified with that kind of a competition which is very materialistic, which is of no value, But when you give up even that competition you fall into another competition where everybody is competing with each other in Sloth. They will get up in the morning, see around, "Now, Mr. A's still sleeping, alright, let me sleep". So Mr. A will think "He's still sleeping, let me sleep". So there is a big competition on as to who is going to wake up first, who is going to do this. And if somebody gets up then one starts finding faults that "He got up but what? He was just taking tea" or "He was talking". What about you? You were still in bed! At least he got up, was talking, doesn't matter. But he was kicking, what about you who was still slumbering in the bed? Every time if you are catching, every time you meet Me you are catching. then how are you going to feel the Kundalini? You must know how the Kundalini moves within yourself. Say, where it is, how far it has gone. You know that Sahaja Yoga is the only way, is the only method that Divine Grace has given you, by which you are going to transform the whole world, and lazy lumps how can they help Sahaja Yoga? (1) The body of a human being is a temple of God. But this temple has to be enlightened and has to be auspicious. You have to clear and clean your being completely so it's a beautiful temple for God to reside. But we deceive ourselves you see. When I am talking you listen to Me and you think that 'O Mother talked very sweetly beautifully', finished. But nothing goes inside. Why? Because of lethargy. Lethargy is a thing, which is a barrier it doesn't allow Me to go inside you. It's a barrier. It's very sweet thing, which smiles, just you see thinking, "O Mother is saying something nice". It's very great, it gives you happiness and all that but it doesn't go inside, you do not imbibe. And, that's why try to put your attention to yourself and feel your dignity and honor. Feel your presence that you have to have a presence and when I tell to some people they'll say, "I know, Mother, I know I do that". Then why do you do it? That means you are possessed. You are a possessed person. That you know this is wrong, still you are doing it. Then you are a possessed person. Then it's better you beat yourself with shoes. But that stage should go now. I don't like you to beat yourself with shoes, I mean are you that that level? Now it's such a childlike thing, I mean, it's such a childish thing to talk about with such intellectuals as you are, such well read and such well posted people. That doesn't behove Me, a Mother of such gr at people, to talk like this, but sometimes I find My Sahaja Yogis are like two year old children, and then I have to tell them that "Now you are grown up". You see, you can explain it but how are you going to explain yourself? Because if you have to grow, if you want your tree to grow, you must change your priorities and your identifications. If you have to be a first class Sahaja Yogi, you have to put your attention to it. I do not know how to fix it up. Supposing we fix it up like this, it's Butthe level is such still. Who is going to save this country? You people. So again andagain it is against lethargy and whatever is lethargy is

 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007 anti Christ, is anti God, is anti Mataji. Try to become cheerful and blissful, happy, dignified, sensible, sweet. It's not too many things, very few, it's only one and I know we are going to enjoy life very much. You are going to be very happy people. (2) SHABDAWALI Can you tell which Nirmal Tattwa words are explained below by Shri Matají : Means 'one personality' completely 1. A integrated, where you become one with the whole ocean the drop becomes the ocean all the powers of ocean are there for the drop. Problems will be solved in no time. You don't have to sit down and contemplate and worry: how will you solve your problem? it will be solved. But what cannot be solved is the habits you have developed, habits of lethargy. I can understand in London if the people are lethargic, but they are not. They have become extremely, extremely hardworking, active, and also dedicated. How they have achieved it? Only by knowing that this dedication brings forth all the cleansing, and all the powers. Now, supposing this instrument is not clean. You won't be able to even hear Me, it is useless. So our instrument has to be perfect to manifest Sahaja Yoga. If it is not, all the defects can have double effects; like, first it will affect you, you can never feel the full advantage of Sahaja Yoga, and secondly it will affect the people who will meet you, and gradually they'l find out there's something wrong with you. "Some sort of a subdued madness", they'll say, "this Sahaja Yoga is, because I don't find anything great about this man. He's halfway here and halfway there." (3) 2. A meaning the giver of pure joy. Joy here just not means mere joy but bubbling of joy. This power has to come within us, which means when we meet another person in collectivity the other person should feel happy with you. Name of Shri Radha, 3. A achieved if you are to become the Guru, where you go beyond, where you do what is to be done without paying attention to it. : Means beyond; the state that is to be A very high quality yogl, a powerful, 4. A highly evolved realized soul who is a Master and who has gone beyond all human destructive habits Laziness is the worst thing, today, I know today is not a day to say all these things, but you all have to promise to Me that you are going to give up your laziness Swaaha. (1) A state which is only possible if you 5. have faith in God Almighty and in yourself as the messenger of God. B 6. B rationality, only hunger, firstly for food, and for primitive things, then for sex life, for women, for men, then for power, for money and ultimately for spiritual satisfaction. An ocean in which there is no References: (1) 1980-0323: Guarding against slothfulness, Birthday Puja, London. (2) 1980-0927: Lethargy Most Anti God, Chelsham Road, London. (3)1991-0406: Shri Bhavasagara Puja, Brisbane. 7. B delusion that the Mother has given to us, for us to find out that we are in the wrong. Means confusion, delusion. This is a B -M Kundalini, when She rises and passes through the different chakras; the basis of the Devanagari language, used by the Devas. The sounds made by the 8. 9. B It is all pervading power of God's Love, The Cosmic Consclousness. It is Absolute and cannot be compared. 10.D The Sanskrit name given both to birds and realized souls. One who has known Brahma, is selfrealized, is genuinely twice bom. Answers on Page 8

 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007 CORPORATE REALIZATION (A Workshop on Stress Management and Personality Development) Corporate Realization is a reality today. A large number of companies are taking to Sahaja Yoga through 3-day Stress Management Workshops held in companies across India. sent to him regarding the objective and a brief schedule of the workshop. It is then followed up by contacting them through phone or visiting them in person, and explaining to them in detail about Sahaja Yoga. If they are positive, the date and time is decided for the workshop. The corporate sector, as we know, is under tremendous stress, because of the exclusive importance given to money-making. It results in various kinds of diseases like Diabetes, High Blood Pressure, Hypertension, Asthma and early burn-outs. It encourages various kinds of addictive habits like smoking, drinking, and even substance abuse as an escape from the stress and strain of everyday life. Recently there has been an alarming increase in the number of employees resorting to suicidal attempts due to the frustrating rat-race prevailing in the modern corporate sector. Recently, NITL has come up with a CD called 'Nirmal Gyan (Partl& II), which has been instrumental in making these programs huge success. There is a Stress Management movie, which is usually played to inaugurate the workshop. It is followed by a presentation detailing the stress impact on our lives, how Sahaja can overcome it, the subtle system and some modern rese a rch substantiating the veracity and effectiveness of Sahaja techniques in managing stress. This is followed by a Self-Realization session. At the beginning of the session itself, we take the feedback of the participants pertaining to their reason of interest in the program, their expectations from the program, their physical/mental health and also their exposure to any meditative techniques earlier. In such gloomy circumstances, Sahaja Yoga has shown light and hope to numerous people in the Corporate World. Till date, varlous companies like IBM, Oracle, Infosys, Wipro, Satyam, Nokia, Reliance, Accenture etc have benefited from the Stress Management Workshops On the second day, we usually tell them about the raising of the Kundalini, taking bandhan and the balancing technique. This is followed by meditation. On the third day, we introduce them to a few cleansing techniques like fool-soaking and ice pack. Also, a brief introduction to the qualities of the charkas, the causes of catches etc is given. This is followed by meditation on each charka accompanied with the raga associated with the respective charka. conducted by the Sahaja Yogis. There is a group of dedicated Sahaja Yogis (mostly yuvashaktis) in all the major Indian cities (Bangalore, Hyderabad, Delhl-NCR, Pune, Bombay, Chennai), who have taken the responsibility of spreading the great message of our Divine Mother to all the Corporate employees throughout India. These days since most of the Yuvashaktis are working in the corporate sector, hence spreading Sahaja in Corporate is actually helping us, because it will make our workplace surrounded by the Divine Vibrations, and hence will be more conducive to our Sahaja culture. At the end of the third session, we again take the feedback of the participants regarding their experience during the workshop (feeling of cool breeze, heat, tingling, relaxation, thoughtlessness etc), the experimental nature of the workshop and the ease of practice of the meditative technique, their keenness in continuing with Sahaja meditation in future and whether the workshop has met their requirements or not. The modus operandi of conducting a Sahaja program The HR of a company is contacted and a detalled e-mail is

 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007 Sahaja, and also explore the possibility of conducting such workshops on a global scale. Some of the benefits experienced by the participants are as follows: And, as with any Sahaja spreading activity, Shri Mataji's blessings are very much there on these workshops, as can be evidenced by the tremendous flow of the Divine: Cool Breeze during these workshops. So, let us all pray to Shri Mataji to give us the strength and the opportunity to spread Sahaja to all the corporate of the world, so that Corporate world is managed by the Self-Realized souls, and is driven by the soothing fire of the Kundalini and the enlightened vision of the Spirit. Improves Mental, Physical & emotional Health Establishes Peace, Joy & Satisfaction within Better Work-Life Balance Improved Inter-personal relations Optimized Productivity Attitude becomes less Cynical & more Constructive Deals effectively with Pressure situations Some companies are even keen to have regular weekly meditation, and we have had weekly Sahaja Yoga meditation in few companies. The challenge now is to be more vigorous in following up with the participants of these programs so that most of them get established in For any further detail or assistance on corporate realization please contact- corporateworkshops@sahajayoga.org.in Use your Vibrations 6. According to Puranas, Shri Adi Guru Dattatreya worshipped along the bank of a River, what is modem days name of that river? Volga (Russla) Thames (England) Barbera (Cabella) Narmada (India) Vibrations are said to be the source of true knowledge. Answer these questions with your vibrations ONLY The Questions: 1. Which chakra has the quality of seif-faith? Left Vishuddhi Left Heart Centre Heart 7. What does Descent of Shri Ganga from heaven to earth represnts? Descentof Kriya Shakti Descent of Love & Compassion Descentof Shuddh lecha Descentof Resurrection 2. Our which chakras catch if we are stubborn in our nature? Left Mooladhar and Right Swadhishthan Left Nabhi and Right Swadhisthan Left Nabhi and Right Mooladhar 8. Which of the following bhajans did Shri Mataji used to sing very often during Her childhood days: Jogwa Bhay Kaaya tayaa Namo Namo Mariya Gondhari 3. Which chakra is the origin of the thoughts? RightNabhi Right Swadhisshthan RightAgnya 4. Weakening of which chakra, makes us loose confidence whlle talking about Sahaja Yoga and Shri Mataji? Centre Heart Leit Vishuddhi Centre Agnya 9. Which chakra to cure if you feeling very impatient? Left Void Left Heart Left Vishuddhi 10. Find out which chakra does following cities signify for India? Delhi Mumbal Kalkatta Pune 5. Managerial skills of a person are given to us by which chakras? Right Swadhisthan and Left Heart Right Heart and Centre Vishuddhi Centre Heart and BackAgnya

 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007 EXPRESSIONS OF HEART Transformation The Mother's Kingdom I'm a cry from the inner myths, I'm a volcano of thoughts, I make myself a dusty art, Even here, I'm so far and apart. O Mother,please sit back and rest As we spread Your Divine Love with a warrior's zest. You have written on our hands our destiny, Now the world shall dance to Your Divine Symphony. Embracing a life of illusion, I make inroads for cultivation, Cultivation leading to pleasure, And pleasure that I desire. Into Thy Kingdom You have let us transcend, so that in the Divine Ocean of Love we all may blend. Come and go the trials and tribulations, Theres no stopping the Eternal Jubilations. Pleasure, O pleasure, give me a break, I found a light, which is a snake, Snake, which makes me awake, Of love and life that all pervade. So with the patience we all watch and wait, And witness how the things culminate. Mohit Deopujari Conquered is my heart, I believe I have a part, In this sea of art, Which is inside and smart. A New Beginning O Lord, thank you for a new beginning. Many lives have blissful motive, silence abound, man becomes an angel The Flute of Shri Krishna plays, makes the light rise within. A want to grow, and a want to embrace, I witness you, so close, your grace, Living, it has to be, so lovely, so pure, A love of a Mother, that's for sure. O Lord, thank you for a new beginning Mahalaxmi's son Mahavishnu, Shri Christ Call him forgiveness or new light, He made us eligible to reach Kailash's height. Nothing is that, I want, Nothing is there, I can't and shan't, A stream of light and a snow of glow, O God, now I know, it's you, where I flow. O Lord what a new beginning.. Mother's energy, the love infinite You made us meet the father in paradise All this achieved gives a new view to life, Together we feel bliss and joy, the almighty realm and all so divine, Silence has come we all unite Peaceful we are in your love infinite Who was I and where was I heading, Fighting and crying, sleeping and wasting, Here I am, and will be here for ever, In the silence of your holy, divine endeavor. In the silence of your holy, divine endeavor. Hitesh Nidhi Sharma, Kathmandu, Nepal O Lord it is just a beginning, Now we pray that everyday, The beginning comes for all new sage, Hence we play with colours of vibrations you spray, Under this umbrella ohl Mother we all pray, That Infinite we all become and in our hearts Forever you stay... Answers to Shabdanjali Advait, Ahlad-dayini, Atit, Avadhoot, Bhakti, Bhavasagar, Bhranti, Bija-Mantras, Brahm, Dwij Shridevi Angurala, New Delhi. 8.

 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007 YUVASHAKTI REPORTER sacrifices; some history and genesis of Sahaja Yoga; Knowledge on subtle system, as to how our Chakras work (or even how much do they tolerate our nuisance) and balancing our channels; what books/magazines to read Uttarakhand Yuva Shakti Seminar Bhimtal, Saturday, 24 Feb'07: Uttrakhand Yuva Shakti collective had a unique Seminar cum workshop on 24 February 2007 at Col. V Tewari's (Uttrakhand Coordinator) residence premises amidst the greeneries of Kumaon ranges in Bhimtal (Nainital). Yuva Shaktis were mainly from Almora, Bhimtal, Nainital, Kathgodam, Pantnagar and Kashipur collectivity of Kumaon region. There were around 50-60 Yuva Shaktis who had assembled to attend this one day workshop. WE WANT SAHAJA YOGAII The topics in the Seminar mainly were focused on the essence and knowledge of the subtle system and the Tattwa. It was so engrossing that everyone intangibly felt as if the entire collectivity was literally touring through the visual path of the ida, Pingala and Sushumna along with their gross expression of plexuses within. There were some interesting revealing facts where one could realize as to why and how the respective colours of the Nadis and Chakras are governed by our inner emotions and actions etc (ida, pingala). Then the topic covered aspects on cleansing of all the three channels. These were metaphorically related and demonstrated with practical knowledge of our day to day life styles. like Chaitanya Lahiri/Divine Cool Breeze (The Vedas for Sahaja Yogis) or the Yuva magazine - Yuvadrishti that caters to the Sahaja Yogis and also shared the information on the world wide Sahaja websites, Subtle knowledge on the manifestation of Ekadasha Rudras on the Forehead and the qualities of the ten Gurus in the Void (unique to Sahaja Yoga) were concisely described. Various cleansing techniques such as foot soaking, make the collective understand the fact that how Shri candling, and shoe beating and matka treatment were Ganesha spares none those who dives into the realms of explained practically. The principle of the Gruha Lakshmi. was explained precisely. Very vivid explanations were portrayed on the various elements like Light, Air Fire... etc. The use of water and effect of earth on us were also In an interactive discussion on Protocol and Ritualism there was an emphasis on why we should not indulge into much of ritualism and its pros and cons in our ascent. To ritualism departing from the Nirmal Vidya, a beautiful example with metaphor through a story was narrated - The traffic police hauls up who tries to act funny and becomes a bit nuisance as they drive honking their horns unnecessarily through out creating troubles for himself deliberated at length. and also for others on way. Similarly in our journey of Then an interactive session on Demonstration and rehearsal on self realization and knowledge disseminations to the seekers and our attitude towards them (practical demonstrations), topics covering Yuva spiritual ascent Shri Ganesha looks after us like a cop. Then there were many subjects and subtle aspects that were covered like the inherent dangers of transgressing protocols of Brotherhood and Sisterhood and Marriage protocols in Yuvas. So the protocol is to be maintained with wife and sister distinction or brother-sister relationship especially after coming into Sahaja Yoga as we become realized souls to understand this aspect from inside. The maryadas have been distinctly defined and they are to be respected. issues/struggles/solutions/meditation/rituals/self realization were discussed. Aunique set of questionnaire was served as a class room workshop before and after the workshop to assess how far the collective Yuvas have progressed. The questionnaire itself was so simple in the first look, yet it did test our inner knowledge on our individual ascent and progress that was to be completed in ten minutes. It had questions as to what are the changes and benefits we got from Sahaja; questions were focused on our subtle system, about various Chakras their deities and many more. Another questionnaire was related to our experiences and work done by us for Sahaja. Finally, a performa regarding our personal information was filled Basic knowledge on Shri Mataji and Her advent on Earth, as to say who is Shri Mataji and how "Yuva Shakti' was christened (by Mother in 1987); basic aspects of protocol expected from Yuva Shakti; contribution of Shri Mataji and Her family in the freedom struggle and Her respect for the country; Shri Mataji's association with Gandhiji and the 9.

 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007 and this was the winding up of the programme very interesting old lecture of Shri Mataji was distributed on how to deal with the new comers. It was the talk of Devi Puja, 1989 in Helsinki. powers) to help India come over these issues. Issue# 1 India has sufficient money to sustain itself. The problem lies in management of it. Common man suffers because many resources like food, water, electricity, petroleum etc are poorly managed by corrupt officials and bureaucrats. The day long seminar cum workshop was concluded with a beautiful gesture of Gruha Lakshmi's expression of warmth (lunch) that was served by the senior yogi/yoginis present over there, to all the 50-60 Yuvas present there, just like a picnic. Finally, before the departure it turned out to be another real party time for the Yuvas as it marked the Birthday celebration of our state coordinator Col. V Tewaril At 4:30 P.M the collectivity of the Yuva sangha departed with a lot of learning and lessons in hand and with a vow in heart to spread Mother's message of Love to every nook and coner and becoming a fruit from flower as we understood the blossorm time has sprung up within us by Mother's grace. Suggestion/Solution We can pray to Shri Mataji in Her Shri Saraswati and Shri Shri Mataji meeting Yuva Shakti in Cabella Shri Mataji met swiss yuvashakti in Cabella on 28th May (Day of Pentecost). Here are some words She spoke during the meeting: Hanuman form, that by Her grace everything may become organized, just like it was in the kingdom of Shri Rama. We may shoe-beat corrupt officials, bureaucrats, politicians and poor system of India. O A Yuva told Shri Mataji about Internation Yuvashakti Seminar (30th July-2nd June), which is going to be held in Cabella for ages 16 to 27. Shri Mataji immediately responded "Very Good". She then added, "The atmosphere is not good for them." By saying that She was talking about the outside world, which makes it hard for young seekers to get their realisation. Her face darkened a little bit. "It is very important what you are doing." She said, then added, " You can save them." Issue#32 Indian society and its values are being influenced by west. The main source of this is media (i.e. films, TV serials, newspaper, magazines, internet etc). The vulgarity and obscenity hurts the Innocence of people esp. children and gives them false ideas. Then yuvashakti gave beautiful pink roses to Shri Mataji, each of the Yuvas was allowed to individually hand them over to Shri Mataji, who collected them in Her Holy hands, thanking every one of us and still smiling. She asked sweetly, "Everyone brought a flower?l" She said, "These roses look like Indian roses". One of the Yuvas explained, that they were from Her own garden. Shri Mataji said again, "May God bless you!" while smelling all the roses. They all bowed down and left, their hearts trembling and laughing, grateful to be so much under Her attention. Suggestion/Solution () We must pray to Shri Mataji in Her Shri Vishnumaya of form that by Her grace there may be correct usage o media, which highlights values and morality of India. ()We may shoe-beatmisuse of media. Issue# 3 Two major rivers in India-Ganga and Yamuna, which are Ida Nadi and Pingla Nadi of the World respectively, are falling victim to immense pollution. Chemicals from factories, garbage, waste fertilizers, waste from ritual activities at the banks are the main cause. After that Shri Mataji added, "Yuva Shakti are first class, because they are very innocent." Later, "Yuvashakti are strong and solid Sahaja Yogis" and then "The Yuvashakti are the best. They are deep." Suggestion/Solution (1) We must pray to Shri Mataji for the well-being and purity of these sacred rivers. The purity of these rivers will help all the sahaja yogis of the word in their ascent. The India Around Us (i) We can paper burn the negativities working against purity of these rivers. While doing a havan we can give an ahutiof the negativities. It is our duty to become good cltizens of our country and be aware of its problems. Some of the following points needs our attention and we can do our bit (with spiritual 10

 Yuvadrishtl Jun 2007 that's how we have hydrostatics even stones, gold all of them have got energy in themselves. It is all controlled by the principle of Shri Ganesha. Though such a tiny little child how great is his work and how much He has to work out. From matter one moves to living plants, then to animals, then to human beings and everywhere His energy works. At the level of matter we might call it electro- magnetic, potentially it is the energy of Shri Ganesha which is electro magnetic at that point. When it starts evolving growing, that's how we have different strata of energies that we see in different growth of evolution. Sahaja and Physics Q. Who controls the energy in the matters? Ans: "Think that In the molecule of a substance there is an energy which is acting. One may say why is there energy in matter? If theare was no energy in the matter how can you have all chemical compounds? Who pushes them? Say sodium chloride. Sodium and chloride are attached to each other. But if the chloride has to go to some other atom then who does that? There has to be some energy, which is in built into matter. We know water has energy, Shri Ganesh Puja, Cabella, Italy, 19.09.1993 Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. Subscription Form (Photocopy can be used) You are requested to tick in blocks given below for the magazines you would like to subscribe for the Year 2007. Outstation Rs. 225/- 2. Chaitanya Lahiri Marathi Rs. 300/- 1. Chaitanya Lahiri Hindi Local (for Pune) Rs.200/- Rs. 120/- 4. Yuvadrishti Rs. 300/- 3. Divine Cool Breeze Please provide the full Postal address for mailing the magazines. (PLEASE FILL IN BLOCK LETTERS ONLY) Name Address For Office use only: Issued Receipt No Amount Rs. Date Drawn on Dated By way of Cash/ Cheque/ Demand Draft No. Please send the above form duly filled along with the Cheque/DD to the following Address: Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd., No. 8, Chandragupta Housing Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-4110 38 Tel : 020-25286537, Fax : 020-25286722 11

 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007 DEVAI NAMO NAMAH Om Twameva Sakshat SHRI KARTIKEYA Sakshat Shri Adishakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyei Namo Namah or satanic people were put. That's the only day you can Shri Matali on Shri Kartikeya Kartikeya represents the great, we can say the, captor sleep late and a good news foryou." (2) or leader of all the ganas, of all the, like a Commander-in- Chief. Ganesha is the King but He is the Commander-in- Chief and because German character is to be in command of everything we are going to have this puja where the men will be in command of their spirits and their manly qualities and women will be in command of thair wornanly qualities. To be in command is different from to be a master. Master owns it, a commander does not own it. He does not own it that is also lost. Possession is also lost, we just command it. And that is the state we have to come to now, from Ganesha state to the state of Kartikeya. The other way round, Ganesha is nice, he's the King, very nicely sitting down with all the powers, alright? In a sense He's there but Kartikeya's the one who commands innocence, gives you a power of that commandment. He commands. After the Guru Puja it's better that we should have the power to command others and that commanding spirit comes in the men through their talking, through their dynamism, through their personal achievements; for the women through their loving power, for, through their from our subtle system back to Hell i.e. from where they forbearance, through their gracious behaviour, forgiveness, compassion. So let us develop that today, preserving our innocence. When the Kundalini ascends that we can command it, means it's not that what we have but in a position we are to command. I hope you plays an important role in clearing out the blockages in the understand whatis Kartikeya.." (1) About Right Mooladhara When it comes to clearing Mooladhara we usually miss out right mooladhara. Right Mooladhar is the chakra which is abode of Shri Kartikeya. He is the one who protects us from the demonic forces. Right Mooladhar is the chakra which manifests Wisdom and Surrendering of Shri Ganesha. Right Mooladhar is also importantas out of eleven Ekadasha Rudras two are Shri Ganesha and Shri Kartikeya. The Rudras protect us from satanic attacks and give us strength to fight negativities. Therefore, right mooladhar becomes equally important for clearing & strengthening our left side, It is observed that when our right mooladhara improves our catching of left swadhisthana also reduces. Shri kartikeya also keeps supervision over Hell. Shri Bhairavnath while fighting against spirit possessions in us, touches right mooladhar and therefore works in coordination with Shri Kartikeya to thwart the negativities came. The power of Shri Kartikeya is also very essential in from the sacrum bone to Sahastrara, right mooladhar path of Kundalini. It Is observed that when our right mooladhara improves our right side also becomes better; for two reasons: ".. The spirit of Kartikeya - that pure, absolute dynamism which doesn't indulge into nonsensical things and useless things; which shows results." (3) 1, Since Mooladhara is directly associated with our Agnya chakra, so right mooladhar directly cures right agnya, and it also repairs the weakened ego-controlling Rudra on our forehead. (Out of 11 rudras present on our forehead two are present to control our ego and superego) 2. As an effect of reduced ego we develop shraddha and enlightened mind (which has Divine discretion and knowledge). "...Now in front, in the center here, is who? Kartikeya, in the center; Christ is in the center, in the center itself where the optic chiasma is. Here outside is Kartikeya. What is Kartikeya? Kartikeya is the protector of Christ. Around Kartikeya, they're all protectors of Christ..." (4) .You know Narakasüra has taken his birth, and he's to be killed, the Sahaja Yogis are going to kll him. You have to come up to a point and definitely he can be killed. When Kartikeya is awakened within you, he can be killed. But for that you have to be just like gold, untarnishable. You need strang people to do that. A sword that can kill him has to come out of your mettles. Then Narakasura can be killed. He is one of the worst possible asuras. That is the fourteenth day. When he was killed, the gate of hell was opened and all those where his disciples or his followers "...One can not describe how He looked after His mother, it's impossible. No words can describe the understanding of Christ for His Mother, His love, His gentleness, His care, His devotion, dedication, His 'SHRADHA'can not be described. And you know that He came as an evolved Shri Ganesh and at the back He is Shri Ganesh, in front He is Karthikeya, very powerful, eleven Rudras, and this, has given him the highest position. "(2) 12

 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007 Prayers/Affirmations for Right Mooladhara It is also observed that as right mooladhar improves, our useless mental activity réduces and inner-silence augments greatly. Thus right mooladhar plays an important role in balancing and establishing thoughtless and improve my right mooladhara", "Shri Mataji verily 1. Keep right hand towards Shri Mataji's photograph and left hand on Mother Earth and pray "Mother kindiy purify you're the slayer of all the demons", "Shri Mataji please make me worthy of you", "Shri Mataji whatever I do is to please you", "Shri Mataji please bless me with the qualities of Shri Kartikeya", "Shri Mataji please bless me with complete surrender and Divine wisdom of Shri awareness. But, this must not be understood that we need to neglect left and centre Mooladhar. In fact without awakening Shri Nirmal Ganesha and Shri Gauri Ganesha, Shri Kartikeya cannot be awakened. Ganesha". We can take following mantras: a. Shri Kartikeya Sakshat b. Shri RakhasHantri Sakshat C. Shri Rakshasaghni Sakshat 2. Following is the meditation to improve Mooladhara (as told by Shri Matali Left hand toward Mother and right hand on the 1. ground. Put attention on Left Mooladhara. Take Shri Nirmal Ganesh mantra, say in your heart "Mother by your graceI am innocent". Meditate for few minutes. 2. Then both hands on the lap, put attention on Center Mooladhara, Take Shri Ganesh Gauri mantra and say in your heart "Shri Mataji please make me Innocent". Meditate for few minutes. 3. Look more towards Mother Earth. It is observed that after meditating like this our whole day passes very nicely. Shri Mataji has sald that if we do this every or alternate morning (by heart and not mechanically) for one year, this meditation develops the entire being in such a way that all the obstacles in the path of ascent go away. 3. Then put right hand towards Mother and left hand on the ground (just the opposite of first step), put attention on Right Mooladhara. First take Shri Kartikeya mantra, say in your heart "Shri Mataji please make me worthy of you" and meditate for a few minutes, then take Shri Rakshas- Hantri mantra and again meditate on Right Mooladhara, also say loudly in your heart "Mother you are the destroyer of all the evil in me" and meditate for a while. After experiencing in meditation and hence realizing by heart, above described knowledge of Mooladhara can be effective. Otherwise, it will not work out properly. Reference: 1. 1986-0713: Women Should Be Women, Kartikeya Puja, Holzkirchen, Germany. 2. 1983-1106: Diwali Puja, Hampstead, UK. 3. 1996-1221: Shri Kartikeya Puja, Mumbai, 4. 1981-0904:Advice on Ekadasha Rudra, London Shri 4. The attention becomes pure and we go in thoughtless awareness. 5 Finish the morning meditation with Om Twameva Sakshal Shri Ganesh Gauri Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyei Namo Namah PRAYER FOR LEFT HEART We pray to Lord Shiva to look after our union. I surrender to YOU. Now Gauri Kundalini surrenders to the spirit. We pray to Lord Shiva to look after this. I forget everything eise. I leave it in YOUR Holy hands. YOU raise me up. I forget all that was in me before, just lift me up. You raise me up. Everything I have dropped out, no other desire but just lift me higher. Make me YOUR servant. The rest of it is not important. All the other manifestations of this desire are over. Now lamabsolutely surrendered to YOU, my spirit. Lift me higher and higherand higher.Away from all the thoughts and things that were not the spirit. Make me complete spirit. Forget all that was there. That elevation, that ascent becomes fast quick trip. A very fast thing. If you just try this every moment, anything that goes against the spirit must be given up. And that spirit is what? The PURE desire. We have to be one with the spirit, and all the rest is not important. You are in the beautiful kingdom of GOD where all ugliness drops out like when the lotus opens out; all the mud drops out from it. In the same beautiful way, let MY children become fragrant beautiful offering to LORD SADASHIVA..MAY GOD bless you. - H.H.SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI 13

 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007 शब्दांजली विभिन्न भाषाओं में समाए सहज ज्ञान, जिसे हम चैतन्य द्वारा महसूस करते हैं। आईए, हम उसे शब्दों के माध्यम से जानें। अल्लाह हु - कव्वाली मालिकुल मुल्क लाशरी का लाहु वादाहु ला इल्लाह इल्लाहू। हर अन्त तुझ पर ही होता है। तेरी हम्द-ओ-साना अल्लहम दु इल्लाह, है। कि तू मेरे मोहम्मद का खुदा मैं कसम से कहता हूँ कि केवल एक ही परमात्मा है, अल्लाह हूं, अल्लाह हू, अल्लाह हूँ... जो कि सम्पूर्ण संसार का मालिक है और हे परमात्मा, तुम्हारे सिवाय और कोई भी नहीं है! तेरी पूजा करना ही भगवान की है, पूजा है। क्योंकि तू ही मेरे मोहम्मद का खुदा जहाँ कुछ नहीं होता वहाँ से तेरी शुरुआत होती है| शमस तबरेज़ गर खुदा तलबी, खुशबू काह ला इल्लाह इल्लाहू। ये जुर्मीं जब न थी, जहां जब न था, हे शमस तबरेज़ (ईरान के एक फकीर), अगर तुझे चाँद, सूरज न थे, आसमाँ जब न था। परमात्मा को पाने की तीव्र इच्छा है, तो ऊँचे स्वर में बोलो कि परमात्मा केवल एक ही है। जब यह धरती नहीं थी, जब यह संसार नहीं था, चाँद, सूरज नहीं थे, यह आकाश नहीं था। कौनैन का मसजूद है, माबूद है तू, हर शह तेरी शाहिद है, के मशहूद है ह राज़-ए-हक भी किसी पर आया जब ना था, तब ना था कुछ यहां, था मगर तु ही तु। तू। हे परमात्मा! तू ही दोनों जहान ( लोक-परलोक) का मालिक है और तेरी ही पूजा होती है, हर रचना तेरे ही होने की गवाही देती है। जब परम से परम सत्य को कोई नहीं जानता था और जब यहाँ कुछ नहीं था, अगर कुछ था तो वह केवल ही था। तू हर एक के लब पर है तेरी हम्द-ओ-सना, हर सोज़ में, हर साज़ में मौजूद है तू। पहुँचे मेराज में अर्श तक मुस्तफा, बन्दे में पर्दा रहा। जब ना मा बूद हर किसी के होठों पर तेरे ही नाम की प्रशंसा जब मुस्तफा ( मुहम्म्द साहब का एक नाम) स्वर्ग तक पहुँचे, जब उनमें और भगवान में कोई पर्दा नहीं रहा। और साज़ हर चाहत (दीवानगी) में, हर सुर में तू ही मौजूद है। तब मदालिक ने हज़रत से झुक कर कहा, सारी मखलूक तेरे ही नाम से हर इबतिदा है, तेरे ही नाम तक हर इन्तहा है। में हक नुमा तू हा तू। अल्लाह हू, अल्लाह हूँ, अल्लाह हूँ... ह हर शुरुआत तुझ से होती है और 14 ত

 २ Yuvadrishtl Jun 2007 ७ तब फरिश्ते (देवदूत) ने परमात्मा के आगे झुक कर कहा, सारे संसार में अगर कोई है, तो वह तू (परमात्मा) है, तेरे चमत्कार हर किसी की ऑँखों को चुंधिया देते हैं। इसके अलावा कोई भी नहीं है। डाली-डाली तेरी तखलीक के नहीं होता वहाँ से तेरी शुरुआत होती है। गाती है, गुण पत्ता-पत्ता तेरी कुंदरत का पता देता है। जहाँ कुछ खालिक-ए-कुल है तु, इसमें क्या गुफ्तगू? सारे आलम को है तेरी ही जुस्तजू। गाती है, पेड़ की हर एक डाली तेरी निर्मलता के गुण पेड़ का हर पत्ता तेरे होने की गवाही देता है| इसमें कोई विवाद नहीं है के तू ही सबका मालिक है, ला इलाहा तेरी शान या! वादहू, और सभी को ( जिसे तेरे द्वारा रचा गया है) तुझे पाने का तू खयाल-ओ-तजस्सुस, तू ही आरजू जुनून है। हे परमात्मा! तेरे जैसा कोई भी नहीं है और सब जगह तुम्हारा ही महत्व है, तुम ही विचार, जिज्ञासा और ईच्छा हो। तेरी जलवागिरी है आईन चार सू, ला शरीका लहू, मालिक-ए-मुल्क तू। हे परमात्मा! संसार की हर एक रचना तुम्हारी महानता को आँख की रोशनी, दिल की आवाज़ तू, ही सम्पूर्ण विश्व के मालिक हो। दर्शाती है इसलिए इसमें कोई संशय नहीं है कि तुम होगा भी तू ही तू। था भी तू, है भी तू, अल्लाह हू, अल्लाह हूं, अल्लाह हूँ... हर शय तेरे जमाल की आईना-दार है, हर शय पुकारती है तु परवरदिगार है, ळे परमात्मा! आँख की रोशनी भी तुम हो और हृदय की पुकार भी तुम हो? भूत, वर्तमान और भविष्य ( तीनों कालों में) भी तुम ही हो, अर्थात् तुम आदि-अनादि हो। जहाँ नहीं होता वहाँ से तेरी शुरूआत होती है| हर रचना आप ही का यश प्रतिबिम्बित करती है. हर रचना आप ही को परमात्मा कहती है। कुछ तेरी रबूबियत की अदा को कमाल है, तू रब-ए-कायनात है, तू ला-ज़याल है। Interesting Sahaja Worldwide Links 1. International YuvaShakti Community- www.yuvashakti.com आपके प्रभुत्व का सौन्दर्य उत्तम है, आप ब्रह्माण्ड के ईश्वर हैं, आपका पतन (अन्त) नहीं हो 2. Online Sahaja Radio- www.sahajayoga.com.au/media/radio/ सकता। 3. Sahaja Blog- http://divinesahajayoga blogspot.com/ जो हर शान नई शान दिखा देता है, तू दीदा-ए-शौख को हैरान बना देता है 4. Online Leela Game: Visit www.yogacolorado.org Click "Yogis Login", located on right side of the Shri Chakra. Enter the password: "lambodar" or"gajanana' Follow the instructions and click "Play" हे परमात्मा, तू हर किसी के गुणों को जागृत करके एक नई पहचान बना देता है। 15 र ত

 ब्रह्माण्डीय सहज परिवार के लिये अन्तर-अवलोकन प्रिय भाईयों और बहनों, नहीं कर सकते और उसका कुप्रभाव श्रीमाताजी के शरीर पर पड़ता है। पिछले कुछ वर्षों में हमने शायद ही श्रीमाताजी के मुखारबिन्द पर मुस्कान देखी होगी। हम ये भी जानते है कि उनका स्वास्थ्य बिगड़ रहा है। अतः हमने स्वयं से प्रश्न किया कि 'ऐसा क्यों?' नए आए सहजयोगी कह सकते हैं कि "क्योंकि वे वृद्ध हो रही हैं।" परन्तु जिन लोगों ने सहज में थोड़ी सी भी गहनता तथा सूझ-बूझ प्राप्त की है, उनके साथ हम अपने अन्तर-अवलोकन के निष्कर्षों का विश्लेषण करना चाहेंगे: 7. क्योंकि भवसागर में विद्यमान दस शक्तियों को जागृत करके परमेश्वरी प्रेम का माध्यम बनना हमारा एकमात्र लक्ष्य नहीं है। अतः हमारे अन्दर स्थित गुरुतत्व सुप्तावस्था में है। 8. क्यांकि अब भी उत्रान्ति में बाधा डालने वाले, गहनता में अवरोध उत्पन्न करने वाले तथा परमेश्वरी प्रेम की चैतन्य लहरियों को समझने वाले सूक्ष्मता विरोधी अपने संस्करों (आदतों) से हमें अत्यन्त प्रेम है। 1. क्योंकि हम सहजयोग में वह स्तर, वह गहनता प्राप्त नहीं कर पा रहे हैं जिससे बाहुय विश्व के लोग (विश्व सरकारों तथा संसदों) सहित हमारी ओर आकर्षित हों और पूरे विश्व के लिए सहजयोग अद्वितीय ब्रह्माण्डीय एकीकरण बन जाए। 9. क्योंकि (एक ओर तो) अपनी बुद्धि और (दूसरी ओर) अपनी भावनाओं को परमेश्वरी चैतन्य लहरियों के समक्ष समर्पित करना हमारा लक्ष्य नहीं हैं। स्वयं को अपने अहं और प्रतिअहं से मुक्त करने हमारा लक्ष्य नहीं है, इसी कारण से अपने तर्किक और भावनात्मिक लिप्सताओं को हम किसी भी प्रकार छोड़ना नहीं चाहते। 2. क्योंकि सहजयोग में हमारी उल्करान्ति बहुत धीमी है। उत्क्रान्ति की गति धीमी होने के कारण हमारे अन्दर शुद्ध इच्छा की दुर्बलता है, शुद्ध इच्छा इतनी कम है कि हम उसे क्रियान्वित नहीं करते। 10. क्योंकि हम अन्य लोगों के अहं और प्रतिअहं के प्रभाव से मुक्त करने का प्रयत्न नहीं करते इसी कारण हम अपने मन और शरीर को समझने की अपनी आदत के सम्मुख तो नतमस्तक हो जाते हैं, परन्तु अपनी आत्मा के सम्मुख नहीं। 3. क्योंकि पूरा दिन ध्यानावस्था में बने रहना हमें याद नहीं रहता। यद्यपि हम प्रातः और सायं नियमित रूप से ध्यान करते हैं फिर भी हम बार-बार अहं और प्रतिअहं के शिकंजे में फॅस जाते हैं। र 11. क्योंकि हम भूल जाते हैं कि केवल श्री माताजी ही हमारी गुरु है, उनकी परमेश्वरी प्रेम की चैतन्य लहरियाँ। 4. क्योंकि अब तक भी हम अपनी सभी समस्याओं को श्रीमाताजी के चरणकमलों में, परम चैतन्य के सम्मुख नहीं कर पाते हैं। 12. क्योंकि हम भूल जाते हैं कि हमारे आध्यात्मिक उत्क्रान्ति पथ पर केवल दो बाघाएँ हैं (बंधन)। : अहंकार एवं प्रतिअहंकार 5. क्योंकि हर समय हम पूर्ण सत्य को भूले रहते हैं कि हम आत्मा हैं और श्रीमाताजी परमात्मा हैं, 'परम चैतन्य' हैं। 13. क्योंकि हम भूल जाते हैं कि अपनी बुद्धि और भावनाओं पर आवाछित विश्वास और निर्भरता हमारी सबसे बड़ी गलती 6. क्योंकि हम भूल जाते हैं कि आत्मा के सम्मुख हमारा शरीर है। गौण है। हर क्षण यदि हम आत्मा का आनन्द नहीं उठाते, तो परमेश्वरी तंत्र से हमारा योग अभी अस्थिर एवं डावाँडोल है। ऐसी अवस्था में परम चैतन्य हमारी समस्याओं का समाधान 14. क्योंकि हम भूल जाते हैं कि श्रीमाताजी का हमारे हृदय से 16

 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007 नहीं कर सकते और उसका कुप्रभाव श्रीमाताजी के शरीर पर 9. क्योंकि (एक ओर तो) अपनी बुद्धि और (दूसरी ओर) अपनी भावनाओं को परमेश्वरी चैतन्य लहरियों के समक्ष समर्पित करना हमारा लक्ष्य नहीं हैं। स्वयं को अपने अहं और 7. क्योंकि भवसागर में विद्यमान दस शक्तियों को जागृत करके प्रतिअहं से मुक्त करने हमारा लक्ष्य नहीं है, इसी कारण से परमेश्वरी प्रेम का माध्यम बनना हमारा एकमात्र लक्ष्य नहीं है। अपने तकिक और भावनात्मिक लिप्सताओं को हम किसी भी पड़ता है। प्रकार छोड़ना नहीं चाहते। अतः हमारे अन्दर स्थित गुरुतत्व सुप्तावस्था में है। 8. क्योंकि अब भी उत्क्रान्ति में बाधा डालने वाले, गहनता में 10. क्योंकि हम अन्य लोगों के अहं और प्रतिअहं के प्रभाव से अवरोध उत्पन्न करने वाले तथा परमेश्वरी प्रेम की चैतन्य मुक्त करने का प्रयत्न नहीं करते इसी कारण हम अपने मन तो लहरियों को समझने वाले सूक्ष्मता विरोधी अपने संस्करों और शरीर को समझने की अपनी आदत के सम्मुख नतमस्तक हो जाते हैं, परन्तु अपनी आत्मा के सम्मुख नहीं। (आदतों) से हमें अत्यन्त प्रेम है। Experiences of Yuvashakti Mother's Protection Although every moment in Sahaja is heavenly but I would like to share two (out of hundreds) of Sahaja miracle experiences, 1. 1 have a very sensitive skin - even a wee bit of scratch or burn pains for hours! One day I had lit an agarbatti (Incense stick) and kept it in front of Shri Mataji, I was in office at that time, so someone interrupted and I started giving some instructions to him - as he went away -I saw the burning end of the stick pierced deep in my skin (arm) as a reflex action I jumped to brush itoff my skin and checked the burntarea to my surprise there was not the slightest mark or burn injury !I AlthoughIhad myself taken out the pierced end from my skinl! 2. Very recently I was washing the bottles with acid. Usually, even a slightest droplet of acid burns the skin and I used to immediately wash off with water to ward away the burning sensation. But some 3 days ago, I was washing a turmblerwhich had acquired some stubborn stains and as I poured the acid in it it leaked through one of its designed incisions and fell directly on my right thumblAlthough I could see the harsh acidic effect it made on the tumbler but my skin felt as if plain water had fallen on it I! l understood that Shri Mataji has taken care of Her instrument's skin! Aparna Gangopadhyay, Kolkata Power of a Bandhan I was preparing for entrance of Modern Office Practice, in which there were only 250 seats. I did not want to sit for the exam because my uncle & aunty had come with their children. They were going for a plcnic but my parents forced me to go and take the exam. Solwent there and I was crying because my father had scolded me. I went and took the exam. I don't know what answer I gave to which question but after finishing my exam I just gave bandhan to my paper and submitted it. After few days my result was out and I went to check it. I thought thatI would not succeed but by grace of our Holy Mother a miraculous thing happened. Igot All India 18 th rank, and also an admission in renowned Meerabal Polytechnic. 1 Mugdha Srivastava, Delhi 17

 वर्तमान का महत्त्व श्रीमाताजी ने हमें हमेशा वर्तमान में रहने के लिए कहा है। जब हम निर्विचारिता में होते हैं, तभी हम वर्तमान में होते हैं। परन्तु यह स्थिति पूर्णतः सीपित नहीं है, तो हमें इस के लिए क्या करना चाहिए? आईये लियो टॉलस्टॉय (रूस के आत्मसाक्षात्कारी लेखक) की इस कहानी से जानें। सर्वाल पूछने आया हूँ। पहला - काम का ठीक वक्त मैं कैसे जान सकता हूँ? एक बार एक राजा के मन में तीन सवाल आए। पहला - कोई काम कब शुरू किया जाए? दूसरा - कौन ठीक व्यक्ति हैं जिसकी बात सुनी जाए? तीसरा - महत्त्वपूर्ण काम कौन सा है? दूसरा - कौन लोग मेरे लिए महत्वपूर्ण हैं जिनका औरों की मुझे विशेष ख्याल रखना है। तीसरा - कौन सा काम सबसे महत्त्वपूर्ण है, जिस पर मुझे उसने अपने सारे राज्य में ऐलान करा दिया कि जो कोई भी आकर इन सवालों का उत्तर देगा उसे खूब इनाम दिया जाएगा। बड़े-बड़े विद्वान दूर-दूर से राजा के पास आये, सबने उत्तर दिये, पर सबके उत्तर पहले ध्यान देना चाहिए?" योगी ने राजा की बात सुनी पर जवाब नहीं दिया। हथेली को थूक से गीला कर के, फिर से खोदने लग गया। राजा ने कहा आप थक गये हैं, लाइये, मुझे फावड़ा दीजिए, कुछ देर मैं आपकी जगह काम कर देता हूँ।" अच्छा" कहकर योगी ने फावड़ा राजा को दे दिया और खुद धरती पर लेट कर सुस्ताने लगा। दो क्यारियाँ खोदने पर राजा रुका और अपने प्रश्नों को दोहराया। लेकिन योगी ने कोई जवाब नहीं हेर अलग-अलग थे। जितने भी उत्तर उसे प्राप्त हुए वह उनसे संतुष्ट नहीं हुआ। तब उसने एक योगी से (जिसके ज्ञान का गौरव दूर-दूर तक था) इन सवालों का उत्तर जानने की सोची। मी चक टट मा दिया। राजा शाम होने तक वह योगी एक वन में रहता फावड़ा हाथ में लिए धरती खोदता रहा। था, कभी बाहर नहीं जाता था ि और देहात के सीधे साधे लोगों के अलावा किसी और अन्ततः राजा ने फावड़ा छोड़ कर से बात नहीं करता था। अतः राजा ने अपना सादा वेश कर लिया और योगी की कुटिया आने से पहले ही घोड़े से उतर कर पैदल चलने लगा। साथ के रक्षक सिपांहियों को वहीं छोड़ कर वह अकेला ही कुटिया की ओर चला गया। योगी से कहा "हे ज्ञानी पुरुष, मैं आपसे अपने तीन प्रश्नों के उत्तर के लिए आपके पास आया था, यदि आप मुझे उत्तर नहीं दे सकते तो बता दीजिए, मैं वापिस चला जाता हूँ।" इतने में योगी ने कहा - "देखो! वहाँ से कोई भागा आ रहा है। जाने कौन है?" राजा ने मुड़कर देखा कि एक दाढ़ीवाला व्यक्ति जंगल से भागा चला आ रहा था। उसने अपने दोनों हाथों से अपने पेट को दबा रखा था और उसका लहु बह रहा था। उनके पास पहुँच कर वह बेहोश हो कर गिर गया। दोनो ने मिल कर उसके घाव को घोया और पट्टी बाँधी, बहुत मेहनत से उसके लहु को रोका, फिर उसे होश आया। राजा ने उसे पानी पिलाया और बिछौने कुटिया के पास पहुँच कर राजा देखता है कि योगी कुटिया के आगे धरती खोद रहा था। राजा को देख योगी स्वागत वचन कहता है और फिर उसी तरह खोदने लगता है। योगी की काया दुर्बल थी, धरती में एक फावड़ा मारता कि उसकी साँस फूलने लगती। राजा ने पास जाकर कहा - "हे ज्ञानी योगी मैं आपके पास तीन 18

 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007 पर सुला दिया। राजा सुबह से इतना काम करके थक चुका था, वर्तमान का समय, क्योंकि वह वही समय जिसमें हम जीते हैं अतः वह भी लेट गया और गहरी नींद में सो गया। जब सुबह हुई तो उस दाढ़ीवाले व्यक्ति ने राजा से कहा - "हे है जिसके साथ हम उस समय होते हैं क्योंकि कौन जानता है राजनू! मुझे क्षमा कर दीजिए। राजा बोला - "मैं तो तुम्हें कि आगे किसी से मिलना हमारे भाग्य में है भी या नहीं। सबसे जानता ही नहीं तो क्षमा किस बात की?" वह बोला - "आप महत्त्वपूर्ण कार्य है उस व्यक्ति की जो सेवा हो, कर देना, मुझे नहीं जानते, लेकिन मैं आपको जानता हूँ। आपने मेरे भाई क्योंकि वही एक कार्य है जिसको उस व्यक्ति के हाथ देकर उसे को फाँसी दे कर उसकी सारी सम्पत्ति छीन ली थी। तब मैंने तुम्हारे पास भेजा गया है। आपसे प्रतिशोध लेने का प्रण लिया था। मैंने सोचा था कि जब आप योगी की कुटिया से वापिस आयेंगे तब मैं आपकी हत्या इस प्रकार वह राजा उस योगी से अपने तीन प्रश्नों के उत्तर कर दूँगा। परन्तु दिन पूरा हो गया और आप नहीं लौटे। जब मैं जान कर अपनी राजधानी लौट गया। अपने छिपने की जगह से बाहर आया, तब आपके सिपाहियों ने मुझे पहचान लिया और मुझ पर आक़रमण कर के घायल कर दिया। कैसे भी मैं वहाँ से भागा और यहाँ आपने मुझे यदि पट्टी |ऐसा प्रश्न होता है कि क्या करें? यह ठीक है या नहीं? और नहीं बाँधी होती तो मैं मृत्यु को प्राप्त हो जाता। आपने मेरी जान बचाई है, मैं जब तक जीवित रहूँगा तब तक आपकी सेवा करुगा और अपने बेटे से भी यही कहूँगा। आप मुझे क्षमा कर दीजिये, यही मेरी विनती है।2" राजा को बड़ी प्रसन्नता हुई कि कैसे सहज ही एक शत्रु मित्र बन गया! राजा ने उसे क्षमा कर दिया और सम्पत्ति लौटाने का वचन भी दिया। और वही हमारे हाथ में होता है। सबसे महत्त्वपूर् व्यक्ति वह अब यह प्रश्न बहुत बार हो जाता है, adminstration में, इतना आसान है, इतना आसान है कि कोई सा भी decision लेने से पेहले निर्विचारिता में जाओ, अपने आप decision सामने जो आ जाए वो करिये कभी गुलत हो ही नहीं सकता है। पर decision निर्विचारिता में spontaneous होगा और विचार में आपने अगर कर लिया तो वो biased होगा, क्योंकि उसमें आपका ego और superego दोनों काम कर रहा है। आपके जो कुछ भी संस्कार हैं, आपने जो कुछ लौकिक कमाया है वो आपके पीछे में खड़ा रहेगा। लेकिन अगर निर्विचारिता में करियेगा फिर राजा ने योगी से कहा - "हे ज्ञानी पुरुष, मैं अंतिम बार आपसे अपने प्रश्नों के उत्तर के लिए प्रार्थना करता हूँ।" योगी | तो ये कभी ना होयेगा... आलौकिक होगा...। ने कहा - "हे राजनु! उत्तर तो आपको मिल ही राजा ने पूछा - "कैसे?आपका क्या तात्पर्य है?" योगी बोला - "देखिये, यदि आप मेरी दुर्बलता पर दया नहीं करते और मेरी जगह इन क्यारियों को खोदते नहीं, अपितु | absolutely dynamic! वापिस चले जाते, तो यह व्यक्ति आप पर हमला कर बैठता! और फिर यहाँ न ठहरने पर आप पछतावा करते। अतः उस क्षण आपके लिए सबसे महत्त्वपूर्ण समय वह क्षण था जिस क्षण आप क्यारियाँ खोद रहे थे। उस क्षण आपके लिए सबसे महत्त्वपूर्ण व्यक्ति मैं था और उस क्षण मेरी सहायता करना आपका सबसे महत्त्वपूर्ण कार्य था। इसके बाद वह व्यक्ति जब हमारे पास आकर गिर गया, तब, जब आप उसकी परिचर्या में लगे थे, वह सबसे महत्त्वपूर्ण समय था। क्योंकि यदि आप धाव न बाँधते तो वह अपने मन में आपका वैर लिए मरता। अंतः उस क्षण वह व्यक्ति आपके लिए सबसे महत्त्वपूर्ण व्यक्ति था और जो आप ने उसके लिए किया वह सबसे महत्त्वपूर्ण कार्य। इसलिए याद रखो कि एक ही समय है जो महत्त्वपूर्ण है।" चुका एक क्षण निर्विचारिता में जाकर के आप किसी भी चीज़ का decision ले लें, आप ऐसे-ऐसे decisions लेंगे के | बड़े-बड़े लोगों के बस का नही था! dynamic.. क्षमा की शक्ति का महत्त्व, 1975 स्वयं से पूछें १. इन दो वाक्यों में क्या अन्तर है: चित्त का सहस्त्रार पर होना चित्त का सहस्त्रार में होना २. मैं जीवन में क्या चाहता हूँ - आलीशान, सुखमय, स्वस्थ जीवन या फिर परम? 19

 ॐ ० Yuvadrishti Jun 2007 स्वरशाला (हारमोनियम पर तीन महामंत्र बजाना सीखिये ) ली ॐ त्वमे व साक्षात् श्री महा लक्ष्मी महा सरस्वती महा का रे रे ग ग रे रे रे ग ग ग में ग प म ग रे रे सा सा पु रे - - रे सा जी त्रिगुणात्मि का कुण्डलिनी साक्षात् श्री आदिशक्ति माता रे रे ग रे ग म ग प म ग रे रे प ध म ग प प - प ग वी - न मो न मः ॥ श्री निर्मला दे नी सा रे सा नी धृ धु नी ग रे सा रे सा सा सा नी सा त्वमे व साक्षात् श्री कल्की साक्षात् श्री आदिशक्ति रे रे ग रे ग प ॐ प ध म ग सा सा पू रे - - सा जी श्री निर्मला दे माता नी सा रे सा नी धु नी सा ग म ग प मे ग रे रे {१२ र ি 1SFERLS वी न मो न मः ॥ धृ नी ग रे सा रे सा सा सा ॐ त्वमे व साक्षात् श्री कल्की साक्षात् श्री सहस्त्रार स्वा मि नी मोक्ष रे ग ग ग म प नी नी सां नी नी - सा सा सा पू रे रे - रे रे ग जी प्र दा यनी - - मा- ता म ध प नी ध नी ध प म ग रे नी सां रें नी ध प प - श्री निर्मला दे वी न मो न मः ॥ नी सा रे सा नी ध धु नी ग रे सा रे सा सा नी सा 20 tv to

 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007 MOTHER'S RECIPE Chhole (Spicy Chick Peas) (For 6 People) add the baking powder and quickly add the drained chick Ingredlents: peas 500 gr. Chick peas (soaked over night) 500 gr. Potatoes bolled and cut into small cubes 2.3 tablespoon ghee or oil 2 teaspoon baking powder 2 liter water 5-6 bay leaves 2 teaspoon shajeera (caraway seeds) 1 fresh green chilli ½ teaspoon red chilli powder ½ teaspoon turmeric powder 250 gr. Seedless tamarind • Add the preparation (A) and let everything cook until the chickpeas are tender. (Add hot water if necessary, never cold water it stops the chick peas to getsalt) Add bay leaves * in another frying pan heat the ghee, and cumin seeds and letit splutter. • Add preparation (B), turmeric and green chilli to the 3 big sliced onions 7.5 cm piece ginger, finely chopped 7-8 cloves of garlic, finely chopped 1 teaspoon black pepper 3-4 whale cinnamon sticks 2 black cardamoms 6 pieces of cloves 3 teaspoon coriander seeds 3 teaspoon cumin seeds (jeera) Fresh coriander leaves ghee. Fry for minute, until you smell the spices, but take care not to burn them Optional jaggery or sugar * Add this mixture to the cooked chick peas. Preparation: Add boiled potato cubes, red chill powder, thick tamarind paste and salt. You can also add sugar or Soak the tamarind in a little hot water for an hour. jaggery in the sauce (optional, according toyour taste) your taste). Mix well, cover and simmer for one more squeeze by hand) Keep the thick tamarind extract to put minute. The chickpeas have to be a thick, molst dish and Mix the coarsely ground spices (B) in a bowl Squeeze it to remove the pulp. (Strain through a sieve or not too liquid. into the sauce. When ready, garnish with fresh coriander leaves. Serve with nan or rice. Boil the 2% of water, in a big pot. When it starts boiling As fresh as it has been made Strange thing about cooking was that we had a big catering-style fridge & Mother made a chicken stew which we didn't finish, so we put leftovers in fridge for another day. Then after Mother had left, about a week later, PatAnslow, who stayed up after seminar, & I made another chicken stew & also put it in same fridge & forgot about it. About 3 weeks after this we suddenly remembered 2 stews, but strange thing was that our stew had gone completely rotten, whereas Mother's was as fresh as day it had been made. - Linda Williams 21

 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007 THIS HAPPENED Shiva." Of course, the foxglove contains digitalis, a substance used in heart surgery. She also said sage was very good. She said it is like the sunlight There was a miracle, which I experienced when we had a seminar in English countryside. It was a long time ago, 1979, & Shri Mataji came. It was a very dark day with no sun, heavy clouds. It was very, very dull & heavy. There was a lot of doubting in Sahaja Yoga at that time. And Shri Mataji was talking to us & said that She is Shri Krishna & Shri Jesus & Shri Mataji. She is all of them. She said it is like sunlight. And at that moment beam of sunlight came out of nowhere & shone on Her head & went away. To prove it, She said for beam of light come again on Her head. That happened 2 or 3 times. Out of nowhere sun came. So this was miracle I witnessed together with about 50 yogis, who where presentat that time, Linda Williams I think we stayed up at Crosscraig about a week. Each day, with Mother there, it got clearer and lighter even though more and more TM victims kept túrning up. A whole family of brothers and sisters came over from Ireland. Shri Mataji worked relentlessly, with yogis, elements and persuasion, to get the individual TM mantras disclosed. She just transformed the place, the Miodrag Radosavljevic Adrama of cosmic proportions Mother decided to have a seminar at Crosscraig, house where I was living in Scotland. Word "crosscraig" meant "place of holy stone" and it was a Victorian hunting lodge. At that time it had the most dreadful vibrations imaginable because we had been involved with TM & had even had courses on this brand of madness there. But it was as if Mother wanted to come right into the den of the enemy and clear it out for us and through us. Linda Williams vibrations, while She was there. I remember we had pujas, we hada havan, and we did ajwan. There was one point where She lay on the ground and everybody just came and took vibrations from Her, although everyone who could obviously, there were too many of us. The rest of us held hands with those who had their hands on Her body and She just gave vibrations that way, lying down on the ground or on the floor in the living room. There were about 20 people at seminar, maybe a few more. I remember Marilyn, Gregoire & Maureen, Pat Anslow's sister, Pat & Mother, Mother in all Her glory. We had a havan & Mother kept us up all night, butit was July & nights were only about 2 hours long. I remember we went outside as sun rose, about 3 in morning, in a golden line over loch. She said TM bhoots had come for us in night & had had a nasty shock when they were met by Adi Shakti Herself. I also remember that I had a sort of alittle cottage attached to main house & Mother came to my bedroom. She stamped Her Feet around the room and said that the bhoots had run away, but that they would return after She left. had a hand on Her body and those who Marilyn Leate We had a megalith, a standing stone in garden, which was why place was called Crosscraig. There were quite a few Another thing about that seminar Mother had all the older standing stones in Rannoch Valley, but this one was all alone, about one & half meter high & near the edge of loch. It had a sort of a cup mark in it near top. We took Mother to see it, as it was only about 50 meters from house and She told us something very interesting. She said that people who put up these stones knew that She was going to come here, but that also some very bad things were going to go on here beforehand, TM nonsense. She asked us to feel vibrations of stone &it didn't seem to have any, either positive or negative. She said yes, that was right, stone had been put there to absorb some of negative vibrations & make Her work easier, but that it was full, so could not emit cool vibrations. Sahaja Yogis wash our feet in Her bath water. This was outside in the garden and we newer people sat in a row on the edge of the lawn with our feet down on the gravel area where one drove cars in. In those days we did not realize the deep symbolism of everything that was going on. Linda Williams | also remember Mother sitting in garden & I took Her a bunch of herbs. She said, "One day I must tell you about all these."And She took a foxglove foxgloves grow wild in Scotland and She said, "This flower is sacred to Lord 22

 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007 It made me think, that whole of Mother's incarnation is a drama of cosmic proportions. Years later, Mother Herself said as much. Dattatreya was born. After the Puja Mother had us go into Her room and we massaged Her Feet and legs to take the vibrations which had been generated during the Puja. Very often in those days the vibrations were not taken and Mother explained that they would go round the world and come back to Her and would then cause Her great pain if they were not absorbed, Linda Williams At night She would ask people to go & we would direct vibrations while She slept & She would wake up & comment on something & then fall back to sleep again. She never stopped working on everybody. Just individually & collectively, She didn't stop. She was working on every newcomer who came. People were coming from Ireland, Scotiand, England, ex-TMers who were coming to get cleared out. Linda Williams. Actually, people were really getting better. They were all improving as the week went on. People who had physical problems were just getting better, were feeling healthier, getting more energy and it was an interesting period. Marilyn Leate Marilyn Leate We made garlands out of pink lupines for Mother for Puja. I remember during aarti to Mother at end, feeling tremendous power, joy & majesty of the great Goddess in front of me. When we had sung aarti & were bowing to Mother, She offered us a boon, but said we should ask in our hearts for something material. Although I was going through a bankruptcy case at that moment, I could not bring my self to ask for money, but had heard in London week before that Mother wanted those of us who were married to have children. So l asked for a son who would grow up to fight evil in world. Following year my son It was a beautiful few days. Mother told me She would replace all the terrible memories of my misplaced seeking with beautiful memories and so it has indeed been. As She left to get in Her car, Mother gave me a big hug. It was wonderful. Linda Williams Donation Request For NGO 4. Kindly Speed Post (ONLY) vour Cheque/DD at: Mrs. Gisela Matzer, Jai Shri Mataji Dear Sahaja Yogis, We all kriow that Shri Malaji founded Vishwa Nirmal clo Vishwa Nirmal PremAshram, Prem Ashram, Greater Noida (an NGO for destitute women and children) In 2000. For upbringing & care taking of the children/women and running & maintenance of the Ashram the NGO regularly needs funds. Following is the Information for people who may wish to donate: Plot No.9, Institutional Area, Near Park Knowledge l, Greater Noida, UP-201308. Ph: (0120)2322023, (0120)2230681. Contacts: (1) Mrs. Gisela-09810774865 email-gisela_oma_7@yahoo.com (II) Mr. Jaswant Singh-09891924990 1. The Cheque/DD must be made in favour of HH Shri Mataii Nirmala Devi Foundation. 2. If the donation is greater than or equal to Rs.5000 then please mention your PAN number. If donation() Rs. 3000-Includes food, school, dress, maintenance amount is less than Rs.5000 then please mention (1) Rs.1700-School and Food (only) your postal address. 5. Donation options for a child (per month): (ili) Rs. 500-Schooling (only) We request readers to announce this in their collectives, so as to spread the awareness among people. 3. Donation can also be given in form of kinds like cotton dress, shoes, undergarments (all NEW and NOT old and used ones). Forfurther details: www.nirmalprem.org 23

 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007 Kid Shakti Page Swadisthan Chakra Locate the Swadisthan Chakra on the body chart. Count the Number of petals in the Swadisthan Chakra. Ask your parents the color the Swadisthan Chakra and color it. w ww Shri Brahmadeva is the creator, who has created this Universe and who is the one who is busy still creating and doing lots of things for us. He is that aspect of Shri Mataji which is the Doer of all actions. Qualities of Shri Saraswati include creativity, art, music, poetry, aesthetics and comprehension. She is the giver of all the Nirmal Vidya and takes away all Avidya. Color the following picture of Shri Saraswati and Shri Brahmadeva. 24

 ८ Papaji's Words of Wisdom (Shiv Puja 2007 address) सामने आपके श्रीमाताजी बैठी हैं और इससे बड़ा क्या करें चार लोग हैं और ये तीन लोग हैं और सब दृश्य क्या हो सकता है? उनको देख लेना, भगवान एक के ही पास क्यों जा रहे हैं? उन्होंने कहा कि ये को देख लेना। मैं अच्छी तकदीर वाला हूँ मुझे हर विल्कुल अलग है। मैंने कहा - "क्यों?" कहने लगा रोज देखने का मौका मिल जाता है। आपसे मुझे "ये कोई सहजयोग होता है उसको करता है और है अगर आप देखें तो कितने लोग आये हैं, बैठे हये हैं। क्यों को देता है, सबको अपनी हिफाजत में रखे हैं ।" मैंनें बैठे हुये हैं?क्यों आये हैं?वो इसलिये है कि जो बैठे हैं यहाँ श्रीमाताजी, इन्होंने अपार प्रेम सबको दिया, है न ठीक बात? (तालियों की गड़गड़ाहट) और अब वो कहती हैं कि मेरे बच्चों, मेरे प्यारे बच्चों मैंनें ३० साल, ३५ साल दौड़-दौड़ कर सब काम किया है। कहाँ-कहाँ मैं नहीं गई? लैटिन अमेरिका, अफ्रीका लेकिन अब मुझे थोड़ा सा तो आराम करने दो, बच्चों अब तुम जिम्मेदारी सम्भालो। कहने का म कर े मतलब यह है कि सहज को अब आप बढ़ाइये। लेकिन सहज को बढ़ाने में मैं बहुत हाथ जोड़कर आपसे कहना चाहता हूँ जो सबसे बड़ी चीज है अपने हाथ जोड़े और कहा ये है, यह दुनिया उन्होंने सच्चा प्यार, हर एक के लिये अगर मन में सच्चा बनायी है और मेरी आपसे हाथ जोड़कर विनती है प्यार है, सबके लिये, कोई द्वेष नहीं है यही कि आप इस बात को समझिये और आगे बढ़ाइये, श्रीमाताजी की सबसे बड़ी देन है कि सारी दुनिया बहुत जरूरत है इसकी। देखिये न, दुनिया को एक है। हर एक को प्यार एक तरह से करना देखिये, झगड़े, लड़ाई। एक भगवान, एक ही तो हो चाहिये। उन्होंने कहा है कि हम सहजयोगी हैं, सकता है दो तो नहीं हो सकते। सब उस ही के बच्चे Particularly एक है। एक दूसरे को इतना Pure है। इस प्रेम को आगे बढ़ायें। बहुत हक से लग के प्यार दें, कुछ कहिये नहीं। कोई आपस में तनाजा बढ़ाइये। आप इस देश को बचा सकते हैं, इस नहीं, झगड़ा नहीं, द्वेष नहीं, कुछ नहीं सिर्फ प्यार, दुनिया को बचा सकते हैं इसलिये हाथ जोड़कर उस प्यार को जब आप आगे बढ़ायेंगें तो सहजयोग आपसे कहता हूँ कि इनका ( श्रीमाताजी का) काम आपके जरिये से आगे बढ़ेगा, लोग देखेंगें। मैं आप सम्भालिये। ये हैं, ये बैठी हैं, ये याद रखिये आपको एक बात दो मिनट में बताऊँ, मैं एक बार आप, आपके पास आपके बच्चे आयेंगें, उनके बच्चे लन्दन में था, काम करता था। एक बार एक किताब आयेंगे, सब यहीं आयेंगे लेकिन फिर भी ये अपने की दुकान में गया वहाँ पर चार मेजें लगायी हुई थीं आसन पर बैठेगी और आप काम करेंगें करेंगें?हाथ जो लोग help करते थे, चार तो बैठे हुये थे। मैनें उठाइये... Promise? देखा कि तीन लोगों के पास लोग नहीं जा रहे हैं Thank you, बहुत धन्यवाद और एक लड़का सा है 25 साल का, 30 साल का सब उस ही के पास जा रहे हैं। तो मैनें वहाँ के मैनेजर से कहा कि भाई समझ में नहीं आ रहा कि ॐ

 Shri Ganesha Swayambhu Shri MahaGanapati, GanpatiPhule, India Shri Ganapati, Uluru, Australia



----------------------

2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Vol 8
June
2007
Issue 2
"Yuva Shakti are first class, because they are very innocent. Yuvashakti are strong and
solid Sahaja Yogis. The Yuvashakti are the best. They are deep."
H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 28 May 07, Cabella
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 NSYS LENS
Shri Mataji with children
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 INDEX
NIRMAL VANI : LETHARGY, MOST ANTI-GOD
1.
CORPORATE REALIZATION
6.
2.
8
EXPRESSION OF HEART
3.
YUVASHAKTI REPORTER
9.
4.
12
5.
DEVAI NAMO NAMAH: SHRI KARTIKEYA
शब्दांजली - अल्लाह हूँ
14
6.
ब्रह्माण्डीय सहज परिवार के लिये अन्तर-अवलोकन
16
7.
वर्तमान का महत्त्व
18
8.
स्वरशाला
20
9.
MOTHER'S RECIPE
21
10.
THIS HAPPENED
22
11.
KIDSHAKTI PAGE
24
12.
PAPAJI'S WORDS OF WISDOM
13.
25
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 YUVADRISHTI
Published by
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 8, Chandragupta Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 029
Tel : 020-25286537, Fax : 020-25286722
Printed by
Sharada Printary
Pune
Please mail your experiences, poems,
articles, suggestions, comments, etc. to:
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 8, Chandragupta Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 029
yuvadrishti@gmail.com
For queries regarding delay in receiving
The magazine, please call:
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.,
Tel : 020-25286537
We solemnly thank our article writers, editors,
designers/professionals etc. for their help in making this issue.
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007
NIRMAL VANI
LETHARGY, MOST ANTI-GOD
Some priceless jewels on selected topics, extracted from the treasure trove of our Mother's eternal
words of wisdom, have been strung into exquisite necklace called "Nirmal Vani". This issue, lets focus
on Mother's advice, on how to remove the gross and subtle lethargy within us.
Lethargy is something we have to overcome somehow
and this lethargy is a, actually a satanic force. It's not
lethargy only of the matter that comes from material
domination on the Spirit, but it is really satanic because it
stops your progress and is to be avoided. And to get out of
it one has to be really alert about it, how It crawls onto
you (2).
really throw away and get out of it. Because it explains
everything, you like it, because it gives you little comfort,
and you want to rely on your Sloth. But Krishna has said in
Gita, that Sloth is the worst thing that can happen to
human beings. If they take to Sloth, if they accept Sloth,
they will have all explanations for being Slothful. (1)
Krishna has put, the worst vice in the whale world is
'aalasya', means lethargy. 'Aalasyso Bijayate' everything
comes out of aalasya. According to Him, first thing
lethargy comes in and because of lethargy we get into
vices and then we go to the right side also because of
lethargy. Because just to avoid the lethargy WE go to the
right side too much. So
according to Him
everything start with
lethargy and then the
person loses the
essence of life through
lethargy and this is our
special quality and that
is our real problem is
It (Sloth or Laziness) is the curse of the Sahaja Yoga also.
Sloth is something, is like a devil that can keep you very
much glued to your own positions and will not allow you to
move out. For example in the moming you get up and you
think that "Oh, it's alright, what's the need to getup early in
the morning? There is
no need to do any
meditation. I'l do it
tomorrow". Otherwise
you start thinking that
"It can be done after a
month, do esn't
matter, Mataji is here
and everything will be
alright". But you must
know that there are so
the lethargy.
many imperfections
within you, and if you
do no meditate now,
seriously, take it up as
a very serious thing,
you may lag behind
so much that you may
be dropped out.
Because Sahaja Yoga
is a thing where we say
there is 'akriya'. We
don't have to do
anything. It is effortless.
Everything works out
effortIess,
spontaneously. So we
think that everything is
going to work out for us spontaneously. Only the Kundalini
Jagruti is spontaneous for the first time, not for the second
time, only for the fist time. That is I have to do it or My
photograph has to do it but afterwards you have to work,
you have to keep your Kundalini atloat. You have to
understand what are your problems, what are you getting
into. I mean, individually everyone of you is a
masterpiece, individually. Because of lethargy you are
Meditation is very important after Sahaja Yoga. You have
slept and slept all your life. Sleeping is not so important.
You have to today promise Me that, from tomorrow, you all
are going to get up in the morning and meditate. I was
suggesting that if you take your baths in the moning
would be beter, so that you won't have your sleepy
condition. Sloth is such a devious thing that you do not
see it. It explains everything. If you say "Ohlam sick" it will
say "Oh you are so sick you should go to the hospital". If
you say "I'm tired" it will say "You are extremely tired". Why
should you be so tired? It is nothing but your Sloth is telling
you that "You are extremely tired, you better not do
meditation now you are extremely tired. You better take
some rest, is important".
clouded.
Secondly because of lethargy you are secluded, lethargy
gives you also ego. Because anything that challenges
lethargy you get on top of that person, you don't like such a
person but the lethargy. Also those do not have, are the
people, their attention is on spiritual development. Theirs
Is, as I told you yesterday, on other things, which are not
important to spiritual life. (2)
Sloth is worse than super-ego and ego. Is a kind of an
inertia which pulls you down, and that inertia you have to
3
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007
very childish butl have to tell you because I have seen this
is the problem, that "The day I don't get up, I'll have to pay
10 pence (Rs 8)", let's keep it like that. If you are getting
much more pay then put it at 10 pounds (Rs 800). But
something like that. Or you can say that "That day l'll give
up one sweater of mine". Start it like that. It's very easy.
People will say that "No Mother, when I meditate, you
know, something goes wrong with me'
wrong, there's something wrong with you. So you better
sit down and meditate.
You may think that, "You see l'm not well now" or anything,
Sloth can give you any ideas, Because I don't have that so
I don't know what ideas it gives you. But it can give you
any kind of idea that would be very, very appealing to you.
Because it knows how to please your ego. Sloth is an ego-
satisfying thing, ego-pampering stuff, and it make you feel
that "Oh you are very tired". What are you tired about? You
are all young people, why should you be tired? You get
tired so soon, is nothing but your Mr. Sloth telling you, you
are tired. You will be surprised, after feeling tired, you run
for two miles, you can run.
- means you are
Now, I must say, if you do not
meditate, you are very selfish. That's
the main point is. Because when you
come here, scorpions come out of
you to bite My feet. There are
snakes coming out of you to bite My
feet. Do you want to do that to Me?
Or else to others also.
Now why Sloth works on Sahaja Yoga
so adversely? Why Sloth works out
against Sahaja Yoga so much? The
reason is, because we are not yet
identified with our wellbeing. We do not
think that "We have to be better, we
have to improve, we have to go further,
there's a big gap, we have to do it". We
are not identified with our progress.
Supposing if I tell you, that if you run
two miles, every day in the morning you
will get a beauty prize. 99.9% of
people, of women would be running
early in the moming. Supposing if
somebody tells men that you will get
Mr. Universe if you run every day five
miles in the morning there will be, I
don't know, 99.999% people may be
running like that. Because we are
identified with that kind of a competition
which is very materialistic, which is of
no value, But when you give up even
that competition you fall into another
competition where everybody is competing with each
other in Sloth. They will get up in the morning, see around,
"Now, Mr. A's still sleeping, alright, let me sleep". So Mr. A
will think "He's still sleeping, let me sleep". So there is a
big competition on as to who is going to wake up first, who
is going to do this. And if somebody gets up then one
starts finding faults that "He got up but what? He was just
taking tea" or "He was talking". What about you? You were
still in bed! At least he got up, was talking, doesn't matter.
But he was kicking, what about you who was still
slumbering in the bed?
Every time if you are catching, every
time you meet Me you are catching.
then how are you going to feel the
Kundalini? You must know how the
Kundalini moves within yourself.
Say, where it is, how far it has gone.
You know that Sahaja Yoga is the
only way, is the only method that
Divine Grace has given you, by
which you are going to transform the
whole world, and lazy lumps how
can they help Sahaja Yoga? (1)
The body of a human being is a
temple of God. But this temple has to
be enlightened and has to be
auspicious. You have to clear and clean your being
completely so it's a beautiful temple for God to reside. But
we deceive ourselves you see. When I am talking you
listen to Me and you think that 'O Mother talked very
sweetly beautifully', finished. But nothing goes inside.
Why? Because of lethargy. Lethargy is a thing, which is a
barrier it doesn't allow Me to go inside you. It's a barrier.
It's very sweet thing, which smiles, just you see thinking,
"O Mother is saying something nice". It's very great, it
gives you happiness and all that but it doesn't go inside,
you do not imbibe. And, that's why try to put your attention
to yourself and feel your dignity and honor. Feel your
presence that you have to have a presence and when I tell
to some people they'll say, "I know, Mother, I know I do
that". Then why do you do it? That means you are
possessed. You are a possessed person. That you know
this is wrong, still you are doing it. Then you are a
possessed person. Then it's better you beat yourself with
shoes. But that stage should go now. I don't like you to
beat yourself with shoes, I mean are you that that level?
Now it's such a childlike thing, I mean, it's such a childish
thing to talk about with such intellectuals as you are, such
well read and such well posted people. That doesn't
behove Me, a Mother of such gr at people, to talk like this,
but sometimes I find My Sahaja Yogis are like two year old
children, and then I have to tell them that "Now you are
grown up". You see, you can explain it but how are you
going to explain yourself? Because if you have to grow, if
you want your tree to grow, you must change your
priorities and your identifications. If you have to be a first
class Sahaja Yogi, you have to put your attention to it. I do
not know how to fix it up. Supposing we fix it up like this, it's
Butthe level is such still.
Who is going to save this country? You people. So again
andagain it is against lethargy and whatever is lethargy is
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007
anti Christ, is anti God, is anti Mataji. Try to become
cheerful and blissful, happy, dignified, sensible, sweet. It's
not too many things, very few, it's only one and I know we
are going to enjoy life very much. You are going to be very
happy people. (2)
SHABDAWALI
Can you tell which Nirmal Tattwa words are
explained below by Shri Matají
: Means 'one personality' completely
1. A
integrated, where you become one with the
whole ocean the drop becomes the ocean all the
powers of ocean are there for the drop.
Problems will be solved in no time. You don't have to sit
down and contemplate and worry: how will you solve your
problem? it will be solved. But what cannot be solved is
the habits you have developed, habits of lethargy. I can
understand in London if the people are lethargic, but they
are not. They have become extremely, extremely
hardworking, active, and also dedicated. How they have
achieved it? Only by knowing that this dedication brings
forth all the cleansing, and all the powers. Now, supposing
this instrument is not clean. You won't be able to even
hear Me, it is useless. So our instrument has to be perfect
to manifest Sahaja Yoga. If it is not, all the defects can
have double effects; like, first it will affect you, you can
never feel the full advantage of Sahaja Yoga, and
secondly it will affect the people who will meet you, and
gradually they'l find out there's something wrong with
you. "Some sort of a subdued madness", they'll say, "this
Sahaja Yoga is, because I don't find anything great about
this man. He's halfway here and halfway there." (3)
2. A
meaning the giver of pure joy. Joy here just not
means mere joy but bubbling of joy. This power
has to come within us, which means when we
meet another person in collectivity the other
person should feel happy with you.
Name of Shri Radha,
3. A
achieved if you are to become the Guru, where
you go beyond, where you do what is to be done
without paying attention to it.
: Means beyond; the state that is to be
A very high quality yogl, a powerful,
4. A
highly evolved realized soul who is a Master and
who has gone beyond all human destructive
habits
Laziness is the worst thing, today, I know today is not a
day to say all these things, but you all have to promise
to Me that you are going to give up your laziness
Swaaha. (1)
A state which is only possible if you
5.
have faith in God Almighty and in yourself as the
messenger of God.
B
6. B
rationality, only hunger, firstly for food, and for
primitive things, then for sex life, for women, for
men, then for power, for money and ultimately for
spiritual satisfaction.
An ocean in which there is no
References:
(1) 1980-0323: Guarding against slothfulness, Birthday
Puja, London.
(2) 1980-0927: Lethargy Most Anti God, Chelsham Road,
London.
(3)1991-0406: Shri Bhavasagara Puja, Brisbane.
7. B
delusion that the Mother has given to us, for us to
find out that we are in the wrong.
Means confusion, delusion. This is a
B -M
Kundalini, when She rises and passes through the
different chakras; the basis of the Devanagari
language, used by the Devas.
The sounds made by the
8.
9. B It is all pervading power of God's Love,
The Cosmic Consclousness. It is Absolute and
cannot be compared.
10.D The Sanskrit name given both to birds and
realized souls. One who has known Brahma, is
selfrealized, is genuinely twice bom.
Answers on Page 8
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007
CORPORATE REALIZATION
(A Workshop on Stress Management and Personality Development)
Corporate Realization is a reality today. A large number
of companies are taking to Sahaja Yoga through 3-day
Stress Management Workshops held in companies
across India.
sent to him regarding the objective and a brief schedule of
the workshop. It is then followed up by contacting them
through phone or visiting them in person, and explaining
to them in detail about Sahaja Yoga. If they are positive,
the date and time is decided for the workshop.
The corporate sector, as we know, is under tremendous
stress, because of the exclusive importance given to
money-making. It results in various kinds of diseases like
Diabetes, High Blood Pressure, Hypertension, Asthma
and early burn-outs. It encourages various kinds of
addictive habits like smoking, drinking, and even
substance abuse as an escape from the stress and strain
of everyday life. Recently there has been an alarming
increase in the number of employees resorting to suicidal
attempts due to the frustrating rat-race prevailing in the
modern corporate sector.
Recently, NITL has come up with a CD called 'Nirmal
Gyan (Partl& II), which has been instrumental in making
these programs
huge success.
There is a Stress
Management
movie, which is
usually played to
inaugurate the
workshop. It is
followed by a
presentation
detailing the stress
impact on our lives,
how Sahaja can
overcome it, the
subtle system and
some modern
rese a rch
substantiating the
veracity and
effectiveness of
Sahaja techniques in managing stress. This is followed by
a Self-Realization session. At the beginning of the
session itself, we take the feedback of the participants
pertaining to their reason of interest in the program, their
expectations from the program, their physical/mental
health and also their exposure to any meditative
techniques earlier.
In such gloomy circumstances, Sahaja Yoga has shown
light and hope to numerous people in the Corporate
World. Till date, varlous companies like IBM, Oracle,
Infosys, Wipro, Satyam, Nokia, Reliance, Accenture etc
have benefited from the Stress Management Workshops
On the second day, we usually tell them about the raising
of the Kundalini, taking bandhan and the balancing
technique. This is followed by meditation. On the third
day, we introduce them to a few cleansing techniques like
fool-soaking and ice pack. Also, a brief introduction to the
qualities of the charkas, the causes of catches etc is
given. This is followed by meditation on each charka
accompanied with the raga associated with the respective
charka.
conducted by the Sahaja Yogis. There is a group of
dedicated Sahaja Yogis (mostly yuvashaktis) in all the
major Indian cities (Bangalore, Hyderabad, Delhl-NCR,
Pune, Bombay, Chennai), who have taken the
responsibility of spreading the great message of our
Divine Mother to all the Corporate employees throughout
India. These days since most of the Yuvashaktis are
working in the corporate sector, hence spreading Sahaja
in Corporate is actually helping us, because it will make
our workplace surrounded by the Divine Vibrations, and
hence will be more conducive to our Sahaja culture.
At the end of the third session, we again take the feedback
of the participants regarding their experience during the
workshop (feeling of cool breeze, heat, tingling,
relaxation, thoughtlessness etc), the experimental nature
of the workshop and the ease of practice of the meditative
technique, their keenness in continuing with Sahaja
meditation in future and whether the workshop has met
their requirements or not.
The modus operandi of conducting a Sahaja program
The HR of a company is contacted and a detalled e-mail is
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007
Sahaja, and also explore the possibility of conducting
such workshops on a global scale.
Some of the benefits experienced by the participants are
as follows:
And, as with any Sahaja spreading activity, Shri Mataji's
blessings are very much there on these workshops, as
can be evidenced by the tremendous flow of the Divine:
Cool Breeze during these workshops. So, let us all pray to
Shri Mataji to give us the strength and the opportunity to
spread Sahaja to all the corporate of the world, so that
Corporate world is managed by the Self-Realized souls,
and is driven by the soothing fire of the Kundalini and the
enlightened vision of the Spirit.
Improves Mental, Physical & emotional Health
Establishes Peace, Joy & Satisfaction within
Better Work-Life Balance
Improved Inter-personal relations
Optimized Productivity
Attitude becomes less Cynical & more Constructive
Deals effectively with Pressure situations
Some companies are even keen to have regular weekly
meditation, and we have had weekly Sahaja Yoga
meditation in few companies. The challenge now is to be
more vigorous in following up with the participants of
these programs so that most of them get established in
For any further detail or assistance on corporate
realization please contact-
corporateworkshops@sahajayoga.org.in
Use your Vibrations
6. According to Puranas, Shri Adi Guru Dattatreya
worshipped along the bank of a River, what is modem
days name of that river?
Volga (Russla)
Thames (England)
Barbera (Cabella)
Narmada (India)
Vibrations are said to be the source of true knowledge.
Answer these questions with your vibrations ONLY
The Questions:
1. Which chakra has the quality of seif-faith?
Left Vishuddhi
Left Heart
Centre Heart
7. What does Descent of Shri Ganga from heaven to
earth represnts?
Descentof Kriya Shakti
Descent of Love & Compassion
Descentof Shuddh lecha
Descentof Resurrection
2. Our which chakras catch if we are stubborn in our
nature?
Left Mooladhar and Right Swadhishthan
Left Nabhi and Right Swadhisthan
Left Nabhi and Right Mooladhar
8. Which of the following bhajans did Shri Mataji used to
sing very often during Her childhood days:
Jogwa
Bhay Kaaya tayaa
Namo Namo Mariya
Gondhari
3. Which chakra is the origin of the thoughts?
RightNabhi
Right Swadhisshthan
RightAgnya
4. Weakening of which chakra, makes us loose
confidence whlle talking about Sahaja Yoga and Shri
Mataji?
Centre Heart
Leit Vishuddhi
Centre Agnya
9. Which chakra to cure if you feeling very impatient?
Left Void
Left Heart
Left Vishuddhi
10. Find out which chakra does following cities signify for
India?
Delhi
Mumbal
Kalkatta
Pune
5. Managerial skills of a person are given to us by which
chakras?
Right Swadhisthan and Left Heart
Right Heart and Centre Vishuddhi
Centre Heart and BackAgnya
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007
EXPRESSIONS OF HEART
Transformation
The Mother's Kingdom
I'm a cry from the inner myths,
I'm a volcano of thoughts,
I make myself a dusty art,
Even here, I'm so far and apart.
O Mother,please sit back and rest
As we spread Your Divine Love with a warrior's zest.
You have written on our hands our destiny,
Now the world shall dance to Your Divine Symphony.
Embracing a life of illusion,
I make inroads for cultivation,
Cultivation leading to pleasure,
And pleasure that I desire.
Into Thy Kingdom You have let us transcend,
so that in the Divine Ocean of Love we all may blend.
Come and go the trials and tribulations,
Theres no stopping the Eternal Jubilations.
Pleasure, O pleasure, give me a break,
I found a light, which is a snake,
Snake, which makes me awake,
Of love and life that all pervade.
So with the patience we all watch and wait,
And witness how the things culminate.
Mohit Deopujari
Conquered is my heart,
I believe I have a part,
In this sea of art,
Which is inside and smart.
A New Beginning
O Lord, thank you for a new beginning.
Many lives have blissful motive,
silence abound, man becomes an angel
The Flute of Shri Krishna plays,
makes the light rise within.
A want to grow, and a want to embrace,
I witness you, so close, your grace,
Living, it has to be, so lovely, so pure,
A love of a Mother, that's for sure.
O Lord, thank you for a new beginning
Mahalaxmi's son Mahavishnu, Shri Christ
Call him forgiveness or new light,
He made us eligible to reach Kailash's height.
Nothing is that, I want,
Nothing is there, I can't and shan't,
A stream of light and a snow of glow,
O God, now I know, it's you, where I flow.
O Lord what a new beginning..
Mother's energy, the love infinite
You made us meet the father in paradise
All this achieved gives a new view to life,
Together we feel bliss and joy,
the almighty realm and all so divine,
Silence has come we all unite
Peaceful we are in your love infinite
Who was I and where was I heading,
Fighting and crying, sleeping and wasting,
Here I am, and will be here for ever,
In the silence of your holy, divine endeavor.
In the silence of your holy, divine endeavor.
Hitesh Nidhi Sharma,
Kathmandu, Nepal
O Lord it is just a beginning,
Now we pray that everyday,
The beginning comes for all new sage,
Hence we play with colours of vibrations you spray,
Under this umbrella ohl Mother we all pray,
That Infinite we all become and in our hearts
Forever you stay...
Answers to Shabdanjali
Advait, Ahlad-dayini, Atit, Avadhoot, Bhakti,
Bhavasagar, Bhranti, Bija-Mantras, Brahm, Dwij
Shridevi Angurala, New Delhi.
8.
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007
YUVASHAKTI REPORTER
sacrifices; some history and genesis of Sahaja Yoga;
Knowledge on subtle system, as to how our Chakras work
(or even how much do they tolerate our nuisance) and
balancing our channels; what books/magazines to read
Uttarakhand Yuva Shakti Seminar
Bhimtal, Saturday, 24 Feb'07: Uttrakhand Yuva Shakti
collective had a unique Seminar cum workshop on 24
February 2007 at Col. V Tewari's (Uttrakhand
Coordinator) residence premises amidst the greeneries
of Kumaon ranges in Bhimtal (Nainital). Yuva Shaktis
were mainly from Almora, Bhimtal, Nainital, Kathgodam,
Pantnagar and Kashipur collectivity of Kumaon region.
There were around 50-60 Yuva Shaktis who had
assembled to attend this one day workshop.
WE WANT SAHAJA YOGAII
The topics in the Seminar mainly were focused on the
essence and knowledge of the subtle system and the
Tattwa. It was so engrossing that everyone intangibly felt
as if the entire collectivity was literally touring through the
visual path of the ida, Pingala and Sushumna along with
their gross expression of plexuses within. There were
some interesting revealing facts where one could realize
as to why and how the respective colours of the Nadis and
Chakras are governed by our inner emotions and actions
etc (ida, pingala). Then the topic covered aspects on
cleansing of all the three channels. These were
metaphorically related and demonstrated with practical
knowledge of our day to day life styles.
like Chaitanya Lahiri/Divine Cool Breeze (The Vedas for
Sahaja Yogis) or the Yuva magazine - Yuvadrishti that
caters to the Sahaja Yogis and also shared the
information on the world wide Sahaja websites, Subtle
knowledge on the manifestation of Ekadasha Rudras on
the Forehead and the qualities of the ten Gurus in the Void
(unique to Sahaja Yoga) were concisely described.
Various cleansing techniques such as foot soaking,
make the collective understand the fact that how Shri candling, and shoe beating and matka treatment were
Ganesha spares none those who dives into the realms of explained practically. The principle of the Gruha Lakshmi.
was explained precisely. Very vivid explanations were
portrayed on the various elements like Light, Air Fire...
etc. The use of water and effect of earth on us were also
In an interactive discussion on Protocol and Ritualism
there was an emphasis on why we should not indulge into
much of ritualism and its pros and cons in our ascent. To
ritualism departing from the Nirmal Vidya, a beautiful
example with metaphor through a story was narrated -
The traffic police hauls up who tries to act funny and
becomes a bit nuisance as they drive honking their horns
unnecessarily through out creating troubles for himself
deliberated at length.
and also for others on way. Similarly in our journey of Then an interactive session on Demonstration and
rehearsal on self realization and knowledge
disseminations to the seekers and our attitude towards
them (practical demonstrations), topics covering Yuva
spiritual ascent Shri Ganesha looks after us like a cop.
Then there were many subjects and subtle aspects that
were covered like the inherent dangers of transgressing
protocols of Brotherhood and Sisterhood and Marriage
protocols in Yuvas. So the protocol is to be maintained
with wife and sister distinction or brother-sister
relationship especially after coming into Sahaja Yoga as
we become realized souls to understand this aspect from
inside. The maryadas have been distinctly defined and
they are to be respected.
issues/struggles/solutions/meditation/rituals/self
realization were discussed.
Aunique set of questionnaire was served as a class room
workshop before and after the workshop to assess how
far the collective Yuvas have progressed. The
questionnaire itself was so simple in the first look, yet it did
test our inner knowledge on our individual ascent and
progress that was to be completed in ten minutes. It had
questions as to what are the changes and benefits we got
from Sahaja; questions were focused on our subtle
system, about various Chakras their deities and many
more. Another questionnaire was related to our
experiences and work done by us for Sahaja. Finally, a
performa regarding our personal information was filled
Basic knowledge on Shri Mataji and Her advent on Earth,
as to say who is Shri Mataji and how "Yuva Shakti' was
christened (by Mother in 1987); basic aspects of protocol
expected from Yuva Shakti; contribution of Shri Mataji and
Her family in the freedom struggle and Her respect for the
country; Shri Mataji's association with Gandhiji and the
9.
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007
and this was the winding up of the programme very
interesting old lecture of Shri Mataji was distributed on
how to deal with the new comers. It was the talk of Devi
Puja, 1989 in Helsinki.
powers) to help India come over these issues.
Issue# 1
India has sufficient money to sustain itself. The problem
lies in management of it. Common man suffers because
many resources like food, water, electricity, petroleum etc
are poorly managed by corrupt officials and bureaucrats.
The day long seminar cum workshop was concluded with
a beautiful gesture of Gruha Lakshmi's expression of
warmth (lunch) that was served by the senior yogi/yoginis
present over there, to all the 50-60 Yuvas present there,
just like a picnic. Finally, before the departure it turned out
to be another real party time for the Yuvas as it marked the
Birthday celebration of our state coordinator Col. V
Tewaril At 4:30 P.M the collectivity of the Yuva sangha
departed with a lot of learning and lessons in hand and
with a vow in heart to spread Mother's message of Love to
every nook and coner and becoming a fruit from flower as
we understood the blossorm time has sprung up within us
by Mother's grace.
Suggestion/Solution
We can pray to Shri Mataji in Her Shri Saraswati and Shri
Shri Mataji meeting Yuva Shakti in
Cabella
Shri Mataji met swiss yuvashakti in Cabella on 28th May
(Day of Pentecost). Here are some words She spoke
during the meeting:
Hanuman form, that by Her grace everything may
become organized, just like it was in the kingdom of Shri
Rama. We may shoe-beat corrupt officials, bureaucrats,
politicians and poor system of India.
O A Yuva told Shri Mataji about Internation Yuvashakti
Seminar (30th July-2nd June), which is going to be held
in Cabella for ages 16 to 27. Shri Mataji immediately
responded "Very Good". She then added, "The
atmosphere is not good for them." By saying that She
was talking about the outside world, which makes it hard
for young seekers to get their realisation. Her face
darkened a little bit. "It is very important what you are
doing." She said, then added, " You can save them."
Issue#32
Indian society and its values are being influenced by west.
The main source of this is media (i.e. films, TV serials,
newspaper, magazines, internet etc). The vulgarity and
obscenity hurts the Innocence of people esp. children and
gives them false ideas.
Then yuvashakti gave beautiful pink roses to Shri
Mataji, each of the Yuvas was allowed to individually hand
them over to Shri Mataji, who collected them in Her Holy
hands, thanking every one of us and still smiling. She
asked sweetly, "Everyone brought a flower?l" She said,
"These roses look like Indian roses". One of the Yuvas
explained, that they were from Her own garden. Shri
Mataji said again, "May God bless you!" while smelling all
the roses. They all bowed down and left, their hearts
trembling and laughing, grateful to be so much under Her
attention.
Suggestion/Solution
() We must pray to Shri Mataji in Her Shri Vishnumaya
of
form that by Her grace there may be correct usage o
media, which highlights values and morality of India.
()We may shoe-beatmisuse of media.
Issue# 3
Two major rivers in India-Ganga and Yamuna, which are
Ida Nadi and Pingla Nadi of the World respectively, are
falling victim to immense pollution. Chemicals from
factories, garbage, waste fertilizers, waste from ritual
activities at the banks are the main cause.
After that Shri Mataji added, "Yuva Shakti are first
class, because they are very innocent." Later,
"Yuvashakti are strong and solid Sahaja Yogis" and
then "The Yuvashakti are the best. They are deep."
Suggestion/Solution
(1) We must pray to Shri Mataji for the well-being and purity
of these sacred rivers. The purity of these rivers will help
all the sahaja yogis of the word in their ascent.
The India Around Us
(i) We can paper burn the negativities working against
purity of these rivers. While doing a havan we can give an
ahutiof the negativities.
It is our duty to become good cltizens of our country and
be aware of its problems. Some of the following points
needs our attention and we can do our bit (with spiritual
10
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Yuvadrishtl Jun 2007
that's how we have hydrostatics even stones, gold all of
them have got energy in themselves. It is all controlled by
the principle of Shri Ganesha. Though such a tiny little
child how great is his work and how much He has to work
out. From matter one moves to living plants, then to
animals, then to human beings and everywhere His
energy works. At the level of matter we might call it
electro- magnetic, potentially it is the energy of Shri
Ganesha which is electro magnetic at that point. When it
starts evolving growing, that's how we have different
strata of energies that we see in different growth of
evolution.
Sahaja and Physics
Q. Who controls the energy in the matters?
Ans: "Think that In the molecule of a substance there is an
energy which is acting. One may say why is there energy
in matter? If theare was no energy in the matter how can
you have all chemical compounds? Who pushes them?
Say sodium chloride. Sodium and chloride are attached to
each other. But if the chloride has to go to some other
atom then who does that? There has to be some energy,
which is in built into matter. We know water has energy,
Shri Ganesh Puja, Cabella, Italy, 19.09.1993
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
Subscription Form
(Photocopy can be used)
You are requested to tick in blocks given below for the magazines you would like to subscribe for the Year 2007.
Outstation Rs. 225/-
2. Chaitanya Lahiri Marathi
Rs. 300/-
1. Chaitanya Lahiri Hindi
Local (for Pune) Rs.200/-
Rs. 120/-
4. Yuvadrishti
Rs. 300/-
3. Divine Cool Breeze
Please provide the full Postal address for mailing the magazines. (PLEASE FILL IN BLOCK LETTERS ONLY)
Name
Address
For Office use only: Issued Receipt No
Amount Rs.
Date
Drawn on
Dated
By way of Cash/ Cheque/ Demand Draft No.
Please send the above form duly filled along with the Cheque/DD to the following Address:
Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd.,
No. 8, Chandragupta Housing Society,
Paud Road, Kothrud,
Pune-4110 38
Tel : 020-25286537, Fax : 020-25286722
11
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007
DEVAI NAMO NAMAH
Om Twameva Sakshat
SHRI KARTIKEYA
Sakshat Shri Adishakti Mataji
Shri Nirmala Devyei Namo Namah
or satanic people were put. That's the only day you can
Shri Matali on Shri Kartikeya
Kartikeya represents the great, we can say the, captor sleep late and a good news foryou." (2)
or leader of all the ganas, of all the, like a Commander-in-
Chief. Ganesha is the King but He is the Commander-in-
Chief and because German character is to be in
command of everything we are going to have this puja
where the men will be in command of their spirits and their
manly qualities and women will be in command of thair
wornanly qualities. To be in command is different from to
be a master. Master owns it, a commander does not own
it. He does not own it that is also lost. Possession is also
lost, we just command it. And that is the state we have to
come to now, from Ganesha state to the state of
Kartikeya.
The other way round, Ganesha is nice, he's the King, very
nicely sitting down with all the powers, alright? In a sense
He's there but Kartikeya's the one who commands
innocence, gives you a power of that commandment. He
commands. After the Guru Puja it's better that we should
have the power to command others and that commanding
spirit comes in the men through their talking, through their
dynamism, through their personal achievements; for the
women through their loving power, for, through their from our subtle system back to Hell i.e. from where they
forbearance, through their gracious behaviour,
forgiveness, compassion. So let us develop that today, preserving our innocence. When the Kundalini ascends
that we can command it, means it's not that what we have
but in a position we are to command. I hope you plays an important role in clearing out the blockages in the
understand whatis Kartikeya.." (1)
About Right Mooladhara
When it comes to clearing Mooladhara we usually miss
out right mooladhara. Right Mooladhar is the chakra
which is abode of Shri Kartikeya. He is the one who
protects us from the demonic forces. Right Mooladhar is
the chakra which manifests Wisdom and Surrendering of
Shri Ganesha. Right Mooladhar is also importantas out of
eleven Ekadasha Rudras two are Shri Ganesha and Shri
Kartikeya. The Rudras protect us from satanic attacks
and give us strength to fight negativities. Therefore, right
mooladhar becomes equally important for clearing &
strengthening our left side, It is observed that when our
right mooladhara improves our catching of left
swadhisthana also reduces.
Shri kartikeya also keeps supervision over Hell. Shri
Bhairavnath while fighting against spirit possessions in
us, touches right mooladhar and therefore works in
coordination with Shri Kartikeya to thwart the negativities
came. The power of Shri Kartikeya is also very essential in
from the sacrum bone to Sahastrara, right mooladhar
path of Kundalini.
It Is observed that when our right mooladhara improves
our right side also becomes better; for two reasons:
".. The spirit of Kartikeya - that pure, absolute dynamism
which doesn't indulge into nonsensical things and useless
things; which shows results." (3)
1, Since Mooladhara is directly associated with our Agnya
chakra, so right mooladhar directly cures right agnya, and
it also repairs the weakened ego-controlling Rudra on our
forehead. (Out of 11 rudras present on our forehead two
are present to control our ego and superego)
2. As an effect of reduced ego we develop shraddha and
enlightened mind (which has Divine discretion and
knowledge).
"...Now in front, in the center here, is who? Kartikeya, in
the center; Christ is in the center, in the center itself where
the optic chiasma is. Here outside is Kartikeya. What is
Kartikeya? Kartikeya is the protector of Christ. Around
Kartikeya, they're all protectors of Christ..." (4)
.You know Narakasüra has taken his birth, and he's to
be killed, the Sahaja Yogis are going to kll him. You have
to come up to a point and definitely he can be killed. When
Kartikeya is awakened within you, he can be killed. But for
that you have to be just like gold, untarnishable. You need
strang people to do that. A sword that can kill him has to
come out of your mettles. Then Narakasura can be killed.
He is one of the worst possible asuras. That is the
fourteenth day. When he was killed, the gate of hell was
opened and all those where his disciples or his followers
"...One can not describe how He looked after His mother,
it's impossible. No words can describe the understanding
of Christ for His Mother, His love, His gentleness, His
care, His devotion, dedication, His 'SHRADHA'can not be
described. And you know that He came as an evolved Shri
Ganesh and at the back He is Shri Ganesh, in front He is
Karthikeya, very powerful, eleven Rudras, and this, has
given him the highest position. "(2)
12
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007
Prayers/Affirmations for Right Mooladhara
It is also observed that as right mooladhar improves, our
useless mental activity réduces and inner-silence
augments greatly. Thus right mooladhar plays an
important role in balancing and establishing thoughtless and improve my right mooladhara", "Shri Mataji verily
1. Keep right hand towards Shri Mataji's photograph and
left hand on Mother Earth and pray "Mother kindiy purify
you're the slayer of all the demons", "Shri Mataji please
make me worthy of you", "Shri Mataji whatever I do is to
please you", "Shri Mataji please bless me with the
qualities of Shri Kartikeya", "Shri Mataji please bless me
with complete surrender and Divine wisdom of Shri
awareness.
But, this must not be understood that we need to neglect
left and centre Mooladhar. In fact without awakening Shri
Nirmal Ganesha and Shri Gauri Ganesha, Shri Kartikeya
cannot be awakened.
Ganesha".
We can take following mantras:
a. Shri Kartikeya Sakshat
b. Shri RakhasHantri Sakshat
C. Shri Rakshasaghni Sakshat
2.
Following is the meditation to improve Mooladhara (as
told by Shri Matali
Left hand toward Mother and right hand on the
1.
ground. Put attention on Left Mooladhara. Take Shri
Nirmal Ganesh mantra, say in your heart "Mother by your
graceI am innocent". Meditate for few minutes.
2. Then both hands on the lap, put attention on Center
Mooladhara, Take Shri Ganesh Gauri mantra and say in
your heart "Shri Mataji please make me Innocent".
Meditate for few minutes.
3. Look more towards Mother Earth.
It is observed that after meditating like this our whole day
passes very nicely. Shri Mataji has sald that if we do this
every or alternate morning (by heart and not
mechanically) for one year, this meditation develops the
entire being in such a way that all the obstacles in the path
of ascent go away.
3. Then put right hand towards Mother and left hand on
the ground (just the opposite of first step), put attention on
Right Mooladhara. First take Shri Kartikeya mantra, say in
your heart "Shri Mataji please make me worthy of you"
and meditate for a few minutes, then take Shri Rakshas-
Hantri mantra and again meditate on Right Mooladhara,
also say loudly in your heart "Mother you are the
destroyer of all the evil in me" and meditate for a while.
After experiencing in meditation and hence realizing by
heart, above described knowledge of Mooladhara can be
effective. Otherwise, it will not work out properly.
Reference:
1. 1986-0713: Women Should Be Women,
Kartikeya Puja, Holzkirchen, Germany.
2. 1983-1106: Diwali Puja, Hampstead, UK.
3. 1996-1221: Shri Kartikeya Puja, Mumbai,
4. 1981-0904:Advice on Ekadasha Rudra, London
Shri
4. The attention becomes pure and we go in thoughtless
awareness.
5 Finish the morning meditation with Om Twameva
Sakshal Shri Ganesh Gauri Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti
Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyei Namo Namah
PRAYER FOR LEFT HEART
We pray to Lord Shiva to look after our union. I surrender to YOU. Now Gauri Kundalini surrenders to the spirit. We
pray to Lord Shiva to look after this. I forget everything eise. I leave it in YOUR Holy hands. YOU raise me up. I
forget all that was in me before, just lift me up. You raise me up. Everything I have dropped out, no other desire but
just lift me higher. Make me YOUR servant. The rest of it is not important. All the other manifestations of this desire
are over. Now lamabsolutely surrendered to YOU, my spirit. Lift me higher and higherand higher.Away from all the
thoughts and things that were not the spirit. Make me complete spirit. Forget all that was there. That elevation, that
ascent becomes fast quick trip. A very fast thing. If you just try this every moment, anything that goes against the
spirit must be given up. And that spirit is what? The PURE desire. We have to be one with the spirit, and all the rest is
not important. You are in the beautiful kingdom of GOD where all ugliness drops out like when the lotus opens out;
all the mud drops out from it. In the same beautiful way, let MY children become fragrant beautiful offering to LORD
SADASHIVA..MAY GOD bless you.
- H.H.SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
13
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007
शब्दांजली
विभिन्न भाषाओं में समाए सहज ज्ञान, जिसे हम चैतन्य द्वारा महसूस करते हैं। आईए, हम उसे शब्दों के माध्यम से जानें।
अल्लाह हु - कव्वाली
मालिकुल मुल्क लाशरी का लाहु
वादाहु ला इल्लाह इल्लाहू।
हर अन्त तुझ पर ही होता है।
तेरी हम्द-ओ-साना अल्लहम दु इल्लाह,
है।
कि तू मेरे मोहम्मद का खुदा
मैं कसम से कहता हूँ कि केवल एक ही परमात्मा है, अल्लाह हूं, अल्लाह हू, अल्लाह हूँ...
जो कि सम्पूर्ण संसार का मालिक है और हे परमात्मा,
तुम्हारे सिवाय और कोई भी नहीं है!
तेरी पूजा करना ही भगवान की
है,
पूजा
है।
क्योंकि तू ही मेरे मोहम्मद का खुदा
जहाँ कुछ नहीं होता वहाँ से तेरी शुरुआत होती है|
शमस तबरेज़ गर खुदा तलबी,
खुशबू काह ला इल्लाह इल्लाहू।
ये जुर्मीं जब न थी, जहां जब न था,
हे शमस तबरेज़ (ईरान के एक फकीर), अगर तुझे चाँद, सूरज न थे, आसमाँ जब न था।
परमात्मा को पाने की तीव्र इच्छा है,
तो ऊँचे स्वर में बोलो कि परमात्मा केवल एक ही है।
जब यह धरती नहीं थी, जब यह संसार नहीं था,
चाँद, सूरज नहीं थे, यह आकाश नहीं था।
कौनैन का मसजूद है, माबूद है तू,
हर शह तेरी शाहिद है, के मशहूद
है
ह
राज़-ए-हक भी किसी पर आया जब ना था,
तब ना था कुछ यहां, था मगर तु ही तु।
तू।
हे परमात्मा! तू ही दोनों जहान ( लोक-परलोक) का
मालिक है और तेरी ही पूजा होती है, हर रचना तेरे ही
होने की गवाही देती है।
जब परम से परम सत्य को कोई नहीं जानता था और
जब यहाँ कुछ नहीं था,
अगर कुछ था तो वह केवल ही था।
तू
हर एक के लब पर है तेरी हम्द-ओ-सना,
हर सोज़ में, हर साज़ में मौजूद है तू।
पहुँचे मेराज में अर्श तक मुस्तफा,
बन्दे में पर्दा रहा।
जब ना मा बूद
हर किसी के होठों पर तेरे ही नाम की प्रशंसा
जब मुस्तफा ( मुहम्म्द साहब का एक नाम) स्वर्ग तक
पहुँचे, जब उनमें और भगवान में कोई पर्दा नहीं रहा।
और साज़
हर चाहत (दीवानगी) में, हर सुर
में तू ही
मौजूद है।
तब मदालिक ने हज़रत से झुक कर कहा,
सारी मखलूक
तेरे ही नाम से हर इबतिदा है,
तेरे ही नाम तक हर इन्तहा है।
में हक नुमा तू हा तू।
अल्लाह हू, अल्लाह
हूँ, अल्लाह हूँ...
ह
हर शुरुआत तुझ से होती है और
14
ত
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 २
Yuvadrishtl Jun 2007
७
तब फरिश्ते (देवदूत) ने परमात्मा के आगे झुक कर कहा,
सारे संसार में अगर कोई है, तो वह तू (परमात्मा) है,
तेरे चमत्कार हर किसी की ऑँखों को चुंधिया देते हैं।
इसके अलावा कोई भी नहीं है। डाली-डाली तेरी तखलीक के
नहीं होता वहाँ से तेरी शुरुआत होती है।
गाती है,
गुण
पत्ता-पत्ता तेरी कुंदरत का पता देता है।
जहाँ
कुछ
खालिक-ए-कुल है तु, इसमें क्या गुफ्तगू?
सारे आलम को है तेरी ही जुस्तजू।
गाती है,
पेड़ की हर एक डाली तेरी निर्मलता के
गुण
पेड़ का हर पत्ता तेरे होने की गवाही देता है|
इसमें कोई विवाद नहीं है के तू ही सबका मालिक है, ला इलाहा तेरी शान या! वादहू,
और सभी को ( जिसे तेरे द्वारा रचा गया है) तुझे पाने का
तू खयाल-ओ-तजस्सुस, तू ही आरजू
जुनून है।
हे परमात्मा! तेरे जैसा कोई भी नहीं है और सब जगह
तुम्हारा ही महत्व है,
तुम ही विचार, जिज्ञासा और ईच्छा हो।
तेरी जलवागिरी है आईन चार सू,
ला शरीका लहू, मालिक-ए-मुल्क तू।
हे परमात्मा! संसार की हर एक रचना तुम्हारी महानता को आँख की रोशनी, दिल की आवाज़ तू,
ही
सम्पूर्ण विश्व के मालिक हो।
दर्शाती है इसलिए इसमें कोई संशय नहीं है कि तुम
होगा भी तू ही तू।
था भी तू, है भी
तू,
अल्लाह हू, अल्लाह हूं, अल्लाह हूँ...
हर शय तेरे जमाल की आईना-दार है,
हर शय पुकारती है तु परवरदिगार है,
ळे परमात्मा! आँख की रोशनी भी तुम हो और हृदय की
पुकार भी तुम हो?
भूत, वर्तमान और भविष्य ( तीनों कालों में) भी तुम ही
हो, अर्थात् तुम आदि-अनादि हो।
जहाँ नहीं होता वहाँ से तेरी शुरूआत होती है|
हर रचना आप ही का यश प्रतिबिम्बित करती है.
हर रचना आप ही को परमात्मा कहती है।
कुछ
तेरी रबूबियत की अदा को कमाल है,
तू रब-ए-कायनात है, तू ला-ज़याल है।
Interesting Sahaja Worldwide Links
1. International YuvaShakti Community-
www.yuvashakti.com
आपके प्रभुत्व का सौन्दर्य उत्तम है,
आप ब्रह्माण्ड के ईश्वर हैं, आपका पतन (अन्त) नहीं हो
2. Online Sahaja Radio-
www.sahajayoga.com.au/media/radio/
सकता।
3. Sahaja Blog-
http://divinesahajayoga blogspot.com/
जो हर शान नई शान दिखा देता है,
तू
दीदा-ए-शौख को हैरान बना देता है
4. Online Leela Game:
Visit www.yogacolorado.org
Click "Yogis Login", located on right side of
the Shri Chakra.
Enter the password: "lambodar" or"gajanana'
Follow the instructions and click "Play"
हे परमात्मा, तू हर किसी के गुणों को जागृत करके एक
नई पहचान बना देता है।
15
र
ত
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 ब्रह्माण्डीय सहज परिवार के लिये अन्तर-अवलोकन
प्रिय भाईयों और बहनों,
नहीं कर सकते और उसका कुप्रभाव श्रीमाताजी के शरीर पर
पड़ता है।
पिछले कुछ वर्षों में हमने शायद ही श्रीमाताजी के मुखारबिन्द
पर मुस्कान देखी होगी। हम ये भी जानते है कि उनका स्वास्थ्य
बिगड़ रहा है। अतः हमने स्वयं से प्रश्न किया कि 'ऐसा क्यों?'
नए आए सहजयोगी कह सकते हैं कि "क्योंकि वे वृद्ध हो रही
हैं।" परन्तु जिन लोगों ने सहज में थोड़ी सी भी गहनता तथा
सूझ-बूझ प्राप्त की है, उनके साथ हम अपने
अन्तर-अवलोकन के निष्कर्षों का विश्लेषण करना चाहेंगे:
7. क्योंकि भवसागर में विद्यमान दस शक्तियों को जागृत करके
परमेश्वरी प्रेम का माध्यम बनना हमारा एकमात्र लक्ष्य नहीं है।
अतः हमारे अन्दर स्थित गुरुतत्व सुप्तावस्था में है।
8. क्यांकि अब भी उत्रान्ति में बाधा डालने वाले, गहनता में
अवरोध उत्पन्न करने वाले तथा परमेश्वरी प्रेम की चैतन्य
लहरियों को समझने वाले सूक्ष्मता विरोधी अपने संस्करों
(आदतों) से हमें अत्यन्त प्रेम है।
1. क्योंकि हम सहजयोग में वह स्तर, वह गहनता प्राप्त नहीं
कर पा रहे हैं जिससे बाहुय विश्व के लोग (विश्व सरकारों तथा
संसदों) सहित हमारी ओर आकर्षित हों और पूरे विश्व के लिए
सहजयोग अद्वितीय ब्रह्माण्डीय एकीकरण बन जाए।
9. क्योंकि (एक ओर तो) अपनी बुद्धि और (दूसरी ओर)
अपनी भावनाओं को परमेश्वरी चैतन्य लहरियों के समक्ष
समर्पित करना हमारा लक्ष्य नहीं हैं। स्वयं को अपने अहं और
प्रतिअहं से मुक्त करने हमारा लक्ष्य नहीं है, इसी कारण से
अपने तर्किक और भावनात्मिक लिप्सताओं को हम किसी भी
प्रकार छोड़ना नहीं चाहते।
2. क्योंकि सहजयोग में हमारी उल्करान्ति बहुत धीमी है।
उत्क्रान्ति की गति धीमी होने के कारण हमारे अन्दर शुद्ध इच्छा
की दुर्बलता है, शुद्ध इच्छा इतनी कम है कि हम उसे क्रियान्वित
नहीं करते।
10. क्योंकि हम अन्य लोगों के अहं और प्रतिअहं के प्रभाव से
मुक्त करने का प्रयत्न नहीं करते इसी कारण हम अपने मन
और शरीर को समझने की अपनी आदत के सम्मुख तो
नतमस्तक हो जाते हैं, परन्तु अपनी आत्मा के सम्मुख नहीं।
3. क्योंकि पूरा दिन ध्यानावस्था में बने रहना हमें याद नहीं
रहता। यद्यपि हम प्रातः और सायं नियमित रूप से ध्यान करते
हैं फिर भी हम बार-बार अहं और प्रतिअहं के शिकंजे में फॅस
जाते हैं।
र
11. क्योंकि हम भूल जाते हैं कि केवल श्री माताजी ही हमारी
गुरु है, उनकी परमेश्वरी प्रेम की चैतन्य लहरियाँ।
4. क्योंकि अब तक भी हम अपनी सभी समस्याओं को
श्रीमाताजी के चरणकमलों में, परम चैतन्य के सम्मुख नहीं कर
पाते हैं।
12. क्योंकि हम भूल जाते हैं कि हमारे आध्यात्मिक उत्क्रान्ति
पथ पर केवल दो बाघाएँ हैं
(बंधन)।
: अहंकार एवं प्रतिअहंकार
5. क्योंकि हर समय हम पूर्ण सत्य को भूले रहते हैं कि हम
आत्मा हैं और श्रीमाताजी परमात्मा हैं, 'परम चैतन्य' हैं।
13. क्योंकि हम भूल जाते हैं कि अपनी बुद्धि और भावनाओं
पर आवाछित विश्वास और निर्भरता हमारी सबसे बड़ी गलती
6. क्योंकि हम भूल जाते हैं कि आत्मा के सम्मुख हमारा शरीर
है।
गौण है। हर क्षण यदि हम आत्मा का आनन्द नहीं उठाते, तो
परमेश्वरी तंत्र से हमारा योग अभी अस्थिर एवं डावाँडोल है।
ऐसी अवस्था में परम चैतन्य हमारी समस्याओं का समाधान
14. क्योंकि हम भूल जाते हैं कि श्रीमाताजी का हमारे हृदय से
16
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007
नहीं कर सकते और उसका कुप्रभाव श्रीमाताजी के शरीर पर 9. क्योंकि (एक ओर तो) अपनी बुद्धि और (दूसरी ओर)
अपनी भावनाओं को परमेश्वरी चैतन्य लहरियों के समक्ष
समर्पित करना हमारा लक्ष्य नहीं हैं। स्वयं को अपने अहं और
7. क्योंकि भवसागर में विद्यमान दस शक्तियों को जागृत करके प्रतिअहं से मुक्त करने हमारा लक्ष्य नहीं है, इसी कारण से
परमेश्वरी प्रेम का माध्यम बनना हमारा एकमात्र लक्ष्य नहीं है। अपने तकिक और भावनात्मिक लिप्सताओं को हम किसी भी
पड़ता है।
प्रकार छोड़ना नहीं चाहते।
अतः हमारे अन्दर स्थित गुरुतत्व सुप्तावस्था में है।
8. क्योंकि अब भी उत्क्रान्ति में बाधा डालने वाले, गहनता में 10. क्योंकि हम अन्य लोगों के अहं और प्रतिअहं के प्रभाव से
अवरोध उत्पन्न करने वाले तथा परमेश्वरी प्रेम की चैतन्य मुक्त करने का प्रयत्न नहीं करते इसी कारण हम अपने मन
तो
लहरियों को समझने वाले सूक्ष्मता विरोधी अपने संस्करों और शरीर को समझने की अपनी आदत के सम्मुख
नतमस्तक हो जाते हैं, परन्तु अपनी आत्मा के सम्मुख नहीं।
(आदतों) से हमें अत्यन्त प्रेम है।
Experiences of Yuvashakti
Mother's Protection
Although every moment in Sahaja is heavenly but I would like to share two (out of hundreds) of Sahaja miracle
experiences,
1. 1 have a very sensitive skin - even a wee bit of scratch or burn pains for hours! One day I had lit an agarbatti
(Incense stick) and kept it in front of Shri Mataji, I was in office at that time, so someone interrupted and I started
giving some instructions to him - as he went away -I saw the burning end of the stick pierced deep in my skin
(arm) as a reflex action I jumped to brush itoff my skin and checked the burntarea to my surprise there was not
the slightest mark or burn injury !I AlthoughIhad myself taken out the pierced end from my skinl!
2. Very recently I was washing the bottles with acid. Usually, even a slightest droplet of acid burns the skin and I
used to immediately wash off with water to ward away the burning sensation. But some 3 days ago, I was
washing a turmblerwhich had acquired some stubborn stains and as I poured the acid in it it leaked through one
of its designed incisions and fell directly on my right thumblAlthough I could see the harsh acidic effect it made on
the tumbler but my skin felt as if plain water had fallen on it I! l understood that Shri Mataji has taken care of Her
instrument's skin!
Aparna Gangopadhyay, Kolkata
Power of a Bandhan
I was preparing for entrance of Modern Office Practice, in which there were only 250 seats. I did not want to sit for
the exam because my uncle & aunty had come with their children. They were going for a plcnic but my parents
forced me to go and take the exam. Solwent there and I was crying because my father had scolded me. I went
and took the exam. I don't know what answer I gave to which question but after finishing my exam I just gave
bandhan to my paper and submitted it. After few days my result was out and I went to check it. I thought thatI
would not succeed but by grace of our Holy Mother a miraculous thing happened. Igot All India 18 th rank, and
also an admission in renowned Meerabal Polytechnic.
1
Mugdha Srivastava, Delhi
17
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 वर्तमान का महत्त्व
श्रीमाताजी ने हमें हमेशा वर्तमान में रहने के लिए कहा है। जब हम निर्विचारिता में होते हैं, तभी हम वर्तमान
में होते हैं। परन्तु यह स्थिति पूर्णतः सीपित नहीं है, तो हमें इस के लिए क्या करना चाहिए? आईये लियो
टॉलस्टॉय (रूस के आत्मसाक्षात्कारी लेखक) की इस कहानी से जानें।
सर्वाल पूछने आया हूँ।
पहला - काम का ठीक वक्त मैं कैसे जान सकता हूँ?
एक बार एक राजा के मन में तीन सवाल आए।
पहला - कोई काम कब शुरू किया जाए?
दूसरा - कौन ठीक व्यक्ति हैं जिसकी बात सुनी जाए?
तीसरा - महत्त्वपूर्ण काम कौन सा है?
दूसरा - कौन लोग मेरे लिए महत्वपूर्ण हैं जिनका औरों की
मुझे विशेष ख्याल रखना है।
तीसरा - कौन सा काम सबसे महत्त्वपूर्ण है, जिस पर मुझे
उसने अपने सारे राज्य में ऐलान करा दिया कि जो कोई भी
आकर इन सवालों का उत्तर देगा उसे खूब इनाम दिया जाएगा।
बड़े-बड़े विद्वान दूर-दूर से राजा के पास आये, सबने उत्तर
दिये, पर सबके उत्तर
पहले ध्यान देना चाहिए?"
योगी ने राजा की बात सुनी पर जवाब नहीं दिया। हथेली को
थूक से गीला कर के, फिर से खोदने लग गया। राजा ने कहा
आप थक गये हैं, लाइये, मुझे
फावड़ा दीजिए, कुछ देर मैं
आपकी जगह काम कर देता हूँ।"
अच्छा" कहकर योगी ने फावड़ा
राजा को दे दिया और खुद धरती
पर लेट कर सुस्ताने लगा। दो
क्यारियाँ खोदने पर राजा रुका
और अपने प्रश्नों को दोहराया।
लेकिन योगी ने कोई जवाब नहीं
हेर
अलग-अलग थे। जितने भी
उत्तर उसे प्राप्त हुए वह उनसे
संतुष्ट नहीं हुआ। तब उसने
एक योगी से (जिसके ज्ञान का
गौरव दूर-दूर तक था) इन
सवालों का उत्तर जानने की
सोची।
मी
चक
टट
मा
दिया। राजा शाम होने तक
वह योगी एक वन में रहता
फावड़ा हाथ में लिए धरती
खोदता रहा।
था, कभी बाहर नहीं जाता था
ि
और देहात के सीधे साधे
लोगों के अलावा किसी और
अन्ततः राजा ने फावड़ा छोड़ कर
से बात नहीं करता था। अतः
राजा ने अपना सादा वेश कर लिया और योगी की कुटिया
आने से पहले ही घोड़े से उतर कर पैदल चलने लगा। साथ के
रक्षक सिपांहियों को वहीं छोड़ कर वह अकेला ही कुटिया की
ओर चला गया।
योगी से कहा "हे ज्ञानी पुरुष, मैं आपसे अपने तीन प्रश्नों के
उत्तर के लिए आपके पास आया था, यदि आप मुझे उत्तर नहीं
दे सकते तो बता दीजिए, मैं वापिस चला जाता हूँ।" इतने में
योगी ने कहा - "देखो! वहाँ से कोई भागा आ रहा है। जाने
कौन है?"
राजा ने मुड़कर देखा कि एक दाढ़ीवाला व्यक्ति जंगल से भागा
चला आ रहा था। उसने अपने दोनों हाथों से अपने पेट को
दबा रखा था और उसका लहु बह रहा था। उनके पास पहुँच
कर वह बेहोश हो कर गिर गया। दोनो ने मिल कर उसके घाव
को घोया और पट्टी बाँधी, बहुत मेहनत से उसके लहु को रोका,
फिर उसे होश आया। राजा ने उसे पानी पिलाया और बिछौने
कुटिया के पास पहुँच कर राजा देखता है कि योगी कुटिया के
आगे धरती खोद रहा था। राजा को देख योगी स्वागत वचन
कहता है और फिर उसी तरह खोदने लगता है। योगी की काया
दुर्बल थी, धरती में एक फावड़ा मारता कि उसकी साँस फूलने
लगती।
राजा ने पास जाकर कहा - "हे ज्ञानी योगी मैं आपके पास तीन
18
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007
पर सुला दिया। राजा सुबह से इतना काम करके थक चुका था, वर्तमान का समय, क्योंकि वह वही समय जिसमें हम जीते हैं
अतः वह भी लेट गया और गहरी नींद में सो गया।
जब सुबह हुई तो उस दाढ़ीवाले व्यक्ति ने राजा से कहा - "हे है जिसके साथ हम उस समय होते हैं क्योंकि कौन जानता है
राजनू! मुझे क्षमा कर दीजिए। राजा बोला - "मैं तो तुम्हें कि आगे किसी से मिलना हमारे भाग्य में है भी या नहीं। सबसे
जानता ही नहीं तो क्षमा किस बात की?" वह बोला - "आप महत्त्वपूर्ण कार्य है उस व्यक्ति की जो सेवा हो, कर देना,
मुझे नहीं जानते, लेकिन मैं आपको जानता हूँ। आपने मेरे भाई क्योंकि वही एक कार्य है जिसको उस व्यक्ति के हाथ देकर उसे
को फाँसी दे कर उसकी सारी सम्पत्ति छीन ली थी। तब मैंने तुम्हारे पास भेजा गया है।
आपसे प्रतिशोध लेने का प्रण लिया था। मैंने सोचा था कि जब
आप योगी की कुटिया से वापिस आयेंगे तब मैं आपकी हत्या इस प्रकार वह राजा उस योगी से अपने तीन प्रश्नों के उत्तर
कर दूँगा। परन्तु दिन पूरा हो गया और आप नहीं लौटे। जब मैं जान कर अपनी राजधानी लौट गया।
अपने छिपने की जगह से बाहर आया, तब आपके सिपाहियों
ने मुझे पहचान लिया और मुझ पर आक़रमण कर के घायल कर
दिया। कैसे भी मैं वहाँ से भागा और यहाँ आपने मुझे यदि पट्टी |ऐसा प्रश्न होता है कि क्या करें? यह ठीक है या नहीं? और
नहीं बाँधी होती तो मैं मृत्यु को प्राप्त हो जाता। आपने मेरी
जान बचाई है, मैं जब तक जीवित रहूँगा तब तक आपकी सेवा
करुगा और अपने बेटे से भी यही कहूँगा। आप मुझे क्षमा कर
दीजिये, यही मेरी विनती है।2"
राजा को बड़ी प्रसन्नता हुई कि कैसे सहज ही एक शत्रु मित्र
बन गया! राजा ने उसे क्षमा कर दिया और सम्पत्ति लौटाने का
वचन भी दिया।
और वही हमारे हाथ में होता है। सबसे महत्त्वपूर् व्यक्ति वह
अब यह प्रश्न बहुत बार हो जाता है, adminstration में,
इतना आसान है, इतना आसान है कि कोई सा भी
decision लेने से पेहले निर्विचारिता में जाओ, अपने आप
decision सामने जो आ जाए वो करिये कभी गुलत हो ही
नहीं सकता है। पर decision निर्विचारिता में
spontaneous होगा और विचार में आपने अगर कर
लिया तो वो biased होगा, क्योंकि उसमें आपका ego और
superego दोनों काम कर रहा है। आपके जो कुछ भी
संस्कार हैं, आपने जो कुछ लौकिक कमाया है वो आपके
पीछे में खड़ा रहेगा। लेकिन अगर निर्विचारिता में करियेगा
फिर राजा ने योगी से कहा - "हे ज्ञानी पुरुष, मैं अंतिम बार
आपसे अपने प्रश्नों के उत्तर के लिए प्रार्थना करता हूँ।" योगी | तो ये कभी ना होयेगा... आलौकिक होगा...।
ने कहा - "हे राजनु! उत्तर तो आपको मिल ही
राजा ने पूछा - "कैसे?आपका क्या तात्पर्य है?"
योगी बोला - "देखिये, यदि आप मेरी दुर्बलता पर दया नहीं
करते और मेरी जगह इन क्यारियों को खोदते नहीं, अपितु | absolutely dynamic!
वापिस चले जाते, तो यह व्यक्ति आप पर हमला कर बैठता!
और फिर यहाँ न ठहरने पर आप पछतावा करते। अतः उस
क्षण आपके लिए सबसे महत्त्वपूर्ण समय वह क्षण था जिस क्षण
आप क्यारियाँ खोद रहे थे। उस क्षण आपके लिए सबसे
महत्त्वपूर्ण व्यक्ति मैं था और उस क्षण मेरी सहायता करना
आपका सबसे महत्त्वपूर्ण कार्य था। इसके बाद वह व्यक्ति जब
हमारे पास आकर गिर गया, तब, जब आप उसकी परिचर्या में
लगे थे, वह सबसे महत्त्वपूर्ण समय था। क्योंकि यदि आप धाव
न बाँधते तो वह अपने मन में आपका वैर लिए मरता। अंतः
उस क्षण वह व्यक्ति आपके लिए सबसे महत्त्वपूर्ण व्यक्ति था
और जो आप ने उसके लिए किया वह सबसे महत्त्वपूर्ण कार्य।
इसलिए याद रखो कि एक ही समय है जो महत्त्वपूर्ण
है।"
चुका
एक क्षण निर्विचारिता में जाकर के आप किसी भी चीज़ का
decision ले लें, आप ऐसे-ऐसे decisions लेंगे के
| बड़े-बड़े लोगों के बस का नही था! dynamic..
क्षमा की शक्ति का महत्त्व, 1975
स्वयं से पूछें
१. इन दो वाक्यों में क्या अन्तर है:
चित्त का सहस्त्रार पर होना
चित्त का सहस्त्रार में होना
२. मैं जीवन में क्या चाहता हूँ - आलीशान, सुखमय,
स्वस्थ जीवन या फिर परम?
19
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 ॐ
०
Yuvadrishti Jun 2007
स्वरशाला
(हारमोनियम पर तीन महामंत्र बजाना सीखिये )
ली
ॐ त्वमे व साक्षात् श्री महा लक्ष्मी महा सरस्वती महा का
रे रे ग ग
रे रे
रे ग
ग ग में ग प म ग रे रे
सा सा पु रे - - रे
सा
जी
त्रिगुणात्मि का कुण्डलिनी साक्षात् श्री आदिशक्ति माता
रे रे ग रे
ग म ग प म ग रे रे
प ध म ग
प
प -
प
ग
वी -
न मो न मः ॥
श्री निर्मला दे
नी सा रे सा नी धृ धु नी ग रे सा रे सा सा सा
नी सा
त्वमे व साक्षात् श्री कल्की साक्षात् श्री आदिशक्ति
रे रे ग रे ग प
ॐ
प ध म ग
सा सा पू रे - -
सा
जी श्री निर्मला दे
माता
नी सा रे सा नी धु
नी सा
ग म ग प मे ग रे रे
{१२
र
ি
1SFERLS
वी
न मो न मः ॥
धृ नी ग रे सा रे सा सा सा
ॐ त्वमे व साक्षात् श्री कल्की साक्षात् श्री सहस्त्रार स्वा मि नी मोक्ष
रे ग
ग ग म प नी नी सां नी नी -
सा सा सा पू रे रे - रे रे ग
जी
प्र दा यनी - - मा- ता
म ध प नी ध नी ध प म ग रे
नी सां रें नी ध प प -
श्री निर्मला दे
वी
न मो न मः ॥
नी सा रे सा नी ध धु नी ग रे सा रे सा सा
नी सा
20
tv
to
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007
MOTHER'S RECIPE
Chhole (Spicy Chick Peas)
(For 6 People)
add the baking powder and quickly add the drained chick
Ingredlents:
peas
500 gr. Chick peas (soaked over night)
500 gr. Potatoes bolled and cut into small cubes
2.3 tablespoon ghee or oil
2 teaspoon baking powder
2 liter water
5-6 bay leaves
2 teaspoon shajeera (caraway seeds)
1 fresh green chilli
½ teaspoon red chilli powder
½ teaspoon turmeric powder
250 gr. Seedless tamarind
• Add the preparation (A) and let everything cook until
the chickpeas are tender. (Add hot water if necessary,
never cold water it stops the chick peas to getsalt)
Add bay leaves
* in another frying pan heat the ghee,
and cumin seeds and letit splutter.
• Add preparation (B), turmeric and green chilli to the
3 big sliced onions
7.5 cm piece ginger, finely chopped
7-8 cloves of garlic, finely chopped
1 teaspoon black pepper
3-4 whale cinnamon sticks
2 black cardamoms
6 pieces of cloves
3 teaspoon coriander seeds
3 teaspoon cumin seeds (jeera)
Fresh coriander leaves
ghee. Fry for minute, until you smell the spices, but take
care not to burn them
Optional jaggery or sugar
* Add this mixture to the cooked chick peas.
Preparation:
Add boiled potato cubes, red chill powder, thick
tamarind paste and salt. You can also add sugar or
Soak the tamarind in a little hot water for an hour. jaggery in the sauce (optional, according toyour taste)
your taste). Mix well, cover and simmer for one more
squeeze by hand) Keep the thick tamarind extract to put minute. The chickpeas have to be a thick, molst dish and
Mix the coarsely ground spices (B) in a bowl
Squeeze it to remove the pulp. (Strain through a sieve or
not too liquid.
into the sauce.
When ready, garnish with fresh coriander leaves.
Serve with nan or rice.
Boil the 2% of water, in a big pot. When it starts boiling
As fresh as it has been made
Strange thing about cooking was that we had a big catering-style fridge & Mother made a chicken stew which we
didn't finish, so we put leftovers in fridge for another day. Then after Mother had left, about a week later, PatAnslow,
who stayed up after seminar, & I made another chicken stew & also put it in same fridge & forgot about it. About 3
weeks after this we suddenly remembered 2 stews, but strange thing was that our stew had gone completely rotten,
whereas Mother's was as fresh as day it had been made.
- Linda Williams
21
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007
THIS HAPPENED
Shiva." Of course, the foxglove contains digitalis, a
substance used in heart surgery. She also said sage was
very good.
She said it is like the sunlight
There was a miracle, which I experienced when we
had a seminar in English countryside. It was a long time
ago, 1979, & Shri Mataji came. It was a very dark day with
no sun, heavy clouds. It was very, very dull & heavy. There
was a lot of doubting in Sahaja Yoga at that time. And Shri
Mataji was talking to us & said that She is Shri Krishna &
Shri Jesus & Shri Mataji. She is all of them. She said it is
like sunlight. And at that moment beam of sunlight came
out of nowhere & shone on Her head & went away. To
prove it, She said for beam of light come again on Her
head. That happened 2 or 3 times. Out of nowhere sun
came. So this was miracle I witnessed together with about
50 yogis, who where presentat that time,
Linda Williams
I think we stayed up at Crosscraig about a week. Each
day, with Mother there, it got clearer and lighter even
though more and more TM victims kept túrning up. A
whole family of brothers and sisters came over from
Ireland. Shri Mataji worked relentlessly, with yogis,
elements and persuasion, to get the individual TM
mantras disclosed. She just transformed the place, the
Miodrag Radosavljevic
Adrama of cosmic proportions
Mother decided to have a seminar at Crosscraig, house
where I was living in Scotland. Word "crosscraig" meant
"place of holy stone" and it was a Victorian hunting lodge.
At that time it had the most dreadful vibrations imaginable
because we had been involved with TM & had even had
courses on this brand of madness there. But it was as if
Mother wanted to come right into the den of the enemy
and clear it out for us and through us.
Linda Williams
vibrations, while She was there. I remember we had
pujas, we hada havan, and we did ajwan. There was one
point where She lay on the ground and everybody just
came and took vibrations from Her, although everyone
who could
obviously, there were too many of us. The rest of us held
hands with those who had their hands on Her body and
She just gave vibrations that way, lying down on the
ground or on the floor in the living room.
There were about 20 people at seminar, maybe a few
more. I remember Marilyn, Gregoire & Maureen, Pat
Anslow's sister, Pat & Mother, Mother in all Her glory. We
had a havan & Mother kept us up all night, butit was July &
nights were only about 2 hours long. I remember we went
outside as sun rose, about 3 in morning, in a golden line
over loch. She said TM bhoots had come for us in night &
had had a nasty shock when they were met by Adi Shakti
Herself. I also remember that I had a sort of alittle cottage
attached to main house & Mother came to my bedroom.
She stamped Her Feet around the room and said that the
bhoots had run away, but that they would return after She
left.
had a hand on Her body and those who
Marilyn Leate
We had a megalith, a standing stone in garden, which was
why place was called Crosscraig. There were quite a few
Another thing about that seminar Mother had all the older standing stones in Rannoch Valley, but this one was all
alone, about one & half meter high & near the edge of
loch. It had a sort of a cup mark in it near top. We took
Mother to see it, as it was only about 50 meters from
house and She told us something very interesting. She
said that people who put up these stones knew that She
was going to come here, but that also some very bad
things were going to go on here beforehand, TM
nonsense. She asked us to feel vibrations of stone &it
didn't seem to have any, either positive or negative. She
said yes, that was right, stone had been put there to
absorb some of negative vibrations & make Her work
easier, but that it was full, so could not emit cool vibrations.
Sahaja Yogis wash our feet in Her bath water. This was
outside in the garden and we newer people sat in a row on
the edge of the lawn with our feet down on the gravel area
where one drove cars in. In those days we did not realize
the deep symbolism of everything that was going on.
Linda Williams
| also remember Mother sitting in garden & I took Her a
bunch of herbs. She said, "One day I must tell you about
all these."And She took a foxglove foxgloves grow wild in
Scotland and She said, "This flower is sacred to Lord
22
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007
It made me think, that whole of Mother's incarnation is a
drama of cosmic proportions. Years later, Mother Herself
said as much.
Dattatreya was born.
After the Puja Mother had us go into Her room and we
massaged Her Feet and legs to take the vibrations which
had been generated during the Puja. Very often in those
days the vibrations were not taken and Mother explained
that they would go round the world and come back to Her
and would then cause Her great pain if they were not
absorbed,
Linda Williams
At night She would ask people to go & we would direct
vibrations while She slept & She would wake up &
comment on something & then fall back to sleep again.
She never stopped working on everybody. Just
individually & collectively, She didn't stop. She was
working on every newcomer who came. People were
coming from Ireland, Scotiand, England, ex-TMers who
were coming to get cleared out.
Linda Williams.
Actually, people were really getting better. They were all
improving as the week went on. People who had physical
problems were just getting better, were feeling healthier,
getting more energy and it was an interesting period.
Marilyn Leate
Marilyn Leate
We made garlands out of pink lupines for Mother for Puja.
I remember during aarti to Mother at end, feeling
tremendous power, joy & majesty of the great Goddess in
front of me. When we had sung aarti & were bowing to
Mother, She offered us a boon, but said we should ask in
our hearts for something material. Although I was going
through a bankruptcy case at that moment, I could not
bring my self to ask for money, but had heard in London
week before that Mother wanted those of us who were
married to have children. So l asked for a son who would
grow up to fight evil in world. Following year my son
It was a beautiful few days. Mother told me She would
replace all the terrible memories of my misplaced seeking
with beautiful memories and so it has indeed been. As
She left to get in Her car, Mother gave me a big hug. It was
wonderful.
Linda Williams
Donation Request For NGO
4. Kindly Speed Post (ONLY) vour Cheque/DD at:
Mrs. Gisela Matzer,
Jai Shri Mataji Dear Sahaja Yogis,
We all kriow that Shri Malaji founded Vishwa Nirmal clo Vishwa Nirmal PremAshram,
Prem Ashram, Greater Noida (an NGO for destitute
women and children) In 2000. For upbringing & care
taking of the children/women and running &
maintenance of the Ashram the NGO regularly needs
funds. Following is the Information for people who may
wish to donate:
Plot No.9, Institutional Area,
Near Park Knowledge l,
Greater Noida, UP-201308.
Ph: (0120)2322023, (0120)2230681.
Contacts:
(1) Mrs. Gisela-09810774865
email-gisela_oma_7@yahoo.com
(II) Mr. Jaswant Singh-09891924990
1. The Cheque/DD must be made in favour of HH Shri
Mataii Nirmala Devi Foundation.
2. If the donation is greater than or equal to Rs.5000
then please mention your PAN number. If donation() Rs. 3000-Includes food, school, dress, maintenance
amount is less than Rs.5000 then please mention (1) Rs.1700-School and Food (only)
your postal address.
5. Donation options for a child (per month):
(ili) Rs. 500-Schooling (only)
We request readers to announce this in their collectives,
so as to spread the awareness among people.
3. Donation can also be given in form of kinds like cotton
dress, shoes, undergarments (all NEW and NOT old and
used ones).
Forfurther details: www.nirmalprem.org
23
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Jun 2007
Kid Shakti Page
Swadisthan Chakra
Locate the Swadisthan Chakra on the body chart. Count the Number of petals in the
Swadisthan Chakra. Ask your parents the color the Swadisthan Chakra and color it.
w ww
Shri Brahmadeva is the creator, who has created this Universe and who is the one who is busy still
creating and doing lots of things for us. He is that aspect of Shri Mataji which is the Doer of all actions.
Qualities of Shri Saraswati include creativity, art, music, poetry, aesthetics and comprehension. She is
the giver of all the Nirmal Vidya and takes away all Avidya. Color the following picture of Shri Saraswati
and Shri Brahmadeva.
24
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-26.txt 
 ८
Papaji's Words of Wisdom
(Shiv Puja 2007 address)
सामने आपके श्रीमाताजी बैठी हैं और इससे बड़ा क्या करें चार लोग हैं और ये तीन लोग हैं और सब
दृश्य क्या हो सकता है? उनको देख लेना, भगवान एक के ही पास क्यों जा रहे हैं? उन्होंने कहा कि ये
को देख लेना। मैं अच्छी तकदीर वाला हूँ मुझे हर विल्कुल अलग है। मैंने कहा - "क्यों?" कहने लगा
रोज देखने का मौका मिल जाता है। आपसे मुझे "ये कोई सहजयोग होता है उसको करता है और
है
अगर
आप देखें तो कितने लोग आये हैं, बैठे हये हैं। क्यों को देता है, सबको अपनी हिफाजत में रखे हैं ।" मैंनें
बैठे हुये हैं?क्यों आये हैं?वो इसलिये है कि जो बैठे हैं
यहाँ श्रीमाताजी, इन्होंने अपार प्रेम सबको दिया, है
न ठीक बात? (तालियों की गड़गड़ाहट) और अब वो
कहती हैं कि मेरे बच्चों, मेरे प्यारे बच्चों मैंनें ३०
साल, ३५ साल दौड़-दौड़ कर सब काम किया है।
कहाँ-कहाँ मैं नहीं गई? लैटिन अमेरिका, अफ्रीका
लेकिन अब मुझे थोड़ा सा तो आराम करने दो,
बच्चों अब तुम जिम्मेदारी सम्भालो। कहने का
म
कर
े
मतलब यह है कि सहज को अब आप बढ़ाइये।
लेकिन सहज को बढ़ाने में मैं बहुत हाथ जोड़कर
आपसे कहना चाहता हूँ जो सबसे बड़ी चीज है अपने हाथ जोड़े और कहा ये है, यह दुनिया उन्होंने
सच्चा प्यार, हर एक के लिये अगर मन में सच्चा बनायी है और मेरी आपसे हाथ जोड़कर विनती है
प्यार है, सबके लिये, कोई द्वेष नहीं है यही कि आप इस बात को समझिये और आगे बढ़ाइये,
श्रीमाताजी की सबसे बड़ी देन है कि सारी दुनिया बहुत जरूरत है इसकी। देखिये न, दुनिया को
एक है। हर एक को प्यार एक तरह से करना देखिये, झगड़े, लड़ाई। एक भगवान, एक ही तो हो
चाहिये। उन्होंने कहा है कि हम सहजयोगी हैं, सकता है दो तो नहीं हो सकते। सब उस ही के बच्चे
Particularly एक है। एक दूसरे को इतना Pure है। इस प्रेम को आगे बढ़ायें। बहुत हक से लग के
प्यार दें, कुछ कहिये नहीं। कोई आपस में तनाजा बढ़ाइये। आप इस देश को बचा सकते हैं, इस
नहीं, झगड़ा नहीं, द्वेष नहीं, कुछ नहीं सिर्फ प्यार, दुनिया को बचा सकते हैं इसलिये हाथ जोड़कर
उस प्यार को जब आप आगे बढ़ायेंगें तो सहजयोग आपसे कहता हूँ कि इनका ( श्रीमाताजी का) काम
आपके जरिये से आगे बढ़ेगा, लोग देखेंगें। मैं आप सम्भालिये। ये हैं, ये बैठी हैं, ये याद रखिये
आपको एक बात दो मिनट में बताऊँ, मैं एक बार आप, आपके पास आपके बच्चे आयेंगें, उनके बच्चे
लन्दन में था, काम करता था। एक बार एक किताब आयेंगे, सब यहीं आयेंगे लेकिन फिर भी ये अपने
की
दुकान में गया वहाँ पर चार मेजें लगायी हुई थीं आसन पर बैठेगी और आप काम करेंगें करेंगें?हाथ
जो लोग help करते थे, चार तो बैठे हुये थे। मैनें उठाइये... Promise?
देखा कि तीन लोगों के पास लोग नहीं जा रहे हैं Thank you, बहुत धन्यवाद
और एक लड़का सा है 25 साल का, 30 साल का
सब उस ही के पास जा रहे हैं। तो मैनें वहाँ के
मैनेजर से कहा कि भाई समझ में नहीं आ रहा कि
ॐ
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Shri Ganesha Swayambhu
Shri MahaGanapati, GanpatiPhule, India
Shri Ganapati, Uluru, Australia
