The Divine Cool Breeze March-April : 2007

 Divine Cool Breeze The 2007 MAR. APR. NIRMALA. NIVERSAL PURE CONTENTS Christmas Puja 2006, Pune 3 - Los Angeles, USA - Oct.2006 Navratri Puja New York, USA - 16.6.1999 Public Programs 10 11 The Path of Ascent 12 A Fact (An Experience) Advice by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi - 22.3.1977 13 The Creation Of Lord Jesus - 11.4.82 24 Description of the birtb of Shri Jesus 30 Her Holiness - Shri Mataji's Advice 33 36 Ready For The War? 38 America Calling West Coast receives Shri Adi Shakti 39 By the Grace of Shri Ganesha 40 Shri Krishna Puja - 6.8.1988 41 DHARMA VMHSIA RELIGION

 COOL BREEZE THE DIVINE Published by Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 108, Chandragupt Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411029 Ph. No. : 020-25285232 Printed by Krishna Priter & Designer Tri Nagar, Delhi-35 Mob.: 9212238008 For Subscription Please Write to: Nirmal Trasformatiom Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 108,Chandragupt Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411Q29 Tel.No.: 020-25285232 Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles, Miracle Photographs etc. To Shri O.P. Chandna G-I1 (463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110034 Ph.: 011-65356811

 The Christmas Puja (Three Days Seminar) Nirmal Nagri, Bhukam, Pune (24th December to 26 December) The three days seminar was in fact main pandal in the evening for Puja. The evening wore a very serene look with a beautiful golden yellow sun set against the hilly back ground. Sky was clear. A vèry comfortable temperature a historical seminar in all respects. The great celebration by 12-15 thousand Sahaja Yogis present and participating and the tremendous flow of vibrations has made it a part of Sahaja History. It was just the other day that the Sahaja Yogis across the globe had gathered here in this very holy place to offer their puja at Her Holy Lotus Feet of Shri Mataji in Her Shri Mahalakshmi Form and the experiences were fantastic. While, today we have gathered here again to invoke His powers of Shri Jesus in Her Shri Maha Vishnu Form. Although every time the Christmas day reminds the yogis of the Ganapatipule days as Shri Maha Ganesha Himself awakens within us as Shri Jesus and yearns for our Divine Mother to accept the Puja. Nevertheless, the Nirmal Nagri seemed nothing less than the Ganapatipule experience with its mundane earthy lustre and fragrance excepting the colour of earth are not that red as in Ganapatipule and the Guru in His form of the Arabian sea is not so close by. 24th December, 2006- was a memorable musical evening for Sahaja Yogis. The evening excitement escalated with the staging of the Dance Drama by the Sahaja children of ISPS, Dharamshala, India, to explain the story of Creation, the Cosmos and its essence and the Causal, the origin of the various notes of music, subliming it with the original score of the most powerful declaration of the advent of Shri AdiShakti in Her own words from an old archived audio score. The silence that followed was just celestial. The Evening rolled with play of the vibrations as the collectivity enjoyed the three hours performance by the ISPS children. The day was done with the announcement of the rematched couples to get married on 26th December. At quarter to six the Puja pandal was almost half filled as if it was gradually spreading its wings to accommodate the larger collectivity with their beautiful and fragrant attire as they kept on pouring. The little Ganeshas, dressed beautifully, appeared playful, while the adults tried to adjust themselves to catch up the best of the times, either by rushing in front or occupying a comfortable place close by the four giant projection screens spanning across the ground. The interior decoration of the stage had the baroque art of a palatial architecture with the centre attraction of 25th December 2006- the second day was dedicated to the offering of the Christmas Puja at Her Holy Lotus Feet of Shri Mataji in Her Shri Jesus Mary Form in the evening. Puja timings were announced for six thirty but collectivity was requested to be in meditation right at quarter to six to avoid any hurried movements before the puja. Although in the morning the wonderful musical programme did much of the cleansing in the collectivity that swelled up to approximately 15-18 thousand in the open air space before the

 - 2007 Issue: 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze throne set for Shri Mataji. could not be seen. At half past six the meditation started with the three Mahamantras and bhajans by musical choir group. Kaisi Ye Phuhar Chali. . Ek Gauri ke Dulare, ek Radhaji ke Pyare . the two bhajans were enough to set the collectivity to the right meditative state to go into the meditation with screening of the 2001 Christmas Puja message of H.H. Shri Mataji in Ganpatipule, India. It was just as if Shri Mataji was physically present as the collectivity listened to Her Powerful messages. Speaking on the essence of Christ Shri Mataji reminded us that "Christ was the embodiment of Param Chaitanya, He was Omkara. He was Shri Ganesha. And those who follow Him have to be very different people. But it always happens in every religion that they go at random into the opposite direction, completely opposite". Concluding the pravachan Shri Mataji Said : "I hope you all people understand the importance of spreading Sahaja Yoga. If you don't do that, you are absolutely useless. The greatest thing for Me, as you have so many lights here, we should have many more Sahaja Yogis all over the world, if you want to change this world and if you want to avoid all the trails and turbulations of the useless life they are leading -you have to save them! You have to salvage them. That's your job, that's what you have to 'pay' for Sahaja Yoga. Not for yourself, not for yourself. Don't get worried about yourself. Sahaja Yoga. This is what is your job now. Your job is not important; only this is important, how many people you give Realisation". You have to spread Thereafter when Shri Jagdambe Aai Further speaking about Jesus Christ, Shri Mataji explained that The Essence of Christ's life was detachment and secrifice .. He stood for Truth..That you have to become the Spirit. Talking of Mohammed Sahib Shri Mataji explained the meaning of Meraj (the awakening of Kundalini) and Jehad (to achieve victory over shad - ripus). Further, talking on the Maryadas and the Protocols Mother thus spoke, "And in these modern times, as we see, people have crossed all the maryadas, all the things of a religion. Before, I went to America; I was surprised how they have forgotten about morality. ... Re was being sung, the announcement came up from the stage to play the Shenai to welcome Her Holiness Shri Mataji in the Nirmal Nagari as message of Her arrival flowed in. it was almost at half past eight that Swagata Agata Swagatam filled the air and the collectivity stood up with their joining in the chorus to welcome our most beloved Mother in the stage. Extraordinary flow of vibrations filled the entire milieu. As the curtains were raised it was the most spectacular sight that the yogis were yearning for so long to catch up. The collectivity was blessed to witness the Devi with Her Divine Grace seated in Her beautifully decorated chair. It was a breathless moment as if everything froze at that point of time. Mother looked so cheerful that every heart felt that Mother will enlighten Her children like yester years with Her On the subject of Christ and the Realization Shri Mataji said that Christ was not only a Realized Self; He was 'Relization' himself!" From India He returned to West to teach them "Nirmal Tatwam' without which The Light of Truth

 5n 2007 Issue: 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze Form. As the Shringar concluded with VishwaVandita the World Council coordinators, and India Trust members were called for performing the Arti. The Arti and the Maha mantras were recited as the puja concluded at quarter to ten. divine message again after a long pause. The giant projection screens very professionally captured the close up of Her Divine gesture and the radiant shinning face of Mother. It was so vibrant, so powerful yet so compassionate, subtly expressed with a child-like grace in Our Mother. It was indeed Her Shri Maha Ganesha form that was before us. Could all that be just illusion..or it was just Mahamaya in Her actual form. Words fails to describe the moment. It was It was then the turn for offering the international gifts at Her Holy Lotus Feet of our Shri Mataji. But before that a huge six tier beautifuly decorated white Christmas cake was blessed cut by our most beloved Mother for Her children (that was brought in by a group of red coloured Santa dressed yogis). Sir CP helped Mother with the cake as he stood up and offered the cake piece to Shri Mataji. like the God experience...it was like the direct impact of the oceanic expansion of the Love from within for seeking to be 'being one' with the God. The sudden insight reflected a childlike wonder, ecstatic exaltation above bodily and personal existence, sublimed in a timeless frame within a nameless expression. The International gifts flowed like showers of love from most of the countries of the world. While gift from the little angels of the Nirmal Prem NGO projects at Greater Noida, ISPS, Dharmashala and state of West Bengal from India added to the collective offering of the gifts at Her Holy Lotus Feet. Suddenly, the silence..the ràpport that was built between Mother and the children was interrupted with the announcement for the puja by invoking Shri Ganesha with offering flower at Her Holy Lotus Feet by children aged between 8 to 12 years. Little Ganeshas with a santa caps were seen rushing from everywhere around the stage to not to miss the most awaited moments of their lives. The choir started with "Vinati It was after a long pause that our beloved Pappaji, Sir CP stood up to address the collectivity with very powerful words and expressions that touched all our hearts and there was a vow in between. It was indeed a part of the resolution taken by the collective on behalf of the world Sahaja collective and vowed before our most Holy Mother. Sir CP began with these words... puja Suniye'...(song composed by Mother Herself)" and then followed by the recitation permission bhajan Ganesha of the Shri Atharvashirsham The puja continued through many more powerful bhajans like "Jai Jagadambe...Jai Ganeshji ki Ma Ambe...Jago Savera'.Then it was the time for the shringar bhajans with 'Namoh Namoh Maria' and 'Jagi Tarak Janma' while seven married ladies did the Shrinagar and Kalpana didi was seen to guide and help coronate the Devi in Her Shri Jesus Mary "May I wish you all a very happy Christmas and a very happy New Year? He said you know when a new year comes every one makes new resolutions every time. People have many wishes to make that they expect to be fulfilled. Continuing in his flawless diction Sir CP said "he has a wish to make that She (Shri Mataji) should

 2007 6 Issue: 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze son-Lord Jesus - in this Punya Bhoomi. The Morning activities sprang up live one after the other with unfolding excitement and sported a very bright look as the yoginis and yogis enjoyed the special occasion of haldi (turmeric) ceremony before the marriage could be solemnised in the evening. The Mehandi ceremony was performed just after the Puja on 25th itself. Yogis and Yoginis could be seen cheering up with yellow cheeks and loved to be bathed in that vibrated turmeric paste. It was like bathing in total bliss amongst the collectivity enjoying the coolness of the event and dancing to the tunes of fast bhajans that so naturally made the collective Kundalini dance. continue to be presiding here like this and we should be sitting here. And accompanying this wish is the world needs Her to spread the love and the message to be one. He further said, that if this world created by Her becomes the whole ultimate world that we live in, will be the greatest of the wishes. Then like a father he assured and desired for us to take a strong resolution that Shri Mataji has played Her role and whose turn should it be now? The entire collectivity after a pause affirmed- "Ours". "Do you promise that"? "I stood up just to get that promise from you on this New Year" The Curtains were drawn at quarter to eleven as the collectivity stood up with freezing chilliness in the air. The coolness spoke for itself the level of vibration that rose at that moment. Mother in Her Shri Jesus Form blessed us on behalf of the 'entire The entire milieu seemed to transform the Nirmal Nagri into a heaven on earth. Spontaneous expression emerges in praise for this Punya bhoomi in Persian couplet "Gar Firdous baroe Zameen ast, hameen ast, hameen ast, hameen ast", which means "If there be paradise on earth, this is it, this is it, this is it" This couplet was once expressed by Emperor Jehangir during his first visit to Kashmir in India and instantly fell in love with it. collectivity of the world with all fortunes for the years to come overflowing from our palms and from hearts. Thank You Mother for You accepted our prayers and the Christmas Puja at Your Holy Lotus Feet. Mother we promise you on behalf of the world collectivity that we shall abide by the resolution we just now made to Sir CP on spreading Your meessage of Love and taking Realization to the farthest corner of the world by Your blessings. Please make us Your effective instrument to carry forward our desire as You are the Doer and the Ultimate enjoyer. It must be almost quarter past five in the evening that Nirmal Nagri was preparing to welcome Her Holy arrival of Shri Mataji in Her Shri Gauri Form and solemnize the marriage of more than 100 couples. The ganas and the deities could tangibly be felt around in that part of the heaven as if trying to greet with fragrance brushing past the Yogis and Yoginis rushing to catch up the glory of that evening. Every heart felt there was something very special that was waiting for everyone as a surprise. It was as if a collective desire in heart yearning to meet the most beloved person. It was like 26th December, The Marriage Day: was even more exhilrating since the Sahasrardal Lotus was blooming open and filling the whole campus with the Divine fragrance of chaitanya. It was because Shri Mata Ji, as Mother Mary, had awakened Her

 Issue: 3 & 4 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze words that were beyond expression of joy. As Sir. CP held the mike before Her Holiness, Shri Mataji remarked in Hindi... As if thousand of crackers brust out in joy...the voice still rings in heart...as She said..... "Shadiyan Ho gayin .(The marriages are over), Aap Sabko badhayee (Congratulation to your all)......then there were a few more historic words...that go into history, but the experience was terrific and made us recall of an earlier years messages from Her-Holiness. heart that was talking without speaking, listening without hearing and trying to compose songs of joy within, without being sung. The grooms marched ahead with the very vibrant popular Hindi film song numbers (a parodey of a folk song) amidst the dancing accompanying collectivity, while the brides were instructed to offer their puja in Her Nirakar Form at the holy alter of Shri Mataji after audio play of a short recorded message from Shri Mataji advising the brides. The vibrations grew stronger as the time rolled by. The choir rendered a few popular bhajans. It was almost at quarter to nine, some hundred plus would be brides and the Bride grooms queued up against the mid line curtains held in between them to garland each other before the actual ceremony of havan and solemnizing of the marriage took place. Shri Mataji once had revealed that we have to ask for three things called "salokya", "samipya, and "sannidhya" is the companionship of God. But we have got "tadatmya", which is oneness with God, which is not in the concept of any one of the yogis and the saints and the seers who have been before, And this "tadatmya" we have when we are outside Her body, while they have this "tadatmya" when they are inside Her body, when they are no more. So She warned us that we should understand the time limit. Shri Mataji thus spoke that we must understand our greatness and we must we people are chosen for the highest work in this creation". Exactly at Nine Her Holiness Shri Mataji blessed the collectivity with Her Divine Darshan. The marriage vows invoking the deities of the seven Chakra couplets were sung one after the other as the 'would be brides' and the 'bride grooms' gradually stepped forward seven steps to come nearer. Then it was the time for the couples to settle before the individual small Haven Kund constructed for this purpose with their respective Father-Mother-Uncle and best Friends surrendering before Shri Adi Shakti for solemnizing the marriage by Her blessings of Shri Mataji. The event passed on as Shri mataji very keenly observed the entire ceremony biessing the couple. understand how Further it was announced that the forthcoming Birthday Puja will be held at Nirmal Nagari Pune, instead of Chhindwara. Also the world collectivity of Sahaja Yogis was invited on behalf of SirC.P. to join and celebrate the 60th Marriage Anniversary of Shri Mataji and SirC.P. The announcement was cheered with thunderous applause. Mr. Rajeev Bagaddhe from Pune musical choir was then requested to lead the popular Quawwali 'Meri Mata Ka Karam Hai' Sir CP was in great Moods and seen joining with the clapping rhythm along with the It was then a historic moment that made history as our most Divine Mother blessed the couples and the event with

 2007 8. Issue: 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze It was in fact the collective Kundalini that was involuntary dancing quite unaware of what the physical self was enacting and what the others were enjoying them and the moment who did not rise to dance physically in collective. There was not much of restrain as the curtains were drawn close collectivity as Mr. Gregoir, Mr. Dinesh Rai were requested to join the dancing couples before Shri Mataji infront of the stage with the tunes of the quawwali number. Collectivity Shall remember this event for long. It was an explicable moment very difficult to put in expression. to announce the holy departure of Shri The entire cosmos as if have opened it enfolding arms and the infinity trying to spread out in timeless ponoply that helped dissolve all doubts, all separation from the divine. Fear of losing, achieving the thought- lessness and getting integrated to that great power of the Creator dissolved in a comforting flood of bliss, peace and dazzling experience -It was indeed the ultimate Holy connection with the Divinity, That power that created us..the meaning of God rendered so lucid before all thoughts confronted and the entire collectivity was in total bliss. It was like enjoying the resurrection of the soul and the Spirit within, with the divine presence of the great power on Earth...the greatest power in the Cosmos that created us. Mataji. The collectivity was already dissolved into that heaven of freedom where we pray Mother let our Spirit be awake. Thank You Shri Mataji for this historic day, as the coolness spoke for itself. Interestingly many cameras froze the unseen deities and ganas in their frame of focus, who too had joined the collectivity on this day and were enjoying even long after Mother left a trail of vibrations behind for Her children and Ganas to enjoy...probably just caught unaware in frames as miracles all around. Jai Shri Mataji SITA India

 NAVRATRI PUJA October 2006 Los Angeles U.S.A. My dad was one of the musicians present and so told me some amazing stories about it. It was Gandhiji's birthday that day, so they presented the National Anthem of India, and soon following some bhajans to the Devi. During the bhajan Ma Teri Jai Ho, Mother actually sang the ENTIRE song! Sadhana didi was in tears, and everyone's jaw was dropped in disbelief. I was told that when Mother sang, the vibrations in the room were almost electric, everyone could feel the energy coming from Her. It was such joyful news and I can only imagine what it must have been like to witness. If I can find video of this l'll post a link here immediately, but I am not sure when it would be available, or if anyone actually got it on tape. Again just to keep everyone updated on what's going on here. In the past 2 weeks or so, there have been small daily pujas to Mother for Navaratri, where oti is presented and occaisionally some bhajans. In order to keep it small and simple, the whole collective doesn't attend the pujas but I am just going to tell what I have heard from my parents and other aunties and uncles. During the 6th day of Navaratri, at 1:30 in the morning, Mother Herself was saying repeatedly "I am the Devi, I am the Devi." When the ladies went up to offer oti, they could only reply, "Shri Mataji, you are the Devi, you are Mahadevi and please protect us." Everyone was amazed to hear Mother speak those words, everybody in the room felt the power of them. A couple nights ago, on Dussehara, the 10th day of Navaratri (Monday night) a few yogis were asked to Mother's house to present some bhajans. All my love, Sulu (Internet Version)

 Public Program - Follow Up to VIP Conference New York, USA, 16.6.1999 the meaning of it. But in actual I've seen this Kundalini Yoga business is terrible. Because people have suffered so much, So it's something very different, I don't know what. they do in the name of Kundalini Yoga. Q. Is there a healing energy that will come of the meditation tonight? SHRI MATAJI: Yes. First of all one must know, what is this energy is. You must understand, and it heals people, no doubt, it does heal. First it will heal you and then it will heal others also. No doubt about it. It Q: Do you believe that the Kundalini is the same life-force energy that the Chinese called Chi, that this energy is part of us, part of the world that we can access in this way and also through things like Chi-Gong and Tai-Chi, is it the same force? does. Q: what is the connection if any of Sahaja Yoga and Reiki or are they parallel with one anoiher? SHRI MATAJI: Ya,ya. It's true. But you see it is, it has something to do with that, and that is what is our ego and super-ego. The Chinese, what they have written, it's correct. But Chinese also don't know who is Lao- SHRI MATAJI: I don't want to criticize anything, only thing you should see, all these things, what have you gained.... First question, what have you gained by doing anything? Have you got self-realization? Have you got the knowledge of the Divine? Have you felt the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost? Just like that. As a Mother I would say what did you get out of it? There are so many in the market, so many. I would ask you this question. Child, what did you get? There's no end to such things. Tse, can you imagine? Lao-Tse is the man who talked about this thing, He's the one who told them about Kundalini and they don't know who is Lao-Tse. Especially in America, I don't know what sort of Chinese live here. It's such a great source of knowledge, and what they have said is a perfect thing. But everything gets integrated in Sahaja Yoga. All the knowledge, all the scriptures, everything gets integrated. Absolutely integrated because out of light you see the truth in all of them. There is truth in everything, there is truth in every religion... Q: Does the Kundalini Yoga that you teach has anything to do with Tantra Yoga? SHRI MATA JI: You see, the name is Kundalini Yoga but it has nothing to do with Kundalini, I must tell you. So, Sahaja Yoga and Kundalini Yoga is the same if you see "Internet Version

 The Path of Ascent from illusions. Keep me in reality. Take away the sheen of superficiality. Let me enjoy your Feet in my heart. Let me see your Feet in my heart." "Whatever you do, it should please Me is one of the ways. It should please Me. That's one of the signs. So how should we do it? Put Me in your heart. Just try to put Me in your heart. It's very simple. I'm before you now. I am in Only such people even the Mahavishnu, Mahesha have done that. Don't you think you have to do it? person. So humble down yourself. Humble I was trying to give Realization to one I said that "You down yourself in your heart. Humble down in your heart. Enjoy your humility. Enjoy your virtues. The greatest virtue of a Sahaja Yogi is humility. of my relations just today and don't close your eyes." He said, "No. Il'm not looking at your face because, when I see you, I feel you are my aunt, but I'm just looking at your Feet here so that I shouldn't feel any more that Now so many things you have seen to convince you, but in no way can it be any kind of subjection because what subjection can you give Me? Think of that. When every subjection is a biessing, what subjection you are giving? you are any more my aunt. You are very great and your face is the one that puts me into illusions." He could see. It's a Mahamaya. He Every feeling in the heart is a said, "Only at your Feet I grow and through your Feet only I can get over this barrier, this feeling." blessing. Just now you feel it and you feel the joy in your heart. Then what is your subjection about what? I can understand people who have just newly come or are good for nothing, but you are not on the periphery. But some of them do go into periphery in no time. You give them some work firish. If I am sweet to someone- finished. If I see, someone-finished. I mean this is too much. I can't even be nice to you. In the same way, I mean I know I am a Mahamaya. I know I am. I had to be. But you have to put My Feet into your heart. Just my Feet into your heart because photo fades. Everything might be an illusion. Might be. By seeing my face, you do not get over your barriers. To say, "I must see Mother, I must do this, Mother must come to my house, She must have food at my place, she must visit my home - all this is so stupid. I cannot understand what's the matter with these If you do any mistakes, all right, then you feel - then you get your left Vishuddhi. You've done your mistake. "Oh look, finished." You love Me. Maybe there is something wrong in the love or maybe something has happened. it doesn't matter. people. "Mother, please come in my heart. Let me clean my heart so that You are there. Put your Feet into my heart. Let your Feet be worshipped in my heart. Let me not be in delusion. Take me away "Now I'm going to be cautious. I'm not going to make any mistakes. How could I do this mistake? Because I was not fully in love. If I loved something I would not have done such a mistake."

 - 2007 12 Issue: 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze develop that awe, your Ekadasha Rudra will disappear. Ekadasha Rudra will disappear. Just think of the awe. All right, so develop your love. No, you will do "I feel guilty" because I have done such a thing. So you miss this and that both, so your mistake becomes a barrier again. See the science and the joy and the joy of the awe. It's deep, very deep like a sea. Sea, on superficial level, is very turbulent, but inside it is silent, absolutely Don't feel guilty about it. We have to progress further. Forget the past, forget the past, forget the past. You have to go further. You have to be serious people. When we talk, we have to talk that dignity of that awe. silent. Feel that depth. Without awe, you cannot go down." That's very important and once you A Fact (An Experience) It was 5 p.m. when I noticed that the petrol of my scooter was in reserve on 5th May 80 and I had to reach Gandhi Bhawan at 6 p.m. to attend the 'SAHASRARA' function arranged by Sahaja Ybgis of Delhi with my child who was waiting for me at home. this thought came in my mind, a sikh youth stopped his scooter by my side since the traffic line was not cleared. I was suddenly prompted to ask him if the petrol was available in the city. He promptly pointed out to the petrol pump next to Ambedkar Stadium and advised me to go there. The distance that I had to travel was In the swing of mind, though there quite far off and the petrol was not sufficient for the purpose. So hurridely I reached petrol pump near Cdeon cinema just to hear that there was no stock of petrol. On my way home, at Asaf Ali Road petrol pump also I could not get petrol. In past also for few days there was shortage of petrol in the city due to the disturbances in Assam and the petrol was available only on the selected pumps. I, therefore, lost the hope of reaching in time for the function. was hardly anyhope, I reached the petrol pump and was surprised to see that the petrol was available there. I hurriediy purchased the petrol and reached Gandhi Bhawan in time to attend the function with the child. My above experience convinced me further that H.H. Mataji Nirmala Devi is always there with us to help all the Sahaja Yogis whenever we remember Her. Sakshat Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi By this time I had reached Delhi Gate and while awaiting for the green signal from the traffic police, I was feeling in my heart that unless the divine help comes to me from the Mother, H.H. Mataji Nirmala Devi, I shall not be able to attend the function. No sooner nато патаha. Gopal Patankar New Delhi. 23-5-80. (from archives)

 Advice Given by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 22nd March 1977 Sahaj Yoga is not a thing to the taken that frivolously. It works in you in no time. Effortlessly. After Realisation, for all Human-Beings, it is necessary to understnad the complete working of the Kundalini and the Vibrations. You must know be that. You will work it out very well. Now hwould like you to ask Me questions. Because when I go away, I don't want the halfhearted people to ask you questions because when the questions start, the Murmuring Souls will try to bring out people, who are as yet halfbacked and then they will fizzle out. So you have to completely mature into Sahaj Yoga. Do not listen to any body because he said so. You ask him what is his authority. Does he know anything about Kundalini, how many people he has given realization to? Then you keep quite, You have seen Kundalini moving, you have seen its Pulsation. You have felt the Vibrations. Any-body can talk against Sahaj-Yoga. It is very easy. Any Dick, Tom, Harry can say. Very easy to criticize anything. But if you are a serious people, then you must understand that you have felt the Vibrations. They are there and that you are going to proceed further. It is for your own good and for your own asking you should get it. If there are certain problems on your Chakras, they must be corrected. So what is the question now? the complete Science of it. What is the use of the money if you do not know how to spend it or use it? So the best thing is to get it. If you are sick, and cured by Sahaj-Yoga, you will find that you will become so much healthier and better. You will be enriched much more. If you do not take to Sahaja yoga, gradually you will find that your Vibrations are lost after some time be-cause God doesn't want to waste His Vibrations on people who do not want to give it to others. There are some people who will give explanations, that we have got families, how are we to give up? I have also family, you know I have Grand Children also. This is the only good thing you can do without paying a single pie. You have got it without paying a single pie; and you have to distribute it without taking a single pie, and you have to enjoy it. You can enjoy it only if you can give. You have to learn all these things and by God's grace, here are at least Q. fifty percent people who can tell you about Kundalini, quite well. They are going to work out with you, they are going to tell you about this. Nothing to feel bad, because once you master the Kundalini, you will just become the same. So there is nothing to feel superior or inferior about it. Only thing is that to-day you have jumped into the sea and learnt how to swim, and they have learnt it long time back. Gradually you will pick up very fast. It is only your simplicity and earnestness to Why god has created this Ego and Super-Ego within us ? From our stomach, the Med, the fat, rises into our Brain, passing through all these centres, evolving to be the Cells of the Brain, Even brain is the Med, fat cells, what you call as Mendu. So for the Med to become the Mendu, it has to evolve, to achieve a certain amount of changes of Awareness, of Human-Awareness. The Human brain is the most Precious one Ans.

 - 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 3 & 4 14 constantly changing and then you reach a position where you say that this is the position. All this is done by a Human Brain. So a Human Brain is the most coveted thing, most Evolved thing, and with the brain heart also. Human Heart also has to be co-related with the brain. So both the things Evolve. Our stomachs are evolved very well. Actually our stomachs are much more subtle and they cannot take gross things, we require. very fine and sofisticated things for digestion. because it has a dimension, which animals do not have; a Mental Dimesion you can say. an Emotional Dimension, His physical Dimension also has another Dimension. We can say that on every Dimension we have four sides. Emotionally, we understand love, we understand how to receive, how to reciprocate. We understand beauty, we understand poetry, we understand sweet gestures. We can creat these things also. On the Mental level our dimension has a Fourth dimension, I should say, by which we creat things. Animals cannot create. We can create. On the Physical side also we have a special advantage, that we have lifted our heads up. Our hands act in a different way than our feet. We have a better capacity to hold things. Not only that, but also we can use this body to lift much heavier things that are here. For instance we can create a Crane and lift the things. So we have also got a power by which we can have Mastry over the Matter. This is not among the animals. So we have already a higher Dimension which is reached in our brain. How such a beautiful Human brain is Created! At this stage to protect this Brain, you require a hard covering. So God has created this system by which you get completely covered. By creating the Ego and Super-Ego, which is just to say a by- product of your activities. Any activity a Human being does has a reaction. For instance, if you say NO to something, it has a reaction, it creats his Ego. If he accepts something he creats a Super-Ego. This is also done, because the Brain of the Man is made Triangular and Prismatic in nature. It is Prism like Brain. In this Prism of this Brain, when the Rays of God's divine Power flows in, it goes into refraction inta different angles, and by the principle of the Parallelogram Of Forces, part of it escapes outside this side and part from this side. One side the man can think of the future and of the past but the animals do not think of these things. So that is how our Brain is specially made one. It is protected by creating the Ego and Super-Ego completely by which our Talu, where the Fontanel bone is covered; you are separated from the all Pervading Power, from which you get your independence, and, freedom, to act as you like, to use your brain as you like to lear%3B because the Evolution, if it has to go any further, this is the Transition period, when So at this stage of Human Evolution, when man has reached this stage, we should say that it is still in a transitional stage3B little more he has to jump and he becomes that for which he has been Created. So in this transition it is necessary to Protect that Brain very carefully one purpose, secondly to make this Brain independent of the will of God and to make it used by itself, so that it develops another dimension of Wisdom, by faultering, by making mistakes, by correcting, by failing, by going into extremes. Man starts coming in the Center and understands, that this is the position. Now see in our country the Political views. Since the British time the Political scene is

 Issue: 3 & 4 - 2007 15 The Divine Cool Breeze Mokshdayini. No doubt about it. If that is my nature, than I will do it. If the Nature of the Sun is to give you Rays of the Sun, it will give. It is not difficult, because that is the nature of the Sun. If it is the nature of the human being to see things and colours, he will see it. What is so great about it, what is to be proud about its. I mean I don't understand, that if You are That, then You are That. What is there to be higher or lower? I can't just understand. This is all because of the Human Ego, that a man has valuations. He thinks this is higher, that is lower, In a way, Human-Beings are higher than animals. And Human-Beings are much higher than Gods; and Much Higher than God almighty sometimes, because he has to beg you to come out to Sahaja-Yoga. Unless and until you are freely accepting Sahaja-Yoga, it does not work out. You have to be absolutely free. I cannot, entice you,I cannot hypnotise you, I cannot do any thing. It has to be there. And that is why it works like That. Why should you feel that there is something wrong in it? It has worked with so many people. So many people have felt it. You will also feel it. It is your Due, so you are feeling it. And supposing there is something wrong with the seed or something wrong with the flower, We will correct it also. It may take two days more. Doesn't matter. It is not something extraordinary for me. Yes it is, in a way, because in all my previous lives I have not done it. So I feel very happy. For example, when you are a leaf, you cannot do the things of a flower. when you are root, bee cannot come to you at all. But when you are a flower, then a Bee can come and do it. What is so much surprising about it? Because it has been Promised so many times, It has been said, even Vivekananda has said, that Mother will come and She will do the Job. He has also said that Buddha is you have to try. We can say like this; for simile, because simile should not be drawn too far. Suppose I prepare one instrument: After preparing it I first try it on a small cell. And then I put it to the mains. In the same way first it is tried seperately, individually with an articulation. The other day I gave a simile of an egg. An egg is created by articulating it completely protected, till it reaches the complete stage of its re-birth, the Dwija, then only the mother bird pierces the egg and there is a re-birth of the chick. In the same way you are made, protected, so that you are made ready, Ultimately you reach a stage, where you are just ready to jump into another state, and it happens. In the incubators also, if you put these eggs, with the warmth, warmth is the love, and with that they grow, and at a point all of them.hatch out. Of course not at the same time, but say within a couple of days. It is in the same manner that the Sahaj Yoga is working out to-day. That you are just ready to have it. You had a very great past, you have been seeking, you have been going round, and you have no idea as what you had been doing. To-day you are wearing ordinary dresses, like ordinary people, and to-day you are here for a lecture with Me, and at this time this happens. This is a greatest miracle for some people, but for Me it is just a happening. It has to HAPPEN at this time. We see lots of flowers turning into fruits, but we don't call it a miracle. Because we have taken it for granted. So many of these miracles we have taken for granted. Now it has to happen to Human-Beings. And when it HAPPENS, it HAPPENS LIKE THAT!- Naturally, you think that for Me it is a child's play. Because that is My Job, to give you Moksha. I am a

 16 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 3 & 4 2007 just a part, a little drop. He has said all these things. When you quote Vivekananda, read Him properly. He has also said, I cannot do anything, Mother is going to do. Everybody is putting on that Mother. Shankaracharya Many people know. Gagangad Maharaj said Mother will come. In the Bible, if you read John's revelation, that a woman will come and She will give Rebirth, She will be protecting the Child", all these things are there. And now when the Mother comes, you say "Why are you the Mother'? Now the Mother must come with a horn or what should She do? But I am the Mother, and I have to do the job. Now you start finding thing? Why has She given you? What have faults with Me. So what to do with you people? After all what should I have? Whatever I have thought proper, I have What else do you want Me to have? If Lord Ganesha has a trunk of an Elephant, it has a meaning. And if somebody has something things. It is on the Tape. There is another else, it has a meaning. We say that Surabhi, the first cow which appeared in the Vrindavana, in the VAIKUNTHA stage. She appeared, and all the Gods were inside Her. We accept a cow but we do not accept a Human-Being, who has got these Powers. It's all right. Don't accept. Not that you should flately accept Me because once I say it, then there are many matajis all over now. But what I am saying is that you should feel the Vibrations yourself, you should take them, and if you see the Kundalini rising then that is the first sign. If you see the Kundalini rising, you should. When I went to Ambernath, there was one Janardan Maharaj. He had come because he had heard about Me. He came just to test me, or whatever it is. So he was siting near the stage, the people told Me that he may not accept you Mataji. I said if he is a Realized Soul, he may. When I just went inside and went to the stage, he just fell flat on My feet. thing. How are you going to behave yourself, Then he told Me, I saw everybody's or you are going to behave in a manner, that Kundalini rising, as soon as You stepped is going to be detrimental to your inside. I could see. They can see also. He saw everybody's Kundalini rising. As soon as I came in they would not, but the Kundalini rose, to wish you welcome. So they know. know. He told many people, I have not met him. He has told many people about Me. When I went to see him, he talked to ME as he would talk to an Incarnation. He did not talk to me as he would talk to Mrs. C. P. Srivastav. He did not. They have taped all that he has said about Me. He asked the fellows, 'Why Mataji has given you all this you done? How many of you are going to give their lives to Her? She has given you this precious thing. You cannot part with one farthing. What are you going to do for Her? He scolded all of them. He said all these person, his name is Prahlad Brahamchari. He is from Calicut. He went to America, He told people about Me. They now know about Me. He told them that She has come now, and there is nothing to worry. but you people are such egoistical that you cannot bear to hear such things about anyone. That is the truth. You are too egoistical. There is a proverb, 'empty vessel makes too much sound.' It is a sign of emptiness. Those people are telling me, even that Nagnath Baba from Ambernath said 'MATAJI they can never accept you. They have never accepted any Incarnation uptil now, and they are not going to accept You. Try Your level best. The Gangangiri Maharaj says 'For twelve years you try. If they are all right, then I will come down'. They are all afraid of Human-Beings. Really it is true. There are like that. Three very old people came many to see me in Haridwar. They said the same

 - 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 3 & 4 17 progressing Spiritual life, What are you going to do? It is for you to decide. there, a sentence here, will come down. I said now leave it now, if you want your Realization then come along and have it. And the greatest problem is that all this is love, that is just a form of love, it is nothing but Love which expands, gives you Vibrations, again receives back, it goes in a parabola like that which you call a Pradakshina of a Shakti. What is Shakti? Shakti is a Parabola. And now Einstein is If you have read a few books, you cannot settle ME in those books, You see there is Yoga Shastra, Yesterday, Justice Vaidya told you that there is Satvik Yoga- shastra etc. Yoga Shastra for ME! What is it? Did Rama read any books or Krishna read any books, that I am going to read any books? You see this is for people, who have know Everything So why should I worry about such things? I have to just pull you out. That's all. I know My job. A person who knows the job does not have to do all this. And it comes to this that I have to talking about a parabola. We have a parabola long time back here. We know it was Shakti. You can explain this in your science and everything. In this life I have learnt English Language, a little of science and a little of Psychology and all that. These psychologists are so onesided people. Yoga- Shastrakar are onesided people. They do not match each other. I am telling you the basic principle between the two. Both are human efforts, I am a different person. Now what should I do if I am like that? How can I become like you? If I know how to come up why should I become a little baby and say I must crawl up gradually. to climb up, I tell you all this. You yourself should realise that Mataji is doing like that just by Her Chitta. I will tell you about a case. Yesterday they told me about one of our Sahajyogi's brother, who drinks too much and he is in Goa. What can we do that he should come here? He came to-day. He came just like that. It is just my attention. If you put anything to my attention, it works. I don't have to bother. It is like a Human being lifting anything. Now an ant will say how did you lift it, it is possible for a Human being to lift like this, and for me it is easy to lift your Kundalini and to do the miscellaneous things like that, because it is my attention, CHITTA, my attntion itself is Anand in itself, is Bliss itself, is a knowledge. I don't need any intelligence or anything because I know everything. In my head there is a library. You have read one book, that fellow has found something from somewhere, now how am I to tell you how this mad man has found out something from somewhere and how did he find in darkness what did he find. He must I am an old Woman Of Thousands Of Years! So know everything. You are still a baby. How. can I become like you? So to-day is the day I thought of telling you about it; so that you just don't worry about things how I do it. I really do things, I cure people. Now here is the gentleman, a Heart patient, ask him. Even before I met him, he got quite cured and I cured him. There are so many people here who will say that. Once a Frenchman asked me a question about the Western life. I did not answer it at that time. I started saying something else. So the boy Rajesh, who brought him to me, said, 'You see MATAJI has not answered your question. She has recorded it, and it will act! Because in his case it has acted. have found somebody's leg and thought it must be somebody's hand, Now for a person like me, it is so difficult to go to every person, any body who has read a book

 18 2007 Issue: 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze So, the God; whatever, he has done Kabira, and Hiranya Sanhita and all your Yogas. I am going to prove it to you. Have you ever seen Kundalini pulsating before?1 will show you the pulsation of a Kundalini. You have never heard before, that on the is for your good. He has given Ego and Superego, not to get spoiled and finished. You cannot blame God for that. Supposing God has given you light, to go that way. He has told you to take an independent light to fingers the Vibrations are coming. But you find out that. And if you start burning with that light, what can the God do? It is not God's mistake! Many people think that this Ego is horried. Ego you must have. You have not to fight with your Ego. Only thing is that your Ego should become one with that of God. That's all. Its a very simple thing. If you just become One with that God; now supposing this has an Ego. How can I talk with this? I will say something, this will say something. But if it has no Ego, as his ego Then we never said 'why do we go to the has become one with my saying, then it carries my voice, carries my sayings, everything it is so simple. It is very simple searching inside for you. And I have found it thing but you cannot do it. Is the point. So I am here. Once you are awakened once your light has come, then you can do it also. Why Not? I have told Gangangad Maharaj, when he started telling me, why he cannot give realisation to people like this. I have done so much and I have undergone so much! How these people are doing it? These people will become very Egoistical. I said, "They will not' He said 'how do you know?'I said that they are made after the Pattern of Shri Ganesh. Same powers they will have. Even with the finger moving, My Sons can give Realisation, they can. Who are you to challenge and ask Me? He kept quite. He said, You are the Mother. Do what you please. have not only felt it, but can diagnose a person. You can tell a person, what he is suffering from and cure him also, Now you will say' how is it possible? Somebody says that ten thousand years before, we have never heard a thing like this. Every thing must happen ten thousand years before? Then why are we proceeding further? Better go back. What an argument is this? After- all we have discovered going to the Moon. Moon? 'You see it is a simple question. But you have to know that somebody is out. I have visited all these Gurus. All these Rakshasas. All of them, very nicely befooling them. I tried to find out what they are upto! Now I also know their tricks. I know what they have done to you and that is why I can correct it. I have studied all the permutations and combinations and everything. Everything of Kundalini, of whatever is possible. It is not so simple with the Human beings. They can be easily persuaded, they can be enticed, they can be hypnotised. I cannot be hypnotised. But you can. Anybody can hypnotised you. I have seen thousands of people getting hypnotised, taking out their clothes, dancing, jumping. I have seen some people, making faces like that. All sorts of things can be done. The hypnosis is so much that when they come before me, they, also start doing that. Because they are used to it. It is like Dr. Jekyl and Mr. Hyde, who list. So it is wise for you to understand that I know all these things, and I will tell you everything, I have got it for you specially, I know all the It is a fantastic thing; that is why it is difficult for the people to understand. But anything like this has to be fantastic. And we have to prove the existence of God. We have to prove that He exists, and He works. All those people, talks about Nanaka,

 - 2007 19 Issue: 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze theoretical ; if he comes to the programme, or somebady goes to him and show how to use his hands, he will become a master of it. Because as it is he has knowledge, it will fit into it. As if the Ganges will flow into all the canals that have been made to receive permutations all combinations, and you don't have to do any research about it. No money is needed to be spent. Still, you see, there are people with me for the last seven years, and still they say that Mother every time You say something, we had to learn. This is this, this is that, this combination, that combination. the water; and it will go and settle into it. Perfectly. Your reading is not going to be wasted, but you will know what is right and what is wrong. Now if there is another Question, you can ask. I have already taken quite a long time for one question, as it was a very important question. Even five lives will not be sufficient for you to know, a little bit about this knowledge. So why worry about this research and this, and that? Just listen to Me and use your hands and learn and discover for yourself that this is the Truth. And don't listen to everyone, third person coming round the corner. As if you have no brains at all. So you must not listen to every one. You are special people. By God's Grace you have got Vibrations. It is a very big thing. Those who haven't got will also get it, I would request you, that you have cleared out now, after Realization, and also later on, whenever you are tired, it is better, that is a bath for you. Every-day, you do that treatment for yourself. It cleans yourself, because you gather. I do not gather. hand towards the photograph first and take Nothing happens to Me; but it happens to you. So you must have a bath in the night; take out all the Problems in that water, and throw it away. Water with salt, is a SEA which takes away all the problems. There are so many other ways you keep your eyes open towards the by which you can take out. Akasha, then Photograph and keep your hands like this, PRITHVI. We have people, they can tell you, they know. I have told them that five six people should come here. We have a braintrust. They will be all sitting down over there. So next time when you come, and if you have any problem, you can ask them. Now may be you are learned, but you can learn from them. Even persons like Justice Vaidya told Me that' I must know more about Sahaj Yoga. It is more practical than give you whatever you want. You can ask Q. What is Bath? How to ake it? (Foot Soak) Ans. It is a simple method. You put My Photograph in a proper place. Put a light before it. Even a candle will do. Put both the hands towards the Photograph. Sit in the water, with a little salt. The water should be a little warm. You will be amazed that the whole trouble will go away in the water. Then you throw away the water in the W.C. Every body can do it. Now if you have trouble at Vishudhi Chakra, put your right out the left hand. Supposing you find the Vibrations are flowing into it, then you put left hand towards the Photograph, and the right hand outside. You will be surprised that the whole thing will be cleared out. And if stretched and with open palms, or sometimes towards the Akasha, you will be surprised that your eyes are very much improved with this. Mother Earth also; if you put your head on the Mother Earth, just touch her with your forehead and say' Mother for- give me for touching you with my feet. She is your Grandmother; you ask for any thing and you will get it. They are all waiting to

 Issue; 3 & 4 - 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze 20 into. And when I put My finger into it,I have found that My Vibrations can turn round. Even when I blow out air from my mouth, those who are realised can feel in on their Sahasrara. It is a Fact. So why should it look so funny to people? What is the next Question? the help of Hanumana, you can ask the help of Ganesha. The other day the Newspaper people told Me, the two disciples of Mine who are the correspondents, were going somewhere, and they had My Photograph with them. They said that it was so amazing that our driver just bumped into a truck going ahead of us. We said that we are all finished, and we have closed our eyes. When we opened our eyes, the truck was ahead and we were there. We did not know Q. If you see all the Six Chakras; near each one there exists some or the other indocrime Glands. What relation these Chakras have with the glands? how we were saved! Even the driver had closed his eyes. We didn't know how the truck went that side and how we were here! So accidents are avoided, and people have seen that they have good health and can live long, Everything is there. Afterall we have jumped into the Kingdom of God. Only thing is to keep your seats all right for the time-being. Then the whole thing is to be lifted up, into Satya-Yuga. Already Satya- Yuga has started. . Indocrime Glands are controlled by the Chakras also. For example, we can say Mooladhara Chakra controls the Prostrat like Ans. that. Even Agnya Chakra controls Pitutory and Pineal, both of them. That is how it controls the Ego and Super-Ego. So it has a controlling effect an that, very much. They are the gross agents for that. You see for example, to control all the Nature. God has fixed up all the stars. Major Nine stars are there. These are placed there to control the Universe and everything. It is controlled through those points. It also effects our physical and material life. My Photo has the Vibrations. It is a Fact. Also there are many things that have Vibrations. Even this statue has Vibrations. But not so much as they are for Me. First of all I am a living Being, and another thing is that their proportions may be wrong. They are created by the Human-Beings, by their Q. Respected Mataji, pleas strengthen me in knowledge and show me more clearly the way. imaginations. But these SWAYAMBHU i) Lingas, all of them have got it. For example, What are these Vibrations ? (Physiologically, Scientifically, and Spiritually.) supposing you go to, say, this Ranjangaon, Ganesh, it has complete Vibrations. Because these are special statues come out ii) of the Mother Earth. Mother Earth throws Where these Vibrations come from? From You, Cosmos or Atmosphere? What way do the Vibrations benifit us? out. Mother Earth thinks She creates these things. She throws these things. And they ii) What are the Do's and Don'ts of give Vibrations. So you take Vibrations from them also. But My photograph is the photograph of Reality. Another thing is that whatever I speak, because I am That, it is Pranava flowing. It is actually Pranava. My every talk, everything is Mantra going Sahaj-Yoga? Very Good Question. Ans. First question is about what are these Vibrations? I told you yesterday, that

 - 2007 21 Issue: 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze When you become Subtle, you become like a radio, you start receiving it. Now how will you know what is correct and what is incorrect? You ask the Subtle, and the Subtle answers you, and you get the answers on your hand. it is like this. So these are the Vibrations, which you receive, from the All-Pervading power. And the All-Pervading Power is Emitted out, and you receive it from ME, of the All-Pervading. It is just the same, from everywhere. These are the Vibrations. in our heart, there is a flicker of light, which is burning all the time, which is Atma; which is the reflection of Paramatma in our heart. In short I will tell you what happens when the Kundalini rises. She opens the Brahama Randhra. And there is the Seat of the Sadashiva, the Pitha. The Pitha is here at Sahasrara, but Sadashiva is in the Heart, reflected as Atma. Pitha is created because it receives the Subtle Energy which is ll Pervading, The Gross, Inside all the Pervading; e.g. This mike collects my voice. Voice is a subtle energy, which is collected through this, and if you have a radio it will catch them. The Self-realization, which is the very subtle point, you try to understand now. That it is so far an un-conscious for you. Your Atma is in the un-conscious, it is not in the Awareness. It is in the Achetan. It is in your un-conscious. You are not yet Aware about it. But once you are Realized, it starts flowing into your Awareness, means that you start feeling into your central Nervous System, because your nervous system is your Chetana. Is your Awareness. Human awareness. Human awareness is nothing else but the Central Nervous System. But this central nervous system starts Feeling now. The Vibrations, the Light of the Atma through it So that it tells us why it is known as Samadhi. Samadhi means the Un-Conscious. When the Un-Conscious becomes the Conscious, it is called The Samadhi. In the same way Pithas are in the brain, and Pitha of Sadashiva is higher up here, which is opened out, so that the Subtle, the Sukshama, gross passes into our heart, through a very Subtle channel. Just like a gas-light, it has a flicker and when the Gas opens out the Prakash occurs. Now the Vibrations are that Prakash going through us. These Vibrations start flowing through us. Now what do I do? You will say 'Mataji what do you do?' I do nothing but I just try to give you that force, which is the, you can say, Gas Power. That is the Gas-Power. Because the Kundalini knows when I am before you. She rises, She opens out, and It starts flowing. It is flowing through Me through out. But unless you are Subtle, you cannot feel it. you can say, that I am the Finite in the Infinite. Or you can say the Infinite in the Finite. I am both. So the Energy that is emitted into all the Subtle Energy is passing through Me. Is The Virat. From the Virat, the whole thing is passing. It is going into the All-Pervading. It is all Pervading. Everybody, everywhere it is going. Even it is in a Cell, in a Carbon atom it is there, in all atoms it is there. It is the Subtle Energy. That is Emitted through Me. It is not Besudhavsthal, It means that you become aware of the unconscious. Not only that, but first you become Nirvichar, the Nirvikalpa, and then a complete Self- realization. So Samadhi, is a confusing word. Samadhi Just means an Universal Un-Conscious. Yesterday Justice Vaidya told you that there are three types of sadhanas, Satvik, Rajasik, and Tamasik. Tamasik goes to the left hand side, leads it to the Sub- Conscious, collective Sub-Conscious,

 - 2007 22 Issue: 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze connected to the Libido on the left hand side, and Right side is the Supra-Conscious, connected with the Pingala Nadi, which is the Will-Power as you call it, goes to the collective Supra Conscious. Goddesses and Ganas are on this side. and all those who fall into that go to the Hell. But the Center is the Super-Conscious. For the Sushumna, the Human-Being rises above the Super-Conscious. They gradually start becoming more and more Aware. They have the same body. For Example, if you look at the cell of the brain, it is the same as the cell of a fat. But there is a difference. So the difference starts taking place and by the time, you open out from here, then there is even a greater dimension, to that cell. Your Brain, that it starts receiving the Vibrations and can understand it. Then in your Nirvikalpa stage, you get another dimension, by which you have the Know-Abouts of your knowledge. The last is the Self-Realization, where you just enjoy. Complete Enjoyment. No problems. You do not catch, nothing happens. I would say our Vaidya Sahib is very much near Self-Realization. The way he got his Self-Realization is very remarkable. All right Accepted? This is the Vital Force of Life. It gives you a complete balance. It corrects your physical being. It corrects your Mental being. It corrects your emotional being, It gives you a complete Spiritual oneness with God. It integrates you completely. As far as I am concerned, I have no Pashchatap. I don't understand what is Pashchatap. I don't understand what is Temptation? I don't understand these things because I am completely One with Myself. Every finger I move, every hand I move, it has a meaning. It is done without thinking, but there is a big thought behind it. I say 'HAN' Han means there is a formation of circle which works. It is difficult to explain, as my mechanism is different from yours, so I can't explain what I do, You don't have those Mechanics within you. But it is like that. When I say, Hin? Hun, Han, Hin, all these are tremendous words. They create a kind of a force; a kind of a formation in which it gulfs all the bad things, all the Rakshasas and all that, and you can pull them out also. Now I gave in a Mataka, my breath. It is a Pranava itself complete. That Pranava, in the night, when they will be sleeping will come out, and take out all the bad things in you gradually, and bind them, and put them inside. You have seen many mad people are cured like that. God, The next question is about the being Physiologically, you can feel on your hands, on your fingers. Scientifically you can say that the Para-Sytnpathatic gets activated You get the control of the Parasympathatic, you jump into the Un-conscious, the Universal Unconscious. I have already told you the Spiritual aspects of these Vibrations. Physiological? Vibrations Q. What are the Don'ts and do's for Sahaj- Yogis? Ans. First and foremost thing is that a Sahaja-Yogi cannot smoke or drink. One, absolutely hundred precent sure. Because if you drink or smoke, you will find after sometime. either you will loose your Regarding the second part of the Question, Where these Vibrations are coming from; You, Cosmos, or Atmosphere? Vibrations, or you will start vomiting. You cannot smoke. If you smoke, your Vishudhi will be caught. If you drink, your Manipur The Vibrations come from everywhere, I am the emitting Force.

 - 2007 Issue: 3 & 4 23 The Divine Cool Breeze them. Make them loving. Make a nice society. Every one of you should be the carrier of Love of your Mother. If you are a Sahaj-Yogi, and if you change and transform in your behaviour, naturally Sahaj-Yoga will have its own reputation, and everybody will start taking to Sahaj-Yoga. You cannot earn any money from Sahaj-Yoga. will be caught, and whenever you put your hand towards my Photograph, your Nabhi- Chakra will be burning. Many people have done it without any difficulty. They do not have any difficulty. They just give up. So this is one of the most important thing that you have to gradually give up. You just take my Name and it will work it out. Secondly Don't fast. When Mother is there you have not the fast. Only fast on Narak' Chaturdashi. That's all. If you don't feel like eating, eat something else. But don't keep your stomach empty. You can drink fruit juice, or milk or whatever you like. These are certain things about the food and stomach, Nabhi-Chakra. Do not have Sahaj-Yogis for business partnership. Do not use Sahaj-Yoga for making money. You have to be generous people. You have to be honest. There are Ten Commandments as Next the Eyes; are the very important things, where you have to be very careful not to move your eyes very fast anywhere, try to keep your eyes steady, and mostly on the Mother Earth. You have heard about Laxamana. He never saw the face of they say, and be satisfied in your heart. You have to lead a chaste life, and see chaste things. Your priorities will change. You friends will change, You will not like dirty jokes. You will just change, and run away from them. I have seen these foreigners now. They say that they just cannot tolerate those things now. Once upon a time whatever they used to tolerate and enjoy also; they cannot tolerate it now. Because you have become sensitive now. You have to be decent people. Sitaji. Önly saw Her feet. How can that be? He was always with them. So you can imagine what should be the position. For complete fourteen years, he has to lead a Brahmachari life. She was like his mother. He knew that She was Adishakti. But he just saw Her feet. That should be our case. We should lead a sanctified married life. Create a nest of family. A proper family house. Try to adopt, comprise, adjust. Make your wife realise, make your husband Realise, and bring peace in the family; because there are many great souls who want to take birth. Those who got married like this, they all got realised children. So you must try to get a family life, a proper family, a proper relationship. Give service to your parents, don't find faults with your parents and try to be kind to them, and try to be good in the family. Don't spoil the children, also correct Don't be misers at all. All miserly people are against Sahaj-Yoga, and if miserly people come I give them troubles. If you are miserly, you get lots of troubles. So don't get miserly. I am telling you, Don't be too talkative also. If you become too talkative, and troublesome,I can stop your talking. If you don't talk at all; that is also not good. That means, don't go to extremes. May God bless you all. (Nirmala Yoga, 1983)

 THE CREATION OF LORD JESUS (11.04.1982) Ra-dha. Ra means energy, dha the one who sustains energy. In my last lectures, I've told you how Christ was created first in the heavens. In the Devi Bhagvat-if you read that-He was There are many aspects of Easter, created as Mahavishnu and it is mentioned one has to understand, but the most of all "why did He have to die and why was He resurrected?" This point I have not yet touched perhaps so clearly-that's the point I want to tell you today. It's only you people can understand the importance of the life of Christ. And when it is said that you have to very clearly that first He was created as an egg. It is written in this book, which perhaps was written 14,000 years back. It's a book that predicts about Christ and that is why people, in the West at Easter especially, offer an egg to each other as a friend. So, first the existence came on this earth as an get your realisation through Christ, it means egg that was Christ and part of it was kept in that state and the rest of it was used by that He had to pierce through the Agnya Chakra. He had to be there. If He had not created this gap in the gate, we could never have not realisation. That is why it is said the Holy Ghost, by Mahalakshmi, to create Christ out of it. In that ancient book He was called as Mahavishnu, means the greater form of Vishnu. But actually Vishnu is The Father and He is the Son created by the Holy Ghost. After my lecture, I would like, if you have the book, to read it out to them-the whole you are to pass through the gates of heaven only with the grace of Christ. Of course, that doesn't mean 'churches', it doesn't mean at all 'churches'. You have to understand as Sahaja Yogi that you have to pass through to Agnya Chakra. Ultimately that's the most text of how Christ was created and when difficult point where human being had to pass. Because at the Agnya Chakra your ego and superego are fully grown. At the human stage only this ego is developed. Now, how to overcome the ego was a point, He was created. He cried for His Father and He cried also on the cross once, and He cried for years and then Christ, in Mahavishnu state, was blessed by His Father who said your position will be placed higher that mine and you will be the "Adhara"-means the support-of the universe. See how from Mooladhara He becomes the and to overcome the ego Christ had to do this. When He was created in the begining as Shri Ganesha you know the story how He was created; that the "mala" (dross) from the body of Parvati was taken out because before Her marriage She had to cover Herself for Her bath with many scented 'Adhara'. This was all done at the heavenly stage 'vaikuntha' stage. You can say then, He was given birth by the Holy Ghost who was the Mother of Christ on this earth, who things, (paste) and it was taken out-all these things-andHer vibrations came out. And She created this Child just to protect Her chastity. Outside Her bathroom She put Him was nobody else but was the incarnation of Mahalakshmi - means She was Radha.

 Issue: 3 & 4 25 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze and you know the whole story about it. Now, there was a part of the element of the earth in that child- "prithvi-tattwa" was there. All other centres have, have got some elements in them, some elements, like prithvitattwa is there, earth element. Then you have got water element, and then you have got air element, and you come to this : it is the light elements, it's the light. And, at this point, at Agnya Chakra, He had to cross the last element, that was the light element, that the elements- to that existence which is Spirit. So the resurrection is where you Become, from your attention you jump into the attention of the Spirit, when you attention, when you become the Spirit. That is the happening which has happened to you also. But He became pure Spirit, pure feel your Brahma Tattwa, when He was resurrected and the Resurrection is a happening of the Divine Power which came from Mooladhara means He had to come out into the true form Chakra as just earth element, started growing. It took its birth from there, came up to Agnya Chakra, there Christ was created to pass through all the elements, ultimately to enter the Sahasrara to become a complete Brahma Tattwa. And this was a very difficult thing, was very experimental; and the experiment was a quite dangerous one. It could have failed because He had in Him that human element, the body element, of only the Divine Power, the Aumkara, the vibrations you can call it or the absolute-you call it the logos or something lik that, the first sound-Brahma. So He had to become the principle of Brahma. To become principle of Brahma, He had to get rid of all other elements in Him. So, the last was also the light element which He aiso had to crss through, So he had earth element in Him as He was of the mala, and all other elements within Him. But when it comes to the Agnya, which suffers. And He suffered, because this body element suffers-not the Spirit, the Spirit He had to give up all the elements, that He had to die the death of all these elements does not suffer, the body suffers. So, He had to suffer that body element and to get over it, to get out of it. And to get out of it, He had to have a tremendous courage. It that were within Him-to become complete, absolute, pure Spirit. What He did in subtle form works out in the gross form, and to do was such a difficult operation-without Him nobody could have achieved. He knew it was predestined, but it was one of the most difficult things to happen. that He had to die, and whatever died in Him was that little earth elements and other elements. And what came out of Him was Pure Spirit, was "Pure Spirit." That was resurrected, the Pure Spirit, the pure Brahma Tattwa which had formed the body of Christ RE wonder how many Christians know the significance of an egg, Now egg signifies a stage where you are, before realisation, When you are in your egg and this happening came. Christ has done what was predicted about Him. That He's a Saviour because He passed through that gate to take people from this bodily existence-means the one that depends on shell-that you are Mr. X, you are Mrs Y. But, when you mature fully inside, the bird is ready and that is the time you are hatched.

 2007 26 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 3 & 4 coming up. We are repeating the history again. They were so ego-oriented, they were so full of ego that to destory their ego somebody had to do this-to create a This is the time you get twice-born. So, the Resurrection of Christ signifies that, and that's why we give that egg to people, saying you are that, an egg, a reminder of that. And this egg can become a Spirit. And also it is written that it was an egg when He came first. He was created as an egg when He passage. By His death so many things are proved. That all those who crucified Him were stupid peopie, they were ego-oriented, they were blind, they could not see what He saw. They could not see what a genuine personality He was. They crucified Him. I mean, this is-the greatest stupidity, and they crucified Him. It was all known because these people were so stupid they would have only crucified Him. What else could they do? Because they couldn't bear, with their little came first, He was created as an egg-half of it remained as Shri Ganesha, and half of it became Mahavishnu. Then He came on this earth and He departed with all His elements and the pure vibrations formed His body. He remained there within all of you to be awakened and when the Kundalini takes your attention through that point there you also become the Spirit. That's why He said "I'm the gate, l'am the door"- because you can become Christ. That's why He didn't say "I'm the destination," that you have to achieve Him.But, He has created this space for you. You can become spiritually awakened, you can become your Spirit. egos, somebody Who is so simple, Who is so genuine, Who is so true. So, they crucified Him, and that Crucifixion came as a breakthrough for us. But message for us is the Resurrection part. Message for us is the But, Christ is an incarnation. He was the Son of God, and so He's an incarnation. And that incarnation came on this earth just to pull you out of your elements to make you become the Spirit. Now, how it is that it was the most difficult thing-because human beings have created in their heads all kinds of artificial barriers. You see whatever we Resurrection and not Crucifixion. Crucifixion is not the message because He has done for us-this is the point where the Jews must understand. The other day I was reading- today only-some discussion with the Archbishop of Canterbury took place and the fellow was asking him questions as if he was asking questions to God. And, in a way, he said also that "I would ask this question to God. That why is it that so many Jews were killed?" They asked for it! They wanted that they must suffer because they wouldn't give the credit of suffering to Christ. They thought we all had to suffer. Ego. It's ego. "How did anybody suffer for us, we must suffer separately." They couldn't give that credit to Christ. And all the later thinking was that we think and whatever we do with our mind is all dead, manmade, is artificial-because reality is beyond your mind, it is not in your mind, you cannot conceive it, you cannot hold Whatever is in your mind is not the reality It is beyond. So, for a human being to accept something that is beyond mind had become so difficult, at the time of Christ because of Romans and all these people

 - 2007 Issue: 3 & 4 27 The Divine Cool Breeze must suffer. So, whatever you think comes into action on this gross level. So Mr. Hitler was born and he made them suffer, and the created, a liver is created, a brain is created, a nose is created. If they start fighting, say this eye starts fighting this eye.. we laugh. But we human beings do the same thing. We are all the time doing it. This is the stupidity of human beings, which is creating problems. And when you become very stupid, somebody horrible takes advantage of that and comes on this earth just like Hitler, and he tries to put you right. stupidity of human beings is responsible for all the problems that are created on this earth. The other question was "how the children get leukemia, he would ask God." How children get leukemia. If the parents are so frantic and speedy,, children have to get it. If you are not relaxed person when you are married, when you are going to have a baby, you are thinking of divorces and all sorts of nonsense, that franticness will work on the child. Psychologically it is a left side problem, and the child has to be a patient of You don't need all that. You need only wisdom and your realization. And that is what is done today-that you have got realisation. So Easter for Sahaja Yogis all over the world is the most important happening: because if it had not happened it would not have been possible to give realisation to people. leukemia as soon as he's born. That is what it is! So, the problems are created by human beings because of their stupidity, There is no problem that God has created for you. He has solved all your problems. All our problems He solves. You've seen in Sahaja Yoga how He solves your little-little problems even. But we create problems for ourselves, by our stupidity, by our addiction to elements, to material things, to material habits. Matter sits on our head--that is, we can say on the level of the earth element. I think Gavin will read it out to you later on about what is written about Christ in Devi Bhagwat. This book was written about 14.000 yours back by Markendaya. So, imagine 14,000 years back! He knew, being a seer. just like Blake, what was going to happen when Christ was to come. But He was called as Mahavishnu. He was not Vishnu. He was the Son of Vishnu, and how many Christians understand this about Easter? They don't. Christianity today is nothing but a mental activity which is dead, just nonsense, just like any other nonsensical religion. It has become just another foolish, stupid religion, which has no meaning. Unless and until you get your realisation, unless and until you feel the vibrations, unless and until you feel this Divine surrounding Power, how will you understand? Because that's the only thing that is truth, that's the only thing Then, we have other problems, like emotional attachments: this is my daughter, this is my child, this is my..., this is mine, I'm so attached to my child, this my country, this is your country. We create problems. This Falkland thing, what we're going to get out of this territory? God never crèated Argentina, Chile, England and all that. She created one, homogeneous structure and it is to look after each other-like a heart is

 2007 28 Issue: 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze realisation and if you do not understand that that's reality. And unless and until you achieve it how will you know about Christ? And fighting about Him! How Can you fight? I can't understand. To me it's stupid, gone to another extreme. By this thing what you do actually, is to use all these incarnations to kill each other. Can you imagine? The things that came to elevate you, to make you into higher living are now used, the same things, the names are used, to kill, to kill each other, to bring down each other. At the most, if you reach a point where you don't understand, then they start saying "it's mystery." What is the mystery? this awareness, that this collective awareness is the only way you can stay in that area, otherwise you get out. You start having your smaller wells and you just go down into them. The more you start to expand yourself you rise higher and then you are again with your baddhas and whatever it is. But, if you think that I have to live for the whole, I'm responsible for the whole, l'm responsible for creating a nucleus of a.cell which is going to look after the Whole and if I fall down the rest also suffers: I have no business to fall down because I have been resurrected to this point; I've In Sahaja Yoga there's no mystery. It's all just there. To me human beings are a mystery. I don't understand them. I can't understand. The Resurrection of Christ has entered into the state of collectivity where my being, which is the Spirit, is the collective being and I have to stay there, I have to be there, I cannot fall, is not the way I can live. to now be collective resurrection. This is what is Mahayoga. Has to be the collective resurrection, and for this collective resurrection first of all, Sahaja Yogis must decide to be collective. Because through Kundalini awakening ye cross, no doubt-you cross through. But you enter an area of collectivity and if you do not allow that collectivity to permeate into you, then you come down. Supposing you become a state beyond the elements, the state where you are a collective being. You're aware that you're a part and parcel of the Whole. You're aware that you have to help your nose and your eyes because you're part and parcel of the Whole. You reach that state where But, I've seen after realisation also, people cannot get out of their shells. They still remain in the shell. They cannot spread their wings and sing and get out of their shell and just fly. They cannot do it. They still stick on to their small ways of life in a smaller way, in every way. On a holiday you go, you want to have a separate holiday. Why? This is the holiday time- holy day, as they say, HOLY DAY. This the holy day. When you are with other Sahaja Yogis you are really enjoying a holiday. When do you enjoy a holiday otherwise? Which is the other way? To be with them is the real holiday. That is why one should understand that you should expand you collectivity. If you do not expand you understand I'm as important as other cells are and other cells are helped by me your collectivity you are just a waste. You are a wasteful creation of Sahja Yogis, which, I'm sorry to say, will go down. Such people show also-in the beginning, gradually and they have to sstain me. We arè one. There should be omplete concord. This avareness comes after

 Issue: 3 & 4 2007 29 The Divine Cool Breeze they start getting better and better and once you are in full state you start enjoying each other's company without any fears about them, without having any possessiveness about them without having any kind of expectations, but just enjoying it. That has to happen. All our cells in our body are like that. If they can do it why not we? Because worried about the whole British people, Bristol, all the Jamaicans. Then about the and then of the whole world. You should be. One should not think how will my daughter get married, how can I get a ticket to go there? All these nonsensical ideas should be given up. Because you have now entered into the kingdom of God and He's going to look after you. Because that state you establish within yourself-that you are a collective being. All other things will drop out. Gradually everybody will be remoulded. Even the most difficult type, I've seen, have improved. But what about you, the one who is improving everybody else, what about you? How far are you there? How far in your faith that you know that I have entered into the Kingdom of God and that each and every action of mine is looked after and guided by His power, and I'm aware of it? l'am aware that I've entered into the Kingdom of God, which is expressed through my collectivity. So collectivity is the nature of a Sahaja Yogi and that's what one we have so much of sense-at least we think we have more sense than the cells have. At least it is expected because we have evolved so much from unicell to this state. And then you are the epitome of God's creation! You are the topmost people. Then why not? When you are resurrected the first thing that should happen to you is to understand you are no more an individual, but you are a collective being. You are no more an individual. All things which make you circumscribe your individuality-throw that away. You are no more an individual. All problems which come to you as individual problems are absolutely useless, false, wasteful. Think of the has to realise. collective problems. May God bless you. I enjoy such people. Like the other day Fergie was anxious to know for Bristol, which points are there which are giving (Nirmala Yoga). 1983 vibrations from the Mother Earth. He's

 Description of the birth of Shri Jesus Addressing Nārada, son of Brahma, is eternal and real as Shri Krishna is eternal and real. This world, composed of the seven islands, is surrrounded by the seven oceans. Forty-nine Upa Dvipas ( , smaller islands adjacent to them) are existing here. Besides there are countless mountains, and forests. Higher than this earth is the Brahmaloka (m ata), with seven heavens, and below this are the seven Patalas. This 1-34. Narayana said :-" O Devarshi I The egg (born of Moola Prakriti va) that was floating in the waters for a period equal to the life period of Brahma, now in the fulness of time, separated into two parts. Within that egg there was a powerful Child, lustrous like one thousand millions of suns. This child could not suck mother's milk, as it was forsaken by Her. So being tired of hunger, the child for a moment cried repeatedly. The child that will become the Lord of countiess Brahmandas (universes), is the bounding limit of Brahmanda. Just above this earth there is the Bhurloka (भुरलोक); above is Bhuvarloka (मुवरलोक); then Savarloka (स्वरलोक) then Janarloka (जनरलोक), then Taparloka (a ), then Satyaloka (a , and above that is Brahmaloka. The splendor of Brahmaloka is like that of molten gold. But all the substances, whether outside or inside this Brahmaloka, are transient. When this Brahmanda (aag cosmos) dissolves, everything dissolves and is destroyed. All are temporary like bubble of water. Only Goloka and Vaikuntha (ua) are eternal. In every pore of this Maha Virata is existing one Brahmanda (cosmos). What to speak of others, even Krishna cannot count the number of these Brahmandas. In every Brahmanda, the number of the Gods is three kotis or 30 millions. Some of them are the Dikpatis (fa the Regents of the Quarters); some are the Dikpalas (f the Rulers of the Quarters), some are asterisms, and some planets. In the Bhurloka, there are four Varnas (auf Brahmins, etc.,) and in the Patalas there are Nagas (). Thus the Universe exists composed of moveable and non-moveable things (this is Brahmanda Vivriti aamus faa), O narada ! Now the Virata Purusha began to look up to the skies again now an orphan having no father nor mother, began to look upwards from the waters. This boy came to be denominated afterwards by the name of Maha Virata ( fa, when he became gross and grosser. As there is nothing finer than radium so there is nothing grosser than Maha Virata. The power of this Maha Virata is onesixteenth of that of Shri Krishna, the Highest Self. But this boy. (born of the Prakriti-Radha) is the Sole Stay of all this Universe and he is denominated by the name "Maha-Vishnu" (HEI-fa). In his every pore countless universes are existing. So much so that even Shri Krishna could not count them. If it were possible to count the number of the dust particles, it is impossible to count the number of the Universes. So there are endless Brahmas, Vishnus, and Maheshvaras. In every Brahmanda, there is Brahma Vishnu and Mahesha. Each Brahmanda extends from Patala (yara) to the Brahmaloka (aereta). the abode of Vaikuntha (agua) is higher than that (i.e, it is situated outside of Brahmanda), again the abode of Goloka (ateta) is fifty koti yojanas (50X10X4X2 million miles) higher than Vaikuntha. This Goloka Dhama (te ) *SHRIMAD DEVI BHAGAVATAM, Chapter II to IX book

 2007 Issue: 3 & 4 31 The Divine Cool Breeze giving thus to the Virata the boon and the Mantra said:- "O Child! Say what more you desire; I will give you that instantly." The Virata boy, hearing thus the words of Shri Krishna, spoke:- "O Thou Omnipresent I I have got no desires whatsoever, save this, that as song as I live, whether for a short time or a long time, let me have pure Bhakti towards Thy Lotus Feet. and again but He could not see anything within that egg except the void. Then distressed with hunger he cried out repeatedly and became merged in anxiety. Next moment getting back his consciousness, he began ot think of Krishna, the Highest Person and saw there at once the eternal light of Brahma. He saw there His form as deep blue like new rain-cloud; with two hands, garment of a yellow colour, sweet smile on His face, flute in His hand and He seemed to be very 35-41. In this world he is Jivanmukta (liberated whilst living) Who is your Bhakta, and that bewildered fool is dead while living who is devoid of any Bhakti to Thee. What needs he to perform japam, asceticism, sacrifice, worship, holding fasts and observances, going to sacred places of pilgrimages and other virtuous acts if he be without any bhakti to Shri Krishna? Vain is his life who is devoid of any devotion to Shri Krishna, under Whose Grace he has obtained his life and Whom he does not now anxious to show His Grace to Devotees. Looking at the Lord, His Father, the boy became glad and smiled. The Lord, the Bestower of boon, granted him boons appropriate for that moment "O Child ! Let you possess knowledge like Me; let your hunger and thirst vanish; let you be the holder of innumerable Brahmandas till the time of Pralaya (vera the universal dissolution). Be without any selfishness, be fearless and the bestower of boons to all. Let not old age, death, disease sorrow, nor any other ailings afflict thee." Thus saying, He repeated thrice on his ear the six-lettered great Mantra "Om Krishnaya Svaha" worshipped by the Vedas with their Amgas, ("ॐ कृष्णाय स्वाहा"), the Giver of desires and the destroyer of all troubles and calamities O Brahma's Son ! thus giving the mantra. Sri Krishna arranged for his fooding thus; "In every universe, whatever offerings will be given to Shri Krishna, one sixteenth of that will go to Narayana, the Lord of Vaikuntha and fifteen-sixteenth is to go to this boy, the Virata." Shri Krishna did not allot any share for Himself. Himself transcending all the Gunas, and Full, He is always satisfied with Himself. What necessity is there for any further offerings? Whatever the people offer with devotion, the Lord to Lakshmi, the Virata eats all these. Bhagavan Shri Krishna pay homage and worship. He is endowed with Shakti as long as Atma (Self) resides in his body; no sooner the Atma departs from his body all the Shaktis accompany him. O Great One l And thou art the Universal Atman (soul) who transcends Prakruti, Who is All will, the Primeval Person and of the nature of the Highest Light." Thus saying, the Virata boy remained silent. Shri Krishna then, spoke in sweet words - "O Child ! Let you remain as fresh as ever like Me. You will not have any fall even if innumerable Brahmas pass away. 42-57. Let you divide yourself in parts and turn into smaller Viratas in every universe. Brahma will spring from your navel and will create the cosmos. From the forehead of that Brahma will spring eleven Rudras for the destruction of the creation. But they will all be parts of Shiva. The Rudra named Kalagni, (efa) of these eleven *SHRIMAD DEVI BHAGAVATAM, Chapter I to IX book

 - 2007 Issue: 3 & 4 32 The Divine Cool Breeze become very anxious and came back to his former place and began to meditate the Lotus Feet of Shri Krishna. Then, in meditation, with his introspective eye, he first saw the smaller Virata, then the endless great Virata lying on the waterly bed, in whose pores the universes are existing and then he saw the God Shri Krishna in Goloka Rudras, will be the destroyer of all this Vishvas (Cosmos.) Besides, from each of your sub-divisions, the Vishnu will orginate and that Bhagavan Vishnu will be the Preserver of this Vishva (world). I say that under My favour you will always be full of Bhakti towards Me and no sooner you meditate on Me, you will be able to see My lovely form. There is no doubt in this; and your Mother, Who resides in My breast, will not be difficult for you to see. Let you remain here in ease and comfort. I now go to Goloka". Saying thus Shri Krishna, the Lord of World disappeared. Going to His own abode He spoke instantly to Brahma and Shankara, skilled in the works of creation and destruction : "O Child Brahma ! Go with Gopas and Gopis, He. then began to praise the Lord of Goloka when He granted boons to your father, and he began to do the work of creation. 58-62. From the mind of your father, were born first Sanaka and other brothers and then from his forehead eleven Rudras sprang. Then from the left side of that small virata lying on the bed of waters, the four-handed Vishnu Bhagavan, the Preserver of the Universe, came. He went to Shvetadvipa, where he remained. Then your father became engaged in creating this Universe, moveable and non -moveable, composed of three worlds, heaven, earth and Patala, in the navel of that small Virata Purusha. O Narada ! Thus from the pores of that great Virata each universe has sprung and in every universe there is one small Virata, one Brahma, one Vishnu and one Shiva and Sanaka and others. O Best of twice born! Thus I have described the glories of Krishna, that give exceeding pleasure and Moksha. How say what more you want to hear? quickly and be born in parts from the navels of each of the smaller Viratas that will arise from the pores of the Great virata. O Child Mahadeval Go and be born in parts from the forehead of each Brahma in every universe for the destruction of the creation3; (but be careful that you not forget) and perform austerities for a long time." O Son of the Creater Brahma ! Thus saying, the Lord of the Universe remained silent. Brahma and Shiva, the auspicious, bowing to the Lord, went to their own duties. On the other hand, the Great Virata that lay floating in the waters of the Brahmanda sphere, created from his every pore each smaller Virata. That youth Janardan of the form of the Great Cosmos, wearing yellow garment of the bluish-green colour of the Durba grass, lay sleeping pervading everywhere. Brahma took his birth in His navel. He, then, after his birth, began to travel in that navel- lotus and in the stem of the Lotus for one Here ends the Third Chapter of the Ninth Book on the Origin of Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesha and others in the Maha Puranam Shrimad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharshi Veda Vyasa. lakh yugas. But he could not find out the place whence the lotus or its stem had sprung up.O Narada ! Then your father (Nirmala Yoga) 1983 "SHRIMAD DEVI BHAGAVATAM, Chapter Iil to IX book

 Her Holiness Shri Mataji's Advice blessed with dignity. At that time you will never joke, nor will you make fun nor will you be frivolous. You talk to the person in such a manner, that the person becomes wise and you also talk only that which is wisdom No one, so far in the history of spirituality, has ever raised the Kundalini in such a short time, as you people are doing. It moves under your fingers.. It is absolutely Shri Ganesha's power which is given to you. The Ganesha shakti is given to you These powers can be maintained if by Shri Ganesha Himself within you, to give you the confidence. To give you the confidence that you can raise the Kundalini, but not the feeling that you are raising the Kundalini. If you go on without surrendering yourself to Sahaja Yoga, after some time you will lose this power very fast. you try to follow Shri Ganesha. These are His powers. Three powers of Adi Shakti work in you. One gives you longivity and clears out ideas about your desire. If your desires are right, all your desires are fulfilled by these powers. But, the first thing you should know is that the desires should be right. If your desires are clear-cut then they will be fulfilled. That power you can achieve only by putting your bandhan on your heart. Whatever desire you have, say and put it on your heart, means you are asking from your heart, seven times. You just give it a bandhan and the work will be done. But don't use it for non-sensical things, because, if you use it for non-sensical things, this power will go away. Use for something special, of a higher level. Everybody will be magnetically attracted towards you and you will be always guided by great souls and angels. At the time when you are moving your hand on Kundalini, it is the greatest power you are using. I don't know how much 'shraddha' (faith) you have for yourself and about the power you have got. At that time there will be no obstruction on your hand by anyone whatsoever. When you are raising the Kundalini, attention of the person who is taking the realization from you, will not be attracted by outside things. That means you can raise the Kundalini at any time, because, at that time you reside in the lotus which is closed. At the time of Kundalini awakening you will not have baser or impure feelings about the person to whom you are giving the realization. May be before and after, but not when you are giving the realization. These dirty feelings will not come to you, automatically. You do not have to stop your mind, automatically it will work. This power of desiring, protects you in all the way that is possible. It guides you, looks after you, gives you peace and tremendous faith in Sahaja Yoga. Ultimately you become filled with the joy of Sahaja Yoga and you do not like anything, else, but Sahaja Yoga. But sometimes we identify ourselves with our ego and we think, our ego in Sahaja Yoga. Many a time I have seen, people like it because it is identified with their ego. It should be separated from that, and should be brought in our lives, in our day to day life. When we are meeting You will be absolutely satisfied. Even if you are hungry, you will not feel the hunger or any physical need at the time you are giving the realization. There will be no distraction of any kind. You won't do anything that is indignified. At that time you are being

 34 2007 Issue: 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze too much about food spoils your Vishuddhi, very badly. Then talking ill about anyone, complaining about anyone to me will spoil your Vishuddhi. If I ask and you say something, it is all right, but all the time talking ill about each other will spoil your Vishuddhi. each other, when we are talking to each other, that you should see, one ripple falling, and another rising and another rising and another falling, as you see the sea, becoming one with each other. By the middle power, you will give realization to the people, tell their chakras, you will be able to correct your chakras. By this power only, you will have a very great power over your will. You will be what you decide to be. You can transform yourself without any difficulty. There are many powers of Mahalakshmi which you have to achieve but for that your Sushumna has to be cleaned very much. For that you have to develop detachment in life. Unless and until you develop detachment, the deeper powers of Mahalakshmi do not come up. For example, in the small things like, having connections with me, even that one is to be a detached thing. This detachment has to be developed for your Mahalakshmi power. Then you go beyond. Your timings will be worked out correctly. You wouldn't have to see the time. To preserve this power of time you must not hurry up too much, not be the slave of watch. Just let it go. Do not have any obstinacy about anything. When you judge others you should know that you are being judged by God. In judging others, God has judged you also, It is His judgement which is going to decide how far you are. Those who are in Sahaja Yoga today, may be, some, who think that they are great Sahaja Yogis, big people. But may be they are not; and those who think that they are not and that they want to increase and improve their Shakti, they may be the people who are occupying very high places. So, under these circumstances one should never boast and should not have false estimation about oneself. That is the way your can preserve your powers much better, of your Vishuddhi. Also I have seen, people start discussing me in a very funny way. I think best way to deal with the problem is not to speak about me and if you want to speak, you must know that it should be absolutely positive, otherwise you are harming others. So, that's how your Vishuddhi Chakra problems are increasing and they go on Increasing specially when you try to confuse yourself and to quarrel with yourself and think that Sahaja Yoga has gained by your coming. You have gained and not Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja Yoga is proved by itself. It does not need your help. If there is truth, then by accepting the truth, you have enhanced your position has enhanced, not the position of the truth. So this idea must go from your head right away. Just allow yourself to be drifted with the flow of Sahaja Yoga. If it works out, well and good. If it does not work out, well and good. Just keep it like that and then you will be surprised, how this Mahalakshmi power improves and the blessings of this power are tremendous. Like that, you have thousand and one powers awakened within you. For example, in Vishuddhi Chakra, you have sixteen thousand powers awakened in you, as you are today. But when you speak you don't understand that you are a Sahaja Yogi, when you eat you don't understand that this tongue belongs to a Sahaja Yogi and it should not hanker after anything. Thinking It is the easiest to keep your Vishuddhi all right when you keep yourself in state of witness.

 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze 35 Issue: 3 & 4 are getting very much involved in a particular case, then I stop it. I do so many things by which I just stop it and then you cannot have that power in you. On the contrary you suffer quite a bit because you do not know how to protect yourself from all these bad things. So, I have to request you that before starting to cure others you first cure yourself fully, and also you can use my photograph for curing others. That is possible if you develop the habit, after realization, that everything that you do and want or face, is put into Nirvicharita, into thoughtless-awareness. If you start that habit, you will be amazed, your witness state will improve and that will rise in your being. It is very important to understand that without transformation you have no meaning. Whatever you are, do not identify yourself with that, but whatever you want to be, you try to be that. And this power you have got. Put your attention always on positivity and not on negativity. Normally, I have seen that negative people turn towards the negative people. You are a lamp that is burning a light which enlightens others in their minds. It is very great thing. Earlier, even one person like that was in billions and billions of people and now there are so many of you. But quality wise, if you don't rise, it is going to be a hopeless case. So you must improve your quality. You have got curative powers. You know that you can cure people. But do not get into that mess, because, there Mahamaya plays Her part. If I find that you (Nirmala Yoga) 1983 The Awakening On high a Blessed Flower unfolds, the light grows as it further blooms; Woken from a night of dreams Of dread fear and uncertainty Faces upturned towards the truth rejoice to behold the doom of Doom. And sprinkled far and few between vague glimpses of reality, As shadows flee and draw away I open up my eyes to see, The Fair Mother whose unfading voice awakened me with gentle calls Ascends with power and majesty: The Ageless Goddess, the Source of All. With selfless love and gentle care A Longed-for Face bends over me. She takes Her seat above that Flower Then slowly recognition grows Of She for whom I've ever sought, whose center forms a throne of gold, And reveals to all the Age of Truth; Through consciousness and bliss-behold! And follows bliss and grace untold And joys of which I had dreamt not. Continues with increasing strength the reunion started on that day, Christine And songs are sung with loudening voice which chase all sleep and doubt away. (Nirmala Yoga) 1983

 READY FOR THE WAR? system (left swadhistan, nabhi, agnya) but it is most effective when riding the wave length of our possessiveness and attachment. Sahaja Yogis who have understood this are therefore quite careful not to let marriage, family, job, power traps or any such human relationship become a trap for them. Indeed the successful culmination of the purification trend is detachment. Where there is no-attachment, there is no ground for negativity to occupy. The yogi who is detached has vanished, has become invisible to the eyes of negativity: he can't be found anymore. He himself, however, can search out, find and destroy negativity if he chooses to do so. Such a yogi joins then the crack unit of the Sahajland Defence forces, the Yogeshwari bhakta squadron, named after the principle which rules it. "Ready for the war ?" asked Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi a choir of Sahaja Yogis who were singing some battle hymn on the tenth February '83 in Delhi. Well, are we ready ? What weapons do we master, what about tactics and strategy ? The Weapons: Weapons are of two kinds: defensive (shield armour, helmet) and offensive (sword, spear, bow and arrows). At the time of Shri Rama the-fight was rather uncomplicated : I aim my arrow, I shoot, I kill.. and it's a great pleasure to see the rakshasa falling. At the time of Shri Krishna the importance of the weapons' quality was immense : Arjunha would not have defeated Karna had not Shri Indra tricked Karna into giving him the breast plate from Shri Surya that made Karna invulnerable. At the time of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi what are the weapons of the Offensive weapons : The essence of the yogic attack system is expressed in one word : attention !Attention (chitta) is the edge of the consciousness (chit) and the more concentrated the consciousness can men of God ? Upgraded weaponry of the twentieth Century's war of the yogis is too complex a subject to be adequatly introduced here. Furthermore the Sahajland Intelligence Service would not allow the release of be, the sharpest its edge. Sahaja Yoga teaches many meditation exercises to the concentration sensitive, classified informations on-yogic defence systems that the bhootish nasties are still unsuccessfully trying to penetrate. However I have been permitted to expose here a few basic principles. of the foster consciousness and to strengthen the chitta (cf Rajabhi Modi's lecture at the New York seminar in October '83). The chitta of an evolved Yogi works as a vibrations forward delivery system. As a laser beam launched from the nirvichara platform (thoughtless awareness), the enlightened attention concentrates the Chaitanya Shakti (power of vibrations) on an identified sphere of negativity. As a mantra propelled missile, it directs the vibrations of a specific deity or divine aspect against the point of negativity which corresponds to the evil, antagonistic force opposed to this aspect. In both cases two results are possible. Either the Defensive weapons : The essence of the yogic defence system is expressed in one word purification! Time and again we are using the techniques of Sahaja Yoga to cleanse the various koshas (chakras) of our psychosomatic instrument so that negativity will lose its grip on it, so that it will not find in our system any dark and remote corner where it would hide and plot, waiting for the ripe moment to assault us. Negativity knows the penetration axis of our

 2007 37 Issue: 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze negativity is right away pulverised. Or the negativity is too strong to be destroyed but then, the chitta instantly switches itself on to the Sahajland Telecommunication Network and passes all the relevant informations concerning the obstacle on to the Supreme Command (See Nirmala Yoga issue Jan. Feb. '83 pg 32). The supreme Command takes over. Really, in the aquarian age, the bhoots are having a bad time. But it isn't compulsory to feel sorry for them. The Battlefield : There are two battlefields ; the microcosm of our own individual being and the macrocosm, the field of the cosmic fight between Shri Mataji's devas and angels against Satan, the collective principle of Evil. When you free the first from adverse interferences you join in the second as a nicely turned instrument. The struggle takes place on various levels. But one could perhaps say that it is still largely a guerilla struggle of the yogis freedom fighters against the various dark lords who have enslaved this planet; against their human, ex-human and less than which covers all situations. First principie: concentrate all your forces on that precise point of the battlefield where the enemy lines can be broken. How ? Buy puting our attention on Shri Mataji. Why ? All the angels, ganas and shaktis at once rush to the rescuse, riding the beams emitted by Her Lotus Feet. After all, the Goddess is called "ranapandita", that is, mastering the science of wars and battles. Thus we can now limit ourselves to stating the basic principles of sahaja warfare. All a sahaja warrior needs knowing is to call the Divine Mother's attention on his Kurukshetra. "Strike, Arjuna, by Me all these foes have already been slained", Shri Krishna made plain to His disciple that He is the real Doer. Sahaja Yoga proves this truth to be enternal. As far as strategy is concerned, classified information available only to inner core yogis cannot, of course, be released here. Even these yogis don't know the long term plan of the Supreme Command which is drafted outside of time and space, and thus, beyond mental computation. useful security check against the spies of Avidya land. For centuries together they have tried to locate Armageddon, the site of the last struggle. But... when the last seeker will have left Sodome and Gommorrha, when the armies will camp before Sambhalpur, when all the yogis of the earth will be integrated into the Sahaja Telecommunication Network, when all the horses will have become white like snow... human troopers. It is quite interesting to realise how, at the time of the battle of the Kurukshetra, Shri Krishna who is the lord of dharma, taught the Pandavas to discard the rules of military dharma of their time. In today's battle also, the higher goal of manifesting the victory of the Spirit overrules all the smaller dharmas. That is why there is a great versatility in move, manoevres, styles and camouflage in the Sahajland fighting forces. No one can ever predict how they will operate! land they may well get the answer. JAI SHRI MATAJI ! Tactics And Strategy First question: "Should we fight the negativity or should we avoid it?" -The answer given by Shri Mataji : "If you can fight, do it, if you can't, run away". Hence a flexible response Gregoire Vienna, 21 November 1983 Nirmal Yoga 1983

 AMERICA CALLING experience; It was evident that those who were seeking had all been to some guru or cult. Had the Adi Shakti come too late? No, She reminded them that She had come 10 Dharma is the sustaining force of human civilisation. Without Dharma the civilsation lacks its evolutionary momentum and starts moving in a linear direction. Whatever moves linearly is destined to reach a dead end. The recent American tour of Shri Mataji was a tryst with the Dead Sea. How to cope with a society which lives between the choice of suicide and cancers. years ago but no one paid heed to Her. She had then warned them of all the false gurus and all the problems. She had been the first to come. The tone softened, the radiant smile returned. We all took heart again as She said: "Never mind, come my children". Only the divine Force could handle such a colossal task and that is precisely what the Adi Shakti did. The compassion and love of Shri Mataji blessed the shores of Vancouver and Toronto. Boston proclaimed a rousing welcome from the portals of the American Ashram. Shri Mataji Cleared the Hamsa Chakra and New York became receptive to Sahaja Yoga, May great names from the United Nations got their realisation and a great reception was hosted at the U.N. for Shri Mataji. The threshold was opened by a very positive seminar with the Jungain Society in New York. The worn and ancient shoulders that had carried the burden of C.J. Jung were happily relieved by the living force of Sahaja Yoga Thereon the soils of Sahaja Yoga gathered force in Los Angles and as impressive meeting in San Diego. The media followed close at heels and nearly all mornings were spent beyond closed doors of T.V. recordings. By now Shri Mataji had already been in America for over a month. The season had changed and the time had come to say goodbye. In a beautiful setting in a forested area, north of New York, the parting seminar was held. Over 80 Sahaja Yogis from all over America were assembled amidst the Fall colours to hear the parting words of Shri Adi Shakti. Sahaja Yoga came to a new light in San Francisco where even Pastors and Rabbis were attending on Shri Mataji, Two popular RabbIs sang Songs in praise.of the Mother. On a bleak rainy morning of the last The seminar held at Santa cruz was day, looking towards the heavens Shri Mataji slowly said ; "Lord Krishna must stop playing His games". a great success. It was attended by over 150 potential Sahaja Yogis. Shri Mataji said many wonderful things, A great Havan was performed for all America; the prayers and pujas which all Sahaja Yogis of the world had been offering every Saturday seemed to be answered. It was indeed a deep . Yogi Mahajan (Nirmal Yoga) 1983

 West Coast receives Shri Adi Shakti The third programme i.e. on the 27th (Tuesday): Right from the start, Shri Mataji came on them very forcefully, and it was one clean sweep!l About 250 people. And when Mother asked how many are not feeling it, only three hand went up. Then She asked them to ask, if it was the 'Cool Breeze of the Holy Ghost, and it was just 'tremendous! She said, "Now ask, MOTHER, ARE YOU THE HOLY GHOST?" And every one just felt the vibrations so strongly. Then one man (negative) got up and asked "Did you say you were the Holy Ghost?"- And SHRI MATAJI stood up, and threw one arm up in the air and in a clear loud voice declared, "YES, I AM THE HOLY GHOST." And the whole hall stood up and started clapping. Everyone accepted HER just like that. It was the most joyous, powerful and breath- taking spectacle of my life I could never imagine anything so tremendous ! To Say the least, it has been extremely successful. It started with a Puja in New York, then Mother came to Los Angles where we met Her. It was so Joyous 11. We had a grand puja and two TV shows (one was live). Both interviewers got their relisation and it was all tremendous. Then Mother flew on to Houston, where they had a Puja, and Public programmes. Not too many people came. Then back to Los Angles where we had a public programme on Saturday the 24th Sept. There were about 200 people with an organised negative reaction from 6-7 placed Christian fanatics. But the audience was with Mother. Next day (Sunday 25th Sept.) was a programme is San Diego. Shri Mataji arrived about (12.30 - 1.00) p.m. and we had a Picnic lunch (very good !). Mother was very pleased with San Diego. We had a public programme in the evening, and the Hall was Jam Packed ! It was highly successful, and Mother stayed on after the programme to talk to, and work on individuals, After that She took us all out to dinner to celebrate She said, "We must go and celebrate now." Then followed programmes in San Francisco and a week-end seminar in Santa Cruz, at which there were 130-140 people. Very successful, we had a puja and Havan, at which Shri Mataji invited everybody. After the seminar there followed extremily successful meetings in Santa Cruz, and Vancouver... Next morning was a Radio recording in San Diego which was very successful, Shri Mataji was very happy. That Radio studio sends the recordings to 400 Radio stations for relay all over the World! Then She had a Newspaper interview by the San Diego Union, which also went very well. Very positive. Both Radio and paper interviewers got their realisation. That evening was the programme in Los Angeles (Monday 26th) which went fairly well. (slight disturbance). We have been having regular follow up meetings. The regular people everywhere are so positive, its incredible! ..Things are really going very well.. JAI SHRI MATAJI Karan (San Diego) (Nirmal Yoga) 1983

 By the Grace of Ganesha I came to Sahaja Yoga, as many Western seekers do, with a badly damaged Mooladhara Chakra. Although I had received my realisation in late 1982, my vibrations were pretty sluggish until I was honoured to receive in October 1983, Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi who stayed in my apartment in Toronto during her 1983 North American Tour. large animals have always scared me. But it seemed so gentle I soon gave up the fear. I wished I had something to give it as it caressed my hand with its trunk. I thought it was looking for sugar or something to eat but on awakening realised immediately that it was touching the heel of my palm : the location of the Mooladhara Chakra. When I woke up I knew instinctively that the elephant was Shri Ganesha. I went into meditation and to my surprise felt no tingling on my palms where I had always felt heat from the damaged Mooladhara. It was nothing short of a miracle. According to some of the more subtle Sahaja Yogis travelling with her, she wrought a miracle during her 4 days with us by transforming the quality of my vibrations. After her departure, my hands sang. But 15 years of a lifestyle incompatible with finding God had taken their toll and my Mooladhara Chakra needed to be reset. I wanted to share the joy and humility I felt with others but only Sahaja Yogis can understand. As a Westerner, Shri Ganesha is not familiar to me, but from that day onl feel personal and deep love for gentle elephant-headed God. It was the clumination of the healing started by Shri Mataji while she was in Toronto. I had this dream in the bed used by Shri Mataji only a few weeks before. By the grace of God, two miracles in a month have turned me away totally from the part and set my footsteps in a new I had a detailed conversation with Rajabhai Modi at the New York Seminar which brought Mother's North American Tour to a close in late October. I returned to Toronto armed with Shri Modi's suggestions and a determination to work on resetting the Mooladhara. Two weeks after my return I spent doing an intensive homeopathic weekend to clear me through blockages in the spiritual, mental and physical bodies. The night I took the remedy prescribed - it was Thuja, the Tree of Life-I had a vivid dream. direction. JAI SHRI MATAJI Michael Knite Toronto November 7, 1983 In the dream I was face to face with an enormous elephant. I felt fear at first as (Nirmal Yoga) 1983

 SHRI KIRSHNA PUJA GARLATE - MILAN ASHRAM - 06.08.88 Parvachan of H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi ("YOU ARE A UNIVERSAL BEING") of Vishnu has brought us to the understanding that we have to seek the truth and ultimately we have to become Sahaja Yogis. Today we have gathered here to worship Shri Krishna. We must understnad the significance of Shri Krishna's advent on the Vishuddhi chakra. As you know very well, except for once or twice, Shri Brahmadeva has [not] taken his incarnation. Also Shri Ganesha has only once taken His birth as Lord Jesus Christ. But Vishnu Tattwa, the So this principle of Shri Krishna is so important that at the state of, as you call it, the Vishuddhi chakra, we become complete in the sense that when the Sahasrara is opened out for you and you start feeling the vibrations, you are not yet fully complete. If you were just complete then it would have been an end of your evolutionB because at the stage, if you had finished it then there was no need to have Sahaja Yoga. But actually it means that once the Sahasrara is opened out, then you have to come down to your Vishuddhi chakra; that means to your collective. If it is not working on your Vishuddhi chakra, the enlightenment on Vishuddhi chakra, you cannot feel the vibrations. As you saw yesterday, the artists started playing in a very new dimension. It is not that they got only the awakening of the Kundalini; the awakening of the Kundalini was there, no doubt, but it had to come down to their Vishuddhi chakra. If I could not have brought it back to their Vishuddhi chakra, their hands could not have moved that fast, they would have never felt the sweetness, the 'Madhurya' of Shri Krishna and they would not have manifested it. principle of Vishnu, has taken many a time birth on this earth, as the Goddess had to take many a time Her birth. They had to work together many a time, and with the principle of Vishnu, the principle of Mahalakshmi has acted to help the ascent of the people. So the principle of Vishnu is for your ascent, for the evolutionary process of human beings, through this advent and through the power of Mahalakshmi, we have bécome human beings from amoeba stage. This is a spontaneous working for us, but for the principle of Vishnu He had to go through various incarnations to evolve. As you know, there have been incarnations of Shri Vishnu as a fish to begin with, and went on till it came to the state of Shri Krishna, where they say that He has become complete. But, one has to realise that He works on our central nervous system, He buiids our central nervous system. Through our evolutionary process our central nervous system has been built up and this central nervous system has given us all the human awareness that we have. Otherwise we would have been just like the stones. But through this building up of our awareness, one after another, building up different chakras within us, this principle So all that is expressed through your fingers and hands achieves that new awareness of creating the 'Madhurya' the sweetness. In your art, in your music, in your gestures, in every way your hands are very important. But Vishuddhi chakra also plays

 - 2007 42 Issue: 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze This is only outward, this is the outward manifestation of the Vishuddhi part, as you know, on the sixteen chakras on the sub-plexus which look after our face, our ears, nose, eyes, neck, all these things are looked after by Vishuddhi chakra. As a result, also you can become great actors, you can have eyes which are innocent, you can have a skin which is shining, you can have ears which can hear the divine music, chakra's improvement within yourself, through the awakening of Shri Krishna on the Vishuddhi Chakra. But what happens really is that, inside you, you become a witness, you become a witness in the sense that all that is disturbing, all that is troubling you all that is a problem, you just start watching it. You start witnessing it, you start seeing it and you do not get disturbed. That seeing, that witnessing state has a tremendous power, whatever you see without thinking, your problems get solved. Any problem you have, once you get this witness state, what you call 'tatasthata' means you are standing on the shores and watching the waves move, then you know how to solve the problems you can have a nose which shows your dignity. In the same way, your whole facial expresion changes. If you are a very harsh person and a hot-tempered person and you have harshness on your face or else if you are like a beggar all the time, or you are crying all the time, weepings, your face looks so miserable, everything changes and comes into the centre, where you look beautiful, you look attractive in a divirie way and also you get a very sweet contenance. So your witness state has to be developed and sometimes I have seen people have to go through little difficulties to develop that witness state. This is very important that once the Kundalini starts supplying you from your Sahasrara downward, moving on your chakras and enriching your different chakras. On the Vishuddhi chakra, when it has to stay, it really tries to take you through turnoils. And you start thinking that, "see how my life was so blissful, I had so many blessings and now what has happened". But this is the time when you should become 'tatasthata'- means you should become a witness - if you become a witness everything improves. For example, you are, say, a person who is working in some place, as soon as you become a witness, you see, your attention goes inside and you start watching things from inside out. As a result, you see exactly Also the teeth and the tongue are looked after by the Vishuddhi chakra, so your teeth which are in trouble get cured.. you sometimes as I told you, I have never been to a dentist in all my life, so you can imagine that you don't have to go to the dentist any more if you have your Vishuddhi chakra alright. Then, also your tongue improves, for example, some people are very sarcastic by temperament, they cannot say something sweetly, all the time they are sarcastic, saying sarcastic things. Some people havu a habit of abusive language, some people are extremely beggarly types, all the time talking in a very beggarly manner. There's no dignity, there's no sweetness and there is no selfconfidence for some people. Some people even stammer. Some people cannot stand on stage and give a lecture, all these things drop out as soon as your Vishuddhi chakra improves.

 43 Issue: 3 & 4 - 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze that will hurt others. So hurting anybody is what's wrong and where, and as you have got the power of witnessing, with that power you get over the problems that you have. not in the dharma of Shri Krishna. He either killed somebody or He was sweet, there's nothing inbetween. Either you have to be sweet to people or you have to kill Problems get solved very easily if you know how to witness the whole situation [rather] than to get involved in it. And this is the best state, which you call as 'Sakshisvarupatva' which you achieve when the Kundalini someone. Now the killing part you leave it. So you only have to be sweet. You all have to be sweet to each other, especially among Sahaja Yogis, you all have to be extremely comes up and the connection is established and the divine ray starts falling through that and enriches your Vishuddhi chakra. sweet to each other. And dealing with others also, sweetly you have to tell them if you find anything wrong with them see, this is not good, you have now come to Sahaja Yoga, now you must behave like this or behave like that. Now the name of Shri Krishna has come from the word 'Krish' meaning the ploughing, ploughing of the soil for planting the crops. Now He is the one who has done the ploughing for us, in the sense that He has created us in such a manner that when Now Shri Krishna's life has another very significant role to play, that is, He came on this earth after Shri Rama's advent-who was also Shri Vishnu. VWhen Shri Rama came the people were very ignorant, they had no idea about dharma., So as a king He the sprouting has to be done you are already ready for it. But as it is we human beings spoil our Vishuddhi chakra by many wrong things, as you have seen, that we smoke or we take drugs, or we take tobaccos and all that, so our Vishuddhi chakra goes out. On top of that, if you are a person who doesn't talk at all, or who talks too much or who shouts and screams and who shows temper, raises his voice, also spoils his Vishuddhi chakra. wanted to teach them dharma and so He had to become very serious. So His incarnation was something of a very serious father who is very seriously undergoing all kinds of turmoils and things and to create an image of a benevolent king. As a result, when His incarnation was over, people became very serious minded and all the seriousness started in the religion, all the ritualism started; people became extremely So the first thing is that in your using the Vishuddhi chakra you have to remember that it is to be used for sweetness, for rigid and that rigidity killed all the joy of life and then all kinds of other things also started 'madhurya'. If you want to say something to someone, try to say something that is sweet and nice, practice it. In certain places I have seen that people are used to a kind of a talk and sometimes they cannot talk in the fashion that is sweet-for them it is adharma, to talk sweetly to someone. They only believe that you must really talk in a manner with that rigidity the beginning of Brahmanism. Brahminism started in India when people started using Brahmanism as a birthright while it is not a birthright of anyone to be a Brahman but you have to become a

 2007 44 Issue: 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze And now in Sahaja Yoga we have proved that whatever religion you may follow, whatever things you follow, ideas or philosophy, whatever you may follow, you all can become realised souls. So nobody is higher, nobody is lower. So many people think that the best thing is to believe that all Brahman. After realisation you become a Brahman, this fact is established not only is Shri Krishna's time but also in Shri Rama's time because Shri Rama himself was not a Brahman, He made a person write His Ramayana, who was Valmiki, who was a schedule caste and was a fisherman. Very surprising He asked this fisherman to write His Ramayana when He was not a Brahman. And He made Him a Brahman, in others are wrong and we are correct. But all of those people who believe like this may have to go to hell directly, because they have not reached the truth. The truth is; you have to become a Realised SOul, and if you are not a Realised Soul, you are nowhere near God. You have to enter into the kingdom of God Christ Himself has said that, "you have to enter into the kingdom of God, you have to be born again and when you'll be calling me 'Christ, Christ', I won't recognise you". Openly He said it. He has warned you. Say about ... Mohamed Sahib himself has said that, when the time of Kayama (Resurrection) comes, your hands will speak. He has also said very clearly "till the Kayama, you'll do all those rituals like . you see .. rosary and all that. But when the Kayama comes, when you get your resurrection, then you don't have to do it". He has clearly said it; but nobody is trying to find out the Kayama, only they're trying to find fault with this or that and fight the sense as you have become Brahmans, means knowing the Brahma. Those who know the Brahman are the real Brahmans and not those who are born in the Brahman caste. That is why people some times get very upset when they see so-called religious people. How can these be Brahmans if they are so perverse, and they can commit all kinds of sins. So by following any such religion or any such rigid ideas you cannot improve. If you call yourself a'Christian' then one thing has to be seen in a Christian that you cannot have adulterous eyes. Now I would like to know how many Christians can claim that. If they have no adulterous eyes about,I say women, they'll have adulterous eyes about things. So you cannot say that by becoming 'Christians' we have become really Christians. with each other. In the same way we can say about Hindus. In the Hidu religion, Krishna has said that the Atman resides in everyone. He never said that the birth determines your 'jati' (caste). But among Hindus we believe that everybody has a jathi and that everybody is a separate thing. Some people are to be treated like low, some as high, This is just the opposite of what Krishna has preached because He said in everyone there is Atman, Now this Resurrection time He has already mentioned, when your hands will speak, is in Sahaja Yoga. So after this you don't have to do any rituals. Now you have become a 'pir' (a realised soul) according to Him. Now once you have become a 'walli' you don't have to do all these things and you become a 'Dharmateeta'. It is said also in Indian philosophy by Shri Krishna that you

 Issue: 3 & 4 - 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze 45 become a 'Dharmateeta'. You go beyond religion, means religion becomes part and parcel of you, You don't have to have outside religions which are of no use. It is clearly said. And Shri Krishna has said it as clearly as anybody could say it. - Very, very clearly that you have to go beyond your gunas, beyond your dharmas, that means you have to become a person who is religious innately. And not to become a person who is just outwardly something like Christian, Hindu, Muslim. No! Inside! you have to become. just play Holi, be happy, joyous, dance and sing", that's what He said. Now what to do? Now if He has said so. So they started a new thing, "Let's make it a romantic stuff". Human beings know how to make everything perverse. Nobody can beat them in this. So they made him look like a very romantic personality, romancing with Radha. "Ra-dha', 'Ra' is energy, 'dha' is the one who has sustained energy. And yet they show romances with Her . She was Mahalakshmi Herself! They show His relationship with Mahalakhmi as if they were husband and wife. So there were also some poets who started describing them as husband and wife, and all kinds of nonsense. Now as a result of that you have seen what Shri Krishna has said that once you become from inside then I don't have to tell you, "Don't drink, don't do this, don't do that". Nothing. You just don't do it, you just don't do it, and you understand it so well that this should not be done, that should not be done. In divine relationship there is nothing like husband and wife. [There] is the power which is potential (feminine energy) and the power that is kinetic (masculine energy). There is no such relationship that exists as human beings try to make it. Because human beings have a habit to bring all the To overcome all kinds of ritualistic nonsense of religion, Shri Krishna's advent was there. It was a very important advent but don't know how many people Divine incarnations to their own levels As you have seen, the Best are the Greeks, who brought all the great incanations to their own levels. In the same way they could not do much with Shri Krishna so they said. "alright, make him a romantic personality, understand that. He came to show that it's all 'Leela', it's all the play of God, What is there to be serious? What is there to be ritualistic? You cannot bind God in any rituals. That's why He came on this earth; to. that will suit us". tell you that you should not try to blind yourself by rituals which are nonsensical. So it suited many horrible people. We had Wanhabin Laknow who had 365 wives and He used to dress up like Shri Krishna, sometime like Radha and dance and He said, "Now, I have become Shri Krishna". So many gurus came as Shri Krishna playing the flute, calling everyone else their gopis and this and that, al nonsense. VWe have so many groups now working like that. Brahma Kumaris and all These were His teachings, so many years back, He taught this six thousand years back. But still, if you see in every religion, there are so many rituals going on. So when the incarnations died, people started rituals, funny stuff, even when Shri Krishna died, they didn't know what to do now. Because He said, "no more rituals

 Issue: 3 & 4 - 2007 46 The Divine Cool Breeze So they went to the river and said, "Oh River, the saint never ate anything, he was absolutely detached about food, he didn't touch the food". And the river went that. When there is one Krishna, the rest are all gopis and gopas and they don't marry and all kinds of nonsense. This not marrying is absolutely absurd! and preverse and down. So they were surprised, "How is it the saint ate everything and did not eat anything?" It means he was in 'Aswadha', he was not involved into the food, he was detached and they were surprised. It looks like a lie from a human point of view, it is not. It is not. That is the fact. He is a Yogeshwara and he is so detached. brings a bad name to Shri Krishna. Shri Krishna was Yogeshwara. He was Yogeshwara. He was so detached that once His wives, who were His powers, said that "We want to go across and worship a particular saint". He said, "alright, why didn't you go? They said, "No, the river is in spate and we don't know how to cross the river". So people don't understand Divinity and they think that, "how can it be a person who has 16,000 wives and five other wives He said "Alright, you go and tell the river we want to go and see such and such a saint and Shri Krishna has said you calm down. If Shri Krishna is Yogeshwara and if He has had no wife, then you go down". can be a person who is not yet married?" This was possible for Shri Krishna because He was Yogeshwara. That is what you all have to be is Yogeshwaras. You are married, you have got children. I'm happy you're married because that is an auspicious thing So they went to the river and said that, "If Shri Krishna has had no wives and He is a Yogeshwara, then please go down". And the river went down. So they were very to do to marry to begin with. But you should not get involved with your family; my child, my family. Many people I have seen, they come to Sahaja Yoga, get married and get lost! Because to them . married now, "I'm enjoying my family now, looking after my family". Our family is the whole universe; it is not just my own wife and my children but the whole universe is our family. You are a universal beings. This is what He preached throughout, that you are a universal being and you have to be a part and parcel of the whole. When you are part and parcel of the surprised, that "He is supposed to be our husband and still He is Yogeshwara. He is so detached!" They crossed over and they went and worshipped the saint. So the saint said, "Now, you can go back". When they were coming back, they found again the river was in spate. So they went back to the saint and said, "Now how do we go back?" He said, "How did you come?" They said, "Shri Krishna said that, "You go and ask the river if I was a Yogeshwara, then you go down". "Alright, so you go and tell the river that the saint did not eat anything whatsoever and he was absolutely detached about it, so the river will go down". So they were surprised because they had fed him, he had eaten everything, he had done everything. whole, the microcosm becomes the macrocosm. And this is not just a lacture but has to happen within yourself. You have to develop your collective consciousness. This is the gift of Shri Krishna, because at the

 Issue: 3 & 4 2007 47 The Divine Cool Breeze brain He becomes the Virata. So now we have 3 identities within ourselves; on the heart is Shiva, in the brain is Shri Krishna, face it and say this was wrong, and this wrong I will not do again. And it's finished. For you are, after all, saints now. You have to become 'wallis'. You have now become realised souls, you have become now 'Atmajas'. You have got Brahmachaitanya, you have seen on your heads there was light, you have seen the proof of it. the Virata, and in the liver, Brahmadeva. So we have 3 identities and in the stomach, in the Void as you say, are all the Guru Tatwa where all the great Gurus from Adinath, Mohammed Sahib and others, up to Shirdi Sainath reside. All of them are the Guru principle which we worshipped last time Soldon't have to give you a second certificate. Only thing, you better understand and be aware of your own position as Shri Krishna has said you have to be aware of your Self. First to get Self-Realisation and then to be aware of your position. Then you'll be surprised how you develop proper attention and proper understanding. when we were in Andorra. So how they are all related with each other, how they have worked out together and brought you to the state of witness is very important. Now your Vishuddhi chakra has to Absolutely, it is an easy thing to do as soon as you find that you have achieved that witness-state. So please try to make yourself a witness. When you see something, go into thoughtless awareness. That is your fort. Don't think. See the beauty that is there, just pouring in, just watch how these three are standing still just watching you all. See, absolutely still, nothing is moving. They don't even allow one leaf to move let it be. Till the breeze, till [then] we just keep quiet and watch. Like these mountains how they are steadily watching everything and emitting joy and beauty. In the same way, we have to become a witness. We need not talk too much, we need not be improved. First of all, this feeling guility business was so much yesterday that, I tell you that it was impossible to put it out. There is nothing to feel guilty about, it's fashion, just a fashion; "I'm sorry", morning till evening, "I'm sorry, I'm sorry". What are you sorry for, for being a human being or for a Sahaja Yogi? So one has to be very pleasant towards oneself aiso, all the time "I'm sorry, I should not have done this, I should not have done that". All the time feeling sorry and feeling guilty spoils your left Vishuddhi. As your left Vishuddhi is spoilt what happens is that your Shri Krishna tattwa is gone. Then you cannot feel the collective, then you cannot understand what has gone wrong with you. keep quiet but in the centre we should witness the whole thing as 'Leela'. That's why He is called 'Leeladhara', means the one who sustains the Leela of persons. So just if you have to say sorry, say sorry to God and after that don't say sorry any more. You face it, Whatever you have done wrong, alright face it! This was wrong, alright.. it will not be done [anymore]. Do not argue with it, do not continue with it. Just It doesn't make you mad, it doesn't make you funny, but it makes you joyous. Anything that makes you joyous is the

 2007 48 Issue: 3 & 4 The Divine Cool Breeze Vishnu principle of Shri Krishna. I Hope all of us are going to enjoy our Vishnu principle hereafter as we have enjoyed before by meditating. Because when we meditate we go into Thoughtless Awareness. When we are in Thoughtless Awareness, then only we grow, otherwise we cannot grow. Whatever we may try we cannot grow. Unless and until we meditate we cannot become But sometimes it can be very temporary and it may go down if people don't take to it in the proper way. I wish you all the very great luck for your witness-state. In the witness state, we do not, in any way, express ourselves in a funny manner but just in looking at ourselves. Because only we have created all the problems. it is only we, detaching ourselves from ourselves, who can see these problems and can solve them. By God's Grace, as I know, you all are going to grow very much and this state is to be achieved. In every state whether it is a blessing, whether it is a progress or whether it is just a turnoil, you have to be seaworthy. Any ship which is seaworthy is the one which can face not only all kinds of beautiful voyages, but turnoils and even the tempest. Thoughtlessly Aware. All those who also want to gain in any walk of life, in any dimension, those who want to become, say, great artists, great scientists, great anything have to meditate. In Sahaja Yoga it is important you must meditate, otherwise the Kundalini will come down and you will lose all your talents. That is a fact which has to be told and you saw how people have got transformed. May God Bless You.

 MONA LISA in her smile is Eternal Cause of Ganesh Principle "Ganesha establishes within you the higher self. The baser self, which enjoys all the baser things in life, is cut down or completely destroyed by Shri Ganesha. If you see Mona Lisa, she cannot be an actress, or win any beauty contest, but her face is very serene and motherly and pure. Why is it she is eternally so much appreciated? The reason is there is Ganesha Principle in her. It's the mother. The story goes that this lady had lost her child and she would never smile again or cry. When one little child was brought to her, and she saw the child, the smile that came on her face of her love for the child is being depicted by this great artist. Even the eyes of a crocodile cracking her eggs to take out the babies are so gentle and loving. But when you become modern, your actions are funny. So love for your child has to be absolutely important, but as Sahaja Yogis you should not have attachment, only for your child." H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi (Shri Ganesh Puja, Les Diablerets- Switzerland, 10th August 1989)

 fHELGOME Pratisthan-Gurgaon "When we meditate we go into Thoughtless Awareness. When we are in Thoughtless Awareness, then only we grow, otherwise we cannot grow. Whatever we may try we cannot grow. Unless and until we meditate we cannot become Thoughtlessly Aware. In Sahaja Yoga it is important you must meditate, otherwise the Kundalini will come down and you will lose all your talents. That is a fact which has to be told and you saw how people have got transformed." (H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi) SHRI KIRSHNA PUJA Milan Ashram - 06.08.88



----------------------

2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The
Divine Cool Breeze
March-April : 2007
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Divine
Cool
Breeze
The
2007
MAR. APR.
NIRMALA.
NIVERSAL
PURE
CONTENTS
Christmas Puja 2006, Pune
3
- Los Angeles, USA - Oct.2006
Navratri Puja
New York, USA - 16.6.1999
Public Programs
10
11 The Path of Ascent
12 A Fact (An Experience)
Advice by Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi - 22.3.1977
13
The Creation Of Lord Jesus - 11.4.82
24
Description of the birtb of Shri Jesus
30
Her Holiness - Shri Mataji's Advice
33
36 Ready For The War?
38 America Calling
West Coast receives Shri Adi Shakti
39
By the Grace of Shri Ganesha
40
Shri Krishna Puja - 6.8.1988
41
DHARMA
VMHSIA
RELIGION
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 COOL BREEZE
THE
DIVINE
Published by
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 108, Chandragupt Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411029
Ph. No. : 020-25285232
Printed by
Krishna Priter & Designer
Tri Nagar, Delhi-35
Mob.: 9212238008
For Subscription Please Write to:
Nirmal Trasformatiom Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 108,Chandragupt Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411Q29
Tel.No.: 020-25285232
Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles, Miracle Photographs etc.
To
Shri O.P. Chandna
G-I1 (463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110034
Ph.: 011-65356811
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 The Christmas Puja
(Three Days Seminar)
Nirmal Nagri, Bhukam, Pune
(24th December to 26 December)
The three days seminar was in fact
main pandal in the evening for Puja. The
evening wore a very serene look with a
beautiful golden yellow sun set against the
hilly back ground. Sky was clear. A vèry
comfortable temperature
a historical seminar in all respects. The great
celebration by 12-15 thousand Sahaja Yogis
present and participating and the
tremendous flow of vibrations has made it a
part of Sahaja History.
It was just the other day that the
Sahaja Yogis across the globe had
gathered here in this very holy place to
offer their puja at Her Holy Lotus Feet of
Shri Mataji in Her Shri Mahalakshmi Form
and the experiences were fantastic. While,
today we have gathered here again to
invoke His powers of Shri Jesus in Her Shri
Maha Vishnu Form. Although every time the
Christmas day reminds the yogis of the
Ganapatipule days as Shri Maha Ganesha
Himself awakens within us as Shri Jesus and
yearns for our Divine Mother to accept the
Puja. Nevertheless, the Nirmal Nagri
seemed nothing less than the Ganapatipule
experience with its mundane earthy lustre
and fragrance excepting the colour of earth
are not that red as in Ganapatipule and the
Guru in His form of the Arabian sea is not
so close by.
24th December, 2006- was a
memorable musical evening for Sahaja
Yogis. The evening excitement escalated
with the staging of the Dance Drama by the
Sahaja children of ISPS, Dharamshala,
India, to explain the story of Creation, the
Cosmos and its essence and the Causal,
the origin of the various notes of music,
subliming it with the original score of the
most powerful declaration of the advent of
Shri AdiShakti in Her own words from an
old archived audio score. The silence that
followed was just celestial.
The Evening rolled with play of the
vibrations as the collectivity enjoyed the
three hours performance by the ISPS
children. The day was done with the
announcement of the rematched couples to
get married on 26th December.
At quarter to six the Puja pandal was
almost half filled as if it was gradually
spreading its wings to accommodate the
larger collectivity with their beautiful and
fragrant attire as they kept on pouring. The
little Ganeshas, dressed beautifully,
appeared playful, while the adults tried to
adjust themselves to catch up the best of
the times, either by rushing in front or
occupying a comfortable place close by the
four giant projection screens spanning
across the ground. The interior decoration
of the stage had the baroque art of a palatial
architecture with the centre attraction of
25th December 2006- the second
day was dedicated to the offering of the
Christmas Puja at Her Holy Lotus Feet of
Shri Mataji in Her Shri Jesus Mary Form in
the evening. Puja timings were
announced for six thirty but collectivity was
requested to be in meditation right at
quarter to six to avoid any hurried
movements before the puja. Although in the
morning the wonderful musical programme
did much of the cleansing in the collectivity
that swelled up to approximately 15-18
thousand in the open air space before the
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 - 2007
Issue: 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
throne set for Shri Mataji.
could not be seen.
At half past six the meditation started
with the three Mahamantras and bhajans by
musical choir group. Kaisi Ye Phuhar
Chali. . Ek Gauri ke Dulare, ek Radhaji
ke Pyare . the two bhajans were enough
to set the collectivity to the right meditative
state to go into the meditation with screening
of the 2001 Christmas Puja message of H.H.
Shri Mataji in Ganpatipule, India. It was just
as if Shri Mataji was physically present as
the collectivity listened to Her Powerful
messages. Speaking on the essence of
Christ Shri Mataji reminded us that "Christ
was the embodiment of Param Chaitanya,
He was Omkara. He was Shri Ganesha. And
those who follow Him have to be very
different people. But it always happens in
every religion that they go at random into
the opposite direction, completely opposite".
Concluding the pravachan Shri
Mataji Said : "I hope you all people
understand the importance of spreading
Sahaja Yoga. If you don't do that, you are
absolutely useless. The greatest thing for
Me, as you have so many lights here, we
should have many more Sahaja Yogis all
over the world, if you want to change this
world and if you want to avoid all the trails
and turbulations of the useless life they are
leading -you have to save them! You have
to salvage them. That's your job, that's what
you have to 'pay' for Sahaja Yoga. Not for
yourself, not for yourself. Don't get worried
about yourself.
Sahaja Yoga. This is what is your job now.
Your job is not important; only this is
important, how many people you give
Realisation".
You have to spread
Thereafter when Shri Jagdambe Aai
Further speaking about Jesus Christ,
Shri Mataji explained that The Essence of
Christ's life was detachment and secrifice
.. He stood for Truth..That you have to
become the Spirit. Talking of Mohammed
Sahib Shri Mataji explained the meaning of
Meraj (the awakening of Kundalini) and
Jehad (to achieve victory over shad - ripus).
Further, talking on the Maryadas and the
Protocols Mother thus spoke, "And in these
modern times, as we see, people have
crossed all the maryadas, all the things of a
religion. Before, I went to America; I was
surprised how they have forgotten about
morality. ...
Re was being sung, the announcement
came up from the stage to play the Shenai
to welcome Her Holiness Shri Mataji in the
Nirmal Nagari as message of Her arrival
flowed in. it was almost at half past eight
that Swagata Agata Swagatam filled the air
and the collectivity stood up with their
joining in the chorus to welcome our most
beloved Mother in the stage.
Extraordinary flow of vibrations filled
the entire milieu. As the curtains were raised
it was the most spectacular sight that the
yogis were yearning for so long to catch up.
The collectivity was blessed to witness the
Devi with Her Divine Grace seated in Her
beautifully decorated chair. It was a
breathless moment as if everything froze at
that point of time. Mother looked so cheerful
that every heart felt that Mother will enlighten
Her children like yester years with Her
On the subject of Christ and the
Realization Shri Mataji said that Christ was
not only a Realized Self; He was
'Relization' himself!" From India He
returned to West to teach them "Nirmal
Tatwam' without which The Light of Truth
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 5n
2007
Issue: 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
Form. As the Shringar concluded with
VishwaVandita the World Council
coordinators, and India Trust members were
called for performing the Arti. The Arti and
the Maha mantras were recited as the puja
concluded at quarter to ten.
divine message again after a long pause.
The giant projection screens very
professionally captured the close up of Her
Divine gesture and the radiant shinning face
of Mother. It was so vibrant, so powerful yet
so compassionate, subtly expressed with a
child-like grace in Our Mother. It was indeed
Her Shri Maha Ganesha form that was
before us. Could all that be just illusion..or
it was just Mahamaya in Her actual form.
Words fails to describe the moment. It was
It was then the turn for offering the
international gifts at Her Holy Lotus Feet of
our Shri Mataji. But before that a huge six
tier beautifuly decorated white Christmas
cake was blessed cut by our most beloved
Mother for Her children (that was brought in
by a group of red coloured Santa dressed
yogis). Sir CP helped Mother with the cake
as he stood up and offered the cake piece
to Shri Mataji.
like the God experience...it was like the
direct impact of the oceanic expansion of
the Love from within for seeking to be 'being
one' with the God. The sudden insight
reflected a childlike wonder, ecstatic
exaltation above bodily and personal
existence, sublimed in a timeless frame
within a nameless expression.
The International gifts flowed like
showers of love from most of the countries
of the world. While gift from the little angels
of the Nirmal Prem NGO projects at Greater
Noida, ISPS, Dharmashala and state of
West Bengal from India added to the
collective offering of the gifts at Her Holy
Lotus Feet.
Suddenly, the silence..the ràpport
that was built between Mother and the
children was interrupted with the
announcement for the puja by invoking Shri
Ganesha with offering flower at Her Holy
Lotus Feet by children aged between 8 to
12 years. Little Ganeshas with a santa caps
were seen rushing from everywhere around
the stage to not to miss the most awaited
moments of their lives. The choir started with
"Vinati
It was after a long pause that our
beloved Pappaji, Sir CP stood up to address
the collectivity with very powerful words
and expressions that touched all our hearts
and there was a vow in between. It was
indeed a part of the resolution taken by the
collective on behalf of the world Sahaja
collective and vowed before our most Holy
Mother. Sir CP began with these words...
puja
Suniye'...(song composed by Mother
Herself)" and then followed by the
recitation
permission bhajan
Ganesha
of the Shri
Atharvashirsham The puja continued
through many more powerful bhajans like
"Jai Jagadambe...Jai Ganeshji ki Ma
Ambe...Jago Savera'.Then it was the time
for the shringar bhajans with 'Namoh Namoh
Maria' and 'Jagi Tarak Janma' while seven
married ladies did the Shrinagar and
Kalpana didi was seen to guide and help
coronate the Devi in Her Shri Jesus Mary
"May I wish you all a very happy
Christmas and a very happy New Year? He
said you know when a new year comes
every one makes new resolutions every
time. People have many wishes to make that
they expect to be fulfilled. Continuing in his
flawless diction Sir CP said "he has a wish
to make that She (Shri Mataji) should
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 2007 6
Issue: 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
son-Lord Jesus - in this Punya Bhoomi. The
Morning activities sprang up live one after
the other with unfolding excitement and
sported a very bright look as the yoginis and
yogis enjoyed the special occasion of haldi
(turmeric) ceremony before the marriage
could be solemnised in the evening. The
Mehandi ceremony was performed just
after the Puja on 25th itself. Yogis and
Yoginis could be seen cheering up with
yellow cheeks and loved to be bathed in that
vibrated turmeric paste. It was like bathing
in total bliss amongst the collectivity
enjoying the coolness of the event and
dancing to the tunes of fast bhajans that so
naturally made the collective Kundalini
dance.
continue to be presiding here like this and
we
should be sitting here. And
accompanying this wish is the world needs
Her to spread the love and the message to
be one. He further said, that if this world
created by Her becomes the whole ultimate
world that we live in, will be the greatest of
the wishes. Then like a father he assured
and desired for us to take a strong
resolution that Shri Mataji has played Her
role and whose turn should it be now? The
entire collectivity after a pause affirmed-
"Ours". "Do you promise that"? "I stood up
just to get that promise from you on this New
Year"
The Curtains were drawn at quarter
to eleven as the collectivity stood up with
freezing chilliness in the air. The coolness
spoke for itself the level of vibration that rose
at that moment. Mother in Her Shri Jesus
Form blessed us on behalf of the 'entire
The entire milieu seemed to
transform the Nirmal Nagri into a heaven
on earth. Spontaneous expression emerges
in praise for this Punya bhoomi in Persian
couplet "Gar Firdous baroe Zameen ast,
hameen ast, hameen ast, hameen ast",
which means "If there be paradise on earth,
this is it, this is it, this is it" This couplet was
once expressed by Emperor Jehangir
during his first visit to Kashmir in India and
instantly fell in love with it.
collectivity of the world with all fortunes for
the years to come overflowing from our
palms and from hearts. Thank You Mother
for You accepted our prayers and the
Christmas Puja at Your Holy Lotus Feet.
Mother we promise you on behalf of
the world collectivity that we shall abide by
the resolution we just now made to Sir CP
on spreading Your meessage of Love and
taking Realization to the farthest corner of
the world by Your blessings. Please make
us Your effective instrument to carry forward
our desire as You are the Doer and the
Ultimate enjoyer.
It must be almost quarter past five
in the evening that Nirmal Nagri was
preparing to welcome Her Holy arrival of Shri
Mataji in Her Shri Gauri Form and solemnize
the marriage of more than 100 couples. The
ganas and the deities could tangibly be felt
around in that part of the heaven as if trying
to greet with fragrance brushing past the
Yogis and Yoginis rushing to catch up the
glory of that evening. Every heart felt there
was something very special that was
waiting for everyone as a surprise. It was
as if a collective desire in heart yearning to
meet the most beloved person. It was like
26th December, The Marriage Day:
was even more exhilrating since the
Sahasrardal Lotus was blooming open and
filling the whole campus with the Divine
fragrance of chaitanya. It was because Shri
Mata Ji, as Mother Mary, had awakened Her
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Issue: 3 & 4
2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
words that were beyond expression of joy.
As Sir. CP held the mike before Her Holiness,
Shri Mataji remarked in Hindi... As if
thousand of crackers brust out in joy...the
voice still rings in heart...as She said.....
"Shadiyan Ho gayin .(The marriages are
over), Aap Sabko badhayee (Congratulation
to your all)......then there were a few more
historic words...that go into history, but the
experience was terrific and made us recall
of an earlier years messages from
Her-Holiness.
heart that was talking without speaking,
listening without hearing and trying to
compose songs of joy within, without being
sung.
The grooms marched ahead with the
very vibrant popular Hindi film song numbers
(a parodey of a folk song) amidst the
dancing accompanying collectivity, while the
brides were instructed to offer their puja in
Her Nirakar Form at the holy alter of Shri
Mataji after audio play of a short recorded
message from Shri Mataji advising the
brides. The vibrations grew stronger as the
time rolled by. The choir rendered a few
popular bhajans. It was almost at quarter to
nine, some hundred plus would be brides
and the Bride grooms queued up against
the mid line curtains held in between them
to garland each other before the actual
ceremony of havan and solemnizing of the
marriage took place.
Shri Mataji once had revealed that
we have to ask for three things called
"salokya", "samipya, and "sannidhya" is the
companionship of God. But we have got
"tadatmya", which is oneness with God,
which is not in the concept of any one of the
yogis and the saints and the seers who have
been before, And this "tadatmya" we have
when we are outside Her body, while they
have this "tadatmya" when they are inside
Her body, when they are no more. So She
warned us that we should understand the
time limit. Shri Mataji thus spoke that we
must understand our greatness and we must
we people are
chosen for the highest work in this creation".
Exactly at Nine Her Holiness Shri
Mataji blessed the collectivity with Her
Divine Darshan. The marriage vows
invoking the deities of the seven Chakra
couplets were sung one after the other as
the 'would be brides' and the 'bride grooms'
gradually stepped forward seven steps to
come nearer. Then it was the time for the
couples to settle before the individual small
Haven Kund constructed for this purpose
with their respective Father-Mother-Uncle
and best Friends surrendering before Shri
Adi Shakti for solemnizing the marriage by
Her blessings of Shri Mataji. The event
passed on as Shri mataji very keenly
observed the entire ceremony biessing the
couple.
understand
how
Further it was announced that the
forthcoming Birthday Puja will be held at
Nirmal Nagari Pune, instead of Chhindwara.
Also the world collectivity of Sahaja Yogis
was invited on behalf of SirC.P. to join and
celebrate the 60th Marriage Anniversary of
Shri Mataji and SirC.P. The announcement
was cheered with thunderous applause.
Mr. Rajeev Bagaddhe from Pune
musical choir was then requested to lead the
popular Quawwali 'Meri Mata Ka Karam Hai'
Sir CP was in great Moods and seen joining
with the clapping rhythm along with the
It was then a historic moment that
made history as our most Divine Mother
blessed the couples and the event with
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 2007
8.
Issue: 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
It was in fact the collective Kundalini
that was involuntary dancing quite unaware
of what the physical self was enacting and
what the others were enjoying them and the
moment who did not rise to dance
physically in collective. There was not much
of restrain as the curtains were drawn close
collectivity as Mr. Gregoir, Mr. Dinesh Rai
were requested to join the dancing couples
before Shri Mataji infront of the stage with
the tunes of the quawwali number.
Collectivity Shall remember this event for
long. It was an explicable moment very
difficult to put in expression.
to announce the holy departure of Shri
The entire cosmos as if have opened
it enfolding arms and the infinity trying to
spread out in timeless ponoply that helped
dissolve all doubts, all separation from the
divine. Fear of losing, achieving the thought-
lessness and getting integrated to that great
power of the Creator dissolved in a
comforting flood of bliss, peace and dazzling
experience -It was indeed the ultimate Holy
connection with the Divinity, That power that
created us..the meaning of God rendered
so lucid before all thoughts confronted and
the entire collectivity was in total bliss. It was
like enjoying the resurrection of the soul and
the Spirit within, with the divine presence of
the great power on Earth...the greatest
power in the Cosmos that created us.
Mataji. The collectivity was already dissolved
into that heaven of freedom where we pray
Mother let our Spirit be awake.
Thank You Shri Mataji for this historic
day, as the coolness spoke for itself.
Interestingly many cameras froze the
unseen deities and ganas in their frame of
focus, who too had joined the collectivity on
this day and were enjoying even long after
Mother left a trail of vibrations behind for Her
children and Ganas to enjoy...probably just
caught unaware in frames as miracles all
around.
Jai Shri Mataji
SITA India
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 NAVRATRI PUJA
October 2006
Los Angeles U.S.A.
My dad was one of the musicians present
and so told me some amazing stories about
it. It was Gandhiji's birthday that day, so they
presented the National Anthem of India, and
soon following some bhajans to the Devi.
During the bhajan Ma Teri Jai Ho, Mother
actually sang the ENTIRE song! Sadhana
didi was in tears, and everyone's jaw was
dropped in disbelief. I was told that when
Mother sang, the vibrations in the room were
almost electric, everyone could feel the
energy coming from Her. It was such joyful
news and I can only imagine what it must
have been like to witness. If I can find video
of this l'll post a link here immediately, but I
am not sure when it would be available, or if
anyone actually got it on tape.
Again just to keep everyone updated
on what's going on here. In the past 2 weeks
or so, there have been small daily pujas to
Mother for Navaratri, where oti is presented
and occaisionally some bhajans. In order to
keep it small and simple, the whole
collective doesn't attend the pujas but I am
just going to tell what I have heard from my
parents and other aunties and uncles.
During the 6th day of Navaratri, at 1:30 in
the morning, Mother Herself was saying
repeatedly "I am the Devi, I am the Devi."
When the ladies went up to offer oti, they
could only reply, "Shri Mataji, you are the
Devi, you are Mahadevi and please
protect us." Everyone was amazed to hear
Mother speak those words, everybody in the
room felt the power of them. A couple nights
ago, on Dussehara, the 10th day of Navaratri
(Monday night) a few yogis were asked to
Mother's house to present some bhajans.
All my love,
Sulu
(Internet Version)
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Public Program - Follow Up to VIP Conference
New York, USA, 16.6.1999
the meaning of it. But in actual I've seen this
Kundalini Yoga business is terrible. Because
people have suffered so much, So it's
something very different, I don't know what.
they do in the name of Kundalini Yoga.
Q. Is there a healing energy that will come
of the meditation tonight?
SHRI MATAJI: Yes. First of all one must
know, what is this energy is. You must
understand, and it heals people, no doubt,
it does heal. First it will heal you and then it
will heal others also. No doubt about it. It
Q: Do you believe that the Kundalini is the
same life-force energy that the Chinese
called Chi, that this energy is part of us, part
of the world that we can access in this way
and also through things like Chi-Gong and
Tai-Chi, is it the same force?
does.
Q: what is the connection if any of Sahaja
Yoga and Reiki or are they parallel with one
anoiher?
SHRI MATAJI: Ya,ya. It's true. But you see
it is, it has something to do with that, and
that is what is our ego and super-ego. The
Chinese, what they have written, it's correct.
But Chinese also don't know who is Lao-
SHRI MATAJI: I don't want to criticize
anything, only thing you should see, all these
things, what have you gained.... First
question, what have you gained by doing
anything? Have you got self-realization?
Have you got the knowledge of the Divine?
Have you felt the cool breeze of the Holy
Ghost? Just like that. As a Mother I would
say what did you get out of it? There are so
many in the market, so many. I would ask
you this question. Child, what did you get?
There's no end to such things.
Tse, can you imagine? Lao-Tse is the man
who talked about this thing, He's the one
who told them about Kundalini and they don't
know who is Lao-Tse.
Especially in America, I don't know what sort
of Chinese live here. It's such a great source
of knowledge, and what they have said is a
perfect thing. But everything gets integrated
in Sahaja Yoga. All the knowledge, all the
scriptures, everything gets integrated.
Absolutely integrated because out of light
you see the truth in all of them. There is truth
in everything, there is truth in every religion...
Q: Does the Kundalini Yoga that you teach
has anything to do with Tantra Yoga?
SHRI MATA JI: You see, the name is
Kundalini Yoga but it has nothing to do with
Kundalini, I must tell you. So, Sahaja Yoga
and Kundalini Yoga is the same if you see
"Internet Version
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 The Path of Ascent
from illusions. Keep me in reality. Take
away the sheen of superficiality. Let me
enjoy your Feet in my heart. Let me see
your Feet in my heart."
"Whatever you do, it should please
Me is one of the ways. It should please Me.
That's one of the signs.
So how should we do it? Put Me in
your heart. Just try to put Me in your heart.
It's very simple. I'm before you now. I am in
Only such people even the
Mahavishnu, Mahesha have done that.
Don't you think you have to do it?
person.
So humble down yourself. Humble
I was trying to give Realization to one
I said that "You
down yourself in your heart. Humble down
in your heart. Enjoy your humility. Enjoy your
virtues. The greatest virtue of a Sahaja Yogi
is humility.
of my relations just today and
don't close your eyes."
He said, "No. Il'm not looking at your
face because, when I see you, I feel you
are my aunt, but I'm just looking at your Feet
here so that I shouldn't feel any more that
Now so many things you have seen
to convince you, but in no way can it be any
kind of subjection because what subjection
can you give Me? Think of that. When every
subjection is a biessing, what subjection you
are giving?
you are any more my aunt. You are very
great and your face is the one that puts me
into illusions."
He could see. It's a Mahamaya. He
Every feeling in the heart is a
said, "Only at your Feet I grow and through
your Feet only I can get over this barrier,
this feeling."
blessing. Just now you feel it and you feel
the joy in your heart. Then what is your
subjection about what? I can understand
people who have just newly come or are
good for nothing, but you are not on the
periphery. But some of them do go into
periphery in no time. You give them some
work firish. If I am sweet to someone-
finished. If I see, someone-finished. I mean
this is too much. I can't even be nice to you.
In the same way, I mean I know I am
a Mahamaya. I know I am. I had to be. But
you have to put My Feet into your heart.
Just my Feet into your heart because
photo fades. Everything might be an
illusion. Might be. By seeing my face, you
do not get over your barriers.
To say, "I must see Mother, I must
do this, Mother must come to my house, She
must have food at my place, she must visit
my home - all this is so stupid. I cannot
understand what's the matter with these
If you do any mistakes, all right, then
you feel - then you get your left Vishuddhi.
You've done your mistake. "Oh look,
finished." You love Me. Maybe there is
something wrong in the love or maybe
something has happened. it doesn't matter.
people.
"Mother, please come in my heart.
Let me clean my heart so that You are
there. Put your Feet into my heart. Let
your Feet be worshipped in my heart. Let
me not be in delusion. Take me away
"Now I'm going to be cautious. I'm
not going to make any mistakes. How could
I do this mistake? Because I was not fully in
love. If I loved something I would not have
done such a mistake."
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 - 2007
12
Issue: 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
develop that awe, your Ekadasha Rudra will
disappear. Ekadasha Rudra will disappear.
Just think of the awe.
All right, so develop your love. No,
you will do "I feel guilty" because I have done
such a thing. So you miss this and that both,
so your mistake becomes a barrier again.
See the science and the joy and the
joy of the awe. It's deep, very deep like a
sea. Sea, on superficial level, is very
turbulent, but inside it is silent, absolutely
Don't feel guilty about it. We have to
progress further. Forget the past, forget the
past, forget the past. You have to go further.
You have to be serious people. When we
talk, we have to talk that dignity of that awe.
silent.
Feel that depth. Without awe, you
cannot go down."
That's very important and once you
A Fact
(An Experience)
It was 5 p.m. when I noticed that the
petrol of my scooter was in reserve on 5th
May 80 and I had to reach Gandhi Bhawan
at 6 p.m. to attend the 'SAHASRARA'
function arranged by Sahaja Ybgis of Delhi
with my child who was waiting for me at
home.
this thought came in my mind, a sikh youth
stopped his scooter by my side since the
traffic line was not cleared.
I was suddenly prompted to ask him
if the petrol was available in the city. He
promptly pointed out to the petrol pump next
to Ambedkar Stadium and advised me to go
there.
The distance that I had to travel was
In the swing of mind, though there
quite far off and the petrol was not sufficient
for the purpose. So hurridely I reached petrol
pump near Cdeon cinema just to hear that
there was no stock of petrol. On my way
home, at Asaf Ali Road petrol pump also I
could not get petrol. In past also for few days
there was shortage of petrol in the city due
to the disturbances in Assam and the petrol
was available only on the selected pumps.
I, therefore, lost the hope of reaching in time
for the function.
was hardly anyhope, I reached the petrol
pump and was surprised to see that the
petrol was available there. I hurriediy
purchased the petrol and reached Gandhi
Bhawan in time to attend the function with
the child.
My above experience convinced me
further that H.H. Mataji Nirmala Devi is
always there with us to help all the Sahaja
Yogis whenever we remember Her.
Sakshat Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
By this time I had reached Delhi Gate
and while awaiting for the green signal from
the traffic police, I was feeling in my heart
that unless the divine help comes to me from
the Mother, H.H. Mataji Nirmala Devi, I shall
not be able to attend the function. No sooner
nато патаha.
Gopal Patankar
New Delhi.
23-5-80.
(from archives)
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Advice Given by
Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan
22nd March 1977
Sahaj Yoga is not a thing to the taken
that frivolously. It works in you in no time.
Effortlessly. After Realisation, for all
Human-Beings, it is necessary to
understnad the complete working of the
Kundalini and the Vibrations. You must know
be that. You will work it out very well.
Now hwould like you to ask Me
questions. Because when I go away, I don't
want the halfhearted people to ask you
questions because when the questions start,
the Murmuring Souls will try to bring out
people, who are as yet halfbacked and then
they will fizzle out. So you have to
completely mature into Sahaj Yoga. Do not
listen to any body because he said so. You
ask him what is his authority. Does he know
anything about Kundalini, how many people
he has given realization to? Then you keep
quite, You have seen Kundalini moving, you
have seen its Pulsation. You have felt the
Vibrations. Any-body can talk against
Sahaj-Yoga. It is very easy. Any Dick, Tom,
Harry can say. Very easy to criticize
anything. But if you are a serious people,
then you must understand that you have felt
the Vibrations. They are there and that you
are going to proceed further. It is for your
own good and for your own asking you
should get it. If there are certain problems
on your Chakras, they must be corrected.
So what is the question now?
the complete Science of it. What is the use
of the money if you do not know how to
spend it or use it? So the best thing is to get
it. If you are sick, and cured by Sahaj-Yoga,
you will find that you will become so much
healthier and better. You will be enriched
much more. If you do not take to Sahaja
yoga, gradually you will find that your
Vibrations are lost after some time be-cause
God doesn't want to waste His Vibrations
on people who do not want to give it to
others. There are some people who will give
explanations, that we have got families, how
are we to give up? I have also family, you
know I have Grand Children also. This is
the only good thing you can do without
paying a single pie. You have got it without
paying a single pie; and you have to
distribute it without taking a single pie, and
you have to enjoy it. You can enjoy it only if
you can give. You have to learn all these
things and by God's grace, here are at least
Q.
fifty percent people who can tell you about
Kundalini, quite well. They are going to work
out with you, they are going to tell you about
this. Nothing to feel bad, because once you
master the Kundalini, you will just become
the same. So there is nothing to feel superior
or inferior about it. Only thing is that to-day
you have jumped into the sea and learnt how
to swim, and they have learnt it long time
back. Gradually you will pick up very fast. It
is only your simplicity and earnestness to
Why god has created this Ego and
Super-Ego within us ?
From our stomach, the Med, the fat,
rises into our Brain, passing through all these
centres, evolving to be the Cells of the Brain,
Even brain is the Med, fat cells,
what you call as Mendu. So for the Med to
become the Mendu, it has to evolve, to
achieve a certain amount of changes of
Awareness, of Human-Awareness. The
Human brain is the most Precious one
Ans.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 - 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 3 & 4
14
constantly changing and then you reach a
position where you say that this is the
position. All this is done by a Human Brain.
So a Human Brain is the most coveted thing,
most Evolved thing, and with the brain heart
also. Human Heart also has to be co-related
with the brain. So both the things Evolve.
Our stomachs are evolved very well. Actually
our stomachs are much more subtle and
they cannot take gross things, we require.
very fine and sofisticated things for
digestion.
because it has a dimension, which animals
do not have; a Mental Dimesion you can say.
an Emotional Dimension, His physical
Dimension also has another Dimension. We
can say that on every Dimension we have
four sides. Emotionally, we understand love,
we understand how to receive, how to
reciprocate. We understand beauty, we
understand poetry, we understand sweet
gestures. We can creat these things also.
On the Mental level our dimension has a
Fourth dimension, I should say, by which we
creat things. Animals cannot create. We can
create. On the Physical side also we have a
special advantage, that we have lifted our
heads up. Our hands act in a different way
than our feet. We have a better capacity to
hold things. Not only that, but also we can
use this body to lift much heavier things that
are here. For instance we can create a
Crane and lift the things. So we have also
got a power by which we can have Mastry
over the Matter. This is not among the
animals. So we have already a higher
Dimension which is reached in our brain.
How such a beautiful Human brain is
Created!
At this stage to protect this Brain, you
require a hard covering. So God has
created this system by which you get
completely covered. By creating the Ego and
Super-Ego, which is just to say a by-
product of your activities. Any activity a
Human being does has a reaction. For
instance, if you say NO to something, it has
a reaction, it creats his Ego. If he accepts
something he creats a Super-Ego.
This is also done, because the Brain
of the Man is made Triangular and Prismatic
in nature. It is Prism like Brain. In this Prism
of this Brain, when the Rays of God's divine
Power flows in, it goes into refraction inta
different angles, and by the principle of the
Parallelogram Of Forces, part of it escapes
outside this side and part from this side. One
side the man can think of the future and of
the past but the animals do not think of these
things. So that is how our Brain is
specially made one. It is protected by
creating the Ego and Super-Ego completely
by which our Talu, where the Fontanel bone
is covered; you are separated from the all
Pervading Power, from which you get your
independence, and, freedom, to act as you
like, to use your brain as you like to lear%3B
because the Evolution, if it has to go any
further, this is the Transition period, when
So at this stage of Human Evolution,
when man has reached this stage, we
should say that it is still in a transitional stage3B
little more he has to jump and he becomes
that for which he has been Created. So in
this transition it is necessary to Protect that
Brain very carefully one purpose, secondly
to make this Brain independent of the will of
God and to make it used by itself, so that it
develops another dimension of Wisdom, by
faultering, by making mistakes, by
correcting, by failing, by going into extremes.
Man starts coming in the Center and
understands, that this is the position. Now
see in our country the Political views. Since
the British time the Political scene is
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Issue: 3 & 4 - 2007
15
The Divine Cool Breeze
Mokshdayini. No doubt about it. If that is my
nature, than I will do it. If the Nature of the
Sun is to give you Rays of the Sun, it will
give. It is not difficult, because that is the
nature of the Sun. If it is the nature of the
human being to see things and colours, he
will see it. What is so great about it, what is
to be proud about its. I mean I don't
understand, that if You are That, then You
are That. What is there to be higher or
lower? I can't just understand. This is all
because of the Human Ego, that a man has
valuations. He thinks this is higher, that is
lower, In a way, Human-Beings are higher
than animals. And Human-Beings are much
higher than Gods; and Much Higher than
God almighty sometimes, because he has
to beg you to come out to Sahaja-Yoga.
Unless and until you are freely accepting
Sahaja-Yoga, it does not work out. You have
to be absolutely free. I cannot, entice you,I
cannot hypnotise you, I cannot do any thing.
It has to be there. And that is why it works
like That. Why should you feel that there is
something wrong in it? It has worked with
so many people. So many people have felt
it. You will also feel it. It is your Due, so you
are feeling it. And supposing there is
something wrong with the seed or
something wrong with the flower, We will
correct it also. It may take two days more.
Doesn't matter. It is not something
extraordinary for me. Yes it is, in a way,
because in all my previous lives I have not
done it. So I feel very happy. For example,
when you are a leaf, you cannot do the
things of a flower. when you are root, bee
cannot come to you at all. But when you are
a flower, then a Bee can come and do it.
What is so much surprising about it?
Because it has been Promised so many
times, It has been said, even Vivekananda
has said, that Mother will come and She will
do the Job. He has also said that Buddha is
you have to try.
We can say like this; for simile,
because simile should not be drawn too far.
Suppose I prepare one instrument: After
preparing it I first try it on a small cell. And
then I put it to the mains. In the same way
first it is tried seperately, individually with an
articulation. The other day I gave a simile of
an egg. An egg is created by articulating it
completely protected, till it reaches the
complete stage of its re-birth, the Dwija, then
only the mother bird pierces the egg and
there is a re-birth of the chick. In the same
way you are made, protected, so that you
are made ready, Ultimately you reach a
stage, where you are just ready to jump into
another state, and it happens. In the
incubators also, if you put these eggs, with
the warmth, warmth is the love, and with that
they grow, and at a point all of them.hatch
out. Of course not at the same time, but say
within a couple of days.
It is in the same manner that the
Sahaj Yoga is working out to-day. That you
are just ready to have it. You had a very great
past, you have been seeking, you have been
going round, and you have no idea as what
you had been doing. To-day you are
wearing ordinary dresses, like ordinary
people, and to-day you are here for a
lecture with Me, and at this time this
happens. This is a greatest miracle for some
people, but for Me it is just a happening. It
has to HAPPEN at this time. We see lots of
flowers turning into fruits, but we don't call it
a miracle. Because we have taken it for
granted. So many of these miracles we have
taken for granted. Now it has to happen to
Human-Beings. And when it HAPPENS, it
HAPPENS LIKE THAT!- Naturally, you think
that for Me it is a child's play. Because that
is My Job, to give you Moksha. I am a
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 16
The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 3 & 4
2007
just a part, a little drop. He has said all these
things. When you quote Vivekananda, read
Him properly. He has also said, I cannot do
anything, Mother is going to do. Everybody
is putting on that Mother. Shankaracharya Many people know. Gagangad Maharaj
said Mother will come. In the Bible, if you
read John's revelation, that a woman will
come and She will give Rebirth, She will be
protecting the Child", all these things are
there. And now when the Mother comes, you
say "Why are you the Mother'? Now the
Mother must come with a horn or what
should She do? But I am the Mother, and I
have to do the job. Now you start finding thing? Why has She given you? What have
faults with Me. So what to do with you
people? After all what should I have?
Whatever I have thought proper, I have
What else do you want Me to have? If Lord
Ganesha has a trunk of an Elephant, it has
a meaning. And if somebody has something things. It is on the Tape. There is another
else, it has a meaning. We say that Surabhi,
the first cow which appeared in the
Vrindavana, in the VAIKUNTHA stage. She
appeared, and all the Gods were inside Her.
We accept a cow but we do not accept a
Human-Being, who has got these Powers.
It's all right. Don't accept. Not that you should
flately accept Me because once I say it, then
there are many matajis all over now. But
what I am saying is that you should feel the
Vibrations yourself, you should take them,
and if you see the Kundalini rising then that
is the first sign. If you see the Kundalini
rising, you should. When I went to
Ambernath, there was one Janardan
Maharaj. He had come because he had
heard about Me. He came just to test me,
or whatever it is. So he was siting near the
stage, the people told Me that he may not
accept you Mataji. I said if he is a Realized
Soul, he may. When I just went inside and
went to the stage, he just fell flat on My feet. thing. How are you going to behave yourself,
Then he told Me, I saw everybody's or you are going to behave in a manner, that
Kundalini rising, as soon as You stepped is going to be detrimental to your
inside. I could see. They can see also. He
saw everybody's Kundalini rising. As soon
as I came in they would not, but the Kundalini
rose, to wish you welcome. So they know.
know. He told many people, I have not met
him. He has told many people about Me.
When I went to see him, he talked to ME as
he would talk to an Incarnation. He did not
talk to me as he would talk to Mrs. C. P.
Srivastav. He did not. They have taped all
that he has said about Me. He asked the
fellows, 'Why Mataji has given you all this
you done? How many of you are going to
give their lives to Her? She has given you
this precious thing. You cannot part with one
farthing. What are you going to do for Her?
He scolded all of them. He said all these
person, his name is Prahlad Brahamchari.
He is from Calicut. He went to America, He
told people about Me. They now know about
Me. He told them that She has come now,
and there is nothing to worry. but you people
are such egoistical that you cannot bear to
hear such things about anyone. That is the
truth. You are too egoistical. There is a
proverb, 'empty vessel makes too much
sound.' It is a sign of emptiness. Those
people are telling me, even that Nagnath
Baba from Ambernath said 'MATAJI they can
never accept you. They have never
accepted any Incarnation uptil now, and they
are not going to accept You. Try Your level
best. The Gangangiri Maharaj says 'For
twelve years you try. If they are all right, then
I will come down'. They are all afraid of
Human-Beings. Really it is true. There are
like that. Three very old people came
many
to see me in Haridwar. They said the same
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 - 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 3 & 4
17
progressing Spiritual life, What are you going
to do? It is for you to decide.
there, a sentence here, will come down. I
said now leave it now, if you want your
Realization then come along and have it.
And the greatest problem is that all this is
love, that is just a form of love, it is nothing
but Love which expands, gives you
Vibrations, again receives back, it goes
in a parabola like that which you call a
Pradakshina of a Shakti. What is Shakti?
Shakti is a Parabola. And now Einstein is
If you have read a few books, you
cannot settle ME in those books, You see
there is Yoga Shastra, Yesterday, Justice
Vaidya told you that there is Satvik Yoga-
shastra etc. Yoga Shastra for ME! What is
it? Did Rama read any books or Krishna read
any books, that I am going to read any
books? You see this is for people, who have
know Everything So why
should I worry about such things? I have to
just pull you out. That's all. I know My job. A
person who knows the job does not have to
do all this. And it comes to this that I have to
talking about a parabola. We have a
parabola long time back here. We know it
was Shakti. You can explain this in your
science and everything. In this life I have
learnt English Language, a little of science
and a little of Psychology and all that. These
psychologists are so onesided people. Yoga-
Shastrakar are onesided people. They do
not match each other. I am telling you the
basic principle between the two. Both are
human efforts, I am a different person. Now
what should I do if I am like that? How can I
become like you? If I know how to come up
why should I become a little baby and say I
must crawl up gradually.
to climb up, I
tell you all this. You yourself should realise
that Mataji is doing like that just by Her
Chitta. I will tell you about a case. Yesterday
they told me about one of our Sahajyogi's
brother, who drinks too much and he is in
Goa. What can we do that he should come
here? He came to-day. He came just like
that. It is just my attention. If you put anything
to my attention, it works. I don't have to
bother. It is like a Human being lifting
anything. Now an ant will say how did you
lift it, it is possible for a Human being to lift
like this, and for me it is easy to lift your
Kundalini and to do the miscellaneous things
like that, because it is my attention, CHITTA,
my attntion itself is Anand in itself, is Bliss
itself, is a knowledge. I don't need any
intelligence or anything because I know
everything. In my head there is a library. You
have read one book, that fellow has found
something from somewhere, now how am I
to tell you how this mad man has found out
something from somewhere and how did he
find in darkness what did he find. He must
I am an old Woman Of Thousands
Of Years! So know everything. You are still
a baby. How. can I become like you? So
to-day is the day I thought of telling you
about it; so that you just don't worry about
things how I do it. I really do things, I cure
people. Now here is the gentleman, a Heart
patient, ask him. Even before I met him, he
got quite cured and I cured him. There are
so many people here who will say that. Once
a Frenchman asked me a question about
the Western life. I did not answer it at that
time. I started saying something else. So
the boy Rajesh, who brought him to me,
said, 'You see MATAJI has not answered
your question. She has recorded it, and it
will act! Because in his case it has acted.
have found somebody's leg and thought it
must be somebody's hand, Now for a
person like me, it is so difficult to go to every
person, any body who has read a book
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 18
2007
Issue: 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
So, the God; whatever, he has done
Kabira, and Hiranya Sanhita and all your
Yogas. I am going to prove it to you. Have
you ever seen Kundalini pulsating before?1
will show you the pulsation of a Kundalini.
You have never heard before, that on the
is for your good. He has given Ego and
Superego, not to get spoiled and finished.
You cannot blame God for that. Supposing
God has given you light, to go that way. He
has told you to take an independent light to fingers the Vibrations are coming. But you
find out that. And if you start burning with
that light, what can the God do? It is not
God's mistake! Many people think that this
Ego is horried. Ego you must have. You have
not to fight with your Ego. Only thing is that
your Ego should become one with that of
God. That's all. Its a very simple thing. If
you just become One with that God; now
supposing this has an Ego. How can I talk
with this? I will say something, this will say
something. But if it has no Ego, as his ego Then we never said 'why do we go to the
has become one with my saying, then it
carries my voice, carries my sayings,
everything it is so simple. It is very simple searching inside for you. And I have found it
thing but you cannot do it. Is the point. So I
am here. Once you are awakened once your
light has come, then you can do it also. Why
Not? I have told Gangangad Maharaj, when
he started telling me, why he cannot give
realisation to people like this. I have done
so much and I have undergone so much!
How these people are doing it? These
people will become very Egoistical. I said,
"They will not' He said 'how do you know?'I
said that they are made after the Pattern of
Shri Ganesh. Same powers they will have.
Even with the finger moving, My Sons can
give Realisation, they can. Who are you to
challenge and ask Me? He kept quite. He
said, You are the Mother. Do what you
please.
have not only felt it, but can diagnose a
person. You can tell a person, what he is
suffering from and cure him also, Now you
will say' how is it possible? Somebody says
that ten thousand years before, we have
never heard a thing like this. Every thing
must happen ten thousand years before?
Then why are we proceeding further? Better
go back. What an argument is this? After-
all we have discovered going to the Moon.
Moon? 'You see it is a simple question. But
you have to know that somebody is
out. I have visited all these Gurus. All these
Rakshasas. All of them, very nicely befooling
them. I tried to find out what they are upto!
Now I also know their tricks. I know what
they have done to you and that is why I can
correct it. I have studied all the permutations
and combinations and everything.
Everything of Kundalini, of whatever is
possible. It is not so simple with the Human
beings. They can be easily persuaded, they
can be enticed, they can be hypnotised. I
cannot be hypnotised. But you can. Anybody
can hypnotised you. I have seen thousands
of people getting hypnotised, taking out their
clothes, dancing, jumping. I have seen some
people, making faces like that. All sorts of
things can be done. The hypnosis is so much
that when they come before me, they, also
start doing that. Because they are used to
it. It is like Dr. Jekyl and Mr. Hyde, who list.
So it is wise for you to understand that I know
all these things, and I will tell you everything,
I have got it for you specially, I know all the
It is a fantastic thing; that is why it is
difficult for the people to understand. But
anything like this has to be fantastic. And
we have to prove the existence of God. We
have to prove that He exists, and He works.
All those people, talks about Nanaka,
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 - 2007
19
Issue: 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
theoretical ; if he comes to the programme,
or somebady goes to him and show how to
use his hands, he will become a master of
it. Because as it is he has knowledge, it will
fit into it. As if the Ganges will flow into all
the canals that have been made to receive
permutations all combinations, and you
don't have to do any research about it. No
money is needed to be spent. Still, you see,
there are people with me for the last seven
years, and still they say that Mother every
time You say something, we had to learn.
This is this, this is that, this combination, that
combination.
the water; and it will go and settle into it.
Perfectly. Your reading is not going to be
wasted, but you will know what is right and
what is wrong. Now if there is another
Question, you can ask. I have already taken
quite a long time for one question, as it was
a very important question.
Even five lives will not be sufficient
for you to know, a little bit about this
knowledge. So why worry about this
research and this, and that? Just listen to
Me and use your hands and learn and
discover for yourself that this is the Truth.
And don't listen to everyone, third person
coming round the corner. As if you have no
brains at all. So you must not listen to every
one. You are special people. By God's Grace
you have got Vibrations. It is a very big thing.
Those who haven't got will also get it, I would
request you, that you have cleared out now,
after Realization, and also later on,
whenever you are tired, it is better, that is a
bath for you. Every-day, you do that
treatment for yourself. It cleans yourself,
because you gather. I do not gather. hand towards the photograph first and take
Nothing happens to Me; but it happens
to you. So you must have a bath in the
night; take out all the Problems in that
water, and throw it away. Water with salt,
is a SEA which takes away all the
problems. There are so many other ways you keep your eyes open towards the
by which you can take out. Akasha, then Photograph and keep your hands like this,
PRITHVI. We have people, they can tell
you, they know. I have told them that five
six people should come here. We have a
braintrust. They will be all sitting down over
there. So next time when you come, and if
you have any problem, you can ask them.
Now may be you are learned, but you can
learn from them. Even persons like Justice
Vaidya told Me that' I must know more about
Sahaj Yoga. It is more practical than give you whatever you want. You can ask
Q. What is Bath? How to ake it? (Foot Soak)
Ans. It is a simple method. You put My
Photograph in a proper place. Put a light
before it. Even a candle will do. Put both the
hands towards the Photograph. Sit in the
water, with a little salt. The water should be
a little warm. You will be amazed that the
whole trouble will go away in the water. Then
you throw away the water in the W.C.
Every body can do it. Now if you have
trouble at Vishudhi Chakra, put your right
out the left hand. Supposing you find the
Vibrations are flowing into it, then you put
left hand towards the Photograph, and the
right hand outside. You will be surprised that
the whole thing will be cleared out. And if
stretched and with open palms, or
sometimes towards the Akasha, you will be
surprised that your eyes are very much
improved with this. Mother Earth also; if you
put your head on the Mother Earth, just touch
her with your forehead and say' Mother for-
give me for touching you with my feet. She
is your Grandmother; you ask for any thing
and you will get it. They are all waiting to
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Issue; 3 & 4 - 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
20
into. And when I put My finger into it,I
have found that My Vibrations can turn
round. Even when I blow out air from my
mouth, those who are realised can feel
in on their Sahasrara. It is a Fact. So why
should it look so funny to people? What is
the next Question?
the help of Hanumana, you can ask the help
of Ganesha. The other day the Newspaper
people told Me, the two disciples of Mine
who are the correspondents, were going
somewhere, and they had My Photograph
with them. They said that it was so amazing
that our driver just bumped into a truck
going ahead of us. We said that we are all
finished, and we have closed our eyes.
When we opened our eyes, the truck was
ahead and we were there. We did not know
Q. If you see all the Six Chakras; near each
one there exists some or the other indocrime
Glands. What relation these Chakras have
with the glands?
how we were saved! Even the driver had
closed his eyes. We didn't know how the
truck went that side and how we were here!
So accidents are avoided, and people have
seen that they have good health and can
live long, Everything is there. Afterall we
have jumped into the Kingdom of God. Only
thing is to keep your seats all right for the
time-being. Then the whole thing is to be
lifted up, into Satya-Yuga. Already Satya-
Yuga has started.
. Indocrime Glands are controlled by
the Chakras also. For example, we can say
Mooladhara Chakra controls the Prostrat like
Ans.
that. Even Agnya Chakra controls Pitutory
and Pineal, both of them. That is how it
controls the Ego and Super-Ego. So it has
a controlling effect an that, very much. They
are the gross agents for that. You see for
example, to control all the Nature. God has
fixed up all the stars. Major Nine stars are
there. These are placed there to control the
Universe and everything. It is controlled
through those points. It also effects our
physical and material life.
My Photo has the Vibrations. It is a
Fact. Also there are many things that have
Vibrations. Even this statue has Vibrations.
But not so much as they are for Me. First of
all I am a living Being, and another thing is
that their proportions may be wrong. They
are created by the Human-Beings, by their
Q. Respected Mataji, pleas strengthen me
in knowledge and show me more clearly the
way.
imaginations. But these SWAYAMBHU
i)
Lingas, all of them have got it. For example,
What are these Vibrations ?
(Physiologically, Scientifically, and
Spiritually.)
supposing you go to, say, this Ranjangaon,
Ganesh, it has complete Vibrations.
Because these are special statues come out
ii)
of the Mother Earth. Mother Earth throws
Where these Vibrations come from?
From You, Cosmos or Atmosphere? What
way do the Vibrations benifit us?
out. Mother Earth thinks She creates these
things. She throws these things. And they
ii)
What are the Do's and Don'ts of
give Vibrations. So you take Vibrations from
them also. But My photograph is the
photograph of Reality. Another thing is that
whatever I speak, because I am That, it
is Pranava flowing. It is actually Pranava.
My every talk, everything is Mantra going
Sahaj-Yoga?
Very Good Question.
Ans.
First question is about what are
these Vibrations? I told you yesterday, that
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 - 2007
21
Issue: 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
When you become Subtle, you become like
a radio, you start receiving it. Now how will
you know what is correct and what is
incorrect? You ask the Subtle, and the Subtle
answers you, and you get the answers on
your hand. it is like this. So these are the
Vibrations, which you receive, from the
All-Pervading power. And the All-Pervading
Power is Emitted out, and you receive it from
ME, of the All-Pervading. It is just the same,
from everywhere. These are the Vibrations.
in our heart, there is a flicker of light, which
is burning all the time, which is Atma; which
is the reflection of Paramatma in our heart.
In short I will tell you what happens when
the Kundalini rises. She opens the Brahama
Randhra. And there is the Seat of the
Sadashiva, the Pitha. The Pitha is here at
Sahasrara, but Sadashiva is in the Heart,
reflected as Atma. Pitha is created because
it receives the Subtle Energy which is ll
Pervading, The Gross, Inside all the
Pervading; e.g. This mike collects my voice.
Voice is a subtle energy, which is collected
through this, and if you have a radio it will
catch them.
The Self-realization, which is the
very subtle point, you try to understand now.
That it is so far an un-conscious for you.
Your Atma is in the un-conscious, it is not in
the Awareness. It is in the Achetan. It is in
your un-conscious. You are not yet Aware
about it. But once you are Realized, it starts
flowing into your Awareness, means that you
start feeling into your central Nervous
System, because your nervous system is
your Chetana. Is your Awareness. Human
awareness. Human awareness is nothing
else but the Central Nervous System. But
this central nervous system starts Feeling
now. The Vibrations, the Light of the Atma
through it So that it tells us why it is known
as Samadhi. Samadhi means the
Un-Conscious. When the Un-Conscious
becomes the Conscious, it is called The
Samadhi.
In the same way Pithas are in the
brain, and Pitha of Sadashiva is higher up
here, which is opened out, so that the Subtle,
the Sukshama, gross passes into our heart,
through a very Subtle channel. Just like a
gas-light, it has a flicker and when the Gas
opens out the Prakash occurs. Now the
Vibrations are that Prakash going through
us. These Vibrations start flowing through
us. Now what do I do? You will say 'Mataji
what do you do?' I do nothing but I just try to
give you that force, which is the, you can
say, Gas Power. That is the Gas-Power.
Because the Kundalini knows when I am
before you. She rises, She opens out, and
It starts flowing. It is flowing through Me
through out. But unless you are Subtle, you
cannot feel it. you can say, that I am the
Finite in the Infinite. Or you can say the
Infinite in the Finite. I am both. So the
Energy that is emitted into all the Subtle
Energy is passing through Me. Is The Virat.
From the Virat, the whole thing is passing.
It is going into the All-Pervading. It is all
Pervading. Everybody, everywhere it is
going. Even it is in a Cell, in a Carbon atom
it is there, in all atoms it is there. It is the
Subtle Energy. That is Emitted through Me.
It is not Besudhavsthal, It means that
you become aware of the unconscious. Not
only that, but first you become Nirvichar, the
Nirvikalpa, and then a complete Self-
realization. So Samadhi, is a confusing
word. Samadhi Just means an Universal
Un-Conscious. Yesterday Justice Vaidya told
you that there are three types of sadhanas,
Satvik, Rajasik, and Tamasik. Tamasik goes
to the left hand side, leads it to the Sub-
Conscious, collective Sub-Conscious,
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 - 2007
22
Issue: 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
connected to the Libido on the left hand side,
and Right side is the Supra-Conscious,
connected with the Pingala Nadi, which is
the Will-Power as you call it, goes to the
collective Supra Conscious.
Goddesses and Ganas are on this side. and
all those who fall into that go to the Hell. But
the Center is the Super-Conscious. For the
Sushumna, the Human-Being rises above
the Super-Conscious. They gradually start
becoming more and more Aware. They have
the same body. For Example, if you look at
the cell of the brain, it is the same as the
cell of a fat. But there is a difference. So the
difference starts taking place and by the
time, you open out from here, then there is
even a greater dimension, to that cell. Your
Brain, that it starts receiving the Vibrations
and can understand it. Then in your
Nirvikalpa stage, you get another dimension,
by which you have the Know-Abouts of your
knowledge. The last is the Self-Realization,
where you just enjoy. Complete Enjoyment.
No problems. You do not catch, nothing
happens. I would say our Vaidya Sahib is
very much near Self-Realization. The way
he got his Self-Realization is very
remarkable.
All right Accepted?
This is the Vital Force of Life. It gives you a
complete balance. It corrects your physical
being. It corrects your Mental being. It
corrects your emotional being, It gives you
a complete Spiritual oneness with God.
It integrates you completely. As far as I am
concerned, I have no Pashchatap. I don't
understand what is Pashchatap. I don't
understand what is Temptation? I don't
understand these things because I am
completely One with Myself. Every finger
I move, every hand I move, it has a
meaning. It is done without thinking, but
there is a big thought behind it. I say 'HAN'
Han means there is a formation of circle
which works. It is difficult to explain, as my
mechanism is different from yours, so I can't
explain what I do, You don't have those
Mechanics within you. But it is like that.
When I say, Hin? Hun, Han, Hin, all these
are tremendous words. They create a kind
of a force; a kind of a formation in which it
gulfs all the bad things, all the Rakshasas
and all that, and you can pull them out also.
Now I gave in a Mataka, my breath. It is a
Pranava itself complete. That Pranava, in
the night, when they will be sleeping will
come out, and take out all the bad things in
you gradually, and bind them, and put them
inside. You have seen many mad people are
cured like that.
God,
The next question is about the
being
Physiologically, you can feel on your hands,
on your fingers. Scientifically you can say
that the Para-Sytnpathatic gets activated
You get the control of the Parasympathatic,
you jump into the Un-conscious, the
Universal Unconscious. I have already told
you the Spiritual aspects of these Vibrations.
Physiological?
Vibrations
Q. What are the Don'ts and do's for Sahaj-
Yogis?
Ans. First and foremost thing is that a
Sahaja-Yogi cannot smoke or drink. One,
absolutely hundred precent sure. Because
if you drink or smoke, you will find after
sometime. either you will loose your
Regarding the second part of the
Question, Where these Vibrations are
coming from; You, Cosmos, or Atmosphere?
Vibrations, or you will start vomiting. You
cannot smoke. If you smoke, your Vishudhi
will be caught. If you drink, your Manipur
The Vibrations
come from
everywhere, I am the emitting Force.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-24.txt 
 - 2007
Issue: 3 & 4
23
The Divine Cool Breeze
them. Make them loving. Make a nice
society. Every one of you should be the
carrier of Love of your Mother. If you are a
Sahaj-Yogi, and if you change and transform
in your behaviour, naturally Sahaj-Yoga will
have its own reputation, and everybody will
start taking to Sahaj-Yoga. You cannot earn
any money from Sahaj-Yoga.
will be caught, and whenever you put your
hand towards my Photograph, your Nabhi-
Chakra will be burning. Many people have
done it without any difficulty. They do not
have any difficulty. They just give up. So this
is one of the most important thing that you
have to gradually give up. You just take my
Name and it will work it out. Secondly Don't
fast. When Mother is there you have not the
fast. Only fast on Narak' Chaturdashi. That's
all. If you don't feel like eating, eat something
else. But don't keep your stomach empty.
You can drink fruit juice, or milk or whatever
you like. These are certain things about the
food and stomach, Nabhi-Chakra.
Do not have Sahaj-Yogis for
business partnership.
Do not use Sahaj-Yoga for making
money. You have to be generous people.
You have to be honest.
There are Ten Commandments as
Next the Eyes; are the very
important things, where you have to be very
careful not to move your eyes very fast
anywhere, try to keep your eyes steady, and
mostly on the Mother Earth. You have heard
about Laxamana. He never saw the face of
they say, and be satisfied in your heart.
You have to lead a chaste life, and
see chaste things. Your priorities will change.
You friends will change, You will not like dirty
jokes. You will just change, and run away
from them. I have seen these foreigners
now. They say that they just cannot tolerate
those things now. Once upon a time
whatever they used to tolerate and enjoy
also; they cannot tolerate it now. Because
you have become sensitive now. You have
to be decent people.
Sitaji. Önly saw Her feet. How can that be?
He was always with them. So you can
imagine what should be the position. For
complete fourteen years, he has to lead a
Brahmachari life. She was like his mother.
He knew that She was Adishakti. But he just
saw Her feet. That should be our case. We
should lead a sanctified married life. Create
a nest of family. A proper family house. Try
to adopt, comprise, adjust. Make your wife
realise, make your husband Realise, and
bring peace in the family; because there are
many great souls who want to take birth.
Those who got married like this, they all got
realised children. So you must try to get a
family life, a proper family, a proper
relationship. Give service to your parents,
don't find faults with your parents and try to
be kind to them, and try to be good in the
family. Don't spoil the children, also correct
Don't be misers at all. All miserly
people are against Sahaj-Yoga, and if
miserly people come I give them troubles. If
you are miserly, you get lots of troubles. So
don't get miserly. I am telling you, Don't be
too talkative also. If you become too
talkative, and troublesome,I can stop your
talking. If you don't talk at all; that is also
not good. That means, don't go to extremes.
May God bless you all.
(Nirmala Yoga, 1983)
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-25.txt 
 THE CREATION OF
LORD JESUS
(11.04.1982)
Ra-dha. Ra means energy, dha the one who
sustains energy.
In my last lectures, I've told you how
Christ was created first in the heavens. In
the Devi Bhagvat-if you read that-He was
There are many aspects of Easter,
created as Mahavishnu and it is mentioned
one has to understand, but the most of all
"why did He have to die and why was He
resurrected?" This point I have not yet
touched perhaps so clearly-that's the point
I want to tell you today. It's only you people
can understand the importance of the life of
Christ. And when it is said that you have to
very clearly that first He was created as an
egg. It is written in this book, which perhaps
was written 14,000 years back. It's a book
that predicts about Christ and that is why
people, in the West at Easter especially,
offer an egg to each other as a friend. So,
first the existence came on this earth as an
get your realisation through Christ, it means
egg that was Christ and part of it was kept
in that state and the rest of it was used by
that He had to pierce through the Agnya
Chakra. He had to be there. If He had not
created this gap in the gate, we could never
have not realisation. That is why it is said
the Holy Ghost, by Mahalakshmi, to create
Christ out of it.
In that ancient book He was called
as Mahavishnu, means the greater form of
Vishnu. But actually Vishnu is The Father
and He is the Son created by the Holy Ghost.
After my lecture, I would like, if you have
the book, to read it out to them-the whole
you are to pass through the gates of heaven
only with the grace of Christ. Of course, that
doesn't mean 'churches', it doesn't mean at
all 'churches'. You have to understand as
Sahaja Yogi that you have to pass through
to Agnya Chakra. Ultimately that's the most
text of how Christ was created and when
difficult point where human being had to
pass. Because at the Agnya Chakra your
ego and superego are fully grown. At the
human stage only this ego is developed.
Now, how to overcome the ego was a point,
He was created. He cried for His Father and
He cried also on the cross once, and He
cried for years and then Christ, in
Mahavishnu state, was blessed by His
Father who said your position will be placed
higher that mine and you will be the
"Adhara"-means the support-of the universe.
See how from Mooladhara He becomes the
and to overcome the ego Christ had to do
this. When He was created in the begining
as Shri Ganesha you know the story how
He was created; that the "mala" (dross) from
the body of Parvati was taken out because
before Her marriage She had to cover
Herself for Her bath with many scented
'Adhara'.
This was all done at the heavenly
stage 'vaikuntha' stage. You can say then,
He was given birth by the Holy Ghost who
was the Mother of Christ on this earth, who
things, (paste) and it was taken out-all these
things-andHer vibrations came out. And She
created this Child just to protect Her
chastity. Outside Her bathroom She put Him
was nobody else but was the incarnation of
Mahalakshmi - means She was Radha.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Issue: 3 & 4
25
2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
and you know the whole story about it. Now,
there was a part of the element of the earth
in that child- "prithvi-tattwa" was there. All
other centres have, have got some elements
in them, some elements, like prithvitattwa is
there, earth element. Then you have got
water element, and then you have got air
element, and you come to this : it is the light
elements, it's the light. And, at this point, at
Agnya Chakra, He had to cross the last
element, that was the light element, that
the elements- to that existence which is
Spirit.
So the resurrection is where you
Become, from your attention you jump into
the attention of the Spirit, when you
attention, when you become the Spirit. That
is the happening which has happened to you
also. But He became pure Spirit, pure
feel your
Brahma Tattwa, when He was resurrected
and the Resurrection is a happening of the
Divine Power which came from Mooladhara
means He had to come out into the true form
Chakra as just earth element, started
growing. It took its birth from there, came
up to Agnya Chakra, there Christ was
created to pass through all the elements,
ultimately to enter the Sahasrara to become
a complete Brahma Tattwa. And this was a
very difficult thing, was very experimental;
and the experiment was a quite dangerous
one. It could have failed because He had in
Him that human element, the body element,
of only the Divine Power, the Aumkara, the
vibrations you can call it or the absolute-you
call it the logos or something lik that, the
first sound-Brahma. So He had to become
the principle of Brahma. To become principle
of Brahma, He had to get rid of all other
elements in Him. So, the last was also the
light element which He aiso had to crss
through, So he had earth element in Him as
He was of the mala, and all other elements
within Him. But when it comes to the Agnya,
which suffers. And He suffered, because this
body element suffers-not the Spirit, the Spirit
He had to give up all the elements, that He
had to die the death of all these elements
does not suffer, the body suffers. So, He
had to suffer that body element and to get
over it, to get out of it. And to get out of it,
He had to have a tremendous courage. It
that were within Him-to become complete,
absolute, pure Spirit. What He did in subtle
form works out in the gross form, and to do
was such a difficult operation-without Him
nobody could have achieved. He knew it was
predestined, but it was one of the most
difficult things to happen.
that He had to die, and whatever died in Him
was that little earth elements and other
elements. And what came out of Him was
Pure Spirit, was "Pure Spirit." That was
resurrected, the Pure Spirit, the pure Brahma
Tattwa which had formed the body of Christ
RE
wonder how many Christians know
the significance of an egg, Now egg
signifies a stage where you are, before
realisation, When you are in your egg
and this happening came. Christ has done
what was predicted about Him. That He's a
Saviour because He passed through that
gate to take people from this bodily
existence-means the one that depends on
shell-that you are Mr. X, you are Mrs Y. But,
when you mature fully inside, the bird is
ready and that is the time you are hatched.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-27.txt 
 2007
26
The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 3 & 4
coming up. We are repeating the history
again. They were so ego-oriented, they were
so full of ego that to destory their ego
somebody had to do this-to create a
This is the time you get twice-born. So, the
Resurrection of Christ signifies that, and
that's why we give that egg to people, saying
you are that, an egg, a reminder of that. And
this egg can become a Spirit. And also it is
written that it was an egg when He came
first. He was created as an egg when He
passage.
By His death so many things are
proved. That all those who crucified Him
were stupid peopie, they were ego-oriented,
they were blind, they could not see what He
saw. They could not see what a genuine
personality He was. They crucified Him.
I mean, this is-the greatest stupidity, and they
crucified Him. It was all known because
these people were so stupid they would have
only crucified Him. What else could they do?
Because they couldn't bear, with their little
came first, He was created as an
egg-half of it remained as Shri Ganesha, and
half of it became Mahavishnu. Then He
came on this earth and He departed with all
His elements and the pure vibrations formed
His body. He remained there within all of you
to be awakened and when the Kundalini
takes your attention through that point there
you also become the Spirit. That's why He
said "I'm the gate, l'am the door"- because
you can become Christ. That's why He didn't
say "I'm the destination," that you have to
achieve Him.But, He has created this space
for you. You can become spiritually
awakened, you can become your Spirit.
egos, somebody Who is so simple, Who is
so genuine, Who is so true. So, they
crucified Him, and that Crucifixion came as
a breakthrough for us.
But message for us is the
Resurrection part. Message for us is the
But, Christ is an incarnation. He was
the Son of God, and so He's an incarnation.
And that incarnation came on this earth just
to pull you out of your elements to make
you become the Spirit. Now, how it is that it
was the most difficult thing-because human
beings have created in their heads all kinds
of artificial barriers. You see whatever we
Resurrection and not Crucifixion. Crucifixion
is not the message because He has done
for us-this is the point where the Jews must
understand. The other day I was reading-
today only-some discussion with the
Archbishop of Canterbury took place and the
fellow was asking him questions as if he was
asking questions to God. And, in a way, he
said also that "I would ask this question to
God. That why is it that so many Jews were
killed?" They asked for it! They wanted that
they must suffer because they wouldn't give
the credit of suffering to Christ. They thought
we all had to suffer. Ego. It's ego. "How did
anybody suffer for us, we must suffer
separately." They couldn't give that credit to
Christ. And all the later thinking was that we
think and whatever we do with our mind is
all dead, manmade, is artificial-because
reality is beyond your mind, it is not in your
mind, you cannot conceive it, you cannot
hold Whatever is in your mind is not the
reality It is beyond. So, for a human being
to accept something that is beyond mind had
become so difficult, at the time of Christ
because of Romans and all these people
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-28.txt 
 - 2007
Issue: 3 & 4
27
The Divine Cool Breeze
must suffer. So, whatever you think comes
into action on this gross level. So Mr. Hitler
was born and he made them suffer, and the
created, a liver is created, a brain is created,
a nose is created. If they start fighting, say
this eye starts fighting this eye.. we laugh.
But we human beings do the same thing.
We are all the time doing it. This is the
stupidity of human beings, which is creating
problems. And when you become very
stupid, somebody horrible takes advantage
of that and comes on this earth just like
Hitler, and he tries to put you right.
stupidity of human beings is responsible for
all the problems that are created on this
earth. The other question was "how the
children get leukemia, he would ask God."
How children get leukemia. If the parents
are so frantic and speedy,, children have to
get it. If you are not relaxed person when
you are married, when you are going to have
a baby, you are thinking of divorces and all
sorts of nonsense, that franticness will work
on the child. Psychologically it is a left side
problem, and the child has to be a patient of
You don't need all that. You need
only wisdom and your realization. And that
is what is done today-that you have got
realisation. So Easter for Sahaja Yogis all
over the world is the most important
happening: because if it had not happened
it would not have been possible to give
realisation to people.
leukemia as soon as he's born. That is what
it is!
So, the problems are created by
human beings because of their stupidity,
There is no problem that God has created
for you. He has solved all your problems. All
our problems He solves. You've seen in
Sahaja Yoga how He solves your little-little
problems even. But we create problems
for ourselves, by our stupidity, by our
addiction to elements, to material things,
to material habits. Matter sits on our
head--that is, we can say on the level of
the earth element.
I think Gavin will read it out to you
later on about what is written about Christ in
Devi Bhagwat. This book was written about
14.000 yours back by Markendaya. So,
imagine 14,000 years back! He knew, being
a seer. just like Blake, what was going to
happen when Christ was to come. But He
was called as Mahavishnu. He was not
Vishnu. He was the Son of Vishnu, and how
many Christians understand this about
Easter? They don't. Christianity today is
nothing but a mental activity which is dead,
just nonsense, just like any other
nonsensical religion. It has become just
another foolish, stupid religion, which has
no meaning. Unless and until you get your
realisation, unless and until you feel the
vibrations, unless and until you feel this
Divine surrounding Power, how will you
understand? Because that's the only
thing that is truth, that's the only thing
Then, we have other problems, like
emotional attachments: this is my daughter,
this is my child, this is my..., this is mine, I'm
so attached to my child, this my country, this
is your country. We create problems. This
Falkland thing, what we're going to get out
of this territory? God never crèated
Argentina, Chile, England and all that. She
created one, homogeneous structure and it
is to look after each other-like a heart is
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-29.txt 
 2007
28
Issue: 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
realisation and if you do not understand that
that's reality. And unless and until you
achieve it how will you know about
Christ? And fighting about Him! How Can
you fight? I can't understand. To me it's
stupid, gone to another extreme. By this
thing what you do actually, is to use all these
incarnations to kill each other. Can you
imagine? The things that came to elevate
you, to make you into higher living are now
used, the same things, the names are used,
to kill, to kill each other, to bring down each
other. At the most, if you reach a point where
you don't understand, then they start saying
"it's mystery." What is the mystery?
this awareness, that this collective
awareness is the only way you can stay in
that area, otherwise you get out. You start
having your smaller wells and you just go
down into them. The more you start to
expand yourself you rise higher and then
you are again with your baddhas and
whatever it is. But, if you think that I have to
live for the whole, I'm responsible for the
whole, l'm responsible for creating a nucleus
of a.cell which is going to look after the
Whole and if I fall down the rest also suffers:
I have no business to fall down because I
have been resurrected to this point; I've
In Sahaja Yoga there's no mystery.
It's all just there. To me human beings are a
mystery. I don't understand them. I can't
understand. The Resurrection of Christ has
entered into the state of collectivity where
my being, which is the Spirit, is the collective
being and I have to stay there, I have to be
there, I cannot fall, is not the way I can live.
to now be collective resurrection. This is
what is Mahayoga. Has to be the collective
resurrection, and for this collective
resurrection first of all, Sahaja Yogis must
decide to be collective. Because through
Kundalini awakening ye cross, no
doubt-you cross through. But you enter an
area of collectivity and if you do not allow
that collectivity to permeate into you, then
you come down. Supposing you become a
state beyond the elements, the state where
you are a collective being. You're aware that
you're a part and parcel of the Whole. You're
aware that you have to help your nose and
your eyes because you're part and parcel
of the Whole. You reach that state where
But, I've seen after realisation also,
people cannot get out of their shells. They
still remain in the shell. They cannot spread
their wings and sing and get out of their shell
and just fly. They cannot do it. They still stick
on to their small ways of life in a smaller
way, in every way. On a holiday you go, you
want to have a separate holiday. Why? This
is the holiday time- holy day, as they say,
HOLY DAY. This the holy day. When you are
with other Sahaja Yogis you are really
enjoying a holiday. When do you enjoy a
holiday otherwise? Which is the other way?
To be with them is the real holiday. That is
why one should understand that you should
expand you collectivity. If you do not expand
you understand I'm as important as other
cells are and other cells are helped by me
your collectivity you are just a waste. You
are a wasteful creation of Sahja Yogis,
which, I'm sorry to say, will go down. Such
people show also-in the beginning, gradually
and they have to sstain me. We arè one.
There should be omplete concord.
This avareness comes after
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Issue: 3 & 4
2007
29
The Divine Cool Breeze
they start getting better and better and once
you are in full state you start enjoying each
other's company without any fears about
them, without having any possessiveness
about them without having any kind of
expectations, but just enjoying it. That has
to happen. All our cells in our body are like
that. If they can do it why not we? Because
worried about the whole British people,
Bristol, all the Jamaicans. Then about the
and then of the whole world. You should be.
One should not think how will my daughter
get married, how can I get a ticket to go
there? All these nonsensical ideas should
be given up. Because you have now entered
into the kingdom of God and He's going to
look after you. Because that state you
establish within yourself-that you are a
collective being. All other things will drop out.
Gradually everybody will be remoulded.
Even the most difficult type, I've seen, have
improved. But what about you, the one who
is improving everybody else, what about
you? How far are you there? How far in your
faith that you know that I have entered into
the Kingdom of God and that each and
every action of mine is looked after and
guided by His power, and I'm aware of it?
l'am aware that I've entered into the
Kingdom of God, which is expressed
through my collectivity. So collectivity is the
nature of a Sahaja Yogi and that's what one
we have so much of sense-at least we think
we have more sense than the cells have. At
least it is expected because we have evolved
so much from unicell to this state. And then
you are the epitome of God's creation! You
are the topmost people. Then why not?
When you are resurrected the first thing
that should happen to you is to
understand you are no more an
individual, but you are a collective being.
You are no more an individual. All things
which make you circumscribe your
individuality-throw that away. You are no
more an individual. All problems which come
to you as individual problems are absolutely
useless, false, wasteful. Think of the
has to realise.
collective problems.
May God bless you.
I enjoy such people. Like the other
day Fergie was anxious to know for Bristol,
which points are there which are giving
(Nirmala Yoga).
1983
vibrations from the Mother Earth. He's
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Description of the birth of Shri Jesus
Addressing Nārada, son of Brahma,
is eternal and real as Shri Krishna is eternal
and real. This world, composed of the seven
islands, is surrrounded by the seven oceans.
Forty-nine Upa Dvipas ( , smaller
islands adjacent to them) are existing here.
Besides there are countless mountains, and
forests. Higher than this earth is the
Brahmaloka (m ata), with seven heavens,
and below this are the seven Patalas. This
1-34. Narayana said :-" O Devarshi
I The egg (born of Moola Prakriti va)
that was floating in the waters for a period
equal to the life period of Brahma, now in
the fulness of time, separated into two parts.
Within that egg there was a powerful Child,
lustrous like one thousand millions of suns.
This child could not suck mother's milk, as
it was forsaken by Her. So being tired of
hunger, the child for a moment cried
repeatedly. The child that will become the
Lord of countiess Brahmandas (universes),
is the bounding limit of Brahmanda. Just
above this earth there is the Bhurloka
(भुरलोक); above is Bhuvarloka (मुवरलोक); then
Savarloka (स्वरलोक) then Janarloka (जनरलोक),
then Taparloka (a ), then Satyaloka
(a , and above that is Brahmaloka. The
splendor of Brahmaloka is like that of
molten gold. But all the substances, whether
outside or inside this Brahmaloka, are
transient. When this Brahmanda (aag
cosmos) dissolves, everything dissolves and
is destroyed. All are temporary like bubble
of water. Only Goloka and Vaikuntha (ua)
are eternal. In every pore of this Maha Virata
is existing one Brahmanda (cosmos). What
to speak of others, even Krishna
cannot count the number of these
Brahmandas. In every Brahmanda, the
number of the Gods is three kotis or 30
millions. Some of them are the Dikpatis
(fa the Regents of the Quarters); some
are the Dikpalas (f the Rulers of the
Quarters), some are asterisms, and some
planets. In the Bhurloka, there are four
Varnas (auf Brahmins, etc.,) and in the
Patalas there are Nagas (). Thus the
Universe exists composed of moveable and
non-moveable things (this is Brahmanda
Vivriti aamus faa), O narada ! Now the Virata
Purusha began to look up to the skies again
now an orphan having no father nor mother,
began to look upwards from the waters. This
boy came to be denominated afterwards by
the name of Maha Virata ( fa, when he
became gross and grosser. As there is
nothing finer than radium so there is nothing
grosser than Maha Virata. The power of this
Maha Virata is onesixteenth of that of Shri
Krishna, the Highest Self. But this boy. (born
of the Prakriti-Radha) is the Sole Stay of all
this Universe and he is denominated by the
name "Maha-Vishnu" (HEI-fa). In his every
pore countless universes are existing. So
much so that even Shri Krishna could not
count them. If it were possible to count the
number of the dust particles, it is impossible
to count the number of the Universes. So
there are endless Brahmas, Vishnus, and
Maheshvaras. In every Brahmanda, there
is Brahma Vishnu and Mahesha. Each
Brahmanda extends from Patala (yara) to
the Brahmaloka (aereta). the abode of
Vaikuntha (agua) is higher than that (i.e, it is
situated outside of Brahmanda), again the
abode of Goloka (ateta) is fifty koti yojanas
(50X10X4X2 million miles) higher than
Vaikuntha. This Goloka Dhama (te )
*SHRIMAD DEVI BHAGAVATAM, Chapter II to IX book
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-32.txt 
 2007
Issue: 3 & 4
31
The Divine Cool Breeze
giving thus to the Virata the boon and the
Mantra said:- "O Child! Say what more you
desire; I will give you that instantly." The
Virata boy, hearing thus the words of Shri
Krishna, spoke:- "O Thou Omnipresent I I
have got no desires whatsoever, save this,
that as song as I live, whether for a short
time or a long time, let me have pure Bhakti
towards Thy Lotus Feet.
and again but He could not see anything
within that egg except the void. Then
distressed with hunger he cried out
repeatedly and became merged in
anxiety. Next moment getting back his
consciousness, he began ot think of Krishna,
the Highest Person and saw there at once
the eternal light of Brahma. He saw there
His form as deep blue like new
rain-cloud; with two hands, garment of a
yellow colour, sweet smile on His face, flute
in His hand and He seemed to be very
35-41. In this world he is Jivanmukta
(liberated whilst living) Who is your Bhakta,
and that bewildered fool is dead while living
who is devoid of any Bhakti to Thee. What
needs he to perform japam, asceticism,
sacrifice, worship, holding fasts and
observances, going to sacred places of
pilgrimages and other virtuous acts if he be
without any bhakti to Shri Krishna? Vain is
his life who is devoid of any devotion to Shri
Krishna, under Whose Grace he has
obtained his life and Whom he does not now
anxious to show His Grace to Devotees.
Looking at the Lord, His Father, the boy
became glad and smiled. The Lord, the
Bestower of boon, granted him boons
appropriate for that moment "O Child ! Let
you possess knowledge like Me; let your
hunger and thirst vanish; let you be the
holder of innumerable Brahmandas till the
time of Pralaya (vera the universal
dissolution). Be without any selfishness, be
fearless and the bestower of boons to all.
Let not old age, death, disease sorrow, nor
any other ailings afflict thee." Thus saying,
He repeated thrice on his ear the six-lettered
great Mantra "Om Krishnaya Svaha"
worshipped by the Vedas with their Amgas,
("ॐ कृष्णाय स्वाहा"), the Giver of desires and
the destroyer of all troubles and calamities
O Brahma's Son ! thus giving the mantra.
Sri Krishna arranged for his fooding thus;
"In every universe, whatever offerings will
be given to Shri Krishna, one sixteenth of
that will go to Narayana, the Lord of
Vaikuntha and fifteen-sixteenth is to go to
this boy, the Virata." Shri Krishna did not allot
any share for Himself. Himself transcending
all the Gunas, and Full, He is always satisfied
with Himself. What necessity is there for any
further offerings? Whatever the people offer
with devotion, the Lord to Lakshmi, the Virata
eats all these. Bhagavan Shri Krishna
pay homage and worship. He is endowed
with Shakti as long as Atma (Self) resides
in his body; no sooner the Atma departs from
his body all the Shaktis accompany him. O
Great One l And thou art the Universal
Atman (soul) who transcends Prakruti, Who
is All will, the Primeval Person and of the
nature of the Highest Light." Thus saying,
the Virata boy remained silent. Shri Krishna
then, spoke in sweet words - "O Child ! Let
you remain as fresh as ever like Me. You
will not have any fall even if innumerable
Brahmas pass away.
42-57. Let you divide yourself in parts
and turn into smaller Viratas in every
universe. Brahma will spring from your
navel and will create the cosmos. From the
forehead of that Brahma will spring eleven
Rudras for the destruction of the creation.
But they will all be parts of Shiva. The Rudra
named Kalagni, (efa) of these eleven
*SHRIMAD DEVI BHAGAVATAM, Chapter I to IX book
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-33.txt 
 - 2007
Issue: 3 & 4
32
The Divine Cool Breeze
become very anxious and came back to his
former place and began to meditate the
Lotus Feet of Shri Krishna. Then, in
meditation, with his introspective eye, he first
saw the smaller Virata, then the endless
great Virata lying on the waterly bed, in
whose pores the universes are existing and
then he saw the God Shri Krishna in Goloka
Rudras, will be the destroyer of all this
Vishvas (Cosmos.) Besides, from each of
your sub-divisions, the Vishnu will orginate
and that Bhagavan Vishnu will be the
Preserver of this Vishva (world). I say that
under My favour you will always be full of
Bhakti towards Me and no sooner you
meditate on Me, you will be able to see My
lovely form. There is no doubt in this; and
your Mother, Who resides in My breast, will
not be difficult for you to see. Let you remain
here in ease and comfort. I now go to
Goloka". Saying thus Shri Krishna, the Lord
of World disappeared. Going to His own
abode He spoke instantly to Brahma and
Shankara, skilled in the works of creation
and destruction : "O Child Brahma ! Go
with Gopas and Gopis, He. then began to
praise the Lord of Goloka when He granted
boons to your father, and he began to do
the work of creation.
58-62. From the mind of your father,
were born first Sanaka and other brothers
and then from his forehead eleven Rudras
sprang. Then from the left side of that small
virata lying on the bed of waters, the
four-handed Vishnu Bhagavan, the
Preserver of the Universe, came. He went
to Shvetadvipa, where he remained. Then
your father became engaged in creating this
Universe, moveable and non -moveable,
composed of three worlds, heaven, earth
and Patala, in the navel of that small Virata
Purusha. O Narada ! Thus from the pores
of that great Virata each universe has sprung
and in every universe there is one small
Virata, one Brahma, one Vishnu and one
Shiva and Sanaka and others. O Best of
twice born! Thus I have described the
glories of Krishna, that give exceeding
pleasure and Moksha. How say what more
you want to hear?
quickly and be born in parts from the navels
of each of the smaller Viratas that will arise
from the pores of the Great virata. O Child
Mahadeval Go and be born in parts from
the forehead of each Brahma in every
universe for the destruction of the creation3;
(but be careful that you not forget) and
perform austerities for a long time." O Son
of the Creater Brahma ! Thus saying, the
Lord of the Universe remained silent.
Brahma and Shiva, the auspicious, bowing
to the Lord, went to their own duties. On the
other hand, the Great Virata that lay floating
in the waters of the Brahmanda sphere,
created from his every pore each smaller
Virata. That youth Janardan of the form of
the Great Cosmos, wearing yellow garment
of the bluish-green colour of the Durba
grass, lay sleeping pervading everywhere.
Brahma took his birth in His navel. He, then,
after his birth, began to travel in that navel-
lotus and in the stem of the Lotus for one
Here ends the Third Chapter of the
Ninth Book on the Origin of Brahma, Vishnu
and Mahesha and others in the Maha
Puranam Shrimad Devi Bhagavatam of
18,000 verses by Maharshi Veda Vyasa.
lakh yugas. But he could not find out the
place whence the lotus or its stem had
sprung up.O Narada ! Then your father
(Nirmala Yoga)
1983
"SHRIMAD DEVI BHAGAVATAM, Chapter Iil to IX book
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Her Holiness Shri Mataji's Advice
blessed with dignity. At that time you will
never joke, nor will you make fun nor will
you be frivolous. You talk to the person in
such a manner, that the person becomes
wise and you also talk only that which is
wisdom
No one, so far in the history of
spirituality, has ever raised the Kundalini in
such a short time, as you people are doing.
It moves under your fingers.. It is absolutely
Shri Ganesha's power which is given to you.
The Ganesha shakti is given to you
These powers can be maintained if
by Shri Ganesha Himself within you, to give
you the confidence. To give you the
confidence that you can raise the Kundalini,
but not the feeling that you are raising the
Kundalini. If you go on without surrendering
yourself to Sahaja Yoga, after some time you
will lose this power very fast.
you try to follow Shri Ganesha. These are
His powers.
Three powers of Adi Shakti work in
you. One gives you longivity and clears out
ideas about your desire.
If your desires are right, all your
desires are fulfilled by these powers. But,
the first thing you should know is that the
desires should be right. If your desires are
clear-cut then they will be fulfilled. That
power you can achieve only by putting your
bandhan on your heart. Whatever desire you
have, say and put it on your heart, means
you are asking from your heart, seven times.
You just give it a bandhan and the work will
be done. But don't use it for non-sensical
things, because, if you use it for non-sensical
things, this power will go away. Use for
something special, of a higher level.
Everybody will be magnetically
attracted towards you and you will be always
guided by great souls and angels.
At the time when you are moving
your hand on Kundalini, it is the greatest
power you are using. I don't know how much
'shraddha' (faith) you have for yourself and
about the power you have got. At that time
there will be no obstruction on your hand by
anyone whatsoever.
When you are raising the Kundalini,
attention of the person who is taking the
realization from you, will not be attracted by
outside things. That means you can raise
the Kundalini at any time, because, at that
time you reside in the lotus which is closed.
At the time of Kundalini awakening
you will not have baser or impure feelings
about the person to whom you are giving
the realization. May be before and after, but
not when you are giving the realization.
These dirty feelings will not come to you,
automatically. You do not have to stop your
mind, automatically it will work.
This power of desiring, protects you
in all the way that is possible. It guides you,
looks after you, gives you peace and
tremendous faith in Sahaja Yoga. Ultimately
you become filled with the joy of Sahaja Yoga
and you do not like anything, else, but
Sahaja Yoga. But sometimes we identify
ourselves with our ego and we think, our
ego in Sahaja Yoga. Many a time I have
seen, people like it because it is identified
with their ego. It should be separated from
that, and should be brought in our lives, in
our day to day life. When we are meeting
You will be absolutely satisfied. Even
if you are hungry, you will not feel the hunger
or any physical need at the time you are
giving the realization.
There will be no distraction of any
kind. You won't do anything that is
indignified. At that time you are being
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-35.txt 
 34
2007
Issue: 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
too much about food spoils your Vishuddhi,
very badly. Then talking ill about anyone,
complaining about anyone to me will spoil
your Vishuddhi. If I ask and you say
something, it is all right, but all the time
talking ill about each other will spoil
your Vishuddhi.
each other, when we are talking to each
other, that you should see, one ripple falling,
and another rising and another rising and
another falling, as you see the sea,
becoming one with each other.
By the middle power, you will give
realization to the people, tell their chakras,
you will be able to correct your chakras. By
this power only, you will have a very great
power over your will. You will be what you
decide to be. You can transform yourself
without any difficulty. There are many
powers of Mahalakshmi which you have to
achieve but for that your Sushumna has to
be cleaned very much. For that you have to
develop detachment in life. Unless and until
you develop detachment, the deeper
powers of Mahalakshmi do not come up. For
example, in the small things like, having
connections with me, even that one is to
be a detached thing. This detachment has
to be developed for your Mahalakshmi
power. Then you go beyond. Your timings
will be worked out correctly. You wouldn't
have to see the time. To preserve this power
of time you must not hurry up too much, not
be the slave of watch. Just let it go. Do not
have any obstinacy about anything.
When you judge others you should
know that you are being judged by God. In
judging others, God has judged you also, It
is His judgement which is going to decide
how far you are. Those who are in Sahaja
Yoga today, may be, some, who think that
they are great Sahaja Yogis, big people. But
may be they are not; and those who think
that they are not and that they want to
increase and improve their Shakti, they may
be the people who are occupying very high
places. So, under these circumstances one
should never boast and should not have
false estimation about oneself. That is the
way your can preserve your powers much
better, of your Vishuddhi.
Also I have seen, people start
discussing me in a very funny way. I think
best way to deal with the problem is not to
speak about me and if you want to speak,
you must know that it should be absolutely
positive, otherwise you are harming others.
So, that's how your Vishuddhi Chakra
problems are increasing and they go on
Increasing specially when you try to confuse
yourself and to quarrel with yourself and
think that Sahaja Yoga has gained by your
coming. You have gained and not Sahaja
Yoga. Sahaja Yoga is proved by itself. It does
not need your help. If there is truth, then by
accepting the truth, you have enhanced your
position has enhanced, not the position of
the truth. So this idea must go from your
head right away.
Just allow yourself to be drifted with
the flow of Sahaja Yoga. If it works out, well
and good. If it does not work out, well and
good. Just keep it like that and then you will
be surprised, how this Mahalakshmi power
improves and the blessings of this power
are tremendous.
Like that, you have thousand and
one powers awakened within you. For
example, in Vishuddhi Chakra, you have
sixteen thousand powers awakened in you,
as you are today. But when you speak you
don't understand that you are a Sahaja Yogi,
when you eat you don't understand that this
tongue belongs to a Sahaja Yogi and it
should not hanker after anything. Thinking
It is the easiest to keep your
Vishuddhi all right when you keep yourself
in state of witness.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-36.txt 
 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
35
Issue: 3 & 4
are getting very much involved in a
particular case, then I stop it. I do so many
things by which I just stop it and then you
cannot have that power in you. On the
contrary you suffer quite a bit because you
do not know how to protect yourself from all
these bad things. So, I have to request you
that before starting to cure others you first
cure yourself fully, and also you can use my
photograph for curing others.
That is possible if you develop the
habit, after realization, that everything that
you do and want or face, is put into
Nirvicharita, into thoughtless-awareness. If
you start that habit, you will be amazed, your
witness state will improve and that will rise
in your being.
It is very important to understand that
without transformation you have no
meaning. Whatever you are, do not identify
yourself with that, but whatever you want to
be, you try to be that. And this power you
have got. Put your attention always on
positivity and not on negativity. Normally, I
have seen that negative people turn towards
the negative people.
You are a lamp that is burning a light
which enlightens others in their minds. It is
very great thing. Earlier, even one person
like that was in billions and billions of people
and now there are so many of you. But
quality wise, if you don't rise, it is going to
be a hopeless case. So you must improve
your quality.
You have got curative powers. You
know that you can cure people. But do not
get into that mess, because, there
Mahamaya plays Her part. If I find that you
(Nirmala Yoga)
1983
The Awakening
On high a Blessed Flower unfolds,
the light grows as it further blooms;
Woken from a night of dreams
Of dread fear and uncertainty
Faces upturned towards the truth
rejoice to behold the doom of Doom.
And sprinkled far and few between
vague glimpses of reality,
As shadows flee and draw away
I open up my eyes to see,
The Fair Mother whose unfading voice
awakened me with gentle calls
Ascends with power and majesty:
The Ageless Goddess, the Source of All.
With selfless love and gentle care
A Longed-for Face bends over me.
She takes Her seat above that Flower
Then slowly recognition grows
Of She for whom I've ever sought,
whose center forms a throne of gold,
And reveals to all the Age of Truth;
Through consciousness and bliss-behold!
And follows bliss and grace untold
And joys of which I had dreamt not.
Continues with increasing strength
the reunion started on that day,
Christine
And songs are sung with loudening voice
which chase all sleep and doubt away.
(Nirmala Yoga)
1983
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-37.txt 
 READY FOR THE WAR?
system (left swadhistan, nabhi, agnya) but
it is most effective when riding the wave
length of our possessiveness and
attachment. Sahaja Yogis who have
understood this are therefore quite careful
not to let marriage, family, job, power traps
or any such human relationship become a
trap for them. Indeed the successful
culmination of the purification trend is
detachment. Where there is no-attachment,
there is no ground for negativity to occupy.
The yogi who is detached has vanished, has
become invisible to the eyes of negativity:
he can't be found anymore. He himself,
however, can search out, find and destroy
negativity if he chooses to do so. Such a
yogi joins then the crack unit of the
Sahajland Defence forces, the Yogeshwari
bhakta squadron, named after the principle
which rules it.
"Ready for the war ?" asked Shri
Mataji Nirmala Devi a choir of Sahaja Yogis
who were singing some battle hymn on the
tenth February '83 in Delhi. Well, are we
ready ? What weapons do we master, what
about tactics and strategy ?
The Weapons: Weapons are of two
kinds: defensive (shield armour, helmet) and
offensive (sword, spear, bow and
arrows). At the time of Shri Rama the-fight
was rather uncomplicated : I aim my arrow,
I shoot, I kill.. and it's a great pleasure to
see the rakshasa falling. At the time of Shri
Krishna the importance of the weapons'
quality was immense : Arjunha would not
have defeated Karna had not Shri Indra
tricked Karna into giving him the breast plate
from Shri Surya that made Karna
invulnerable. At the time of Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi what are the weapons of the
Offensive weapons : The essence
of the yogic attack system is expressed in
one word : attention !Attention (chitta) is the
edge of the consciousness (chit) and the
more concentrated the consciousness can
men of God ?
Upgraded weaponry of the twentieth
Century's war of the yogis is too complex a
subject to be adequatly introduced here.
Furthermore the Sahajland Intelligence
Service would not allow the release of
be, the sharpest its edge. Sahaja Yoga
teaches many meditation exercises to
the concentration
sensitive, classified informations on-yogic
defence systems that the bhootish nasties
are still unsuccessfully trying to penetrate.
However I have been permitted to expose
here a few basic principles.
of the
foster
consciousness and to strengthen the chitta
(cf Rajabhi Modi's lecture at the New York
seminar in October '83). The chitta of an
evolved Yogi works as a vibrations forward
delivery system. As a laser beam launched
from the nirvichara platform (thoughtless
awareness), the enlightened attention
concentrates the Chaitanya Shakti (power
of vibrations) on an identified sphere of
negativity. As a mantra propelled missile, it
directs the vibrations of a specific deity or
divine aspect against the point of negativity
which corresponds to the evil, antagonistic
force opposed to this aspect. In both cases
two results are possible. Either the
Defensive weapons : The essence
of the yogic defence system is expressed in
one word purification! Time and again we
are using the techniques of Sahaja Yoga to
cleanse the various koshas (chakras)
of our psychosomatic instrument so that
negativity will lose its grip on it, so that it will
not find in our system any dark and remote
corner where it would hide and plot, waiting
for the ripe moment to assault us.
Negativity knows the penetration axis of our
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-38.txt 
 2007
37
Issue: 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
negativity is right away pulverised. Or the
negativity is too strong to be destroyed but
then, the chitta instantly switches itself on
to the Sahajland Telecommunication
Network and passes all the relevant
informations concerning the obstacle on to
the Supreme Command (See Nirmala Yoga
issue Jan. Feb. '83 pg 32). The supreme
Command takes over. Really, in the aquarian
age, the bhoots are having a bad time. But
it isn't compulsory to feel sorry for them.
The Battlefield : There are two
battlefields ; the microcosm of our own
individual being and the macrocosm, the
field of the cosmic fight between Shri Mataji's
devas and angels against Satan, the
collective principle of Evil. When you free
the first from adverse interferences you join
in the second as a nicely turned instrument.
The struggle takes place on various levels.
But one could perhaps say that it is still
largely a guerilla struggle of the yogis
freedom fighters against the various dark
lords who have enslaved this planet; against
their human, ex-human and less than
which covers all situations.
First principie: concentrate all your
forces on that precise point of the battlefield
where the enemy lines can be broken. How
? Buy puting our attention on Shri Mataji.
Why ? All the angels, ganas and shaktis at
once rush to the rescuse, riding the beams
emitted by Her Lotus Feet. After all, the
Goddess is called "ranapandita", that is,
mastering the science of wars and battles.
Thus we can now limit ourselves to stating
the basic principles of sahaja warfare. All a
sahaja warrior needs knowing is to call the
Divine Mother's attention on his Kurukshetra.
"Strike, Arjuna, by Me all these foes have
already been slained", Shri Krishna made
plain to His disciple that He is the real Doer.
Sahaja Yoga proves this truth to be enternal.
As far as strategy is concerned,
classified information available only to inner
core yogis cannot, of course, be released
here. Even these yogis don't know the long
term plan of the Supreme Command which
is drafted outside of time and space, and
thus, beyond mental computation. useful
security check against the spies of Avidya
land. For centuries together they have tried
to locate Armageddon, the site of the last
struggle. But... when the last seeker will
have left Sodome and Gommorrha, when
the armies will camp before Sambhalpur,
when all the yogis of the earth will be
integrated into the Sahaja
Telecommunication Network, when all the
horses will have become white like snow...
human troopers. It is quite interesting to
realise how, at the time of the battle of the
Kurukshetra, Shri Krishna who is the lord of
dharma, taught the Pandavas to discard the
rules of military dharma of their time. In
today's battle also, the higher goal of
manifesting the victory of the Spirit overrules
all the smaller dharmas. That is why there
is a great versatility in move, manoevres,
styles and camouflage in the Sahajland
fighting forces. No one can ever predict how
they will operate!
land
they may well get the answer.
JAI SHRI MATAJI !
Tactics And Strategy First
question: "Should we fight the negativity or
should we avoid it?" -The answer given by
Shri Mataji : "If you can fight, do it, if you
can't, run away". Hence a flexible response
Gregoire
Vienna, 21 November 1983
Nirmal Yoga
1983
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-39.txt 
 AMERICA CALLING
experience; It was evident that those who
were seeking had all been to some guru or
cult. Had the Adi Shakti come too late? No,
She reminded them that She had come 10
Dharma is the sustaining force of
human civilisation. Without Dharma the
civilsation lacks its evolutionary momentum
and starts moving in a linear direction.
Whatever moves linearly is destined to reach
a dead end. The recent American tour of
Shri Mataji was a tryst with the Dead Sea.
How to cope with a society which lives
between the choice of suicide and cancers.
years ago but no one paid heed to Her. She
had then warned them of all the false gurus
and all the problems. She had been the first
to come. The tone softened, the radiant
smile returned. We all took heart again as
She said: "Never mind, come my children".
Only the divine Force could handle such a
colossal task and that is precisely what the
Adi Shakti did.
The compassion and love of Shri
Mataji blessed the shores of Vancouver and
Toronto. Boston proclaimed a rousing
welcome from the portals of the American
Ashram. Shri Mataji Cleared the Hamsa
Chakra and New York became receptive to
Sahaja Yoga, May great names from the
United Nations got their realisation and a
great reception was hosted at the U.N. for
Shri Mataji.
The threshold was opened by a very
positive seminar with the Jungain Society
in New York. The worn and ancient
shoulders that had carried the burden of C.J.
Jung were happily relieved by the living force
of Sahaja Yoga
Thereon the soils of Sahaja Yoga
gathered force in Los Angles and as
impressive meeting in San Diego. The
media followed close at heels and nearly all
mornings were spent beyond closed doors
of T.V. recordings.
By now Shri Mataji had already been
in America for over a month. The season
had changed and the time had come to say
goodbye. In a beautiful setting in a forested
area, north of New York, the parting
seminar was held. Over 80 Sahaja Yogis
from all over America were assembled
amidst the Fall colours to hear the parting
words of Shri Adi Shakti.
Sahaja Yoga came to a new light in
San Francisco where even Pastors and
Rabbis were attending on Shri Mataji, Two
popular RabbIs sang Songs in praise.of the
Mother.
On a bleak rainy morning of the last
The seminar held at Santa cruz was
day, looking towards the heavens Shri Mataji
slowly said ; "Lord Krishna must stop
playing His games".
a great success. It was attended by over
150 potential Sahaja Yogis. Shri Mataji said
many wonderful things, A great Havan was
performed for all America; the prayers and
pujas which all Sahaja Yogis of the world
had been offering every Saturday seemed
to be answered. It was indeed a deep
. Yogi Mahajan
(Nirmal Yoga)
1983
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-40.txt 
 West Coast receives Shri Adi Shakti
The third programme i.e. on the 27th
(Tuesday): Right from the start, Shri Mataji
came on them very forcefully, and it was one
clean sweep!l About 250 people. And when
Mother asked how many are not feeling it,
only three hand went up. Then She asked
them to ask, if it was the 'Cool Breeze of the
Holy Ghost, and it was just 'tremendous!
She said, "Now ask, MOTHER, ARE YOU
THE HOLY GHOST?" And every one just
felt the vibrations so strongly. Then one man
(negative) got up and asked "Did you say
you were the Holy Ghost?"- And SHRI
MATAJI stood up, and threw one arm up in
the air and in a clear loud voice declared,
"YES, I AM THE HOLY GHOST." And the
whole hall stood up and started clapping.
Everyone accepted HER just like that. It was
the most joyous, powerful and breath-
taking spectacle of my life I could never
imagine anything so tremendous !
To Say the least, it has been
extremely successful. It started with a Puja
in New York, then Mother came to Los
Angles where we met Her. It was so Joyous
11. We had a grand puja and two TV shows
(one was live). Both interviewers got their
relisation and it was all tremendous. Then
Mother flew on to Houston, where they had
a Puja, and Public programmes. Not too
many people came. Then back to Los
Angles where we had a public programme
on Saturday the 24th Sept. There were
about 200 people with an organised
negative reaction from 6-7 placed Christian
fanatics. But the audience was with Mother.
Next day (Sunday 25th Sept.) was a
programme is San Diego. Shri Mataji arrived
about (12.30 - 1.00) p.m. and we had a
Picnic lunch (very good !). Mother was very
pleased with San Diego. We had a public
programme in the evening, and the Hall was
Jam Packed ! It was highly successful, and
Mother stayed on after the programme to
talk to, and work on individuals, After that
She took us all out to dinner to celebrate
She said, "We must go and celebrate now."
Then followed programmes in San
Francisco and a week-end seminar in Santa
Cruz, at which there were 130-140 people.
Very successful, we had a puja and Havan,
at which Shri Mataji invited everybody. After
the seminar there followed extremily
successful meetings in Santa Cruz, and
Vancouver...
Next morning was a Radio
recording in San Diego which was very
successful, Shri Mataji was very happy. That
Radio studio sends the recordings to 400
Radio stations for relay all over the World!
Then She had a Newspaper interview by the
San Diego Union, which also went very well.
Very positive. Both Radio and paper
interviewers got their realisation. That
evening was the programme in Los
Angeles (Monday 26th) which went fairly
well. (slight disturbance).
We have been having regular
follow up meetings. The regular people
everywhere are so positive, its incredible!
..Things are really going very well..
JAI SHRI MATAJI
Karan
(San Diego)
(Nirmal Yoga)
1983
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-41.txt 
 By the Grace of Ganesha
I came to Sahaja Yoga, as many Western
seekers do, with a badly damaged
Mooladhara Chakra. Although I had received
my realisation in late 1982, my vibrations
were pretty sluggish until I was honoured to
receive in October 1983, Her Holiness Shri
Mataji Nirmala Devi who stayed in my
apartment in Toronto during her 1983 North
American Tour.
large animals have always scared me. But
it seemed so gentle I soon gave up the fear.
I wished I had something to give it as it
caressed my hand with its trunk. I thought
it was looking for sugar or something to eat
but on awakening realised immediately that
it was touching the heel of my palm : the
location of the Mooladhara Chakra.
When I woke up I knew instinctively
that the elephant was Shri Ganesha. I went
into meditation and to my surprise felt no
tingling on my palms where I had always
felt heat from the damaged Mooladhara. It
was nothing short of a miracle.
According to some of the more
subtle Sahaja Yogis travelling with her, she
wrought a miracle during her 4 days with us
by transforming the quality of my
vibrations. After her departure, my hands
sang. But 15 years of a lifestyle
incompatible with finding God had taken their
toll and my Mooladhara Chakra needed to
be reset.
I wanted to share the joy and humility I felt
with others but only Sahaja Yogis can
understand. As a Westerner, Shri Ganesha
is not familiar to me, but from that day onl
feel personal and deep love for gentle
elephant-headed God. It was the clumination
of the healing started by Shri Mataji while
she was in Toronto. I had this dream in the
bed used by Shri Mataji only a few weeks
before. By the grace of God, two miracles
in a month have turned me away totally from
the part and set my footsteps in a new
I had a detailed conversation with
Rajabhai Modi at the New York Seminar
which brought Mother's North American Tour
to a close in late October. I returned to
Toronto armed with Shri Modi's suggestions
and a determination to work on resetting the
Mooladhara.
Two weeks after my return I spent
doing an intensive homeopathic weekend to
clear me through blockages in the spiritual,
mental and physical bodies. The night I took
the remedy prescribed - it was Thuja, the
Tree of Life-I had a vivid dream.
direction.
JAI SHRI MATAJI
Michael Knite
Toronto
November 7, 1983
In the dream I was face to face with
an enormous elephant. I felt fear at first as
(Nirmal Yoga)
1983
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-42.txt 
 SHRI KIRSHNA PUJA
GARLATE - MILAN ASHRAM - 06.08.88
Parvachan of H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
("YOU ARE A UNIVERSAL BEING")
of Vishnu has brought us to the
understanding that we have to seek the truth
and ultimately we have to become Sahaja
Yogis.
Today we have gathered here to worship
Shri Krishna. We must understnad the
significance of Shri Krishna's advent on the
Vishuddhi chakra. As you know very well,
except for once or twice, Shri Brahmadeva
has [not] taken his incarnation. Also Shri
Ganesha has only once taken His birth as
Lord Jesus Christ. But Vishnu Tattwa, the
So this principle of Shri Krishna is
so important that at the state of, as you call
it, the Vishuddhi chakra, we become
complete in the sense that when the
Sahasrara is opened out for you and you
start feeling the vibrations, you are not yet
fully complete. If you were just complete then
it would have been an end of your evolutionB
because at the stage, if you had finished it
then there was no need to have Sahaja
Yoga. But actually it means that once the
Sahasrara is opened out, then you have to
come down to your Vishuddhi chakra; that
means to your collective. If it is not working
on your Vishuddhi chakra, the enlightenment
on Vishuddhi chakra, you cannot feel the
vibrations. As you saw yesterday, the artists
started playing in a very new dimension. It
is not that they got only the awakening of
the Kundalini; the awakening of the
Kundalini was there, no doubt, but it had to
come down to their Vishuddhi chakra. If I
could not have brought it back to their
Vishuddhi chakra, their hands could not have
moved that fast, they would have never felt
the sweetness, the 'Madhurya' of Shri Krishna
and they would not have manifested it.
principle of Vishnu, has taken many a time
birth on this earth, as the Goddess had to
take many a time Her birth. They had to work
together many a time, and with the principle
of Vishnu, the principle of Mahalakshmi has
acted to help the ascent of the people. So
the principle of Vishnu is for your ascent,
for the evolutionary process of human
beings, through this advent and through the
power of Mahalakshmi, we have bécome
human beings from amoeba stage. This is
a spontaneous working for us, but for the
principle of Vishnu He had to go through
various incarnations to evolve.
As you know, there have been
incarnations of Shri Vishnu as a fish to begin
with, and went on till it came to the state of
Shri Krishna, where they say that He has
become complete. But, one has to realise
that He works on our central nervous
system, He buiids our central nervous
system. Through our evolutionary process
our central nervous system has been built
up and this central nervous system has
given us all the human awareness that we
have. Otherwise we would have been just
like the stones. But through this building up
of our awareness, one after another, building
up different chakras within us, this principle
So all that is expressed through your
fingers and hands achieves that new
awareness of creating the 'Madhurya' the
sweetness. In your art, in your music, in your
gestures, in every way your hands are very
important. But Vishuddhi chakra also plays
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-43.txt 
 - 2007
42
Issue: 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
This is only outward, this is the
outward manifestation of the Vishuddhi
part, as you know, on the sixteen chakras
on the sub-plexus which look after our face,
our ears, nose, eyes, neck, all these things
are looked after by Vishuddhi chakra. As a
result, also you can become great actors,
you can have eyes which are innocent, you
can have a skin which is shining, you can
have ears which can hear the divine music,
chakra's improvement within yourself,
through the awakening of Shri Krishna on
the Vishuddhi Chakra. But what happens
really is that, inside you, you become a
witness, you become a witness in the sense
that all that is disturbing, all that is troubling
you all that is a problem, you just start
watching it. You start witnessing it, you start
seeing it and you do not get disturbed. That
seeing, that witnessing state has a
tremendous power, whatever you see
without thinking, your problems get solved.
Any problem you have, once you get this
witness state, what you call 'tatasthata'
means you are standing on the shores and
watching the waves move, then you know
how to solve the problems
you can have a nose which shows your
dignity. In the same way, your whole facial
expresion changes. If you are a very harsh
person and a hot-tempered person and you
have harshness on your face or else if you
are like a beggar all the time, or you are
crying all the time, weepings, your face looks
so miserable, everything changes and
comes into the centre, where you look
beautiful, you look attractive in a divirie way
and also you get a very sweet contenance.
So your witness state has to be
developed and sometimes I have seen
people have to go through little difficulties
to develop that witness state. This is very
important that once the Kundalini starts
supplying you from your Sahasrara
downward, moving on your chakras and
enriching your different chakras. On the
Vishuddhi chakra, when it has to stay, it really
tries to take you through turnoils. And you
start thinking that, "see how my life was so
blissful, I had so many blessings and now
what has happened". But this is the time
when you should become 'tatasthata'-
means you should become a witness - if you
become a witness everything improves. For
example, you are, say, a person who is
working in some place, as soon as you
become a witness, you see, your attention
goes inside and you start watching things
from inside out. As a result, you see exactly
Also the teeth and the tongue are
looked after by the Vishuddhi chakra, so your
teeth which are in trouble get cured.. you
sometimes as I told you, I have never
been to a dentist in all my life, so you can
imagine that you don't have to go to the
dentist any more if you have your Vishuddhi
chakra alright. Then, also your tongue
improves, for example, some people are
very sarcastic by temperament, they cannot
say something sweetly, all the time they are
sarcastic, saying sarcastic things. Some
people havu a habit of abusive language,
some people are extremely beggarly types,
all the time talking in a very beggarly manner.
There's no dignity, there's no sweetness and
there is no selfconfidence for some people.
Some people even stammer. Some people
cannot stand on stage and give a lecture,
all these things drop out as soon as your
Vishuddhi chakra improves.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-44.txt 
 43
Issue: 3 & 4 - 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
that will hurt others. So hurting anybody is
what's wrong and where, and as you have
got the power of witnessing, with that power
you get over the problems that you have.
not in the dharma of Shri Krishna. He either
killed somebody or He was sweet, there's
nothing inbetween. Either you have to be
sweet to people or you have to kill
Problems get solved very easily if you know
how to witness the whole situation [rather]
than to get involved in it. And this is the best
state, which you call as 'Sakshisvarupatva'
which you achieve when the Kundalini
someone. Now the killing part you leave it.
So you only have to be sweet. You all have
to be sweet to each other, especially among
Sahaja Yogis, you all have to be extremely
comes up and the connection is established
and the divine ray starts falling through that
and enriches your Vishuddhi chakra.
sweet to each other. And dealing with
others also, sweetly you have to tell them
if you find anything wrong with them see,
this is not good, you have now come to
Sahaja Yoga, now you must behave like this
or behave like that.
Now the name of Shri Krishna has
come from the word 'Krish' meaning the
ploughing, ploughing of the soil for planting
the crops. Now He is the one who has done
the ploughing for us, in the sense that He
has created us in such a manner that when
Now Shri Krishna's life has another
very significant role to play, that is, He came
on this earth after Shri Rama's advent-who
was also Shri Vishnu. VWhen Shri Rama
came the people were very ignorant, they
had no idea about dharma., So as a king He
the sprouting has to be done you are already
ready for it. But as it is we human beings
spoil our Vishuddhi chakra by many wrong
things, as you have seen, that we smoke or
we take drugs, or we take tobaccos and all
that, so our Vishuddhi chakra goes out. On
top of that, if you are a person who doesn't
talk at all, or who talks too much or who
shouts and screams and who shows
temper, raises his voice, also spoils his
Vishuddhi chakra.
wanted to teach them dharma and so He
had to become very serious. So His
incarnation was something of a very serious
father who is very seriously undergoing all
kinds of turmoils and things and to create
an image of a benevolent king. As a result,
when His incarnation was over, people
became very serious minded and all the
seriousness started in the religion, all the
ritualism started; people became extremely
So the first thing is that in your using
the Vishuddhi chakra you have to remember
that it is to be used for sweetness, for
rigid and that rigidity killed all the joy of life
and then all kinds of other things also started
'madhurya'. If you want to say something to
someone, try to say something that is sweet
and nice, practice it. In certain places I have
seen that people are used to a kind of a talk
and sometimes they cannot talk in the
fashion that is sweet-for them it is adharma,
to talk sweetly to someone. They only
believe that you must really talk in a manner
with that rigidity the beginning of
Brahmanism.
Brahminism started in India when
people started using Brahmanism as a
birthright while it is not a birthright of anyone
to be a Brahman but you have to become a
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-45.txt 
 2007
44
Issue: 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
And now in Sahaja Yoga we have
proved that whatever religion you may follow,
whatever things you follow, ideas or
philosophy, whatever you may follow, you
all can become realised souls. So nobody
is higher, nobody is lower. So many people
think that the best thing is to believe that all
Brahman. After realisation you become a
Brahman, this fact is established not only is
Shri Krishna's time but also in Shri Rama's
time because Shri Rama himself was not a
Brahman, He made a person write His
Ramayana, who was Valmiki, who was a
schedule caste and was a fisherman. Very
surprising He asked this fisherman to write
His Ramayana when He was not a
Brahman. And He made Him a Brahman, in
others are wrong and we are correct. But all
of those people who believe like this may
have to go to hell directly, because they have
not reached the truth. The truth is; you have
to become a Realised SOul, and if you are
not a Realised Soul, you are nowhere near
God. You have to enter into the kingdom of
God Christ Himself has said that, "you have
to enter into the kingdom of God, you have
to be born again and when you'll be calling
me 'Christ, Christ', I won't recognise you".
Openly He said it. He has warned you. Say
about ... Mohamed Sahib himself has said
that, when the time of Kayama
(Resurrection) comes, your hands will
speak. He has also said very clearly "till the
Kayama, you'll do all those rituals like . you
see .. rosary and all that. But when the
Kayama comes, when you get your
resurrection, then you don't have to do it".
He has clearly said it; but nobody is
trying to find out the Kayama, only they're
trying to find fault with this or that and fight
the sense as you have become Brahmans,
means knowing the Brahma. Those who
know the Brahman are the real Brahmans
and not those who are born in the Brahman
caste.
That is why people some times get
very upset when they see so-called religious
people. How can these be Brahmans if they
are so perverse, and they can commit all
kinds of sins. So by following any such
religion or any such rigid ideas you cannot
improve. If you call yourself a'Christian' then
one thing has to be seen in a Christian that
you cannot have adulterous eyes. Now I
would like to know how many Christians can
claim that. If they have no adulterous eyes
about,I say women, they'll have adulterous
eyes about things. So you cannot say that
by becoming 'Christians' we have become
really Christians.
with each other.
In the same way we can say about
Hindus. In the Hidu religion, Krishna has
said that the Atman resides in everyone. He
never said that the birth determines your 'jati'
(caste). But among Hindus we believe that
everybody has a jathi and that everybody is
a separate thing. Some people are to be
treated like low, some as high, This is just
the opposite of what Krishna has preached
because He said in everyone there is Atman,
Now this Resurrection time He has
already mentioned, when your hands will
speak, is in Sahaja Yoga. So after this you
don't have to do any rituals. Now you have
become a 'pir' (a realised soul) according to
Him. Now once you have become a 'walli'
you don't have to do all these things and
you become a 'Dharmateeta'. It is said also
in Indian philosophy by Shri Krishna that you
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-46.txt 
 Issue: 3 & 4 - 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
45
become a 'Dharmateeta'. You go beyond
religion, means religion becomes part and
parcel of you, You don't have to have outside
religions which are of no use. It is clearly
said. And Shri Krishna has said it as clearly
as anybody could say it. - Very, very clearly
that you have to go beyond your gunas,
beyond your dharmas, that means you have
to become a person who is religious innately.
And not to become a person who is just
outwardly something like Christian, Hindu,
Muslim. No! Inside! you have to become.
just play Holi, be happy, joyous, dance and
sing", that's what He said. Now what to do?
Now if He has said so. So they started a
new thing, "Let's make it a romantic stuff".
Human beings know how to make
everything perverse. Nobody can beat them
in this. So they made him look like a very
romantic personality, romancing with Radha.
"Ra-dha', 'Ra' is energy, 'dha' is the one who
has sustained energy. And yet they show
romances with Her . She was Mahalakshmi
Herself! They show His relationship with
Mahalakhmi as if they were husband and
wife. So there were also some poets who
started describing them as husband and
wife, and all kinds of nonsense.
Now as a result of that you have
seen what Shri Krishna has said that once
you become from inside then I don't have to
tell you, "Don't drink, don't do this, don't do
that". Nothing. You just don't do it, you just
don't do it, and you understand it so well
that this should not be done, that should not
be done.
In divine relationship there is nothing
like husband and wife. [There] is the power
which is potential (feminine energy) and the
power that is kinetic (masculine energy).
There is no such relationship that exists as
human beings try to make it. Because
human beings have a habit to bring all the
To overcome all kinds of ritualistic
nonsense of religion, Shri Krishna's advent
was there. It was a very important advent
but don't know how many people
Divine incarnations to their own levels As
you have seen, the Best are the Greeks,
who brought all the great incanations to their
own levels. In the same way they could not
do much with Shri Krishna so they said.
"alright, make him a romantic personality,
understand that. He came to show that it's
all 'Leela', it's all the play of God, What is
there to be serious? What is there to be
ritualistic? You cannot bind God in any
rituals. That's why He came on this earth; to. that will suit us".
tell you that you should not try to blind
yourself by rituals which are nonsensical.
So it suited many horrible people.
We had Wanhabin Laknow who had 365
wives and He used to dress up like Shri
Krishna, sometime like Radha and dance
and He said, "Now, I have become Shri
Krishna". So many gurus came as Shri
Krishna playing the flute, calling everyone
else their gopis and this and that, al
nonsense. VWe have so many groups now
working like that. Brahma Kumaris and all
These were His teachings, so many
years back, He taught this six thousand
years back. But still, if you see in every
religion, there are so many rituals going on.
So when the incarnations died, people
started rituals, funny stuff, even when Shri
Krishna died, they didn't know what to do
now. Because He said, "no more rituals
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-47.txt 
 Issue: 3 & 4 - 2007
46
The Divine Cool Breeze
So they went to the river and said,
"Oh River, the saint never ate anything, he
was absolutely detached about food, he
didn't touch the food". And the river went
that. When there is one Krishna, the rest
are all gopis and gopas and they don't marry
and all kinds of nonsense. This not marrying
is absolutely absurd! and preverse and
down. So they were surprised, "How is it the
saint ate everything and did not eat
anything?" It means he was in 'Aswadha',
he was not involved into the food, he was
detached and they were surprised. It looks
like a lie from a human point of view, it is
not. It is not. That is the fact. He is a
Yogeshwara and he is so detached.
brings a bad name to Shri Krishna.
Shri Krishna was Yogeshwara. He
was Yogeshwara. He was so detached that
once His wives, who were His powers, said
that "We want to go across and worship a
particular saint". He said, "alright, why didn't
you go? They said, "No, the river is in spate
and we don't know how to cross the river".
So people don't understand Divinity
and they think that, "how can it be a person
who has 16,000 wives and five other wives
He said "Alright, you go and tell the river we
want to go and see such and such a saint
and Shri Krishna has said you calm down. If
Shri Krishna is Yogeshwara and if He has
had no wife, then you go down".
can be a person who is not yet married?"
This was possible for Shri Krishna because
He was Yogeshwara. That is what you all
have to be is Yogeshwaras. You are married,
you have got children. I'm happy you're
married because that is an auspicious thing
So they went to the river and said
that, "If Shri Krishna has had no wives and
He is a Yogeshwara, then please go down".
And the river went down. So they were very
to do to marry to begin with. But you should
not get involved with your family; my child,
my family. Many people I have seen, they
come to Sahaja Yoga, get married and get
lost! Because to them . married now,
"I'm enjoying my family now, looking after
my family". Our family is the whole universe;
it is not just my own wife and my children
but the whole universe is our family. You are
a universal beings. This is what He preached
throughout, that you are a universal being
and you have to be a part and parcel of the
whole. When you are part and parcel of the
surprised, that "He is supposed to be our
husband and still He is Yogeshwara. He is
so detached!" They crossed over and they
went and worshipped the saint. So the saint
said, "Now, you can go back".
When they were coming back, they
found again the river was in spate. So they
went back to the saint and said, "Now how
do we go back?" He said, "How did you
come?" They said, "Shri Krishna said that,
"You go and ask the river if I was a
Yogeshwara, then you go down". "Alright,
so you go and tell the river that the saint did
not eat anything whatsoever and he was
absolutely detached about it, so the river will
go down". So they were surprised because
they had fed him, he had eaten everything,
he had done everything.
whole, the microcosm becomes the
macrocosm.
And this is not just a lacture but has
to happen within yourself. You have to
develop your collective consciousness. This
is the gift of Shri Krishna, because at the
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-48.txt 
 Issue: 3 & 4
2007
47
The Divine Cool Breeze
brain He becomes the Virata. So now we
have 3 identities within ourselves; on the
heart is Shiva, in the brain is Shri Krishna,
face it and say this was wrong, and this
wrong I will not do again. And it's finished.
For you are, after all, saints now. You have
to become 'wallis'. You have now become
realised souls, you have become now
'Atmajas'. You have got Brahmachaitanya,
you have seen on your heads there was
light, you have seen the proof of it.
the Virata, and in the liver, Brahmadeva. So
we have 3 identities and in the stomach, in
the Void as you say, are all the Guru Tatwa
where all the great Gurus from Adinath,
Mohammed Sahib and others, up to Shirdi
Sainath reside. All of them are the Guru
principle which we worshipped last time
Soldon't have to give you a second
certificate. Only thing, you better understand
and be aware of your own position as Shri
Krishna has said you have to be aware of
your Self. First to get Self-Realisation and
then to be aware of your position. Then you'll
be surprised how you develop proper
attention and proper understanding.
when we were in Andorra.
So how they are all related with each
other, how they have worked out together
and brought you to the state of witness is
very important.
Now your Vishuddhi chakra has to
Absolutely, it is an easy thing to do
as soon as you find that you have achieved
that witness-state. So please try to make
yourself a witness. When you see
something, go into thoughtless awareness.
That is your fort. Don't think. See the beauty
that is there, just pouring in, just watch how
these three are standing still just watching
you all. See, absolutely still, nothing is
moving. They don't even allow one leaf to
move let it be. Till the breeze, till [then]
we just keep quiet and watch. Like these
mountains how they are steadily watching
everything and emitting joy and beauty. In
the same way, we have to become a witness.
We need not talk too much, we need not
be improved. First of all, this feeling guility
business was so much yesterday that, I tell
you that it was impossible to put it out. There
is nothing to feel guilty about, it's fashion,
just a fashion; "I'm sorry", morning till
evening, "I'm sorry, I'm sorry". What are you
sorry for, for being a human being or for a
Sahaja Yogi? So one has to be very
pleasant towards oneself aiso, all the time
"I'm sorry, I should not have done this, I
should not have done that". All the time
feeling sorry and feeling guilty spoils your
left Vishuddhi. As your left Vishuddhi is spoilt
what happens is that your Shri Krishna
tattwa is gone. Then you cannot feel the
collective, then you cannot understand what
has gone wrong with you.
keep quiet but in the centre we should
witness the whole thing as 'Leela'. That's
why He is called 'Leeladhara', means the
one who sustains the Leela of persons.
So just if you have to say sorry, say
sorry to God and after that don't say sorry
any more. You face it, Whatever you have
done wrong, alright face it! This was wrong,
alright.. it will not be done [anymore]. Do
not argue with it, do not continue with it. Just
It doesn't make you mad, it doesn't
make you funny, but it makes you joyous.
Anything that makes you joyous is the
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-49.txt 
 2007
48
Issue: 3 & 4
The Divine Cool Breeze
Vishnu principle of Shri Krishna. I Hope all
of us are going to enjoy our Vishnu principle
hereafter as we have enjoyed before by
meditating. Because when we meditate we
go into Thoughtless Awareness. When we
are in Thoughtless Awareness, then only we
grow, otherwise we cannot grow. Whatever
we may try we cannot grow. Unless and until
we meditate we cannot become
But sometimes it can be very
temporary and it may go down if people don't
take to it in the proper way. I wish you all the
very great luck for your witness-state. In the
witness state, we do not, in any way, express
ourselves in a funny manner but just in
looking at ourselves.
Because only we have created all the
problems. it is only we, detaching ourselves
from ourselves, who can see these problems
and can solve them. By God's Grace, as I
know, you all are going to grow very much
and this state is to be achieved. In every
state whether it is a blessing, whether it is a
progress or whether it is just a turnoil, you
have to be seaworthy. Any ship which is
seaworthy is the one which can face not only
all kinds of beautiful voyages, but turnoils
and even the tempest.
Thoughtlessly Aware.
All those who also want to gain in
any walk of life, in any dimension, those who
want to become, say, great artists, great
scientists, great anything have to meditate.
In Sahaja Yoga it is important you must
meditate, otherwise the Kundalini will
come down and you will lose all your
talents. That is a fact which has to be told
and you saw how people have got
transformed.
May God Bless You.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-50.txt 
 MONA LISA
in her smile is
Eternal Cause of Ganesh Principle
"Ganesha establishes within you the
higher self. The baser self, which
enjoys all the baser things in life, is cut
down or completely destroyed by Shri
Ganesha. If you see Mona Lisa, she
cannot be an actress, or win any beauty
contest, but her face is very serene and
motherly and pure. Why is it she is
eternally so much appreciated? The
reason is there is Ganesha Principle in
her. It's the mother. The story goes that
this lady had lost her child and she
would never smile again or cry. When
one little child was brought to her, and
she saw the child, the smile that came
on her face of her love for the child is
being depicted by this great artist. Even
the eyes of a crocodile cracking her
eggs to take out the babies are so gentle
and loving. But when you become
modern, your actions are funny. So
love for your child has to be absolutely
important, but as Sahaja Yogis you
should not have attachment, only for
your child."
H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
(Shri Ganesh Puja, Les Diablerets-
Switzerland, 10th August 1989)
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-51.txt 
 fHELGOME
Pratisthan-Gurgaon
"When we meditate we go into Thoughtless Awareness. When we
are in Thoughtless Awareness, then only we grow, otherwise we cannot
grow. Whatever we may try we cannot grow. Unless and until we
meditate we cannot become Thoughtlessly Aware.
In Sahaja Yoga it is important you must meditate, otherwise the
Kundalini will come down and you will lose all your talents. That is a fact
which has to be told and you saw how people have got transformed."
(H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi)
SHRI KIRSHNA PUJA
Milan Ashram - 06.08.88
