The Divine Cool Brecze January-February, 2007

 Breeze Cool Divine The JAN. - FEB. - 2007 NIRMALA NIVERSAL PURE CONTENTS 1. Realization in Refugee Camp in Israel - 31 - 7 - 2006 Prayer To Shri Mataji 2. Farewell to Shri Mataji - 2 -8 - 2006 3. Shri Mataji in Los Angeles, USA 3-8-06 4. (2-8-2006) A wonderful Day in London 5. 1000Months of love celebrated 22 7 - 2006 6. The Queen of Heaven 7. Classic Recollection from Dr. Bohdan (10. 8. 1991) 8. - 10-5-1992 Sahasrara Puja 9. Asato Ma Sat Gamaya 10. Agya Chakra - 3-2-83 11. Christmas Eve Talk - 24-12-1982. 12. Sahasrara Puja -France (5.05.1984) 13. VMHS DHARMA VISHWA FrELIGION

 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE Published by Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 108, Chandragupt Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411029 Ph. No. : 020-25285232 Printed by Krishna Printer & Designer Tri Nagar, Delhi-35 Mob.: 9212238008 For Subseription Please Write to : Nirmal Transformatiom Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 108,Chandragupt Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune - 411029 Tel.No.: 020-25285232 Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles, Miracle Photographs ete. to : Shri O.P. Chandna G-11 (463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110 034 Ph.: 011-65356811

 Realization in Refugee Camp in Israel Mondy, 31 July, 2006 It was so beautiful there and the Yesterday we (me, Grish, Shankar, atmosphere was absolutely amazing People were really seeking some inner peace and were all truly thankful for the realisation they have received. So many were telling me how all their worries and fears which were haunting them for 2 weeks have been washed away after the realisation. And many many children came to us and sat for a long time deep in meditation. David and many many others whom you don't know.) went to a place which is kind like a refugee camp on one of the Southern Israeli shores of the meditarenean. [hizballa are sending about 100 bombs a day to all north Israel and many of the northern citizens have escaped southwards] so in that camp are around 7000 "refugees" who are very nicely taken care of in this big big project which is providing them free of charge all meals, drinks various activities and entertainment programs and different basic facilities. There was so much love and care in the air and I felt so much satisfaction. At first the whole camp was reminding many of us of Sahaj camps or Ganapatipule, and also to see all this different people who didn't know each other before integrate so wonderfully and care for each other was a very elevatig experience and very sahaj. When we left all people and organizers asked us to come again even everyday if we'd like to. So there we went to spread Mother's love and vibrations, and we were welcomed so nicely, they quickly organised a place for us and brought us all we needed and after about 3 minutes declared on the speakers that all those who wish to experiment in yoga are welcomed to our spot. A few seconds later a lecture had started to about 40 people and from that moment people kept coming, or coming back with their relatives and held us there till very late in the night and were asking if we will be coming also tomorrow and in the next day. I wish I will get more chances to go there and I hope none of them will be left unrealised. Jai Shri Mataji Anat (Internet Version) Prayer to our Beloved Mother, Her Holiness Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namaha Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have done-the wars and the hate that men have done - the selling of weapons by Iran to Lebanon to make material, political and destructive profits. between Lebanon, Plaestine and Israel. Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have done - the shelling and the sophisticated weapons that are killing innocent children and families in their homes without mercy. Shri Adi Shakti, to undo the evil that men have done, please command us and show us how to be able to fulfill completely all Your desires on earth.

 - 2007 Issue: 1 & 2 The Divine Cool Breeze Holy Lotus Feet, anger into compassion, vanity and ego into natural humility, jealousy into devotion, greed into unlimited generosity and materialism into spirituality. Shri Adi Shakti, to undo the evil that men have done, please use us as your instruments and rockets of Love and Devotion to enlighten everybody's Spirit. (Vanity into Self respect, ego into natural humility,) Shri Adi Shakti, to undo the evil that men have done, please give us strength to fulfill our dedication to You completely and spontaneously with natural humility. Shri Adi Shakti, to undo the evil that men have done, please Bless us with Veeta Raga and Teach us how to establish Sahaj Yoga, so that your Divine Laws will spread quickly everywhere. Shri Adi Shakti, to undo the evil that men have done, please transform the stone-hearted and brainwashed people into Your instruments and Bombs of Our Beloved Mother, please forgive us for any mistake we have done against our Spirit and please may You substitute our so-called freedom with Your wishes, and Your instructions, because there is no freedom unless it is an authority from You. Our Beloved Mother, please may Your thousand months of Love on this earth as Creator of all creations give us innocence, wisdom and discrimination so the Satya Yuga will be established to bring Absolute Unison of Heaven and Earth at Your Compassion and Pure Love. Shri Adi Shakti, to undo the evil that men have done, may You please accept us as Your devoted and loving children to spread Sahaja Yoga spontaneously, so a completely positive collectivity will quickly grow in Lebanon, Israel, Palestine, Iran, Syria and in all the Middle-East. Shri Adi Shakti, to undo the evil that men have done, please open our hearts and enlighten our faith so the ignorance around us will transform hate into love, war into peace, shells and weapons into dust at Your Holy Lotus Feet. Your children from Lebanon, Iran and Israel (Internet Version) Farewell to Shri Mataji Wednesday Night (2.8.2006) St. George's House Hello West Midlands brothers and sisters, already in London for work). I knew there was some kind of ceremony taking place to mark Shri Mataji's departure but I hadn't given a thought to the idea I might be able to attend. What a surprise! I was with Vimala who is also in the Bhajan group, so we sadly left Nicola baby-sitting the kids, and jumped into the car, Half an hour later we were in Shri I wanted to share a wonderful experience with you, which took place this Wednesday at Shri Mataji's house in Chiswick. At ten p.m. on Wednesday nightI got a call from Matthew Cooper (Mother's photographer) - "we might need a tabla player, you better get over here quick" (I was

 Issue: I & 2 - 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze that Shri Mataji was engaging us again. Mataji's hallway, waiting for Her to come up from downstairs. Shri Mataji then began to give out gifts, starting with ties for the men. I was distracted while trying to choose another bhajan to play, and didn't even notice this was happening, until I was being called to receive a tie. Suddenly I was at Mother's feet found myself talking to Sir C.P. and Shri Mataji!! It turned out that playing under the spotlight had been a great blessing, as Sir complementing enthusiastically on the tabla playing. He asked me where I learnt, and I said I learnt from Sandesh Popatkar in Nagpur, whom Shri Mataji and Sir C.P. know well, and they seemed pleased to hear that. In a simple remark that later, on reflection, seems to carry unknowable significance, Shri Mataji said simply "I am meeting you for the first time". This is the first time She has spoken to me. All I managed to do was smile and The lift doors opened to a great and wonderful surprise- Shri Mataji was walking! In this joyful moment the idea began to bubble up that we might be in for a very special evening. After Shri Mataji and Sir C. P. had settled, we all took our seats in the living room. As various beautiful offerings were made to Shri Mataji, we began to sing some Bhajans. Sia was there with a harmonium, but the main bhajan group had not arrived yet, as we'd had such late notice. As it happened, I had been practicing some bhajans with Sia and Anthony Headlam over the previous two evenings. These were beautiful songs, quiet and melodious rather than rousing, but not so well known, so perhaps not ideal for a collective event like this, but they were the only songs we had practiced together for years, so we performed them. It was really just Sia, Anthony and Vimala singing, accompanied by harmonium and tabla: I'm used to playing with the big sound of the bhajan group, so this felt really under the spotlight, but it was very enjoyable and did sound very nice. There have been four or five babies born in the last week or two, and suddenly they were all there with their mothers, at Shri Mataji's feet. This included Paul and Dhamini Goundry, who arrived all the way from Sheffield at exactly the right moment, and walked in the front door and directly to Mother's feet! Paul looked like all his Christmases had come at once. Mario C.P. was me namaskar. The evening continued with many gifts being given by Shri Mataji, and pretty much continuous light conversation from Her. She was asking what everyone's name was, asking people how they were, and having small exchanges here and there with much laughter. As always, words are not adequate to describe the atmosphere. We did not perform any more bhajans, which felt right as everyone was hanging on Shri Mataji's every word, but Marcellow arrived with his classical guitar and we played some very quiet instrumental music together. And suddenly, the most incredible presented a photo album of all the babies born since Shri Mataji's visit last year. Then he plucked up the courage to ask Shri Mataji for a name for their daughter. She stared hard at the baby for a full minute or two, and named her Leela, to a hearty round of applause. Everyone was feeling so happy part of the evening. Shri Mataji spoke to us. Just a sentence or two, but she actually spoke to us, as our Mother and Guru, for the first time in two years or more I think. She said, and this is from memory so it is certainly not 100% accurate:

 - 2007 Issue: 1 & 2 The Divine Cool Breeze a single sentence. As brothers and sisters in the family of Sahaja Yoga, we are closer to each other than any brothers and sisters have ever been. If we can live by that, and never let the bonds between us be challenged by our petty human foolishness, then nothing can prevent Shri Mataji's beautiful movement of Sahaja Yoga from reaching it's ultimate destination. "We are all very close. Very close... If only that is realized, everything will work out. We are brothers and sisters... But that is another matter.. We are in Sahaja Yoga." (without the tone of voice, this may be interpreted as very close to some event or thing, but at the time it was clear - speaking for myself of course that she was using the term close, as in close to each other.) With Love, Not surprisingly, Shri Mataji in Her genius has given us the antidote to all that has challenged us these past two years, in Tom (Internet Version) ... Shri Mataji Arrives in Los Angeles 3 August, 2006 Dear everyone minutes everyone went outside the airport building at the curb waiting for Shri Mataji's car to arrive there. Jai Shri Mataji !! Just a quick note to share the wonderful news of arrival of our Holy Mother in the land of the Vishuddhi. Shri Mataji and Sir CP arrived at LAX airport on Thursday evening (Aug 3rd). Both Sir CP and Shri Mataji were escorted by yogis into the arrivals waiting lounge at terminal B at LAX airport at about 8:30pm. Our Divine Mother was received by Sadhana didi and her family. Yogis sang some bhajans while waiting and got an 'extended' darshan for another 15 minutes. If heaven could exist on Earth it was there in the hearts of yogis in form of love for their Motehr and Her family. Despite the 14 hour journey from London to LAX, Shri Mataji looked fresh and departed the airport around 9.15 pm leaving our hearts and nabhis tremendously satisfied with Her Divine 'darshan' - as powerful as a About 60-70 yogis had gathered at the airport to welcome Shri Mataji. Yogis had driven and flown from all over like Sacremento, San Jose, Irvine, LA, etc. Seven of us were blessed to drive up to LAX from San Diego which is about 115 miles away.Even several seekers had by 'chance' come to the airport and were delighted to hear about Her arrival. Cne seeker upon being told about Shri Mataji even said that just listening about Her gives him the chills up his spine and promised to go online to find out more about such a Divine personality. puja. Most people know how hot the summers have been this year with record high temperatures all over the country. Just 2-3 before Her arrival the days Paramchaitanya around this region had started batencing out and cooling off the environment by rain and clouds, preparing for Her arrival. Thank You Mother for coming here and keeping as protected with Your love. We pray to remain at your Divine lotus feet. -Love and regards San Diego yogis (Internet Version) Upon Shri Mataji's and Sir CP's arrival in the lounge, yogis quietly formed a circle gathering around them and offered flowers with a namaskar. After about 10

 A Wonderful Day in London 2nd August, 2006 Officially it was "farewell", as Mother Wednesday 2nd August was a lovely day in London, You could say it was a Wonderful Day, a special day. All day Shri Mataji had been Chatting, Laughing, Telling jokes. She Said it was a very auspicious day. Some biscuits have been specially made for Her and sent in on the tea tray. "Ah", She Says "These biscuits are so good, who made them, I must get the recipe"... A thrilled and delighted Patty is ushered in for a chat. And a cup of Darjeeling tea is offered, made by Rachael. "Aah" Mother Says, "This is the best cup of tea I have had in a long time"... was due to set off next day to join our beloved brothers and sisters in the U.S.A. Just going from one home to another. And that night there was no sadness in this "farewell", only Joy, for we did Fare Well. The first sight of Our Holy Mother, smiling as only She can, was as She walked gently and with minimum assistance from two beaming helpers, from the elevator into the beautiful "blue room". Everybody crammed in. The Sari was a Heavenly pink and gold. As soon as everybody was inside, Mother leaned forward in her chair. "Why don't you all move forward?" Come evening-time as many of us as possible crammed into the big sitting- room at Chiswick, spreading into the hallway, up the stairs, down the stairs..if only we had a bigger place, ten times more of us could be there. Let's hope that one day it will be that way, and we can all be there together. Those whose turn it was the night knew that they were carrying the love, the hopes and dreams, of all the Callective of all the world, and sharing through their hearts. We did, old, young, and newborn. Sweetly lilting Bhajans were sung. So many offerings were made by delighated Yogis and Yoginis, Aunties, Shakti..There was Aarti, there was a beautiful garland, so many flowers, sweets, nuts, fruits, cakes, bangles, ornaments, a sari, coconuts, all with such sweetness and love. Yuva Uncles, (from SWAN) **** **** The Australian Sahaja Yoga News letter 28 July 2006 At the vishuddhi Chakra Shri Krisha established this, or He manifested, this pure relationship of a sister In a collective life that we have, in the ashram where we live, where we move about as Sahaja Yogis, if we do not have this basic principle within us, there will be a chaos, complete chaos. Once this purity of relationship is established, that: 'Apart from my wife, all the rest are my sisters or mothers,' it cannot be a proper society and the chaos of the social system of America is because they have no sense of pure relationships. Once you call somebody a sister, she's a sister. And once you call sombody a brother, he's a brother. It's not only that you should be born of the same parents - it's not necessary - but this is a very important principle to have a very pure society where everybody can live peacefully." Raksha Bandhan Puja Los Angeles, USA 7 August, 1990

 1000 months of love Celebrated On the night of the 21st July, on the auspicious anniversary of 1000 months of Divine presence on Earth, Shri Mataji was offered a huge cake, decorated with rose petals. On that same day, a local newspaper published an advertisement in full page, written by the Italian yogis, thanking Shri Mataji for all the work She has been doing in Italy in these 25 years and all the blessings She has bestowed upon us. The same ad was published next day in four different local editions of the national newspaper "La Republica". On the 22nd July evening, hundreds of yogis from all over Italy and the neighbouring countries assembled at Palazzo Doria to celebrate together Her 1000 months on this Earth, to thank Her for all the love She has been pouring on all of us and to salute Her before Her departure songs. Shri Mataji afterwards watched a DVD about Her 15 years in Cabella and 25 years in Italy, with the background music of Ave Maria, which left all of us in a blissful state. from Cabella. To the Mother f all Then 1000 candles were lit and of offered at Her lotus feet and, immediately after, the procession of yogis started. All of the yogis that had gathered, a few hundreds, in a long line entered the hall, bowed before Mother and offered gifts, flowers, paintings, cards at Her Lotus Feet in an unending stream of love. Gueus waur The evening ended with the offering of a big cake "To the Mother of all Gurus", The evening began with an uplifting dance performed by the yoginis of Cabella and some yuva shaktis. After that the yuva shakti group in full had the opportunity to sing bhajans at the Lotus feet of the Divine Mother. Some more songs performed by yogis and yoginis from Austria and Italy filled the atmosphere with vibrations and peace, before the children from Daglio camp enchanted the audience with their joyful accompanied by ten other cakes with the symbols of the ten Adi Gurus. While all this was going on, the yuva shakti in the next room kept singing bhajans to praise the glory of our Mother. -Jai Shri Mataji (The Australian S.Y. News Letter) 28 July 2006

 The 84 names of Shri Vishnumaya 24. She whose Teeth are as Red as She who is the Kali. She who was created by Mahakali Herself She who dwells in the Vishuddhi Padma, the Lotus of Vishuddhi. She who is Kulishangi, thunderbolt- bodied 1. Pomegranate Flowers. 2. She with a Hundred Eyes. 25 She who is Narayani. 26. 3. 27. The Goddess who is the Gracious Remover of Afflictions. 4. She who gives Chastity, the Foundation of all Dharmas. Her Flowers of Chastity that express the Powers of Shri Ganesha. She who insisted that Chastity by the battle with the Kauravas. 31. The One who was Draupadi. 28. She who is dazzling like lightning. 5. 29. She who has special weapons. 6. She who is a weapon of Shri 7. 30. Americeshwari. She who is the conqueror of 8. rakshasas and devils, She who conquered Mahishasura. She who destroyed Shumbha and Nishumbha The One is the Eternal Virgin. The One whose Chastity is protected by the brother. 32. 9. 10. 33. The One who cares for the spirituality of the brother. 34. She who was responsible for the 11. She who is the beloved daughter of Mahabharata. 12. She who joins the five elements, the five Pandavas. She who can enter into all the elements. 35. the Vindhya mountains. 13. She who is the Devi praised in the Devi Mahatmyam. She to whom Adi Shankaracharya 36. 14. She who integrates heart and brain. 38. 37. gave praise Born into the home of the cowherd Nanda. She who is quick-acting. 15. The One who burns away negativity. 39. The Powerful one whose Electricity brings auspiciousness. 41. 40. She who was born on the same day as Shri Krishna. The sister of Shri Krishna as the 16. She who controls lightning, earthquakes, typhoons and burning forests. 17. Mayashakti. The One who declares that an Avatar 18. She who gives a miracle picture every 28 seconds. 42. of Truth has come. She who sacrificed herself in order to 19. The One who enlightens the film medium. The One who gives pure speech. The One who empowers mantras. She who is without ego. She who bestows true humility The One who creates confidence. 43. announce the Birth of Shri Krishna. She who became Lightning to 20. 44. announce the Birth of Shri Krishna. 21. She who is the Maya that is 45. 46. 47. impossible to surpass - Vaikrtika Rahasya. 22. She whose Maya is beyond the knowledge of Shiva Brahma and Vishnu. 23. She who is of Mysterious Forms - Murti Rahasya. 48. 49. The Keeper of Reality. The One who exposes negativity. The One who exposes false sophistication. 50. 51.

 · 2007 Issue: 1& 2 10 The Divine Cool Breeze She who clears the Path for Self Realisation. She who does not tolerate sarcasm. The One who is fully Capable. 69. She who is blameless. 52. She who protects the respect for 53. 70. grandparents. 54. 71. She who guards the respect for the Mother principle. She who is the power of a sister in a family. She who makes us part and parcel of the whole. She who removes self doubt. She who gives the quality of being whole hearted about Sahaja Yoga. She who brings us to the Virata. She who is Shri Vithala Vishnumaya Virata. 72. 55. 73. 74. 56. She who resides in the Left Vishuddhi, as the Maha Shakti. 75 57. She who is the destroyer of false mantras. 58. She who was Fatima, the Pure Sister and Daughter. 76. 59. The One who destroys false 77. Saraswati, She who becomes the explanations. She who helps keep the maryadas of the chakras. She whose root is in the heart. Vishnumaya at Hamsa Chakra. The Destroyer of the Danavas and the Asuras of Viprachittla. She who is known as Shakambhari. 60. 78, 61. The One who gives courage. 79. 80. 62. The great Bhramari, Her Fiery Beauty slays even the worst of foes. The Fire Power of the Ida Nadi. She who speaks the Truth and purifies the ethers. She who is the Power of a Woman. She who is to be worshipped every day. The Power in a woman that cannot be dominated by money materialism. She who is the Destroyer of Myths. She who removes artificial norms She who reveals what is underneath. 63. or 81. 82. 64. 65. 83. 66. 84. She who is the support of Joy. She who gives comprehension of the Subtle. 67. 68. -Jai Shri Mataji. (Australian Newsletter)

 The Queen of Heaven When I was but a child I first saw the Queen of Heaven She stood swathed in silken garb with golden hue Her face it shone towards me with love and light / will come and I will protect you is what She said to me And She did come and She did protect me. When I was still a child I saw the Queen of Heaven once more She stood upon the Earth ringed in fiery glow My fear was for my heavenly Mother but She turned and said | am your Mother I will allow no harm to come to you or me I fell at Her Feet and prayed I never had to leave / am older now and the world intrudes My Mother still protects me and loves me more But what of me, am I still at my Mothers Feet I may not be constant and I may not be perfect but She is within my heart and She is the soul of me. (Auriol Purdie) a lot of the Sahaja Yogis from London. My The first verse is based on this experience: She was wearing the same sari as in parents had come back before and told me that Shri Mataji was coming. When She arrived, Her car pulled up and it was a Mercedes. I remember Her getting out of the car and She was wearing exactly the same sari as She had been wearing in the dream, so I knew exactly who She was. my dream Before I met Shri Mataji, my parents and I were going through a very rough patch in our lives. I was five at the time. I had a dream that an Indian lady, who I later discovered was Shri Mataji, was standing (Auriol Purdie) at the prow of this barge and She was looking towards me. I was not in the barge. The second verse is based on this experience: 'Don't worry, 'll come and get you am the fire soon,' She said with great love in Her eyes, in the dream. She was wearing a sari which had spots on it and I remembered it very clearly. Once in Shri Mataji's house in Brompton Square, London, which was being redecorated, Mother was walking around and directing people. She would tell us where My parents went to meet Shri Mataji down in London. I didn't go down because paintings and other decorations were to go and what colour this door or that window frame was to be painted. we were living in Scotland at the time. However, Mother came up to our house with (Auriol Purdie)

 - 2007 12 Issue: 1 & 2 The Divine Cool Breeze She appeared not to see the torch and walked straight in front of it. A flame It was a mess to begin with. One always has to make a mess to create a house. One day, Mother was wearing a synthetic nylon sari and walking around amid the rubble and dust. I was in a room leapt out of the torch, then went round Her synthetic sari below knee height in a blue ring, then back into the torch. While all this was happening, I was horrified and took a dive across the room to move the where some people were making plaster moldings to go on cornices. Some other people had been working in the room too and someone had left a blowtorch burning. It was pointing into the middle of the room torch. I landed in an undignified heap at Mother's Feet. (Linda Williams) and Mother walked in. When we realized what had (Linda Williams) happened, we looked up in amazement to find Shri Mataji smiling down at us. Shri Mataji, wearing a highly inflammable nylon sari, walked towards the blowtorch and, as She passed very I am the fire, how could it hurt Me?' Shri Mataji said, and She went on Her close to it, the flame leapt right out of the nozzle and went completely around Shri Mataji two or three times, forming a ring a few centimetres away from the sari. way to supervise putting in some pipe in the next room. (Auriol Purdie) (Auriol Purdie)

 Classic recollection from Dr. Bohdan On the evening of the putch in Moscow,10 August, 1991 after a Public Program (This was transcribed from a conversation over dinner at Viktor Bezeka's house in Moscow. Hope you enjoy - Alan) pump it up, take the wheel off, get another one, and I'm trying to put it on, and it is not going on. And I say, 'Now look Bohdan, there are four bolts and four holes', but it just wasn't going on. And I'm starting to sweat. I knew it was serious when Yogi Mahajan got out of the car and started to roll up his sleeves. Then I knew we were in trouble, hey, if this guy comes out to help...(laughter) "Shri Mataji was the only one to have a program in the whole of Moscow that evening, because we had booked the hall in an Army sports stadium, all other programs had been cancelled that night, but we had been pre-warned that at ten o' clock there would be a curfew. Mother gave a beautiful program, as always, there was about, I would say, four thousand people and then of course afterwards, they all came around Mother, some with tears in their eyes, going towards Mother, And Mother, is just being a Mother radiating continuous love. And they are slowly pushing Her back, because they want to touch Her, they want to be near Her, so slowly She is going back and I think, 'Oh my God, it's nearly ten 'o clock, it's five minutes to ten, we still have to get all through the center of Moscow', which is under curfew and where martial law was in place. I was the driver, we had the Moscvitch, Mother's car, so I mounted the gutter on to the pavement, and I parked the car perpendicular to the sidewalk. I opened the back door to the car, as Shri Mataji went backwards, and when She was one metre away, I said, 'Shri Mataji, your car Sol said, 'OK'. And I am looking over at Mother, She had the window a little bit open. My nose goes to the window, 'Shri Mataji, are You OK?" And, at that moment, about sixty T82 tanks, the big battle tanks, come down Leningradskaya from the south, and they were going to bivouac at the Central Sports complex, under the control of Army Command. And I am looking at these tanks, and the guys there in their classic, signature Red Army tank commander leather hats. Each tank commander is looking pale, but resolute, looking straight ahead, clearly nervous as they face the possibility of opening fire on their own people. But to me, they look very young and very pale and I said, 'These are children, what are they doing, giving children for war.' I really felt that. AndI said, 'Why don't these old guys?'..That was my feelings, but then I thought, 'Of course,Bohdan, the eighteen and ninteen year old boys, they have always gone to war, but they are children, eighteen or nineteen, I consider them as children. And they are the ones who go to their deaths while the old politicians stay in their 'kabinets' (offices) ." And She looked around, 'Ah, very good,' and just got in. And then I closed the door and voom, off we go, and we are trying to beat this curfew. And we are coming down Leningradskaya Street, which is then absolutely dark, because all the lights were off, and all of a sudden I hear, 'Tuk, tuk, tuk, tuk, tuk. Oh God, it's a flat tyre.' And we stopped. I have never changed the tyre of a Moscvitch, this was the first time. (laughter) And Yogi Mahajan was in the car too, with Shri Mataji sitting on the right side at the back. The flat tyre is the over, over which Shri Mataji is sitting. So I get out the car jack, drink vodka, sherry or port, if they are English. So that was the first thought.' And then I asked Mother, 'Are you alright Mother? She had put her little glasses

 - 2007 Issue: I & 2 14 The Divine Cool Breeze a very small voice, almost in a scared voice, said, 'Bohdan, will we be alright?' And while Mother, who has opened my center heart at that moment, and I am about to reassure Her in an excessive way, almost saying, 'Of course, Mother.' And I went, 'Hey, wait a minute, this is Adi Shakti sitting there. She has given me this huge heart, there is no fear and so on. What maya is She giving me now?' So I said within, 'Il'm sorry Mother, You are the ...' And I said aloud, "Yes, Shri Mataji, I think we will be alright.' But, you know, She was playing, you see. She was really playing. And then She said, 'Bohdan, in a small voice, 'Turn left.' And my initial reaction is, Well, Mother doesn't know.' And then, 'Bohdan, are you mad? What is this thought coming that Mother doesn't know? You just stay silent." This all took one second, very quickly, to neutralize this thought and said, "Yes, Shri Mataji.' 'And left.' And then Shri Mataji said, 'Turn right here, and right." And it was dark. We actually, I think, went down some one-way streets the wrong way, I didn't even ask, look or anything, one way streets, then what we did. We ended up between houses, Doms, (Houses are the big blocks of flats, that Russians typically live in, so this would be off the road, over grass and dirt) we don't know if we are going into a ditch, we don't know if we were going up to a wall or a rock. I'm just going like this. And we ended up somehow, with Mother saying, "Go left, go right," on the other side of the river going south down the Warsawska Expressway, and I don't even know how, because the whole of the middle of the city was blocked off." on and She said, 'Yes, I am studying them,' as the sixty tanks roared past. And afterwards, we realize that the sixty tanks were supposed to help in the success of the putch, but they decided, the army commanders, not to send these tanks out, they stayed still, they waited, and it looked like they were for Gorbachev actually. So we had to have a flat tyre so Shri Mataji could study these tanks. And I think these tanks, if they had been put into different parts of Moscow, would have helped the success of the putch. So they were left, and they were neutralized by Mother's holy gaze, holy attention. But anyway, then I realized that Mother was saving Russia and I was saving a tyre, we all had our duties. Each to his own. So, I am trying to put this wheel on the car, I could understand if was a round peg in a square hole, but it wasn't, both were round, a round hole and a round bolt? It is impossible for me to understand, I am going mad. In fact, it was Yogi Mahajan who came to the rescue, he saw two small guide pins which I hadn't noticed and these enabled the wheel to locate accurately on the four bolts. Later, I learned that this device used to be on post-war English cars, nineteen forty seven, nineteen forty eight. So finally I realized that this is what it was. When Yogi pointed it out, l almost got up and kissed him. He was the key to this success. So I put this wheel on and we were off. I was in a suit, so I put the jacket back on, my arms were all black and covered in grease up to here (pointing to the elbows). It was August. Alan interjects, "Imagine, if you will, So then we are going towards the center of Moscow, down Leningardskaya, not yet Gorky Street, and all of a sudden, in the distance, we see guys, at a temporary barricade Schlagbaum, and I say, 'Oh, they won't let us through,' and we have to go Rastergoeva, which is south, and Mother, in you are reading a novel, a fantasy, in which God, a little old lady, is being driven along in a Moscvitch, in the center of Moscow, saving Russia. You wouldn't believe it was possible." Bohdan, "It was quite an experience."

 Sahasrara Puja (The Will of God) Pravachan of H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Cabella - 10.5.1992 As it was put forword was about to obliterate all the value system, all the proof of God Almighty. If you see, in the history, one after another, when science established itself, the people who are so-called incharge of the helm of affairs in religion, in different religions, tried to cope with the findings of the science. They tried to show that, alright, if it is said, this much in the Bible, and if it is wrong we should correct it. Augustin did that. And it started working as if it is all a stupidity. The scriptures were just literature, At least known itself do not have lots of things which were describing the biology of today. They could not reveal that human beings were specially created by God. They thought it was just a matter of chance that one after another the animals acquired a situation by which they became human beings. Thus all the time Divinity was challenged. And there was no way of giving the proof of whatever is said in the Bible or in the Koran or in the Geeta or in the upnishdas or in the Torah, Anyone of these things could not be proved because it was still just stupid, very very few people got their realisation and when they talked people did not believe them, and thought that are just trying to say something which they are using to propound their own theories. So the whole thing became a kind of a dead science. There is no science of they thought that is the only way you can control another people and can go on. They were least bothered as to deliver the goods whatever had been described in the Bible. Bible, of course, was tempered very much and there have been lots of changes in that, and the persons like Paul and Peter, who joined together tried to spoil most of the Truth. Though koran was not so much touched but still it dealt more with the right side, with the reproduction systems and all those things and so many things are still ambiguous. Now simultaneously two things have happened, I don't know if you are aware of it or not - First thing that has happened is that now we have a new science of microbiology, in which we have discovered that every cell has got a DNA tape - Every cell has got a programme in it as we have in a computer a chip, every cell has got a tape in it, in a way that it is programmed. And according to that programme a development takes place. Now imagine the intricacy of it. So many computers are already programmed and all these cells have been in them. So a very mysterious sort of thing has come up before the scientists and they cannot explain it. They cannot explain many things. One of them is this. Now what Sahaja Yoga has done is that it has proved that it is The Will of God, it is The Desire of God. The Will of God which is doing all the work ; and it has been proved. All this chaitanaya, Adi Shakti, is nothing but The Will of God. And Will of God is the one that is working out everything very harmoniously. I don't know if some of you must have read my book, first book, where I described how this earth was created. There was a religion. People started thinking that what is the use of following these 10 commands or these strict rules of life ? Because by following that you gain nothing, you lose all the fun of the life. Avoid to think of gaining some pungas as also And that is how all the time there was a big derailment of human value system. Also these organised religions, these monopolically organised religions, started taking to course of gaining power or winning money; because bang but it was very very harmonious and how it developed is through The Will of Gog

 Issue: 1 & 2 - 2007 16 The Divine Cool Breeze now become part and parcel of that big computer of that Will of God. We have become the mediums, or we can say the channels of that Will of God. We are connected with that Will of God which created all this Universe. So everything was done in a way that God's will was working. Now The Will of God you are feeling on your finger tips. After realisation, now you have discovered the absolute science which is The Will of God, which is an absolute science. You people know that we have cured people through Sahaja Yoga. You also know that giving bandhan and all that works out. So many things work out automatically after realisation that people don't want to believe ! In the beginning people would not believe, then the scientists told them something. But now it is, you can see that, the science is always in the flux, all the time changing. One theory is again challenged, another theory is again challenged ! But Sahaja Yoga has exposed you to that great truth of science which cannot be challenged. Which is always there. So anybody who comes out with any new proposal about defaming God or saying that there is no God, we can prove not that there is God but everything, the creation of this earth, the creation of human beings, everything was done harmoniously by The Will of God. If The Will of God has done everything, the human beings should not take any credit for discovering something which has been created by God. Supposing this carpet is made by somebody and we start discovering all the colours, what is so great? It is all there. You cannot create. So it is not the creation part of it which is so much important but the fashioning of this work, whole thing was done by The Will of God. Now if The WVill of God is so important, it has to be proved and now through Sahaja Yoga, after the breaking of the Sahasrara you have now, for the first time, felt The Will of God, which is such an important thing. But for us it has come to us so Sahaj that we don't understand, we just give a bandhan and the things work out and we feel that the things are worked out. So it is bandhan which has worked out and we have managed it. It is not so. It is much more than that. We have So everything we can manage because we have got the absolute science in our hands; the absolute science, which will work out the betterment of the whole world. We can prove it to the scientists, that there is a Will of God. which has done all this creation. Even evolutionary process is The Will of God. Without his will nothing could have happened. So many people used to say that not even a blade of grass moves without The Will of God, which is a very true thing. And you have seen now that The Will of God we have got as our own power. We can use it. So how important it is to be a Sahaja yogi? Perhaps we don't realise how important it is to be a Sahaja Yogi. Sahaja Yoga is not only for saying to others I am full of joy, I am enjoying myself, Igot purified, everything is fine". But for what? Why did you get all these blessings ? Why you have been cleansed? So that this knowledge of The Will of God should be apparent in you ; not only that, it should be a part and parcel of you. So we have to raise our level, we have to come up. For mediocre and ordinary people it is really useless to give them Sahaja Yoga because they are good for nothing. They are not going to help us in any way. Because what is needed is now, today, that we should have people who can really manifest and reflect The Will of God. And for that, you can understand, we have to have very strong people. Because this will has created this whole Universe, this Cosmos, the mother Earth, everything is created by this Will of God. So now we are exposed to a new dimension, and that dimension is that

 Issue: I & 2 - 2007 17 The Divine Cool Breeze are they going to take up the role of what they have got ? we are the ones who are challenges of that Will of God. So the Omnipotent God who is So then what is our duty, what everywhere, who has done all this, the Will of God, that has worked it out, has to work through you people. And you have to be very strong, very sensible, very wise, also very effective people. The more effective you become the more energy you will get. But, still, I feel that Sahaja yogis are no more taking the responsibility of understanding that they have to represent this God Almighty who is Omnipresent, Omniscient, who knows everything, who sees everything, and who is Potent, who is Almighty. If you understand that this is what has happened after opening the Sahasrara, that you have now got the power which has these three qualities in it, say now, this big thing has to be supported by strong pillars, but supposing if they are not strong, it will fall down. In the same way, such a great power which has come to you, for that we don't need very successful people, we don't need people who have a big name or those who have lots of money. What we need is people of character, people of understanding, of wisdom, and of strength, that whatever may come I will stand by it. I will take to it, I will cope with it, I will change myself and imporve myself. should we do about it? As a result of Sahasara being opened out one thing is that illusions have vanished, what you call in Sanskrit Bhranti. Illusions have vanished, you should have no illusion as to the existence of God Almighty, the power of His Will and the truth about Sahaja Yoga. We should have no doubts at all-minimum of minimum should be like that. But while using this power we should be aware that this power is given to you because you are capable of handling it. It is the highest power that you can think of. Take any governor, take any minister, anyone, they can be removed tomorrow, they can become corrupt, they can become absolutely devoid of any knowledge of their own powers. There are many people who just get elected without knowing what they have to do. So this is not just a conversion of people, it is not only even transformation, but it is a new fashioning of a new human being which has come forward and which is capable of carrying the Will of God further. So as a result of your realisation what you have got ? The first thing that has happened is that your illusions have gone, You should have no illusion about God Almighty, His will and that He is Omnipotent,Omnipresent and Omniscient. All His omnipotence has done this work and as collective consciousness you should also know that you are aiso omnipotent, omnipresent and omniscient. Omniscient is the thing that sees everything, knows everything, knows everything. Part of it, that power is also within you. So to prove His omnipresence you have to be all the time aware that you are Sahaja yogis. So, now illusion has been dispelled. I hope you all have got rid of your illusions. Also you should have no illusions about yourself. If you have an illusion you should leave Sahaja Yoga. But know that you are chosen for this purpose by God's Will, that is why you are here - and you have to take up the responsibility of understading this science which is absolute, and work it out yourself, for yourself as well as for others. You have felt my love, but your love must be felt because God is love. So your love must be felt by others. Others must feel that you are compassionate, loving, understanding. All When I find, even now, Sahaja yogis struggling about their wives, their children, their houses, their jobs, | start wondering what is level now? Where are they? Where their

 Issue: 1 & 2 - 2007 18 The Divine Cool Breeze the time this Will of God is flowing through you and you have to work it out in such a manner that people should know that you are a saint. That this power is flowing through you. all this was created first of all to make the whole world very beautiful. All these innate qualities were also placed within you. All these duties were placed within you. We are specially made human beings, that they should become saintly people, that they should have the sanctity innately. But it happens in the country which developed that our brain was bombarded by all kinds of television, all kinds of things and we became very, we can say, we became very vulnerable. We started getting into the ideas of others. Anybody who is dominating would dominate us. It is not only Hitler who dominated people. We also see, today, how much you are dominated, if you really detach yourself from this world. For example fashions. Certain things that come up, people cannot wear at any cost. They cannot take to something that is sensible; because it is a fashion. For example nowadays there is the fashion to have such a small skirt, you can't get a long skirt anywhere. Everybody has to wear that kind of skirts. Otherwise you are not "in", you are not in the madhouse. Now this kind of thing is bombarded on us morning till evening. So first of all we become slave of these entrepreneurs, whatever they give us now, I was told, in Belgium, that you cannot get anything fresh. You have to take everything from the supermarket, which is all tinned. Gradually what is happening to us ;we are getting absolutely artificial. The food is artificial, the dress is artificial, our whole attitude becomes artificial. Because we are so much by advertisements, by all kinds of outside infuences that we just get lost and we forget what is our innate sense, which is being dominated by all these modern things. So adding up to the science also there is a big progress in another call the There is a second thing that has happened to you is that, not the illusion about God or about yourself, second thing that has happened is that you have understood the integration, that in the world there is complete integration which is existing Normally if you see the children they innate understanding. They know. If you see, normally, a good child would always like to share his things; would like to love another child. If another little child is there he would like to protect that child. Naturally. It won't think whether it has black hair or red hair or blue hair, Naturally, innately a child feels that way. Aiso if you take another child, supposing, who is a little baby, they know that one should be careful about the privacy of the body. Children don't want to be made nude before others. No child likes it innately. So all these innate qualities are within us. have their natural own Children don't like to steal, they don't know what stealing is. They have no idea of stealing. I have seen also children that if they go to a place which is very beautiful, in somebody's house, they will always try to keep the beauty of that place. But if it is already shabby they don't mind. So innately all these qualities are there I think the countries which are supposed to be underdeveloped have so many of these qualities within them, which are innately built within us. Innocence is innately built. So The Will of God. built up first and foremost thing was innocence and auspiciousness. The first thing he did was to create Shri Ganesha, or I will say 'She' because The Will of God is Adi Shakti - And direction that you 'money' can became very important. Once the money becomes important,

 - 2007 19 Issue: 1 & 2 The Divine Cool Breeze great power - you are chosen for such a great thing and on the other side you have this kind of slavery. So try to understand that your innate qualities were the best. But, luckily, by the Kundalini awakening and breaking of the Sahasrara, all these innate qualities which were looked like lost, like your innocence, like your creativity, like your religion within, like your compassion and love for the humanity, like your power of judgement, wisdom, all these great qualities, which we thought were lost, were nothing but they were in a dormant state. They all got awakened one by one. I don't have to tell you, 'don't drink this, don't eat this, don't do that'. You yourself realise that this is wrong. You yourself know what is good for you. And still if you want to do away you can go ahead. But already there is a light within you to see for yourself what is good and what is bad. It has come because of this Sahasrara being opened out to this new dimension of new knowledge. This is not new. It is innately built within you. then all your entrepreneurs become important; because they know how to make money and befool you all the time. Today you have this things, tommorrow you will have that thing, today you change this and have this. But the people who are innately built they do not change. They have their dresses of the same type, they do not change. On the contrary they find it very difficult to get out of their traditional achievements and they don't want to change themselves. So for Sahaja yogis it is important to see and watch if they are getting this slavery from the entrepreneurs in the modern times. Then the thoughts - So many books we read which give you thoughts which are some mad ramblings, I must say, of some mad man like Freud. How could Freud inffuence the west? Because you have lost your innate sense and you accepted it. You accepted that, and that is how Freud became your sort of Jesus Christ. He became the most important thing. Sex became the most important thing. I mean it is so simple. With a little common sense you can understand that at every moment we are put into this kind of a domination by these few domineering people who have certain ideas that they put forward. Anybody puts any idea, for example Sod or Sartre or anyone. That idea starts becoming "oh! He said it!" Who is he? What is his life? Just see for yourself what sort of a man he is. With a little common sense, Now all those innate qualities are manifesting and you are enjoying. So now you have to get out of your petty ideas and petty things. Because people are reporting to me something very funny. I cannot believe Sahaja yogis can do like that. They run away with the plates that I have bought, they run away with the plates! They throw things here and there. All over the places they are throw- ing things. How can you behave like that ? I mean, this is so stupid and insipid. If you do not have a proper discipline of life for yourself you cannot carry The Will of God. You cannot. But I am not going to tell you 'do this or do that'. I respect your freedom. And I just want that your own Kundalini should awaken that wisdom in you, that greatness in you, that glory in you and you start understanding what are your innate qualities. So it will purify. Once you are purified completely, like you see, if you have some gold which is not but with your will that you have now Will of God which has fashioned the whole world, which has fashioned you, every cell within you has been fashioned by God Almighty. And what are you doing is to play into the hands of these entrepreneurs ! They have realised that these valnerable people are very good for having as their disciples, I should say, to make money, to befool them ! Now on this side you have such a

 2007 Issue: 1 & 2 20 The Divine Cool Breeze pure, you put it in the fire. The gold is separated. In the same way the fire of Kundalini cleanses you completely, makes you absolutely clean and you start seeing your own glory, your own nature, your own greatness. So the integration part comes to you easily. You start integrating. can read any book. What is so great ? Some, would say, in Sahaja Yoga, people should not become fundamentalists. Be very careful. Because that is why you are born like that. I mean, I dont know - It is not your innate quality but the way you are made, that way, you are fashioned yourself, that way, that you start also making Sahaja Yoga, sometimes, a fundamentalism !" Mother said so !" Do not use me anywhere - "Mother said so" is the way your want to dominate others. You yourself say because now you have the right, you have an individuality in Sahaja Yoga. You can say what you have to say yourself. But don't say "Mother has said it." Because anybody can start like that "Christ said it": a clegyman, a pope can stand on his own platform and say that "Christ has said it." We can just arbitrarily use all these things. So, nobody has busi- ness to use Me arbitrarily. Whatever you have to say you say yourself but don't ever quote Me as that "Mother said it", or in this book such and such is written, so this is a lie, or that is a lie. You are not bound by any lie, by whatever I say. It is you who have to stand up and see for yourself what you have to say. Because you have to use, now, your will and for that you have to develop yourself to have a Pure Will, the Pure Desire of God Almightly. First of all we used to have Sahaja Yogis, say some from England, some from Spain, some from here. They would always have different groups. They would never sit together- you could make out, this is English sitting here, they are sitting here, they are sitting there, and they would form their groups. But now it is not so. Now I find they all are becoming integrated. The integration of human beings is the most important thing for Sahaja Yogis. That comes by understanding not by intelligence, but by innate understanding that all human beings are made by God, by His Will, and we have no right to despise anything. The second integration that has come within us is that all religions, all religions are born on the same tree of spiritual light. That all religions are to be worshipeed. All incarnations, all prophets, ll scriptures are to be worshipped. There are defects, there are problems with those scriptures which can be corrected. So, gradually you start entering into the subtler side of divinity to understand that all these people have worked hard to create today's atmosphere for Sahaja Yoga. And no religion is to be despised, and no religion is to be attacked, which is very, very, absolutely unreal ; and we are working out a very unreal theory which does not exit in the Divine Plan. So this is how we will finish all T.TLT The integration not only outward but inward. Like, first of all, whatever we did our mind used to say one thing, our heart used to say another thing, our brain used to say another thing. Now what has happened is that all these three things have become one. So whatever your brain says is absolutely acceptable to your heart, absolutely acceptable to your attention. So you yourself have now become integrated. fundamentalism. Fundamentalists are the ones who Many people write "Mother want to do it, but I can't do it"- Mother it is my desire to do it but I cant do it"- Not now! Now you are believe that this is written in this book, this is written in this book and because we read this book we are something better. Anybody

 Issue: 1 & 2 - 2007 21 The Divine Cool Breeze I have got mental gains, I have got joy, happiness". It is not the only thing. That should not be the only criteria. But what you should have is the understanding of your own personality which has been specially fashioned many, many lives for you to come completely integrated and you can easily do the whole thing, very welI, If you want to examine yourself you should try to find out "Am integrated or not ? Whatever I am doing, am I doing it with full heart or not ? with my full attention or not ?" I feel that you do with full heart and full intelligence but full attention is not there. Still the attention, which is the first thing that was enlightened, is not fully there. So the whole attention should be, absolutely, there that "I have to do this thing with full attention". in this life to get your realisation, to do the further work of Will of God. Every moment when you see a miracle taking place, you do realise that it is all done by Paramchaitanaya. what So is Paramchaitanaya? It is the Will of Adi-Shakti. And what is Adi Shakti ? It is The Will of God. Otherwise the integration is not So all whatever is done is all fixed entities, we can call then, all these vibralions are like, we can say, DNA tapes. They all know how they have to fashion. See today it is very sunny. Everybody is surprised how can that be! So many things happen like this. The other day we had havan. It was absolutely cloudy. So the whole cosmos is working for you. You are on the stage now complete. Integration is Partial. So these three things have to be completely integrated. So the integration of all the chakras comes in. Like whatever you do has to be auspicious, whatever you do has to be with full attention, whatever you do has to be absolutely religious. So like that all these centers are being absolutely one, integrated and you have to see to it. But if you don't power that you have. So the whole life should be integrated. Now, say omebody's confidant as to what you are, how can you husband is not of that level or somebody's wife is not of that level. You should not bother. You should just bother about yourself. Don't expect anything from anybody else. It is your duty which is important. You have to fulfil your duty and you have to work it out yourself. Unless and until you understand that it is your individual being which has achieved it, I will say individual being which has to realise, is the individual being that has to become one integrated with the rest of them. If you start putting things, now many times, I have seen, if I say something then you will start thinking that I have said for somebody else. They never take it for themselves. So we have not to have faith in yourself, if you are not help? How can you work out yourself and work out all the problems of the world, which are created only by human beings. So we have to absolutely withdraw all these dominations on us. First from science. We can prove everything, that in Sahaja Yoga whatever you say has been proved. So we can throw science which is just all the way, all the time in the flux, changing all the time. Then the so called religions that we have, so called religions. Because people who have been catholics, who have been Protestants, who have been Hindus or Muslims and this or that, they all have got that thing on their heads. And this has to be thrown out. We have to become a new personality. After realisation, as I said, you become like lotuses from the mud. So now you have become lotuses and the see what are my gains. "I have got financial gains, I have got physical gains,

 22 Issue: 1 & 2 - 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze understand in a proper sense, When I asked "why do you throw things here and there", they say "we are detached !" Wonderful way ! And what about your children ? You cling on to them ! What about your own things? You cling on to them - For a small little thing they will bother my head and when it belongs to Me or to Sahaja Yoga then they will have a very nice time with it and throw it away wherever they like to. I mean this kind of responsibility ! How can you call them Divine? How can they be saintly people ? Saintly people not only are responsible for themselves but for everyone. lotuses have to throw away all this dead mud, otherwise fragrance would not be there. That one has to achieve is to throw away all these shackles which are killing you, which are of no use but a garden. And beautiful lotuses, as you are, you have to understand that the whole fashioning has been done so carefully, with such sweetness, such delicacy! So first of all we must have respect for ourselves, we must have affection and love for others and we must have respect, means we must have discipline. We have to have the discipline. Because, if you respect yourself you definitely discipline yourself, and you will make it available. Very slowly, smoothly, sweetly, with great affection I have brought you to this level. I did not ask you to go to the Himalays, to stand on your heads or to donate all your properties to me. Nothing of that kind. We have managed it in a very, very beautifu! manner. Now further when you have to go futher, then you have to understand your duties. You have duties towards your family, towards your house, towards this, towards that. No duty towards Sahaja Yoga! Now as you can realise from My life itself that I work very hard, travel a lot, much more than anyone of you can do, because I have the will that I have to bring this world to that state of enjoyment, to that state of happiness, to that state of Divinity, where they realise what is their glory, what is the glory of their Father. SoI work very hard and I never, never think that something will go wrong with Me or this will happen, that will happen. I never have bothered you of my family life, about my children, about anyone. Whatever problems I had, I am dealing with them myself. But here I get such big, big yourself a little more ! Now you are attached letters from Sahaja Yogis, writting about their daughters, sons, this thing, that thing ! Another thing is attachment to family. It is the biggest burden on your head. And all the time you are worried about your children, you one worried about this, you are worried about that. That is not your responsibility. Please try to understand that. That is the responsibility of God Almighty. You can't do everything, to the whole world. Nobody can better than Him. Can you ? But when you try to take the responsibility. He says "alright, look after !' and the problems start So when we were before Sahaja Yoga, you were not attached to anyone, in a sense you were only attached to yourself, you were selfcentred; now you have videned to your wife, to your children. But that is not the thing. That is also selfish. Because they are you children, you think. They are not your children. They are the children of God. I hope all of you are intelligent enough to understand your responsibility and work it out. This is a very important thing that has happened to you that Sahasrara has opened. Now you can prove the Existence of God. His Will, challenge Sahaja Yoga. Those scientists who will challenge can be exposed. Anybody, whether you are a scientist, economist, politician, anything, everything can be Detachment is the word one should

 Issue: 1 & 2- 2007 23 The Divine Cool Breeze should get out of Sahaja Yoga. Without the collectivity you cannot grow. Without the discipline of Sahaja Yoga you cannot grow. It is better to have ten people of good quality than to have thousand useless people. That is what is The Will of God explained in the light of Sahaja Yoga. And it can be proved that there is only one politics that is of God, one economics that is of God and there is only one Religion that is of God, is Vishwa Nirmala Dharma. It can be proved. There is nothing to be afraid of or to worry about. This all can be proved to the scientists and to the other intellectuals and to some few people, if they want to listen to us. If they don't want to listen to us, forget it. Because we are so powerful, why should we worry about them. But if they are willing to listen to us then it is better that we tell them "now we have discovered this great power" And if it works out, if this great power works out, then only we can really fashion the whole world in a new way. So now, as you are today here, so many people, I am really enamoured to see, so many people are there, and we have done so much of our growth and grown out of all these nonsensical things that you were following. But today we have to take the vow that "I will now fashion my life according to The Will of God. Absolutely And dedicate my self to that". No family, no other considerations, just forget it Nothing so important. Everything can be looked after by Will of God. So if you just try to follow The Will of God, your children will be looked af- ter, everything will be looked after. You don't have to worry for anything. And that works. Just try to understand that you have problems because you don't want to give these problems to God. You want to keep it to yourselves. That is why you have problems. If you decide that "no, I just want to give these problems to The God's Will" finished. Also there are some who want to say that "we are not as capable. Mother, we can't do it". Saying like this is also stupid. You test yourself, see for yourself. T have great hopes from you people. But the seriousness with which you should take Sahaja Yoga, for example, even meditation people don't do. Simple thing like meditation you people don't do. I don't understand. How will you go without meditation? Unless and until you become, thoughtlessly aware, you cannot grow.. So you have to, you have to, at least, meditate morning, evening. There are many people who are not even collective by temperament. If they are staying in an Ashram they just think that Ashram's life is not good. Such people shoud really get out of Sahaja Yoga. Because they have not yet understood what Sahaja Yoga is. Without collectivity how will you grow ? How you will assemble your powers ? If nobody works in a Sangha, in a group, combining together only you can be strong. It is a fact that if you have one stick you can break it, but if you put many sticks together you cannot break it. There are still people, I know, who are still not so much in collectivity; shows how poor they are in their understanding of their ownselves. And they are telling me that "Mother we don't want to stay in the Ashram now any more" - So they So first of all one has to understand why do we say such things. May be that you are very money oriented, that we want to have money for ourself or something like that. Or some people are there to talk of business also in Sahaja Yoga. There must be something like money orientation or some sort of a material attachment that they say that we are not capable, we cannot change. The second could be this Mamatava, as you call it, the attachment. The attachment to your family, children, this, that. Or this is mine, this is mine, this is mine. This could

 Issue: I & 2 - 2007 24 The Divine Cool Breeze people tell me, are not so important. Main thing is that you should all ascend higher and higher and compete with each other in getting into higher situation. be the second reason that you think that you are not bold enough or you are not strong enough to do Sahaja Yoga. Thirdly could be that you are still playing with your old habits and that you are enjoying your life without Sahaja Yoga. There can be some reason like that. So just try to locate" why I am behaving like this? Why I am not getting into the same beautiful path of my ascent as everybody has got it?" If we introspect we will find out. "There is something wrong with me that I think l am not capable of doing this". You are capable of doing everything. You just try this and enjoy it. As it is, I think, in such a short time we have achieved a lot, no doubt. But still we have to speed up and work it out. I am sure that this new science, we can say, that which is the absolute science, will, one day, outshadow the other sciences and tell people that this is what it is. It is in your hands, you work it out. So today is the day we celebrate by which we have opened absolutely a new dimension, Absolutely a venue of a great Divinity of the Truth of Divine. And this is something so great that we can really finish all the illusions they have about themselves, about their age. We can manage that. That power you all have. So most important thing now remains is that you should become a proper, strong, compassionate vehicle of God's Will. Then what is most important of course, I agree that you do my Pooja because that helps you a lot, no doubt. But other things are not there, so many other things, you May God bless you!

 ASATO MA SAT GAMAYA TAMSOMA JYOTIR GAMAYA MRITYORMA AMRITAM GAMAYA Yogis experience, very first mainfestation of the Self as perception of truth, which there after becomes a part of their systems, and leads them to further revelations. It has become natural for human attention to go after different temptations and in that pursuit ignore their inborn desire to unite with the Supreme. Even in ancient days people in general had this tendency, but the lamp of inborn desire was burning bright in many great souls who developed it further and also tried to boost up the flickering flame in others. Prayer being discussed was perhaps an expression to their yearning for liberation, 'Tamaso ma jyotir gamaya' (Lead me from darkness to light) "Tamasa' is darkness and jyoti is light or flame. Jyoti dispels darkness. 'Jyoti represents auspiciousness and burns out all badhas. In India the people learn to offer the prayers to jyoti' in their childhood itself; for example :- "Asato ma sat gamaya' The 'Sat' is the existence. The 'Sat' is also the truth. Unchangeable, indestructible and imperishable existence alone is the truth and vice versa. As against that, anything transient, mortal, which is degenerated with a passage of time is the 'asat' unreal and non-existent. "Shubham karoti kalyanam arogyam dhana sampada Shatrubuddhi vinashaya deep-jyoti namostute (Obeisance to the flame (lamp) that gives auspiciousness, welfare, health and wealth and destroys evil designs and enemity of the enemies). According to a story from an Upanishad, a disciple asked his guru "Ko aham"? (Who am I ?) The guru replied "Tat twam asi" (You are that). When the disciple asked what 'that' was he was told to find out. Then he starts his enquiry. 'Am I this body ? and on reflecting on it, he realises that he cannot be the body, but something else. He also understands that mind is sometimes sorry, sometimes happy, attention is unsteady, 'buddhi' (intellect) is busy only in analysing. Following the process of negation, he concludes that he must be that which remains unaffected despite so many changes and which is foundational for all the functions. His guru then tells him that he is immortal Spirit and he should meditate and become One with the Spirit. Jyoti' is also the Brahman. Its puja is performed, before that of deity, describing it as "Brahmarupa" and 'avyaya' (aa) (the inexhaustible). Shri Mataji has told us that the Atma is in the form of flame (jyoti swarup) which grows with rising of Kundalini and enlightens the inner being, With that, the darkness of attachment and temptations and associated emotions start receding. The light of Brahman' shines in our awareness and becomes a part of our inner beings. "Tamas' is ignorance and Jyoti i.e. light is true knowledge. True knowledge is that "the Atma' alone is changeless, formless, attributeless, imperishable and undecaying and I'is 'Atma' and not the body. Ignorance is misidentification of I' with the body which generates attachment to unreal. "Sat' is the 'Atman'. The first prayer says "Lead me from non-existent unreal to the existence which alone is the truth." By the grace and love of Shri Mataji, Sahaja

 - 2007 Issue: 1 & 2 26 The Divine Cool Breeze itself with the Spirit. Chaitanya Lahari (the vibrations) coming from the Lotus Feet of Adi Shakti is the Amruta. Shri Adi Shankaracharya tells in the tenth verse of Saundarya Lahari that drenching the universe with nectar dripping from Her Lotus Feet, Adi-shakti descends to Her abode and turning Herself in serpentine coils, rests in the lotus-like fine hole. Her 106th name in Lalita Sahasranama is Sudhasara bhivarshini: She rains the quintessence of The light comes to Sahaja Yogis with the Self-realization. "Mrityorma amritam gamaya' (Lead me from death to eternity) Mrityu is death. Amrita is immortality. All gross, including the physical, mental and vital beings is transient. Body is the medium for expression and fulfilment of desires, for which 'I' consciousness identifies itself with the body. Every experience of gross pleasures strengthens the attachment and that causes the fear of death. Complete unison with the Self is deathlessness because that is the stage of liberation from the desires associated with subtle being from previous lives, as also from man made bondages with the gross. ambrosial nectar. Thus, first it is Self-realization, followed by the revelation of the truth, in the light of nectarine vibrations. New dimensions of the truth are unfolded by the Self in the depth of meditation. Even flow of cool vibrations indicates that, what is perceived is the truth. Facts, that it is the Self that manifests itself as vibrations and that the vibrations are emanating from the lotus feet of Shri Mataji, show that She is the Supreme Self. The Spirit has vouchsafed it. Have we attained that depth of meditations at which the truth will be perceived ? Amruta is also an epithet of God Almighty. The 'Amruta' is the ambrosial nectar, drinking which, according to a scriptural idea, makes one immortal. In reality, the nectar must be that which guides l' to liberate itself from bondages of past karmas and unite (Nirmala Yoga) 1983

 AGYA CHAKRA Pravachan Of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi (Delhi 3.2.1983) Today we are going to understand the centre of Agya. Agya Chakra, which is placed on the crossing of the 'optic chaisma." The nerves that supply the eyes go backwards in the opposite direction and wherever they cross, this subtle centre is situated. It has a continuous connection with on to each other and cross each other. And there is no gap in between for the Kundalini to pass through. This superego and ego go back, go down-ward and come to the Vishuddhi Chakra and circle round it and go in the same direction. So you find that they come upto this place, they start from this place, go upto the Agya Chakra and then they cross-over. But here they are in the same direction as they went, at Agya here they cross-over. So when you have a problem on the left hand side, you get the affects of that on the right hand side. But right hand starts from here upto this side and the left hand starts from here. But the left hand the other centres through the 'medulla oblongata.' This centre has got two petals. And this subtle centre on one side acts through the eyes and at the back of the head, where you have some protrusion. This is the physical side of this centre is. Now the people who talk of the third eye, this is the third eye So that we have two eyes with which we see and there is a third eye which is a subtler eye through which we can see. If you see this eye, that nieans you are away from it. For example, if you can see your eyes that means you are seeing your reflection, not the reality. If you see anything that means you are looking at it. So those people who say they see an eye-for example people who take LSD and all such things, they start seeing another eye. They just see this eye and they think their third eye has opened. Actually you are very much away from the eye, that is why you can see it. You go to a supraconscious level on the right side and on the left side to the subconscious level, you can see the eye. But in Sahaja Yoga you have to see 'through' that eye. Like a window, you can look at the window, but if you see through the window you cannot look at the window. So this illusion that people have that we can see third eye and that is why our Kundalini is awakened, they are sadly mistaken. actually acts on the right hand side. So this third eye is to be penetrated through or we have to enter into the third eye, through Kundalini awakening. But it is such a closed passage which is the door to the limbic area, which is the kingdom of God, that anybody who tries to push their attention through this closed door, either goes to the left or to the right. And this is the beginning of the trouble of the people when they donot understand that whatever is unknown is not God, is not Divine. So, when they move on the right side, they go to the supraconscious area. And they start seeing hallucinations. Actually these are not hallucinations but actual things, because they exist on the right hand side. So they start seeing things of the right hand side. They may see colours and the formation of colours, and they may see also people who are dead, who have been very egoistical. They can see Gandharvas and Kinnaras, because they go to the 'Gandharvalok', to the right side, and start seeing those things in the unknown awareness of supraconsciousness. But that movement is very dangerous. Because if anybody catches you there, then you get an This is a very narrow passage, through which attention cannot pass normally, it is impossible thing. It is a narrow passage, where, the ego and superego fit

 - 2007 28 Issue: I & 2 The Divine Cool Breeze exhausted and such a person becomes actually a mental wreck. So many people who said, we are raising your Kundalini by this method or that method, wreck the life of the Sadhakas. Ultimately they are left high and dry without achieving anything Nobody knows what to achieve and what to receive. added personality sitting on your head, and you get possessed by ego and you become on your own and you actually become malignant. Hitler is one of the examples of that. He learnt this from the Tibetan lamas-how to go to the supraconscious? And when he learnt it from them, he used it and made many people supraconscious, ego-oriented. You must have heard about the lama system, which was another big problem. They knew the future part, who is going to be the next lama. Where you will find him ? Where you will get him ? All the future things they knew and peopie thought this was Divine ! To know future is not Divine. It is an area which we should never go to. Because it is an imbalance. We are human beings and we have to know the 'present' and 'not the future'. Once you go through the present stage then you reach a height from where you can see the past, the present and the future. Supposing on the Mother earth, if you have a means of going higher and hang yourself there, then you can see whatever has passed through, and you can also see what is going to come; and wherever you are, you are in the present. In the same way, when a person ascends in reality, in the present, he goes at this point in the superconsciousness from where he sees the supraconscious right side and also he can see the subconscious; but he has no interest. He wants to rise in the present. And, this is what actually the Kundalini awakening is. So they are misled. But logically one must understand, that at least your health should be all right. Mentally you should be better off. Your temperament has to improve; minimum of minimum, But if you are losing all your money to the Guru, you are losing all your health for these non-sensical experiences, and you have no control over yourself, then you must know that this is not in anyway the reality. Reality is where you are in control. If you are in the control of something else, then you are a lost case. For example, some people start jumping and they say 'Mother I start jumping automatically.' That is serious affair. That means you have no control over yourself. You are just jumping because somebody is making you jump. 'You'are not jumping : that means your own 'Chetana' your own attention, your own awareness is under the control of somebody else; you cannot control yourself. So all these experience in which people think, they are flying in the air or they are having extra-terrestial movements and people are going in the air and seeing things-all these are very dangerous things. Such a person may ultimately become a lunatic. Absolutely. Because he loses control So all those people who say that Kundalini, the awakening of the Kundalini, it is very difficult and it is harmful, are the people who have no right to awaken the Kundalini. So when they try to play tricks, actually their sympathetic nervous system goes into great agitation. And this sympathetic system on the left and right side starts extracting more energy from the central path. So, much so, that it gets himself. complete over These are called as parapsychological experiments, in America, to give it a big name 'parapsychology.' Of course, it is a para because it is beyond the psyche of a persons, but is very dangerous You are not supposed to get into these muddles where the spirits capture you and you start behaving in a manner that you

 - 2007 Issue: I & 2 29 The Divine Cool Breeze cannot explain. Once, I think about five six years back or may be more, no, about 12 yrs. back, agroup of Americans came to see Me and they told Me that 'you must teach us how to fly in the air.' I said Why? Aren't you flying?'. They said, "No we want to have that space travel". I said why ? "Because Russians are doing experiments in para-psychology and we want to do the same'. I said they will all get possessed and they will finish off. I do not want to do the same thing, as Russians are doing. If they come to me I will tell them the same thing. So they said, 'No, no we must learn.' I said if I tell you that you become slaves of those spirits and of your own and you start shaking your body all the time. Despite that they said "yes, we must do it'. And when they told me that because Russians are doing it, we want to do it, I said who sent you here ? So they told me the name of a gentleman, who is a journalist in Bombay. I said this fellow used to 'suffer'from this trouble. He used to leave his body, go into another world, see this and see that, who suffered so much and he was losing complete control over himself, and I "cured' him. So does he think I can put back the disease in you? I cured him of this disease and why do you want to get into this disease? But they were quite sure that they wanted it and I discovered later on they are having parapsychological business in America which is an 'extremely' dangerous thing. to the subconscious area they start seeing forms and things in such a mnanner that they think, they have reached heavens, But they are seeing past of evolution, past of everything. So this supraconscious business, is very dangerous, no doubt, but also the subconscious is very dangerous. Because all incurable diseases like cancer, malaitis, all that come from the movement of the attention to the left side. So one should be very careful before going to any one of these tanktrikas. Or to these people who are trying to control you or trying to tell you something about the future or the past. There is no need to know about the future or the past. What is the need ? How does it help? Actually if I start telling you how I came all the way from there and how I was held by the jam or anything, will you be interested? How do you get interested in your past glory or past life, which was of no value at all, today ? But it is a human weakness that he wants to add to his personality something that is extremely artificial, non-existent, and of no value. And then he says that I did this, I did this, I happened to do this, I never got it. In India people normally gc more to the left side with this Agya. Because they, say, worship God. Now if they have to worship God, they have no connection with God. See it I had no connection to microphone, could not speak to you. So without connection to God, they start worshipping God. Then they will sing of kinds of Aartis, fasting, this, torturing their own lives. This is left sided people. And singing the praise, all these things. Going to the extremes, 24 hours they are like that. So somebody sucks them into the left side. If they go on saying, Rama Rama like that. You might say that Valmiki was told to say. But who told him? It was Narada. Narada is an So this is the movement not crossing the Agya but moving, floating on the left or the right, whether you go to subconscious or to the supraconscious. Effects may be different but is the same thing to Sahaja Yoga. The people who go to the subconscious area may start seeing me also in different forms, like the people who take LSD they cannot see me, they just see lights coming out of me. And those who go Rama..

 - 2007 Issue: I & 2 30 The Divine Cool Breeze find explanation of all these incarnations who have come on this earth. So to understand Jesus Christ, you must read Devi Bhagvat. But if you say this to Christians, they would not like to listen to you. Because for them, Bible is the last word. How can it be? Because Christ's life is depicted there only for four years. And He must have reference in other books also; and we have to open our eyes to those books and see for ourselves what is the truth. Because if we want to have an organised religion, you have to say 'this is the thing, there is nothing else. Because if there is anything else, then your organisation falls apart. But it is not true. incarnation, Narada. You are not Narada. So how can you tell yourself or anybody can tell you, take this name? You take any name, you cannot go to God. So where do you go? You go somewhere. There may be a servant called Rama, he might capture you. And people start behaving in such a funny manner that they look like mad, insipid people. Same thing about supraconscious. People who are very ambitious, they too can get into such a mad condition where they do not think of the collectivity of the whole, but they just start thinking about themselves. And when such a situation comes in, it is impossible to convince them that they are wrong till they reach their waterloo and finish off. Because Christ has been described "very clearly' in Devi Bhagvat. And we can prove it in the Kundalini, that when the Kundalini rises and stops here, at the Agya, here, you have to say Lord's prayer, otherwise, it would not open. To awaken Jesus Christ, if you do not awaken Him, it would not open. You have to take His name otherwise it would not open, proves it was Christ who was ruling. Or even if you take the name of Mahavishnu, it opens. So Mahavishnu and Jesus Christ are the same. So this Agya Chakra is a gate, is the door of heaven, and everyone has to pass through it. Now on this chakra resides the great incarnation of our Lord, Jesus Christ. In our Indian Shastras, he is called as Mahavishnu, the son of Radha ji. And His essences are made of eleven Rudras, means eleven destroying powers. But the governing essence the main essence, is that of Shri Ganesha, means innocence. So he is the embodiment of innocence. Innocence means complete purity. And His body was not made out of Mother Earth, in the sense that He never had a body that was perishable, It is Aumkara. So when He died, He ascended. That is the fact, He ascended. And because He was a person made of Aumkara. Now as He is the son of Radhaji, you can see the relationship between Him and the relationship between other dieties very easily. About Mahavishnu, it is written in the Devi Bhagvat. So you must see the 'proof' of it. And just because you want to believe that Christ is your own and discard everybody else as heathens, you are sadly mistaken. Absolutely you are sadly mistaken. In every scripture people have entered from the back door. 'Every' scripture. I told you about Gita, what wrong things they have written about the food which is scientifically not true. To say that Tamogunis are the people who eat meat, is not true, because they eat protein and they have to be Rajogunis, automatically. So how they have tried to change it, just to suit their thing at that part. But in the beginning they could not, because they said, Krishna said that "You kill these people. I have already But who reads Devi Bhagvat? Nobody has time to read these books. Mostly what trash things they read, there you cannot

 - 2007 31 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: I & 2 you can raise the Kundalini you will be amazed to see that all these dieties are killed them. Whom are you killing? So just to bring this, you see, Brahmanic stamp, they did this. placed on various Chakras and they are to be raised. Now sometimes you see, I am blamed in India that I am preaching about Christ, so l am spreading Christianity, and if I go to England, they say I am preaching about Krishna, so l am spreading Hinduism. Now if I have to tell you that Radha ji has created Christ and if you see Christ, his fingers are like this." Try to understand. Two fingers like this. One of Krishna and one of Vishnu. And he says 'the Father'And who is the Father of Christ, then? Is Shri Vishnu: Shri Krishna. Because in Mahavishnu's In the Bible the mistake came when Saint Paul, who never knew Christ-he had nothing to do with Christ-just entered into the Bible. I don't know, why he is there! He was not a realised soul. He was just supraconscious Roman soldier. Roman, very bad soldier, who used to kill so many Christians. And suddenly they entered this Mr. Sain Paul into it and he is accepted in the Bible all over the world. But you read him and you will know he is not a realised soul at all. He talks in a supraconscious way. He is an organising machine and he is good for nothing. There he describes, in the acts you see, which he has written-many people may not be knowing that acts has been written by Mr. Paul himself-and this Mr. Paul tries to describe the disciples of Christ as supraconscious bhoots, absolutely like supraconscious people and they behaved in such a funny manner that everybody started feeling that they are mad. Can you imagine, Christ's disciples behaving like that! But you have to gulp it down and devour everything if you are a Christian. Because it is in the Bible. And you start questioning if you are a born-realised person, that what is this non-sense, who is this Mr. Paul? From where does he come in? Because he does description, it is, Shri Krishna Himself worshipped His son and said "you will be the support of the Universe, and whosoever will ever worship me, the fruits of that will go to you," and He placed Him even higher than Himself. And that you can see that above the Vishuddhi Chakra, stands Mahavishnu. And He is the gate through which everybody has to pass. He 'actually' blessed Him special and He said "you will be the Support of the Universe." See now you have known that Shri Ganesha stays at Mooladhara Chakra. Moola dhara Chakra means the support of the Moola, support of the roots. But Christ is placed at the support of the fruit. So the same thing evolves at that point, that you become aware of Christ only when your Agya Chakra opens. not talk like Christ. Now this Agya Chakra can be opened when the Kundalini goes up and opens it up. But supposing if you are too much ego oriented, then you have turned it so tight say, the two ropes have turned it so tight that nothing can pass through. Or if you are too much of a superego and a frightened personality and dominated one, then also it is twisted so badly that Agya Chakra cannot open up. So what we have to do, is to give a balance through the Agya Chakra by So the time has come for all of us to understand that all religions are one. They are part and parcel of one life stream and that all incarnations are supporting each other, nourishing each other and caring for each other. There is 'complete' concord between them. There is 'no way', you will see they will oppose each other, 'never'. So this point is to be proved also and that can be only proved 'if you know how to raise the Kundalini. If you are a realised soul and if

 Issue: I & 2 32 -2007 The Divine Cool Breeze moving left to the right or right to the left according to the need, which you will understand in the technique of Sahaja Yoga-after realisation, not now. Now when the balance is established then the Chakras, the Agya Chakra becomes little also better off, because there is no twist on it. And then only, when the Kundalini rises, She can push through. If you are normal person, if you are not an ego and superego type, then then there is no problem to raise your Kundalini through your Agya. But say in Delhi, sincel have come, I have been working on the Agya morning till evening. People are 'extremely ego oriented, They all think that they are the administrators of the whole World. Delhi is full of this Agya. Such proud and such vain people are here that they always think that they are ruling the whole World. They are the people who are the administrators and the great people belonging to politics, this that. All ego oriented. And such people cannot be given realisation easily; first their ego has to be brought down and they have to accept God as the Supreme Being, as the Lord, as the Real King of the World. Then only it works out. Now when some people also try to spoil this Agya like moving the eyes, the roving eyes. Christ-imagine l-specially mentioned that "They say thou shall not commit adultery; I say thou shall not have adulterous eyes" Just imagine! He talked of the eyes. Because He is controlling the eyes at that point. But in the West, it is hard to find any man or a woman who does not have adulterous eyes, those who are the followers of Christ have such horrible eyes that you don't know what they are doing, they will go mad. They cannot keep their eyes straight. All the times their eyes turning, this side that side, this side, that side. They have lusty eyes or they are looking at things or something else, but it is all joyless, there is not joy! They are just looking at people for no fun at all. So Christ has said : "Thou shall not have adulterous eyes."But this was all said as an order by Christ. Of course no body obeyed it. On the contrary like I told you the Muslims were, it was said not to drink, they started having poems written by Umar Khayaam to challenge Mohammad Sahib. But among Christians they started challenging Christ, all anti-Christ activities, by which innocence of the poeple should be destroyed, by which their eyes would be de- stroyed and all the purity of mind will be destroyed. And the another extreme started, which was 'not at all' preached by Christ-l don't know how it came into Christian religion -is a thing called nunnery and making people Brahamacharinis and Brahmacharis. You cannot make anyone Brahmichari or Brahmicharini. It is a state-avastha, where a person has to rise, like Yogeshwara, like Shri Krishna. Despite all that he was a Brahmachari. It is a state of mind where you are not involved. It is a different thing, that you just load somebody with an idea that you should become, absolutely a Brahmachari or a Brahmacharini or you should lead a celibate life, forcing them. Christ never said so. He could not become a married man because He was here on this earth to do one great job, is to make this ascent through this Agya Chakra,' that is why He was crucified. By doing this he was to create a space in the Agya Chakra and that is what He did, at the command of His Father and His Mother. And He did it. So the people who are doing all this non-sense of celibacy-which is not. Which is not, because from the mind there is no celibacy. Celibacy must come from within, the purity must come from within. And that has created problem in Catholicism and also they started another big stuff like

 - 2007 Issue: I & 2 33 The Divine Cool Breeze: became Christians. But actually, they should have been told that Mahavishnu is born. If going and confessing to the priest. Now this is also another funny thing is to go to a priest Priest is never a realised soul I have seen it. Because if he is a realised soul he will run away from priesthood. So they would go and confess it to the priest and the poor priest would become mad and the confessor would have a left-Vishuddhi, feeling the guilt. That was the wrong side absolutely of God. To feel guilty is not necessary. they had read anything of the Devi Bhagvat and had told that Mahavishnu is born, then people would have given up this idea that you have to suffer for your Karmas. So Indians are still thinking that we have to still suffer for our Karmas, we should fast, we should walk and we should hang ourselves by the nearest tree all the time. This is not needed. What you have to do, is to just wait for the moment when the Agya Chakra will be opened. Keep in the centre. As Buddha has said keep in the centre. And then when the Kundalini rises all this whatever is accumulated, will be sucked in and you can get your Moksha. This was the simple thing to be done. Instead of that we Indians believe Then, after Christ there were people who would not accept Christ, like Jews. So they said that we will not accept Christ and 'we must suffer because we must suffer for God.' Even now Christians believe non- sensically that we should suffer. Now, I would say Indians also believe that we have to suffer, but they also know that Mahavishnu is going to come and when he comes, He will have power to suck our Karmas and we don't have to suffer. Actually that is what happens when Christ is awakened within you, He sucks your Karmas, he sucks your ego and super ego. He sucks your Karmas, your papas, (sins) your conditioning and that is how you become free. This is a very important point which people must know, that, that was the great job He did: was to establish Himself at the Agya Chakra to suck these two things. And when He sucks these two, when He sucks these, then we are above our Karmas, our sins and our papas. So we don't have to worry about sins, papas and all that. But these people we should say, those who came to this earth, as missionaries, who came down to India to preach Christianity, had no idea of Mahavishnu nor they had any idea of Christ. They came with a gun in one hand and Bible in the other. And we stupid Indians also did not know any value of our heritage, and we just said 'alright, let us become Christians so that they give us good jobs.' And that is how all the job oriented, all sorts of people we must suffer, we must go into fast. Now in Sahaja Yoga you are not allowed to fast in the name of God. You may fast otherwise because if you have no money you can fast, you have to fast in any case. But not in the name of God or your Karmas. Then secondly, the Jews refused to accept Christ, as a result the Jews said that: we are not going to accept Christ, we have to suffer. So, alright, they suffered and suffered and suffered. So they got Mr. Hitler to put them right; their sufferings. After getting Mr. Hitler, now they are becoming Hitlers. So you can imagine how wrong ideas can take you to such a limit, that as a result of this thing, that we have to suffer; that Hitier was born to support their wishes that they must suffer. Nobody has to suffer any more now. You have to work-out your Kundalini awakening. And you have to establish yourself very well in Sahaja Yoga. All your sufferings are going to be taken away. One of the names of the Devi is Papa Vimochini. She removes all your papas. "Sankat Vimochan' we call it 'Shri Ganesha'. He is

 - 2007 34 Issue: I & 2 The Divine Cool Breeze attention has to be clean. If your attention is soiled then your Agya Chakra will not be alright. Then you will have hallucinations, you will have wrong ideas and you will think of wrong things. So if you really want to find the meaning of your being, if you really want awakening of the Kundalini, then know that whatever you have known so far about God or everything has to be revised, has to be again seen for yourself, what it is like. Unless and until you pass through this you 'cannot' be baptised. the One who removes all the hurdles of life. And you really, when blessed, you can see that God has so many ways of blessing the people. It is miraculous. Absolutely it is a mirarcle. So many people who are in Sahaja Yoga now, say that miracle has lost its meaning in Sahaja Yoga. It is a fact. So, one has to understand that God exists. Not only He exists. He acts. He loves, and that we are supposed to know Him. Whatever you may have done, wherever may be the mistakes, you have to become One with God. Because He is your loving Father. He is the Father who is the Ocean of love. And only thing you have to do, is to just ask for it and when the Kundalini rises you become One with Him and He wants to bestow all His Kingdom, all His powers upon His children, whom He has created. So all these funny ideas about religion that you have to suffer, that you must do penance, that you should become Brahmacharis-all these absurd ideas, should be given up. You have to be absolutely a normal happy person. God has done so much for you He has created so much for you. But even then if you want to be miserable, what can one do? The people who talk of Baptism, like John the Baptist, he was really a realised soul and when he raised the Kundalini and put the water on the head, he really gave them realisation. That is 'baptism'. Christian means a baptised person, but not any Dick, Tom and Harry can put his hand on your head and say you are realised. On the contrary William Blake says, 'the priest cursed on my head.' It is true. For a realised soul, if you put the hand of a priest who is not a realised soul and who is not properly entitled to do it, children get into problems. We have seen many children who are realised souls, who got into problems-their eyes became squinty, they become funny, their brains went off and we have to cure them. So it is a very dangerous thing to make everyone put their hands on this pulsating fontanelle bone area which we call as Taloo. Taloo is the Brahmarandhra, and is the 'most' important part of a human being, so everybody should by 'very' careful before they touch this. You have to be a realised soul and you have to know how to do it, means you have to be a Sahaja Yogi. So for your children when they are born you have to be careful. If they are realised souls more so. Because if they are not realised souls, then their reaction is not so violent. But if they are realised souls, they scream and shout and they cannot bear it. As far as Mother is concerned if you want to punish your Mother sometimes, or say, you want to just make her unhappy, then you say: .otherwise I will not eat my food'. So fasting is not allowed in Sahaja Yoga. But if you have to fast for food, other things, it is all right. But otherwise there is no need to fast except for one or two days, you have to fast. And thus we understand that Agya Chakra which is the most important door through which 'everybody' has to pass, everybody has to pass, and that has to be properly worshipped and kept clean. For that you must keep your attention very clean. Your So one must understand, though it

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 1 & 2 - 2007 35 it. Put a light before the photograph. Light is the way you cure your Agnya Chakra. Always. Light or the sun. Because Christ resides in the sun. So what you do, is to put a light in front Take another light behind and give an Aarti to your Agnya Chakra at the back It is resided by Maha Ganapati and Maha Bhairava. So you just give it a Aarti and Agya Chakra will open. But how do you open this? Very simple thing is that, any thought comes to you, you should say 'I for- give' This is the greatest weapon Christ has given us. You just say :1 forgive, I forgive'. and you can overcome your ego. This is the mantra for this Chakra in the front, where looks like very traditional or anything like that, one must see that those things which are harmful to human beings must be given up. The time has come for all of us to give up those things which are not good for our health, which are not good for our spiritual being. The time has come. If you do not accept this, then only thing I can say as a Mother that 'I am concerned about you'. But it is much more than that. It is a dangerous time you are in. And Agya Chakra, if it is spoilt at the back, that means you are definitely possessed. At the back if the Agnya Chakra is caught then one develops blindness, with the eyes open. Now, in India it is very common. The reason is we have very funny ideas about the Devi or the God coming into the body of human beings. How can that be? It is again the same thing, supraconscious business. Amaid servant who is all the time using bad words, who has no sense of cleanliness, who has no sense of holiness, suddenly becomes agitated, "Ho Ho Ho.... she goes on. And all the women, in Maharashtra it is very common, they wili go and fall at her feet. The Devi has come, the Devi has come' and now they fall at her feet. And then ultimately they are caught up. Because they get the possession by a spirit. We had one very bad case recently where a man, he came to me and he told me that he cannot help, he has to touch the feet of his sister-in-law because she is a Devi. I said why? Because she gets into this agitation.' So I told that if you think that she is a Devi and if you want to touch her feet you don't come to me again. But he became blind, 'absolutely' blind! And when he became 'absolutely' blind then he came to me and then we had to put the Agya Chakra alright. Now how do you do it in Sahaja Yoga. As you have the photogaraph you may use you just say 'I forgive, I forgive and you will find your Agya Chakra will open out and you will find your ego will go away. Forgivness is one of the 'biggest' weapons human beings have got. But they are so stupid if I tell them forgive. Now what is there not to forgive. I say what is so difficult ? What are yo doing? Are you doing some thing when you are saying, I am forgiving. Do you do something? Nothing. On the contrary when you do not forgive, then what is happening is, the person whom you do not forgive, is actually torturing you, while you are not torturing that person. So this is the mantra of the Agya Chakra in front, and at the back, as I told you, you have to move the light. Now somebody will, you see, one day they will do, two days they will do -that is not how the Sahaja yoga is to be worked out. You have to really go all out to do it, and I have seen people who had eyes which were all bent like this, they coOuld never raise their eyes, are now, have open eyes, proper eyes with this working. It is 'very simple to be done. more thing that happens to our eyes. When the Swadishthana Chakra goes out of order. It is represented here at the back, which is There is one

 Issue: I & 2 - 2007 36 The Divine Cool Breeze of the Guru Principle. He was a Muslim. But all His disciples are Hindus. They are not Muslims. Muslims don't accept him even as God. Not only that, but there is one place called Hazimallang, where a Saint died who was a Muslim. But he told that only the Brahmins, means the realised souls, must worship me.' And so they had to appoint some Brahmin-which they did not understand-the word 'Brahmin'. They are Hindus who are worshipping a Muslim peer. So the idea, that once you become the peer, once you become a realised soul, then he has no religion. He is beyond religion, He 'becomes' the religion. Then there is no binding for him, because a drop has gone to the ocean. Now he has become the ocean. So for the ocean, there is no limitation. And because he has crossed his limitations, he is 'above' all these things. And that is what we believe in. That if he is a peer, if he is a realised soul, then he is a realised soul. Once I went to a small village, called Mian Ki Takdi. As soon as I stepped into the village. I felt 'tremendous' vibrations. AndI said Who was the great saint who lived here? So they said there was one muslim peer. I said 'Whatever it is, he was a Saint'. And when I was sitting and giving lecture, you will see the photographs, the lights came on my head seven times. And the seventh time then I put my hand like this. But nobody saw it, only I knew. And I knew that it was there, I was laughing with it. And then the people, you see, when they took the photographs, they could picture it. 'around' this back Agya. So When you have diabetes or anything like that, people start becoming blind. Because this Swadisthana Chakra which is around, goes on pressing it and that is how, that part which is surrounding this centre, oppresses and augments that centre, so that the eyes cannot see; there is no light. There is darkness and people have eyes open. You have seen many diabetic people get this blindness. So first of all cure your diabetes through curing your swadisthana. And also you can use ice around your Swadisthana at the back. But first of all if you improve your Swadishthana you will feel very much better. So the treatment of the front side is with the light. And the treatment of the brack is with the water. But the best is also to use the light or the water whichever way you like. Because if it is Swadishthana you have to use the water but if it is 'just' the possesion, then you have to use-without diabetes, if it is a possesion-then you have to just use the light. That is how we cure our Agnya Chakra. Even Christ said am the LIGHT, I am the PATH', Because He is the Aumkara. He is the path. and He is the door, He is the gate and everybody will have to pass through His gate. He never told lies. But they crucified him. They just crucified him. One thing good we have, we are fortunate in this country, we don't have any organised religion. Thank your stars for that. If you had any organised religion, you could never have taken to Sahaja Yoga. Because according to organised religion you have to believe in one person and as if he has no connection with anyone, he is alone person hanging in the air, he has nothing to do with any body else. So 'thank' God for this that it has not happened in this country. And that is how we have people who are more suited for Sahaja Yoga than we have in 'any' other country because they are so conditioned. And it is a very great blessing. For example now, Sai Nath who was the last incarnation So these realised souls are all over and they are helping. The never enter into anybody, they never trouble you, they guide you, to the proper lines. They bring their Angels and they help you to come to the right path, to the right conclusions. And they never try to possess you, they never try to hypnotise you, or take you to the wrong side of life. So when you are realised also, you must know that you have to know'completely

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: I & 2 - 2007 37 and a centripetal, both the forces working. By one you come in and by another you are thrown like a tangent. Nobody is anxious to have a very big group or anything. If it is big, well and good, one wants to save as many as possible. But nobody is going to force you, nobody is going to have any cheap sort of a circus for it. It is the wish of the people, those who have to come, you cannot force them. You cannot force a person to get his what is the reality. Go on understanding, trying to assimilate it, not to discard it because you are attached to another organisation. There is 'no' organisation in Sahaja Yoga, you know very well. There is no grouping in Sahaja Yoga. There is no membership in Sahaja Yoga. But' it is a living organisation It is a living organisation. So anything happens here, the whole body knows. We don't have to have organisation written for this body, In the same way Sahaja Yoga works out. realisation. So this is what is today at the Agya Chakra, I have told you. Agya Chakra I have spoken many a times in England and in America and was very much sometimes 'opposed' by some churches and things. But I think if they want to exist any longer, they "better' take to truth and 'know' that what they know so far is incomplete. They have to know the full of it. Because Christ could not talk much and whatever He said was written down by His disciples the way they understood. To understand Christ you have to have your realisation. But still I must say, as we have in our body different type of sensory system, we too have in Sahaja Yoga, people who just come in, just the beginners. They are not exposed to the truths which they cannot bear. Then if they pass a certain line of understanding then they are taken as we say Nirvichar Samadhi people, who are given certain facilities to enter into certain new dimensions and ideas. But the inner circle people are the ones who are in Nirvikalpa. Such people are only taken into consideration for teaching Sahaja Yoga. Anybody who tries to teach Sahaja Yoga, talk about Sahaja Yoga at the second stage just is thrown out, because there is a centrifugal May God bless you. Nirmala Yoga (1983) **

 Christmas Eve Talk by H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Pune, 24th December, 1982 way, otherwise you cannot get over these horrible ideas of Arch Bishops, and the Bishops and the Popes. Before we start, the celebrations of the Birth of Christ, we have to little bit review what we have done after His Birth, so that we understand where do we stand in relation to Him. For He was the Son of a Virgin so that even the slightest blot on His name should not be created. Because He was to do the The other side is the Ego part. Then people like Mr. Frued came in and they put absolutely' anti-God ideas into people, absolutely anti-God.' It is against the Mother, against the Son, 'Absolutely, it is absurd'. These anti God devilish ideas penetrated and people started saying, "what's wrong? This is all conditioning, we should remove all conditioning", so they become ego-oriented, which is the other side which Christ had to work out. So l mean, after Christ has been established in the West, they have seen to it that they create 'all' hurdles that are possible under the Sun, for the Agya Chakra to open out. greatest job, of creating for us Agya awareness, which would help us to suck in all our sins, all our conditionings, and all our egos. And the great personality was created for such a great work within ourselves. But unfortunately, we have spoilt both these institutions within us to such an extent that it is the most difficult task to give realisation to Christians. On the one side we have too much conditioning, as you know, through catholicism and other ideas about Despite that, I find that all Sahaja Yogis who are from the West are still attached to 'Christianity' and not to Christ. There is a lingering Christianity still within you, and the Christianity has to drop out. While Indians are very good at dropping out all non-sensical ideas. Because we have Christianity which created a 'horrible' conditioning in our super ego, which is just like a solid rock, I think, sometimes. And those who have been in catholic churches are still, get stuck up with it. Even as they are facing Me, I find their eyes are blinking and the Agya is not straight. You have to give up all that conditioning 'completely' if we have to 'really' get to Sahaja Yoga. To that extent we went, that we tried to create institutions- of course, we collected money, no doubt about it, lot of money-all kinds of drama, of the Papal Order and of Arch Bishop Order and all these Arch Bishops and all tomfoolery. All kinds of non-sensical donkey people were created. 'Absolutely. They have nothing to do with the Christ, they have nothing to do with GOD, they have no idea of Divine Life. And to them prohibiting people from doing something was fully religion. And this has taken the West into such darkness that had lots of challenges in this country for every thing. For the conditioning, we have had challenges, for the ego oriented, we have had challenges. So people are used to this kind of a giving-up. But in the West, we still are very much attached to that non-sense of Christianity. It has nothing to do with Christ, believe me, and this fanaticism which is lingering still in your mind must be given-up, otherwise you do not do 'any' justice to Christ. That by no chance means that you take to another religion like Hinduism or any non-sensical Jainism, or anything. The 'essence', the "Tattwa' of Christianity is Christ. And it is 'so' thickly clouded by all these non-sensical things that you 'really' Sahaja Yoga has to be worked out in a very great speed and in a very expensive

 - 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 1 & 2 39 have to drop-out this word 'Christianity' from your vocabulary completely, and from your mind, otherwise you can 'never' go to the essence. It is a fact, take it from me. But you must know you are special people. You are above them, you've risen above them. Christ is awakened. So to do justice to Christ, you must get over all your conditionings, to begin with, of Christianity, if you have any, or if you have been Fruedian get rid of that horrible fellow. 'Absolutely', he was anti Christ. Sick, Sick, Sick. We have nothing to do with Frued's ideas, 'even this much'! 'Believe me." We have not to justify him at any point for 'anything'. He took full advantage of the And even now the attention of all the people is on what Christ said, or Mother Mary has said it, and which has come through these horrible people to us. So to learn about other Dieties and other great Incarnations, we neutralise. We must try to neutralise too much attention by learning about other Dieties, say, Shri Ganesha. If you talk about Shri Ganesha, He is the essence of Christ. You understand it. Ganesha is the essence of Christ, and Christ is the manifestation of Shri Ganesha's powers. So, if you go to the 'essence', of most things, you see, that is better. Then of course, Christ is there but we must see in Him, as He is, which very few' people have seen before, but now in Sahaja Yoga you 'should' see Him as He was. He was the Holiest of Holy, first of all. You accept that position. Then this Frued nonsence has nothing to do. Those who call themselves Christians : five days they do all non-sensical of Frued and sixth day they talk of Christianity, and seventh day they go to Church. How can they go? I mean, how can they call themselves Christians-by what standard? Just tell me. I mean, just think of it. And the Indians have asked them repulsion people developed out of the conditionings.. And then he built up all these stories, because he was himself a very 'low-level man', not to be counted as a human being from 'any' standard. You see, Christ came for human beings, but not for these 'low-level' people. Even the lepers were better than him, I think. 'Horrible' | Even to think about the whole things makes me nauseate. It is very unholy. So, for all practical purposes, we have to understand that we have nothing to do with Mr. Frued. "He is filth, he is dirt'. He is absolutely 'lowievel man.' We have nothing to learn from him, nor from his ideas. Now, the other side of it is the conditioning of the church. There are still many Sahaja Yogis, still confused with it. Of course, if you have to save the Christians, so called, you have to take them out of the conditioning. Luckily, we have someone who is writing a thesis about these things, how these things are dangerous to society. But still nobody realises this is anti-Christ activity; to condition. It is a anti-Christ activity. Christ came on this Earth where Moses has laid down the 'Dharma'. After it, so many, He thought, people will be in balance and He has to give the message of His resurrection and ascent. That is how He came on Earth. But then they created even worst things than the Shariat; Shariat is in the Bible. All these to get out because they won't understand what it is. 'So' non-sensical, it is 'filth'. The Holiest of the Holy, we have brought Him down to such a low level by our non-sensical ideas! So one has to understand that these conditionings of catholicism made us 'so' repulsive to ourselves that we took to the other side which is even worse, much worse than the conditioning. And you come in contact with these people morning till evening. Either they are Fruedian or they are so-called Christian, even after realisation.

 - 2007 Issue: I & 2 The Divine Cool Breeze 40 I find people get very easily attached to negative people. They get identified with negative pepole 'very' common. And they think that they are being sympathetic. It is the sympathy they are working. It could be your sister, could be your wife, your child. It can be anybody. But by getting 'attached' to such people, you are really harming that person because that person will go down to hell, and you will also go down to hell, So if you want to do any good to the person, best thing is not to be attached to that person and tell that person that these are Anti-Christ activities; and get attached to that group which is doing holy work and understand that the strength lies in getting attached to 'that' group than getting attached to one some singled-out negative personality. laws are in the Bible where they say that anybody who does this thing should be killed, anybody who does like that should be beheaded. It is all in the Bible. You see, whatever these Muslims are doing is all in the Bible. Coming from Bible, So, to neutralise all that Mr. Frued started another style. For us divine laws are binding we know that is the only way one can rise. It is not compulsion, but voluntary acceptance that we have to rise, that we have to be alright, there are no conditionings in Sahaja Yoga but this is how we improve. This is how we go further, so we accept the situation, and we move forward with it. That is why realisation should give you that strength to 'fight' anti-Christ activity within your mind. You have to face yourself is the pointI am saying. Not only that you have to face yourself, But you have to face the so-called society that is around, and see for yourself that these conditionings and these anti-Christ activities into which you have indulged detrimental to your growth, and to your ascent. And as you are special people who have got realisation, you have to argue it out with yourself and reach proper conclusions. No use arguing out with others. Now, everyone of you has had some experience. I give you the example of 's wife, she is not here neither he is here. But it is nice to understand what happended in her case. He was very attached to her. He married her. He asked me. I was really shocked that he is so insensitive, why can't he see her, why can't he understand her? But I did not know what to say, but I was really shocked and for about two minutes, did not say anything. I am sure she played her cards very well. And I said 'Alright, you can marry. You will get happiness, if you think, you get happiness, that is all'. I did not say joy;. If you think you can get happiness, marry. Now she got married to him. Then he said she must come with him to England. He brought her. I tried to avoid I told him'be careful'. Then they lost their passports. He found his passport, she did not. But he got after my life; he said please ask Mr. Shrivastav; somehow get her passport. Passport should be there. i said alright. Then they made her passport. Then she came with me. Still she was continuing. I told that "please send away this lady, I do not want her to be with me. It is a headeache, all 24- hours . I must have some time without these horrible' Bhoots' around me Please get rid of her, she is bad."But he completely are As you know with the conditioning, people get quiet, they do not talk,but the conditioning is growing inside. With the ego people talk too much and they aggress others with their talking and the ego is growing too much. So one has to be in the witnesss state, that means wherever you have to talk, you have to talk and wherever you have to keep quiet, you have to keep quiet. This is at the Vishuddhi level. At the Agya level, you have to detest 'all' that is ugly. 'all' that is unholy, 'all' that is fifth. Because now a new sensitivity has developed within you. And a new sensitivity to Holiness, to auspiciousness. Try to improve this auspiciousness within you. she is with me

 Issue: I & 2 - 2007 41 The Divine Cool Breeze could not understand ! Still he was siding with her. Then one day it happened that she attacked my heart. The heart got into a big fist. I said now you put hand on my heart and see. It's throbbing like anything. He could not put his hand, could not even bring it near it. I said now please ask her to get down. When she got down, it stopped. Then he realised this is the thing, but still he did not give her up, did not give her up ! Went to Los Angeles, everywhere she followed me. The sympathy, you see, she could have gone away, she was quite a robust lady. But in Los Angeles, then she started showing her teeth to him, gradually. And then ultimately he got into trouble, he started getting the pains, but as soon as I left Los Angeles, she got her epilepsy. And he realised how dangerous it was to carry her all the time with me. Now he cannot send her away because she has epilepsy. He did not take her back. She tried to disrupt all the Ashram by telling them her sympathy stories Oooh! you know my husband, he wants to leave me", this , that, non sense; and all of them fell for her. Now, she is a Bhoot, and a Bhoot. And the Bhoot started increasing. One more Bhoot added sympathy to other, one more bhoot added once you've given sympathy, one more bhoot added. And she was creating problems, "you see that, this is not good, he is not good, he is against me, this family is against me, that is against me." Then someone got heart attack , got heart attack. So then he sent her away. one has to be careful. This is on a Christmas Day I have to say because 'there only' the light starts-at the Agya Chakra. Because if you shift from the principle of Christ you start giving arguments in support of the negativity. Always, in the opposite direction, alright? And you have all the arguments which work 'against' Christ. The same Agya Chakra when it goes funny, you start seeing things very reasonable which are 'absolutely' false and wrong. So we have to be 'alert'. We have to be with Christ. Now, they will say also about getting vibrations, "Mother, alright. I am also very much there. True, we saw the vibrations." Nothing doing I feel embarrassed. Sometimes I do not tell, I feel embarrassed. And people also try to manoeuvre me by playing tricks on me so that I am rather worried, sometimes, how to tell people. Because I have seen ego- oriented people are extremely' sensitive. Now they are not arrogant, one thing is there, but they are extremely sensitive and if you tell them anything they will not accept. Like yesterday, I lashed all the Poona people, they said it was for our good. Nobody said that, Mother why did you say such and such thing?" No, not one. Everybody said it was for our good. But in the West if you lash them, then you will be lashed. Nobody is going to take it that way. So, I have to tell you one thing to have your ego problems settled, first of all see, that you are not playing to your ego. And also, see your conditionings which are now Bhoots, all these conditionings have become Bhoots in you. All the Church Bhoots have got into your heads. They are all there. So you must see that these Bhoots are not there, because we have to be Holy. We have to be clean. We have to be resurrected. We 'are' resurrected people. Christ has resurrected us. But you have to think 'how much' he has to work for us. The more you Now you do not repeat all that non-sense. Negativity is not to be tolerated, not to be carried on with, discretion is better part of balance. One need not be afraid, but discretion is better part of balance.. All right? If you have negativity, better get rid of it. If somebody is so negative, better have nothing to do with that person, whatever may be the relationship, just have nothing to do Because no use going down, if you are a seeker, you are a responsible seeker and a Sahaja Yogi;

 - 2007 Issue: I & 2 42 The Divine Cool Breeze a big wind towards the Agya, horrible stink coming out of this terrible type of a ego. 'Absolutely' not the way to treat the King of Kings who is born within you. You are so respected that Christ is born within your Agya. But you must respect your Agya Chakra. try to be in unison with negativity, we harm Him 'more', we torture him 'more', we trouble Him 'more'. The one who was born in the 'manger' in the most difficult circumstances, where everybody requires comfort, who from the very beginning went through hazardous life till His death. His birth itself, you can see, was in a cow-shed. None of you are born in a cow-shed. And while the Chrisitians are so particular about comforts, most surprising is, why Christ was born in cow shed? In a very-very cold night Christ clean, healthy and holy. The attention should was born. Nothing much to cover 'sparkling beauty' it was. Now we have to keep Him within ourselves comfortably. We are not going to give Him that manger in our Agya project a power of holiness, so that anybody Chakra. Manger of thoughts and a crown of thought-that we are not going to give Him. We are going to make Him comfortable by not accepting negativity as a sympathy. You have to be kind towards your auspiciousness and holiness so that Christ enjoys His stay born, yet to grow. I am sure Sahaja Yogis there in your Agya. That we do not torture Him by our useless ideas uncomfortable behaviours, inauspicious appearances and unholy acceptance of wrong ideas. Try to respect Him; there He stands. Try to make Him very comfortable. I wish I could do that, problems, nothing. So they are still children but He resides in everybody's Agya Chakra. If he was only in my Agya, I would have given Him the greatest comforts, but he wants to be manifested in everybody's Agya. Sol have to request you as a Mother to look after Him, give him a nice cradle, give Him a comfortable time, because he is born to give you your resurrection. He has taken up such a great responsibility to suck all your conditioning and to suck all your ego, but that does not mean that you put stones on top of it. It's like, sometimes I find the conditioning of some of the people in the West is so great, that a big mountain is falling on this little child. And sometimes I find a big a bad breath. Horrible breath of ego, it stinks, blowing like Your attention should be in the Centre so that no wobbliness-Imagine put a child-like they say, a child is to put on the wings. So this Agya Chakra is to be kept very be holy. The attention outside is still not very holy, should be detached' attention. If you start seeing through your Agya it should who looks at your eyes should know that serenity is flowing from these eyes, and not lust and greed and aggression. All this we can achieve because we have got Christ within our Agya. Accept Him there. He is will understand the importance of the Agya Chakra, In the East, no problem, because to them He is only Ganesha. Ganesha is a child and they know for definite that childhood has no contamination. no as far as sin is concerned. There is a story- one pastor went to a village, and gave a big lecture to them, and the villagers had to thank. So he got up and he said, Thank you very much for telling us all about it, we did not know what was sin and thank God you have told us that there is sin!" So this awareness is not in their heads. They do not understand. You will be surprised, you cannot ask Indians. They won't understand what it means, you know. They may say Mr. Frued, this, that; but they do not understand, it is so anti-God. Actually I did not know till the other day, when Rustom told me with great hesitation what it means 'really'. So that is what it is and we have to understand this.

 The Divine Cool Breeze 2007 Issue: 1 & 2 43 If Kundalini is staying at thoughtless awareness means just dialating and the eyes can become black, but there's no sparkle. But when it comes out, then you find a sparkle' in the eyes. There is a difference in the eyes, if you see. The eyes get dialated- the pupils get dialated-when the Agya chakra is being 'just' penetrated, that is still here it is. Then you can't see clearly. Correct. But at thoughtless awareness is all this part' So if you push it up a little higher-you know how to push Kundalini with your attention-or you watch here sahasrara or you think of Me; Kundalini will go up. Alright? Today is the great day of Holiness. Let us celebrate the birth of Christ in our Agnya Chakra and let us sing praise of it so that He in His 'pure' essence, in his holy body, He should be there; not Christianity and neither Fruedian non-sense. Christianity is 'equally' bad as Fruedian. There is no difference at all. Whether you kill the child with the mountains falling on him or with a horrible stinking, dirty-smelling breeze blowing on him, it is just the same. So please get rid of 'both' the ideas- 'absolutely. And in 'purity' you respect Him. Absolutely purity' because 'He is purity'. Now you may say that Mother if He is pure purity- there are some stupid people who ask me- "if He is purity, then how can we make him impure?" What I mean, if you do not respect Him, why will He be there? He will disappear. He likes purity. He will disappear from there- it is not good for you. So thoughtless awareness is just the beginning. And it's a great area, upto Shri Krishna point where you become the witness. Now the witness point when you've become, then there is a sparkle in your eyes Your eyes sparkle. Sparkle in the eyes is a sign that the Kundalini is flowing well. That time you see 'more' than you see normally. And in the the start, it starts looking bigger, everything starts looking much clearer. Alright? So better create a cradle, a beautiful cradle, of love, of honesty, as His Mother prepared for Him. With all sweetness and kindness and assurance that you will nurture the beauty and the auspiciousness of Christ. Dilatation of the pupil takes place Some people really at that time have opened their eyes and they said "Oh! We've become blind." That's true, it happens. It's correct. Alright? Good question. May God bless you all. Any questions you have, ask me. Agya is very important and best way is to take your Kundalini up. You see, don't roam about in Agya. Very dangerous. You can be thrown as he said on the 4, 4, 4 foot back or you can go this side 6, 6, 6, 6. It works out 6, 6, 6, 6 this side and 4, 4, 4, 4 this side. Dangerous. Never go. You see you should be very careful. You should never roam about in Agya because you're thrown out. The attention is thrown out-projected. A Sahaja Yogi : When I am in thoughtless awareness, I can't see clearly. Shri Mataji : I think you must be seeing more than what you see normally! He is correct. When you are thoughtlessly aware, your eyes, you see, the pupils start dialating, its correct. But take it higher-the Kundalini-slightly higher, push it up. Airight?

 The Divine Cool Breeze Issue: 1& 2 44 2007 that. If they are there, let it be, Because you see, your Agya is very important. You should not allow your Agya to be attracted by these things. You might just find a flame, like that. Sometime you might just find a little dot, standing dot. They are all actually angels who are with you and try to assure you. But that's not important. What is important is, on your way, you should go further and do not go this side or that side. But if you are seeing everyday those images, then try to push it back or this way, whichever way it is and try to finish them so that you go further. That means you are sticking on to the same point or you're moving in the other direction on the sides. Because direction should be further You start thinking; all problematic. Try to take your Kundalini out all the time. 'See', that it's coming out. Put your attention there-and the best is now put your attention to me ! Because I am Sahasrara. Don't allow your Kundalini to remain in Agya part. It's dangerous. No doubt. You have become subtler and you can start moving left and right if you want to, and if you try to. I'l tell you. If you start closing your eyes; say, you're sleepy and you start seeing images at that time. That means you are going on to the left side-they're dead bodies, you start seeing their faces, this, that-you are going to the left side. Now supposing you start seeing lights and stars and this and that- all sorts of things-l mean more the colours, we should say, you'are moving on the right hand side, so try to avoid it. 'I don't want it', you should say And you try to put your Agya- if it is left, you put it to the right side or if it is right-just by pushing it. and further and further. SY : How should we protect our sub-conscious since we cannot be conscious about it? Shri Mataji: You need not. I mean, you don't have to worry ! Just keep to the conscious. Alright? You don't do anything! Actually, if you see, what do you do? But what happens, that after sometime, when you've achieved a certain state, of higher consciousness, then if you want you 'can' penetrate into these areas. You can see all these things. But then certain different types of things you see, for example, you might see from my Sahasrara huge, big "Valayas' coming out, or something like that. That's a different point altogether. And also sometimes you might see a little-say, a flame-that's a good sign, that means somebody is guiding you. But you've to be careful. Not to indulge into these things and SY:I just enjoy Shri Mataji : Yes, just enjoy. That's the best part. Just enjoy! I want you to enjoy. Don't create problems for yourself, that's all and just enjoy. Alright? Just don't create problems for yourself. Don't be ambitious. Don't be aggressive. And don't be-submissive too much to others. That's rarely so. But be submissive to Sahaja Yoga, be surrendered to Sahaja Yoga. because there 'is' a guidance for you you're all followed by great dieties, no doubt, but you should not try to, sort of, hanker after (Nirmal Yoga) 1983 ***

 Sahasrara Puja Rouen, France, (05.05.1984) Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi At this point of time, it is very It is so wonderful for your Mother to important to understand that we have to take a bigger step. The whole Sahasrara moves in this way, all these Chakras throw their lights in this way, in a clockwise manner and the axis is the heart. see you so many beautiful Sahaja Yogis assembled together on this day of Sahasrara. I think the first era of Sahaja Yoga has ended now and new has started. In the first era of Sahaja Yoga, the starting point was first the opening of the Sahasrara. And gradually moving towards the completion,I find there are so many who are great Sahaja Yogis today. It is very natural process of growth that you have gone through. The first one was, we can say, is just the awakening of the Kundalini, and piercing the fontanel bone area. As you see on top of your head these bandhans, that's how you too have in your head, the same way. And you have the Chakras the same way, built in your Sahasrara. So in the first era of Sahaja YOga, we have awakened the dieties in your centers, in the medulla oblongata and also in the brain, but now the time has come for us to spread it on a horizontal level, and to move it on the horizontal level, we have to understand how to go about it. So the essence of all the religions, of all the prophets, of all the incarnations, is compassion, and is placed in this Chakra of heart. Thus we understand that in the second era now, we have to have compassion, is the manifestation now of the compassion. If God Almighty had no compassion, He would not have created this great universe. Actually His power, or the Adi Shakti, is the embodiment of His compassion, and this compassion has brought forth all the evolution to human level and even your emancipation as Sahaja Yogis, and compassion is always completely covered with forgiveness. So you can see the Trinity meets at this point: The Son of God is forgiveness, is the embodiment of forgiveness. So the God Almighty, who is the Witness, the Mother who is the compassion and the Child who is the forgiveness, all of them meet at heart Chakra in the Sahasrara. Like the seven colours of rainbow, we have got seven colours of the light of these centers, of the Chakras, and when we started from the back, from the Mooladhara, bringing it up to the, this side, Agnya, then it is placed in a different order, if you see it clearly. I mean to say that in the Sahasrara, because it's a concave placement, it's important to understand, that the center of the fontanel bone area corresponds to our heart. So, heart is the pivotal point for the second era now. I hope you understand what I mean. Now, one must learn how to improve Sahasrara itself. You know the presiding deity of the Sahasrara very well. Now, the place of Sahasrara is in your head as you think it to be, but it's just the center of the whole universe. To develop this you have to pay attention to your heart Chakra in the fontanel bone area. If you pay attention to the fontanel bone area then there you must establish the deity. But this deity has to be first established into the heart. So if you have to place your attention to Saharara, first thing you have to do is to pay attention to your heart. In the Sahasrara, the heart-Chakra and the heart itself, the Atma, coincide. Means the Jagadamba becomes one with the heart, that is the Atma, so we see that here the yoga takes place. Now you are very lucky people that you have the deity in person with you. The people who got realization before I came on this earth, had to imagine the deities, and in that imagination they were never perfect. But as

 Issue: 1 & 2 - 2007 46 The Divine Cool Breeze desire to be fulfilled. So, at the Krishna's level it was "Yoga Kshema vahamyaham". So the Kshema was looked after at Krishna's level because it was promised. they say that at Sahasrara "She is Mahamaya", that is how it is described. So if you also see the person, you may not be knowing fully that person, or in the perfect way, or a complete way, because Mahamaya Shakti is much greater than your imagination, that is why one has to surrender. With your limited imagination of brain one cannot see the deity. But what next in the new era that has to come? As you have now good families, good ashrams, good jobs, everyone is happy, let us think of the next era. Next era is of compassion, as I told you, but if any one of the Chakras are weak in you still, the light that becomes white because of the seven colors, may dim out or may be defective. So, all the Chakras that are within us are to be looked after. To pay attention to every Chakra, and put compassion, the feeling of compassion on these Chakras. Now let us take the Chakra of Shri Ganesha. You pay attention to Shri Ganesha and establish Him through your thought, because now your thought is divine, in the Mooladhara Chakra, with great respect. Also it is said "She is Bhaktigamya", you can know through bhakti, through devotion, So the devotion has to be there, but the devotion has to be a very clean devotion, in the sense there should be no malice in the heart, heart should be clean. Heart, to keep it clean is very difficult. Always human beings have a relative understanding of reality, but reality is absolute. So to achieve that, one has to get rid of all the other kind of impurities that are within the heart. So in the beginning we try to achieve our realization, not with very clean heart. At that time, we had lots of attachments, we were identified with false things and also we thought, by getting realization, we'll become very powerful people. After realization, also, we started indulging into petty things. We started asking for favours for our relations, friends, mothers, sisters, and the women thought of their husbands and their brothers, their children. They all asked for the blessings of all those with whom they were entangled. All this entanglement, you got over, I know, very soon. Here now, you have to know that in the first era of Sahaja Yoga I could not have talked of these things to you, of this, this is much subtler doing, subtler work. Now put your feeling on that Chakra, Chakra is the 'pradesha', is the 'country', and the King is Shri Ganesha, and that's the country. Now when you put your attention onto that Chakra, put your feelings towards Him, of feeling of love and adoration to Him, to begin with, and then to manifest compassion, you have to ask nothing but one thing that, "O God of innocence, give innocence to all the people of the world". But first you have to be innocent to ask that, otherwise it is unauthorized asking, or you can say, you have no right to ask. Now the job of a Avtara is such that He has to fulfill the desires of His bhaktas, His disciples. For example, Shri Krishna was asked by gopis that we want you to be with us individually with everyone of us; so He divided Himself into many Krishnas and He was with everyone of them. But that was a very Divine Desire, I think, that was a very Divine Desire of the gopis. But when you asked Me about your brothers, sisters, mothers, fathers, I tried to do that, whatever was possible. Also the Kshema that you asked for, ashrams you asked for, all the things that you needed, was there for your So, to understand innocence, you should try to understand yourself, how your mind is working. When you, say, look at anyone, do you feel that you should possess that person, do you feel unduly attracted, or something base feeling comes into your mind? For an innocent person, when he sees a beautiful person, or a woman, or a

 Issue: I & 2 - 2007 The Divine Cool Breeze 47 that acts by itself. You don't have to say that you act, it acts, but you just become the vehicle, a beautiful clean vehicle of that discretion. Then you should believe now you are spreading horizontally. beautiful scene, or a beautiful creation, the first thing should happen that he becomes thoughtless, there is no thought. So if there is no thought, there's no question of having any expression of possessiveness or any kind of a baser feeling. In the first era of Sahaja Yoga, you needed to see Me in person. As we say in Sanskrit, a "Dhyeya", is the target, you wanted the target in front of you, whatever is to be achieved. So now when you wanted that all the time and you felt happy, secure, joyous, when you had that in person before you. Then, in the second era, now, you will not desire so much that Mother should be there. You'll But, if you pray to Shri Ganesha, also unauthorized a little bit, that "Please make me innocent, so that I'm empowered to ask you for this boon that, whereever I go,I become the source of Innocence, so that I emit innocence. When people look at me, they feel I'm innocent". This is compassion, the compassion to ask Him to give you the power of compassion itself. So that, as you see here, these beautiful centers as if the lights start moving horizontally. It starts moving on the sympathetic nervous system. So you become the powerful Innocence yourself. You don't become stupid or childish, but you become child-like. take it over from Me. This is the Divine Desire I'm telling you about, and you have to work on that from today onwards. I am with you, you know that, but need not be in this body, because I don't know if I exist in this body or not. But once this desire starts working, you will see tremendous miracles happening. When the child is born to a mother, automatically she gets milk. So the nature is so connected with the whole thing, In you divine desire also it is connected, and it is very evident when you are a divine person. So you may find Me anywhere, you are walking on the street, suddenly you might find Mataji walking with you. So this is the second era we have started, and you should not be shocked if you see Me sitting on your bed and putting My hand on your head, or you may see Me in the form of Christ walking into your room, or as Shri Rama. That has to happen, so you should be prepared. Already so many miracles have taken place on you, but on a grosser level. You have seen the light coming on My head and the photographs have shown some miracles to you, but many things will happen, that you will see something that you could never imagine. This has to happen just to convince you that you have reached a certain height of your evolution in the new The whole behavior is extremely dignified and innocent. Normally if you find a person who is dignified is, normally, is not an innocent person. Because he puts up a show, it's a deliberation, to become serious and show that he is very dignified to impress others. And a child doesn't put up the show of innocence, of dignity or anything, because the child is not aware of deliberations. But you develop that rare combination of innocent dignity. Now the other quality of say, Shri Ganesha, starts experssing itself on harizontal level, that you become discreet. But that is a power, I'm again saying, is a power of discretion you develop. Now one must understand the difference between the power of discretion and discretion itself. So the power means it acts. For example, you may not speak, but if you are standing somewhere the discretion itself will act in the situation. Like a Sahaja Yogi, supposing is a good Sahaja Yogi, is going in a train, and the train has an accident- mostly it will nobody will die. So you establish the discretion which is power itself, not, but has

 2007 48 The Divine Gool Breeze Issue: 1 & 2 you, then know that you are progressing well. As soon as you see an ordeal or a calamity falling on the personality and you do not get worried about it, then know that you are progressing. When no amount of artificiality can impress you then know you are progressing. No amount of material well-being in others makes you unhappy, по тore unhappy, then know that you are progressing well. No amount of labor or troubles are sufficient to become a Sahaja Yogi. Whatever you may try one cannot become a Sahaja Yogi, while you have got it without any effort, so you are something special. era of Pragyalok because this is a new state into which now you will be entering on a horizontal basis. In this era you will give up asking for gross things, and also for anything subtler, anything that is subtle, the asking will disappear, and that is the time you will become very powerful. Whatever I say happens as you know, only thing, I cannot command you to be evolved. The Kundalini's work in you has been done, quite a lot, now the new work of compassion, of spreading it to others, has to be done by you. As the light grows brighter and brighter, the area it covers becomes bigger and bigger. So you become the giver of compassion. So this, once you understand that you are special, you will become humble about it. Then when it happens to you, that you humble down when you see you have achieved something, that you have some powers, that you are emitting innocence, that you are discreet and as a result of that you become more compassion, humbler personality, a sweeter personality, then you should believe that you are in the heart of your Mother. This is the sign of the new Sahaja Yogi now in the new era who has to move with new force. Where you will grow so fast, that without meditation you will be in meditation, without being in My presence you will be in My presence, without asking you will be blessed by your Father. This is what you are in for; and again I welcome you to this new era today on this great day of Sahasrara. In My last lecture, which you have heard already, I have requested you how to do Tapa. With a complete surrendered mind you have to go through the pilgrimage, say, of this castel. This is one of the glimpses of the tapa that you have to do, because I am told some of you had to get into little difficulties and you people suffered a little bit on your way, for the pilgrimage. But it is fun to be venturesome and to get into places where the devils dare not go, and if you know how to get fun out of the so-called discomforts, then you should know you are on the right lines, and as you start becoming discreet automatically, you should know you are progressing well. (Progress in Sahaja Yoga explained) As you become more peaceful and your temper vanishes in the thin air as soon as you see somebody attacking May God bless you all!

 2 15 Pralisthan-Gurgaon "O my children, you are really born out of my Sahasrara, I conceived you in my heart and gave you the new birth through the Brahmarandhra. The Ganges of my love has carried you into the realm of collective consciousness. This love is too great for my human body. It nourishes you, soothes you awareness to bliss and joy. But this love also corrects you and prunes you. It guides you and directs you. It reveals itself in the form of true knowledge. It absorbs your shocks and settles you like a guiding leaf on the hard surface of truth. It strengthens you to fulfil your aspirations of reaching spiritual heights." and gives you security. Gradually it opens your -H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi-



----------------------

2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The
Divine Cool Brecze
January-February, 2007
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Breeze
Cool
Divine
The
JAN. - FEB. - 2007
NIRMALA
NIVERSAL
PURE
CONTENTS
1.
Realization in Refugee Camp in Israel - 31 - 7 - 2006
Prayer To Shri Mataji
2.
Farewell to Shri Mataji - 2 -8 - 2006
3.
Shri Mataji in Los Angeles, USA 3-8-06
4.
(2-8-2006)
A wonderful Day in London
5.
1000Months of love celebrated 22 7 - 2006
6.
The Queen of Heaven
7.
Classic Recollection from Dr. Bohdan (10. 8. 1991)
8.
- 10-5-1992
Sahasrara Puja
9.
Asato Ma Sat Gamaya
10.
Agya Chakra - 3-2-83
11.
Christmas Eve Talk - 24-12-1982.
12.
Sahasrara Puja -France (5.05.1984)
13.
VMHS
DHARMA
VISHWA
FrELIGION
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-3.txt 
 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
Published by
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 108, Chandragupt Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411029
Ph. No. : 020-25285232
Printed by
Krishna Printer & Designer
Tri Nagar, Delhi-35
Mob.: 9212238008
For Subseription Please Write to :
Nirmal Transformatiom Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 108,Chandragupt Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune - 411029
Tel.No.: 020-25285232
Please Send Your Experiences, Suggestions, Articles, Miracle Photographs ete. to :
Shri O.P. Chandna
G-11 (463), Rishi Nagar, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110 034
Ph.: 011-65356811
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Realization in Refugee Camp in Israel
Mondy, 31 July, 2006
It was so beautiful there and the
Yesterday we (me, Grish, Shankar,
atmosphere was absolutely amazing
People were really seeking some inner
peace and were all truly thankful for the
realisation they have received. So many
were telling me how all their worries and
fears which were haunting them for 2 weeks
have been washed away after the
realisation. And many many children came
to us and sat for a long time deep in
meditation.
David and many many others whom you
don't know.) went to a place which is kind
like a refugee camp on one of the Southern
Israeli shores of the meditarenean. [hizballa
are sending about 100 bombs a day to all
north Israel and many of the northern
citizens have escaped southwards] so in that
camp are around 7000 "refugees" who are
very nicely taken care of in this big big project
which is providing them free of charge all
meals, drinks various activities and
entertainment programs and different basic
facilities.
There was so much love and care
in the air and I felt so much satisfaction. At
first the whole camp was reminding many
of us of Sahaj camps or Ganapatipule, and
also to see all this different people who didn't
know each other before integrate so
wonderfully and care for each other was a
very elevatig experience and very sahaj.
When we left all people and organizers
asked us to come again even everyday if
we'd like to.
So there we went to spread Mother's
love and vibrations, and we were welcomed
so nicely, they quickly organised a place for
us and brought us all we needed and after
about 3 minutes declared on the speakers
that all those who wish to experiment in yoga
are welcomed to our spot. A few seconds
later a lecture had started to about 40 people
and from that moment people kept coming,
or coming back with their relatives and held
us there till very late in the night and were
asking if we will be coming also tomorrow
and in the next day.
I wish I will get more chances to go
there and I hope none of them will be left
unrealised.
Jai Shri Mataji
Anat
(Internet Version)
Prayer to our Beloved Mother,
Her Holiness Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namaha
Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil
Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil
that men have done-the wars and the hate
that men have done - the selling of weapons
by Iran to Lebanon to make material, political
and destructive profits.
between Lebanon, Plaestine and Israel.
Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil
that men have done - the shelling and the
sophisticated weapons that are killing
innocent children and families in their homes
without mercy.
Shri Adi Shakti, to undo the evil that
men have done, please command us and
show us how to be able to fulfill completely
all Your desires on earth.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-5.txt 
 - 2007
Issue: 1 & 2
The Divine Cool Breeze
Holy Lotus Feet, anger into compassion,
vanity and ego into natural humility, jealousy
into devotion, greed into unlimited generosity
and materialism into spirituality.
Shri Adi Shakti, to undo the evil that
men have done, please use us as your
instruments and rockets of Love and
Devotion to enlighten everybody's Spirit.
(Vanity into Self respect, ego into
natural humility,)
Shri Adi Shakti, to undo the evil that
men have done, please give us strength to
fulfill our dedication to You completely and
spontaneously with natural humility.
Shri Adi Shakti, to undo the evil that
men have done, please Bless us with Veeta
Raga and Teach us how to establish Sahaj
Yoga, so that your Divine Laws will spread
quickly everywhere.
Shri Adi Shakti, to undo the evil that
men have done, please transform the
stone-hearted and brainwashed people into
Your instruments and Bombs of
Our Beloved Mother, please forgive
us for any mistake we have done against
our Spirit and please may You substitute our
so-called freedom with Your wishes, and
Your instructions, because there is no
freedom unless it is an authority from You.
Our Beloved Mother, please may
Your thousand months of Love on this earth
as Creator of all creations give us
innocence, wisdom and discrimination so
the Satya Yuga will be established to bring
Absolute Unison of Heaven and Earth at Your
Compassion and Pure Love.
Shri Adi Shakti, to undo the evil that
men have done, may You please accept us
as Your devoted and loving children to
spread Sahaja Yoga spontaneously, so a
completely positive collectivity will quickly
grow in Lebanon, Israel, Palestine, Iran,
Syria and in all the Middle-East.
Shri Adi Shakti, to undo the evil that
men have done, please open our hearts and
enlighten our faith so the ignorance around
us will transform hate into love, war into
peace, shells and weapons into dust at Your
Holy Lotus Feet.
Your children from
Lebanon, Iran and Israel
(Internet Version)
Farewell to Shri Mataji
Wednesday Night (2.8.2006)
St. George's House
Hello West Midlands brothers and sisters,
already in London for work). I knew there was
some kind of ceremony taking place to mark
Shri Mataji's departure but I hadn't given a
thought to the idea I might be able to attend.
What a surprise! I was with Vimala who is
also in the Bhajan group, so we sadly left
Nicola baby-sitting the kids, and jumped into
the car, Half an hour later we were in Shri
I wanted to share a wonderful
experience with you, which took place this
Wednesday at Shri Mataji's house in
Chiswick.
At ten p.m. on Wednesday nightI got
a call from Matthew Cooper (Mother's
photographer) - "we might need a tabla
player, you better get over here quick" (I was
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Issue: I & 2
- 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
that Shri Mataji was engaging us again.
Mataji's hallway, waiting for Her to come up
from downstairs.
Shri Mataji then began to give out
gifts, starting with ties for the men. I was
distracted while trying to choose another
bhajan to play, and didn't even notice this
was happening, until I was being called to
receive a tie. Suddenly I was at Mother's feet
found myself talking to Sir C.P. and Shri
Mataji!! It turned out that playing under the
spotlight had been a great blessing, as Sir
complementing
enthusiastically on the tabla playing. He
asked me where I learnt, and I said I learnt
from Sandesh Popatkar in Nagpur, whom
Shri Mataji and Sir C.P. know well, and they
seemed pleased to hear that. In a simple
remark that later, on reflection, seems to
carry unknowable significance, Shri Mataji
said simply "I am meeting you for the first
time". This is the first time She has spoken
to me. All I managed to do was smile and
The lift doors opened to a great and
wonderful surprise- Shri Mataji was walking!
In this joyful moment the idea began to
bubble up that we might be in for a very
special evening.
After Shri Mataji and Sir C. P. had
settled, we all took our seats in the living
room. As various beautiful offerings were
made to Shri Mataji, we began to sing some
Bhajans. Sia was there with a harmonium,
but the main bhajan group had not arrived
yet, as we'd had such late notice. As it
happened, I had been practicing some
bhajans with Sia and Anthony Headlam over
the previous two evenings. These were
beautiful songs, quiet and melodious rather
than rousing, but not so well known, so
perhaps not ideal for a collective event like
this, but they were the only songs we had
practiced together for years, so we
performed them. It was really just Sia,
Anthony and Vimala singing, accompanied
by harmonium and tabla: I'm used to playing
with the big sound of the bhajan group, so
this felt really under the spotlight, but it was
very enjoyable and did sound very nice.
There have been four or five babies born in
the last week or two, and suddenly they were
all there with their mothers, at Shri Mataji's
feet. This included Paul and Dhamini
Goundry, who arrived all the way from
Sheffield at exactly the right moment, and
walked in the front door and directly to
Mother's feet! Paul looked like all his
Christmases had come at once. Mario
C.P.
was
me
namaskar.
The evening continued with many
gifts being given by Shri Mataji, and pretty
much continuous light conversation from
Her. She was asking what everyone's name
was, asking people how they were, and
having small exchanges here and there with
much laughter. As always, words are not
adequate to describe the atmosphere.
We did not perform any more
bhajans, which felt right as everyone was
hanging on Shri Mataji's every word, but
Marcellow arrived with his classical guitar
and we played some very quiet instrumental
music together.
And suddenly, the most incredible
presented a photo album of all the babies
born since Shri Mataji's visit last year. Then
he plucked up the courage to ask Shri Mataji
for a name for their daughter. She stared
hard at the baby for a full minute or two, and
named her Leela, to a hearty round of
applause. Everyone was feeling so happy
part of the evening. Shri Mataji spoke to us.
Just a sentence or two, but she actually
spoke to us, as our Mother and Guru, for the
first time in two years or more I think. She
said, and this is from memory so it is
certainly not 100% accurate:
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-7.txt 
 - 2007
Issue: 1 & 2
The Divine Cool Breeze
a single sentence. As brothers and sisters
in the family of Sahaja Yoga, we are closer
to each other than any brothers and sisters
have ever been. If we can live by that, and
never let the bonds between us be
challenged by our petty human foolishness,
then nothing can prevent Shri Mataji's
beautiful movement of Sahaja Yoga from
reaching it's ultimate destination.
"We are all very close. Very close...
If only that is realized, everything will work
out. We are brothers and sisters... But that
is another matter.. We are in Sahaja Yoga."
(without the tone of voice, this may be
interpreted as very close to some event or
thing, but at the time it was clear - speaking
for myself of course that she was using
the term close, as in close to each other.)
With Love,
Not surprisingly, Shri Mataji in Her
genius has given us the antidote to all that
has challenged us these past two years, in
Tom
(Internet Version)
...
Shri Mataji Arrives in Los Angeles
3 August, 2006
Dear everyone
minutes everyone went outside the airport
building at the curb waiting for Shri Mataji's
car to arrive there.
Jai Shri Mataji !!
Just a quick note to share the
wonderful news of arrival of our Holy Mother
in the land of the Vishuddhi. Shri Mataji and
Sir CP arrived at LAX airport on Thursday
evening (Aug 3rd). Both Sir CP and Shri
Mataji were escorted by yogis into the arrivals
waiting lounge at terminal B at LAX airport
at about 8:30pm. Our Divine Mother was
received by Sadhana didi and her family.
Yogis sang some bhajans while
waiting and got an 'extended' darshan for
another 15 minutes. If heaven could exist on
Earth it was there in the hearts of yogis in
form of love for their Motehr and Her family.
Despite the 14 hour journey from
London to LAX, Shri Mataji looked fresh and
departed the airport around 9.15 pm leaving
our hearts and nabhis tremendously satisfied
with Her Divine 'darshan' - as powerful as a
About 60-70 yogis had gathered at
the airport to welcome Shri Mataji. Yogis had
driven and flown from all over like
Sacremento, San Jose, Irvine, LA, etc. Seven
of us were blessed to drive up to LAX from
San Diego which is about 115 miles
away.Even several seekers had by 'chance'
come to the airport and were delighted to
hear about Her arrival. Cne seeker upon
being told about Shri Mataji even said that
just listening about Her gives him the chills
up his spine and promised to go online to
find out more about such a Divine personality.
puja.
Most people know how hot the
summers have been this year with record
high temperatures all over the country. Just
2-3
before
Her arrival the
days
Paramchaitanya around this region had
started batencing out and cooling off the
environment by rain and clouds, preparing
for Her arrival.
Thank You Mother for coming here
and keeping as protected with Your love. We
pray to remain at your Divine lotus feet.
-Love and regards
San Diego yogis
(Internet Version)
Upon Shri Mataji's and Sir CP's
arrival in the lounge, yogis quietly formed a
circle gathering around them and offered
flowers with a namaskar. After about 10
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-8.txt 
 A Wonderful Day in London
2nd August, 2006
Officially it was "farewell", as Mother
Wednesday 2nd August was a lovely
day in London, You could say it was a
Wonderful Day, a special day. All day Shri
Mataji had been Chatting, Laughing, Telling
jokes. She Said it was a very auspicious day.
Some biscuits have been specially made for
Her and sent in on the tea tray. "Ah", She
Says "These biscuits are so good, who
made them, I must get the recipe"... A thrilled
and delighted Patty is ushered in for a chat.
And a cup of Darjeeling tea is offered, made
by Rachael. "Aah" Mother Says, "This is the
best cup of tea I have had in a long time"...
was due to set off next day to join our beloved
brothers and sisters in the U.S.A. Just going
from one home to another. And that night
there was no sadness in this "farewell", only
Joy, for we did Fare Well.
The first sight of Our Holy Mother,
smiling as only She can, was as She walked
gently and with minimum assistance from
two beaming helpers, from the elevator into
the beautiful "blue room". Everybody
crammed in. The Sari was a Heavenly pink
and gold. As soon as everybody was inside,
Mother leaned forward in her chair. "Why
don't you all move forward?"
Come evening-time as many of us
as possible crammed into the big sitting-
room at Chiswick, spreading into the
hallway, up the stairs, down the stairs..if only
we had a bigger place, ten times more of us
could be there. Let's hope that one day it will
be that way, and we can all be there together.
Those whose turn it was the night knew that
they were carrying the love, the hopes and
dreams, of all the Callective of all the world,
and sharing through their hearts.
We did, old, young, and newborn.
Sweetly lilting Bhajans were sung. So many
offerings were made by delighated Yogis and
Yoginis, Aunties,
Shakti..There was Aarti, there was a
beautiful garland, so many flowers, sweets,
nuts, fruits, cakes, bangles, ornaments, a
sari, coconuts, all with such sweetness and
love.
Yuva
Uncles,
(from SWAN)
****
****
The Australian Sahaja Yoga News letter
28 July 2006
At the vishuddhi Chakra Shri Krisha
established this, or He manifested, this pure
relationship of a sister In a collective life that
we have, in the ashram where we live, where
we move about as Sahaja Yogis, if we do not
have this basic principle within us, there will
be a chaos, complete chaos. Once this purity
of relationship is established, that: 'Apart from
my wife, all the rest are my sisters or mothers,'
it cannot be a proper society and the chaos
of the social system of America is because they
have no sense of pure relationships.
Once you call somebody a sister, she's
a sister. And once you call sombody a brother,
he's a brother. It's not only that you should be
born of the same parents - it's not necessary -
but this is a very important principle to have
a very pure society where everybody can live
peacefully."
Raksha Bandhan Puja
Los Angeles, USA
7 August, 1990
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-9.txt 
 1000 months of love Celebrated
On the night of the 21st July, on the
auspicious anniversary of 1000 months of
Divine presence on Earth, Shri Mataji was
offered a huge cake, decorated with rose
petals. On that same day, a local newspaper
published an advertisement in full page,
written by the Italian yogis, thanking Shri
Mataji for all the work She has been doing in
Italy in these 25 years and all the blessings
She has bestowed upon us. The same ad
was published next day in four different local
editions of the national newspaper "La
Republica". On the 22nd July evening,
hundreds of yogis from all over Italy and the
neighbouring countries assembled at
Palazzo Doria to celebrate together Her
1000 months on this Earth, to thank Her for
all the love She has been pouring on all of
us and to salute Her before Her departure
songs. Shri Mataji afterwards watched a
DVD about Her 15 years in Cabella and 25
years in Italy, with the background music of
Ave Maria, which left all of us in a blissful
state.
from Cabella.
To the
Mother
f all
Then 1000 candles were lit and
of
offered at Her lotus feet and, immediately
after, the procession of yogis started. All of
the yogis that had gathered, a few hundreds,
in a long line entered the hall, bowed before
Mother and offered gifts, flowers, paintings,
cards at Her Lotus Feet in an unending
stream of love.
Gueus
waur
The evening ended with the offering
of a big cake "To the Mother of all Gurus",
The evening began with an uplifting
dance performed by the yoginis of Cabella
and some yuva shaktis. After that the yuva
shakti group in full had the opportunity to sing
bhajans at the Lotus feet of the Divine
Mother. Some more songs performed by
yogis and yoginis from Austria and Italy filled
the atmosphere with vibrations and peace,
before the children from Daglio camp
enchanted the audience with their joyful
accompanied by ten other cakes with the
symbols of the ten Adi Gurus.
While all this was going on, the yuva
shakti in the next room kept singing bhajans
to praise the glory of our Mother.
-Jai Shri Mataji
(The Australian S.Y. News Letter)
28 July 2006
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-10.txt 
 The 84 names of Shri Vishnumaya
24. She whose Teeth are as Red as
She who is the Kali.
She who was created by Mahakali
Herself
She who dwells in the Vishuddhi
Padma, the Lotus of Vishuddhi.
She who is Kulishangi, thunderbolt-
bodied
1.
Pomegranate Flowers.
2.
She with a Hundred Eyes.
25
She who is Narayani.
26.
3.
27. The Goddess who is the Gracious
Remover of Afflictions.
4.
She who gives Chastity, the
Foundation of all Dharmas.
Her Flowers of Chastity that express
the Powers of Shri Ganesha.
She who insisted that Chastity by the
battle with the Kauravas.
31. The One who was Draupadi.
28.
She who is dazzling like lightning.
5.
29.
She who has special weapons.
6.
She who is a weapon of Shri
7.
30.
Americeshwari.
She who is the conqueror of
8.
rakshasas
and devils,
She who conquered Mahishasura.
She who destroyed Shumbha and
Nishumbha
The One is the Eternal Virgin.
The One whose Chastity is protected
by the brother.
32.
9.
10.
33. The One who cares for the spirituality
of the brother.
34. She who was responsible for the
11.
She who is the beloved daughter of
Mahabharata.
12.
She who joins the five elements, the
five Pandavas.
She who can enter into all the
elements.
35.
the Vindhya mountains.
13.
She who is the Devi praised in the
Devi Mahatmyam.
She to whom Adi Shankaracharya
36.
14.
She who integrates heart and brain.
38.
37.
gave praise
Born into the home of the cowherd
Nanda.
She who is quick-acting.
15.
The One who burns away negativity.
39.
The Powerful one whose Electricity
brings auspiciousness.
41.
40.
She who was born on the same day
as Shri Krishna.
The sister of Shri Krishna as the
16.
She who controls lightning,
earthquakes, typhoons and burning
forests.
17.
Mayashakti.
The One who declares that an Avatar
18.
She who gives a miracle picture every
28 seconds.
42.
of Truth has come.
She who sacrificed herself in order to
19.
The One who enlightens the film
medium.
The One who gives pure speech.
The One who empowers mantras.
She who is without ego.
She who bestows true humility
The One who creates confidence.
43.
announce the Birth of Shri Krishna.
She who became Lightning to
20.
44.
announce the Birth of Shri Krishna.
21. She who is the Maya that is
45.
46.
47.
impossible to surpass - Vaikrtika
Rahasya.
22. She whose Maya is beyond the
knowledge of Shiva Brahma and
Vishnu.
23. She who is of Mysterious Forms -
Murti Rahasya.
48.
49. The Keeper of Reality.
The One who exposes negativity.
The One who exposes false
sophistication.
50.
51.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-11.txt 
 · 2007
Issue: 1& 2
10
The Divine Cool Breeze
She who clears the Path for Self
Realisation.
She who does not tolerate sarcasm.
The One who is fully Capable.
69.
She who is blameless.
52.
She who protects the respect for
53.
70.
grandparents.
54.
71.
She who guards the respect for the
Mother principle.
She who is the power of a sister in a
family.
She who makes us part and parcel of
the whole.
She who removes self doubt.
She who gives the quality of being
whole hearted about Sahaja Yoga.
She who brings us to the Virata.
She who is Shri Vithala Vishnumaya
Virata.
72.
55.
73.
74.
56.
She who resides in the Left Vishuddhi,
as the Maha Shakti.
75
57.
She who is the destroyer of false
mantras.
58.
She who was Fatima, the Pure Sister
and Daughter.
76.
59. The One who destroys false
77. Saraswati, She who becomes the
explanations.
She who helps keep the maryadas of
the chakras.
She whose root is in the heart.
Vishnumaya at Hamsa Chakra.
The Destroyer of the Danavas and the
Asuras of Viprachittla.
She who is known as Shakambhari.
60.
78,
61.
The One who gives courage.
79.
80.
62.
The great Bhramari, Her Fiery Beauty
slays even the worst of foes.
The Fire Power of the Ida Nadi.
She who speaks the Truth and purifies
the ethers.
She who is the Power of a Woman.
She who is to be worshipped every
day.
The Power in a woman that cannot
be dominated by money
materialism.
She who is the Destroyer of Myths.
She who removes artificial norms
She who reveals what is underneath.
63.
or
81.
82.
64.
65.
83.
66.
84.
She who is the support of Joy.
She who gives comprehension of the
Subtle.
67.
68.
-Jai Shri Mataji.
(Australian Newsletter)
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-12.txt 
 The Queen of Heaven
When I was but a child I first saw the Queen of Heaven
She stood swathed in silken garb with golden hue
Her face it shone towards me with love and light
/ will come and I will protect you is what She said to me
And She did come and She did protect me.
When I was still a child I saw the Queen of Heaven once more
She stood upon the Earth ringed in fiery glow
My fear was for my heavenly Mother but She turned and said
| am your Mother I will allow no harm to come to you or me
I fell at Her Feet and prayed I never had to leave
/ am older now and the world intrudes
My Mother still protects me and loves me more
But what of me, am I still at my Mothers Feet
I may not be constant and I may not be perfect but
She is within my heart and She is the soul of me.
(Auriol Purdie)
a lot of the Sahaja Yogis from London. My
The first verse is based on this experience:
She was wearing the same sari as in
parents had come back before and told me
that Shri Mataji was coming. When She
arrived, Her car pulled up and it was a
Mercedes. I remember Her getting out of the
car and She was wearing exactly the same
sari as She had been wearing in the dream,
so I knew exactly who She was.
my dream
Before I met Shri Mataji, my parents
and I were going through a very rough patch
in our lives. I was five at the time. I had a
dream that an Indian lady, who I later
discovered was Shri Mataji, was standing
(Auriol Purdie)
at the prow of this barge and She was
looking towards me. I was not in the barge.
The second verse is based on this
experience:
'Don't worry, 'll come and get you
am the fire
soon,' She said with great love in Her eyes,
in the dream. She was wearing a sari which
had spots on it and I remembered it very
clearly.
Once in Shri Mataji's house in
Brompton Square, London, which was being
redecorated, Mother was walking around and
directing people. She would tell us where
My parents went to meet Shri Mataji
down in London. I didn't go down because
paintings and other decorations were to go
and what colour this door or that window
frame was to be painted.
we were living in Scotland at the time.
However, Mother came up to our house with
(Auriol Purdie)
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-13.txt 
 - 2007
12
Issue: 1 & 2
The Divine Cool Breeze
She appeared not to see the torch
and walked straight in front of it. A flame
It was a mess to begin with. One
always has to make a mess to create a
house. One day, Mother was wearing a
synthetic nylon sari and walking around
amid the rubble and dust. I was in a room
leapt out of the torch, then went round Her
synthetic sari below knee height in a blue
ring, then back into the torch. While all
this was happening, I was horrified and
took a dive across the room to move the
where some people were making plaster
moldings to go on cornices. Some other
people had been working in the room too
and someone had left a blowtorch burning.
It was pointing into the middle of the room
torch. I landed in an undignified heap at
Mother's Feet.
(Linda Williams)
and Mother walked in.
When we realized what had
(Linda Williams)
happened, we looked up in amazement to
find Shri Mataji smiling down at us.
Shri Mataji, wearing a highly
inflammable nylon sari, walked towards
the blowtorch and, as She passed very
I am the fire, how could it hurt
Me?' Shri Mataji said, and She went on Her
close to it, the flame leapt right out of the
nozzle and went completely around Shri
Mataji two or three times, forming a ring a
few centimetres away from the sari.
way to supervise putting in some pipe in the
next room.
(Auriol Purdie)
(Auriol Purdie)
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Classic recollection from Dr. Bohdan
On the evening of the putch in Moscow,10 August, 1991 after a Public Program
(This was transcribed from a conversation over dinner at
Viktor Bezeka's house in Moscow. Hope you enjoy - Alan)
pump it up, take the wheel off, get another
one, and I'm trying to put it on, and it is not
going on. And I say, 'Now look Bohdan, there
are four bolts and four holes', but it just wasn't
going on. And I'm starting to sweat. I knew it
was serious when Yogi Mahajan got out of
the car and started to roll up his sleeves.
Then I knew we were in trouble, hey, if this
guy comes out to help...(laughter)
"Shri Mataji was the only one to have
a program in the whole of Moscow that
evening, because we had booked the hall in
an Army sports stadium, all other programs
had been cancelled that night, but we had
been pre-warned that at ten o' clock there
would be a curfew. Mother gave a beautiful
program, as always, there was about, I would
say, four thousand people and then of course
afterwards, they all came around Mother,
some with tears in their eyes, going towards
Mother, And Mother, is just being a Mother
radiating continuous love. And they are
slowly pushing Her back, because they want
to touch Her, they want to be near Her, so
slowly She is going back and I think, 'Oh my
God, it's nearly ten 'o clock, it's five minutes
to ten, we still have to get all through the
center of Moscow', which is under curfew
and where martial law was in place. I was
the driver, we had the Moscvitch, Mother's
car, so I mounted the gutter on to the
pavement, and I parked the car
perpendicular to the sidewalk. I opened the
back door to the car, as Shri Mataji went
backwards, and when She was one metre
away, I said, 'Shri Mataji, your car
Sol said, 'OK'. And I am looking over
at Mother, She had the window a little bit
open. My nose goes to the window, 'Shri
Mataji, are You OK?" And, at that moment,
about sixty T82 tanks, the big battle tanks,
come down Leningradskaya from the south,
and they were going to bivouac at the Central
Sports complex, under the control of Army
Command.
And I am looking at these tanks, and
the guys there in their classic, signature Red
Army tank commander leather hats. Each
tank commander is looking pale, but
resolute, looking straight ahead, clearly
nervous as they face the possibility of
opening fire on their own people. But to me,
they look very young and very pale and I said,
'These are children, what are they doing,
giving children for war.' I really felt that. AndI
said, 'Why don't these old guys?'..That was
my feelings, but then I thought, 'Of
course,Bohdan, the eighteen and ninteen
year old boys, they have always gone to war,
but they are children, eighteen or nineteen, I
consider them as children. And they are the
ones who go to their deaths while the old
politicians stay in their 'kabinets' (offices)
."
And She looked around, 'Ah, very
good,' and just got in. And then I closed the
door and voom, off we go, and we are trying
to beat this curfew. And we are coming down
Leningradskaya Street, which is then
absolutely dark, because all the lights were
off, and all of a sudden I hear, 'Tuk, tuk, tuk,
tuk, tuk. Oh God, it's a flat tyre.' And we
stopped. I have never changed the tyre of a
Moscvitch, this was the first time. (laughter)
And Yogi Mahajan was in the car too, with
Shri Mataji sitting on the right side at the
back. The flat tyre is the over, over which
Shri Mataji is sitting. So I get out the car jack,
drink vodka, sherry or port, if they are
English. So that was the first thought.'
And then I asked Mother, 'Are you
alright Mother? She had put her little glasses
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-15.txt 
 - 2007
Issue: I & 2
14
The Divine Cool Breeze
a very small voice, almost in a scared voice,
said, 'Bohdan, will we be alright?' And while
Mother, who has opened my center heart at
that moment, and I am about to reassure
Her in an excessive way, almost saying, 'Of
course, Mother.' And I went, 'Hey, wait a
minute, this is Adi Shakti sitting there. She
has given me this huge heart, there is no
fear and so on. What maya is She giving
me now?' So I said within, 'Il'm sorry Mother,
You are the ...' And I said aloud, "Yes, Shri
Mataji, I think we will be alright.' But, you
know, She was playing, you see. She was
really playing. And then She said, 'Bohdan,
in a small voice, 'Turn left.' And my initial
reaction is, Well, Mother doesn't know.' And
then, 'Bohdan, are you mad? What is this
thought coming that Mother doesn't know?
You just stay silent." This all took one second,
very quickly, to neutralize this thought and
said, "Yes, Shri Mataji.' 'And left.' And then
Shri Mataji said, 'Turn right here, and right."
And it was dark. We actually, I think, went
down some one-way streets the wrong way,
I didn't even ask, look or anything, one way
streets, then what we did. We ended up
between houses, Doms, (Houses are the
big blocks of flats, that Russians typically
live in, so this would be off the road, over
grass and dirt) we don't know if we are going
into a ditch, we don't know if we were going
up to a wall or a rock. I'm just going like this.
And we ended up somehow, with Mother
saying, "Go left, go right," on the other side
of the river going south down the Warsawska
Expressway, and I don't even know how,
because the whole of the middle of the city
was blocked off."
on and She said, 'Yes, I am studying them,'
as the sixty tanks roared past. And
afterwards, we realize that the sixty tanks
were supposed to help in the success of the
putch, but they decided, the army
commanders, not to send these tanks out,
they stayed still, they waited, and it looked
like they were for Gorbachev actually. So we
had to have a flat tyre so Shri Mataji could
study these tanks. And I think these tanks, if
they had been put into different parts of
Moscow, would have helped the success of
the putch. So they were left, and they were
neutralized by Mother's holy gaze, holy
attention.
But anyway, then I realized that
Mother was saving Russia and I was saving
a tyre, we all had our duties. Each to his own.
So, I am trying to put this wheel on the car,
I could understand if was a round peg in a
square hole, but it wasn't, both were round,
a round hole and a round bolt? It is
impossible for me to understand, I am going
mad. In fact, it was Yogi Mahajan who came
to the rescue, he saw two small guide pins
which I hadn't noticed and these enabled the
wheel to locate accurately on the four bolts.
Later, I learned that this device used to be
on post-war English cars, nineteen forty
seven, nineteen forty eight. So finally I
realized that this is what it was. When Yogi
pointed it out, l almost got up and kissed him.
He was the key to this success. So I put this
wheel on and we were off. I was in a suit, so
I put the jacket back on, my arms were all
black and covered in grease up to here
(pointing to the elbows). It was August.
Alan interjects, "Imagine, if you will,
So then we are going towards the
center of Moscow, down Leningardskaya,
not yet Gorky Street, and all of a sudden, in
the distance, we see guys, at a temporary
barricade Schlagbaum, and I say, 'Oh, they
won't let us through,' and we have to go
Rastergoeva, which is south, and Mother, in
you are reading a novel, a fantasy, in which
God, a little old lady, is being driven along in
a Moscvitch, in the center of Moscow, saving
Russia. You wouldn't believe it was
possible."
Bohdan, "It was quite an experience."
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Sahasrara Puja
(The Will of God)
Pravachan of H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Cabella - 10.5.1992
As it was put forword was about to
obliterate all the value system, all the proof
of God Almighty. If you see, in the history,
one after another, when science established
itself, the people who are so-called incharge
of the helm of affairs in religion, in different
religions, tried to cope with the findings of
the science. They tried to show that, alright,
if it is said, this much in the Bible, and if it is
wrong we should correct it. Augustin did that.
And it started working as if it is all a stupidity.
The scriptures were just literature, At least
known itself do not have lots of things which
were describing the biology of today. They
could not reveal that human beings were
specially created by God. They thought it
was just a matter of chance that one after
another the animals acquired a situation by
which they became human beings. Thus all
the time Divinity was challenged. And there
was no way of giving the proof of whatever
is said in the Bible or in the Koran or in the
Geeta or in the upnishdas or in the Torah,
Anyone of these things could not be proved
because it was still just stupid, very very few
people got their realisation and when they
talked people did not believe them, and
thought that are just trying to say something
which they are using to propound their own
theories. So the whole thing became a kind
of a dead science. There is no science of
they thought that is the only way you can
control another people and can go on. They
were least bothered as to deliver the goods
whatever had been described in the Bible.
Bible, of course, was tempered very much
and there have been lots of changes in that,
and the persons like Paul and Peter, who
joined together tried to spoil most of the
Truth. Though koran was not so much
touched but still it dealt more with the right
side, with the reproduction systems and all
those things and so many things are still
ambiguous.
Now simultaneously two things have
happened, I don't know if you are aware of it
or not - First thing that has happened is that
now we have a new science of
microbiology, in which we have discovered
that every cell has got a DNA tape - Every
cell has got a programme in it as we have in
a computer a chip, every cell has got a tape
in it, in a way that it is programmed. And
according to that programme a
development takes place. Now imagine the
intricacy of it. So many computers are
already programmed and all these cells have
been in them. So a very mysterious sort of
thing has come up before the scientists and
they cannot explain it. They cannot explain
many things. One of them is this. Now what
Sahaja Yoga has done is that it has
proved that it is The Will of God, it is The
Desire of God. The Will of God which is
doing all the work ; and it has been proved.
All this chaitanaya, Adi Shakti, is nothing
but The Will of God. And Will of God
is the one that is working out everything
very harmoniously. I don't know if
some of you must have read my
book, first book, where I described
how this earth was created. There was a
religion. People started thinking that what is
the use of following these 10 commands or
these strict rules of life ? Because by
following that you gain nothing, you lose all
the fun of the life. Avoid to think of gaining
some pungas as also And that is how all
the time there was a big derailment of
human value system. Also these organised
religions, these monopolically organised
religions, started taking to course of
gaining power or winning money; because
bang but it was very very harmonious and
how it developed is through The Will of Gog
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Issue: 1 & 2
- 2007
16
The Divine Cool Breeze
now become part and parcel of that big
computer of that Will of God. We have
become the mediums, or we can say the
channels of that Will of God. We are
connected with that Will of God which
created all this Universe.
So everything was done in a way that God's
will was working. Now The Will of God you
are feeling on your finger tips. After
realisation, now you have discovered the
absolute science which is The Will of God,
which is an absolute science. You people
know that we have cured people through
Sahaja Yoga. You also know that giving
bandhan and all that works out. So many
things work out automatically after realisation
that people don't want to believe ! In the
beginning people would not believe, then the
scientists told them something. But now it
is, you can see that, the science is always
in the flux, all the time changing. One theory
is again challenged, another theory is again
challenged ! But Sahaja Yoga has exposed
you to that great truth of science which
cannot be challenged. Which is always
there. So anybody who comes out with any
new proposal about defaming God or
saying that there is no God, we can prove
not that there is God but everything, the
creation of this earth, the creation of human
beings, everything was done harmoniously
by The Will of God. If The Will of God has
done everything, the human beings should
not take any credit for discovering something
which has been created by God. Supposing
this carpet is made by somebody and we
start discovering all the colours, what is so
great? It is all there. You cannot create. So it
is not the creation part of it which is so much
important but the fashioning of this work,
whole thing was done by The Will of God.
Now if The WVill of God is so important, it
has to be proved and now through Sahaja
Yoga, after the breaking of the Sahasrara you
have now, for the first time, felt The Will of
God, which is such an important thing.
But for us it has come to us so Sahaj
that we don't understand, we just give a
bandhan and the things work out and
we feel that the things are worked out.
So it is bandhan which has worked
out and we have managed it. It is not so.
It is much more than that. We have
So everything we can manage
because we have got the absolute science
in our hands; the absolute science, which
will work out the betterment of the whole
world. We can prove it to the scientists, that
there is a Will of God. which has done all
this creation. Even evolutionary process is
The Will of God. Without his will nothing could
have happened. So many people used to
say that not even a blade of grass moves
without The Will of God, which is a very true
thing. And you have seen now that The Will
of God we have got as our own power. We
can use it. So how important it is to be a
Sahaja yogi? Perhaps we don't realise how
important it is to be a Sahaja Yogi.
Sahaja Yoga is not only for saying to
others I am full of joy, I am enjoying myself,
Igot purified, everything is fine". But for what?
Why did you get all these blessings ? Why
you have been cleansed? So that this
knowledge of The Will of God should be
apparent in you ; not only that, it should be a
part and parcel of you.
So we have to raise our level, we
have to come up. For mediocre and
ordinary people it is really useless to give
them Sahaja Yoga because they are good
for nothing. They are not going to help us in
any way. Because what is needed is now,
today, that we should have people who can
really manifest and reflect The Will of
God. And for that, you can understand,
we have to have very strong people.
Because this will has created this whole
Universe, this Cosmos, the mother Earth,
everything is created by this Will of God.
So now we are exposed to a new
dimension, and that dimension is that
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Issue: I & 2 - 2007
17
The Divine Cool Breeze
are they going to take up the role of what
they have got ?
we are the ones who are challenges of that
Will of God.
So the Omnipotent God who is
So then what is our duty, what
everywhere, who has done all this, the Will
of God, that has worked it out, has to work
through you people. And you have to be very
strong, very sensible, very wise, also very
effective people. The more effective you
become the more energy you will get. But,
still, I feel that Sahaja yogis are no more
taking the responsibility of understanding that
they have to represent this God Almighty
who is Omnipresent, Omniscient, who
knows everything, who sees everything, and
who is Potent, who is Almighty. If you
understand that this is what has happened
after opening the Sahasrara, that you have
now got the power which has these three
qualities in it, say now, this big thing has to
be supported by strong pillars, but
supposing if they are not strong, it will fall
down. In the same way, such a great power
which has come to you, for that we don't
need very successful people, we don't need
people who have a big name or those who
have lots of money. What we need is people
of character, people of understanding, of
wisdom, and of strength, that whatever may
come I will stand by it. I will take to it, I will
cope with it, I will change myself and imporve
myself.
should we do about it? As a result of
Sahasara being opened out one thing is that
illusions have vanished, what you call in
Sanskrit Bhranti. Illusions have vanished,
you should have no illusion as to the
existence of God Almighty, the power of His
Will and the truth about Sahaja Yoga. We
should have no doubts at all-minimum of
minimum should be like that. But while
using this power we should be aware that
this power is given to you because you are
capable of handling it. It is the highest power
that you can think of. Take any governor, take
any minister, anyone, they can be removed
tomorrow, they can become corrupt, they
can become absolutely devoid of any
knowledge of their own powers. There are
many people who just get elected without
knowing what they have to do.
So this is not just a conversion of
people, it is not only even transformation, but
it is a new fashioning of a new human being
which has come forward and which is
capable of carrying the Will of God further.
So as a result of your realisation what you
have got ? The first thing that has happened
is that your illusions have gone, You should
have no illusion about God Almighty, His will
and that He is Omnipotent,Omnipresent and
Omniscient. All His omnipotence has done
this work and as collective consciousness
you should also know that you are aiso
omnipotent, omnipresent and omniscient.
Omniscient is the thing that sees everything,
knows everything, knows everything. Part of
it, that power is also within you. So to prove
His omnipresence you have to be all the time
aware that you are Sahaja yogis.
So, now illusion has been dispelled.
I hope you all have got rid of your illusions.
Also you should have no illusions
about yourself. If you have an illusion
you should leave Sahaja Yoga. But know
that you are chosen for this purpose by
God's Will, that is why you are here -
and you have to take up the responsibility
of understading this science which
is absolute, and work it out yourself,
for yourself as well as for others. You have
felt my love, but your love must be felt
because God is love. So your love must be
felt by others. Others must feel that you are
compassionate, loving, understanding. All
When I find, even now, Sahaja
yogis struggling about their wives,
their children, their houses, their jobs,
| start wondering what is
level now? Where are they? Where
their
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Issue: 1 & 2 - 2007
18
The Divine Cool Breeze
the time this Will of God is flowing through
you and you have to work it out in such a
manner that people should know that you
are a saint. That this power is flowing
through you.
all this was created first of all to make the
whole world very beautiful. All these innate
qualities were also placed within you. All
these duties were placed within you. We are
specially made human beings, that they
should become saintly people, that they
should have the sanctity innately. But it
happens in the country which developed that
our brain was bombarded by all kinds of
television, all kinds of things and we became
very, we can say, we became very
vulnerable. We started getting into the ideas
of others. Anybody who is dominating would
dominate us. It is not only Hitler who
dominated people. We also see, today, how
much you are dominated, if you really
detach yourself from this world. For
example fashions. Certain things that
come up, people cannot wear at any cost.
They cannot take to something that is
sensible; because it is a fashion. For
example nowadays there is the fashion to
have such a small skirt, you can't get a long
skirt anywhere. Everybody has to wear that
kind of skirts. Otherwise you are not "in", you
are not in the madhouse. Now this kind of
thing is bombarded on us morning till
evening. So first of all we become slave of
these entrepreneurs, whatever they give us
now, I was told, in Belgium, that you cannot
get anything fresh. You have to take
everything from the supermarket, which is
all tinned. Gradually what is happening to us
;we are getting absolutely artificial. The food
is artificial, the dress is artificial, our whole
attitude becomes artificial. Because we are
so much by advertisements, by all kinds of
outside infuences that we just get lost and
we forget what is our innate sense, which is
being dominated by all these modern things.
So adding up to the science
also there is a big progress in another
call the
There is a second thing that has
happened to you is that, not the illusion about
God or about yourself, second thing that has
happened is that you have understood the
integration, that in the world there is
complete integration which is existing
Normally if you see the children they
innate
understanding. They know. If you see,
normally, a good child would always like to
share his things; would like to love another
child. If another little child is there he would
like to protect that child. Naturally. It won't
think whether it has black hair or red hair or
blue hair, Naturally, innately a child feels that
way. Aiso if you take another child,
supposing, who is a little baby, they know
that one should be careful about the privacy
of the body. Children don't want to be made
nude before others. No child likes it innately.
So all these innate qualities are within us.
have
their
natural
own
Children don't like to steal, they don't
know what stealing is. They have no idea of
stealing. I have seen also children that if they
go to a place which is very beautiful, in
somebody's house, they will always try to
keep the beauty of that place. But if it is
already shabby they don't mind. So
innately all these qualities are there
I think the countries which are
supposed to be underdeveloped have so
many of these qualities within them, which
are innately built within us. Innocence is
innately built. So The Will of God. built up
first and foremost thing was innocence and
auspiciousness. The first thing he did was
to create Shri Ganesha, or I will say 'She'
because The Will of God is Adi Shakti - And
direction that you
'money'
can
became very important.
Once the money becomes important,
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-20.txt 
 - 2007
19
Issue: 1 & 2
The Divine Cool Breeze
great power - you are chosen for such a
great thing and on the other side you have
this kind of slavery. So try to understand that
your innate qualities were the best. But,
luckily, by the Kundalini awakening and
breaking of the Sahasrara, all these innate
qualities which were looked like lost, like your
innocence, like your creativity, like your
religion within, like your compassion and
love for the humanity, like your power of
judgement, wisdom, all these great qualities,
which we thought were lost, were nothing
but they were in a dormant state. They all
got awakened one by one. I don't have to tell
you, 'don't drink this, don't eat this, don't do
that'. You yourself realise that this is wrong.
You yourself know what is good for you. And
still if you want to do away you can go ahead.
But already there is a light within you to see
for yourself what is good and what is bad. It
has come because of this Sahasrara being
opened out to this new dimension of new
knowledge. This is not new. It is innately built
within you.
then all your entrepreneurs become
important; because they know how to make
money and befool you all the time. Today you
have this things, tommorrow you will have
that thing, today you change this and have
this. But the people who are innately built
they do not change. They have their dresses
of the same type, they do not change. On
the contrary they find it very difficult to get
out of their traditional achievements and they
don't want to change themselves. So for
Sahaja yogis it is important to see and watch
if they are getting this slavery from the
entrepreneurs in the modern times.
Then the thoughts - So many
books we read which give you thoughts
which are some mad ramblings, I must say,
of some mad man like Freud. How could
Freud inffuence the west? Because you
have lost your innate sense and you
accepted it. You accepted that, and that is
how Freud became your sort of Jesus
Christ. He became the most important thing.
Sex became the most important thing.
I mean it is so simple. With a little common
sense you can understand that at every
moment we are put into this kind of a
domination by these few domineering people
who have certain ideas that they put forward.
Anybody puts any idea, for example Sod or
Sartre or anyone. That idea starts
becoming "oh! He said it!" Who is he? What
is his life? Just see for yourself what sort of
a man he is. With a little common sense,
Now all those innate qualities are
manifesting and you are enjoying. So now
you have to get out of your petty ideas and
petty things. Because people are reporting
to me something very funny. I cannot believe
Sahaja yogis can do like that. They run away
with the plates that I have bought, they run
away with the plates! They throw things here
and there. All over the places they are throw-
ing things. How can you behave like that ?
I mean, this is so stupid and insipid. If you
do not have a proper discipline of life for
yourself you cannot carry The Will of God.
You cannot. But I am not going to tell you 'do
this or do that'. I respect your freedom. And
I just want that your own Kundalini should
awaken that wisdom in you, that
greatness in you, that glory in you
and you start understanding what are
your innate qualities. So it will purify.
Once you are purified completely, like
you see, if you have some gold which is not
but with your will that you have now Will of
God which has fashioned the whole world,
which has fashioned you, every cell within
you has been fashioned by God Almighty.
And what are you doing is to play into the
hands of these entrepreneurs ! They have
realised that these valnerable people are very
good for having as their disciples, I should
say, to make money, to befool them !
Now on this side you have such a
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-21.txt 
 2007
Issue: 1 & 2
20
The Divine Cool Breeze
pure, you put it in the fire. The gold is
separated. In the same way the fire of
Kundalini cleanses you completely, makes
you absolutely clean and you start seeing
your own glory, your own nature, your own
greatness. So the integration part comes to
you easily. You start integrating.
can read any book. What is so great ? Some,
would say, in Sahaja Yoga, people should
not become fundamentalists. Be very
careful. Because that is why you are born
like that. I mean, I dont know - It is not your
innate quality but the way you are made, that
way, you are fashioned yourself, that way,
that you start also making Sahaja Yoga,
sometimes, a fundamentalism !" Mother
said so !" Do not use me anywhere - "Mother
said so" is the way your want to dominate
others. You yourself say because now you
have the right, you have an individuality in
Sahaja Yoga. You can say what you have to
say yourself. But don't say "Mother has said
it." Because anybody can start like that
"Christ said it": a clegyman, a pope can
stand on his own platform and say that
"Christ has said it." We can just arbitrarily
use all these things. So, nobody has busi-
ness to use Me arbitrarily. Whatever you
have to say you say yourself but don't ever
quote Me as that "Mother said it", or in this
book such and such is written, so this is a
lie, or that is a lie. You are not bound by any
lie, by whatever I say. It is you who have to
stand up and see for yourself what you have
to say. Because you have to use, now, your
will and for that you have to develop yourself
to have a Pure Will, the Pure Desire of God
Almightly.
First of all we used to have Sahaja
Yogis, say some from England, some from
Spain, some from here. They would always
have different groups. They would never sit
together- you could make out, this is English
sitting here, they are sitting here, they are
sitting there, and they would form their
groups. But now it is not so. Now I find they
all are becoming integrated. The integration
of human beings is the most important thing
for Sahaja Yogis. That comes by
understanding not by intelligence, but by
innate understanding that all human beings
are made by God, by His Will, and we have
no right to despise anything.
The second integration that has
come within us is that all religions, all
religions are born on the same tree of
spiritual light. That all religions are to be
worshipeed. All incarnations, all prophets, ll
scriptures are to be worshipped. There are
defects, there are problems with those
scriptures which can be corrected. So,
gradually you start entering into the subtler
side of divinity to understand that all these
people have worked hard to create today's
atmosphere for Sahaja Yoga. And no religion
is to be despised, and no religion is to be
attacked, which is very, very, absolutely
unreal ; and we are working out a very
unreal theory which does not exit in the
Divine Plan. So this is how we will finish all
T.TLT
The integration not only outward but
inward. Like, first of all, whatever we did our
mind used to say one thing, our heart used
to say another thing, our brain used to say
another thing. Now what has happened is
that all these three things have become one.
So whatever your brain says is absolutely
acceptable to your heart, absolutely
acceptable to your attention. So you
yourself have now become integrated.
fundamentalism.
Fundamentalists are the ones who
Many people write "Mother want to
do it, but I can't do it"- Mother it is my desire
to do it but I cant do it"- Not now! Now you are
believe that this is written in this book, this is
written in this book and because we read
this book we are something better. Anybody
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Issue: 1 & 2 - 2007
21
The Divine Cool Breeze
I have got mental gains, I have got joy,
happiness". It is not the only thing. That
should not be the only criteria. But what you
should have is the understanding of your own
personality which has been specially
fashioned many, many lives for you to come
completely integrated and you can easily do
the whole thing, very welI, If you want to
examine yourself you should try to find out
"Am integrated or not ? Whatever I am
doing, am I doing it with full heart or not ?
with my full attention or not ?" I feel that you
do with full heart and full intelligence but full
attention is not there. Still the attention, which
is the first thing that was enlightened, is not
fully there. So the whole attention should be,
absolutely, there that "I have to do this thing
with full attention".
in this life to get your realisation, to do the
further work of Will of God. Every moment
when you see a miracle taking place, you
do realise that it is all done by
Paramchaitanaya.
what
So
is
Paramchaitanaya? It is the Will of Adi-Shakti.
And what is Adi Shakti ? It is The Will of God.
Otherwise the integration is not
So all whatever is done is all fixed
entities, we can call then, all these vibralions
are like, we can say, DNA tapes. They all
know how they have to fashion. See today it
is very sunny. Everybody is surprised how
can that be! So many things happen like this.
The other day we had havan. It was
absolutely cloudy. So the whole cosmos is
working for you. You are on the stage now
complete. Integration is Partial. So these
three things have to be completely
integrated. So the integration of all the
chakras comes in. Like whatever you do has
to be auspicious, whatever you do has to be
with full attention, whatever you do has to
be absolutely religious.
So like that all these centers
are being absolutely one, integrated and you have to see to it. But if you don't
power that you have. So the whole life
should be integrated. Now, say omebody's confidant as to what you are, how can you
husband is not of that level or somebody's
wife is not of that level. You should
not bother. You should just bother
about yourself. Don't expect anything
from anybody else. It is your duty which
is important. You have to fulfil your duty
and you have to work it out yourself.
Unless and until you understand that
it is your individual being which has
achieved it, I will say individual being which
has to realise, is the individual being that has
to become one integrated with the rest of
them. If you start putting things, now many
times, I have seen, if I say
something then you will start thinking that I
have said for somebody else. They never
take it for themselves. So we have not to
have faith in yourself, if you are not
help? How can you work out yourself and
work out all the problems of the world, which
are created only by human beings.
So we have to absolutely withdraw
all these dominations on us. First from
science. We can prove everything, that in
Sahaja Yoga whatever you say has been
proved. So we can throw science which is
just all the way, all the time in the flux,
changing all the time. Then the so called
religions that we have, so called religions.
Because people who have been catholics,
who have been Protestants, who have been
Hindus or Muslims and this or that, they all
have got that thing on their heads. And this
has to be thrown out. We have to become a
new personality. After realisation, as I said,
you become like lotuses from the mud. So
now you have become lotuses and the
see what are my gains. "I have got financial
gains, I have got physical gains,
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-23.txt 
 22
Issue: 1 & 2 - 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
understand in a proper sense, When I asked
"why do you throw things here and there",
they say "we are detached !" Wonderful way
! And what about your children ? You cling
on to them ! What about your own things?
You cling on to them - For a small little thing
they will bother my head and when it
belongs to Me or to Sahaja Yoga then they
will have a very nice time with it and throw it
away wherever they like to. I mean this kind
of responsibility ! How can you call them
Divine? How can they be saintly people ?
Saintly people not only are responsible for
themselves but for everyone.
lotuses have to throw away all this dead
mud, otherwise fragrance would not be
there. That one has to achieve is to throw
away all these shackles which are killing you,
which are of no use but a garden. And
beautiful lotuses, as you are, you have to
understand that the whole fashioning has
been done so carefully, with such
sweetness, such delicacy!
So first of all we must have respect
for ourselves, we must have affection and
love for others and we must have respect,
means we must have discipline. We have
to have the discipline. Because, if you
respect yourself you definitely discipline
yourself, and you will make it available.
Very slowly, smoothly, sweetly, with
great affection I have brought you to this
level. I did not ask you to go to the Himalays,
to stand on your heads or to donate all your
properties to me. Nothing of that kind. We
have managed it in a very, very beautifu!
manner. Now further when you have to go
futher, then you have to understand your
duties. You have duties towards your family,
towards your house, towards this, towards
that. No duty towards Sahaja Yoga!
Now as you can realise from My life
itself that I work very hard, travel a lot, much
more than anyone of you can do, because
I have the will that I have to bring this world
to that state of enjoyment, to that state of
happiness, to that state of Divinity, where
they realise what is their glory, what is the
glory of their Father. SoI work very hard and
I never, never think that something will go
wrong with Me or this will happen, that will
happen. I never have bothered you of my
family life, about my children, about anyone.
Whatever problems I had, I am dealing with
them myself. But here I get such big, big yourself a little more ! Now you are attached
letters from Sahaja Yogis, writting about their
daughters, sons, this thing, that thing !
Another thing is attachment to family. It is
the biggest burden on your head. And all the
time you are worried about your children, you
one worried about this, you are worried about
that. That is not your responsibility. Please
try to understand that. That is the
responsibility of God Almighty. You can't do everything, to the whole world. Nobody can
better than Him. Can you ? But when you try
to take the responsibility. He says "alright,
look after !' and the problems start
So when we were before Sahaja
Yoga, you were not attached to anyone, in a
sense you were only attached to yourself,
you were selfcentred; now you have videned
to your wife, to your children. But that is not
the thing. That is also selfish. Because they
are you children, you think. They are not your
children. They are the children of God. I hope
all of you are intelligent enough to understand
your responsibility and work it out. This is a
very important thing that has happened to
you that Sahasrara has opened. Now you
can prove the Existence of God. His Will,
challenge Sahaja Yoga. Those scientists
who will challenge can be exposed. Anybody,
whether you are a scientist, economist,
politician, anything, everything can be
Detachment is the word one should
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Issue: 1 & 2- 2007
23
The Divine Cool Breeze
should get out of Sahaja Yoga. Without the
collectivity you cannot grow. Without the
discipline of Sahaja Yoga you cannot grow.
It is better to have ten people of good quality
than to have thousand useless people. That
is what is The Will of God
explained in the light of Sahaja Yoga. And it
can be proved that there is only one politics
that is of God, one economics that is of God
and there is only one Religion that is of God,
is Vishwa Nirmala Dharma. It can be proved.
There is nothing to be afraid of or to
worry about. This all can be proved to the
scientists and to the other intellectuals and
to some few people, if they want to listen to
us. If they don't want to listen to us, forget it.
Because we are so powerful, why should
we worry about them. But if they are willing
to listen to us then it is better that we tell
them "now we have discovered this great
power" And if it works out, if this great power
works out, then only we can really fashion
the whole world in a new way.
So now, as you are today here, so
many people, I am really enamoured to see,
so many people are there, and we have
done so much of our growth and grown out
of all these nonsensical things that you were
following. But today we have to take the vow
that "I will now fashion my life according to
The Will of God. Absolutely And dedicate my
self to that". No family, no other
considerations, just forget it Nothing so
important. Everything can be looked after
by Will of God. So if you just try to follow The
Will of God, your children will be looked af-
ter, everything will be looked after. You
don't have to worry for anything. And that
works. Just try to understand that you have
problems because you don't want to give
these problems to God. You want to keep it
to yourselves. That is why you have
problems. If you decide that "no, I just want
to give these problems to The God's Will"
finished. Also there are some who want to
say that "we are not as capable. Mother, we
can't do it". Saying like this is also stupid.
You test yourself, see for yourself.
T have great hopes from you people.
But the seriousness with which you should
take Sahaja Yoga, for example, even
meditation people don't do. Simple thing like
meditation you people don't do. I don't
understand. How will you go without
meditation? Unless and until you become,
thoughtlessly aware, you cannot grow.. So
you have to, you have to, at least, meditate
morning, evening. There are many people
who are not even collective by temperament.
If they are staying in an Ashram they just
think that Ashram's life is not good. Such
people shoud really get out of Sahaja Yoga.
Because they have not yet understood what
Sahaja Yoga is. Without collectivity how will
you grow ? How you will assemble your
powers ? If nobody works in a Sangha, in a
group, combining together only you can be
strong. It is a fact that if you have one stick
you can break it, but if you put many sticks
together you cannot break it. There are still
people, I know, who are still not so much in
collectivity; shows how poor they are in their
understanding of their ownselves. And they
are telling me that "Mother we don't want to
stay in the Ashram now any more" - So they
So first of all one has to understand
why do we say such things. May be that you
are very money oriented, that we want to
have money for ourself or something like
that. Or some people are there to talk of
business also in Sahaja Yoga. There must
be something like money orientation or some
sort of a material attachment that they say
that we are not capable, we cannot change.
The second could be this Mamatava, as you
call it, the attachment. The attachment to
your family, children, this, that. Or this is
mine, this is mine, this is mine. This could
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Issue: I & 2 - 2007
24
The Divine Cool Breeze
people tell me, are not so important. Main
thing is that you should all ascend higher and
higher and compete with each other in
getting into higher situation.
be the second reason that you think that you
are not bold enough or you are not strong
enough to do Sahaja Yoga. Thirdly could be
that you are still playing with your old habits
and that you are enjoying your life without
Sahaja Yoga. There can be some reason
like that. So just try to locate" why I am
behaving like this? Why I am not getting into
the same beautiful path of my ascent as
everybody has got it?" If we introspect we
will find out. "There is something wrong with
me that I think l am not capable of doing this".
You are capable of doing everything. You just
try this and enjoy it.
As it is, I think, in such a short time
we have achieved a lot, no doubt. But still
we have to speed up and work it out. I am
sure that this new science, we can say, that
which is the absolute science, will, one day,
outshadow the other sciences and tell
people that this is what it is. It is in your
hands, you work it out.
So today is the day we celebrate by
which we have opened absolutely a new
dimension, Absolutely a venue of a great
Divinity of the Truth of Divine. And this is
something so great that we can really finish
all the illusions they have about themselves,
about their age. We can manage that. That
power you all have.
So most important thing now
remains is that you should become a proper,
strong, compassionate vehicle of God's Will.
Then what is most important of course,
I agree that you do my Pooja because that
helps you a lot, no doubt. But other things
are not there, so many other things, you
May God bless you!
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-26.txt 
 ASATO MA SAT GAMAYA
TAMSOMA JYOTIR GAMAYA
MRITYORMA AMRITAM GAMAYA
Yogis experience, very first mainfestation of
the Self as perception of truth, which there
after becomes a part of their systems, and
leads them to further revelations.
It has become natural for human
attention to go after different temptations and
in that pursuit ignore their inborn desire to
unite with the Supreme. Even in ancient days
people in general had this tendency, but the
lamp of inborn desire was burning bright in
many great souls who developed it further
and also tried to boost up the flickering flame
in others. Prayer being discussed was
perhaps an expression to their yearning for
liberation,
'Tamaso ma jyotir gamaya'
(Lead me from darkness to light)
"Tamasa' is darkness and jyoti is
light or flame. Jyoti dispels darkness. 'Jyoti
represents auspiciousness and burns out
all badhas. In India the people learn to offer
the prayers to jyoti' in their childhood itself;
for example :-
"Asato ma sat gamaya'
The 'Sat' is the existence. The 'Sat'
is also the truth. Unchangeable,
indestructible and imperishable existence
alone is the truth and vice versa. As against
that, anything transient, mortal, which is
degenerated with a passage of time is the
'asat' unreal and non-existent.
"Shubham karoti kalyanam arogyam
dhana sampada
Shatrubuddhi vinashaya deep-jyoti
namostute
(Obeisance to the flame (lamp)
that gives auspiciousness, welfare, health
and wealth and destroys evil designs and
enemity of the enemies).
According to a story from an
Upanishad, a disciple asked his guru "Ko
aham"? (Who am I ?) The guru replied "Tat
twam asi" (You are that). When the disciple
asked what 'that' was he was told to find out.
Then he starts his enquiry. 'Am I this body ?
and on reflecting on it, he realises that he
cannot be the body, but something else. He
also understands that mind is sometimes
sorry, sometimes happy, attention is
unsteady, 'buddhi' (intellect) is busy only in
analysing. Following the process of
negation, he concludes that he must be that
which remains unaffected despite so many
changes and which is foundational for all the
functions. His guru then tells him that he is
immortal Spirit and he should meditate and
become One with the Spirit.
Jyoti' is also the Brahman. Its puja
is performed, before that of deity, describing
it as "Brahmarupa" and 'avyaya' (aa) (the
inexhaustible).
Shri Mataji has told us that the Atma
is in the form of flame (jyoti swarup) which
grows with rising of Kundalini and enlightens
the inner being, With that, the darkness of
attachment and temptations and associated
emotions start receding. The light of
Brahman' shines in our awareness and
becomes a part of our inner beings.
"Tamas' is ignorance and Jyoti i.e.
light is true knowledge. True knowledge is
that "the Atma' alone is changeless,
formless, attributeless, imperishable and
undecaying and I'is 'Atma' and not the body.
Ignorance is misidentification of I' with the
body which generates attachment to unreal.
"Sat' is the 'Atman'. The first prayer
says "Lead me from non-existent unreal to
the existence which alone is the truth." By
the grace and love of Shri Mataji, Sahaja
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-27.txt 
 - 2007
Issue: 1 & 2
26
The Divine Cool Breeze
itself with the Spirit. Chaitanya Lahari (the
vibrations) coming from the Lotus Feet of
Adi Shakti is the Amruta. Shri Adi
Shankaracharya tells in the tenth verse of
Saundarya Lahari that drenching the
universe with nectar dripping from Her Lotus
Feet, Adi-shakti descends to Her abode and
turning Herself in serpentine coils, rests in
the lotus-like fine hole. Her 106th name in
Lalita Sahasranama is Sudhasara
bhivarshini: She rains the quintessence of
The light comes to Sahaja Yogis with the
Self-realization.
"Mrityorma amritam gamaya'
(Lead me from death to eternity)
Mrityu is death. Amrita is immortality.
All gross, including the physical, mental and
vital beings is transient. Body is the medium
for expression and fulfilment of desires, for
which 'I' consciousness identifies itself with
the body. Every experience of gross
pleasures strengthens the attachment and
that causes the fear of death. Complete
unison with the Self is deathlessness
because that is the stage of liberation from
the desires associated with subtle being
from previous lives, as also from man made
bondages with the gross.
ambrosial nectar.
Thus, first it is Self-realization,
followed by the revelation of the truth, in the
light of nectarine vibrations. New dimensions
of the truth are unfolded by the Self in the
depth of meditation. Even flow of cool
vibrations indicates that, what is perceived
is the truth. Facts, that it is the Self that
manifests itself as vibrations and that the
vibrations are emanating from the lotus feet
of Shri Mataji, show that She is the Supreme
Self. The Spirit has vouchsafed it. Have we
attained that depth of meditations at which
the truth will be perceived ?
Amruta is also an epithet of God
Almighty.
The 'Amruta' is the ambrosial nectar,
drinking which, according to a scriptural idea,
makes one immortal. In reality, the nectar
must be that which guides l' to liberate itself
from bondages of past karmas and unite
(Nirmala Yoga)
1983
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-28.txt 
 AGYA CHAKRA
Pravachan Of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
(Delhi 3.2.1983)
Today we are going to understand
the centre of Agya. Agya Chakra, which is
placed on the crossing of the 'optic chaisma."
The nerves that supply the eyes go
backwards in the opposite direction and
wherever they cross, this subtle centre is
situated. It has a continuous connection with
on to each other and cross each other. And
there is no gap in between for the Kundalini
to pass through. This superego and ego go
back, go down-ward and come to the
Vishuddhi Chakra and circle round it and go
in the same direction. So you find that they
come upto this place, they start from this
place, go upto the Agya Chakra and then they
cross-over. But here they are in the same
direction as they went, at Agya here they
cross-over. So when you have a problem
on the left hand side, you get the affects of
that on the right hand side. But right hand
starts from here upto this side and the left
hand starts from here. But the left hand
the other centres through the 'medulla
oblongata.' This centre has got two petals.
And this subtle centre on one side acts
through the eyes and at the back of the head,
where you have some protrusion. This is the
physical side of this centre is. Now the people
who talk of the third eye, this is the third eye
So that we have two eyes with which we
see and there is a third eye which is a subtler
eye through which we can see. If you see
this eye, that nieans you are away from it.
For example, if you can see your eyes that
means you are seeing your reflection, not
the reality. If you see anything that means
you are looking at it. So those people who
say they see an eye-for example people who
take LSD and all such things, they start
seeing another eye. They just see this eye
and they think their third eye has opened.
Actually you are very much away from the
eye, that is why you can see it. You go to a
supraconscious level on the right side and
on the left side to the subconscious level,
you can see the eye. But in Sahaja Yoga you
have to see 'through' that eye. Like a window,
you can look at the window, but if you see
through the window you cannot look at the
window. So this illusion that people have that
we can see third eye and that is why our
Kundalini is awakened, they are sadly
mistaken.
actually acts on the right hand side.
So this third eye is to be penetrated
through or we have to enter into the third eye,
through Kundalini awakening. But it is such
a closed passage which is the door to the
limbic area, which is the kingdom of God,
that anybody who tries to push their attention
through this closed door, either goes to the
left or to the right. And this is the beginning
of the trouble of the people when they donot
understand that whatever is unknown is not
God, is not Divine. So, when they move on
the right side, they go to the supraconscious
area. And they start seeing hallucinations.
Actually these are not hallucinations but
actual things, because they exist on the right
hand side. So they start seeing things of the
right hand side. They may see colours and
the formation of colours, and they may see
also people who are dead, who have been
very egoistical. They can see Gandharvas
and Kinnaras, because they go to the
'Gandharvalok', to the right side, and start
seeing those things in the unknown
awareness of supraconsciousness. But that
movement is very dangerous. Because if
anybody catches you there, then you get an
This is a very narrow passage,
through which attention cannot pass
normally, it is impossible thing. It is a narrow
passage, where, the ego and superego fit
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-29.txt 
 - 2007
28
Issue: I & 2
The Divine Cool Breeze
exhausted and such a person becomes
actually a mental wreck. So many people
who said, we are raising your Kundalini by
this method or that method, wreck the life of
the Sadhakas. Ultimately they are left high
and dry without achieving anything Nobody
knows what to achieve and what to receive.
added personality sitting on your head, and
you get possessed by ego and you become
on your own and you actually become
malignant. Hitler is one of the examples of
that. He learnt this from the Tibetan
lamas-how to go to the supraconscious?
And when he learnt it from them, he used it
and made many people supraconscious,
ego-oriented. You must have heard about the
lama system, which was another big
problem. They knew the future part, who is
going to be the next lama. Where you will
find him ? Where you will get him ? All the
future things they knew and peopie thought
this was Divine ! To know future is not Divine.
It is an area which we should never go to.
Because it is an imbalance. We are human
beings and we have to know the 'present'
and 'not the future'. Once you go through
the present stage then you reach a height
from where you can see the past, the
present and the future. Supposing on the
Mother earth, if you have a means of going
higher and hang yourself there, then you can
see whatever has passed through, and you
can also see what is going to come; and
wherever you are, you are in the present. In
the same way, when a person ascends in
reality, in the present, he goes at this point
in the superconsciousness from where he
sees the supraconscious right side and also
he can see the subconscious; but he has
no interest. He wants to rise in the present.
And, this is what actually the Kundalini
awakening is.
So they are misled.
But logically one must understand,
that at least your health should be all right.
Mentally you should be better off. Your
temperament has to improve; minimum of
minimum, But if you are losing all your money
to the Guru, you are losing all your health for
these non-sensical experiences, and you
have no control over yourself, then you must
know that this is not in anyway the reality.
Reality is where you are in control. If you are
in the control of something else, then you
are a lost case. For example, some people
start jumping and they say 'Mother I start
jumping automatically.' That is serious affair.
That means you have no control over
yourself. You are just jumping because
somebody is making you jump. 'You'are not
jumping : that means your own 'Chetana'
your own attention, your own awareness is
under the control of somebody else; you
cannot control yourself. So all these
experience in which people think, they are
flying in the air or they are having
extra-terrestial movements and people are
going in the air and seeing things-all these
are very dangerous things. Such
a person may ultimately become
a lunatic. Absolutely. Because he loses
control
So all those people who say that
Kundalini, the awakening of the Kundalini, it
is very difficult and it is harmful, are the
people who have no right to awaken the
Kundalini. So when they try to play tricks,
actually their sympathetic nervous system
goes into great agitation. And this
sympathetic system on the left and right side
starts extracting more energy from the
central path. So, much so, that it gets
himself.
complete
over
These are called as parapsychological
experiments, in America, to give
it a big name 'parapsychology.' Of course,
it is a para because it is beyond the
psyche of a persons, but is very dangerous
You are not supposed to get into
these muddles where the spirits capture you
and you start behaving in a manner that you
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-30.txt 
 - 2007
Issue: I & 2
29
The Divine Cool Breeze
cannot explain. Once, I think about five six
years back or may be more, no, about 12
yrs. back, agroup of Americans came to see
Me and they told Me that 'you must teach us
how to fly in the air.' I said Why? Aren't you
flying?'. They said, "No we want to have that
space travel". I said why ? "Because
Russians are doing experiments in
para-psychology and we want to do the
same'. I said they will all get possessed and
they will finish off. I do not want to do the
same thing, as Russians are doing. If they
come to me I will tell them the same thing.
So they said, 'No, no we must learn.' I said if
I tell you that you become slaves of those
spirits and of your own and you start shaking
your body all the time. Despite that they said
"yes, we must do it'. And when they told me
that because Russians are doing it, we want
to do it, I said who sent you here ? So they
told me the name of a gentleman, who is a
journalist in Bombay. I said this fellow used
to 'suffer'from this trouble. He used to leave
his body, go into another world, see this and
see that, who suffered so much and he was
losing complete control over himself, and I
"cured' him. So does he think I can put back
the disease in you? I cured him of this
disease and why do you want to get into this
disease? But they were quite sure that they
wanted it and I discovered later on they are
having parapsychological business in
America which is an 'extremely' dangerous
thing.
to the subconscious area they start seeing
forms and things in such a mnanner that they
think, they have reached heavens, But they
are seeing past of evolution, past of
everything. So this supraconscious
business, is very dangerous, no doubt, but
also the subconscious is very dangerous.
Because all incurable diseases like cancer,
malaitis, all that come from the movement
of the attention to the left side. So one should
be very careful before going to any one of
these tanktrikas. Or to these people who are
trying to control you or trying to tell you
something about the future or the past.
There is no need to know about the
future or the past. What is the need ? How
does it help? Actually if I start telling you how
I came all the way from there and how I was
held by the jam or anything, will you be
interested? How do you get interested in your
past glory or past life, which was of no value
at all, today ? But it is a human weakness
that he wants to add to his personality
something that is extremely artificial,
non-existent, and of no value. And then he
says that I did this, I did this, I happened to
do this, I never got it.
In India people normally gc more to
the left side with this Agya. Because they,
say, worship God. Now if they have to
worship God, they have no connection with
God. See it I had no connection to
microphone, could not speak to you. So
without connection to God, they start
worshipping God. Then they will sing of kinds
of Aartis, fasting, this, torturing their own
lives. This is left sided people. And singing
the praise, all these things. Going to the
extremes, 24 hours they are like that. So
somebody sucks them into the left side. If
they go on saying, Rama Rama
like that. You might say
that Valmiki was told to say. But who
told him? It was Narada. Narada is an
So this is the movement not
crossing the Agya but moving, floating on the
left or the right, whether you go to
subconscious or to the supraconscious.
Effects may be different but is the same thing
to Sahaja Yoga. The people who go to the
subconscious area may start seeing me
also in different forms, like the people who
take LSD they cannot see me, they just see
lights coming out of me. And those who go
Rama..
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-31.txt 
 - 2007
Issue: I & 2
30
The Divine Cool Breeze
find explanation of all these incarnations who
have come on this earth. So to understand
Jesus Christ, you must read Devi Bhagvat.
But if you say this to Christians, they would
not like to listen to you. Because for them,
Bible is the last word. How can it be?
Because Christ's life is depicted there only
for four years. And He must have reference
in other books also; and we have to open
our eyes to those books and see for
ourselves what is the truth. Because if we
want to have an organised religion, you have
to say 'this is the thing, there is nothing else.
Because if there is anything else, then your
organisation falls apart. But it is not true.
incarnation, Narada. You are not Narada. So
how can you tell yourself or anybody can tell
you, take this name? You take any name,
you cannot go to God. So where do you go?
You go somewhere. There may be a servant
called Rama, he might capture you. And
people start behaving in such a funny
manner that they look like mad, insipid
people.
Same thing about supraconscious.
People who are very ambitious, they too can
get into such a mad condition where they
do not think of the collectivity of the whole,
but they just start thinking about themselves.
And when such a situation comes in, it is
impossible to convince them that they are
wrong till they reach their waterloo and finish
off.
Because Christ has been described
"very clearly' in Devi Bhagvat. And we can
prove it in the Kundalini, that when the
Kundalini rises and stops here, at the Agya,
here, you have to say Lord's prayer,
otherwise, it would not open. To awaken
Jesus Christ, if you do not awaken Him, it
would not open. You have to take His name
otherwise it would not open, proves it was
Christ who was ruling. Or even if you take
the name of Mahavishnu, it opens. So
Mahavishnu and Jesus Christ are the same.
So this Agya Chakra is a gate, is the
door of heaven, and everyone has to pass
through it. Now on this chakra resides the
great incarnation of our Lord, Jesus Christ.
In our Indian Shastras, he is called as
Mahavishnu, the son of Radha ji. And His
essences are made of eleven Rudras,
means eleven destroying powers. But the
governing essence the main essence, is that
of Shri Ganesha, means innocence. So he
is the embodiment of innocence. Innocence
means complete purity. And His body was
not made out of Mother Earth, in the sense
that He never had a body that was
perishable, It is Aumkara. So when He died,
He ascended. That is the fact, He ascended.
And because He was a person made of
Aumkara. Now as He is the son of Radhaji,
you can see the relationship between Him
and the relationship between other dieties
very easily. About Mahavishnu, it is written
in the Devi Bhagvat.
So you must see the 'proof' of it. And just
because you want to believe that Christ is
your own and discard everybody else as
heathens, you are sadly mistaken. Absolutely
you are sadly mistaken.
In every scripture people have
entered from the back door. 'Every'
scripture. I told you about Gita, what wrong
things they have written about the food which
is scientifically not true. To say that
Tamogunis are the people who eat meat, is
not true, because they eat protein and they
have to be Rajogunis, automatically. So how
they have tried to change it, just to suit their
thing at that part. But in the beginning they
could not, because they said, Krishna said
that "You kill these people. I have already
But who reads Devi Bhagvat?
Nobody has time to read these books. Mostly
what trash things they read, there you cannot
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-32.txt 
 - 2007
31
The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: I & 2
you can raise the Kundalini you will be
amazed to see that all these dieties are
killed them. Whom are you killing? So just
to bring this, you see, Brahmanic stamp, they
did this.
placed on various Chakras and they are to
be raised. Now sometimes you see, I am
blamed in India that I am preaching about
Christ, so l am spreading Christianity, and if
I go to England, they say I am preaching
about Krishna, so l am spreading Hinduism.
Now if I have to tell you that Radha ji has
created Christ and if you see Christ, his
fingers are like this." Try to understand. Two
fingers like this. One of Krishna and one of
Vishnu. And he says 'the Father'And who is
the Father of Christ, then? Is Shri Vishnu:
Shri Krishna. Because in Mahavishnu's
In the Bible the mistake came when
Saint Paul, who never knew Christ-he had
nothing to do with Christ-just entered into the
Bible. I don't know, why he is there! He was
not a realised soul. He was just
supraconscious Roman soldier. Roman,
very bad soldier, who used to kill so many
Christians. And suddenly they entered this
Mr. Sain Paul into it and he is accepted in
the Bible all over the world. But you read him
and you will know he is not a realised soul at
all. He talks in a supraconscious way. He is
an organising machine and he is good for
nothing. There he describes, in the acts you
see, which he has written-many people may
not be knowing that acts has been written
by Mr. Paul himself-and this Mr. Paul tries to
describe the disciples of Christ as
supraconscious bhoots, absolutely like
supraconscious people and they behaved
in such a funny manner that everybody
started feeling that they are mad. Can you
imagine, Christ's disciples behaving like
that! But you have to gulp it down and devour
everything if you are a Christian. Because it
is in the Bible. And you start questioning if
you are a born-realised person, that what is
this non-sense, who is this Mr. Paul? From
where does he come in? Because he does
description, it is, Shri Krishna Himself
worshipped His son and said "you will be
the support of the Universe, and whosoever
will ever worship me, the fruits of that will go
to you," and He placed Him even higher than
Himself. And that you can see that above
the Vishuddhi Chakra, stands Mahavishnu.
And He is the gate through which everybody
has to pass. He 'actually' blessed Him
special and He said "you will be the Support
of the Universe." See now you have known
that Shri Ganesha stays at Mooladhara
Chakra. Moola dhara Chakra means the
support of the Moola, support of the roots.
But Christ is placed at the support of the fruit.
So the same thing evolves at that point, that
you become aware of Christ only when your
Agya Chakra opens.
not talk like Christ.
Now this Agya Chakra can be opened
when the Kundalini goes up and opens it up.
But supposing if you are too much ego
oriented, then you have turned it so tight say,
the two ropes have turned it so tight that
nothing can pass through. Or if you are too
much of a superego and a frightened
personality and dominated one, then also it
is twisted so badly that Agya Chakra cannot
open up. So what we have to do, is to give a
balance through the Agya Chakra by
So the time has come for all of us to
understand that all religions are one. They
are part and parcel of one life stream and
that all incarnations are supporting each
other, nourishing each other and caring for
each other. There is 'complete' concord
between them. There is 'no way', you will
see they will oppose each other, 'never'. So
this point is to be proved also and that can
be only proved 'if you know how to raise the
Kundalini. If you are a realised soul and if
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Issue: I & 2
32
-2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
moving left to the right or right to the left
according to the need, which you will
understand in the technique of Sahaja
Yoga-after realisation, not now. Now when
the balance is established then the Chakras,
the Agya Chakra becomes little also better
off, because there is no twist on it. And then
only, when the Kundalini rises, She can push
through. If you are normal person, if you are
not an ego and superego type, then then
there is no problem to raise your Kundalini
through your Agya. But say in Delhi, sincel
have come, I have been working on the Agya
morning till evening. People are 'extremely
ego oriented, They all think that they are the
administrators of the whole World. Delhi is
full of this Agya. Such proud and such vain
people are here that they always think that
they are ruling the whole World. They are
the people who are the administrators and
the great people belonging to politics, this
that. All ego oriented. And such people
cannot be given realisation easily; first their
ego has to be brought down and they have
to accept God as the Supreme Being, as
the Lord, as the Real King of the World. Then
only it works out. Now when some people
also try to spoil this Agya like moving the
eyes, the roving eyes. Christ-imagine
l-specially mentioned that "They say thou
shall not commit adultery; I say thou shall
not have adulterous eyes" Just imagine! He
talked of the eyes. Because He is controlling
the eyes at that point. But in the West, it is
hard to find any man or a woman who does
not have adulterous eyes, those who are the
followers of Christ have such horrible eyes
that you don't know what they are doing, they
will go mad. They cannot keep their eyes
straight. All the times their eyes turning, this
side that side, this side, that side. They have
lusty eyes or they are looking at things or
something else, but it is all joyless, there is
not joy! They are just looking at people for
no fun at all.
So Christ has said : "Thou shall not
have adulterous eyes."But this was all said
as an order by Christ. Of course no body
obeyed it. On the contrary like I told you the
Muslims were, it was said not to drink, they
started having poems written by Umar
Khayaam to challenge Mohammad Sahib.
But among Christians they started
challenging Christ, all anti-Christ activities,
by which innocence of the poeple should be
destroyed, by which their eyes would be de-
stroyed and all the purity of mind will be
destroyed.
And the another extreme started,
which was 'not at all' preached by Christ-l
don't know how it came into Christian
religion -is a thing called nunnery and making
people Brahamacharinis and Brahmacharis.
You cannot make anyone Brahmichari or
Brahmicharini. It is a state-avastha, where
a person has to rise, like Yogeshwara, like
Shri Krishna. Despite all that he was a
Brahmachari. It is a state of mind where you
are not involved. It is a different thing, that
you just load somebody with an idea that you
should become, absolutely a Brahmachari
or a Brahmacharini or you should lead a
celibate life, forcing them. Christ never said
so. He could not become a married man
because He was here on this earth to do
one great job, is to make this ascent through
this Agya Chakra,' that is why He was
crucified. By doing this he was to create a
space in the Agya Chakra and that is what
He did, at the command of His Father and
His Mother. And He did it. So the people who
are doing all this non-sense of celibacy-which
is not. Which is not, because from the mind
there is no celibacy. Celibacy must come
from within, the purity must come from within.
And that has created problem in Catholicism
and also they started another big stuff like
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-34.txt 
 - 2007
Issue: I & 2
33
The Divine Cool Breeze:
became Christians. But actually, they should
have been told that Mahavishnu is born. If
going and confessing to the priest. Now this
is also another funny thing is to go to a priest
Priest is never a realised soul I have seen it.
Because if he is a realised soul he will run
away from priesthood. So they would go and
confess it to the priest and the poor priest
would become mad and the confessor
would have a left-Vishuddhi, feeling the guilt.
That was the wrong side absolutely of God.
To feel guilty is not necessary.
they had read anything of the Devi Bhagvat
and had told that Mahavishnu is born, then
people would have given up this idea that
you have to suffer for your Karmas. So
Indians are still thinking that we have to still
suffer for our Karmas, we should fast, we
should walk and we should hang ourselves
by the nearest tree all the time. This is not
needed. What you have to do, is to just wait
for the moment when the Agya Chakra will
be opened. Keep in the centre. As Buddha
has said keep in the centre. And then when
the Kundalini rises all this whatever is
accumulated, will be sucked in and you can
get your Moksha. This was the simple thing
to be done. Instead of that we Indians believe
Then, after Christ there were people
who would not accept Christ, like Jews. So
they said that we will not accept Christ and
'we must suffer because we must suffer for
God.' Even now Christians believe non-
sensically that we should suffer. Now, I would
say Indians also believe that we have to
suffer, but they also know that Mahavishnu
is going to come and when he comes, He
will have power to suck our Karmas and we
don't have to suffer. Actually that is what
happens when Christ is awakened within
you, He sucks your Karmas, he sucks your
ego and super ego. He sucks your Karmas,
your papas, (sins) your conditioning and that
is how you become free. This is a very
important point which people must know,
that, that was the great job He did: was
to establish Himself at the Agya Chakra
to suck these two things. And when He
sucks these two, when He sucks these,
then we are above our Karmas, our sins
and our papas. So we don't have to worry
about sins, papas and all that. But these
people we should say, those who came to
this earth, as missionaries, who came down
to India to preach Christianity, had no idea
of Mahavishnu nor they had any idea of
Christ. They came with a gun in one
hand and Bible in the other. And we
stupid Indians also did not know any
value of our heritage, and we just
said 'alright, let us become Christians so
that they give us good jobs.' And that is
how all the job oriented, all sorts of people
we must suffer, we must go into fast.
Now in Sahaja Yoga you are not
allowed to fast in the name of God. You may
fast otherwise because if you have no
money you can fast, you have to fast in any
case. But not in the name of God or your
Karmas. Then secondly, the Jews refused
to accept Christ, as a result the Jews said
that: we are not going to accept Christ, we
have to suffer. So, alright, they suffered and
suffered and suffered. So they got Mr. Hitler
to put them right; their sufferings. After
getting Mr. Hitler, now they are becoming
Hitlers. So you can imagine how wrong ideas
can take you to such a limit, that as a result
of this thing, that we have to suffer; that Hitier
was born to support their wishes that they
must suffer.
Nobody has to suffer any more now.
You have to work-out your Kundalini
awakening. And you have to establish
yourself very well in Sahaja Yoga. All your
sufferings are going to be taken away. One
of the names of the Devi is Papa Vimochini.
She removes all your papas. "Sankat
Vimochan' we call it 'Shri Ganesha'. He is
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-35.txt 
 - 2007
34
Issue: I & 2
The Divine Cool Breeze
attention has to be clean. If your attention is
soiled then your Agya Chakra will not be
alright. Then you will have hallucinations, you
will have wrong ideas and you will think of
wrong things. So if you really want to find
the meaning of your being, if you really want
awakening of the Kundalini, then know that
whatever you have known so far about God
or everything has to be revised, has to be
again seen for yourself, what it is like. Unless
and until you pass through this you 'cannot'
be baptised.
the One who removes all the hurdles of life.
And you really, when blessed, you can see
that God has so many ways of blessing the
people. It is miraculous. Absolutely it is a
mirarcle. So many people who are in Sahaja
Yoga now, say that miracle has lost its
meaning in Sahaja Yoga. It is a fact.
So, one has to understand that God
exists. Not only He exists. He acts. He
loves, and that we are supposed to know
Him. Whatever you may have done,
wherever may be the mistakes, you have
to become One with God. Because He is
your loving Father. He is the Father who is
the Ocean of love. And only thing you have
to do, is to just ask for it and when the
Kundalini rises you become One with Him
and He wants to bestow all His Kingdom, all
His powers upon His children, whom He has
created. So all these funny ideas about
religion that you have to suffer, that you must
do penance, that you should become
Brahmacharis-all these absurd ideas,
should be given up. You have to be
absolutely a normal happy person. God has
done so much for you He has created so
much for you. But even then if you want to
be miserable, what can one do?
The people who talk of Baptism, like
John the Baptist, he was really a realised
soul and when he raised the Kundalini and
put the water on the head, he really gave
them realisation. That is 'baptism'. Christian
means a baptised person, but not any Dick,
Tom and Harry can put his hand on your head
and say you are realised. On the contrary
William Blake says, 'the priest cursed on my
head.' It is true. For a realised soul, if you
put the hand of a priest who is not a realised
soul and who is not properly entitled to do it,
children get into problems. We have seen
many children who are realised souls, who
got into problems-their eyes became squinty,
they become funny, their brains went off and
we have to cure them. So it is a very
dangerous thing to make everyone put their
hands on this pulsating fontanelle bone area
which we call as Taloo. Taloo is the
Brahmarandhra, and is the 'most' important
part of a human being, so everybody should
by 'very' careful before they touch this. You
have to be a realised soul and you have to
know how to do it, means you have to be a
Sahaja Yogi. So for your children when they
are born you have to be careful. If they are
realised souls more so. Because if they are
not realised souls, then their reaction is not
so violent. But if they are realised souls, they
scream and shout and they cannot bear it.
As far as Mother is concerned if you
want to punish your Mother sometimes, or
say, you want to just make her unhappy, then
you say: .otherwise I will not eat my food'.
So fasting is not allowed in Sahaja Yoga. But
if you have to fast for food, other things, it is
all right. But otherwise there is no need to
fast except for one or two days, you have to
fast.
And thus we understand that Agya
Chakra which is the most important door
through which 'everybody' has to pass,
everybody has to pass, and that has to be
properly worshipped and kept clean. For that
you must keep your attention very clean. Your
So one must understand, though it
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-36.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 1 & 2 - 2007
35
it. Put a light before the photograph. Light is
the way you cure your Agnya Chakra.
Always. Light or the sun. Because Christ
resides in the sun. So what you do, is to put
a light in front Take another light behind and
give an Aarti to your Agnya Chakra at the
back It is resided by Maha Ganapati and
Maha Bhairava. So you just give it a Aarti
and Agya Chakra will open. But how do you
open this? Very simple thing is that, any
thought comes to you, you should say 'I for-
give' This is the greatest weapon Christ has
given us. You just say :1 forgive, I forgive'.
and you can overcome your ego. This is
the mantra for this Chakra in the front, where
looks like very traditional or anything like that,
one must see that those things which are
harmful to human beings must be given up.
The time has come for all of us to give up
those things which are not good for our
health, which are not good for our spiritual
being. The time has come. If you do not
accept this, then only thing I can say as a
Mother that 'I am concerned about you'. But
it is much more than that. It is a dangerous
time you are in.
And Agya Chakra, if it is spoilt at the
back, that means you are definitely
possessed. At the back if the Agnya Chakra
is caught then one develops blindness, with
the eyes open. Now, in India it is very
common. The reason is we have very funny
ideas about the Devi or the God coming into
the body of human beings. How can that be?
It is again the same thing, supraconscious
business. Amaid servant who is all the time
using bad words, who has no sense of
cleanliness, who has no sense of holiness,
suddenly becomes agitated, "Ho Ho Ho....
she goes on. And all the women, in
Maharashtra it is very common, they wili go
and fall at her feet. The Devi has come, the
Devi has come' and now they fall at her feet.
And then ultimately they are caught up.
Because they get the possession by a spirit.
We had one very bad case recently where
a man, he came to me and he told me that
he cannot help, he has to touch the feet of
his sister-in-law because she is a Devi. I
said why? Because she gets into this
agitation.' So I told that if you think that she
is a Devi and if you want to touch her feet
you don't come to me again. But he
became blind, 'absolutely' blind! And
when he became 'absolutely' blind then
he came to me and then we had to put the
Agya Chakra alright.
Now how do you do it in Sahaja Yoga.
As you have the photogaraph you may use
you just say 'I forgive, I forgive and you will
find your Agya Chakra will open out and you
will find your ego will go away. Forgivness is
one of the 'biggest' weapons human beings
have got. But they are so stupid if I tell them
forgive. Now what is there not to forgive.
I say what is so difficult ? What are yo doing?
Are you doing some thing when you are
saying, I am forgiving. Do you do something?
Nothing. On the contrary when you do not
forgive, then what is happening is, the person
whom you do not forgive, is actually torturing
you, while you are not torturing that person.
So this is the mantra of the Agya Chakra in
front, and at the back, as I told you, you have
to move the light. Now somebody will, you
see, one day they will do, two days they
will do -that is not how the Sahaja yoga
is to be worked out. You have to
really go all out to do it, and I have seen
people who had eyes which were
all bent like this, they coOuld never raise
their eyes, are now, have open eyes,
proper eyes with this working. It is 'very
simple to be done.
more thing
that happens to our eyes. When the
Swadishthana Chakra goes out of order. It
is represented here at the back, which is
There is one
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-37.txt 
 Issue: I & 2 - 2007
36
The Divine Cool Breeze
of the Guru Principle. He was a Muslim. But
all His disciples are Hindus. They are not
Muslims. Muslims don't accept him even as
God. Not only that, but there is one place
called Hazimallang, where a Saint died who
was a Muslim. But he told that only the
Brahmins, means the realised souls, must
worship me.' And so they had to appoint
some Brahmin-which they did not
understand-the word 'Brahmin'. They are
Hindus who are worshipping a Muslim peer.
So the idea, that once you become the peer,
once you become a realised soul, then he
has no religion. He is beyond religion, He
'becomes' the religion. Then there is no
binding for him, because a drop has gone to
the ocean. Now he has become the ocean.
So for the ocean, there is no limitation. And
because he has crossed his limitations, he
is 'above' all these things. And that is what
we believe in. That if he is a peer, if he is a
realised soul, then he is a realised soul.
Once I went to a small village, called Mian
Ki Takdi. As soon as I stepped into the
village. I felt 'tremendous' vibrations. AndI
said Who was the great saint who lived
here? So they said there was one muslim
peer. I said 'Whatever it is, he was a Saint'.
And when I was sitting and giving lecture,
you will see the photographs, the lights came
on my head seven times. And the seventh
time then I put my hand like this. But nobody
saw it, only I knew. And I knew that it was
there, I was laughing with it. And then the
people, you see, when they took the
photographs, they could picture it.
'around' this back Agya. So When you have
diabetes or anything like that, people start
becoming blind. Because this Swadisthana
Chakra which is around, goes on pressing
it and that is how, that part which is
surrounding this centre, oppresses and
augments that centre, so that the eyes
cannot see; there is no light. There is
darkness and people have eyes open. You
have seen many diabetic people get this
blindness. So first of all cure your diabetes
through curing your swadisthana. And also
you can use ice around your Swadisthana
at the back. But first of all if you improve
your Swadishthana you will feel very much
better. So the treatment of the front side is
with the light. And the treatment of the brack
is with the water. But the best is also to use
the light or the water whichever way you like.
Because if it is Swadishthana you have to
use the water but if it is 'just' the possesion,
then you have to use-without diabetes, if it
is a possesion-then you have to just use the
light. That is how we cure our Agnya
Chakra.
Even Christ said am the LIGHT,
I am the PATH', Because He is the Aumkara.
He is the path. and He is the door, He is the
gate and everybody will have to pass through
His gate. He never told lies. But they crucified
him. They just crucified him. One thing good
we have, we are fortunate in this country,
we don't have any organised religion. Thank
your stars for that. If you had any organised
religion, you could never have taken to
Sahaja Yoga. Because according to
organised religion you have to believe in one
person and as if he has no connection with
anyone, he is alone person hanging in the
air, he has nothing to do with any body else.
So 'thank' God for this that it has not
happened in this country. And that is how
we have people who are more suited for
Sahaja Yoga than we have in 'any' other
country because they are so conditioned.
And it is a very great blessing. For example
now, Sai Nath who was the last incarnation
So these realised souls are
all over and they are helping. The never
enter into anybody, they never trouble
you, they guide you, to the proper lines.
They bring their Angels and they help
you to come to the right path, to
the right conclusions. And they never
try to possess you, they never try to
hypnotise you, or take you to the wrong side
of life. So when you are realised also, you
must know that you have to know'completely
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-38.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: I & 2
- 2007
37
and a centripetal, both the forces working.
By one you come in and by another you are
thrown like a tangent. Nobody is anxious to
have a very big group or anything. If it is big,
well and good, one wants to save as many
as possible. But nobody is going to force
you, nobody is going to have any cheap sort
of a circus for it. It is the wish of the people,
those who have to come, you cannot force
them. You cannot force a person to get his
what is the reality. Go on understanding,
trying to assimilate it, not to discard it
because you are attached to another
organisation. There is 'no' organisation in
Sahaja Yoga, you know very well. There is
no grouping in Sahaja Yoga. There is no
membership in Sahaja Yoga. But' it is a living
organisation It is a living organisation. So
anything happens here, the whole body
knows. We don't have to have organisation
written for this body, In the same way Sahaja
Yoga works out.
realisation.
So this is what is today at the Agya
Chakra, I have told you. Agya Chakra I have
spoken many a times in England and in
America and was very much sometimes
'opposed' by some churches and things. But
I think if they want to exist any longer, they
"better' take to truth and 'know' that what they
know so far is incomplete. They have to
know the full of it. Because Christ could not
talk much and whatever He said was written
down by His disciples the way they
understood. To understand Christ you have
to have your realisation.
But still I must say, as we have in
our body different type of sensory system,
we too have in Sahaja Yoga, people who just
come in, just the beginners. They are not
exposed to the truths which they cannot
bear. Then if they pass a certain line of
understanding then they are taken as we say
Nirvichar Samadhi people, who are given
certain facilities to enter into certain new
dimensions and ideas. But the inner circle
people are the ones who are in Nirvikalpa.
Such people are only taken into
consideration for teaching Sahaja Yoga.
Anybody who tries to teach Sahaja Yoga, talk
about Sahaja Yoga at the second stage just
is thrown out, because there is a centrifugal
May God bless you.
Nirmala Yoga
(1983)
**
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-39.txt 
 Christmas Eve
Talk by H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
Pune, 24th December, 1982
way, otherwise you cannot get over these
horrible ideas of Arch Bishops, and the
Bishops and the Popes.
Before we start, the celebrations of the Birth
of Christ, we have to little bit review what we
have done after His Birth, so that we
understand where do we stand in relation to
Him. For He was the Son of a Virgin so that
even the slightest blot on His name should
not be created. Because He was to do the
The other side is the Ego part. Then
people like Mr. Frued came in and they put
absolutely' anti-God ideas into people,
absolutely anti-God.' It is against the Mother,
against the Son, 'Absolutely, it is absurd'.
These anti God devilish ideas penetrated and
people started saying, "what's wrong? This
is all conditioning, we should remove all
conditioning", so they become ego-oriented,
which is the other side which Christ had to
work out. So l mean, after Christ has been
established in the West, they have seen to
it that they create 'all' hurdles that are
possible under the Sun, for the Agya Chakra
to open out.
greatest job, of creating for us Agya
awareness, which would help us to suck in
all our sins, all our conditionings, and all our
egos. And the great personality was created
for such a great work within ourselves. But
unfortunately, we have spoilt both these
institutions within us to such an extent that it
is the most difficult task to give realisation to
Christians.
On the one side we have too much
conditioning, as you know, through
catholicism and other ideas about
Despite that, I find that all Sahaja
Yogis who are from the West are still
attached to 'Christianity' and not to Christ.
There is a lingering Christianity still within
you, and the Christianity has to drop out.
While Indians are very good at dropping out
all non-sensical ideas. Because we have
Christianity which created a 'horrible'
conditioning in our super ego, which is just
like a solid rock, I think, sometimes. And
those who have been in catholic churches
are still, get stuck up with it. Even as they
are facing Me, I find their eyes are blinking
and the Agya is not straight. You have to give
up all that conditioning 'completely' if we have
to 'really' get to Sahaja Yoga. To that extent
we went, that we tried to create institutions-
of course, we collected money, no doubt
about it, lot of money-all kinds of drama, of
the Papal Order and of Arch Bishop Order
and all these Arch Bishops and all tomfoolery.
All kinds of non-sensical donkey people were
created. 'Absolutely. They have nothing to
do with the Christ, they have nothing to do
with GOD, they have no idea of Divine Life.
And to them prohibiting people from doing
something was fully religion. And this has
taken the West into such darkness that
had lots of challenges in this country for every
thing. For the conditioning, we have had
challenges, for the ego oriented, we have
had challenges. So people are used to this
kind of a giving-up. But in the West, we still
are very much attached to that non-sense
of Christianity. It has nothing to do with
Christ, believe me, and this fanaticism which
is lingering still in your mind must be
given-up, otherwise you do not do 'any'
justice to Christ. That by no chance means
that you take to another religion like Hinduism
or any non-sensical Jainism, or anything.
The 'essence', the "Tattwa' of Christianity is
Christ. And it is 'so' thickly clouded by all
these non-sensical things that you 'really'
Sahaja Yoga has to be worked out in a
very great speed and in a very expensive
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-40.txt 
 - 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 1 & 2
39
have to drop-out this word 'Christianity' from
your vocabulary completely, and from your
mind, otherwise you can 'never' go to the
essence. It is a fact, take it from me.
But you must know you are special
people. You are above them, you've risen
above them. Christ is awakened. So to do
justice to Christ, you must get over all your
conditionings, to begin with, of Christianity,
if you have any, or if you have been
Fruedian get rid of that horrible fellow.
'Absolutely', he was anti Christ. Sick, Sick,
Sick. We have nothing to do with Frued's
ideas, 'even this much'! 'Believe me." We
have not to justify him at any point for
'anything'. He took full advantage of the
And even now the attention of all the
people is on what Christ said, or Mother
Mary has said it, and which has come
through these horrible people to us. So to
learn about other Dieties and other great
Incarnations, we neutralise. We must try to
neutralise too much attention by learning
about other Dieties, say, Shri Ganesha. If you
talk about Shri Ganesha, He is the essence
of Christ. You understand it. Ganesha is the
essence of Christ, and Christ is the
manifestation of Shri Ganesha's powers. So,
if you go to the 'essence', of most things,
you see, that is better. Then of course, Christ
is there but we must see in Him, as He is,
which very few' people have seen before,
but now in Sahaja Yoga you 'should' see Him
as He was. He was the Holiest of Holy, first
of all. You accept that position. Then this
Frued nonsence has nothing to do. Those
who call themselves Christians : five days
they do all non-sensical of Frued and sixth
day they talk of Christianity, and seventh day
they go to Church. How can they go? I mean,
how can they call themselves Christians-by
what standard? Just tell me. I mean, just
think of it. And the Indians have asked them
repulsion people developed out of the
conditionings.. And then he built up all these
stories, because he was himself a very
'low-level man', not to be counted as a
human being from 'any' standard. You see,
Christ came for human beings, but not for
these 'low-level' people. Even the lepers
were better than him, I think. 'Horrible' | Even
to think about the whole things makes me
nauseate. It is very unholy. So, for all
practical purposes, we have to understand
that we have nothing to do with Mr. Frued.
"He is filth, he is dirt'. He is absolutely 'lowievel
man.' We have nothing to learn from him,
nor from his ideas.
Now, the other side of it is the
conditioning of the church. There are still
many Sahaja Yogis, still confused with it. Of
course, if you have to save the Christians,
so called, you have to take them out of the
conditioning. Luckily, we have someone who
is writing a thesis about these things, how
these things are dangerous to society. But
still nobody realises this is anti-Christ
activity; to condition. It is a anti-Christ activity.
Christ came on this Earth where Moses
has laid down the 'Dharma'. After it, so
many, He thought, people will be in
balance and He has to give the message
of His resurrection and ascent. That is
how He came on Earth. But then
they created even worst things than
the Shariat; Shariat is in the Bible. All these
to get out because they won't understand
what it is. 'So' non-sensical, it is 'filth'. The
Holiest of the Holy, we have brought Him
down to such a low level by our non-sensical
ideas!
So one has to understand that these
conditionings of catholicism made us 'so'
repulsive to ourselves that we took to the
other side which is even worse, much worse
than the conditioning. And you come in
contact with these people morning till
evening. Either they are Fruedian or they are
so-called Christian, even after realisation.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-41.txt 
 - 2007
Issue: I & 2
The Divine Cool Breeze
40
I find people get very easily attached to
negative people. They get identified with
negative pepole 'very' common. And they
think that they are being sympathetic. It is
the sympathy they are working. It could be
your sister, could be your wife, your child. It
can be anybody. But by getting 'attached' to
such people, you are really harming that
person because that person will go down to
hell, and you will also go down to hell, So if
you want to do any good to the person, best
thing is not to be attached to that person and
tell that person that these are Anti-Christ
activities; and get attached to that group
which is doing holy work and understand that
the strength lies in getting attached to 'that'
group than getting attached to one some
singled-out negative personality.
laws are in the Bible where they say that
anybody who does this thing should be
killed, anybody who does like that should be
beheaded. It is all in the Bible. You see,
whatever these Muslims are doing is all in
the Bible. Coming from Bible, So, to
neutralise all that Mr. Frued started another
style.
For us divine laws are binding we
know that is the only way one can rise. It
is not compulsion, but voluntary
acceptance that we have to rise, that we
have to be alright, there are no
conditionings in Sahaja Yoga but this is
how we improve. This is how we go
further, so we accept the situation, and
we move forward with it. That is why
realisation should give you that strength
to 'fight' anti-Christ activity within your
mind. You have to face yourself is the
pointI am saying. Not only that you have
to face yourself, But you have to face the
so-called society that is around, and see
for yourself that these conditionings and
these anti-Christ activities into which you
have indulged
detrimental to your growth, and to your
ascent. And as you are special people
who have got realisation, you have to
argue it out with yourself and reach
proper conclusions. No use arguing out
with others.
Now, everyone of you has had some
experience. I give you the example of 's wife,
she is not here neither he is here. But it is
nice to understand what happended in her
case. He was very attached to her. He
married her. He asked me. I was really
shocked that he is so insensitive, why can't
he see her, why can't he understand her?
But I did not know what to say, but I was
really shocked and for about two minutes,
did not say anything. I am sure she played
her cards very well. And I said 'Alright, you
can marry. You will get happiness, if you
think, you get happiness, that is all'. I did
not say joy;. If you think you can get
happiness, marry. Now she got married to
him. Then he said she must come with him
to England. He brought her. I tried to avoid
I told him'be careful'. Then they lost their
passports. He found his passport, she did
not. But he got after my life; he said please
ask Mr. Shrivastav; somehow get her
passport. Passport should be there.
i said alright. Then they made her passport.
Then she came with me. Still she
was continuing. I told that "please send
away this lady, I do not want her to
be with me. It is a headeache, all 24- hours
. I must have some time
without these horrible' Bhoots' around me
Please get rid of her, she is bad."But he
completely
are
As you know with the conditioning,
people get quiet, they do not talk,but the
conditioning is growing inside. With the ego
people talk too much and they aggress
others with their talking and the ego is
growing too much. So one has to be in the
witnesss state, that means wherever you
have to talk, you have to talk and wherever
you have to keep quiet, you have to keep
quiet. This is at the Vishuddhi level. At the
Agya level, you have to detest 'all' that is
ugly. 'all' that is unholy, 'all' that is fifth.
Because now a new sensitivity has
developed within you. And a new sensitivity
to Holiness, to auspiciousness. Try to
improve this auspiciousness within you.
she is with me
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-42.txt 
 Issue: I & 2 - 2007
41
The Divine Cool Breeze
could not understand ! Still he was siding
with her. Then one day it happened that she
attacked my heart. The heart got into a big
fist. I said now you put hand on my heart
and see. It's throbbing like anything. He could
not put his hand, could not even bring it near
it. I said now please ask her to get down.
When she got down, it stopped. Then he
realised this is the thing, but still he did not
give her up, did not give her up ! Went to
Los Angeles, everywhere she followed me.
The sympathy, you see, she could have
gone away, she was quite a robust lady. But
in Los Angeles, then she started showing her
teeth to him, gradually. And then ultimately
he got into trouble, he started getting the
pains, but as soon as I left Los Angeles,
she got her epilepsy. And he realised how
dangerous it was to carry her all the time
with me. Now he cannot send her away
because she has epilepsy. He did not take
her back. She tried to disrupt all the Ashram
by telling them her sympathy stories Oooh!
you know my husband, he wants to leave
me", this , that, non sense; and all of them
fell for her. Now, she is a Bhoot, and a Bhoot.
And the Bhoot started increasing. One more
Bhoot added sympathy to other, one more
bhoot added once you've given sympathy,
one more bhoot added. And she was creating
problems, "you see that, this is not good, he
is not good, he is against me, this family is
against me, that is against me." Then
someone got heart attack , got heart attack.
So then he sent her away.
one has to be careful.
This is on a Christmas Day I have to
say because 'there only' the light starts-at
the Agya Chakra. Because if you shift from
the principle of Christ you start giving
arguments in support of the negativity.
Always, in the opposite direction, alright? And
you have all the arguments which work
'against' Christ. The same Agya Chakra
when it goes funny, you start seeing things
very reasonable which are 'absolutely' false
and wrong. So we have to be 'alert'. We have
to be with Christ. Now, they will say also
about getting vibrations, "Mother, alright. I am
also very much there. True, we saw the
vibrations." Nothing doing I feel
embarrassed. Sometimes I do not tell, I feel
embarrassed. And people also try to
manoeuvre me by playing tricks on me so
that I am rather worried, sometimes, how to
tell people. Because I have seen ego-
oriented people are extremely' sensitive. Now
they are not arrogant, one thing is there, but
they are extremely sensitive and if you tell
them anything they will not accept. Like
yesterday, I lashed all the Poona people, they
said it was for our good. Nobody said that,
Mother why did you say such and such
thing?" No, not one. Everybody said it was
for our good. But in the West if you lash
them, then you will be lashed. Nobody is
going to take it that way.
So, I have to tell you one thing to have
your ego problems settled, first of all see,
that you are not playing to your ego. And
also, see your conditionings which are now
Bhoots, all these conditionings have
become Bhoots in you. All the Church Bhoots
have got into your heads. They are all there.
So you must see that these Bhoots are not
there, because we have to be Holy. We have
to be clean. We have to be resurrected. We
'are' resurrected people. Christ has
resurrected us. But you have to think 'how
much' he has to work for us. The more you
Now you do not repeat all that
non-sense. Negativity is not to be tolerated,
not to be carried on with, discretion is better
part of balance. One need not be afraid, but
discretion is better part of balance.. All right?
If you have negativity, better get rid of it. If
somebody is so negative, better have nothing
to do with that person, whatever may be the
relationship, just have nothing to do Because
no use going down, if you are a seeker, you
are a responsible seeker and a Sahaja Yogi;
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-43.txt 
 - 2007
Issue: I & 2
42
The Divine Cool Breeze
a big wind towards the Agya, horrible stink
coming out of this terrible type of a ego.
'Absolutely' not the way to treat the King of
Kings who is born within you. You are so
respected that Christ is born within your
Agya. But you must respect your Agya
Chakra.
try to be in unison with negativity, we harm
Him 'more', we torture him 'more', we trouble
Him 'more'. The one who was born in the
'manger' in the most difficult circumstances,
where everybody requires comfort, who
from the very beginning went through
hazardous life till His death. His birth itself,
you can see, was in a cow-shed. None of
you are born in a cow-shed. And while the
Chrisitians are so particular about comforts,
most surprising is, why Christ was born in
cow shed? In a very-very cold night Christ clean, healthy and holy. The attention should
was born. Nothing much to cover 'sparkling
beauty' it was. Now we have to keep Him
within ourselves comfortably. We are not
going to give Him that manger in our Agya project a power of holiness, so that anybody
Chakra. Manger of thoughts and a crown of
thought-that we are not going to give Him.
We are going to make Him comfortable by
not accepting negativity as a sympathy. You
have to be kind towards your auspiciousness
and holiness so that Christ enjoys His stay born, yet to grow. I am sure Sahaja Yogis
there in your Agya. That we do not torture
Him by our useless ideas uncomfortable
behaviours, inauspicious appearances and
unholy acceptance of wrong ideas. Try to
respect Him; there He stands. Try to make
Him very comfortable. I wish I could do that, problems, nothing. So they are still children
but He resides in everybody's Agya Chakra.
If he was only in my Agya, I would have given
Him the greatest comforts, but he wants to
be manifested in everybody's Agya. Sol have
to request you as a Mother to look after Him,
give him a nice cradle, give Him a
comfortable time, because he is born to give
you your resurrection. He has taken up such
a great responsibility to suck all your
conditioning and to suck all your ego, but that
does not mean that you put stones on top of
it. It's like, sometimes I find the conditioning
of some of the people in the West is so great,
that a big mountain is falling on this little child.
And sometimes I find a big a bad breath.
Horrible breath of ego, it stinks, blowing like
Your attention should be in the
Centre so that no wobbliness-Imagine put a
child-like they say, a child is to put on the
wings. So this Agya Chakra is to be kept very
be holy. The attention outside is still not very
holy, should be detached' attention. If you
start seeing through your Agya it should
who looks at your eyes should know that
serenity is flowing from these eyes, and not
lust and greed and aggression. All this we
can achieve because we have got Christ
within our Agya. Accept Him there. He is
will understand the importance of the Agya
Chakra, In the East, no problem, because
to them He is only Ganesha. Ganesha is a
child and they know for definite that
childhood has no contamination. no
as far as sin is concerned. There is a story-
one pastor went to a village, and gave a big
lecture to them, and the villagers had to
thank. So he got up and he said, Thank you
very much for telling us all about it, we did
not know what was sin and thank God you
have told us that there is sin!" So this
awareness is not in their heads. They do not
understand. You will be surprised, you cannot
ask Indians. They won't understand what it
means, you know. They may say Mr. Frued,
this, that; but they do not understand, it is so
anti-God. Actually I did not know till the other
day, when Rustom told me with great
hesitation what it means 'really'. So that is
what it is and we have to understand this.
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-44.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
2007
Issue: 1 & 2
43
If Kundalini is staying at thoughtless
awareness means just dialating and the eyes
can become black, but there's no sparkle.
But when it comes out, then you find a
sparkle' in the eyes. There is a difference in
the eyes, if you see. The eyes get dialated-
the pupils get dialated-when the Agya chakra
is being 'just' penetrated, that is still here it
is. Then you can't see clearly. Correct. But
at thoughtless awareness is all this part'
So if you push it up a little higher-you know
how to push Kundalini with your attention-or
you watch here sahasrara or you think of
Me; Kundalini will go up. Alright?
Today is the great day of Holiness.
Let us celebrate the birth of Christ in our
Agnya Chakra and let us sing praise of it so
that He in His 'pure' essence, in his holy
body, He should be there; not Christianity and
neither Fruedian non-sense. Christianity is
'equally' bad as Fruedian. There is no
difference at all. Whether you kill the child
with the mountains falling on him or with a
horrible stinking, dirty-smelling breeze
blowing on him, it is just the same.
So please get rid of 'both' the ideas-
'absolutely. And in 'purity' you respect Him.
Absolutely purity' because 'He is purity'. Now
you may say that Mother if He is pure purity-
there are some stupid people who ask me-
"if He is purity, then how can we make him
impure?" What I mean, if you do not respect
Him, why will He be there? He will disappear.
He likes purity. He will disappear from there-
it is not good for you.
So thoughtless awareness is just
the beginning. And it's a great area, upto Shri
Krishna point where you become the
witness. Now the witness point when you've
become, then there is a sparkle in your eyes
Your eyes sparkle. Sparkle in the eyes is a
sign that the Kundalini is flowing well. That
time you see 'more' than you see normally.
And in the the start, it starts looking bigger,
everything starts looking much clearer.
Alright?
So better create a cradle, a beautiful
cradle, of love, of honesty, as His Mother
prepared for Him. With all sweetness and
kindness and assurance that you will nurture
the beauty and the auspiciousness of Christ.
Dilatation of the pupil takes place
Some people really at that time have opened
their eyes and they said "Oh! We've become
blind." That's true, it happens. It's correct.
Alright? Good question.
May God bless you all.
Any questions you have, ask me.
Agya is very important and best way
is to take your Kundalini up. You see, don't
roam about in Agya. Very dangerous. You
can be thrown as he said on the 4, 4, 4 foot
back or you can go this side 6, 6, 6, 6. It
works out 6, 6, 6, 6 this side and 4, 4, 4, 4
this side. Dangerous. Never go. You see you
should be very careful. You should never
roam about in Agya because you're thrown
out. The attention is thrown out-projected.
A Sahaja Yogi : When I am in thoughtless
awareness, I can't see clearly.
Shri Mataji : I think you must be seeing more
than what you see normally!
He is correct. When you are
thoughtlessly aware, your eyes, you see,
the pupils start dialating, its correct. But
take it higher-the Kundalini-slightly higher,
push it up. Airight?
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-45.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Issue: 1& 2
44
2007
that. If they are there, let it be, Because you
see, your Agya is very important. You should
not allow your Agya to be attracted by these
things. You might just find a flame, like that.
Sometime you might just find a little dot,
standing dot. They are all actually angels who
are with you and try to assure you. But that's
not important. What is important is, on your
way, you should go further and do not go
this side or that side. But if you are seeing
everyday those images, then try to push it
back or this way, whichever way it is and try
to finish them so that you go further. That
means you are sticking on to the same point
or you're moving in the other direction on the
sides. Because direction should be further
You start thinking; all problematic.
Try to take your Kundalini out all
the time. 'See', that it's coming out. Put
your attention there-and the best is now
put your attention to me ! Because I am
Sahasrara.
Don't allow your Kundalini to remain
in Agya part. It's dangerous. No doubt. You
have become subtler and you can start
moving left and right if you want to, and if
you try to.
I'l tell you. If you start closing your
eyes; say, you're sleepy and you start seeing
images at that time. That means you are
going on to the left side-they're dead bodies,
you start seeing their faces, this, that-you
are going to the left side. Now supposing you
start seeing lights and stars and this and that-
all sorts of things-l mean more the colours,
we should say, you'are moving on the right
hand side, so try to avoid it. 'I don't want it',
you should say And you try to put your Agya-
if it is left, you put it to the right side or if it is
right-just by pushing it.
and further and further.
SY : How should we protect our
sub-conscious since we cannot be
conscious about it?
Shri Mataji: You need not.
I mean,
you don't have to worry !
Just keep to the conscious. Alright?
You don't do anything! Actually, if you see,
what do you do?
But what happens, that after
sometime, when you've achieved a certain
state, of higher consciousness, then if you
want you 'can' penetrate into these areas.
You can see all these things. But then certain
different types of things you see, for example,
you might see from my Sahasrara huge, big
"Valayas' coming out, or something like that.
That's a different point altogether. And also
sometimes you might see a little-say, a
flame-that's a good sign, that means
somebody is guiding you. But you've to be
careful. Not to indulge into these things
and
SY:I just enjoy
Shri Mataji : Yes, just enjoy. That's
the best part. Just enjoy!
I want you to enjoy. Don't create
problems for yourself, that's all and just
enjoy. Alright? Just don't create problems for
yourself.
Don't be ambitious. Don't be
aggressive. And don't be-submissive too
much to others. That's rarely so. But be
submissive to Sahaja Yoga, be surrendered
to Sahaja Yoga.
because there 'is' a guidance for
you
you're all followed by great dieties, no doubt,
but you should not try to, sort of, hanker after
(Nirmal Yoga)
1983
***
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-46.txt 
 Sahasrara Puja
Rouen, France, (05.05.1984)
Pravachan of Her Holiness Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi
At this point of time, it is very
It is so wonderful for your Mother to
important to understand that we have to take
a bigger step. The whole Sahasrara moves
in this way, all these Chakras throw their
lights in this way, in a clockwise manner and
the axis is the heart.
see you so many beautiful Sahaja Yogis
assembled together on this day of
Sahasrara. I think the first era of Sahaja Yoga
has ended now and new has started. In the
first era of Sahaja Yoga, the starting point
was first the opening of the Sahasrara. And
gradually moving towards the completion,I
find there are so many who are great Sahaja
Yogis today. It is very natural process of
growth that you have gone through. The first
one was, we can say, is just the awakening
of the Kundalini, and piercing the fontanel
bone area. As you see on top of your head
these bandhans, that's how you too have in
your head, the same way. And you have the
Chakras the same way, built in your
Sahasrara. So in the first era of Sahaja
YOga, we have awakened the dieties in your
centers, in the medulla oblongata and also
in the brain, but now the time has come for
us to spread it on a horizontal level, and to
move it on the horizontal level, we have to
understand how to go about it.
So the essence of all the religions,
of all the prophets, of all the incarnations, is
compassion, and is placed in this Chakra of
heart. Thus we understand that in the
second era now, we have to have
compassion, is the manifestation now of the
compassion. If God Almighty had no
compassion, He would not have created this
great universe. Actually His power, or the Adi
Shakti, is the embodiment of His
compassion, and this compassion has
brought forth all the evolution to human level
and even your emancipation as Sahaja Yogis,
and compassion is always completely
covered with forgiveness.
So you can see the Trinity meets at
this point: The Son of God is forgiveness, is
the embodiment of forgiveness. So the God
Almighty, who is the Witness, the Mother who
is the compassion and the Child who is the
forgiveness, all of them meet at heart Chakra
in the Sahasrara.
Like the seven colours of rainbow,
we have got seven colours of the light of
these centers, of the Chakras, and when we
started from the back, from the Mooladhara,
bringing it up to the, this side, Agnya, then it
is placed in a different order, if you see it
clearly. I mean to say that in the Sahasrara,
because it's a concave placement, it's
important to understand, that the center of
the fontanel bone area corresponds to our
heart. So, heart is the pivotal point for the
second era now. I hope you understand
what I mean.
Now, one must learn how to improve
Sahasrara itself. You know the presiding
deity of the Sahasrara very well. Now, the
place of Sahasrara is in your head as you
think it to be, but it's just the center of the
whole universe. To develop this you have to
pay attention to your heart Chakra in the
fontanel bone area. If you pay attention to
the fontanel bone area then there you must
establish the deity. But this deity has to be
first established into the heart.
So if you have to place your attention
to Saharara, first thing you have to do is to
pay attention to your heart. In the Sahasrara,
the heart-Chakra and the heart itself, the
Atma, coincide. Means the Jagadamba
becomes one with the heart, that is the Atma,
so we see that here the yoga takes place.
Now you are very lucky people that you have
the deity in person with you. The people who
got realization before I came on this earth,
had to imagine the deities, and in that
imagination they were never perfect. But as
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-47.txt 
 Issue: 1 & 2 - 2007
46
The Divine Cool Breeze
desire to be fulfilled. So, at the Krishna's level
it was "Yoga Kshema vahamyaham". So the
Kshema was looked after at Krishna's level
because it was promised.
they say that at Sahasrara "She is
Mahamaya", that is how it is described. So
if you also see the person, you may not be
knowing fully that person, or in the perfect
way, or a complete way, because Mahamaya
Shakti is much greater than your
imagination, that is why one has to
surrender. With your limited imagination
of brain one cannot see the deity.
But what next in the new era that has
to come? As you have now good families,
good ashrams, good jobs, everyone is happy,
let us think of the next era. Next era is of
compassion, as I told you, but if any one
of the Chakras are weak in you still, the
light that becomes white because of the
seven colors, may dim out or may be
defective. So, all the Chakras that are
within us are to be looked after. To pay
attention to every Chakra, and put
compassion, the feeling of compassion
on these Chakras. Now let us take the
Chakra of Shri Ganesha. You pay attention
to Shri Ganesha and establish Him through
your thought, because now your thought is
divine, in the Mooladhara Chakra, with great
respect.
Also it is said "She is Bhaktigamya",
you can know through bhakti, through
devotion, So the devotion has to be there,
but the devotion has to be a very clean
devotion, in the sense there should be no
malice in the heart, heart should be clean.
Heart, to keep it clean is very difficult. Always
human beings have a relative understanding
of reality, but reality is absolute. So to achieve
that, one has to get rid of all the other kind of
impurities that are within the heart.
So in the beginning we try to achieve
our realization, not with very clean heart. At
that time, we had lots of attachments, we
were identified with false things and also we
thought, by getting realization, we'll become
very powerful people. After realization, also,
we started indulging into petty things. We
started asking for favours for our relations,
friends, mothers, sisters, and the women
thought of their husbands and their brothers,
their children. They all asked for the
blessings of all those with whom they were
entangled. All this entanglement, you got
over, I know, very soon.
Here now, you have to know that in
the first era of Sahaja Yoga I could not have
talked of these things to you, of this, this is
much subtler doing, subtler work. Now put
your feeling on that Chakra, Chakra is the
'pradesha', is the 'country', and the King is
Shri Ganesha, and that's the country. Now
when you put your attention onto that
Chakra, put your feelings towards Him, of
feeling of love and adoration to Him, to begin
with, and then to manifest compassion, you
have to ask nothing but one thing that, "O
God of innocence, give innocence to all
the people of the world". But first you have
to be innocent to ask that, otherwise it is
unauthorized asking, or you can say, you
have no right to ask.
Now the job of a Avtara is such that
He has to fulfill the desires of His bhaktas,
His disciples. For example, Shri Krishna was
asked by gopis that we want you to be with
us individually with everyone of us; so He
divided Himself into many Krishnas and He
was with everyone of them. But that was a
very Divine Desire, I think, that was a very
Divine Desire of the gopis. But when you
asked Me about your brothers, sisters,
mothers, fathers, I tried to do that, whatever
was possible. Also the Kshema that you
asked for, ashrams you asked for, all the
things that you needed, was there for your
So, to understand innocence,
you should try to understand yourself,
how your mind is working. When
you, say, look at anyone, do you feel
that you should possess that person, do you
feel unduly attracted, or something
base feeling comes into your mind? For
an innocent person, when he sees a
beautiful person, or a woman, or a
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-48.txt 
 Issue: I & 2 - 2007
The Divine Cool Breeze
47
that acts by itself. You don't have to say that
you act, it acts, but you just become the
vehicle, a beautiful clean vehicle of that
discretion. Then you should believe now you
are spreading horizontally.
beautiful scene, or a beautiful creation,
the first thing should happen that he
becomes thoughtless, there is no
thought. So if there is no thought, there's no
question of having any expression of
possessiveness or any kind of a baser feeling.
In the first era of Sahaja Yoga, you
needed to see Me in person. As we say
in Sanskrit, a "Dhyeya", is the target, you
wanted the target in front of you,
whatever is to be achieved. So now when
you wanted that all the time and you felt
happy, secure, joyous, when you had
that in person before you. Then, in the
second era, now, you will not desire so
much that Mother should be there. You'll
But, if you pray to Shri Ganesha, also
unauthorized a little bit, that "Please make
me innocent, so that I'm empowered to ask
you for this boon that, whereever I go,I
become the source of Innocence, so that I
emit innocence. When people look at me,
they feel I'm innocent". This is compassion,
the compassion to ask Him to give you the
power of compassion itself. So that, as you
see here, these beautiful centers as if the
lights start moving horizontally. It starts
moving on the sympathetic nervous system.
So you become the powerful Innocence
yourself. You don't become stupid or childish,
but you become child-like.
take it over from Me. This is the Divine
Desire I'm telling you about, and you
have to work on that from today
onwards. I am with you, you know that,
but need not be in this body, because I
don't know if I exist in this body or not.
But once this desire starts working, you
will see tremendous miracles happening.
When the child is born to a mother,
automatically she gets milk. So the nature
is so connected with the whole thing, In you
divine desire also it is connected, and it is
very evident when you are a divine person.
So you may find Me anywhere, you are
walking on the street, suddenly you
might find Mataji walking with you. So
this is the second era we have started,
and you should not be shocked if you see
Me sitting on your bed and putting My
hand on your head, or you may see Me
in the form of Christ walking into your
room, or as Shri Rama. That has to
happen, so you should be prepared.
Already so many miracles have
taken place on you, but on a grosser level.
You have seen the light coming on My head
and the photographs have shown some
miracles to you, but many things will happen,
that you will see something that you could
never imagine. This has to happen just to
convince you that you have reached a
certain height of your evolution in the new
The whole behavior is extremely
dignified and innocent. Normally if you find a
person who is dignified is, normally, is not
an innocent person. Because he puts up a
show, it's a deliberation, to become serious
and show that he is very dignified to impress
others. And a child doesn't put up the show
of innocence, of dignity or anything, because
the child is not aware of deliberations. But
you develop that rare combination of innocent
dignity.
Now the other quality of say, Shri
Ganesha, starts experssing itself on
harizontal level, that you become discreet.
But that is a power, I'm again saying, is a
power of discretion you develop. Now one
must understand the difference between the
power of discretion and discretion itself. So
the power means it acts. For example, you
may not speak, but if you are standing
somewhere the discretion itself will act in
the situation. Like a Sahaja Yogi, supposing
is a good Sahaja Yogi, is going in a train,
and the train has an accident- mostly it will
nobody will die. So you
establish the discretion which is power itself,
not, but has
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-49.txt 
 2007
48
The Divine Gool Breeze
Issue: 1 & 2
you, then know that you are progressing
well. As soon as you see an ordeal or a
calamity falling on the personality and
you do not get worried about it, then
know that you are progressing. When no
amount of artificiality can impress you
then know you are progressing. No
amount of material well-being in others
makes you unhappy, по тore unhappy,
then know that you are progressing well.
No amount of labor or troubles are
sufficient to become a Sahaja Yogi.
Whatever you may try one cannot
become a Sahaja Yogi, while you have
got it without any effort, so you are
something special.
era of Pragyalok because this is a new state
into which now you will be entering on a
horizontal basis.
In this era you will give up asking
for gross things, and also for anything
subtler, anything that is subtle, the
asking will disappear, and that is the time
you will become very powerful. Whatever
I say happens as you know, only thing, I
cannot command you to be evolved. The
Kundalini's work in you has been done,
quite a lot, now the new work of
compassion, of spreading it to others,
has to be done by you. As the light grows
brighter and brighter, the area it covers
becomes bigger and bigger. So you become
the giver of compassion.
So this, once you understand that
you are special, you will become humble
about it. Then when it happens to you, that
you humble down when you see you have
achieved something, that you have some
powers, that you are emitting innocence,
that you are discreet and as a result of that
you become more compassion, humbler
personality, a sweeter personality, then you
should believe that you are in the heart of
your Mother. This is the sign of the new
Sahaja Yogi now in the new era who has to
move with new force. Where you will grow
so fast, that without meditation you will be in
meditation, without being in My presence you
will be in My presence, without asking you
will be blessed by your Father. This is what
you are in for; and again I welcome you to
this new era today on this great day of
Sahasrara.
In My last lecture, which you have
heard already, I have requested you how to
do Tapa. With a complete surrendered mind
you have to go through the pilgrimage, say,
of this castel. This is one of the glimpses of
the tapa that you have to do, because I am
told some of you had to get into little
difficulties and you people suffered a little bit
on your way, for the pilgrimage. But it is fun
to be venturesome and to get into places
where the devils dare not go, and if you know
how to get fun out of the so-called
discomforts, then you should know you are
on the right lines, and as you start becoming
discreet automatically, you should know you
are progressing well.
(Progress in Sahaja Yoga explained)
As you become more peaceful
and your temper vanishes in the thin air
as soon as you see somebody attacking
May God bless you all!
 2007_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_I.pdf-page-50.txt 
 2 15
Pralisthan-Gurgaon
"O my children, you are really born out of my Sahasrara, I conceived
you in my heart and gave you the new birth through the
Brahmarandhra. The Ganges of my love has carried you into the realm
of collective consciousness.
This love is too great for my human body. It nourishes you,
soothes you
awareness to bliss and joy. But this love also corrects you and prunes
you. It guides you and directs you. It reveals itself in the form of true
knowledge. It absorbs your shocks and settles you like a guiding leaf
on the hard surface of truth. It strengthens you to fulfil your aspirations
of reaching spiritual heights."
and gives you security. Gradually it opens your
-H.H. Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi-
