ARoadrishti Vol 8 Sep Ssue 3 2007 LEGO t chastiy, Msmraads ithasno limits, iahas no forms, it had no shape But fvo you ritterawavvour attention withou yom del a you can rise deimit it, then higher and higher oubecome higher and igher in your spiritual life. H.H. Shri Mataji NirmalaiDev, Vishnumaya Puja, 1985

 NSYS LENS Shri Charan Destination of a Sahaja Yogi

 INDEX 3. NIRMAL VANI : DIGNIFIED DRESSING 1. अनुभव 9. 3. YUVASHAKTI REPORTER 4. 12 POWER OF WOMEN ब्रह्मपुरी - भविष्य का महातीर्थ 14 17 6. KID SHAKTI PAGE उत्तरांचल आत्मसाक्षात्कार दिवस 18 7. 19 8. MOTHER'S RECIPE PUJA PROTOCOLS 20 9. MOTHER EXPLAINS - Advice on Allergies 22 10. शैतानी प्रवृत्ती की हार 11. 23 SHRI GANGA 12. 25 2. 5.

 EYB YUVADRISHTI Published by Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 8, Chandragupta Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 029 Tel : 020-25286537, Fax : 020-25286722 Printed by Shrada Printary Pune Please mail your experiences, poems, articles, suggestions, comments, etc. to: Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 8, Chandragupta Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 029 yuvadrishti@gmail.com For queries regarding delay in receiving the magazine, please call: Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd., Tel : 020-25286537 We solemnly thank our article writers, editors, designers/professionals etc. for their help in making this issue.

 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007 NIRMAL VANI Dignified Dressing of a Saint In this issue of Nirmalvani, let us enlighten ourselves with divine advice from Shri Mataji on how we can protect our chakras and maintain our state of spiritual ascent by following simple ways of dressing and grooming in an dignified & auspicious manner. By acting on these assertions from Shri Mataji we can uphold the respect for our body as temple of God Dressing for Self-Respect are more natural in their character; to give up artificialities, to be more natural. I don't say that you go and take out the roots and eat them, or you can eat the fish raw, I don't mean that. When going too far with things, always you must avoid. But try to lead a life which is more natural; natural, in the sense that people know that there is no vanity about you. Or some people can be the other way round, you see, they will dress up like a tramp just to attract more attention. I mean they cari be both ways, you see. When I find some of the people, you see, coloring their hair and all that. "Natural" means you must wear natural dresses which are You are saints do you realize? Do you realize your self- esteem? You are saints now. What clothes you wear, you are not vagabonds. You are not tramps. You are not on the street. So you have to wear dignified dress. I have told everyone of you that wear something dignified, not indignified. It has to be majestic, because you are a saint now. You are no more a person running on the street, you are the selected saints by God. So the dress you wear need not be absurd or something funny but should give you dignity. Not any false but a real dignity. You see the vibrations of a dress. Wear suitable to you. (2) You must use as far s possible cotton and as far as possible silks, or cotton natural things, not artificial things like you'll get into trouble if you use plastics your country's dress. You need not wear somebody else's dress or something but the interest in the dress should be that it should give you dignity and a sense of respectability. It is to preserve your respect that you have to weara dress. Thatis the utility of a dress. (1) and things like that. (3) It is very important for Mooladhara to use cotton. You see cotton is better for Mooladhara, With these hard things that you use for the child just grab him down, is very bad, and also one of the reasons is if you dress the Mooladhara like that, then it goes on sides and that creates other problems. (4) Actually in the East, people believe that God has given you a beautiful body, and it is to be adorned with the beauty of what human beings have created, just to respect it, just to worship your body. For example now in India people wear, women wear their saris. The saris are expressive of their moods of these women and of expression of their worship of their body, because you must respect your body. Dresses should be such that should be for utility as well as dignity. There is no need to have uniform clothes for Sahaja Yoga at all, you see, I do not like it. There should be variety, as the nature is. Everyone should look a different person. For a puja and all that you may wear something similar, doesn't matter, where your attention need not be on the variety, but outside, you should be a normal person. (2) This artificial manmade fiber is very dangerous, it's very bad for their (children's) skin. Why give this horrible stuff to your children, which you never had? By the time they grow up to your age they will have all blotches on their faces. (5) Wearing an Undershirt Then there's another thing, which looks very simple, but many people have a habit in, specially summers, to wear a one single kurta or a single shirt and not the under-shirt. This is also not proper. A man must always have something under his shirt, otherwise when it starts perspiring, he can get trouble into this Heart Center. (Note:-Always wear an undershirt. This applies to men Using Natural Materials Then for a Sahaja Yogi it is important to use things which

 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007 and women and at all times of the year, warm or cold. An undershirt absorbs sweat and keeps the area around the Heart chakra dry and protected.) (6) which are comfortable and decent. (12) Here the Mahakali, what does She do? She punishes you. Your body is punished. If you wear very tight clothes, you develop problems of your legs. Anything you do abnormal, you have to pay for it. First you have to pay for doing it and then you have to pay for it physically. So many things can be avoided if we just had a simple life, decide once for all that, Iwill have this kind of dress for this lifetime, finished. Every day to change, itself, is a headache. But that satisfies the ego, not your Self. (13) Covering Sleeves & Knees They're very important Chakras (Shri Chakra & Lalita Chakra) should not even wear sleeveless they should be always covered. All other Chakras we cover, except for Agnya, which we also cover with a kumkum. By that, how many diseases can come. You can get sinus, start from sinus, you can get eye trouble, you can get paralysis of both the hands. You can get also Parkinson's. All sorts of diseases can come. You should never, never expose these Chakras, also the knees. (9) I'll tell you a story of My own daughter. She went to Delhi and all the girls were having sleeveless blouses. So she asked me, "I want to have sleeveless blouses." She was grown up, she was going to college. I said, "All right, have it, whatever you like". She said, "By the way, why don't you wear sleeveless?" I said, "I feel shy." "Then why should you allow me! This is no criteria. Whatever I ask, you say "yes' to me. I'm not that grown up." (7) I've always told ladies that please keep this (Shri Chakra & Lalita Chakra) covered. Its looks so simple, but it's very important. Don't expose this because the power of this should be preserved. They are I should say feminine powers and they are the feminine powers of Shri Krishna, which must be understood that whatever way you respect your body that is the way your chakras are and that is the why you suffer. (8) I saw My granddaughter was wearing a sleeveless dress. I told her, "Better you shouldn't wear a sleeveless dress." She says, "It's very hot, I feel very hot." She's young. I said, "But see, these are two very important chakras. If you expose them, then you'll have problem." She doesn't like to wear dresses which are above the knee, but she says, people wear even above the knee. I said, "Knees, they are very important chakras, we should keep them closed, otherwise if they are affected, we'll have knee trouble." Immediately she changed-immediately. "Mother, 'll wear blouse from inside and something from outside." Immediately. Because she knew this is a natural primordial taboo that we should not expose ours - these two chakras. (10) The Sweet Sari There's no harm in wearing sarees. I think it's very decent dress, and makes a woman look like a woman much more than pants, and those jeans and things like that. (12) I don't think men know much about art and also their one side is missing is aesthetics. Poor things they make one type of clothes, wear all throughout. Just one type of dresses they will make and that they will make and wear throughout. But women are artistic and if our Indian women give up wearing Saris and take to jeans, where will the villagers go? Because they live with the Saris that they make during holidays and things like that. So in India is not possible to introduce all these dresses; in the school maybe but lateron they all give up because they like Saris. So the Saris are still on and will be on because its so artistic it's so beautiful. One Sari doesn't look like another Sari. (14) This fashion is to expose the knees; is very dangerous, because you can get both the nabhis, and I am suffering because of them. They open their knees in this cold weather or hot weather, either you catch the right nabhi, or the left nabhi. (11) Jeans and Tops In India I've seen people wearing some sort of a, so-called short and a so-called short on top, and moving about, that's stupid because it is indecent. So we cannot wear indecent dresses. We have to wear decent dresses but

 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007 They all make their hair properly, because - I have nothing to do with your hair, I am not a hair styling person or anything but if you do not have your hair properly combed and done, then definitely you are in for trouble. So take heed to these things. (16) Wearing Heels I have seen those who stand for a long time without the heels, if you use the heels you might be better off. With the heels the pressure is not so much then distributed more to the lower of those five chakras down below that might help. See in India, if you have hair like this (on eyes or forehead), the mother will say, "Now remve your Jibreyas'[Jhabrey AS IN Jhabrey baal]. Because if you put like that hair, your eyes can become squinty. But that's the fashion, to put the hair like this you see, very much sometimes on the eyes also. It's absolutely stupid to do that way and to play into the hands of these people who make fashions because you are independent. You must stand on your own character; you must stand on your own understanding of things. Instead of ruining your faces, you should try to improve them by your dignity, by your understanding. (14) Sahaja Yogi: Mother you recommended heels, what height? Shri Mataji: No, no I did not say for all of you. I said for varicose veins or especially for people who develops problems on the heels. There is no height. You just try whatever you can say about one inch will do, from one inch onward. Anything not too much one inch or lower but you see if you develop some sort of a bone on your heels... (19) I would request you to clear outyour forehead, Imean, open it out. Remove your hair I mean, all the hair. Keep hair away from the forehead. (Note:-There are natural destructive powers placed along the forehead (The Ekadesha Rudras). These powers destroy negativity attempting to enter into our subtle system. Covering forehead can prevent these powers from being effective.)(17) I have been requesting you to put some oil in your heads at leastonce a week, but now the fashion is not to put any oil. So you don't want to put any oil on your heads. At least once a week you must put some oil in your heads. That will keep your head cool and also before taking bath, use some oil for rubbing on your hands or on your body. Before taking bath at least for fifteen minutes rub oil on your bodies. (15) I have told so many Sahaja Yogis something small, that you must put some oil in the night, moming time you wash. But they don't do it!l But, by doing that, what happens is that you soothe yourself, you sleep well. Oiling is a very good thing. We need it, all of us, especially in this cold weather, we need it. But they won't put. They neglect themselves. Because they think, they're Sahaja Yogis, they are protected, Mother can oil them. It's not sol You have to look after yourself, as far as the body is concerned, the mind is concerned. (9) Hair Shri Mataji spoke of the importance of oiling the hair and stressed in categorical terms that all Sahaja Yogis should put little coconut oil on Sahasrara, everyday. Otherwise we will go bald and even those who are bald should out a little on. The Sahasrara is Her charka, though we need not put on as much oil as She, we must put a little. Mother suggested that we start a Sahaja fashion with the hair oiled like this. I want you to understand that when you dress up also, certain things I don't like at all, like disheveled hair - at all. That might be a fashion, whateveryou do, butl don't like it. Always must be properly combed, properly done hair. These modem things we should give up, of disheveled hair, because this is a sign of pukka [MEANS "REAL"] bhoots coming in. If you have disheveled hair the bhoots recognize a person and they get into such a person, who has disheveled hair. So try to make your hair in a proper... see now Indians, how they make their hair, look at them. Phil Ward

 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007 1997-0823: Shri Krishna Puja: Primordial Taboos and Sahaj Dharma, Cabella 1996-0710: Talk at Vienna Airport 1988-0820: Cure that left Vishuddhi, Vishnumaya Puja, Shudy Camps 1993-0711: Mahakali Puja, France 1998-1025: Significance of Diwali, Diwali Puja 1988-1217: Personal Cleanliness, India Tour, Pune, India 1983-0118: SY Works by Keeping Mother Pleased, Puja talk, Vaitarna, India 1980-0331: What is Seeking?, Public Program, Brighton, England 1995-0716: Watch your mind & attention, Guru Puja, Cabella 1986-0131: Health Advice to Yogis Eternally Inspiring Recollections of Our Holy Mother; pp 147. (10) Other dressing basics (11) (12) I've seen you're very negligent about also covering up yourself (in winters). You must take a shawl all the time. Even if you feel little warm, doesn't matter. But you can take it out, but keep it handy all the time. That's also you get sick, because there's dusteverywhere and if you have a shawl around, at least you're protected. (15) (13) (14) (15) (16) The Essence of Dressing You have to wear the dress to whatever country you (17) belong, whatever suits you for the occasion. Whatever you think is dignified and good, which speaks for your (18) more elegance and your personality. No clownish things are necessary, no dandy stuff is necessary: simple, (19) beautiful dresses should be worn, which give you dignity. (20) (2) Also you have to know the auspiciousness of things that you are using, whether it is auspicious or not. At random we buy clothes. At random we buy things. If you could use your vibratory awareness to buy your things to see what you should buy, what would look nice because beauty and auspiciousness goes hand in hand. Meditation with Shri Matali on Agnya Chakra : "Now put your right hand on your forehead across. Now here, here, you have to say, first of all, I have to forgive all those who have not come in Sahaja Yoga. Those who are on the periphery, who come and go, jump in and jump out. BUT, first of all and foremost, I have to forgive all the Sahaja Yogis because they are all better than me. I am the one who tries to find the faults with them, but I am at the lowest end and I have to forgive them because I must know that I still have to go very further, I am still much less, I have to improve much further. This humility has to come within us. So you have to say here - Let the humility in my heart, in a true sense, not hypocritical, work out this feeling of forgiveness, so that, I bow to reality, to God and Sahaja Yoga. You must respect matter in the sense what clothes you wear. Throwing clothes on the ground, throwing here and there, living like a donkey, like a pigsty is not the way a Sahaja Yogi should live. He has to be orderly; he has to respect his clothes. But it should not be that you respect your clothes so much that you throw away others' clothes. (1) Now the attention should not be also wasted in that "I will today, I will wear this kind of a sari, tomorrow l'll wear that kind of a dress, third day...", because that also spoils the attention. But if it is a decent thing, it's perfectly all right, and that will really make you feel dignified within yourself. (18) Now, you have to put back your hand on the References: (1) back side of your head, and push back your head here and you have to say here - O Mother! Whatever wrong we have done to You so far, whatever wrong goes in our minds, whatever smallness we have shown to You, whatever way we have troubled You and challenged You, please forgive us. You have to ask for forgiveness. In your intelligence, you should know what l am. I don't have to tell you again and again." 1980-0927: Lethargy Most Anti God, Chelsham Road, London 1980-0729: Guru Puja, London 1985-1027: Ego, New Jersey, USA 1986-0709: Advice on Children, Vienna, Austria 1982-0711: Public Program: Heart Vishuddhi Agnya & Sahasrara, Derby, UK 1983-0201: The Mother - Heart Chakra, Delhi, India 1996-0915: Shri Ganesha Puja, Cabella Ligure, Italy 2001-0729 Shri Krishna Puja, Canajoharie 2000-1008: Navaratri Puja, The protection of the left side, Cabella (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 1988-0618: Introspection & Meditation, Shudy Camps (7) (8) (9)

 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007 अनुभव हूँ तो ये शब्द ही मेरे दुःख को सहलाने का कार्य करते हैं । हानिया वे आपको नहीं देखते, किन्तु मैं देखती हूँ .. संभवतः १६६३ या १६६४ की ग्रीष्म ऋतु की बात है, श्री माताजी वर्साव (पोलैण्ड की राजधानी) में थी और उन्होंने सभी एक टीवी कार्यक्रम सहज योगियों को अपने होटल में उन्हें देखने के लिए आमंत्रित कुछ सहजयोगियों ने Transcendental Meditation (TM) किया। श्री माताजी ने हमारा स्वागतू साड़ियों तथा फूलों से सजे के विरूद्ध संवाद कार्यक्रम आयोजित किया था यह कार्यक्रम सभागार में किया। वे बहुत ही उदार और प्रेममय थी और जोकि एक प्रकार की खोजी पत्रकारिता थी, को "क्रीडो" कहा बहुधा हम सबके लिए कुछ सुन्दर उपहार भी लाती थीं। मुझे गया तथा इसे एक रविवार को प्रमुख समयए 6 बजे प्रसारित आज भी याद हैं स्त्रियों के लिए केश आभूषण तथा पुरूषों के किया गया। यह बहुत ही अच्छा कार्यक्रम था जिसमें TM एवं लिए अंगूठियाँ । मिर्गी का संबंध बताया गया, EEG तरंगो के माध्यम से, जोकि दोनों में एक सी थीं और कैसे लोगो को भ्रमित एवं सम्मोहित इसे सरलतर बनाने के लिए माँ ने कुछ स्त्रयों को बुलाया और किया जा रहा था। जब यह कार्यक्रम प्रसारित होने वाला था तब उनसे इन उपहारों को वितरित करने के लिए कहा। वे श्री श्रीमाताजी अपने निवास स्थान पर इस कार्यक्रम के प्रसारण से माताजी के उपहार को लेकर लोगों को देतीं और वापस श्री जुड़े सहजयोगियों के साथ इसे देखनें बैठीं। मै श्रीमाताजी के माताजी के पास और उपहार लेने जातीं। वे कुछ शीघ्रता में थीं, श्रीचरणों के समीप ही बैठीं थी। इस कार्यक्रम के पश्चात् हम क्योंकि श्री माताजी ने उनसे यह शीघ्र करने के लिए कहा था एक प्रसिद्ध भारतीय संगीतज्ञ के कार्यक्रम में साउथ बैंक सेंटर क्योंकि माँ चाहती थीं कि उनके प्रवचन प्रारम्भ करने से पूर्व (लंदन) गये। हम सभी लोग इन आभूषणों को धारण कर लें । इस तरह की श्रीमाताजी ने एक काली शॉल पहनी थी और मैं, चूंकि उस स्थिति में तुरत-फुरत में स्त्रियाँ कई लोगों को कुछ भी दिये गये समय गर्भवती थी, एक विषेश परिधान में थी। हम श्रीमाताजी बगैर सभागार के पीछे तक चलीं जाती थीं। इन लोगों में से एक के निवास से बाहर आये ही थे कि माँ नें काली शॉल मुझे दे दी महिला जिसे उपहार नहीं मिल रहा था, अत्यधिक उग्र स्वभाव और अपने लिए दूसरी शॉल ले आयीं। माँ ने कहा कि भूत इस की थीं और हर बार उसके समीप से गुजरती हुई स्त्रियां उसे काली शॉल को देखकर मेरी समझकर तुम्हारे पास नहीं आयेंगे। उपहार न देकर उसे और क्रोधित कर रही थीं। वह लगभग चूंकि मै असुरक्षित थी, पूरे संगीत कार्यक्रम के दौरान माँ ने मुझे अपने पंजे पर खड़ी थी और अत्यधिक क्रोधित थी... तब तक अपने बगल में बिठाये रखा। बाद में श्रीमाताजी ने कहा कि वे उस पर ध्यान नहीं दे पायीं जब तक श्री माताजी ने उसकी ओर उस कार्यक्रम में सामान्य लंदनवासियों के साथ इसलिए बैठी थीं उन्मुख होकर कुछ इस तरह कहा - "कृपया क्रोधित न हों। वे ताकि वे संगीत के माध्यम से उन पर कार्य कर सकें। माँ ने यह आपको नहीं देख रही हैं, किन्तु मैं आपको देख रही हूँ भी बताया कि जब वे करोड़ों लोगों के साथ राजकुमारी डायना की शादी टीवी पर देख रही थीं तब वे उस प्रत्येक व्यक्ति पर उन्होंने यह इतने प्रेम और आत्मीयता से कहा कि कोई भी यह कार्य कर रहीं थीं, जिसका चित्त उस टीवी कार्यक्रम पर था। आभास कर सकता था कि वे उस क्रोधी स्त्री से अपनी परम् प्रिय संतान की भाँति प्रेम करती हैं और उसको शन्ति तथा निश्चिन्तता देना चाहती हैं। यह घटना मेरे अन्तर मन को छू सम्पूर्ण शक्ति से माँ का गरिमा-रक्षण गयी। मैं इसे अपनी समझ के विकास में एक परिवर्तन बिन्दु लंदन के हीथ्रो हवाई अड्डे पर हुई घटना कोई सुखदायी न थी। मानती हूँ, क्योंकि एक क्षण के हिस्से मात्र में मेरे विश्वास तथा वहाँ का प्रत्येक कर्मचारी नस्लवाद से ग्रस्त था और श्रीमाताजी मेरी सुरक्षा की भावना में चटूटान सी शक्ति आ गयी। मैं इन तथा उनके पति जोकि संयुक्त राष्ट्र में एक वरिष्ठ राजनायक शब्दों को कभी नहीं भूली और जब भी मैं दुखी या आहत होती थे, को इस नस्लवाद का प्रत्येक बारे जब भी वो लंदन में अथवा लिन्डा विलियम्स उ

 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007 चढ़ने तथा नीचे आने में हमें कुल मिलाकर घंटों का समय लगा। हम बेहद गर्मी में वापस आये और चिलचिलाती धूप में लंदन से यात्रा करते थे, सामना करना पड़ता था। इस दिन श्रीमाताजी लंदन से जाने वाली थी और उन्होनें मुझे खडे होकर बस की प्रतीक्षा कर रहें थे कि एक कार हमारे पास तथा टोनी, जोकि लंदन के आरम्भिक सहजयोगियों में से एक आयी श्रीमाताजी उसमें से उतरी और कहा हम और हमारे थे, को जाने का समय गलत बताया। उन्होनें संभवतः एक या यकृत (liver) दोनों बहुत गर्म है। कार का पिछला हिस्सा दो घंटे आगे का समय बताया था। हम उनके साथ पूरे समय थे खोलकर उसमें से हरे अमरूद तथा झाड़ी में लगे चने और जो लोग भी उनको परेशान करते अथवा उनके मार्ग में निकाले। श्रीमाताजी ने वह हम सबमें बाँट दिया। जैसे ही उसे आते थे, हम उन पर कोध करते थे। हमें देर का समय बताना खाया हमसे से प्रत्येक खुद को ठंड़ा होता महसूस कर रहा था। संभवतः श्रीमाताजी का हमें परेशानी में ना पड़नें देने के लिए मैं आज भी उस स्थान पर हर व्यक्ति के लिए चिंता एवं प्रेम से संकेत ही था। जब हम उस दिन वहा पहुँचे तो उपस्थित युक्त श्रीमाताजी को खड़ा प्रतीत करती हूँ। सहजयोगियों ने बताया कि श्रीमाताजी का हवाई जहाज जा चुका था और एक अत्यन्त दुखद घटना यह थी कि हवाई अड्डे के सुरक्षाकर्मी ने माँ के साथ दुर्व्यवहार किया था। हुए गिलयन पाटंकर महान बनने की क्षमता है मैंने श्रीमाताजी से पूछा कि क्या वो सब कुछ जान सकती है?माँ बाद में मुझे संदेष मिला कि मैं श्रीमाताजी को फोन करूँ मैनें ने उत्तर दिया, मैं सभी विचारों, वस्तुओं, भूत, वर्तमान और फोन किया तब माँ ने मुझसे बातें करी और कहा "बाला वास्तव अविश्यकाल को एकसाथ जान सकती हैं परन्तु मैं विचलित नहीं में सुरक्षाकर्मी ने मेरी पीठ पर प्रहार किया था और तुम्हें बताती होती तब बहुत उत्सुकता के साथ मैंने श्रीमाताजी से पूछा हूँ कि उसका प्रहार इतना तीव्र था कि मेरी मेखू द्रव में समस्या उनकी किसी का निदान करने की क्षमता के बारे में तथा लोगों उत्पन्न हो गयी।" और आप कल्पना कर सकते हैं कि एक का इस क्षमता में कितना विष्वास है। श्रीमाताजी बहुत ही प्रेम सहजयोगी के लिए यह अत्यन्त कष्टकारी है। श्रीमाताजी वहाँ से मुस्कुरायी तथा वैर्य से कहा, "एक सौ प्रतिशत आपका उपस्थित सहजयोगियों की प्रतिक्रिया से अप्रसन्न थी क्योंकि विष्वास|" उनमें से एक के अतिरिक्त कोई भी बचाव में नहीं आया। सभी लोग इस भ्रम में थे कि उन्हें शांत एवं प्रेममय बने रहना है। किन्तु श्रीमाताजी उस समय हमें यह दिखानें कि चेष्टा कर रही प्रत्येक समय जब मैं अपने बच्चों से दूर जाती हैं थीं कि जब भी आपकी माँ पर आधात अथवा उनका अपमान मुझे १६E० का वह समय याद है जब श्रीमाता जी हो तब श्रीगणेश की भाँति ही अपनी सम्पूर्ण शक्तियों द्वारा श्रीमाताजी की गरिमा की रक्षा करनी है। साथ ही श्रीमाताजी इस बात की ओर भी संकेत कर रही थी कि स्वाधीनता तरह टूटने के लिए क्षमा माँगी। श्रीमाताजी ने कहा ठीक है और वर्षों के उपरांत भी अस्सी के दशक में भारतीय उपमहाद्वीप से आये व्यक्तियों के साथ कितना भेदभाव किया जाता था। कैसा लगता होगा जब प्रत्येक बार मैं अपने बच्चों से जाती लिन्डा विलियम्स की मेलबर्न से जा रही थी मैं जोर से रो रहा था और अंततः माँ के कंधे पर सुबकने लगा माँ की बाँहे मेरे उपर थी और मैने उनसे इस के कई कहा, "अब तुम यह जानते हो कि एक माँ होने के नाते मुझे दूर हूँ। जब मैं औरो को मेरा इंतजार करते देखती हूँ और उनके हुए इन सबसे बढ़कर सोचने कि बात तो यह है कि एक राजनायक पासपोंट रखने वाले सम्मानित व्यक्ति के साथ एसा अभिवादन को स्वीकार करती हूँ तब यह आन्नद वापस आ व्यवहार हो सकता था तो प्रतिदिन साधारण भारतीय तथा जाता है। एशियाई व्यक्तियों के साथ कैसा व्यवहार होता होगा। चेरिल ब्रैडषो बाला कनेसन मैं आज भी उन्हें देख सकती हैं १६८२ - १६८३ के भारत भ्रमण के दौरान नासिक के बाहर सप्तश्रृंगी मंदिर तक के लिए हमने एक लम्बी चढ़ाई चढ़ी। उपर 8

 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007 YUVASHAKTI REPORTER Yuvashakti Seminar. Seven YuvaShakti went in representing all the different young yogis that gathered for the seminar from all over the world. Cabella, 31st July. Tuesday: Yuvashakti gathered in the castle waiting for the opportunity to present Shri Mataji with their invitation and a prayer for the International Shri Mataji asked who had drawn the graphics for the invitation and exclaimed how beautiful the picture was. Following letter was presented and read to Shri Mataij "Dearest most Respected Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Shri Mataji said that the invitation letter was beautiful and very touching. She said it made Her feel goose bumps as She touched Her left arm with Her right. Mother commented on the reading of the prayer and said that it was spoken very well and that the english was very good. Shri Mataji was then offered a gift of perfume from Dubai and accepted anointment on both Her left and then Her right wrists. Many a time You have looked at us fondly, encouraging us with the light in Your eyes, allowing us to come on stage to worship Your Holy Feet. You have nurtured us, with Your ever flowing maternal Love, waiting eagerly for us to mature into Bhaktas and Messengers worthy of the beauty and magnitude of Your message. As You told us, the "atmosphere is spoilt" and it is indeed challenging for us Yuvashakti to establish the reality of Your light in the hearts of seekers that are lost in the darkness of today's societies. Shri Mataji asked the Yuva Shakti what size and how tall they were. Kurta pyjama and saris were sweetly given to everyone present in the room. She took special care and attention that everyone had been given a kurta and sari that was correctly fitted and playfully made sure each Yuva liked the colour they had been given. Shri Mataji gave Her blessings. Many young people have received their realisation but so few have been able to grasp the essence of Your message. It is also challenging for us Yuvashakti, growing up in the confusion of society's chaos, to rise above the temptations presented by the six enemies of the soul. Dearest Shri Mataji, that is why we have gathered here, so many, today in Cabella for the Pujas and our International Yuvashakti Seminar. We humbly pray with dedicated devotion that the innocence of Shri Nirmal Ganesh be firmly established within our souls, our heats and our minds. WVe pray that this innocence manifests in our eyes and that it brings warmth to the hearts of seekers that have been frozen by the mistakes they have made in ignorance. We pray that You give us the words that will touch their souls, allowing us to connect to them directly, inviting them into your Darbar. We pray that the Love we have for each other reflects the boundless Love that You have for us individually. Sir C.P. asked for the Yuva Shakti invitation card and was again presented to Shri Mataji who held it in Her hands. One of the Yuvas narrated to Shri Malaji the events t hat had taken place during the day at the seminar. She was informed that the Yuva Shakti had watched Her talk given at Shri Ganesha puja on the subject of chastity in Brighton, 1985. Shri Mataji replied "Very good idea." Shri Mataji said that "Only with Sahaja Yoga can you know yourself. You have to do Sahaja Yoga seriously to know yourself." A beautiful photograph of Shri Mataji with a corniced gold leaf frame was then offered. Shri Mataji remarked how beautiful the photo was and asked who had taken it, expressing Her pleasure and joy. Shri 1Mataji asked if there were more Yuva Shakti who would be coning to the castle. Mother was informed that there were 300 Yuva Shakti who had gathered for the seminar from every country, to which she expressed astonishment at the number. She was also informed that the age group was from 16 until 27 and that they were all Yuva Shakti; the younger children were attending the Daglio camp. Mother continued to expressed Her contentmen t and satisfaction throughout. Shri Mataji asked who is the leader of the Yuva Shakti and was informed that there was none and that the Yuva Shakti were just one large collective.. Shri Mataji we thank You for Your attention and we thank You for your protection. You have given us Your heaven and crowned us with Your Love. We realise that we can only thank You by helping those of Your children that are lost, to find Your divine reality in their he arts Shri Mataji we pray for Your inspiration and for Your silent guidance and we desire to do justice, as best we can, to the LOVE You have given us. We pray to be such that You look upon us with the pride of a Mother who sees Her sons and daughters growing from saints into true Sahaja Yogis. Mother was informed that the Yuva Shakti were preparing bhajans and qawwalis for Her. The Yuva Shakti bowed down to Shri Mataji and She gave all Her blessings. Your children, Your Yuvashakti"

 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007 The Yuvashaktis were then split into groups according to the language of their country and asked to come up with ideas for short video clips. These clips are then going to be uploaded onto Youtube (www.youtube.com), an internet site that provides a platform for any individual that wants Internation Yuvashakti Seminar 2007 (31stJuly 3rd August) 31st July. Tuesday: The Yuvashakti Seminar began with three mantras of Shri Ganesha. Thena talk of Shri Mataji of 1985 that was given in Brighton was played. The main theme of the tape was importance of chastity. to upload a video. The aim for each video clip is to convey a message prompting interest in Sahaja Yoga, thereby encouraging people to visit the official Sahaja web site. During the afternoon, ideas from the different country groups were presented. Before the speech, Yuvashaktis were spilt into groups according to the colour of their shirts and given three discussion guidelines: 1) Shri Mataji? 2) chastity to integrate in society? 3). lifestyle to better reflect the guidelines set down by Shri Mataji? Then, in the evening a joyful and vibrant programme was What surprises you the most about this speech of given by the International Yuvashakti in the hangar, including a diverse array of dance and music performances. What compromises do you make with your 2nd August, Thursday: What reasonable changes can you make to your Day three began with music meditation led by Dr Arun Apte. He demonstrated to the powerful connection between sound, silence and meditation and how primordial sounds help us to reach thoughtless awareness. Dr Apte interactively demonstrated taught the relationship between each note and its corresponding chakra. Some of the Yuvashakti boys related to all of us the tremendous words Mother had spoken to them on the previous evening. Following the talk circular groups were formed in which free discussions took place, Everyone was encouraged to freely voice their opinions. This lasted for about an hour, After the lunch break, one person per group gave a presentation on the discussions that had taken place. It was gratifying to see that so many yuvas had taken Shri Mataji's speech to heart and had genuinely expressed themselves in their respective groups. One boy remarked that he had found himself in a dilemma - it was the first time he was listening to a speech of Shri Mataji that so powerfully conveyed the importance of chastity and his problem was that he had a girlfriend. He was asking for help because he did not know what to do Afterwards Dr Brian Wells gave a short lecture on drugs awareness and how it affects the addicts. Dr Wells was followed by Dr David Spiro who spoke about different techniques we can use to clear ourselves, focusing primarily on balancing the left and right sides. There was also a Q&Asession. In the afternoon uncle Sandeep and uncle Sanjay spoke to Yuvashakti about protocol towards Shri Mataji and Other yuvas indicated that hearing this particular speech of Mother had a profound effect on their understanding of themselves and the fundamental importance of their chastity. They considered it as a turning point in their lives. amongst each other. They told us that the best way we can grow in protocol, bhakti and dedication is through meditation. The topic of boyfriends and girifriends was brought up by questions that were asked by some of the Yuvas. Our uncle's response was unequivocal and welcomed by many. Indeed, uncle Sanjay compared the fact that carbon will always have four valences to the fact that in Sahaja, brother-sister relations always had to be pure and that this was an eternal Divine law on which one cannot compromise. 1st August, Wednesday: The day began with a collective meditation followed by a talk from Uncle Wolfgang about the work which the Centre for Evolutionary Learning is doing to spread Sahaja Yoga in the world of business and politics. The upcoming UN Conference for young people was discussed and Yuvashaktis were given guidelines on how to participate. It was suggested that individuals could do research projects with children globally. For example - to see how Sahaja Yoga could reduce stress levels in young children and reduce other health problems. Uncle Bogdan and uncle Zafar, spoke about the dharma, chastity and protection between brothers and sisters. Aunty Sadia and Aunty Brigitte shared their wisdom with us on how to dress to protect our chakras and thus respect our chastity. The day ended with an exchange of We then came to the main topic of the day - 'How to spread the message of Sahaja Yoga using the internet?" First uncle Djamel Metouri spoke about the potential of using Skype in order for Sahaja Yogis to participate in collective global meditations. Further, he highlighted the importance of learning English in order to understand Shri Mataji's talks in Her own words and to strengthen our collective bonds. vibrations. 3rd August, Friday: Heeding the concerns expressed by Shri Mataji when She received the Yuvashakti on Tuesday, everyone decided to focus the end of the seminar on working on America with 10

 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007 bless the education system of india, where admission is granted on the basis of merit and not on preference. We can give a bandhan for this isue. their attentions. First, Yuvashakti listened to Shri Vishnumaya talk of Shri Mataji that was given in New York. Then collectively, 108 names of Shri Krishna were taken while focusing attention on America. Issue#2 Being a doctor is considered as a noble profession in India. But soon, this impression is going to shatter. With so much private hospitals and clinics mushrooming, doctors no longer see patients as a person in need but as a client from whom they have an opportunity to extract money. Innocent people who visit private hospitals for treatments are slapped with hefty bills in the name of treatment and the guarantee.of getting curing is not there. The honesty and service to mankind, which are integral moral values of a doctor, are soon forgotten before the charm of money. After that the following mantra was taken 16 times by everyone present- "Shri Mataji, we desire that Americans recognise your message of KNOW THYSELF". Meditation ended by inviting Mother's feet into our hearts and praying three times together- "Shri Mataji may Americans forget money and worship your Lotus Feet." Then everyone moved to the river bank where collective shoe-beating of seven predominant negativities (immorality, Hollywood, parental indifference, overactive right-side, lack of discretion, materialism and false gurus) that are afflicting America was done. Then everyone said Allah-hu-Akbar" while looking at Mother's castle. Suggestion We can pray to Shri Mataji that Her Shri Dhanvantri power bless the medical fraternity and system of India. By Her blessing may this money madness of doctors be removed from the basis. We can also shoe-beat for this issue. Everyone then gathered for a collective photo which marked the end of our seminar. Issue%23 Female feticide is one of the black spot on Indian culture, where children are loved and cared so much. Due to traditional conditioning in the minds of the people, there is a preference of male child than a female child. If women are less in the society then there cannot be growth as a woman is the Shakti. India Around Us Issue#1 In light of recent events, the education system in India has been exposed badly as it endorses caste based reservation. With reservation some people are granted admission privileges because of their background. Apart from Reservations, bribing the university official, leaking of the exam question paper, relatives/relations of influential people getting easy admissions etc create an environment of unjust and biased society where deserving students don't get through. Suggestion Clearly, this is a negativity acting through the conditioning of the people. Therefore, we can pray to Shri Mataji that Her Shri Garnesha form remove this negativity from the basis and bless the people of India so that they can come out of this ignorance. We may also burn this issue by an ahuti in a havan. Suggestion We can pray to Shri Mataji that Her Shri Saraswati power Collectivity doesn't mean that we should all stick together "The joy we feel during music recital is because Kundalini is dancing. She gets happy, because you ask for nothing but enjoyment of collectivity. Collectivity doesn't mean that we should all stick together. Collectivity means wherever person. The connecting line is of love and not of hatred. But people will live together and break each other's head. That is because they are nowhere near the real growth of Sahaja Yogis. You may be in any part of the world but you are connected and are concerned. As soon as there is a problem in any part of the world, you are connected and effective and you can manage. People don't really understand the meaning of collectivity. Where there is not the other- Ananya. There is no other personality. These personalities are separated from you because of left and right or both. You are yourself fully connected when you are absolutely detached and your Kundalini is dancing. You are alone and never alone. This oneness with the other gives you all the security and the joy you want. That's why the Kundalini awakening means collectivity. Unless and until you want pure collectivity in your being Kundalini won't rise". are, you are connected. When you are connected you love that person and are concerned about that Kundalini Puja, Germany, 1991 11

 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007 POWER OF WOMEN "Behind men you are the source of power, you are the one who can make Sahaja Yoga perfect, you are like this mother Earth who has to give you all the beautiful things and your guru is women who is source of all knowledge and is ocean of knowledge then why should you be left behind, when in all directions you are equal why notin Sahaja Yoga which is source of love. A Woman is like Mother Earth - so simple yet immensely tolerant and patient. Like Mother Earth, a woman is blessed with the power to give birth. Her humble behavior culminates from Divine grace of goddesses Parvati and Durga. She is the one who is bestowed with power to rebuild and enforce ethics in society. her sustenance, she gives you her desire and also she gives you a push in your evolution, if she is an evolved person. Now in the relationship of mother and child, the mother gives a lot. She makes your complete left side. She creates all the left side in you because she had desired you so she creates that. On the right side she gives you all the beauty of delicate things and also the hunches that you get in your business. "(Can we mention references of lectures from which these quotes r taken. Atleast for the larger quotes) As Devi, a woman symbolizes both Ati Somya and Ati Rudra aspects, she has enormous potential to nourish as well as destroy anything in the universe. But she only manifests thenm as and when the need arises. Awoman is the strongest person of household, like Mother Earth she takes all the problems upon herself because she is the strongest power who can withstand this kind of weight on her. Shri Mataji has said that, "Motherhood is the highest gift of divinity, any race that does not have superior mothers cannot exist. Any race, which does not have mothers of great quality, cannot exist. The mothers have to look after preservation, not only of their children, but also of the whole race, of the whole nation. It is very important thing & wherever the mothers have failed the nations have failed. If the mother themselves are selfish, small minded the whole nation will follow the path. Everything passes through the mother to the children."Awoman is not only a mother to her own children but to the whole society. The greatness of Indian culture rests on women, because they maintain the society. She is the thread As Shakti, women play an important role in the universe. This fact is embodied in one of the names of Lord Shiva, Ardhnareshwar, where Shri Shiva and Shri Shakti are shown as one. They cannot work without each other because Shri Shakti is principle of Shri Shiva and without Shakti there is no Shiva. Shri Mataji has said, "Women are shaktis and they are emotions and desires of whole world. It is with their pure desire they can work out great things not only in them but also for others. There is great responsibility on mother because mother makes the heart of child. She can make tigers out of goats like Jijabai who was mother of Shivaji, the saint and great warrior. Even the mother of Duryodhana, Gandhari, gave this blessings to her son "Victory to Righteousness'. She was pious women and believed in truth. She could have been selfish and could have blessed her son but she could see the truth and untruth and her blessings lead to the victory of Pandavas who were with truth," which keeps all the pearls together. Shri Mataji says that the whole power of your mother is love. She has also said that her powers are love, compassion, affection and forgiveness. In the Vishnu Purana, Lord Vishnu asserts "I am more powerful when, (1) take the form of (a) woman" and as a woman Shri Mataji is nurturing the whole universe, even while being is beyond the form of woman. "But the mother who is your own mother, whom you know as your own mother, who gives you physical birth, is the mother who gives you much more than you know of. Because her blood has a vibration and when she gives you her blood, she gives you her vibrations, She gives you 12

 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007 The nature of women's role is such that it involves sacrifice. However, it has never been about giving up under compulsion, rather it is concern for others and love that drives sacrifice by Indian women. For example, when Shri Sitaji was asked to leave Ayodhya by Shri Rama, She did not worry about how She would live alone in the jungle. She sacrificed Her comfortable life at the palace for the sake of Her husband's 'maryada' (reputation). She even refused Shri Ram's suggestion of Ayodhya's Prime Minister to accompany Her to the jungle, keeping in mind that the affairs of His kingdom should not be neglected. She independently and fearlessly brought up Her two brave sons -Luv and Kush. Later, Shri Luv & Kush captured the horse of Ashwamedha Yagnya and defeated the armies of Shri Ram, led by Shri Laxman and Shri Hanuman. Such fearlessness and bravery stunned Shri Ram and He expressed a desire to meet the brave ones. He was even more surprised to find that the two young boys were His own and that they had been trained in the art of warfare by Shri Sita Herself, Such is the Power of Mother. become futile" One of such great women to be born was Mukta Bai whose story is described below... MUKTA BAI Maharashtra has always been the land of saints and sages. Its history and culture is inextricable with spirituality. One such great saint was Shri Muktabai, the sister of Saint Gyaneshwar. She was a great comfort to her brother Saint Gynaneshwar. From the tender age of six when their parents were compelled by the society to commit suicide to secure the respect of the children, she was like the mother to him, soothing, counseling and encouraging him. When upset by the people's egos, Gynaneshwar would withdraw himself into the hut and she would compose inspiring abhangas consoling him, that a saint should not be disturbed by the petty follies of the world. "The one pure in mind forgives everything. The world is a simple piece of cloth Woven with one thread of the Lord, So come out, O Gynaneshwar." The power of women in Sahaja Yoga or sahaja-yoginis can be summed up by the following words of Shri Mataji's, "Women should not compete with man, because she is the source of all power, which her family is getting. All family members children, husband and society is running through this power. This is the Power of love." In Sahaja Yoga, this power further increases through meditation. Apopular abhanga (devotional song), sung often in Pune district, records the meeting of Muktabai with Saint Namadeva in the shrine of Vitthala at Pandharpur. A great devotee of Lord Vitthala, Saint Namdev prided himself in being dearer to the Lord since he always stayed at the Vitthala shrine. Muktabai wanted to shake off this illusion and refused to salute him, saying that by merely staying in a temple one doesn't get Self-Realization. A discussion followed and it was finally agreed to put the matter to the renowned Saint Gora Kumbhar, the potter. During the evening Kirtan, Gora Kumbhar tested Namdeva with a strip of wood. As he drew the strip towards Namadeva, he got angry. So Gora remarked that that Namdeva was still a raw pot and needed the guidance of a Guru. Gora recommended him to Visoba Khechar, a disciple of Saint Gyananeshwar. It is said that when he went there he got his Self-Realization. He had a miraculous revelation that no place was devoid of the Lord's presence in the universe. Namdeva was overwhelmed with divine love and his ego completely melted. So to become powerful women need to meditate, they have to be very deep in connection with their inner spirit (Shiva Tattwa). They should meditate to solve out each and every problem, not only of their family but all the problems of the society and world. Through meditation nothing will be impossible for them. Nothing can deter them from their way just like the brave Ahilya Bai. It was only through her deep spirituality, her dedication that Shri Savitri was able to bring her husband back from Yama's door. "Yatra naryastu pujayante ramante tatra devta Yatraistu na pujante savastatraphala kriya' "Where women are respected, there resides all the gods and bless the whole family with their blessings. And where they are not respected even religious ceremonies Answers of Use your Vibrations (pg 7, June Issue) 1. Left Heart 2. Left Nabhi and Right Mooladhara 3. Right Swadhishthan 4. Left Vishuddhi 5. Right Heart and Centre Vishuddhi 6. Thames (England) 7. Descent of Shuddh Ichha 8. Bhaya Kaya Taya 9. Left Void 10. Delhi - Right Heart, Mumbai - Left Nabhi, Kolkatta - Centre Heart, Pune- Kundalini 13

 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007 ाता भविष्य का महातीर्थ ब्रह्मपुरी पुणे से लगभग १०० कि०मी० दूर सतारा जिले में कृष्णा नदी समतल चोटीवाला एक ऊँचा पहाड़ है। यह वही स्थान है जहाँ के किनारे ब्रह्मपुरी गाँव के पास चैतन्य का एक शक्तिशाली पर दिव्य लीला का एक महत्वपूर्ण हिस्सा- राजा दक्ष प्रजापति स्त्रोत है। यह वही स्थान है जिसे विभिन्न कालखण्डों में श्री का महायज्ञ हुआ था। कथा कुछ इस प्रकार है - यद्यपि सभी देवी-देवताओं को महायज्ञ में आमंत्रित किया गया था तथापि राजा ने अपनी पुत्री उमा तथा उनके पति परमेश्वर शिव को परमात्मा के साथ अकेले होते हैं और आप आत्मा की गहराई आमंत्रित नहीं किया क्योंकि राजा, भगवान शिव को अपने पुत्री में डूब सकते हैं। यह बहुत ही विशिष्ट स्थान है क्योंकि कई के योग्य स्वीकार नहीं करते थे और उनका अपमान करना चाहते थे यद्यपि देवी उमा अपने पिता के घर पर इस समारोह आशीर्वादित किया है। बहुत से सहजयोगियों को इस स्थान की में गईं किन्तु उनके पिता ने उनकी ओर कोई ध्यान नहीं दिया याद उस चित्र से होगी जिसमें श्री माताजी नदी के पत्थरों के और हर अवसर पर उनका और भगवान शिव का अपमान अ प ने स्वाभिमान तथा अपने पति के सीता, श्री मेरी और वर्तमान काल में श्रीमाताजी के दिव्य द चरणों ने पावन किया है। यह वह स्थान है जहाँ पर आप बार श्री माताजी ने अपनी विभिन्न सभाओं के द्वारा बीच सफेद साड़ी पहने खड़ी हुई हैं। किया । द हापुरी का अनेकों इंतिहास अर्थपूर्ण संकतों एवं उत्कृष्टताओं से महानता की रक्षा के लिए देवी उमा ने अपनी बलि चढ़़ाने का निश्चय किया और स्वयं शी म भरा है। योगशास्त्र के ह |सवमरण ्ट्ट । ती को महायज्ञ की अग्नि में होम कर दिया। अपनी पत्नी के बलिदान को देखकर क्रोधित अनुसार ब्रह्मपुरी नाम का तात्पर्य ब्रह्मा के वास, वृत्त अथवा निवास स्थान से है और सचदा ् टटन ा ्ट १० मम लसलली र त भगवान शिव ने नृ त्य प्रारम्भ किया और अग्नि से देवी उमा के शरीर को खींच लिया। नृत्य के दौरान देवी के शरीर के कुछ हिस्से भारत वर्ष के अनेक हिस्सों में गिरे जो शक्तिपीठ के रूप में स्थापित हुए। इन बावन शक्तिपीठों में से साढ़े तीन महाराष्ट्र में है। पटेश्वर मूल स्थान है जहाँ आदि पीठ स्थित हैं। स्थानीय किवदंती है कि भगवान श्री ब्रह्मा जब पटेश्वर में महायज्ञ में आए तब वे ब्रह्मपुरी में रहते थे। ऐसा भी कहा जाता है कि सतयुग में देवी-देवता यहाँ पर अपने दिव्य पान सहस्रार चक्र को भी ब्रह्मपुरी ही कहते हैं। इसका वर्णन मार्कण्डेय पुराण में भी है जहाँ इसका वर्णन भगवान ब्रह्मा के नगर जो कि स्वर्णिम पर्वत मेरू-पर्वत राज और पृथ्वी गृह का आधार है जो भारतीय उपमहाद्वीप के पौराणिक नाम जम्बुद्धीप में है ब्रह्मपुरी इन्द्र एवं सात अन्य देवताओं के नगरों से घिरा हुआ है। ऐसी मान्यता है कि ये स्थान प्रकृति में सूक्ष् रूप से स्थित है और इनको खोज पाना सुगम नहीं है। ताण्डव - के रूप में किया गया है और यह नगर उत्सवों (ब्रह्म सभाओं) के लिए मिलते थे। देवी का आदि स्थान इस छोटे किन्तु दिव्य स्थान के साथ अनेकों किंवदंतियाँ जुड़ी संयोग से सहजयोग के आरम्भिक वर्षों में कई गोष्ठियाँ हुई हैं। ब्रह्मपुरी से कुछ किमी० की दूरी पर पटेश्वर है जो कि ( सेमिनार) ब्रह्मपुरी में ही हुई। इन अवसरों पर ब्रह्मपुरी से 14

 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007 यात्रा के दौरान बार-बार श्री माताजी ने पटेश्वर पर्वत के जिसमें आदि माँ रहती थीं और सहजयोगी उद्यानों में रहते थें। प्रकाश की ओर इशारा करके इस स्थान की आध्यात्मिक श्रीमाता जी 1984 से 1990 के बीच में पश्चिमी साधकों के महत्ता तथा आदिशक्ति से इसके सम्बन्ध की ओर संकेत किया साथ छः बार ब्रह्मपुरी में रुकी, जहाँ उन्होंने उनकी माँ और है। गुरू की तरह सहजयोग की प्रारम्भिक दीक्षा दी और बार-बार जोर देकर कहा - "ब्रह्मपुरी मेरा स्थान है।" यह भी ज्ञात है कि प्राचीन काल से ही तपस्वी और योगी यहाँ रहते थे और ध्यान करते थे। नदी के बायें किनारे पर "भवानी नहानी" नामक भवानी देवी का स्नान स्थल है और इससे मात्र ३० मीटर की दूरी पर एक बहुत छोटा किन्तु चैतन्यपूर्ण श्री भवानी का मन्दिर है। स्थानीय लोग कहते हैं कि इस स्नान-स्थल का पानी रोग निवारक है, विशेषकर चर्मरोगों के लिए। ना श्री 770 अपने वनवास के समय श्री सीता और श्री राम ब्रह्मपुरी में रुके थे रोचक है कि श्री सीता भी स्नान के लिए भवानी नहानी का ही प्रयोग करती थीं और इस नहानी के समीप एक चट्टान है जिसे श्रीमान शिला कहा जाता है। बाद में श्री समर्थ रामदास (जो कि श्री हनुमान के अवतरण थे) को कृष्णा नदी के गहरे पानी में श्री सीता-राम और देवी आंग्लाई की प्रस्तर मूर्तियां मिलीं। श्री माता जी ने स्वयं आंग्लाई शब्द का वास्तविक अर्थ बताया है - आंग्ल+आई त्र आंग्ल लोगों की माँ (अर्थात् पश्चिमी), या माँ मरियम! उन्होंने आगे कहा कि चूंकि उनकी माँ (श्री मेरी) यहाँ इस स्थान पर रहीं हैं अतः पश्चिमी लोगों को यहाँ आकर सहजयोग का अनुकरण करना चाहिए। म रा त ब्रह्मपुरी में छः पूजाएं हुई और जो सहजयोगी इसमें आये थे, वो उन अद्भुत एवं दैवी घटनाओं को आज भी याद करते हैं। एक सीधे कृष्णा नदी में हुई थी। श्रीमाता जी एक बड़ी चट्टान ब्रह्मपुरी में मुख्य मंदिर विट्ठल रुकमणी का है और कृष्णा नदी जो कि ब्रह्मपुरी से गुजरती है श्री कृष्ण की शक्ति को उद्घाटित करती है। कहा जाता है - महाभारत काल में पाँचों पाण्डव ब्रह्मपुरी के निकट पटेश्वर में रुके थे। यहाँ उन्होंने तपस्या की और दुराचारियों और कौरवों से युद्ध में विजय प्राप्त करने के लिए शक्ति अर्जित की। इस प्रकार से पाण्डवों और श्री कृष्ण का संबंध भी इस भूमि से है। पूजा पर बैठी थीं और सहजयोगी बहते हुए सरिता जल में उनकी पुजा कर रहे थे। दिसम्बर 1990 में ब्रह्मपुरी में अपनी आखिरी यात्रा के समय, सहजयोगियों ने पुनः श्रीमाता जी की पूजा उसी स्थान पर सरिता तल पर की। वातावरण ऐसा हो गया था मानो सभी देवी-देवता उस अवसर के साक्षी बनने के लिए एकत्र हुए हों। एक बार जब श्रीमाता जी ब्रह्मपुरी में देर शाम से पहुंची तो उन्होंने सहजयोगियों से कृष्णा नदी के मधुर संगीत को सुनने के लिए कहा और कहा कि वह श्री कृष्ण की शक्ति हैं जो आदि शक्ति का स्वागत्गान कर रही हैं। ब्रह्मपुरी में सहजयोग ब्रह्मपुरी पर श्री माताजी की आशीर्वादित दृष्टि और उनका इस तरह के स्थान को ढूंढ़ने का प्रयास सन् 1970 से प्रारम्भ हुआ जब श्रीमाताजी राहुरी आया करती थीं। अंततः अभिक्षित स्थान मिला और सन् 1984 में श्रीमाताजी ब्रह्मपुरी आईं। उस समय यह एक जंगली स्थान था, जहाँ एक साधारण सा धर था श्रीमाता जी की अनुकम्पा से एक न्यास (ट्रस्ट)-श्री विश्व निर्मल धर्म चैरिटेबल ट्रस्ट, सतारा का पंजीकरण वर्ष - २००३ में हुआ। स्थानीय सहजयोगियों ने आवश्यक निधि का संचय 15 ६ा

 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007 रात्रि प्रवास रू. 150/-, सुबह का नाश्ता और चाय रू. 10/- दोपहर भोज एवं रात्रि भोज रू. 25/- प्रत्येक ( भोजन का मूल्य अलग है क्योंकि कुछ योगी खाने की इच्छा नहीं जाहिर किया और तीन अत्यंत महत्वपूर्ण एवं चैतन्य से परिपूर्ण स्थानों को अधिगृहीत करने में समर्थ हुए। न्यास का एक मात्र उद्देश्य साधकों हेतु एक ऐसा परिसर ब्रह्मपुरी में कृष्णा नदी के किनारे करते।) बनाना है जिसमें समस्त आदि देवियों के मंदिर, श्री आदिशक्ति निर्मला देवी का मंदिर आश्रम एवं अन्य सुविधाएं उपलब्ध हों। किसी अन्य जानकारी के लिए श्रीमानू किंजाले को निम्नलिखित ई-मेल पर संपर्क किया जा vishwanirmaladham@indiatimes.com सकता है नदी के बांये किनारे पर स्थानीय सहजयोगी पहले से ही एक आश्रम बना चुके हैं। यह आश्रम वहाँ आये सहजयोगियों के लिए विश्राम स्थल का कार्य करता है। शीघ्र ही वहाँ पर एक निर्मल नगरी स्थापित करने की योजना है, जिसमें नदी के दायें किनारे पर पहाड़ी के ऊपर बाँस की कुटियाएं बनाई जायेगी। आदिशक्ति श्रीमाताजी निर्मला देवी के चरण कमलों की वंदना स्थानीय योगियों ने वहाँ पर लगभग ७० प्रजातियों के पौधों एवं में पूर्ण समर्पण के साथ वहीं रह जाती हैं। वृक्षों को रोपा है ताकि न केवल ध्यान की गहराई का आनन्द मिलें, अपितु आयुर्वेदिक औषधि एवं प्राकृतिक सानिध्य भी सबसे रोचक आने वाली परियोजना आदिशक्ति श्रीमाताजी मिले। हुए ताड ब्रह्मपुरी से वापस कैसे आया जाये ? यह असम्भव है, क्योंकि आपकी आत्मा सदैव सर्वदा के लिए निर्मला देवी के मंदिर निर्माण की है जो कि विश्व इतिहास में सर्वप्रथम है। मंदिर बनाने का विचार सन् 1983 में तब आया जब सहजयोगी श्रीमाता जी के साथ ब्रह्मपुरी से 30 किमी. दूर स्थित श्री सीताराम मंदिर गये थे। यह मंदिर श्री समर्थ रामदास द्वारा कृष्णा नदी की गहराईयों में पाई गयी मूर्तियों के कारण प्रसिद्ध है। इससे प्रेरित होकर तथा आदिशक्ति का आशीर्वाद ब्रह्मपुरी यात्रा एक व्यक्गित अनुभव कई सहजयोगी दिसम्बर 2006 में महाराष्ट्र दौरे पर थे। सहृदय सहजयोगियों ने इस कार्यक्रम को अत्यंत रोचक बनाते हुए हमारे समक्ष भारत की विभिन्न मनोदशाओं का चित्रण मंदिरों, गाँवों, पर्वतों, झीलों, नगरों और विभिन्न | लेकर कई वर्षों के पश्चात् इस योजना को प्रारम्भ करने का स्वयंभुवों तथा रोचक स्थानों के माध्यम से किया और सहसा ही चैतन्य और परिदृश्यों के इस चित्र में उन्होंने हमें स्वर्ग के| है, जब हम समस्त आदिपीठों, जहाँ श्री आदिशक्ति माँ की द्वार-ब्रह्मपुरी- पर खड़ा कर दिया। श्री किंजाले के स्वागत् अभिभाषण के पश्चात् सब लोग पन्द्रह मिनट के जलक्रिया सत्र पर कृष्णा नदी पर गये। मिनट-घण्टों में परिवर्तित हो गये और 150 जोड़ी योगियों के पैरों के साथ महाजल क्रिया हुई, जोकि आयोजकों के लिए थोड़ा सिरदर्द थी क्योंकि हमारे समक्ष एक व्यस्त कार्यक्रम था किन्तु कोई भी इसे छोड़ना नहीं चाहता क्योंकि वहाँ जाकर हम कालातीत हो जाते। अवसर आया है और ब्रह्मपुरी की यात्रा का यह उचित समय पूजा हुई है, वहाँ पर जाकर ध्यान की गहराईयों का आनन्द ले सकते हैं। व ब्रह्मपुरी तक कैसे पहुंचे ? ब्रह्मपुरी जाने के लिए आपको सतारा जिला केन्द्र, जो कि ब्रह्मपुरी से २५ किमी. दूर है तक जाना होगा पुणे से दो घण्टे तक की यहाँ की यात्रा के लिए बसों की सुविधा उपलब्ध है। यहाँ से ब्रह्मपुरी के लिए किराये पर वाहन मिलते है। सहजयोगी आश्रम में शुल्क अदा करके रह सकते हैं। शुल्क दर इस प्रकार हैं :- क 16 हtc

 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007 Kid Shakti Page Nabhi Chakra Locate the Nabhi Chakra on the body chart. Count the Number of petals in the Nabhi Chakra. Ask your parents the color of the Nabhi Chakra and color it. Shri Lakshmi and Shri Narayan or Shri Vishnu are deities at Nabhi Chakra. Shri Vishnu is the Father principle and preserver of Dharma and the Creation. This aspect of God is responsible for our ascent and evolution, He incarnated ten times. Shri Lakshmi is Goddess of wealth, prosperity, health and well-being. To develop this principle we have to be generous, supportive, helpful and respectful towards others. Color the following picture of Shri Lakshmi. 17

 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007 उत्तरांचल आत्मसाक्षात्कार दिवस हम सभी की इच्छा और परम पावन माँ के आशीर्वाद से दिवस" होगा। यह भी निश्चित किया गया कि नगर केन्द्र अपने यह आभास किया गया कि श्री माता जी का संदेश प्रत्येक की संसाधनों का प्रयोग करके एक छोटा सा जन कार्यक्रम सहभागिता द्वारा सामूहिकता तक पहुँचे, किन्तु इसके पहले यह आयोजित करेंगे। इस तरह से यह आभास किया गया कि इसमें निश्चित किया गया कि विभिन्न शहरों में सहजयोगियों के बीच कम वित्तीय भार प्रत्येक की सक्रिय सहभागिता के साथ एक पारस्परिक संचार तंत्र मजबूत हो और कार्यक्रमों के विषय में सामूहिक चेतना भी रहेगी, जो कि साधकों को समझाते, उनके एक ऐसी रणनीति विकसित की जाए कि इन कार्यक्रमों का प्रश्नों का उत्तर देते और आत्मसाक्षात्कार के समय उनका अनुवर्तन सुचारू रूप से प्राप्त तथा सम्प्रेषित हो सके। राज्य की ख्याल रखने के माध्यम से स्थानीय छोटे केन्द्रों के विकास में संयोजक समिति (१४ सदस्यीय जिसमें तीन राज्य संयोजक भी सहायक होते हैं। सम्मिलित) श्री माताजी की अनुकम्पा से नवम्बर २००६ में योजना तथा कार्यप्रणाली पर विचार विमर्श करने तथा उसे श्री माता जी की कृपा तथा श्रीगणेश जी के मार्ग दर्शन में पहला अन्तिम स्वरूप देने के लिए हरिद्वार में एकत्रित हुए, जहाँ पर "उत्तरांचल आत्मसाक्षात्कार दिवस" १० फरवरी २००७ को सहजयोग के विभिन्न पक्षों पर भी विस्तृत रूप से चर्चा की आयोजित किया गया। इस आत्मसाक्षात्कार दिवस पर वर्षा के गयी। शुद्ध बावजूद सभी कार्यक्रम में साधक आये, यद्यपि उनकी संख्या कम थी और कुछ स्थानों पर सहज योगियों द्वारा किये गये परिणामस्वरूप "पोषित केन्द्रों" के विचार का जन्म हुआ, अथक प्रयास के सामने नगण्य थी, किन्तु फिर भी एक जिसमें संयोजक समिति के प्रत्येक सदस्य को दो नगर केन्द्रों के शुरूआत तो हो गयी थी और हम सभी आश्वस्त थे कि इस पूरे साथ जोड़ दिया गया। यह निश्चित किया गया कि हर सदस्य वर्ष के लिए इस पवित्र कार्य हेतु एक वातावरण बन चुका है। अपने पोषित केन्द्र के सम्पर्क में रहेगा और वहाँ की पूरे राज्य भर में चले इस आत्मसाक्षात्कार के कार्यक्रम में सामूहिकता की समस्याओं को देखेगा तथा उन केन्द्रों से लगभग ५०० साधकों ने आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्राप्त किया। इस दिन सम्बन्धित समस्त सूचनाओं के एकत्रण तथा अग्रसरण के लिए का विशेष आकर्षण गोपेश्वर का कार्यक्रम था, जहाँ पर एक उत्तरदायी होगा। संयोजक समिति के सम्मेलन में लिये गये साल पहले ही आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्राप्त किये हुए एक परिवार से किसी निर्णय अथवा राष्ट्रीय न्यास (ट्रस्ट) की कोई सूचना जो दो बच्चे एक विद्यालय में गये और वहाँ पर लगभग 100 छात्रों कि उस केन्द्र से सम्बन्धित है, वहाँ के नगर केन्द्र को प्रेषित की को आत्मसाक्षात्कार के विषय में बताया और पूरे राज्य में यह जायेगी और सदस्य यह सुनिश्चित करेगा कि सम्बन्धित एक मात्र स्थान था, जहा साक्षात्कार की प्रक्रिया के समय वर्षा घोषणायें केन्द्र में की जायें। आगे सभी संयोजक समिति के नहीं हुई। सदस्यों से अपेक्षित है कि वे एक ई-मेल परिचय रखें, जिससे सूचनाओं का प्रवाह अल्पव्ययी तथा द्रुतगामी हो। दूसरा आत्मसाक्षात्कार दिवस हल्की फुहारों के बीच १० मार्च २००७ को आयोजित किया गया। इस वर्ष लगभग १००० नये इस व्यवस्था के तैयार होते ही अब बारी थी कि नगर के साधकों ने अपने आत्मसाक्षात्कार को प्राप्त किया। इस दिन का संयोजकों और संयोजक समिति के सदस्यों का एक सम्मेलन विशेष आकर्षण 'यमकेश्वर' में कार्यक्रम रहा। जहाँ विगत वर्ष होने की, यह सम्मेलन १४ जनवरी २००७ को मकर-संक्रान्ति राष्ट्रीय सम्मेलन का आयोजन हुआ था ग्रामवासियों ने गत के पावन अवसर पर देहरादून में हुआ। दूरस्थ स्थानों से वर्ष ही अपने आत्मसाक्षात्कार को प्राप्त किया और आगे अपना समय निकाल कर आये विभिन्न संयोजकों के इस लगभग छः माह तक हरिद्वार की सामूहिकता ने उन्हें संभाला। सम्मेलन में यह निश्चित किया गया कि फरवरी २००७ से अब वे ही ग्रामवासी श्री माता जी के प्रेम को प्रसारित करने के प्रत्येक माह के दूसरे शनिवार को "उत्तरांचल आत्मसाक्षात्कार लिए तैयार थें और समीप के "काण्डी" गांव में पूरे साक्षात्कार हुए 18 निय

 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007 MOTHER'S RECIPE कार्यक्रम में उत्साह के साथ हिस्सा लिया। Seviyan ki Kheer (Vermicelli Puddingq) कार्यक्रम के सभी विवरणों को तथा उनके अनुवर्तनों को विस्तृत रूप से लिखना तो संभद नहीं है, किन्तु फिर भी इसको पढ़ना Ingredients: 40g dried vermicelli" (seviyan/sevain) 1 Tbsp.ghee 750ml hot milk Sugar to taste (4Tbsp.) Pinch saffron 1/4 tsp.cardamom powder 1&1/2 Tbsp.chopped cashew nuts 1 Tbsp. raisins 3 Tbsp. almond powder 1/4 tsp. Kewra or rose water (optional) आनन्द दायक होगा। हम इस वर्ष होने वाले कार्यक्रमों की ओर 1) 2) देखते हैं और श्री माता जी के पावन चरणों में नतूमस्तक होकर 3 4) अपने आध्यात्मिक उद्द्धवर्ती विकास के लिए प्रार्थना करते हैं, 5) 6) जिससे हम प्रभावी रूप से क्षैतिज विकास कर सकें और अपनी 7) 8) आदिशक्ति माँ के शुद्ध तथा प्रेममय यंत्र बन सकें। 9) अनन्त प्रेम के साथ, 10) उत्तरांचल सामूहिकता Preparation: 1. Break the vermicelli into approximately 3 cm pieces. 2. In a pot heat the ghee and fry the vermicelli until light golden 3 Add the hot milk and bring to a boil for 5 minutes (adding more milk if necessary). 4 Add sugar, saffron and cardamom powder. Let it cook for a 5 further minutes, stirring constantly. 5 Add chopped cashew nuts, raisins, almond त्रिलोक की स्वामिनी निर्मला देवी हे अनादि करुणा-मई माँ अबोधिता, मंगलमयता पा जाएेँ हम सब पवित्रता, ऐसे तेरे गणेश स्वरूप को बारमबार नमस्कार। आ कर विराजो स्वाधिष्ठान पर, दो ज्ञान हमें निमल प्रज्ञाविष्कार माँ, ऐसे तेरे बह्मा सरस्वती स्वरूप को कोटी नमन श्री माँ, देती हमें समाधान, उदारता, शान्ति, धार्मिक-उत्थान की शक्ति, दस पंखुडी में स्थित श्री लक्ष्मी नारायण स्वरूपिणी को प्रणाम । तू ही सुरक्षा, आत्मविश्वास, प्रेम, करुणा का भंडार, हृदय में रहती हैं ऐसी जगदम्बा माँ महान। बना के सामुहिक देती अनासक्त वराती श्री राधा कृष्ण लीला दे भाव साक्षी। श्री जीसस ने दो पंखुडी खोल, stirring. powder and let it cook for 3 minutes, keep on 6 lfyou like, add kewra or rose water. Serve warm or at room temperature. दिया क्षमा नम्रता का वरदान, TIP: If you cannot find vermicelli you may substitute then for very fine "angel hair" soup noodies." very fine spaghetti कर पार हमें दी तूने शान्ति। स्थिर चित की तू देवी, देना चैतन्य लहरी, रहें निरविचार तेरे चरणों में त्रिलोक की स्वामिनी निर्मला देवी। Source: Cooking with Love, Recipes of Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi गरिमा नेगी, हरिद्वार 19

 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007 PUJA PROTOCOLS So, the protocol of the Guru, and the Mother, is to be understood in Sahaja Yoga, mostly by experiencing. But that doesn't mean that you go out of the way to experience the other side of it. By being protocolish, more and more, you'll find, you'll receive much more help... devotion. As Sahaja yogis offering the Puja at the Holy Feet of Shri Mataji we must observe following protocols, as described by Shri Mataji ..So, the protocolis the simplest of simple to do. So that's the essence of Sahaja Yoga: the simplest of the simple is the protocol. f you understand the protocol, you don't have to do anything, you will grow up by it automatically. But you lack in protocol, and that's how you do not grow. This is the point is, that to grow, best in Sahaja Yoga is to know the protocol, which you can ask others. With experienced people, you can ask. Or, if you want to have your own experience, you can have. But some people try the other way round, like answering Me back, and saying all kinds of things, that, "Let's experiment what happens. And then they break their necks and come to Me for curing. So, that should not happen. Experience should be for betterment, and that's how, if you can ask others, take their advice, those people who are rising higher than normal, "What is the protocol?"And put your attention to it. How can you improve your protocol? "What should we do to observe protocol? What wrong are we doing? Where are we going wrong?" Because the essence of Sahaja Yoga today is the protocol, which should be the simplest. Should be the simplest thing to do. And, once you know the protocol, that, if She has said it, if it is meant, then it's all right. ...Because everything is for your betterment, and a special grace, if you understand the essence of protocol(4). Itis the greatest of greatest blessings and privilege ever to be bestowed on mankind that we are able to attend a Puja of Sakshat Shri Adishakti, The Primordial Mother, The Pramabhrama the creator of enter cosmos, the creator of even Shri Brahma, Shri Vishnu and Shri Shiva. Everything is within Her and She is within everyone and everything. She is omnipotent (all powerful), omniscient (sees everything)and omnipresent(is everywhere) 1. Pujais only for those people who deserve Today I am to tell you a few more secrets about Sahaja Yoga-it is that for the Puja you should not get people of mediocre nature, because to bear a Puja is very difficult. People have not yet understood the value of My being, of My Feet, of My Hands. They cannot, they do not deserve to be here. So do not get anybody because he is your friend or a sister ora brotheris wrong. You are spoiling the chances of the person, because it is too much for him. He cannot bear it. It is meant for very few people. So remember that it is not meant for many people. Now what we call the Chranamrut, meaning the Ambrosia of my Feet, is not meant for everyone. Neither are the blessings of the Puja meant for everyone. So try to avoid people who are not yet fully equipped. First thing they wil start is doubting. Also there will be a problem with the protocol. They won't be able to accept it with that protocol. It is a very great privilege to be here and this privilege cannot be granted to every person (1). So we must realize whom we are facing, whom we are worshipping and on whom we are meditating. We must realize the importance of these times, the importance of every Puja which is offered at Her Lotus feet. The importance of every moment that we are spending together with Her. We must not let ourselves be mediocre anymore. We must grow deeper and deeper in our mediation and rise higher in our spiritual ascent. Hence the Puja must be performed with attention completely on the Lotus Feet of Shri Mataji. Distraction from the Puja, | although not intended, may amount to showing disrespect. Mantras are recited in the praise of the Supreme Goddess and are a form of prayer asking her acceptance of the offerings, which are made with our 20

 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007 seat only once She is seated. Before taking our seat we must bow down in reverence to Shri Mataji. 2. We must cleanse our charkas and our subtle system before the Puja so as to be able to absorb the Divine vibrations. Bandhan is not required in Shri Mataji's presence because when She is sitting there is already a bandhan. 4. Unless and until you are totally cleansed how you can be campletely blessed; clothe by the love of God (2) During the Puja we should stay in meditation and be in thoughtless awareness for as long as possible. We must not move around or talk to others. These actions not only show disrespect towards Shri Mataji but also disturb other Sahaja Yogis. 5. 3. We should meditate after the Aarti, to absorb the vibrations. Now you must meditate also after the Puja because my vibrations you do not suck in without meditation. Always it happens so far I have had very few Pujas i which all my whole vibrations were sucked in. If you have sincerity about it, it is really the sincerity part of it you will suck all my vibrations. Tell your mind not to ask questions and misbehave but to suck the vibrations clearly. This is for your own nourishment, for your own growth, for your own enjoyment (1). Many Sahaja Yogis and Yoginis raise their arms and 6. hands when Shri Mataji arrives and leaves. This is absolutely wrong and against protocol. This is only for us when we receive our self-realization when Shri Mataji makes us to do it and must not be done otherwise. 7. Afterthe Puja we must preserve our meditative state by keeping our attention inside, not talking too much and staying in silence. We must wear dignified clothes for the Puja. Clothes 4. must be made of a natural fabric either silk or cotton and not synthetic or nylon. Yogis should wear Kurta Pyjama and Yoginis should wear Sari. Western cloths must be avoided and cut sleeves are an absolute no-no. References: 1980-0501: Opening the Heart Public Program, 1. Zürich, Switzerland 1982-0731: Dedication through Meditation, Cowley 2. Manor Seminar, England 2001-0729: Shri Krishna Puja, Canajoharie I've always told ladies that please keep this (Shri Chakra & Lalita Chakra) covered. Its looks so simple, but it's very important. Don't expose this because the power of this should be preserved. They are I should say feminine powers and they are the feminine powers of Shri Krishna, which must be understood that whatever way you respect your body that is the way your chakras are and that is the why you suffer. (8) 3. KALPA TARU / wish to be a lush green tree - an innocent witnessing child. All our attention must be on the Puja. 5. As I thrive on the blessed love of my mother who nourishes me from her compassionate womb, She - the earth sustains me - so that I grow lush and strong. I am the 'green sari' of hers whom she drapes around her waist to protect her chastity. 6. Bhakti' and 'Shraddha' are of utmost importance during the Puja. Without these we won't be able to receive blessings of the divine. 7. Puja must be offered with all the Heart. Tired souls, battered beings seek comfort in the silent re-assurance of my existence. I feel honorably fulfilled to shower my soothing shade upon my creator's creation. 'Jai Kaara' is to be done only once as it is inappropriate welcome to the Supreme Goddess to do it again and again. 8. Some advices for Puja (from Sahaja Yogis) 1. times when greedy hands rob me off, when unconscious - unaware existences vandalize. when there is unrelenting heat and un-kept promises by monsoons and others. We must be seated, take bandhan and be in meditation for Puja before Shri Mataji arrives or before the Puja begins. We must sit whereverwe get place and not hanker to sit in front to gain physical proximity (closeness) with Shri Mataji. She is all pervading, Her divine vibrations and divine blessing are everywhere and anywhere we sit, Her attention is on us. 2. still my source - my mother- shall bequeath me with the last drop of her life-giving blood. for me her child to sustain. and so shall I be - as she wants me to be. that wish granting tree- the kalpa- taru. Kavita Naviani, Delhi. We must stand when Shri Mataji arrives and take our 3. 21

 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007 MOTHER EXPLAINS Advice on Allergies Shri Mataji: "Now why the child has an allergy, now let Me ask a question. Why a child will have an allergy? The doctors have to answer. Or of course you are all doctors you should say. "CanI have the answer?" Sahaja Yogi: Mother, It could be the imbalance of heat and cold in the body. Shri Mataji: But why, say on the charkas, you say on the chakras what will be catching if somebody has allergies what does it catch? Sahaja Yogis: Left Nabhi. Shri Mataji: Correct, Left Nabhi. Left Nabhi will catch. Now that means the Mother. Because the child is not yet married, so is the mother that means mother must be having a Left Nabhi herself and that's why the child must be catching with that allergy. So instead of purnishing the child why not cure the Left Nabhi of the mother and Left Nabhi of the child. "Now what will you do if there is a Left Nabhi of the child, what we can do to help the child to get rid of it?" Ah, Very simple, anything that is left can be taken out on the little flame. Put your right hand on the Left Nabhi of the child and put your left hand to the flame and finish. Now in, in diagnosis, you are easy, but now for medicines. Now remember the certain principies of medicines, very certain principles; principles are there. Ifit is left side, you have to take it to the fire or to the sun or to the flames, all right. If it is the Left (here Shri Mataji is saying right) side you have to take it to the water in general. Anybody is suffering from right side put him in the water finished, done, not in the sun of course. Any disease, you bring it to this point. It's very simple. Now let Me have some questions about certain diseases. diseases, which are cured with Geru, Because it is the one which is very hot and it soothes you down. 1990-0831 Shri Hanumana Puja, Schwetzingen, Germany Forallergy the best is geru. You all should take geru, those who suffer from allergy and we get little stone pieces round ones, rub it on that about seven times and then eatit and take it with some water. It is good for allergies, everybody should not, those who have allergies. Geru is not good for people who have overactive liver. 1986-0131: Health Advice to Yogis 1986-0113: About the sun, western habits, the brain and medical matters, Rahuri, India Allergies of the skin can be the result of a lethargic liver, resulting from a left side imbalance of the Swadisthan Chakra; Imbalances of the Left Swadisthan can resuit in lethargic organs, resulting in: allergies of the skin (liver), nervous problems, cancer and leukemia External The best way to see ifit is a case of allergy due to lethargic liver is to apply some gheru with water externally directly to the changed fragment of skin. If it improves it means that we can take internally forsome time. 1984-0313: Intro talk - Three Channels Treatments: Internal Mix it in honey, in a small bowl and keep it in front of Shri Mataji to get vibrated and first thing in morning we have it. It is good for Nabhi, everyday one teaspoon first thing in the morning. Geru is a - that's a kind of a, you know what Geru is, it's a red-coloured stone which is very, very it is very hot and supposing with the cold sometimes you develop those rashes. So, if you put Geru, those rashes are corrected. Or you get, due to badhas, sometimes some sort of skin- 22

 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007 शैतानी प्रवृत्ती की हार मुझे लगता है कि परमात्मा के नज़रिए से जब भी कोई कार्य महत्वपूर्ण होता है, तो सारी नकारात्मक शक्तियाँ इस दिव्य कार्य में विलम्ब करवाने के लिए, इसमें विष्न डालने के लिए तथा इसका पथ परिवर्तन के लिए, अपनी योजनाओं को कार्यान्वित करने लगती हैं। यह अत्यन्त आश्चर्य की बात है। - परमात्मा का कार्य और नकारात्मकता, इंग्लैंड, 31-03-1983 लियो टॉलस्टॉय जी की यह कहानी, जो EvlAIures. But God अन्ततः उनमें एक शर्त लगी। आलिब बोला, मैं उन्हें गुस्सा Endures पर आधारित हैं । इससे हम जानेंगे कि परमात्मा के दिला दूँगा, असफल रहा तो मेरा नया वस्त्र तुम्हारा और जीत ार्य में विघ्न डालने के लिए नकारात्मकता या शैतान कैसे गया तो तुम सभी के नये वस्त्र मेरे। इसके अलावा जीतने पर कार्य करता है और हमें कैसे परमात्मा का साथ देना है। सब मेरी तरफदारी करेंगे, दण्ड मिलेगा तो बचा लेंगे।' शर्त पक्की हो गयी और आलिब ने अगले ही दिन स्वामी में प्राचीन काल की बात है, एक सहृदय और दयालु, धनी व्यक्ति अविवेक ला दिखाने का वायदा किया। था, उसके बहुत सारे दास थे, उसके दासों को अपने स्वामी पर अभिमान था और वे कहते थे, 'इस धरती पर हमारी स्वामी आलिब के दायित्व में भेड़ों की चराई का काम था। कुछ भँड़े जैसा दूसरा कोई नहीं होगा। हमें अच्छा भोजन व वस्त्र देते हैं कीमती नस्ल की थीं, जिन्हें स्वामी बहुत चाहते थे और उन पर और जितना काम हम कर सकते हैं, बस उतना ही करने को उन्हें बहुत गर्व भी था। देते हैं। किसी को कभी भी बुरा-भला नहीं कहते, हमेशा मीठी वाणी बोलते हैं। दूसरे स्वामी तो दासों से पशुओं की भांति अगले दिन स्वामी कुछ अतिथियों को कीमती भेड़ें दिखाने के व्यवहार करते हैं, गलती न होने पर भी जब-तब पिटाई लिए लाये, उनके आने पर आलिब ने अपने साथियों से ऑँखें करते-रहते हैं, मीठा तो बोलते ही नहीं है। हमारे स्वामी तो मुटकाते हुए, इशारे से कहा कि देखना स्वामी झल्लाते हैं कि बहुत अच्छे हैं, हमें तो सब सुख है।' नहीं? सभी दास बाड़े को सब तरफ से घेर कर खड़े हो गये। शैतान भी अपने सेवक का काम देखने एक पेड़ पर चढ़कर लेकिन जब दास अपने स्वामी की इस तरह प्रशंसा करते तो बैठ गया। स्वामी अतिथियों को रेशमी बालों वाला मेमना पाताल लोकवासी शैतान को बड़ी झुँझलाहट होती थी कि दास खासतौर से दिखाना चाहते थे, बोले, 'ये सब भेड़े बहुत अच्छी व स्वामी कैसे प्रेम से रहते हैं। उनके एक सुन्दर जीवन में बाधा नस्ल की हैं, लेकिन एक तो अमूल्यवान है। उसके सींग डालने के लिए उसने एक दास आलिब को बहला लिया। एक पास-पास हैं और बहुत ही पेंचदार व सुन्दर हैं। जानवर क्या दिन जब सब दास अपने स्वामी की प्रशंसा कर रहे थे, तब है, मेरी आंख का तारा है।' आलिब ने कहा स्वामी की अच्छाई की इतनी प्रशंसा क्यों करते हो?हम भी तो उनके सारे काम दौड़-दौड़ कर करते हैं, अच्छे बाड़े में अजनबी चेहरों को देखकर भेड़ें व मेमने इधर-उधर से उनकी सेवा करते हैं, उनके बोलने से पहले उनकी भाग रहे थे। आलिब अनजान बनकर, जानबूझ कर आय उनको और छेड़ रहा था. जिससे भेड़े आपस में मिल जातीं और किसी खास पर निगाह रखना मूश्किल हो रहा था। आखिर स्वामी ज्ञात हो, जब हम उनका कहा काम न करें और उनका पुरेशान हो कर बोले, 'भैया आलिब, मेहरबानी करके उस नुकसान करें। देख लेना तब वे भी औरों की तरह गाली देंगे, मेमने को पकड़कर जरा सामने तो लाइए। देखिए, होशियारी से आवश्यकता भाँप कर उनकी आवश्यकता की वस्तु ला कर दे देते हैं। वे अच्छे नहीं होंगे तो क्या होंगे? वास्तविकता तो तब पीटेंगे और दूसरे स्वामियों की तरह निर्दयी निकलेंगे। पकड़ना और एक-दो पल के लिए हाथ में थाम कर रखियेगा। लेकिन दूसरे दास नहीं माने, मतभेद हुआ और तर्क होने लगा। इतना सुनना था कि आलिब शेर की तरह भेड़ों में घुसा, कोमल 23

 ० Yuvadrishti Sep 2007 विलुप्त हो गयी, फिर आलिब को देखा और मुस्कारते हुए बोले, 'ओ आलिब! तुम्हारे स्वामी का तुम्हें हुक्म था कि मुझे क्रोधित करो। पर मेरा स्वामी तुम्हारे स्वामी से अधिक शक्तिशाली है, मैं तुम पर क्रोध नहीं करूंगा। तुम्हें भय है कि मैं तुम्हें दण्ड दूंगा, नहीं मैं तुम्हें दण्ड नहीं दूंगा, बल्कि मैं तुम्हें अपने अतिथियों के समक्ष स्वतंत्र करता हूँ। जो कुछ भी तुम्हारे पास है, सब ले जाओ और जहाँ चाहो वहाँ जाओ।' इसके पश्चात् स्वामी अतिथियों के साथ घर लौट आये और शैतान दाँत पीसता हुआ पेड़ से धरती पर गिरा और पाताल लोक में समा मेमने की गर्दन को जोर से दबाया, खाल को एक हाथ से जोर से मुट्ठी में कसकर पकड़ा और दूसरे हाथ से पिछली बांयी टांग को पकड़कर धरती से अधर में उठाकर हवा में लटकाता हुआ मालिक की आँखों के आगे ले आया। ऐसे झटके के साथ यह सब किया कि मेमने की टांग टूट गयी और मेमना फड़फड़ाता हुआ धरती पर गिरा। बांयी टांग तकलीफ के कारण मुड़कर लटक गयी थी, तो आलिब ने दांयी टांग से लटका दिया। अतिथि और सारे दास दर्द और सहानुभूति से जैसे चीख ही गया। पड़े। मगर पेड़ पर बैठा शैतान अपने सेवक की चतुराई पर प्रसन्न हुआ। स्वामी क्रोध के कारण ऐसे काले पड़ गये, जैसे इस कहानी में हमने देखा कि शैतान केवल हमारे अन्दर से ही विद्युत भरे मेघ। भौंहे जुड़ गयीं, लेकिन वे सिर लटका कर रह कार्य करने की कोशिश नहीं करता है बल्कि वह दूसरे लोगों के गये और कुछ न बोले। अतिथि और दास भी चूप्पी साधे खडे माध्यम से भी हमारी चेतना को नीचे की ओर ले जाने की थे कि जाने अब क्या होगा?कुछ देर गुमसुम रहकर स्वामी ने कोशिश करता है। लेकिन हमें हमेशा श्रीमाताजी के बताए हुए सिर ऐसे झटका जैसे कोई बोझ सिर से अलग किया। फिर सिर रास्ते पर चलकर शैतान को हराना है और उसे अपनी चाल में को ऊपर करके अपनी आँखे आकाश की और उठायीं। कुछठ सफलता प्राप्त नहीं करने देना है। देर आकाश की ओर मुँह किये खड़े रहे। चेहरे की सिलवट किसी व्यक्ति को यदि आप जीतना चाहें तो अपने हृदय में आप कहें, 'देवी माँ, कृपा करके इस व्यक्ति पर कार्य करें। मेरा पवित्र प्रेम इस व्यक्ति पर कार्य करें।' और आप हैरान होंगे कि आप किस प्रकार उस व्यक्ति के हृदय को जीत लेते हैं। 99% लोग इस पावन प्रेम के पूर्ण नियंत्रण में आ जायेंगे। इतना ही नहीं, ये पवित्र प्रेम उन सभी नकारात्मक शक्तियों को नष्ट करता है, जो आपको हानि पहुँचाने का प्रयत्न कर रही हैं। ये आपको सिखाता है कि वास्तविकता की पूरी तस्वीर को किस प्रकार समझना है, ये तो ऐसा प्रकाश है जो सारे अंधकार को ज्योतिर्मय करता है। आपके अन्दर और बाहर के अंधकार को। आप में जब ये प्रेम आ जाता है तो आप अपने अन्दर अत्यन्त शान्त हो जाते हैं और आपकी शान्ति अभिव्यक्त होती है। शक्ति देवी पूजा, मास्को, 17-9-95 म 24

 SHRI GANGA The Descent of the Ganga and the 'Shuddha-lccha' (Pure Desire) of the Universe ancestors). Why? Because of one's uncontrolled actions derived from and based on free will, one build up arbitrary patterns of desire, expectation and conditioning in the Ida nadi, which hinder one's liberation and ascent. These can be of any sort. We are all aware of the story of Shri Ganga descending from the heavens and as nobody on earth could bear Her power, Shri Shiva being prayed to bear Her in His matted locks. This divine event is a reflection of the inner subtle event that takes place in every seekers life. We can understand the significance of this event through the following article and pray to Shri Mataji, the source of all blessings, to grant us with Param Shuddha lccha. The Shuddha Iccha which also flows in the Ida Nadi can dissolve them away and liberate one on the left side, so that all one's desires, expectations and actions will tend towards one's ascent. But it takes a certain degree of evolution to realize this is What is Shri Ganga? She is the elder sister of Shri Parvati, the daughter of Himavat, the Lord of the Mountains- and the eternal necessary. virgin, for as she expedited the marriage of her younger sister she took a vow of chastity. And that gives a clue. For wherever the primordial Mother manifests, she does so as virgin as Athena, as Vesta, as Gauri etc. What does this virginity mean? It means that in spite of creating, She remains untouched, uninvolved, untainted by the creation; eternally pure or "Nitya Nirmala" as such one gains the power to purify whatever one touches. Know that the Kundalini It takes an even greater degree of evolution to bear the descent of the Shuddha iccha into one's life, for it dissolves and bears away all one's illusions and misidentifications. To witness this, one needs surrender and identification with one's Spirit of a very high order. To be infact like the Lord Shiva- with the Shri Shiva Sadashiva tattva fully awakened, so that one is in pure detachment, and totally above everything. if one is in this state, one can bear the descent of the Ganga or Shuddha lccha without disintegrating. If not all sorts of reactions occur, through fear, misidentification, bitterness, wrong expectations etc., which lead to a disintegration of the personality and it takes the presence of a realized soul of a very high order to allow this to happen. If however one can, like the Lord Shiva, bear the descent of the Ganga into one's life, then one truly helps all Mankind. has this power and that when fully awakened in one, grants one this power- one of the important siddhis of a truly realized (as opposed to self-styled realized) soul. The Kundalini represents the Shuddha Iccha (pure desire) of the Universe, as does the holy Ganga. And both represent the deepest power of the Shri Mahakali Shakti. Now consider, what does it mean: that "the Ganga flowed in heaven and had to be brought down by the efforts of Shri Bhagiratha to liberate his ancestors."? For, the Ganga as the Shuddha Iccha is capricious- knowing only its own desire- it is eternally pure, and totally uncompromising, and this can be a devastating force to enter the life of the unready. So, one should pray eternally for the power to bear the Shuddha Iccha in one's life. It means that while mankind is developing and evolving according to Kama and free will, the Shuddha Iccha remains in heaven and does not interfere in the actions of men, in spite of the misery they bring on themselves. But sometimes great souls see the need for Shuddha lccha to sort out their left side problems (the past, one's Nirmala Yoga, July-August 1985, Vol-5, No.-28

 Pledge by Yuvashakti of the World Uvası e, the Yuva Shakti of the World, take this pledge at the beginning of this new year to furiher our spiritual growth and enhance our under slanding of Sahaj so that we may become effective channels of our Mother's love. We pledge to protect our unnocence from the unending attacks of society by wor- shipping Shri Ganesha, asking for His protection and inviting our Lord to reside in aur Mooladhara during our daily meditations. We pledge to rid ourseives from the stains and blots that cloud the tight of our Spirit from shining in our attention. r- We pledge, as Shri Mataji asked the yuva Shakti, in Sahasrara Puja 2000 in Her castle in Cabefla, to develop a penetrating altention, so that it may be a vector for the Divine Power within us to work our afl the problems facing our world We pledge to seize any opportunity to talk about Sahaja yoga and give Realiza zion with humility. We pledye to become our own musiers so thut vur words resonule with the confi- dence of realised gurus, and inspire seekers to get their Realizat ion and take up a life of freedom within Vishwa Nirmala Dharma. We pledge to face our fears and ask for courage, to face ourselves and spread Sahaja Yoga. We pledge to spend as much time as possible with Yuva Shakti brothers and sisters, to sfiare our Divine Knowledge with them, and to prolect them when nec essary We pledge to surrender to overcome our ego, and to kave faith to overcome our superego. We pledge to pray, with dedicated, humble sincerity to our DIVINE MOTHER that she gfi uS with reconition in Her reality, and that She blessets so that we evercome all he weaknesses that might hold us back from fulfilling our pledge for this new year, which we hope is a beginning of the emergence of a new Vuva Shaktt force energized by its destre to thunk our Mother for having made us Her chitdren Jai Shri Mataji



----------------------

2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-0.txt 
 ARoadrishti
Vol 8
Sep
Ssue 3
2007
LEGO
t chastiy, Msmraads
ithasno limits, iahas no forms, it had no shape But fvo
you
ritterawavvour attention withou
yom del
a you can rise
deimit it,
then
higher and higher
oubecome higher and
igher in your spiritual life.
H.H. Shri Mataji NirmalaiDev, Vishnumaya Puja, 1985
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-1.txt 
 NSYS LENS
Shri Charan
Destination of a Sahaja Yogi
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-2.txt 
 INDEX
3.
NIRMAL VANI : DIGNIFIED DRESSING
1.
अनुभव
9.
3.
YUVASHAKTI REPORTER
4.
12
POWER OF WOMEN
ब्रह्मपुरी - भविष्य का महातीर्थ
14
17
6.
KID SHAKTI PAGE
उत्तरांचल आत्मसाक्षात्कार दिवस
18
7.
19
8.
MOTHER'S RECIPE
PUJA PROTOCOLS
20
9.
MOTHER EXPLAINS - Advice on Allergies
22
10.
शैतानी प्रवृत्ती की हार
11.
23
SHRI GANGA
12.
25
2.
5.
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-3.txt 
 EYB
YUVADRISHTI
Published by
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 8, Chandragupta Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 029
Tel : 020-25286537, Fax : 020-25286722
Printed by
Shrada Printary
Pune
Please mail your experiences, poems,
articles, suggestions, comments, etc. to:
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 8, Chandragupta Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 029
yuvadrishti@gmail.com
For queries regarding delay in receiving
the magazine, please call:
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.,
Tel : 020-25286537
We solemnly thank our article writers, editors,
designers/professionals etc. for their help in making this issue.
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007
NIRMAL VANI
Dignified Dressing of a Saint
In this issue of Nirmalvani, let us enlighten ourselves with divine advice from Shri Mataji on how we can
protect our chakras and maintain our state of spiritual ascent by following simple ways of dressing and
grooming in an dignified & auspicious manner. By acting on these assertions from Shri Mataji we can
uphold the respect for our body as temple of God
Dressing for Self-Respect
are more natural in their character; to give up artificialities,
to be more natural. I don't say that you go and take out the
roots and eat them, or you can eat the fish raw, I don't
mean that. When going too far with things, always you
must avoid. But try to lead a life which is more natural;
natural, in the sense that people know that there is no
vanity about you. Or some people can be the other way
round, you see, they will dress up
like a tramp just to attract more
attention. I mean they cari be
both ways, you see. When I find
some of the people, you see,
coloring their hair and all that.
"Natural" means you must wear
natural dresses which are
You are saints do you realize? Do you realize your self-
esteem? You are saints now. What clothes you wear, you
are not vagabonds. You are not tramps. You are not on the
street. So you have to wear dignified dress. I have told
everyone of you that wear something dignified, not
indignified. It has to be majestic,
because you are a saint now.
You are no more a person
running on the street, you are
the selected saints by God. So
the dress you wear need not be
absurd or something funny but
should give you dignity. Not any
false but a real dignity. You see
the vibrations of a dress. Wear
suitable to you. (2)
You must use as far s possible
cotton and as far as possible
silks, or cotton natural things,
not artificial things like you'll get
into trouble if you use plastics
your country's dress. You need
not wear somebody else's dress
or something but the interest in
the dress should be that it
should give you dignity and a
sense of respectability. It is to
preserve your respect that you
have to weara dress. Thatis the
utility of a dress. (1)
and things like that. (3)
It is very important for
Mooladhara to use cotton. You
see cotton is better for
Mooladhara, With these hard
things that you use for the child
just grab him down, is very bad,
and also one of the reasons is if
you dress the Mooladhara like
that, then it goes on sides and
that creates other problems. (4)
Actually in the East, people
believe that God has given you a
beautiful body, and it is to be
adorned with the beauty of what
human beings have created,
just to respect it, just to worship
your body. For example now in
India people wear, women wear
their saris. The saris are
expressive of their moods of
these women and of expression of their worship of their
body, because you must respect your body. Dresses
should be such that should be for utility as well as dignity.
There is no need to have uniform clothes for Sahaja Yoga
at all, you see, I do not like it. There should be variety, as
the nature is. Everyone should look a different person. For
a puja and all that you may wear something similar,
doesn't matter, where your attention need not be on the
variety, but outside, you should be a normal person. (2)
This artificial manmade fiber is
very dangerous, it's very bad for
their (children's) skin. Why give
this horrible stuff to your children, which you never had?
By the time they grow up to your age they will have all
blotches on their faces. (5)
Wearing an Undershirt
Then there's another thing, which looks very simple, but
many people have a habit in, specially summers, to wear
a one single kurta or a single shirt and not the under-shirt.
This is also not proper. A man must always have
something under his shirt, otherwise when it starts
perspiring, he can get trouble into this Heart Center.
(Note:-Always wear an undershirt. This applies to men
Using Natural Materials
Then for a Sahaja Yogi it is important to use things which
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007
and women and at all times of the year, warm or cold. An
undershirt absorbs sweat and keeps the area around the
Heart chakra dry and protected.) (6)
which are comfortable and decent. (12)
Here the Mahakali, what does She do? She punishes you.
Your body is punished. If you wear very tight clothes, you
develop problems of your legs. Anything you do abnormal,
you have to pay for it. First you have to pay for doing it and
then you have to pay for it physically. So many things can
be avoided if we just had a simple life, decide once for all
that, Iwill have this kind of dress for this lifetime, finished.
Every day to change, itself, is a headache. But that
satisfies the ego, not your Self. (13)
Covering Sleeves & Knees
They're very important Chakras (Shri Chakra & Lalita
Chakra) should not even wear sleeveless they should be
always covered. All other Chakras we cover, except for
Agnya, which we also cover with a kumkum. By that, how
many diseases can come. You can get sinus, start from
sinus, you can get eye trouble, you can get paralysis of
both the hands. You can get also Parkinson's. All sorts of
diseases can come. You should never, never expose
these Chakras, also the knees. (9)
I'll tell you a story of My own daughter. She went to Delhi
and all the girls were having sleeveless blouses. So she
asked me, "I want to have sleeveless blouses." She was
grown up, she was going to college. I said, "All right, have
it, whatever you like". She said, "By the way, why don't you
wear sleeveless?" I said, "I feel shy." "Then why should
you allow me! This is no criteria. Whatever I ask, you say
"yes' to me. I'm not that grown up." (7)
I've always told ladies that please keep this (Shri Chakra
& Lalita Chakra) covered. Its looks so simple, but it's very
important. Don't expose this because the power of this
should be preserved. They are I should say feminine
powers and they are the feminine powers of Shri Krishna,
which must be understood that whatever way you respect
your body that is the way your chakras are and that is the
why you suffer. (8)
I saw My granddaughter was wearing a sleeveless dress.
I told her, "Better you shouldn't wear a sleeveless dress."
She says, "It's very hot, I feel very hot." She's young. I said,
"But see, these are two very important chakras. If you
expose them, then you'll have problem." She doesn't like
to wear dresses which are above the knee, but she says,
people wear even above the knee. I said, "Knees, they are
very important chakras, we should keep them closed,
otherwise if they are affected, we'll have knee trouble."
Immediately she changed-immediately. "Mother, 'll wear
blouse from inside and something from outside."
Immediately. Because she knew this is a natural
primordial taboo that we should not expose ours - these
two chakras. (10)
The Sweet Sari
There's no harm in wearing sarees. I think it's very decent
dress, and makes a woman look like a woman much more
than pants, and those jeans and things like that. (12)
I don't think men know much about art and also their one
side is missing is aesthetics. Poor things they make one
type of clothes, wear all throughout. Just one type of
dresses they will make and that they will make and wear
throughout. But women are artistic and if our Indian
women give up wearing Saris and take to jeans, where will
the villagers go? Because they live with the Saris that they
make during holidays and things like that. So in India is not
possible to introduce all these dresses; in the school
maybe but lateron they all give up because they like Saris.
So the Saris are still on and will be on because its so
artistic it's so beautiful. One Sari doesn't look like another
Sari. (14)
This fashion is to expose the knees; is very dangerous,
because you can get both the nabhis, and I am suffering
because of them. They open their knees in this cold
weather or hot weather, either you catch the right nabhi, or
the left nabhi. (11)
Jeans and Tops
In India I've seen people wearing some sort of a, so-called
short and a so-called short on top, and moving about,
that's stupid because it is indecent. So we cannot wear
indecent dresses. We have to wear decent dresses but
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007
They all make their hair properly, because - I have
nothing to do with your hair, I am not a hair styling
person or anything but if you do not have your hair
properly combed and done, then definitely you are in
for trouble. So take heed to these things. (16)
Wearing Heels
I have seen those who stand for a long time without the
heels, if you use the heels you might be better off. With the
heels the pressure is not so much then distributed more to
the lower of those five chakras down below that might
help.
See in India, if you have hair like this (on eyes or
forehead), the mother will say, "Now remve your
Jibreyas'[Jhabrey AS IN Jhabrey baal]. Because if
you put like that hair, your eyes can become squinty.
But that's the fashion, to put the hair like this you see,
very much sometimes on the eyes also. It's absolutely
stupid to do that way and to play into the hands of
these people who make fashions because you are
independent. You must stand on your own character;
you must stand on your own understanding of things.
Instead of ruining your faces, you should try to
improve them by your dignity, by your understanding.
(14)
Sahaja Yogi: Mother you recommended heels, what
height?
Shri Mataji: No, no I did not say for all of you. I said for
varicose veins or especially for people who develops
problems on the heels. There is no height. You just try
whatever you can say about one inch
will do, from one inch onward. Anything not too much one
inch or lower but you see if you develop some sort of a
bone on your heels... (19)
I would request you to clear outyour forehead, Imean,
open it out. Remove your hair I mean, all the hair.
Keep hair away from the forehead. (Note:-There are
natural destructive powers placed along the forehead
(The Ekadesha Rudras). These powers destroy
negativity attempting to enter into our subtle system.
Covering forehead can prevent these powers from
being effective.)(17)
I have been requesting you to put some oil in your
heads at leastonce a week, but now the fashion is not
to put any oil. So you don't want to put any oil on your
heads. At least once a week you must put some oil in
your heads. That will keep your head cool and also
before taking bath, use some oil for rubbing on your
hands or on your body. Before taking bath at least for
fifteen minutes rub oil on your bodies. (15)
I have told so many Sahaja Yogis something small,
that you must put some oil in the night, moming time
you wash. But they don't do it!l But, by doing that, what
happens is that you soothe yourself, you sleep well.
Oiling is a very good thing. We need it, all of us,
especially in this cold weather, we need it. But they
won't put. They neglect themselves. Because they
think, they're Sahaja Yogis, they are protected,
Mother can oil them. It's not sol You have to look after
yourself, as far as the body is concerned, the mind is
concerned. (9)
Hair
Shri Mataji spoke of the importance of oiling the
hair and stressed in categorical terms that all
Sahaja Yogis should put little coconut oil on
Sahasrara, everyday. Otherwise we will go bald
and even those who are bald should out a little on.
The Sahasrara is Her charka, though we need not
put on as much oil as She, we must put a little.
Mother suggested that we start a Sahaja fashion
with the hair oiled like this.
I want you to understand that when you dress up also,
certain things I don't like at all, like disheveled hair - at all.
That might be a fashion, whateveryou do, butl don't like it.
Always must be properly combed, properly done hair.
These modem things we should give up, of disheveled
hair, because this is a sign of pukka [MEANS "REAL"]
bhoots coming in. If you have disheveled hair the bhoots
recognize a person and they get into such a person, who
has disheveled hair. So try to make your hair in a proper...
see now Indians, how they make their hair, look at them.
Phil Ward
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007
1997-0823: Shri Krishna Puja: Primordial
Taboos and Sahaj Dharma, Cabella
1996-0710: Talk at Vienna Airport
1988-0820: Cure that left Vishuddhi,
Vishnumaya Puja, Shudy Camps
1993-0711: Mahakali Puja, France
1998-1025: Significance of Diwali, Diwali
Puja
1988-1217: Personal Cleanliness, India Tour,
Pune, India
1983-0118: SY Works by Keeping Mother
Pleased, Puja talk, Vaitarna, India
1980-0331: What is Seeking?, Public
Program, Brighton, England
1995-0716: Watch your mind & attention,
Guru Puja, Cabella
1986-0131: Health Advice to Yogis
Eternally Inspiring Recollections of Our Holy
Mother; pp 147.
(10)
Other dressing basics
(11)
(12)
I've seen you're very negligent about also covering up
yourself (in winters). You must take a shawl all the time.
Even if you feel little warm, doesn't matter. But you can
take it out, but keep it handy all the time. That's also you
get sick, because there's dusteverywhere and if you have
a shawl around, at least you're protected. (15)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
The Essence of Dressing
You have to wear the dress to whatever country you (17)
belong, whatever suits you for the occasion. Whatever
you think is dignified and good, which speaks for your (18)
more elegance and your personality. No clownish things
are necessary, no dandy stuff is necessary: simple, (19)
beautiful dresses should be worn, which give you dignity. (20)
(2)
Also you have to know the auspiciousness of things that
you are using, whether it is auspicious or not. At random
we buy clothes. At random we buy things. If you could use
your vibratory awareness to buy your things to see what
you should buy, what would look nice because beauty and
auspiciousness goes hand in hand.
Meditation with Shri Matali on Agnya Chakra :
"Now put your right hand on your forehead across.
Now here, here, you have to say, first of all, I have to
forgive all those who have not come in Sahaja Yoga.
Those who are on the periphery, who come and go,
jump in and jump out. BUT, first of all and foremost, I
have to forgive all the Sahaja Yogis because they are
all better than me. I am the one who tries to find the
faults with them, but I am at the lowest end and I have
to forgive them because I must know that I still have to
go very further, I am still much less, I have to improve
much further. This humility has to come within us. So
you have to say here - Let the humility in my heart, in a
true sense, not hypocritical, work out this feeling of
forgiveness, so that, I bow to reality, to God and Sahaja
Yoga.
You must respect matter in the sense what clothes you
wear. Throwing clothes on the ground, throwing here and
there, living like a donkey, like a pigsty is not the way a
Sahaja Yogi should live. He has to be orderly; he has to
respect his clothes. But it should not be that you respect
your clothes so much that you throw away others' clothes.
(1)
Now the attention should not be also wasted in that "I will
today, I will wear this kind of a sari, tomorrow l'll wear that
kind of a dress, third day...", because that also spoils the
attention. But if it is a decent thing, it's perfectly all right,
and that will really make you feel dignified within yourself.
(18)
Now, you have to put back your hand on the
References:
(1)
back side of your head, and push back your head here
and you have to say here - O Mother! Whatever wrong
we have done to You so far, whatever wrong goes in
our minds, whatever smallness we have shown to You,
whatever way we have troubled You and challenged
You, please forgive us. You have to ask for forgiveness.
In your intelligence, you should know what l am. I don't
have to tell you again and again."
1980-0927: Lethargy Most Anti God, Chelsham
Road, London
1980-0729: Guru Puja, London
1985-1027: Ego, New Jersey, USA
1986-0709: Advice on Children, Vienna,
Austria
1982-0711: Public Program: Heart Vishuddhi
Agnya & Sahasrara, Derby, UK
1983-0201: The Mother - Heart Chakra,
Delhi, India
1996-0915: Shri Ganesha Puja, Cabella
Ligure, Italy
2001-0729 Shri Krishna Puja, Canajoharie
2000-1008: Navaratri Puja, The protection of
the left side, Cabella
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
1988-0618: Introspection & Meditation,
Shudy Camps
(7)
(8)
(9)
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007
अनुभव
हूँ तो ये शब्द ही मेरे दुःख को सहलाने का कार्य करते हैं ।
हानिया
वे आपको नहीं देखते, किन्तु मैं देखती हूँ ..
संभवतः १६६३ या १६६४ की ग्रीष्म ऋतु की बात है, श्री
माताजी वर्साव (पोलैण्ड की राजधानी) में थी और उन्होंने सभी एक टीवी कार्यक्रम
सहज योगियों को अपने होटल में उन्हें देखने के लिए आमंत्रित कुछ सहजयोगियों ने Transcendental Meditation (TM)
किया। श्री माताजी ने हमारा स्वागतू साड़ियों तथा फूलों से सजे के विरूद्ध संवाद कार्यक्रम आयोजित किया था यह कार्यक्रम
सभागार में किया। वे बहुत ही उदार और प्रेममय थी और जोकि एक प्रकार की खोजी पत्रकारिता थी, को "क्रीडो" कहा
बहुधा हम सबके लिए कुछ सुन्दर उपहार भी लाती थीं। मुझे गया तथा इसे एक रविवार को प्रमुख समयए 6 बजे प्रसारित
आज भी याद हैं स्त्रियों के लिए केश आभूषण तथा पुरूषों के किया गया। यह बहुत ही अच्छा कार्यक्रम था जिसमें TM एवं
लिए अंगूठियाँ ।
मिर्गी का संबंध बताया गया, EEG तरंगो के माध्यम से, जोकि
दोनों में एक सी थीं और कैसे लोगो को भ्रमित एवं सम्मोहित
इसे सरलतर बनाने के लिए माँ ने कुछ स्त्रयों को बुलाया और किया जा रहा था। जब यह कार्यक्रम प्रसारित होने वाला था तब
उनसे इन उपहारों को वितरित करने के लिए कहा। वे श्री श्रीमाताजी अपने निवास स्थान पर इस कार्यक्रम के प्रसारण से
माताजी के उपहार को लेकर लोगों को देतीं और वापस श्री जुड़े सहजयोगियों के साथ इसे देखनें बैठीं। मै श्रीमाताजी के
माताजी के पास और उपहार लेने जातीं। वे कुछ शीघ्रता में थीं, श्रीचरणों के समीप ही बैठीं थी। इस कार्यक्रम के पश्चात् हम
क्योंकि श्री माताजी ने उनसे यह शीघ्र करने के लिए कहा था एक प्रसिद्ध भारतीय संगीतज्ञ के कार्यक्रम में साउथ बैंक सेंटर
क्योंकि माँ चाहती थीं कि उनके प्रवचन प्रारम्भ करने से पूर्व (लंदन) गये।
हम सभी लोग इन आभूषणों को धारण कर लें । इस तरह की श्रीमाताजी ने एक काली शॉल पहनी थी और मैं, चूंकि उस
स्थिति में तुरत-फुरत में स्त्रियाँ कई लोगों को कुछ भी दिये गये समय गर्भवती थी, एक विषेश परिधान में थी। हम श्रीमाताजी
बगैर सभागार के पीछे तक चलीं जाती थीं। इन लोगों में से एक के निवास से बाहर आये ही थे कि माँ नें काली शॉल मुझे दे दी
महिला जिसे उपहार नहीं मिल रहा था, अत्यधिक उग्र स्वभाव और अपने लिए दूसरी शॉल ले आयीं। माँ ने कहा कि भूत इस
की थीं और हर बार उसके समीप से गुजरती हुई स्त्रियां उसे काली शॉल को देखकर मेरी समझकर तुम्हारे पास नहीं आयेंगे।
उपहार न देकर उसे और क्रोधित कर रही थीं। वह लगभग चूंकि मै असुरक्षित थी, पूरे संगीत कार्यक्रम के दौरान माँ ने मुझे
अपने पंजे पर खड़ी थी और अत्यधिक क्रोधित थी... तब तक अपने बगल में बिठाये रखा। बाद में श्रीमाताजी ने कहा कि वे
उस पर ध्यान नहीं दे पायीं जब तक श्री माताजी ने उसकी ओर उस कार्यक्रम में सामान्य लंदनवासियों के साथ इसलिए बैठी थीं
उन्मुख होकर कुछ इस तरह कहा - "कृपया क्रोधित न हों। वे ताकि वे संगीत के माध्यम से उन पर कार्य कर सकें। माँ ने यह
आपको नहीं देख रही हैं, किन्तु मैं आपको देख रही हूँ
भी बताया कि जब वे करोड़ों लोगों के साथ राजकुमारी डायना
की शादी टीवी पर देख रही थीं तब वे उस प्रत्येक व्यक्ति पर
उन्होंने यह इतने प्रेम और आत्मीयता से कहा कि कोई भी यह कार्य कर रहीं थीं, जिसका चित्त उस टीवी कार्यक्रम पर था।
आभास कर सकता था कि वे उस क्रोधी स्त्री से अपनी परम्
प्रिय संतान की भाँति प्रेम करती हैं और उसको शन्ति तथा
निश्चिन्तता देना चाहती हैं। यह घटना मेरे अन्तर मन को छू सम्पूर्ण शक्ति से माँ का गरिमा-रक्षण
गयी। मैं इसे अपनी समझ के विकास में एक परिवर्तन बिन्दु लंदन के हीथ्रो हवाई अड्डे पर हुई घटना कोई सुखदायी न थी।
मानती हूँ, क्योंकि एक क्षण के हिस्से मात्र में मेरे विश्वास तथा वहाँ का प्रत्येक कर्मचारी नस्लवाद से ग्रस्त था और श्रीमाताजी
मेरी सुरक्षा की भावना में चटूटान सी शक्ति आ गयी। मैं इन तथा उनके पति जोकि संयुक्त राष्ट्र में एक वरिष्ठ राजनायक
शब्दों को कभी नहीं भूली और जब भी मैं दुखी या आहत होती थे, को इस नस्लवाद का प्रत्येक बारे जब भी वो लंदन में अथवा
लिन्डा विलियम्स
उ
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007
चढ़ने तथा नीचे आने में हमें कुल मिलाकर घंटों का समय
लगा। हम बेहद गर्मी में वापस आये और चिलचिलाती धूप में
लंदन से यात्रा करते थे, सामना करना पड़ता था।
इस दिन श्रीमाताजी लंदन से जाने वाली थी और उन्होनें मुझे खडे होकर बस की प्रतीक्षा कर रहें थे कि एक कार हमारे पास
तथा टोनी, जोकि लंदन के आरम्भिक सहजयोगियों में से एक आयी श्रीमाताजी उसमें से उतरी और कहा हम और हमारे
थे, को जाने का समय गलत बताया। उन्होनें संभवतः एक या यकृत (liver) दोनों बहुत गर्म है। कार का पिछला हिस्सा
दो घंटे आगे का समय बताया था। हम उनके साथ पूरे समय थे खोलकर उसमें से हरे अमरूद तथा झाड़ी में लगे चने
और जो लोग भी उनको परेशान करते अथवा उनके मार्ग में निकाले। श्रीमाताजी ने वह हम सबमें बाँट दिया। जैसे ही उसे
आते थे, हम उन पर कोध करते थे। हमें देर का समय बताना खाया हमसे से प्रत्येक खुद को ठंड़ा होता महसूस कर रहा था।
संभवतः श्रीमाताजी का हमें परेशानी में ना पड़नें देने के लिए मैं आज भी उस स्थान पर हर व्यक्ति के लिए चिंता एवं प्रेम से
संकेत ही था। जब हम उस दिन वहा पहुँचे तो उपस्थित युक्त श्रीमाताजी को खड़ा प्रतीत करती हूँ।
सहजयोगियों ने बताया कि श्रीमाताजी का हवाई जहाज जा
चुका था और एक अत्यन्त दुखद घटना यह थी कि हवाई
अड्डे के सुरक्षाकर्मी ने माँ के साथ दुर्व्यवहार किया था।
हुए
गिलयन पाटंकर
महान बनने की क्षमता है
मैंने श्रीमाताजी से पूछा कि क्या वो सब कुछ जान सकती है?माँ
बाद में मुझे संदेष मिला कि मैं श्रीमाताजी को फोन करूँ मैनें ने उत्तर दिया, मैं सभी विचारों, वस्तुओं, भूत, वर्तमान और
फोन किया तब माँ ने मुझसे बातें करी और कहा "बाला वास्तव अविश्यकाल को एकसाथ जान सकती हैं परन्तु मैं विचलित नहीं
में सुरक्षाकर्मी ने मेरी पीठ पर प्रहार किया था और तुम्हें बताती होती तब बहुत उत्सुकता के साथ मैंने श्रीमाताजी से पूछा
हूँ कि उसका प्रहार इतना तीव्र था कि मेरी मेखू द्रव में समस्या उनकी किसी का निदान करने की क्षमता के बारे में तथा लोगों
उत्पन्न हो गयी।" और आप कल्पना कर सकते हैं कि एक का इस क्षमता में कितना विष्वास है। श्रीमाताजी बहुत ही प्रेम
सहजयोगी के लिए यह अत्यन्त कष्टकारी है। श्रीमाताजी वहाँ से मुस्कुरायी तथा वैर्य से कहा, "एक सौ प्रतिशत आपका
उपस्थित सहजयोगियों की प्रतिक्रिया से अप्रसन्न थी क्योंकि विष्वास|"
उनमें से एक के अतिरिक्त कोई भी बचाव में नहीं आया। सभी
लोग इस भ्रम में थे कि उन्हें शांत एवं प्रेममय बने रहना है।
किन्तु श्रीमाताजी उस समय हमें यह दिखानें कि चेष्टा कर रही प्रत्येक समय जब मैं अपने बच्चों से दूर जाती हैं
थीं कि जब भी आपकी माँ पर आधात अथवा उनका अपमान मुझे १६E० का वह समय याद है जब श्रीमाता जी
हो तब श्रीगणेश की भाँति ही अपनी सम्पूर्ण शक्तियों द्वारा
श्रीमाताजी की गरिमा की रक्षा करनी है। साथ ही श्रीमाताजी
इस बात की ओर भी संकेत कर रही थी कि स्वाधीनता तरह टूटने के लिए क्षमा माँगी। श्रीमाताजी ने कहा ठीक है और
वर्षों के उपरांत भी अस्सी के दशक में भारतीय उपमहाद्वीप से
आये व्यक्तियों के साथ कितना भेदभाव किया जाता था। कैसा लगता होगा जब प्रत्येक बार मैं अपने बच्चों से जाती
लिन्डा विलियम्स
की
मेलबर्न से
जा रही थी मैं जोर से रो रहा था और अंततः माँ के कंधे पर
सुबकने लगा माँ की बाँहे मेरे उपर थी और मैने उनसे इस
के कई
कहा, "अब तुम यह जानते हो कि एक माँ होने के नाते मुझे
दूर
हूँ। जब मैं औरो को मेरा इंतजार करते देखती हूँ और उनके
हुए
इन सबसे बढ़कर सोचने कि बात तो यह है कि एक
राजनायक पासपोंट रखने वाले सम्मानित व्यक्ति के साथ एसा
अभिवादन को स्वीकार करती हूँ तब यह आन्नद वापस आ
व्यवहार हो सकता था तो प्रतिदिन साधारण भारतीय तथा
जाता है।
एशियाई व्यक्तियों के साथ कैसा व्यवहार होता होगा।
चेरिल ब्रैडषो
बाला कनेसन
मैं आज भी उन्हें देख सकती हैं
१६८२ - १६८३ के भारत भ्रमण के दौरान नासिक के बाहर
सप्तश्रृंगी मंदिर तक के लिए हमने एक लम्बी चढ़ाई चढ़ी। उपर
8
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007
YUVASHAKTI REPORTER
Yuvashakti Seminar. Seven YuvaShakti went in
representing all the different young yogis that gathered for
the seminar from all over the world.
Cabella, 31st July. Tuesday: Yuvashakti gathered in the
castle waiting for the opportunity to present Shri Mataji
with their invitation and a prayer for the International
Shri Mataji asked who had drawn the graphics for the
invitation and exclaimed how beautiful the picture was.
Following letter was presented and read to Shri
Mataij
"Dearest most Respected Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi,
Shri Mataji said that the invitation letter was beautiful and
very touching. She said it made Her feel goose bumps as
She touched Her left arm with Her right. Mother
commented on the reading of the prayer and said that it
was spoken very well and that the english was very good.
Shri Mataji was then offered a gift of perfume from Dubai
and accepted anointment on both Her left and then Her
right wrists.
Many a time You have looked at us fondly,
encouraging us with the light in Your eyes, allowing
us to come on stage to worship Your Holy Feet. You
have nurtured us, with Your ever flowing maternal
Love, waiting eagerly for us to mature into Bhaktas
and Messengers worthy of the beauty and
magnitude of Your message. As You told us, the
"atmosphere is spoilt" and it is indeed challenging for
us Yuvashakti to establish the reality of Your light in
the hearts of seekers that are lost in the darkness of
today's societies.
Shri Mataji asked the Yuva Shakti what size and how tall
they were. Kurta pyjama and saris were sweetly given to
everyone present in the room. She took special care and
attention that everyone had been given a kurta and sari
that was correctly fitted and playfully made sure each
Yuva liked the colour they had been given. Shri Mataji
gave Her blessings.
Many young people have received their realisation
but so few have been able to grasp the essence of
Your message. It is also challenging for us
Yuvashakti, growing up in the confusion of society's
chaos, to rise above the temptations presented by
the six enemies of the soul. Dearest Shri Mataji, that
is why we have gathered here, so many, today in
Cabella for the Pujas and our International
Yuvashakti Seminar. We humbly pray with dedicated
devotion that the innocence of Shri Nirmal Ganesh
be firmly established within our souls, our heats and
our minds. WVe pray that this innocence manifests in
our eyes and that it brings warmth to the hearts of
seekers that have been frozen by the mistakes they
have made in ignorance. We pray that You give us
the words that will touch their souls, allowing us to
connect to them directly, inviting them into your
Darbar. We pray that the Love we have for each
other reflects the boundless Love that You have for
us individually.
Sir C.P. asked for the Yuva Shakti invitation card and was
again presented to Shri Mataji who held it in Her hands.
One of the Yuvas narrated to Shri Malaji the events t hat
had taken place during the day at the seminar. She was
informed that the Yuva Shakti had watched Her talk given
at Shri Ganesha puja on the subject of chastity in
Brighton, 1985. Shri Mataji replied "Very good idea." Shri
Mataji said that "Only with Sahaja Yoga can you know
yourself. You have to do Sahaja Yoga seriously to know
yourself."
A beautiful photograph of Shri Mataji with a corniced gold
leaf frame was then offered. Shri Mataji remarked how
beautiful the photo was and asked who had taken it,
expressing Her pleasure and joy.
Shri 1Mataji asked if there were more Yuva Shakti who
would be coning to the castle. Mother was informed that
there were 300 Yuva Shakti who had gathered for the
seminar from every country, to which she expressed
astonishment at the number. She was also informed that
the age group was from 16 until 27 and that they were all
Yuva Shakti; the younger children were attending the
Daglio camp. Mother continued to expressed Her
contentmen t and satisfaction throughout. Shri Mataji
asked who is the leader of the Yuva Shakti and was
informed that there was none and that the Yuva Shakti
were just one large collective..
Shri Mataji we thank You for Your attention and we
thank You for your protection. You have given us
Your heaven and crowned us with Your Love. We
realise that we can only thank You by helping those
of Your children that are lost, to find Your divine
reality in
their he arts
Shri Mataji we pray for Your inspiration and for Your
silent guidance and we desire to do justice, as best
we can, to the LOVE You have given us. We pray to
be such that You look upon us with the pride of a
Mother who sees Her sons and daughters growing
from saints into true Sahaja Yogis.
Mother was informed that the Yuva Shakti were preparing
bhajans and qawwalis for Her. The Yuva Shakti bowed
down to Shri Mataji and She gave all Her blessings.
Your children, Your Yuvashakti"
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007
The Yuvashaktis were then split into groups according to
the language of their country and asked to come up with
ideas for short video clips. These clips are then going to be
uploaded onto Youtube (www.youtube.com), an internet
site that provides a platform for any individual that wants
Internation Yuvashakti Seminar 2007
(31stJuly 3rd August)
31st July. Tuesday:
The Yuvashakti Seminar began with three mantras of Shri
Ganesha. Thena talk of Shri Mataji of 1985 that was given
in Brighton was played. The main theme of the tape was
importance of chastity.
to upload a video. The aim for each video clip is to convey
a message prompting interest in Sahaja Yoga, thereby
encouraging people to visit the official Sahaja web site.
During the afternoon, ideas from the different country
groups were presented.
Before the speech, Yuvashaktis were spilt into groups
according to the colour of their shirts and given three
discussion guidelines:
1)
Shri Mataji?
2)
chastity to integrate in society?
3).
lifestyle to better reflect the guidelines set down by Shri
Mataji?
Then, in the evening a joyful and vibrant programme was
What surprises you the most about this speech of given by the International Yuvashakti in the hangar,
including a diverse array of dance and music
performances.
What compromises do you make with your
2nd August, Thursday:
What reasonable changes can you make to your
Day three began with music meditation led by Dr Arun
Apte. He demonstrated to the powerful connection
between sound, silence and meditation and how
primordial sounds help us to reach thoughtless
awareness. Dr Apte interactively demonstrated taught
the relationship between each note and its corresponding
chakra. Some of the Yuvashakti boys related to all of us
the tremendous words Mother had spoken to them on the
previous evening.
Following the talk circular groups were formed in which
free discussions took place, Everyone was encouraged to
freely voice their opinions. This lasted for about an hour,
After the lunch break, one person per group gave a
presentation on the discussions that had taken place.
It was gratifying to see that so many yuvas had taken Shri
Mataji's speech to heart and had genuinely expressed
themselves in their respective groups. One boy remarked
that he had found himself in a dilemma - it was the first
time he was listening to a speech of Shri Mataji that so
powerfully conveyed the importance of chastity and his
problem was that he had a girlfriend. He was asking for
help because he did not know what to do
Afterwards Dr Brian Wells gave a short lecture on drugs
awareness and how it affects the addicts. Dr Wells was
followed by Dr David Spiro who spoke about different
techniques we can use to clear ourselves, focusing
primarily on balancing the left and right sides. There was
also a Q&Asession.
In the afternoon uncle Sandeep and uncle Sanjay spoke
to Yuvashakti about protocol towards Shri Mataji and
Other yuvas indicated that hearing this particular speech
of Mother had a profound effect on their understanding of
themselves and the fundamental importance of their
chastity. They considered it as a turning point in their lives.
amongst each other. They told us that the best way we
can grow in protocol, bhakti and dedication is through
meditation.
The topic of boyfriends and girifriends was brought up by
questions that were asked by some of the Yuvas. Our
uncle's response was unequivocal and welcomed by
many. Indeed, uncle Sanjay compared the fact that
carbon will always have four valences to the fact that in
Sahaja, brother-sister relations always had to be pure and
that this was an eternal Divine law on which one cannot
compromise.
1st August, Wednesday:
The day began with a collective meditation followed by a
talk from Uncle Wolfgang about the work which the Centre
for Evolutionary Learning is doing to spread Sahaja Yoga
in the world of business and politics. The upcoming UN
Conference for young people was discussed and
Yuvashaktis were given guidelines on how to participate.
It was suggested that individuals could do research
projects with children globally. For example - to see how
Sahaja Yoga could reduce stress levels in young children
and reduce other health problems.
Uncle Bogdan and uncle Zafar, spoke about the dharma,
chastity and protection between brothers and sisters.
Aunty Sadia and Aunty Brigitte shared their wisdom with
us on how to dress to protect our chakras and thus respect
our chastity. The day ended with an exchange of
We then came to the main topic of the day - 'How to
spread the message of Sahaja Yoga using the internet?"
First uncle Djamel Metouri spoke about the potential of
using Skype in order for Sahaja Yogis to participate in
collective global meditations. Further, he highlighted the
importance of learning English in order to understand Shri
Mataji's talks in Her own words and to strengthen our
collective bonds.
vibrations.
3rd August, Friday:
Heeding the concerns expressed by Shri Mataji when She
received the Yuvashakti on Tuesday, everyone decided to
focus the end of the seminar on working on America with
10
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007
bless the education system of india, where admission is
granted on the basis of merit and not on preference. We
can give a bandhan for this isue.
their attentions. First, Yuvashakti listened to Shri
Vishnumaya talk of Shri Mataji that was given in New York.
Then collectively, 108 names of Shri Krishna were taken
while focusing attention on America.
Issue#2
Being a doctor is considered as a noble profession in
India. But soon, this impression is going to shatter. With
so much private hospitals and clinics mushrooming,
doctors no longer see patients as a person in need but as
a client from whom they have an opportunity to extract
money. Innocent people who visit private hospitals for
treatments are slapped with hefty bills in the name of
treatment and the guarantee.of getting curing is not there.
The honesty and service to mankind, which are integral
moral values of a doctor, are soon forgotten before the
charm of money.
After that the following mantra was taken 16 times by
everyone present-
"Shri Mataji, we desire that Americans recognise your
message of KNOW THYSELF".
Meditation ended by inviting Mother's feet into our hearts
and praying three times together-
"Shri Mataji may Americans forget money and worship
your Lotus Feet."
Then everyone moved to the river bank where collective
shoe-beating of seven predominant negativities
(immorality, Hollywood, parental indifference, overactive
right-side, lack of discretion, materialism and false gurus)
that are afflicting America was done. Then everyone said
Allah-hu-Akbar" while looking at Mother's castle.
Suggestion
We can pray to Shri Mataji that Her Shri Dhanvantri power
bless the medical fraternity and system of India. By Her
blessing may this money madness of doctors be removed
from the basis. We can also shoe-beat for this issue.
Everyone then gathered for a collective photo which
marked the end of our seminar.
Issue%23
Female feticide is one of the black spot on Indian culture,
where children are loved and cared so much. Due to
traditional conditioning in the minds of the people, there is
a preference of male child than a female child. If women
are less in the society then there cannot be growth as a
woman is the Shakti.
India Around Us
Issue#1
In light of recent events, the education system in India has
been exposed badly as it endorses caste based
reservation. With reservation some people are granted
admission privileges because of their background. Apart
from Reservations, bribing the university official, leaking
of the exam question paper, relatives/relations of
influential people getting easy admissions etc create an
environment of unjust and biased society where
deserving students don't get through.
Suggestion
Clearly, this is a negativity acting through the conditioning
of the people. Therefore, we can pray to Shri Mataji that
Her Shri Garnesha form remove this negativity from the
basis and bless the people of India so that they can come
out of this ignorance. We may also burn this issue by an
ahuti in a havan.
Suggestion
We can pray to Shri Mataji that Her Shri Saraswati power
Collectivity doesn't mean that we should all stick together
"The joy we feel during music recital is because Kundalini is dancing. She gets happy, because you ask for nothing
but enjoyment of collectivity. Collectivity doesn't mean that we should all stick together. Collectivity means
wherever
person. The connecting line is of love and not of hatred. But people will live together and break each other's head.
That is because they are nowhere near the real growth of Sahaja Yogis. You may be in any part of the world but you
are connected and are concerned. As soon as there is a problem in any part of the world, you are connected and
effective and you can manage. People don't really understand the meaning of collectivity. Where there is not the
other- Ananya. There is no other personality. These personalities are separated from you because of left and right
or both. You are yourself fully connected when you are absolutely detached and your Kundalini is dancing. You are
alone and never alone. This oneness with the other gives you all the security and the joy you want. That's why the
Kundalini awakening means collectivity. Unless and until you want pure collectivity in your being Kundalini won't
rise".
are, you are connected. When you are connected you love that person and are concerned about that
Kundalini Puja, Germany, 1991
11
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007
POWER OF WOMEN
"Behind men you are the source of power, you are the one who can make Sahaja Yoga perfect, you are like
this mother Earth who has to give you all the beautiful things and your guru is women who is source of all
knowledge and is ocean of knowledge then why should you be left behind, when in all directions you are
equal why notin Sahaja Yoga which is source of love.
A Woman is like Mother Earth - so simple yet immensely
tolerant and patient. Like Mother Earth, a woman is
blessed with the power to give birth. Her humble behavior
culminates from Divine grace of goddesses Parvati and
Durga. She is the one who is bestowed with power to
rebuild and enforce ethics in society.
her sustenance, she gives you her desire and also she
gives you a push in your evolution, if she is an evolved
person. Now in the relationship of mother and child, the
mother gives a lot. She makes your complete left side.
She creates all the left side in you because she had
desired you so she creates that. On the right side she
gives you all the beauty of delicate things and also the
hunches that you get in your
business. "(Can we mention
references of lectures from
which these quotes r taken.
Atleast for the larger quotes)
As Devi, a woman symbolizes
both Ati Somya and Ati Rudra
aspects, she has enormous
potential to nourish as well as
destroy anything in the universe.
But she only manifests thenm as
and when the need arises.
Awoman is the strongest person
of household, like Mother Earth
she takes all the problems upon
herself because she is the
strongest power who can
withstand this kind of weight on
her. Shri Mataji has said that,
"Motherhood is the highest gift of
divinity, any race that does not
have superior mothers cannot
exist. Any race, which does not
have mothers of great quality,
cannot exist. The mothers have
to look after preservation, not
only of their children, but also of
the whole race, of the whole
nation. It is very important thing
& wherever the mothers have
failed the nations have failed. If
the mother themselves are
selfish, small minded the whole
nation will follow the path.
Everything passes through the
mother to the children."Awoman
is not only a mother to her own children but to the whole
society. The greatness of Indian culture rests on women,
because they maintain the society. She is the thread
As Shakti, women play an
important role in the universe.
This fact is embodied in one of
the names of Lord Shiva,
Ardhnareshwar, where Shri
Shiva and Shri Shakti are shown
as one. They cannot work
without each other because Shri
Shakti is principle of Shri Shiva
and without Shakti there is no
Shiva. Shri Mataji has said,
"Women are shaktis and they
are emotions and desires of
whole world. It is with their pure
desire they can work out great
things not only in them but also
for others. There is great
responsibility on mother
because mother makes the
heart of child. She can make
tigers out of goats like Jijabai
who was mother of Shivaji, the
saint and great warrior. Even the mother of Duryodhana,
Gandhari, gave this blessings to her son "Victory to
Righteousness'. She was pious women and believed in
truth. She could have been selfish and could have
blessed her son but she could see the truth and untruth
and her blessings lead to the victory of Pandavas who
were with truth,"
which keeps all the pearls together.
Shri Mataji says that the whole power of your mother is
love. She has also said that her powers are love,
compassion, affection and forgiveness. In the Vishnu
Purana, Lord Vishnu asserts "I am more powerful when,
(1) take the form of (a) woman" and as a woman Shri Mataji
is nurturing the whole universe, even while being is
beyond the form of woman.
"But the mother who is your own mother, whom you know
as your own mother, who gives you physical birth, is the
mother who gives you much more than you know of.
Because her blood has a vibration and when she gives
you her blood, she gives you her vibrations, She gives you
12
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007
The nature of women's role is such that it involves
sacrifice. However, it has never been about giving up
under compulsion, rather it is concern for others and love
that drives sacrifice by Indian women. For example, when
Shri Sitaji was asked to leave Ayodhya by Shri Rama, She
did not worry about how She would live alone in the jungle.
She sacrificed Her comfortable life at the palace for the
sake of Her husband's 'maryada' (reputation). She even
refused Shri Ram's suggestion of Ayodhya's Prime
Minister to accompany Her to the jungle, keeping in mind
that the affairs of His kingdom should not be neglected.
She independently and fearlessly brought up Her two
brave sons -Luv and Kush. Later, Shri Luv & Kush
captured the horse of Ashwamedha Yagnya and defeated
the armies of Shri Ram, led by Shri Laxman and Shri
Hanuman. Such fearlessness and bravery stunned Shri
Ram and He expressed a desire to meet the brave ones.
He was even more surprised to find that the two young
boys were His own and that they had been trained in the
art of warfare by Shri Sita Herself, Such is the Power of
Mother.
become futile"
One of such great women to be born was Mukta Bai
whose story is described below...
MUKTA BAI
Maharashtra has always been the land of saints and
sages. Its history and culture is inextricable with
spirituality. One such great saint was Shri Muktabai, the
sister of Saint Gyaneshwar. She was a great comfort to
her brother Saint Gynaneshwar. From the tender age of
six when their parents were compelled by the society to
commit suicide to secure the respect of the children, she
was like the mother to him, soothing, counseling and
encouraging him. When upset by the people's egos,
Gynaneshwar would withdraw himself into the hut and
she would compose inspiring abhangas consoling him,
that a saint should not be disturbed by the petty follies of
the world.
"The one pure in mind forgives everything.
The world is a simple piece of cloth
Woven with one thread of the Lord,
So come out, O Gynaneshwar."
The power of women in Sahaja Yoga or sahaja-yoginis
can be summed up by the following words of Shri Mataji's,
"Women should not compete with man, because she is
the source of all power, which her family is getting. All
family members children, husband and society is running
through this power. This is the Power of love." In Sahaja
Yoga, this power further increases through meditation.
Apopular abhanga (devotional song), sung often in Pune
district, records the meeting of Muktabai with Saint
Namadeva in the shrine of Vitthala at Pandharpur.
A great devotee of Lord Vitthala, Saint Namdev prided
himself in being dearer to the Lord since he always stayed
at the Vitthala shrine. Muktabai wanted to shake off this
illusion and refused to salute him, saying that by merely
staying in a temple one doesn't get Self-Realization. A
discussion followed and it was finally agreed to put the
matter to the renowned Saint Gora Kumbhar, the potter.
During the evening Kirtan, Gora Kumbhar tested
Namdeva with a strip of wood. As he drew the strip
towards Namadeva, he got angry. So Gora remarked that
that Namdeva was still a raw pot and needed the guidance
of a Guru. Gora recommended him to Visoba Khechar, a
disciple of Saint Gyananeshwar. It is said that when he
went there he got his Self-Realization. He had a
miraculous revelation that no place was devoid of the
Lord's presence in the universe. Namdeva was
overwhelmed with divine love and his ego completely
melted.
So to become powerful women need to meditate, they
have to be very deep in connection with their inner spirit
(Shiva Tattwa). They should meditate to solve out each
and every problem, not only of their family but all the
problems of the society and world. Through meditation
nothing will be impossible for them. Nothing can deter
them from their way just like the brave Ahilya Bai. It was
only through her deep spirituality, her dedication that Shri
Savitri was able to bring her husband back from Yama's
door.
"Yatra naryastu pujayante ramante tatra devta
Yatraistu na pujante savastatraphala kriya'
"Where women are respected, there resides all the gods
and bless the whole family with their blessings. And where
they are not respected even religious ceremonies
Answers of Use your Vibrations
(pg 7, June Issue)
1. Left Heart
2. Left Nabhi and Right Mooladhara
3. Right Swadhishthan
4. Left Vishuddhi
5. Right Heart and Centre Vishuddhi
6. Thames (England)
7. Descent of Shuddh Ichha
8. Bhaya Kaya Taya
9. Left Void
10. Delhi - Right Heart, Mumbai - Left
Nabhi, Kolkatta - Centre Heart, Pune-
Kundalini
13
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007
ाता
भविष्य का महातीर्थ
ब्रह्मपुरी
पुणे से लगभग १०० कि०मी० दूर सतारा जिले में कृष्णा नदी समतल चोटीवाला एक ऊँचा पहाड़ है। यह वही स्थान है जहाँ
के किनारे ब्रह्मपुरी गाँव के पास चैतन्य का एक शक्तिशाली पर दिव्य लीला का एक महत्वपूर्ण हिस्सा- राजा दक्ष प्रजापति
स्त्रोत है। यह वही स्थान है जिसे विभिन्न कालखण्डों में श्री का महायज्ञ हुआ था। कथा कुछ इस प्रकार है - यद्यपि सभी
देवी-देवताओं को महायज्ञ में आमंत्रित किया गया था तथापि
राजा ने अपनी पुत्री उमा तथा उनके पति परमेश्वर शिव को
परमात्मा के साथ अकेले होते हैं और आप आत्मा की गहराई आमंत्रित नहीं किया क्योंकि राजा, भगवान शिव को अपने पुत्री
में डूब सकते हैं। यह बहुत ही विशिष्ट स्थान है क्योंकि कई के योग्य स्वीकार नहीं करते थे और उनका अपमान करना
चाहते थे यद्यपि देवी उमा अपने पिता के घर पर इस समारोह
आशीर्वादित किया है। बहुत से सहजयोगियों को इस स्थान की में गईं किन्तु उनके पिता ने उनकी ओर कोई ध्यान नहीं दिया
याद उस चित्र से होगी जिसमें श्री माताजी नदी के पत्थरों के और हर अवसर पर उनका और भगवान शिव का अपमान
अ प ने
स्वाभिमान तथा
अपने पति के
सीता, श्री मेरी और वर्तमान काल में श्रीमाताजी के दिव्य द
चरणों ने पावन किया है। यह वह स्थान है जहाँ पर आप
बार श्री माताजी ने अपनी विभिन्न सभाओं के द्वारा
बीच सफेद साड़ी पहने खड़ी हुई हैं।
किया ।
द हापुरी का
अनेकों
इंतिहास
अर्थपूर्ण संकतों
एवं उत्कृष्टताओं
से
महानता की रक्षा
के लिए देवी उमा
ने अपनी बलि
चढ़़ाने का निश्चय
किया और स्वयं
शी
म
भरा है।
योगशास्त्र के
ह
|सवमरण
्ट्ट
।
ती
को महायज्ञ की
अग्नि में होम कर
दिया। अपनी पत्नी
के बलिदान को
देखकर क्रोधित
अनुसार ब्रह्मपुरी
नाम का तात्पर्य
ब्रह्मा के वास, वृत्त
अथवा निवास
स्थान से है और
सचदा
्
टटन
ा
्ट
१०
मम
लसलली
र
त
भगवान शिव ने
नृ त्य
प्रारम्भ किया और
अग्नि से देवी उमा के शरीर को खींच लिया। नृत्य के दौरान
देवी के शरीर के कुछ हिस्से भारत वर्ष के अनेक हिस्सों में गिरे
जो शक्तिपीठ के रूप में स्थापित हुए। इन बावन शक्तिपीठों में
से साढ़े तीन महाराष्ट्र में है। पटेश्वर मूल स्थान है जहाँ आदि
पीठ स्थित हैं। स्थानीय किवदंती है कि भगवान श्री ब्रह्मा जब
पटेश्वर में महायज्ञ में आए तब वे ब्रह्मपुरी में रहते थे। ऐसा भी
कहा जाता है कि सतयुग में देवी-देवता यहाँ पर अपने दिव्य
पान
सहस्रार चक्र को
भी ब्रह्मपुरी ही
कहते हैं। इसका
वर्णन मार्कण्डेय पुराण में भी है जहाँ इसका वर्णन भगवान ब्रह्मा
के नगर जो कि स्वर्णिम पर्वत मेरू-पर्वत राज और पृथ्वी गृह
का आधार है जो भारतीय उपमहाद्वीप के पौराणिक नाम
जम्बुद्धीप में है
ब्रह्मपुरी इन्द्र एवं सात अन्य देवताओं के नगरों से घिरा हुआ
है। ऐसी मान्यता है कि ये स्थान प्रकृति में सूक्ष् रूप से स्थित है
और इनको खोज पाना सुगम नहीं है।
ताण्डव
- के रूप में किया गया है और यह नगर
उत्सवों (ब्रह्म सभाओं) के लिए मिलते थे।
देवी का आदि स्थान
इस छोटे किन्तु दिव्य स्थान के साथ अनेकों किंवदंतियाँ जुड़ी संयोग से सहजयोग के आरम्भिक वर्षों में कई गोष्ठियाँ
हुई हैं। ब्रह्मपुरी से कुछ किमी० की दूरी पर पटेश्वर है जो कि (
सेमिनार) ब्रह्मपुरी में ही हुई। इन अवसरों पर ब्रह्मपुरी से
14
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007
यात्रा के दौरान बार-बार श्री माताजी ने पटेश्वर पर्वत के जिसमें आदि माँ रहती थीं और सहजयोगी उद्यानों में रहते थें।
प्रकाश की ओर इशारा करके इस स्थान की आध्यात्मिक श्रीमाता जी 1984 से 1990 के बीच में पश्चिमी साधकों के
महत्ता तथा आदिशक्ति से इसके सम्बन्ध की ओर संकेत किया साथ छः बार ब्रह्मपुरी में रुकी, जहाँ उन्होंने उनकी माँ और
है।
गुरू की तरह सहजयोग की प्रारम्भिक दीक्षा दी और बार-बार
जोर देकर कहा - "ब्रह्मपुरी मेरा स्थान है।"
यह भी ज्ञात है कि प्राचीन काल से ही तपस्वी और योगी यहाँ
रहते थे और ध्यान करते थे। नदी के बायें किनारे पर "भवानी
नहानी" नामक भवानी देवी का स्नान स्थल है और इससे मात्र
३० मीटर की दूरी पर एक बहुत छोटा किन्तु चैतन्यपूर्ण श्री
भवानी का मन्दिर है। स्थानीय लोग कहते हैं कि इस
स्नान-स्थल का पानी रोग निवारक है, विशेषकर चर्मरोगों के
लिए।
ना
श्री
770
अपने वनवास के समय श्री सीता और श्री राम ब्रह्मपुरी में रुके
थे रोचक है कि श्री सीता भी स्नान के लिए भवानी नहानी का
ही प्रयोग करती थीं और इस नहानी के समीप एक चट्टान है
जिसे श्रीमान शिला कहा जाता है। बाद में श्री समर्थ रामदास
(जो कि श्री हनुमान के अवतरण थे) को कृष्णा नदी के गहरे
पानी में श्री सीता-राम और देवी आंग्लाई की प्रस्तर मूर्तियां
मिलीं। श्री माता जी ने स्वयं आंग्लाई शब्द का वास्तविक अर्थ
बताया है - आंग्ल+आई त्र आंग्ल लोगों की माँ (अर्थात्
पश्चिमी), या माँ मरियम! उन्होंने आगे कहा कि चूंकि उनकी
माँ (श्री मेरी) यहाँ इस स्थान पर रहीं हैं अतः पश्चिमी लोगों
को यहाँ आकर सहजयोग का अनुकरण करना चाहिए।
म
रा
त
ब्रह्मपुरी में छः पूजाएं हुई और जो सहजयोगी इसमें आये थे, वो
उन अद्भुत एवं दैवी घटनाओं को आज भी याद करते हैं। एक
सीधे कृष्णा नदी में हुई थी। श्रीमाता जी एक बड़ी चट्टान
ब्रह्मपुरी में मुख्य मंदिर विट्ठल रुकमणी का है और कृष्णा नदी
जो कि ब्रह्मपुरी से गुजरती है श्री कृष्ण की शक्ति को उद्घाटित
करती है। कहा जाता है - महाभारत काल में पाँचों पाण्डव
ब्रह्मपुरी के निकट पटेश्वर में रुके थे। यहाँ उन्होंने तपस्या की
और दुराचारियों और कौरवों से युद्ध में विजय प्राप्त करने के
लिए शक्ति अर्जित की। इस प्रकार से पाण्डवों और श्री कृष्ण
का संबंध भी इस भूमि से है।
पूजा
पर बैठी थीं और सहजयोगी बहते हुए सरिता जल में उनकी
पुजा कर रहे थे। दिसम्बर 1990 में ब्रह्मपुरी में अपनी
आखिरी यात्रा के समय, सहजयोगियों ने पुनः श्रीमाता जी की
पूजा उसी स्थान पर सरिता तल पर की। वातावरण ऐसा हो
गया था मानो सभी देवी-देवता उस अवसर के साक्षी बनने के
लिए एकत्र हुए हों। एक बार जब श्रीमाता जी ब्रह्मपुरी में देर
शाम से पहुंची तो उन्होंने सहजयोगियों से कृष्णा नदी के मधुर
संगीत को सुनने के लिए कहा और कहा कि वह श्री कृष्ण की
शक्ति हैं जो आदि शक्ति का स्वागत्गान कर रही हैं।
ब्रह्मपुरी में सहजयोग
ब्रह्मपुरी पर श्री माताजी की आशीर्वादित दृष्टि और उनका इस
तरह के स्थान को ढूंढ़ने का प्रयास सन् 1970 से प्रारम्भ हुआ
जब श्रीमाताजी राहुरी आया करती थीं। अंततः अभिक्षित
स्थान मिला और सन् 1984 में श्रीमाताजी ब्रह्मपुरी आईं। उस
समय यह एक जंगली स्थान था, जहाँ एक साधारण सा धर था
श्रीमाता जी की अनुकम्पा से एक न्यास (ट्रस्ट)-श्री विश्व
निर्मल धर्म चैरिटेबल ट्रस्ट, सतारा का पंजीकरण वर्ष - २००३
में हुआ। स्थानीय सहजयोगियों ने आवश्यक निधि का संचय
15
६ा
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007
रात्रि प्रवास रू. 150/-, सुबह का नाश्ता और चाय रू.
10/- दोपहर भोज एवं रात्रि भोज रू. 25/- प्रत्येक ( भोजन
का मूल्य अलग है क्योंकि कुछ योगी खाने की इच्छा नहीं जाहिर
किया और तीन अत्यंत महत्वपूर्ण एवं चैतन्य से परिपूर्ण स्थानों
को अधिगृहीत करने में समर्थ हुए। न्यास का एक मात्र उद्देश्य
साधकों हेतु एक ऐसा परिसर ब्रह्मपुरी में कृष्णा नदी के किनारे
करते।)
बनाना है जिसमें समस्त आदि देवियों के मंदिर, श्री आदिशक्ति
निर्मला देवी का मंदिर आश्रम एवं अन्य सुविधाएं उपलब्ध हों।
किसी अन्य जानकारी के लिए श्रीमानू किंजाले को निम्नलिखित
ई-मेल पर संपर्क किया जा
vishwanirmaladham@indiatimes.com
सकता है
नदी के बांये किनारे पर स्थानीय सहजयोगी पहले से ही एक
आश्रम बना चुके हैं। यह आश्रम वहाँ आये सहजयोगियों
के लिए विश्राम स्थल का कार्य करता है। शीघ्र ही वहाँ पर एक
निर्मल नगरी स्थापित करने की योजना है, जिसमें नदी के दायें
किनारे पर पहाड़ी के ऊपर बाँस की कुटियाएं बनाई जायेगी। आदिशक्ति श्रीमाताजी निर्मला देवी के चरण कमलों की वंदना
स्थानीय योगियों ने वहाँ पर लगभग ७० प्रजातियों के पौधों एवं में पूर्ण समर्पण के साथ वहीं रह जाती हैं।
वृक्षों को रोपा है ताकि न केवल ध्यान की गहराई का आनन्द
मिलें, अपितु आयुर्वेदिक औषधि एवं प्राकृतिक सानिध्य भी सबसे रोचक आने वाली परियोजना आदिशक्ति श्रीमाताजी
मिले।
हुए
ताड
ब्रह्मपुरी से वापस कैसे आया जाये ?
यह असम्भव है, क्योंकि आपकी आत्मा सदैव सर्वदा के लिए
निर्मला देवी के मंदिर निर्माण की है जो कि विश्व इतिहास में
सर्वप्रथम है। मंदिर बनाने का विचार सन् 1983 में तब आया
जब सहजयोगी श्रीमाता जी के साथ ब्रह्मपुरी से 30 किमी. दूर
स्थित श्री सीताराम मंदिर गये थे। यह मंदिर श्री समर्थ रामदास
द्वारा कृष्णा नदी की गहराईयों में पाई गयी मूर्तियों के कारण
प्रसिद्ध है। इससे प्रेरित होकर तथा आदिशक्ति का आशीर्वाद
ब्रह्मपुरी यात्रा एक व्यक्गित अनुभव
कई सहजयोगी दिसम्बर 2006 में महाराष्ट्र दौरे पर थे।
सहृदय सहजयोगियों ने इस कार्यक्रम को अत्यंत रोचक
बनाते हुए हमारे समक्ष भारत की विभिन्न मनोदशाओं का
चित्रण मंदिरों, गाँवों, पर्वतों, झीलों, नगरों और विभिन्न | लेकर कई वर्षों के पश्चात् इस योजना को प्रारम्भ करने का
स्वयंभुवों तथा रोचक स्थानों के माध्यम से किया और सहसा
ही चैतन्य और परिदृश्यों के इस चित्र में उन्होंने हमें स्वर्ग के| है, जब हम समस्त आदिपीठों, जहाँ श्री आदिशक्ति माँ की
द्वार-ब्रह्मपुरी- पर खड़ा कर दिया। श्री किंजाले के स्वागत्
अभिभाषण के पश्चात् सब लोग पन्द्रह मिनट के जलक्रिया
सत्र पर कृष्णा नदी पर गये। मिनट-घण्टों में परिवर्तित हो
गये और 150 जोड़ी योगियों के पैरों के साथ महाजल क्रिया
हुई, जोकि आयोजकों के लिए थोड़ा सिरदर्द थी क्योंकि
हमारे समक्ष एक व्यस्त कार्यक्रम था किन्तु कोई भी इसे
छोड़ना नहीं चाहता क्योंकि वहाँ जाकर हम कालातीत हो
जाते।
अवसर आया है और ब्रह्मपुरी की यात्रा का यह उचित समय
पूजा हुई है, वहाँ पर जाकर ध्यान की गहराईयों का आनन्द ले
सकते हैं।
व
ब्रह्मपुरी तक कैसे पहुंचे ?
ब्रह्मपुरी जाने के लिए आपको सतारा जिला केन्द्र, जो कि
ब्रह्मपुरी से २५ किमी. दूर है तक जाना होगा पुणे से दो घण्टे
तक की यहाँ की यात्रा के लिए बसों की सुविधा उपलब्ध है।
यहाँ से ब्रह्मपुरी के लिए किराये पर वाहन मिलते है। सहजयोगी
आश्रम में शुल्क अदा करके रह सकते हैं। शुल्क दर इस प्रकार
हैं :-
क
16
हtc
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007
Kid Shakti Page
Nabhi Chakra
Locate the Nabhi Chakra on the body chart. Count the Number of petals in the Nabhi
Chakra. Ask your parents the color of the Nabhi Chakra and color it.
Shri Lakshmi and Shri Narayan or Shri Vishnu are deities at Nabhi Chakra. Shri Vishnu is the Father principle and
preserver of Dharma and the Creation. This aspect of God is responsible for our ascent and evolution, He
incarnated ten times. Shri Lakshmi is Goddess of wealth, prosperity, health and well-being. To develop this
principle we have to be generous, supportive, helpful and respectful towards others. Color the following picture of
Shri Lakshmi.
17
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007
उत्तरांचल आत्मसाक्षात्कार दिवस
हम सभी की इच्छा और परम पावन माँ के आशीर्वाद से दिवस" होगा। यह भी निश्चित किया गया कि नगर केन्द्र अपने
यह आभास किया गया कि श्री माता जी का संदेश प्रत्येक की संसाधनों का प्रयोग करके एक छोटा सा जन कार्यक्रम
सहभागिता द्वारा सामूहिकता तक पहुँचे, किन्तु इसके पहले यह आयोजित करेंगे। इस तरह से यह आभास किया गया कि इसमें
निश्चित किया गया कि विभिन्न शहरों में सहजयोगियों के बीच कम वित्तीय भार प्रत्येक की सक्रिय सहभागिता के साथ एक
पारस्परिक संचार तंत्र मजबूत हो और कार्यक्रमों के विषय में सामूहिक चेतना भी रहेगी, जो कि साधकों को समझाते, उनके
एक ऐसी रणनीति विकसित की जाए कि इन कार्यक्रमों का प्रश्नों का उत्तर देते और आत्मसाक्षात्कार के समय उनका
अनुवर्तन सुचारू रूप से प्राप्त तथा सम्प्रेषित हो सके। राज्य की ख्याल रखने के माध्यम से स्थानीय छोटे केन्द्रों के विकास में
संयोजक समिति (१४ सदस्यीय जिसमें तीन राज्य संयोजक भी सहायक होते हैं।
सम्मिलित) श्री माताजी की अनुकम्पा से नवम्बर २००६ में
योजना तथा कार्यप्रणाली पर विचार विमर्श करने तथा उसे श्री माता जी की कृपा तथा श्रीगणेश जी के मार्ग दर्शन में पहला
अन्तिम स्वरूप देने के लिए हरिद्वार में एकत्रित हुए, जहाँ पर "उत्तरांचल आत्मसाक्षात्कार दिवस" १० फरवरी २००७ को
सहजयोग के विभिन्न पक्षों पर भी विस्तृत रूप से चर्चा की आयोजित किया गया। इस आत्मसाक्षात्कार दिवस पर वर्षा के
गयी।
शुद्ध
बावजूद सभी कार्यक्रम में साधक आये, यद्यपि उनकी संख्या
कम थी और कुछ स्थानों पर सहज योगियों द्वारा किये गये
परिणामस्वरूप "पोषित केन्द्रों" के विचार का जन्म हुआ, अथक प्रयास के सामने नगण्य थी, किन्तु फिर भी एक
जिसमें संयोजक समिति के प्रत्येक सदस्य को दो नगर केन्द्रों के शुरूआत तो हो गयी थी और हम सभी आश्वस्त थे कि इस पूरे
साथ जोड़ दिया गया। यह निश्चित किया गया कि हर सदस्य वर्ष के लिए इस पवित्र कार्य हेतु एक वातावरण बन चुका है।
अपने पोषित केन्द्र के सम्पर्क में रहेगा और वहाँ की पूरे राज्य भर में चले इस आत्मसाक्षात्कार के कार्यक्रम में
सामूहिकता की समस्याओं को देखेगा तथा उन केन्द्रों से लगभग ५०० साधकों ने आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्राप्त किया। इस दिन
सम्बन्धित समस्त सूचनाओं के एकत्रण तथा अग्रसरण के लिए का विशेष आकर्षण गोपेश्वर का कार्यक्रम था, जहाँ पर एक
उत्तरदायी होगा। संयोजक समिति के सम्मेलन में लिये गये साल पहले ही आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्राप्त किये हुए एक परिवार से
किसी निर्णय अथवा राष्ट्रीय न्यास (ट्रस्ट) की कोई सूचना जो दो बच्चे एक विद्यालय में गये और वहाँ पर लगभग 100 छात्रों
कि उस केन्द्र से सम्बन्धित है, वहाँ के नगर केन्द्र को प्रेषित की को आत्मसाक्षात्कार के विषय में बताया और पूरे राज्य में यह
जायेगी और सदस्य यह सुनिश्चित करेगा कि सम्बन्धित एक मात्र स्थान था, जहा साक्षात्कार की प्रक्रिया के समय वर्षा
घोषणायें केन्द्र में की जायें। आगे सभी संयोजक समिति के नहीं हुई।
सदस्यों से अपेक्षित है कि वे एक ई-मेल परिचय रखें, जिससे
सूचनाओं का प्रवाह अल्पव्ययी तथा द्रुतगामी हो।
दूसरा आत्मसाक्षात्कार दिवस हल्की फुहारों के बीच १० मार्च
२००७ को आयोजित किया गया। इस वर्ष लगभग १००० नये
इस व्यवस्था के तैयार होते ही अब बारी थी कि नगर के साधकों ने अपने आत्मसाक्षात्कार को प्राप्त किया। इस दिन का
संयोजकों और संयोजक समिति के सदस्यों का एक सम्मेलन विशेष आकर्षण 'यमकेश्वर' में कार्यक्रम रहा। जहाँ विगत वर्ष
होने की, यह सम्मेलन १४ जनवरी २००७ को मकर-संक्रान्ति राष्ट्रीय सम्मेलन का आयोजन हुआ था ग्रामवासियों ने गत
के पावन अवसर पर देहरादून में हुआ। दूरस्थ स्थानों से वर्ष ही अपने आत्मसाक्षात्कार को प्राप्त किया और आगे
अपना समय निकाल कर आये विभिन्न संयोजकों के इस लगभग छः माह तक हरिद्वार की सामूहिकता ने उन्हें संभाला।
सम्मेलन में यह निश्चित किया गया कि फरवरी २००७ से अब वे ही ग्रामवासी श्री माता जी के प्रेम को प्रसारित करने के
प्रत्येक माह के दूसरे शनिवार को "उत्तरांचल आत्मसाक्षात्कार लिए तैयार थें और समीप के "काण्डी" गांव में पूरे साक्षात्कार
हुए
18
निय
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007
MOTHER'S RECIPE
कार्यक्रम में उत्साह के साथ हिस्सा लिया।
Seviyan ki Kheer (Vermicelli Puddingq)
कार्यक्रम के सभी विवरणों को तथा उनके अनुवर्तनों को विस्तृत
रूप से लिखना तो संभद नहीं है, किन्तु फिर भी इसको पढ़ना
Ingredients:
40g dried vermicelli" (seviyan/sevain)
1 Tbsp.ghee
750ml hot milk
Sugar to taste (4Tbsp.)
Pinch saffron
1/4 tsp.cardamom powder
1&1/2 Tbsp.chopped cashew nuts
1 Tbsp. raisins
3 Tbsp. almond powder
1/4 tsp. Kewra or rose water (optional)
आनन्द दायक होगा। हम इस वर्ष होने वाले कार्यक्रमों की ओर 1)
2)
देखते हैं और श्री माता जी के पावन चरणों में नतूमस्तक होकर 3
4)
अपने आध्यात्मिक उद्द्धवर्ती विकास के लिए प्रार्थना करते हैं,
5)
6)
जिससे हम प्रभावी रूप से क्षैतिज विकास कर सकें और अपनी
7)
8)
आदिशक्ति माँ के शुद्ध तथा प्रेममय यंत्र बन सकें।
9)
अनन्त प्रेम के साथ,
10)
उत्तरांचल सामूहिकता
Preparation:
1. Break the vermicelli into approximately 3 cm pieces.
2. In a pot heat the ghee and fry the vermicelli until light
golden
3 Add the hot milk and bring to a boil for 5 minutes
(adding more milk if necessary).
4 Add sugar, saffron and cardamom powder. Let it cook
for a 5 further minutes, stirring constantly.
5 Add chopped cashew nuts, raisins, almond
त्रिलोक की स्वामिनी निर्मला देवी
हे अनादि करुणा-मई माँ
अबोधिता, मंगलमयता
पा जाएेँ हम सब पवित्रता,
ऐसे तेरे गणेश स्वरूप को बारमबार नमस्कार।
आ कर विराजो स्वाधिष्ठान पर,
दो ज्ञान हमें निमल प्रज्ञाविष्कार माँ,
ऐसे तेरे बह्मा सरस्वती स्वरूप को
कोटी नमन श्री माँ,
देती हमें समाधान, उदारता, शान्ति,
धार्मिक-उत्थान की शक्ति,
दस पंखुडी में स्थित श्री लक्ष्मी नारायण
स्वरूपिणी को प्रणाम ।
तू ही सुरक्षा, आत्मविश्वास, प्रेम, करुणा का भंडार,
हृदय में रहती हैं ऐसी जगदम्बा माँ महान।
बना के सामुहिक देती अनासक्त वराती
श्री राधा कृष्ण लीला दे भाव साक्षी।
श्री जीसस ने दो पंखुडी खोल,
stirring.
powder and let it cook for 3 minutes, keep on
6 lfyou like, add kewra or rose water.
Serve warm or at room temperature.
दिया क्षमा नम्रता का वरदान,
TIP: If you cannot find vermicelli you may substitute then
for very fine "angel hair" soup noodies." very fine
spaghetti
कर पार हमें दी तूने शान्ति।
स्थिर चित की तू देवी, देना चैतन्य लहरी,
रहें निरविचार तेरे चरणों में
त्रिलोक की स्वामिनी निर्मला देवी।
Source: Cooking with Love, Recipes of Her Holiness Shri
Mataji Nirmala Devi
गरिमा नेगी, हरिद्वार
19
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007
PUJA PROTOCOLS
So, the protocol of the Guru, and the Mother, is to be
understood in Sahaja Yoga, mostly by experiencing. But
that doesn't mean that you go out of the way to experience
the other side of it. By being protocolish, more and more,
you'll find, you'll receive much more help...
devotion.
As Sahaja yogis offering the Puja at the Holy Feet of Shri
Mataji we must observe following protocols, as described
by Shri Mataji
..So, the protocolis the simplest of simple to do. So that's
the essence of Sahaja Yoga: the simplest of the simple is
the protocol. f you understand the protocol, you don't
have to do anything, you will grow up by it automatically.
But you lack in protocol, and that's how you do not grow.
This is the point is, that to grow, best in Sahaja Yoga is to
know the protocol, which you can ask others. With
experienced people, you can ask. Or, if you want to have
your own experience, you can have. But some people try
the other way round, like answering Me back, and saying
all kinds of things, that, "Let's experiment what happens.
And then they break their necks and come to Me for
curing. So, that should not happen. Experience should be
for betterment, and that's how, if you can ask others, take
their advice, those people who are rising higher than
normal, "What is the protocol?"And put your attention to it.
How can you improve your protocol? "What should we do
to observe protocol? What wrong are we doing? Where
are we going wrong?" Because the essence of Sahaja
Yoga today is the protocol, which should be the simplest.
Should be the simplest thing to do. And, once you know
the protocol, that, if She has said it, if it is meant, then it's
all right.
...Because everything is for your betterment, and a
special grace, if you understand the essence of
protocol(4).
Itis the greatest of greatest blessings and privilege ever to
be bestowed on mankind that we are able to attend a Puja
of Sakshat Shri Adishakti, The Primordial Mother, The
Pramabhrama the creator of enter cosmos, the creator of
even Shri Brahma, Shri Vishnu and Shri Shiva.
Everything is within Her and She is within everyone and
everything. She is omnipotent (all powerful), omniscient
(sees everything)and omnipresent(is everywhere)
1. Pujais only for those people who deserve
Today I am to tell you a few more secrets about Sahaja
Yoga-it is that for the Puja you should not get people of
mediocre nature, because to bear a Puja is very difficult.
People have not yet understood the value of My being, of
My Feet, of My Hands. They cannot, they do not deserve
to be here. So do not get anybody because he is your
friend or a sister ora brotheris wrong. You are spoiling the
chances of the person, because it is too much for him. He
cannot bear it. It is meant for very few people. So
remember that it is not meant for many people. Now what
we call the Chranamrut, meaning the Ambrosia of my
Feet, is not meant for everyone. Neither are the blessings
of the Puja meant for everyone. So try to avoid people who
are not yet fully equipped. First thing they wil start is
doubting. Also there will be a problem with the protocol.
They won't be able to accept it with that protocol. It is a
very great privilege to be here and this privilege cannot be
granted to every person (1).
So we must realize whom we are facing, whom we are
worshipping and on whom we are meditating. We must
realize the importance of these times, the importance of
every Puja which is offered at Her Lotus feet. The
importance of every moment that we are spending
together with Her. We must not let ourselves be mediocre
anymore. We must grow deeper and deeper in our
mediation and rise higher in our spiritual ascent. Hence
the Puja must be performed with attention completely on
the Lotus Feet of Shri Mataji. Distraction from the Puja,
|
although not intended, may amount to showing
disrespect. Mantras are recited in the praise of the
Supreme Goddess and are a form of prayer asking her
acceptance of the offerings, which are made with our
20
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007
seat only once She is seated. Before taking our seat we
must bow down in reverence to Shri Mataji.
2. We must cleanse our charkas and our subtle system
before the Puja so as to be able to absorb the Divine
vibrations.
Bandhan is not required in Shri Mataji's presence
because when She is sitting there is already a bandhan.
4.
Unless and until you are totally cleansed how you can be
campletely blessed; clothe by the love of God (2)
During the Puja we should stay in meditation and be
in thoughtless awareness for as long as possible. We
must not move around or talk to others. These actions not
only show disrespect towards Shri Mataji but also disturb
other Sahaja Yogis.
5.
3. We should meditate after the Aarti, to absorb the
vibrations.
Now you must meditate also after the Puja because my
vibrations you do not suck in without meditation. Always it
happens so far I have had very few Pujas i which all my
whole vibrations were sucked in. If you have sincerity
about it, it is really the sincerity part of it you will suck all my
vibrations. Tell your mind not to ask questions and
misbehave but to suck the vibrations clearly. This is for
your own nourishment, for your own growth, for your own
enjoyment (1).
Many Sahaja Yogis and Yoginis raise their arms and
6.
hands when Shri Mataji arrives and leaves. This is
absolutely wrong and against protocol. This is only for us
when we receive our self-realization when Shri Mataji
makes us to do it and must not be done otherwise.
7. Afterthe Puja we must preserve our meditative state
by keeping our attention inside, not talking too much and
staying in silence.
We must wear dignified clothes for the Puja. Clothes
4.
must be made of a natural fabric either silk or cotton and
not synthetic or nylon. Yogis should wear Kurta Pyjama
and Yoginis should wear Sari. Western cloths must be
avoided and cut sleeves are an absolute no-no.
References:
1980-0501: Opening the Heart Public Program,
1.
Zürich, Switzerland
1982-0731: Dedication through Meditation, Cowley
2.
Manor Seminar, England
2001-0729: Shri Krishna Puja, Canajoharie
I've always told ladies that please keep this (Shri Chakra
& Lalita Chakra) covered. Its looks so simple, but it's very
important. Don't expose this because the power of this
should be preserved. They are I should say feminine
powers and they are the feminine powers of Shri Krishna,
which must be understood that whatever way you respect
your body that is the way your chakras are and that is the
why you suffer. (8)
3.
KALPA TARU
/ wish to be a lush green tree - an innocent
witnessing child.
All our attention must be on the Puja.
5.
As I thrive on the blessed love of my mother who
nourishes me from her compassionate womb, She
- the earth sustains me - so that I grow lush and
strong.
I am the 'green sari' of hers whom she drapes
around her waist to protect her chastity.
6. Bhakti' and 'Shraddha' are of utmost importance
during the Puja. Without these we won't be able to receive
blessings of the divine.
7. Puja must be offered with all the Heart.
Tired souls, battered beings seek comfort in the
silent re-assurance of my existence. I feel
honorably fulfilled to shower my soothing shade
upon my creator's creation.
'Jai Kaara' is to be done only once as it is
inappropriate welcome to the Supreme Goddess to do it
again and again.
8.
Some advices for Puja (from Sahaja Yogis)
1.
times when greedy hands rob me off, when
unconscious - unaware existences vandalize. when
there is unrelenting heat and un-kept promises by
monsoons and others.
We must be seated, take bandhan and be in
meditation for Puja before Shri Mataji arrives or before the
Puja begins.
We must sit whereverwe get place and not hanker to
sit in front to gain physical proximity (closeness) with Shri
Mataji. She is all pervading, Her divine vibrations and
divine blessing are everywhere and anywhere we sit, Her
attention is on us.
2.
still my source - my mother- shall bequeath me
with the last drop of her life-giving blood. for me her
child to sustain.
and so shall I be - as she wants me to be.
that wish granting tree- the kalpa- taru.
Kavita Naviani, Delhi.
We must stand when Shri Mataji arrives and take our
3.
21
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007
MOTHER EXPLAINS
Advice on Allergies
Shri Mataji: "Now why the child has an allergy, now let Me
ask a question. Why a child will have an allergy? The
doctors have to answer. Or of course you are all doctors
you should say. "CanI have the answer?"
Sahaja Yogi: Mother, It could be the imbalance of heat
and cold in the body.
Shri Mataji: But why, say on the charkas, you say on the
chakras what will be catching if somebody has allergies
what does it catch?
Sahaja Yogis: Left Nabhi.
Shri Mataji: Correct, Left Nabhi. Left Nabhi will catch.
Now that means the Mother. Because the child is not yet
married, so is the mother that means mother must be
having a Left Nabhi herself and that's why the child must
be catching with that allergy. So instead of purnishing the
child why not cure the Left Nabhi of the mother and Left
Nabhi of the child. "Now what will you do if there is a Left
Nabhi of the child, what we can do to help the child to get
rid of it?" Ah, Very simple, anything that is left can be taken
out on the little flame. Put your right hand on the Left
Nabhi of the child and put your left hand to the flame and
finish. Now in, in diagnosis, you are easy, but now for
medicines. Now remember the certain principies of
medicines, very certain principles; principles are there. Ifit
is left side, you have to take it to the fire or to the sun or to
the flames, all right. If it is the Left (here Shri Mataji is
saying right) side you have to take it to the water in
general. Anybody is suffering from right side put him in the
water finished, done, not in the sun of course. Any disease,
you bring it to this point. It's very simple. Now let Me have
some questions about certain diseases.
diseases, which are cured with Geru, Because it is the
one which is very hot and it soothes you down.
1990-0831 Shri Hanumana Puja,
Schwetzingen, Germany
Forallergy the best is geru. You all should take geru, those
who suffer from allergy and we get little stone pieces
round ones, rub it on that about seven times and then eatit
and take it with some water. It is good for allergies,
everybody should not, those who have allergies. Geru is
not good for people who have overactive liver.
1986-0131: Health Advice to Yogis
1986-0113: About the sun, western habits, the
brain and medical matters, Rahuri, India
Allergies of the skin can be the result of a lethargic liver,
resulting from a left side imbalance of the Swadisthan
Chakra; Imbalances of the Left Swadisthan can resuit in
lethargic organs, resulting in: allergies of the skin (liver),
nervous problems, cancer and leukemia
External
The best way to see ifit is a case of allergy due to lethargic
liver is to apply some gheru with water externally directly
to the changed fragment of skin. If it improves it means
that we can take internally forsome time.
1984-0313: Intro talk - Three Channels
Treatments:
Internal
Mix it in honey, in a small bowl and keep it in front of Shri
Mataji to get vibrated and first thing in morning we have it.
It is good for Nabhi, everyday one teaspoon first thing in
the morning.
Geru is a - that's a kind of a, you know what Geru is, it's a
red-coloured stone which is very, very it is very hot and
supposing with the cold sometimes you develop those
rashes. So, if you put Geru, those rashes are corrected.
Or you get, due to badhas, sometimes some sort of skin-
22
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Yuvadrishti Sep 2007
शैतानी प्रवृत्ती की हार
मुझे लगता है कि परमात्मा के नज़रिए से जब भी कोई कार्य महत्वपूर्ण होता है, तो सारी नकारात्मक शक्तियाँ इस दिव्य कार्य
में विलम्ब करवाने के लिए, इसमें विष्न डालने के लिए तथा इसका पथ परिवर्तन के लिए, अपनी योजनाओं को कार्यान्वित
करने लगती हैं। यह अत्यन्त आश्चर्य की बात है।
- परमात्मा का कार्य और नकारात्मकता, इंग्लैंड, 31-03-1983
लियो टॉलस्टॉय जी की यह कहानी, जो EvlAIures. But God अन्ततः उनमें एक शर्त लगी। आलिब बोला, मैं उन्हें गुस्सा
Endures पर आधारित हैं । इससे हम जानेंगे कि परमात्मा के दिला दूँगा, असफल रहा तो मेरा नया वस्त्र तुम्हारा और जीत
ार्य में विघ्न डालने के लिए नकारात्मकता या शैतान कैसे गया तो तुम सभी के नये वस्त्र मेरे। इसके अलावा जीतने पर
कार्य करता है और हमें कैसे परमात्मा का साथ देना है।
सब मेरी तरफदारी करेंगे, दण्ड मिलेगा तो बचा लेंगे।' शर्त
पक्की हो गयी और आलिब ने अगले ही दिन स्वामी में
प्राचीन काल की बात है, एक सहृदय और दयालु, धनी व्यक्ति अविवेक ला दिखाने का वायदा किया।
था, उसके बहुत सारे दास थे, उसके दासों को अपने स्वामी पर
अभिमान था और वे कहते थे, 'इस धरती पर हमारी स्वामी आलिब के दायित्व में भेड़ों की चराई का काम था। कुछ भँड़े
जैसा दूसरा कोई नहीं होगा। हमें अच्छा भोजन व वस्त्र देते हैं कीमती नस्ल की थीं, जिन्हें स्वामी बहुत चाहते थे और उन पर
और जितना काम हम कर सकते हैं, बस उतना ही करने को उन्हें बहुत गर्व भी था।
देते हैं। किसी को कभी भी बुरा-भला नहीं कहते, हमेशा मीठी
वाणी बोलते हैं। दूसरे स्वामी तो दासों से पशुओं की भांति अगले दिन स्वामी कुछ अतिथियों को कीमती भेड़ें दिखाने के
व्यवहार करते हैं, गलती न होने पर भी जब-तब पिटाई लिए लाये, उनके आने पर आलिब ने अपने साथियों से ऑँखें
करते-रहते हैं, मीठा तो बोलते ही नहीं है। हमारे स्वामी तो मुटकाते हुए, इशारे से कहा कि देखना स्वामी झल्लाते हैं कि
बहुत अच्छे हैं, हमें तो सब सुख है।'
नहीं? सभी दास बाड़े को सब तरफ से घेर कर खड़े हो गये।
शैतान भी अपने सेवक का काम देखने एक पेड़ पर चढ़कर
लेकिन जब दास अपने स्वामी की इस तरह प्रशंसा करते तो बैठ गया। स्वामी अतिथियों को रेशमी बालों वाला मेमना
पाताल लोकवासी शैतान को बड़ी झुँझलाहट होती थी कि दास खासतौर से दिखाना चाहते थे, बोले, 'ये सब भेड़े बहुत अच्छी
व स्वामी कैसे प्रेम से रहते हैं। उनके एक सुन्दर जीवन में बाधा नस्ल की हैं, लेकिन एक तो अमूल्यवान है। उसके सींग
डालने के लिए उसने एक दास आलिब को बहला लिया। एक पास-पास हैं और बहुत ही पेंचदार व सुन्दर हैं। जानवर क्या
दिन जब सब दास अपने स्वामी की प्रशंसा कर रहे थे, तब है, मेरी आंख का तारा है।'
आलिब ने कहा स्वामी की अच्छाई की इतनी प्रशंसा क्यों करते
हो?हम भी तो उनके सारे काम दौड़-दौड़ कर करते हैं, अच्छे बाड़े में अजनबी चेहरों को देखकर भेड़ें व मेमने इधर-उधर
से उनकी सेवा करते हैं, उनके बोलने से पहले उनकी भाग रहे थे। आलिब अनजान बनकर, जानबूझ कर
आय
उनको
और छेड़ रहा था. जिससे भेड़े आपस में मिल जातीं और किसी
खास पर निगाह रखना मूश्किल हो रहा था। आखिर स्वामी
ज्ञात हो, जब हम उनका कहा काम न करें और उनका पुरेशान हो कर बोले, 'भैया आलिब, मेहरबानी करके उस
नुकसान करें। देख लेना तब वे भी औरों की तरह गाली देंगे, मेमने को पकड़कर जरा सामने तो लाइए। देखिए, होशियारी से
आवश्यकता भाँप कर उनकी आवश्यकता की वस्तु ला कर दे
देते हैं। वे अच्छे नहीं होंगे तो क्या होंगे? वास्तविकता तो तब
पीटेंगे और दूसरे स्वामियों की तरह निर्दयी निकलेंगे।
पकड़ना और एक-दो पल के लिए हाथ में थाम कर रखियेगा।
लेकिन दूसरे दास नहीं माने, मतभेद हुआ और तर्क होने लगा।
इतना सुनना था कि आलिब शेर की तरह भेड़ों में घुसा,
कोमल
23
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-25.txt 
 ०
Yuvadrishti Sep 2007
विलुप्त हो गयी, फिर आलिब को देखा और मुस्कारते हुए बोले,
'ओ आलिब! तुम्हारे स्वामी का तुम्हें हुक्म था कि मुझे क्रोधित
करो। पर मेरा स्वामी तुम्हारे स्वामी से अधिक शक्तिशाली है,
मैं तुम पर क्रोध नहीं करूंगा। तुम्हें भय है कि मैं तुम्हें दण्ड
दूंगा, नहीं मैं तुम्हें दण्ड नहीं दूंगा, बल्कि मैं तुम्हें अपने
अतिथियों के समक्ष स्वतंत्र करता हूँ। जो कुछ भी तुम्हारे पास
है, सब ले जाओ और जहाँ चाहो वहाँ जाओ।' इसके पश्चात्
स्वामी अतिथियों के साथ घर लौट आये और शैतान दाँत
पीसता हुआ पेड़ से धरती पर गिरा और पाताल लोक में समा
मेमने की गर्दन को जोर से दबाया, खाल को एक हाथ से जोर
से मुट्ठी में कसकर पकड़ा और दूसरे हाथ से पिछली बांयी
टांग को पकड़कर धरती से अधर में उठाकर हवा में लटकाता
हुआ मालिक की आँखों के आगे ले आया। ऐसे झटके के साथ
यह सब किया कि मेमने की टांग टूट गयी और मेमना
फड़फड़ाता हुआ धरती पर गिरा। बांयी टांग तकलीफ के कारण
मुड़कर लटक गयी थी, तो आलिब ने दांयी टांग से लटका
दिया।
अतिथि और सारे दास दर्द और सहानुभूति से जैसे चीख ही गया।
पड़े। मगर पेड़ पर बैठा शैतान अपने सेवक की चतुराई पर
प्रसन्न हुआ। स्वामी क्रोध के कारण ऐसे काले पड़ गये, जैसे इस कहानी में हमने देखा कि शैतान केवल हमारे अन्दर से ही
विद्युत भरे मेघ। भौंहे जुड़ गयीं, लेकिन वे सिर लटका कर रह कार्य करने की कोशिश नहीं करता है बल्कि वह दूसरे लोगों के
गये और कुछ न बोले। अतिथि और दास भी चूप्पी साधे खडे माध्यम से भी हमारी चेतना को नीचे की ओर ले जाने की
थे कि जाने अब क्या होगा?कुछ देर गुमसुम रहकर स्वामी ने कोशिश करता है। लेकिन हमें हमेशा श्रीमाताजी के बताए हुए
सिर ऐसे झटका जैसे कोई बोझ सिर से अलग किया। फिर सिर रास्ते पर चलकर शैतान को हराना है और उसे अपनी चाल में
को ऊपर करके अपनी आँखे आकाश की और उठायीं। कुछठ सफलता प्राप्त नहीं करने देना है।
देर आकाश की ओर मुँह किये खड़े रहे। चेहरे की सिलवट
किसी व्यक्ति को यदि आप जीतना चाहें तो अपने हृदय में आप कहें, 'देवी माँ, कृपा करके इस व्यक्ति पर कार्य करें। मेरा
पवित्र प्रेम इस व्यक्ति पर कार्य करें।' और आप हैरान होंगे कि आप किस प्रकार उस व्यक्ति के हृदय को जीत लेते हैं।
99% लोग इस पावन प्रेम के पूर्ण नियंत्रण में आ जायेंगे। इतना ही नहीं, ये पवित्र प्रेम उन सभी नकारात्मक शक्तियों को
नष्ट करता है, जो आपको हानि पहुँचाने का प्रयत्न कर रही हैं। ये आपको सिखाता है कि वास्तविकता की पूरी तस्वीर को
किस प्रकार समझना है, ये तो ऐसा प्रकाश है जो सारे अंधकार को ज्योतिर्मय करता है। आपके अन्दर और बाहर के
अंधकार को। आप में जब ये प्रेम आ जाता है तो आप अपने अन्दर अत्यन्त शान्त हो जाते हैं और आपकी शान्ति
अभिव्यक्त होती है।
शक्ति देवी पूजा, मास्को, 17-9-95
म
24
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-26.txt 
 SHRI GANGA
The Descent of the Ganga and the 'Shuddha-lccha' (Pure Desire) of the Universe
ancestors). Why? Because of one's uncontrolled actions
derived from and based on free will, one build up arbitrary
patterns of desire, expectation and conditioning in the Ida
nadi, which hinder one's liberation and ascent. These can
be of any sort.
We are all aware of the story of Shri Ganga descending
from the heavens and as nobody on earth could bear Her
power, Shri Shiva being prayed to bear Her in His matted
locks. This divine event is a reflection of the inner subtle
event that takes place in every seekers life. We can
understand the significance of this event through the
following article and pray to Shri Mataji, the source of all
blessings, to grant us with Param Shuddha lccha.
The Shuddha Iccha which also flows in the Ida Nadi can
dissolve them away and liberate one on the left side, so
that all one's desires, expectations and actions will tend
towards one's ascent. But it
takes a certain degree of
evolution to realize this is
What is Shri Ganga? She is the
elder sister of Shri Parvati, the
daughter of Himavat, the Lord of
the Mountains- and the eternal
necessary.
virgin, for as she expedited the
marriage of her younger sister she
took a vow of chastity. And that
gives a clue. For wherever the
primordial Mother manifests, she
does so as virgin as Athena, as
Vesta, as Gauri etc. What does
this virginity mean? It means that
in spite of creating, She remains
untouched, uninvolved, untainted
by the creation; eternally pure or
"Nitya Nirmala" as such one gains
the power to purify whatever one
touches. Know that the Kundalini
It takes an even greater
degree of evolution to bear the
descent of the Shuddha iccha
into one's life, for it dissolves
and bears away all one's
illusions and misidentifications.
To witness this, one needs
surrender and identification
with one's Spirit of a very high
order. To be infact like the Lord
Shiva- with the Shri Shiva
Sadashiva tattva fully
awakened, so that one is in
pure detachment, and totally
above everything. if one is in
this state, one can bear the
descent of the Ganga or
Shuddha lccha without
disintegrating. If not all sorts of
reactions occur, through fear,
misidentification, bitterness,
wrong expectations etc.,
which lead to a disintegration
of the personality and it takes the presence of a realized
soul of a very high order to allow this to happen. If
however one can, like the Lord Shiva, bear the descent of
the Ganga into one's life, then one truly helps all Mankind.
has this power and that when fully
awakened in one, grants one this
power- one of the important
siddhis of a truly realized (as
opposed to self-styled realized)
soul.
The Kundalini represents the
Shuddha Iccha (pure desire) of
the Universe, as does the holy
Ganga. And both represent the deepest power of the Shri
Mahakali Shakti.
Now consider, what does it mean: that "the Ganga flowed
in heaven and had to be brought down by the efforts of
Shri Bhagiratha to liberate his ancestors."?
For, the Ganga as the Shuddha Iccha is capricious-
knowing only its own desire- it is eternally pure, and totally
uncompromising, and this can be a devastating force to
enter the life of the unready. So, one should pray eternally
for the power to bear the Shuddha Iccha in one's life.
It means that while mankind is developing and evolving
according to Kama and free will, the Shuddha Iccha
remains in heaven and does not interfere in the actions of
men, in spite of the misery they bring on themselves. But
sometimes great souls see the need for Shuddha lccha to
sort out their left side problems (the past, one's
Nirmala Yoga, July-August 1985, Vol-5, No.-28
 2007_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_III.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Pledge by Yuvashakti of the World
Uvası
e, the Yuva Shakti of the World, take this pledge at the beginning of
this new year to furiher our spiritual growth and enhance our under
slanding of Sahaj so that we may become effective channels of our Mother's love.
We pledge to protect our unnocence from the unending attacks of society by wor-
shipping Shri Ganesha, asking for His protection and inviting our Lord to reside in
aur Mooladhara during our daily meditations.
We pledge to rid ourseives from the stains and blots that cloud the tight of our
Spirit from shining in our attention.
r- We pledge, as Shri Mataji asked the yuva Shakti, in Sahasrara Puja 2000 in Her
castle in Cabefla, to develop a penetrating altention, so that it may be a vector for
the Divine Power within us to work our afl the problems facing our world
We pledge to seize any opportunity to talk about Sahaja yoga and give Realiza
zion with humility.
We pledye to become our own musiers so thut vur words resonule with the confi-
dence of realised gurus, and inspire seekers to get their Realizat ion and take up a
life of freedom within Vishwa Nirmala Dharma.
We pledge to face our fears and ask for courage, to face ourselves and spread
Sahaja Yoga.
We pledge to spend as much time as possible with Yuva Shakti brothers and
sisters, to sfiare our Divine Knowledge with them, and to prolect them when nec
essary
We pledge to surrender to overcome our ego, and to kave faith to overcome our
superego.
We pledge to pray, with dedicated, humble sincerity to our DIVINE MOTHER
that she gfi uS with reconition in Her reality, and that She blessets so that we
evercome all he weaknesses that might hold us back from fulfilling our pledge for
this new year, which we hope is a beginning of the emergence of a new Vuva
Shaktt force energized by its destre to thunk our Mother for having made us Her
chitdren
Jai Shri Mataji
