The Divine Cool Breezes March and April 2008 volume twenty-one number twO

 VANDÂRU-JANA-VATSALÂ SHE LOVES HER DEVOTEES AS HER CHILDREN 2 Shri Ganesha's Birthday 4 Sankranti Puja 6 Commitment 8 Trust 14 Unending Blessings 16 Security

 They are ordinary villagers. They have never read any yoga. They don't understand anything more about vibrations than these feelings that you get.... This is what is Sahaja, such loving people. And at that time, I just thought of how once with Rama, how you felt those things with people, with very simple people, of very simple heart and shraddha, how they had those feelings of receiving your love and feeling it. Everyone needs love in this world. You cannot exist without love. Your whole being is based on love. 22 Republic Day 24 Secret of Mahamaya 32 The King and the Blind Man

 Shri Ganesha's Birthday Puja • Pratishth an • 10 February 2008 Mỹ Own He is the Purest and translated from Hindi: Today is a very important day for all of us Sahaja Yogis because today Shri Ganesha was born. Shri Ganesha is who we worship and because of whom we got our Realiza- tion. However much you may remember Him, until you know His special qualities, you cannot attain Him. His special quality is that He is the embodiment of purity (shuddha The actual swaroop) and the complete master of the universe. He is the incarnation of the Supreme, of Brahma. By coming into this world, He has created music (sangeet), rhythm (taal) and notes (sur). By His grace only, people become one with music (talleen) – a small boy who came into the world and did such great work. He has given so many things to everyone and pure spirit has taken even today He is active. Shri Ganesha's puja, no matter how much you do it, it is not enough. A lot of people say we don't see Shri Ganesha so much, that even after worship- ping Him we do not attain Him. He is omnipotent, omnipresent and in everything, but you cannot recognize Him until you are realized. After your Realization you can recognize what Shri Ganesha is. Shri Ganesha is purity, the pure spirit. When He is awakened within us, then we have no questions left. Then we are successful in whichever task we undertake. We find joy in everything we do. He is the embodiment of joy and gives joy to everyone. To serve Him is the ultimate dharma (paramdharma). To serve Him means to look after small children, to serve them, to make sure there is no cruelty towards them. This pleases Him very much. Such an embodiment of love, such a pure-hearted Shri Ganesha was born today. This is the importance of this day. Today, if you ask for any wish, then Shri Ganesha will fulfill it. It is His right to fulfill all desires because you are all realized. Ask Him with all your heart and He will help you in every way, every moment, every instant. Today is a very big day because the actual pure spirit has taken birth today and He already had such an eternal state that many people could not comprehend it or write about it. They wrote only what they understood. But now that you are realized, you can understand that by the of Shri Ganesha's name you can get your Realization. By birth today. your power taking His name alone, any disease or any pain will disappear. He is eternal. He is always present within us. When you get your Realization, you can feel Him. And if not realized, you cannot understand Him. That is why people get misled and do wrong things. But with Shri Ganesha's blessings you can do so many things and neither will greedy, nor will you have any problems because He does all the work for you. He takes care of you. Though He is a little boy, He looks after you. Shri Ganesha is a very great power by which so much work is getting done. For Me, He is the purest and My own. I trouble Him a lot. When somebody tries to trouble Me, I ask Him to handle this fellow and to make him all right. When this fellow is unmanageable for Me, when there is a dif- ficult person and it is impossible for Me to handle him, then He does the job. you are you feel

 So today is a very auspicious, as today He is born. Secondly, today is Panchami [the fifth day]. This Panchami is recognized because on this day we wear a dress. Whatever we wear today is so that our body is properly covered. The sense of shame and chastity that our body has is because of Him – Lajja Rupena Samsthitah. So if you have any sense of chastity and shame, it is because of Him. That will benefit you immensely. You cannot feel joyous until you worship Shri Ganesha. By worshipping Shri Gane- serve Him TO sha, your joy increases. You become joyous because He is the personification of joy (anand swaroop). Because of this, both things are today – His birthday and His help. We take His help in any work that we do. Such is our way. But we don't see what we have to do to awaken Him. In that direction our attention does not go. We do not feel that we should become like Him, that we should have a state in which Shri Ganesha is awakened within dharma. us with which we may never venture on the wrong path. Those who are rooted in Ganesha are special. They despise all the wrong things in this world and they do not do anything wrong because Shri Ganesha stops them. They cannot enjoy any wrong activities. This is Shri Ganesha's great blessing, that you have come into such a joyous life. So today, in His service, you sing His praise and glory so that He may be pleased. My eternal blessings to all of you. is the ultimate

 translated from Hindi: Sankranti means that today there should be some- thing new. The kundalini has awakened within you, so have become a new as compared to what you were, you person. But on the day of Sankranti should know to please the Goddess who is sitting within you that you have you do to make Her happy? Distribute you. What should sesame seeds and jaggery. This is for love. To increase the love for each other, we give sesame seeds and jaggery. Today the Sun left its place and, in its northward move- Sankranti Puja ment, came towards us. At this moment we should be very 17 January 2008 thankful to the Sun. It is by the of the Sun that so grace Pratishth an many things take place in our country of which we are quite unaware. We should do namaskar to the Sun today and His power, His knowledge should come into us. I would say that all of you have become realized and vibrations are flowing through you. Now you use of these vibrations, establish the shakti within should make you, establish the peace within you and show the world that this power within is for us and we have to acquire it. Nur- ture this with your good qualities and truthful speech. Today is special because the Sun is particularly benevo- lent towards us and we should thank Him for all this. You have received a lot. There is more to come. You will get more. We should increase it. You have performed so many pujas to Me. I am sur- prised. What do you want by doing so many pujas? I want you all to become great Sahaja Yogis and to lead I thousands of people, lay a virtuous path in this world, teach goodness and feel the shakti that is flowing within you. I am feeling very happy to see you all. O 4.

 You have to please the Goddess who is sitting within you Sankranti Become great Sahaja Yogis and lead thousands of people, lay a virtuous path in this world, teach goodness and feel the shakti that is flowing within you.

 the commitment If Sahaja Yoga can be carried for ten centuries, this world would be a different place. So one has to learn that we have to dedicate. We must fully dedicate ourselves. We are not here to gain everything out of Sahaja Yoga. Like in the beginning, people have problems about their families, so they think that God should solve the problems because they have come to Sahaja Yoga to oblige Sahaja Yoga now, so God must solve their problems. Now they have problems of their jobs, God must solve the problems. If they have problems with their relations, so God must solve their problems. That's the sort of a job given to God because they have very graciously joined Sahaja Yoga. Then, after that, God must give them money. He must provide them with everything. And He must look after them for no commitment at all. There is no commitment. Nobody has any commitment in Paithan India Sahaja Yoga, but God is committed and God has to work it out. Then they start – some people – foolishly start using Sahaja Yoga for other purposes, like earning money or earn- 11 January 1987 ing power or name or fame or domination or anything. not upwards. And then, once you go don't realize whether you are going upward or downward. So in dedication, These are the steps which are going down – down, you one has to see "what have I dedicated for Sahaja Yoga? All the time I have problems. Al the time I say I can't do this because of that, I can't do that because of this. There's the problem. This I would like to do, this I would like to do." All the time there's an I – “I, I and I." "But what have I dedicated? What time have I given to Sahaja Yoga? How much money have I given to Sahaja Yoga?" Nothing at all. People don't even take leave for Sahaja Yoga. They can't do anything for Sahaja Yoga. These people [who created the Ajanta Caves in India] not only took leave, but nently went and settled in that place, in that far-fetched place. Without any machinery, without anything, they did that whole painting and the whole excavation and all that, CC perma- what call the entire work of such a tremendous volume that is impossible in these you modern times. Nobody can recreate something like that – with all your machinery, with everything – because people don't have dedication. So for Sahaja Yoga, we have to put ourselves onto a point – "What did I do? What did I sacrifice for Sahaja Yoga?" Nothing. It's only for my own child or maybe for my wife or for myself or for my job or for something. What is our commitment? And without commitment, purity cannot come in. You will go up and down like a yo-yo.... Committed means even if we have to give our life, we should do it. Even if we have to give up everything, we should do it. But all other considerations are to be taken there. Everything should work out... Of course, Sahaja Yoga is blessings, is blissful. It blesses you all the time. It gives you a very long rope to hang you also sometimes. One must know that it's a blessing of that 6. kind also.

 So one has to be very, very alert that God has chosen us for such a special work and we have to be fully committed to Sahaja Yoga. All those who are wise will take to this and understand that life is only worth this, otherwise it's useless. It's good for nothing. It has no meaning. And this has to come first from the leaders and then from others complete commitment to Sahaja Yoga. It doesn't mean that you have to give up anything. For My sake you don't have to do anything. But for your own sake, for your own betterment, you have to do it... It's not only money, it's not only your talking about it, your saying about it, writ- ing about it, but it is through your own being it should happen. You all should become the source of that I want to emit all over the world, energy that light which is going to enlighten. No amount of artificiality is going to work it out, but complete genuineness within you. Look at these saints, they had nobody, they didn't have Mother to help them. This Gyaneshwara's life, if shocked. He didn't have even shoes to walk. out, will be you read, you He was treated so badly because his father was a sanyasi and was married, so they said that these are the children of a sanyasi. They had no food to eat. They had to walk for miles together in bare feet. They had no blessings of the Mother on them. Despite that, they kept to Sahaja Yoga, kept to their blessings of being one with God because they achieved that state. Now all this is for your good, for benevolence that you get all the blessings, but that doesn't mean that you should stag- I am committed to Sahaja Yoga your and that is what you have to be not progress. One has to progress higher and higher. One has to decide the commitment “I am committed should nate, that you - committed. to Sahaja Yoga." And that is what you have to be – committed.... The commitment has to be there. That's the main point. O

 the day I saw you. I trusted I you The day you came to Me I trusted you. And I worked on you from the very first day, knowing what you are, but I trusted your spirit that it would shine. In the same way, trust. Anything We laugh at others. I have seen Sahaja Yogis laugh at others, make fun of them when they will trust them, you will come to Me. Trust them. When respect them also. you I may do for have to believe in yourself and enjoy the way gently you are sweeping into the So you current of your Mother's love. Just enjoy that. Like a flower that falls into the current and flows and enjoys all the beauties of that current, in the same way you should enjoy. When that enjoyment comes into you, you will start trusting. Trust your Mother. I try many things to correct you, but trust in one thing, that ... anything I may do for you, it is just to clean you. That's My job.... With all this, trust in heart. First trust yourself. Trust others, other Sahaja Yogis. Love thy neighbour as thyself. Who is your neighbour? He is a Sahaja Yogi. Stand by him and trust your Mother. As I have trusted you, you have to trust Me and it will work out. Open your heart to this trust. You should not worry whether it would be protocol- ish, all right or not, whether it would be absolutely respectable or not because the heart knows. Whatever your heart will do in its genuine form will be respectable because there resides your spirit, which manifests. That will look after By outer forms, whatever you try is not going to work out. It is that trust in your loving heart that is going to work... Love gives all the sophistication and the fragrance and all the breeding that is required. Not talking of love, but really loving is the way it is most enjoyable... You are the people who are going to bring Sahaja Yoga on this Earth. You are the people who are going to do it. I am nothing... They will believe you much more. They will believe. They will not believe Me at all. They'll say I'm fantastic, I cannot be understood, so they won't believe Me. They will believe you. They will not trust Me, but they will trust you. They would not trust Christ, but they will trust you because you are one of them. That is why it is important that you should improve in all sincerity, in all truthfulness to yourself. Become a perfect mechanism of God. vou, it is just to clean you. That's My job. your you. 8 2 August 1981

 Trust Trust and security Once you start Sahaj culture in your life, you'’ll be amazed. Others will I trust everyone very be amazed how you are having rapport with each other, how you are looking after everything so well. This is the best way to live in this world - as Sahaja Yogis, where there is no ego, there is no conditioning, noth- ing. You are just absolutely free from all these horrible attributes and then you will be amazed how people will trust you. Christmas Puja 2000 And they are sinking, sinking, тиch. I never doubt to begin with. you emit out of ocean of security, you can call it. Everyone feels secured, secure with you and that security will be felt by everyone. Trust others. You must trust. That is very important – trust for everything. I have seen some people are very serious on money. Some are very serious about posses- sions. Some are this. What your love to others is a sense of security - an but still I have faith that theyll come around, will be all right I know they are sometimes weak people – could be weak about and I'll give them a chance. money, weak about possessions, could be even insulting to things that should not be so, but don't lose your temper. Just have forgiveness for Birthday Felicitations 2002 them and let them feel secured, absolutely secured. Trust... We must grow. And for growth, security is the most important thing. If there is no security for a tree, it will never grow. So everybody should feel secured in the company of Sahaja Yogis.... There should be a healthy growth. But growth must take place and for that you must trust. Somebody might make mistakes. All right, it doesn't matter. Some- body may be dishonest. It doesn't matter. But give them security... This trust has to be there, trusting in God that He will give him the right path. Easter Puja 1984

 TRUST Trust, love and forgiveness We have to trust in ourselves and we have to really love people. We should be humble and love. All this love will help you all your life. This is the message of Christ. Christ has said, "Forgive them..." Very lovingly, He pleads for all the bad people who crucified Him, that "Oh Lord, please forgive them because they don't know what they are doing." Can you imagine such a loving char- CC acter of Christ...? We have to worship that character within us, that we are also loving people. We love each other. All over the world, all the Sahaja Yogis love each other. Easter Puja 2002 God Almighty is the ocean of love, ocean of compassion and ocean of forgive- ness and He loves you so much that you cannot love yourself that much, so trust in Him. Nothing will go wrong. 19 September 1984 Trust of a mother Supposing you show your love.. It's so subtle. It's so innate within We are a very Supposing you show your love.... It's so subtle. It's so innate within you, in. It's there. We have to just open out. Every human being is a bundle of love.... built- beautiful group In pure love, there is a kind of a beautiful light which protects you, v guides you and which enlightens your life completely. This light is just nour- ished and also, we can say, like the lamp has to have the oil, this is the one that which is for our spirituality – the love of a person. You are the embodiment of love, of people who take it from Me, because you are a human being.... If you try to love anybody who is very cruel and very bad, gradually he will calm down. He will harm you a little bit, he will do this, he will see things and he might be mean with you, do all kinds of things, but then gradually you find your love works and works and works. And ultimately it is your love which is important to that person. Now your love is really firstly appreciated more by innocent people like children. Children know what love is.... are something out of the blue, out With all this telling "How can this be?" You have no trust in yourself. You have no faith in your- self.... At the end of the whole thing, I must tell you that when you are a guru, you are also a mother. You have to express yourself like a mother. She is kind. She is gentle. She forgives. She also corrects whenever it's necessary, but in her own sweet way she corrects so the correction takes place. It is not that a you are not confident. You get upset. You feel, who are so much in iIn peace and rebellion starts So all that wisdom of a mother is within you. It is already there, so please try to use it. I am sure it will all work out and, as it is, we are a very beautiful group of people who are something out of the blue, who are so much in peace Guru Puja 1995 in joy together. ånd in joy together. Trust in the other Once you are born of your spirit, you feel the oneness that all cells belong in one great being. The microcosm becomes the macrocosm and you do not feel that separateness from another personality. As you all the time feel you have fear, you trust and you know that another one is a great human being. have apprehensions, you are bothered, but once you become that, you 10 May 1985

 There should be a competition in trusting, in being honest, in being kind, of being in service. Trust your spouse To think that the woman is dominated by the man or the man is dominated by the woman comes from a kind of a complex and this complex must be given up. You are complementary to each other. You decorate each other. Never talk ill of your husbands and never talk ill of your wives. This is the key of having an exclusive married life... You have to trust each other. The trust in God, children imbibe when they start learning from their parents how they trust each other. The whole world is to be transformed, once we learn this trust – not in money alone, but in every way, a trust, a complete trust. As you trust yourself, you must trust the other, who is not the other any more. 29 November 1981 Go on trusting more and more. There should be a competition in loving. There should be a competition in trusting, in being honest, in being kind, of being in service. Let there be a competition like that. 3 March 1980 11

 Trust yourself We cannot believe ourselves that we are capable of getting Realization and secondly that we are afraid to get Realization. Thirdly, we do not trust anyone who talks of Realiza- tion.... But at least trust yourself. See, start from that point. You trust yourself that you should get your Realization, otherwise why do you call yourself a seeker? You have to get your Realization, no doubt about it, but when it comes to trust, whom do we trust? 4 June 1981 Trust Shri Mataji I'm like a mouthpiece of this All-Pervading Power. It doesn't have a mouthpiece to talk to but I'm like a mouthpiece and if I tell you something, you have to just trust Me and do not do something which I have said not to do.... You have to trust Me and believe Me, You have that when I tell you, you are to believe in Me, that I am telling you the truth and which is for your benevolence and for your safety, for your caution. I hope you'll understand to trust this this and must know that I love you very much and I care for all of you individually. you I know about every one of you, what you are doing, where are you. I know everything 23 December 1991 Power fully. somehow. Trust God You have to trust this Power fully. Those days when people were in difficulties, they were always attacked. They had not got their Self Realization. They had to put their trust into the Divine Power. They had to put. But now when you have got Realization, you have got your freedom. You should never forget that you have to trust this Divine Power, all the time that It will look after Navaratri Puja 1990 you. The trust that is in Sahaja Yoga Supposing I have someone in whom I have faith, naturally I will give him all the work. I will trust everything. I'll keep the keys with him or the money with him, never doubt such a person. In the same way, if you have faith – faith in yourself, faith in Sahaja Yoga where you are established – you'll be surprised how things will work out, how life will improve and you will be standing on the rocks. You'll feel that way. You'll have no doubts. You'll have no problems, no diseases. So this is such a state, only with faith.... How to get to this faith? There's no course about it. There's no literature about it. There's no lecture about it, but there is an awaken- ing within you which will ask this, "What am I?" This awakening – "What am I? What have I achieved...? What is it that I have achieved? What have I got out of Sahaja Yoga? All these questions will come to you.... In Sahaja Yoga we trust people. We trust. One among a hundred might deceive us. It doesn't matter. We trust. That faith you put in that person works in his mind also, that "They have put so much faith in Me." But what about the Deities? You show faith in Them, They work. Immediately They work it out... When we talk of faith, it is the challenge to this All-pervading Power which organizes, which knows everything, which is so intelligent, efficient. Above all, it loves then And you. show faith. The resurrection in Sahaja Yoga is that your faith is solid. This you you have to achieve – solid faith. Easter Puja 1993 That is what we have to be. But if we cannot trust other Sahaja Yogis, we cannot love each other, we cannot understand each other. That means we are something low, lower than Mahalakshmi Puja 1990 others. 12

 TRUST Trust yourself, trust others To love God is ... difficult. Without seeing Him, without knowing Him, without know- How to please others ing His bounties, without getting Realization, it is very difficult. But today that is not the should be the priority, case, but still have to have no fear in your mind. Trust – you trust yourself and trust how to make the other others. First of all, try to trust yourself. If you have made mistakes, you have to say, "Yes, person feel the trust. I have made mistakes. All right – so what?" Trust yourself that you can correct yourself 7 April 1980 you also. Trusting doesn't mean a blind ego trip. It does not mean that. Trust means that "Yes, I can correct myself. I can improve. I can do better.... I have been faltering, but I can correct. I have that strength within me. I can rise above all these things. I have that thing within me which I can use to my advantage." Trust yourself. Trust that you are realized souls. Trust that God loves you, that He has chosen you to be His instrument. Love yourself.... You have to perfect yourself and trust in yourself that you can perfect yourself through your kundalini awakening... A clean heart, transparent open heart – trust others. Talk to everyone with an open heart. Trust others. Why do you doubt? If you do not doubt yourself, you'll not doubt others.... What is there to be afraid of anyone? What is there not to trust anyone? What is there to be with anyone? Talk to everyone. Shake hands with everyone. Be nice to everyone. On the way, if you find somebody's difficulty, give him a hand... If somebody cannot sit properly or has a problem, you try to remove the problem. If the person cannot stand, give the place.... Allow your heart to be drenched in your Mother's love. Just allow. angry 2 August 1981 If you trust your joy-giving quality of your spirit, that you're not going to lose that quality of the spirit at any cost, then that acts as a guide and you understand the flexibility of all these worldly, transitory things. They are all changeable. Only you cannot change because you are the spirit. 4 April 1985

 Anant Aashirwad unending blessings Shri Mataji and Sir CP went shopping in a fabric store in Pune on January 18th. Shri Mataji spent quite some time choosing fabrics in various colours and choosing suit pieces, ties and slippers. She made everyone laugh many times with Her wit and humour. A sales person in the fabric shop bowed at Shri Mataji's Feet and She blessed him, saying, "Anant Aashirwad.’ 15

 Many a times, She has taken birth to protect human beings from the evil forces and to give them a sense of security. the one who It's like this: Suppose you drop somebody in the ocean. He'll be so frightened and he’ll die before even he's sunk – really. But supposing a person there is, with all his things to watch and he's the one who's going to see all the beauty of the underworld. He's very nicely secured. He's got beautiful glasses and all that and he's wearing nice paddles. He doesn't have to bother. He just goes there, nicely enjoys everything, takes photographs. The ocean is the same for him or for the one who is dropped in the ocean, but the one who is secure, the 6- one who has all the equipment, the one who knows what is to be seen is enjoying it. In the same way, you are equipped with wisdom, with security and you know what you are doing. The same thing starts becoming so very beautiful and enjoyable. 16 13 September 1992

 This personality may be living in the turmoil of the world, but inside he's completely peaceful. Such a personality emits peace and confidence and security. And being very active, extremely active, such a personality is never tired – and so dynamic and knows so much that you are sometimes surprised that these people who have not even learned how to read and write, how they have got so much of knowledge. Such people you can find in 13 June 1985 in any strata of life. is security The truth is that we are part and parcel of the whole and the spirit is the one which is the collective being. That means it connects you with everyone. When, in your awareness, in consciousness, you become the spirit, you feel the spirit of another person and this spirit is the power behind this love. This spirit, once you feel it, you never change your ideas. In this spirit, you see the truth, you see the beauty of another person, you enjoy the love of another person. And this truth – that you are a part and parcel of the whole – fills you up with tremendous security.... But I have to just tell you very lovingly and with great request that you have to just enter into that and you will see that reality is the most beautiful thing that all the security that you want. gives you 28 August 1984 There is no need at all for you to make money or to find for yourself a kind of a security in money. Your security is inbuilt within you.... Medita- tion will give you security. It will give you are a real enlightenment and a complete connection with the Divine. Without the connection of the Divine, what's the use of doing Sahaja Yoga? Diwali Puja 2002

 This oneness with the whole gives you all the security that you want, all the joy you want. And that's why kundalini awakening means collectivity. Unless and until you want pure collectivity in your being, the kundalini won't rise. Shri Adi Kundalini Puja 1991 Sahaja Yoga gives security Nothing should disturb you which is trivial, useless. If you have faith in Sahaja Yoga, then you must know you are here for a tremendous work of human emancipation. You have a very great responsibility. You represent that part of creation which is the most important, the most vital. And if you fail it, it's absolutely fatal also. All this works out in such a manner that it builds up a tremendous sense of security within are standing on the truth. Hold it with both your hands. You'll grow on it. You'll enjoy yourself. Life will be so much better, much more beautiful. And it is only through you the whole world is going to be saved. So strengthen yourself, strengthen your arms and strengthen your feet. The faith is the strength of Sahaja Yoga, not the brainwaves that you have about it.... Develop that faith that gives you the sense of security. Women are there to give joy and happiness and emotional security to the whole society. SS that you know Birthday Puja 1985 you, you 8 September 1980 As soon as you'll meet a Sahaja Yogi, immediately into thoughtlessness, the other person, you both will go. Everything you start enjoying in a very different manner. And such beautiful feelings come in, such beautiful security is built up that you're surprised, "How could I be like that? How could I feel these securities just expressing themselves in such a 6 April 1991 beautiful manner?" With this complete joy, which Buddha has described as Sangham Sharanam Gachami, you develop such a collectivity of complete security and joy. You must see how the Sahaja Yogis, when they meet each other, the joy is much, much, much more than when they 6 September 1983 would meet their own kith and kin. I asked why people, women, are not looking after their chastity. That's very important. That is the security of a woman. Why the men are not looking after their virtues? Because that is the security of man. I mean that's the natural security you are. 20 July 1981

 106 This centre of the Heart is the centre that is responsible for giving you security. It is the centre of the Mother. This gives you the sense of security. 31 March 1980 The Heart gives security In small, small things we destroy our security.... The complete security within yourself is that you are the Self and these things are not important. If you are a secured man, your children will also find that out, that their security lies in finding their own security. They "Now don't try to help us, to spoil us. Do not give us things by which we feel more insecure." And such children will be really brave children like Shivaji was. him all the protection, no doubt, but she made a Shivaji out of him.... your own security and then the joy of that security will take you to your depth. Why are you insecure in life? Money? The person who has got, who has got now the blessings of the Divine, what more does he want? Because your God is almighty, nobody's might is greater than that of your Father. Nobody can touch you on any point. But your faith is lacking and that's why you should start with your faith in yourself. Make the faith sit in your Heart chakra and that faith is going to give you the joy of security. Faith is the themselves will say, те His mother gave Feel answer for all the insecurities of the world.... The essence of the Heart chakra is to feel your own security, your own Self. Feel your own security within yourself. Only the real- ized can feel their security because they know they have their atma, their spirit. 20 December 1979 When this chakra ... is awakened, you get all the security of the world, you are never insecure, you are never bothered, you have no fear of anyone. You do not have to suggest to yourself that you should not have fear or anything. You just become fearless. There is nothing like fear. There's no reaction to any threat or anything... So you get rid of all your fear, but by domination, but the security that you are love, you are compassion. And the love is the highest of all, that you stand in complete peace and bliss. do not dominate anyone. You love. In your love, you are secured. It is not of you power 26 September 1983 The centre Heart is governed by the Mother of the universe. She gives us the sense of security... We call Her Jagadamba. 11 July 1982 19

 God gives security It's all God's work you are entering into. Who is greater than God? Who is more powerful than Him? Once you enter into His kingdom, everything works out. You know it works out.... The joy of those happenings, the joy of that blissfulness, that security of God fills you up. And when it fills you up, you feel absolutely relaxed. You feel it's all done for 10 July 1984 you. She gives you You want Mahakali to protect you. In your discrimination, in your mistake, you might do something wrong, may do something that is not good for you. It could be very danger- ous for you. But She's the person who guides you how to avoid all the dangers. Now She protects your life. She protects your body. She protects all the organs of your body. She's need. the one who gives you all the security of life. In Her realm you feel completely secure. You are never afraid of anything.... If you are under Her beautiful guidance and Her You can hold blessings, you will never feel afraid to do anything. You'll never do anything wrong also. As soon as you'll try to do wrong She'll hold your hand. She's really the guiding person. . She's the one who actually gives us our existence. Without Her we cannot exist because because all the security ous that you on to Her Feet. She is the one who is the power of Shri Shiva.... She's the one who relaxes you She takes over all your responsibilities. She takes over all your problems. She's the one who solves all the problems. It is we who forget to leave all the problems to Her. If you just leave problems to Her, all your problems are solved. Not only that, but you really feel blessed. It's not only physical. Also it is mental that She makes your mind absolutely free of worries. She doesn't worry and She doesn't want you to worry. If you worry, then She tries to show that, by your worrying, you are denying Her, you are not accepting Her. Worrying is something that is very common and people take great pride in saying, “Oh, CC I was worried." How can you be worried when your Mother is Sakshat Mahakali? She can kill all the demons. She can finish all of them. She knows how to manage things and, when you are like a child before Her, how can you worry about it? So your worries are finished. She You shouldn't worry about yourself. That's the point of it. Her security is so great, She's so secure Herself that She gives you all the security that you need. You can hold on to Her Feet. You can hold on to Her image or to anything. You can even pray to worries about you. Her. Many people are being cured only by praying to Her because She cures you.... The main thing is that we are ourselves worshipping Her. She likes that Her children should worship Her, that on that level She can be one with them. She can give them Her compas- sion, love and protection from all the evil. Navaratri Puja 1999 We are all human beings created by one God, on one Earth, in complete unison. We are part and parcel of that one Primordial Being. We are cells in that body of that great being. part of that, then fragmentation goes away and you become that. You become that. Then all your sense of security is established. All your self-esteem is established. All your glory comes to you. 9 August 1980 And we are fragmented. Thať's why once you know that you are the your There is no need to be nervous. If Mother is late, there must be some plan. If She is early, there must be some plan. If She's going by this plane and not by the other, there must be some plan – not to doubt it. If She's doing something, there must be some plan. You know, Mother has Her own plans. It is a nice idea to think like that. “She has Her own plans, you know." Once you start feeling that way, such security and such beautiful peace will spread in your being. And you will be quite satisfied. CC Shri Buddha Puja 1988 20

 You give security You should be a comfortable person to another, not an uncomfortable person. You should not be a difficult person to others. Your tongue should be such that it should give great solace to others. Your eyes should be such that it We have to have the security of the should give a very great benediction to others. When you look at people, Mother and the protection of the people should feel that "Here is my security." Not to enjoy others, but give Mother and that all the evil forces enjoyment out of you. Enjoyment out of you is the way you should act and must be finished from this world. then the laws of the Divine work better. 27 September 1982 Shri Krishna Puja 1990 As the blessing of the Heart chakra, you become a person completely secured within yourself, absolutely settled with yourself. You neither aggress others nor take aggression upon yourself. You feel so give happiness to others and security to others. And others feel nice in your company.... So one develops that sense of security within yourself because are the spirit. happy with yourself and you you 17 September 1984 This transformation that has taken place within you has brought out all the beauty of your heart, of your compassion, of your love. And you give, want to give security to others without expecting anything, without demanding anything. 29 February 1992 The Parabrahma has come to look after you. Cling on to it. Even the death has to go back. Then what about these minor things? 31 July 1982

 59* REPUBLIC DAY Shri Mataji celebrated the 59th Republic Day of India with Sir C.P. and the entire collective of Pune on the sprawling lawns of Pratishthan. She said in Hindi that, by seeing everything today, “Mera jee (man) bhar aaya hai," implying She was overwhelmed with joy. 22

 Pratishtha,n26 January 2008 Lndian Republic Day 0BLIC

 et of everything is there: the secret I have never talked about Mahamaya, as it is not to be talked about or told. It's a secret, as they say. It's the basis of Sahaja Yoga, I should say, because it's described Mahamaya Puja 10 April 1994 Aukland that when the Goddess comes in the Sahasrara, the Shakti, She is Mahamaya– Sahasrare Mahamaya - already described. She has to be the Mahamaya. It means She should camou- flage Herself fully. Nobody should be able to know Her as the Goddess to begin with and even if they get Realization, they should not reach to the end of it. There are many rea- sons for that. 24

 Mahamaya The job, the closeness and the body The first thing is the job. The job of Mahamaya was to give Realization. Now if I had The Mahamaya come on a tiger with a sword in My hand, nobody would have stood near Me. You all would have run away from Me. In any other form, if the Goddess had come, She could incarnation not have done what She was supposed to do.... The Mother of Christ or Shri Sitaji or Fatima, they all ended their lives. They had to go away from this world so early. They has to come so couldn't do work whatsoever. Now this difficult work of giving Realization to others any intricate. It has to work out in such a manner that nobody feels that it is done by is that people can very some great personality or with a great awe or fear. So the Mahamaya incarnation has to come so that people can come closer. Also it has come closer. very great advantages that when a simple person who's just a housewife starts giving Real- ization, people are flabbergasted. They think, "If She can do it, why not we do it? After all, She's just an ordinary housewife, so it's all right. If She can do something, we can also do it." So they have self-confidence. And being a Mother, She does Her loving part, Her compassion, but the greatest is the patience. You see, none of them had so much patience. All these incarnations who came, you see how they disappeared from this Mother Earth quickly by some excuse or other. But I had to stay. I don't know how long, but it has to be done up to a point, this work of giving Realization. The third thing was that you have to be identified into My body, into the cells of My body, but this is a more difficult task because supposing one of you becomes stupid, becomes foolish, quarrelsome. Anything you but I don't think about Myself. I always think about So it's an indication to Me that something has gone wrong somewhere. Somebody is doing something wrong to some- body. Some Sahaja Yogis are being tortured. Some are sick. Anything like that, I work it out very intensely and intimately. do, any small thing, it hurts Me. It has to, you.

 Mahamaya's secret Mahamaya's blessings are like this. You can't see how you are inside Me. You can't see your reflection within Me. You can't see. This is Mahamaya. This is the secret part of it that you don't know.... I have the cure, so you get cured. You dont know how it hap- pens.... It's My doing. I have taken you into Myself. You haven't. So you don't have to worry as if you are power to troubling Me. It's My own doing. It's My own work. It's My own responsibility. And if I have done it, it's done because I am supposed to do it. That's the job I have to do, so there's nothing to feel bad about. But now, what is the purpose? As I told is that I could come close to you and I need not fill it you, you with fear or awe or even a feeling that I am not a human being. I behave exactly like a human being, I react exactly like human beings and all these powers are hidden within Myself. Unless and until you are a realized soul, understand. Whatever you may do, you won't under- stand. Or maybe in the previous life you had your Real- ization or maybe also you have done such tremendous punyas that you can recognize. There are people like that who have done it. But to make it more congenial won't you to you is to become absolutely a human being, so I married, I have children, I have grandchildren and I do shopping, as you see. People are surprised how I take Coca-Cola. I'm not supposed to take Coca-Cola or eat popcorn. They're surprised, but I have to be just like you. But inside I am not. Outside I I am. To make it more congenial to you is to become absolutely a human being, so I married, I have children, I have grandchildren and I do shopping.

 МАНАМАYА Nothing is a miracle My attention is such that it penetrates into everything and I remember each and every thing very well. My memory's very good, even at this age. So you see, this attention itself is very penetrating and, when it penetrates, it carries with it all the powers that are required and it acts. It's a tremendous machin- ery, which is very subtle and works wonders. So you start telling Me that there is a miracle that has happened. Nothing is a miracle because if you're all in My body and if My body is divine, then what is a miracle? It's all the communication. As this hand can communicate with this hand, I communicate with you. should not get But one thing is definite, that Mahamaya. It's a very dangerous thing because once you get lost ... doesn't act, it doesn't work out. It's not a casual thing, but I want to live very lost with this of rupa then it you casually Myself to show that I'm casual, but I am not. You should not pay your attention casually. That won't work out because you are in My body. Every cell in My body is aware and every cell has a reflector. I don't know about it – you know about it – but there is a reflector in us, which works on remote control. So it works on remote control on your attention also. If your attention is not all right, it corrects. That's the best way we could evolve human beings. There was no other way out because the attention of the people is, on the whole, in the whole world, not yet on the spirit. But suddenly, they get a glimpse that there must be something beyond. The maya that God has created is this whole universe, but this illusive life is created by human beings The need for camouflage So many religions have come. So many have talked about it. So they may say about it, they may talk about it, but still the consciousness that we have to be the spirit is among very few people and they are the ones called as the seekers of truth, while the rest of the people are not. They are busy with this or that.... So under these circumstances, one had to come in a camouflage... They are like enemies of God's love, so you have to enter into them like a spy, camouflaging yourself and make them dance here, here and there. Let them lost a little bit here and there. Let them see for themselves because, with get Mahamaya, She allows you.... If you are with Me, if you are in Sahaja Yoga, you are protected, you are looked after. But you have to stick on. You have to have faith and even if there's any problem, it gets solved. But those who have gone out of it, who go beyond My reach, then they suffer.... One side, you are spiritual, you want to be spiritual. Another side you have this paradoxical culture, which takes you down to hell. 27

 МАНАМАYA The maya of man The whole world is a camouflage. If you see, this is an anti-Mahamaya. So they say that this maya is created by God. No – the maya that God has created is this world, this whole universe and all that. But this illusive life is created by human beings. Absolutely, through their projections of their brains and mental capacities, they have projected because money is everything.... This is one of the illusions that human beings have created. It is what you call as “money maya" and in that comes also the wealth, possessions, materialism. Every- thing is created by human beings and this creation of materialism then boils down to a personality which is involved in all sinful acts. Everything is all right because, if money is all right, materialism is all right.... Because Mahamaya has come, so anti-maya has come.. You should see this clearly because now you have come into the of God. Maya also means love, God's love, CC you Mahamaya maya integrates all and, in that, your eyes should open out and see what horrible things they are doing...? This is the anti-maya that is there and, for that, you need a Mahamaya to correct it and to solve the problem. The complete working of the Divine depends on you people, wherever you are. How many you are is not the point. Wherever you are, how intense you are, how you want to work it out, how you want to put your attention to it – it's very important how you are going to do it because you people should understand the responsibility. This world is get- ting drowned and I feel that at least eighty percent people will be finished. Ten percent would be hanging in between in limbo and ten percent will be Sahaja Yogis, the way it is moving in the West.... Another maya is of power. And the power of money if they can avoid, then they try to power over territory, of the land, this, that. That also made them mad quite a lot in the past, but now they're all fighting for some nonsensical land, which will never belong to them. It stays here permanently, eternally, but the fights are going on. Then, in the name of religion, they're fighting for this area, that area or they're fighting just for changing their religion or getting more people in that religion. I don't know what is their idea of religion. Is religion meant for that? the religions. have The illusive mirage So here again, the Mahamaya has to work and the Mahamaya works this way, that She integrates all the religions. She shows that all religions are the same, have the same spiri- tuality. It's on the same tree of spirituality they have grown. Instead of making people spiritual, they have made them money-oriented or they have made them power-oriented. I mean it's the other way around. It's like the tree growing underneath or something, something absurd that you cannot explain and that is the thing that is illusive. That illusiveness is called maya. And this illusiveness appeals to many people. Appeals - that's the point I'm worried about. Something is illusive, then they go on running after that like a mirage and ultimately they are destroyed. So what will be saved, at the most. But this is a very sad affair because it has taken so much effort to make human beings, to make them all right, to make them sensible and now what find is that they are going to be all finished. It's too much to bear, too much to believe in, but it is going to happen, if you people do not take it up seriously and work it out. For you also, there should not be any illusions because many of you are more busy with other things. To you other things are more important than Sahaja Yoga. But what- ever you are doing, you can bring Sahaja Yoga into that. Into anything you can bring in Sahaja Yoga. I said in politics, in agriculture, in social life, in your jobs, everywhere you you see – a picture just now – is that at least so many – ten percent of people you 28

 Mahamaya is that which brings you back to reality. can bring Sahaja Yoga. By your own behavior, by your own intelligence, you can bring in Sahaja Yoga into every field.... This is what is to get into the maya of God, that you get rid of all the illusions which are false, which do not allow you to see the right thing and then seriously to get into the productive side of Sahaja Yoga. Can you imagine how productive is Sahaja Yoga, how the miracles work out, how there is this Divine Power that is anxious to help? Mahamaya brings you back So this is it. The maya is like this, that it allows you to do what you like. You use your freedom. You go places to places, do what you want to do. Whatever do it. All right, this is a part of the maya, but Mahamaya is that which brings you back, brings you back to normal, brings you back to reality, to understand. It is at that point when you understand Mahamaya.... In the think is proper, you you of your Mother, you just enjoy. Maya should give you enjoyment. That's the best thing that this maya can give and you can enjoy it so much. I think it is a very beautiful atmosphere created by this Mahamaya so you can enjoy each other, you can maya enjoy My company, you can enjoy nature – such a rapport, such a beautiful understand- ing between everything... Nobody is bothered as to who is higher, who is lower, what is the position, how much money he has got or what he has got, nothing – just you're all enjoying. If somebody has a talent, he enjoys because he has a talent and the others also enjoy because he has talent – no jealousies, no rivalries, nothing. Somebody sings better, it is all right.... All these differences which are skin deep are finished and I find everybody appreciates everybody's talent... All this appreciation and all this beautiful feeling for others is only possible through Sahaj – no jealousies, no rivalries, nothing. These come because of an ignorance, which creates the maya about yourself, also "I am this, I am that." And then the "I" comes down. So all conditionings also can create a maya. Many conditionings are there that "I am from such a family. I am from such a dissolving has to be started. Gradually, you should try to understand. thing." That all has to be stopped.... Mahamaya's

 Everything is in that vision of Mahamaya. 30

 МАНАМAYA CONTINUED Everything is there Many people ask Me, “Mother, how did You do it?" Forget it. It's Mahamaya.... That part you need not go into. Just enjoy. Just enjoy that and you are enjoying it. It's the best way maya you are in that to enjoy this Mahamaya.. I thought something unique must be done which encompasses everything of Sahaja Yoga. It's not one incarnation. It's not one nadi, it's not one Goddess, but all of it is there. It's like a film. It is audio, visual, everything is there – drama, music, also acting. Everything is there in a film now. I mean that far, everything integrated. In the same way, I think Mahamaya has everything in it every part that you tell Me, everything that you enjoy, – every everything that you discover. Everything is in that vision of Mahamaya, which has been created for you. May God bless you.

 KING AND THE BLIND MAN a story about knowledge and humiltiy otedo THERE IS A SAYING IN SANSKRIT, which is very common: “Vidya vinaye na shob- hate."Even the knowledge is decorated. Shobhate means "gets decorations" CC or “beau- tified through humility." If there is an educated man he has to be a humble person. If he is not a humble person, then he is not educated at all, in any way. I don't know if I have told you a story about one saint who was meditating and was blind. A king came there and asked him, “Did you see some people around?" CC The saint said, “Yes, my King. Sit down. I saw your servant come in and then your minister came and then the prime minister came and now have come. you The king said, “You are blind. How did you know? Through your meditation?" "No, common sense." "What is the common sense?" The blind saint answered, "First the servant came in. He said, 'What, you are a bogus fellow sitting down here, wasting your time.' He gave me two or three abuses, used bad language and said, 'Have you seen any person here?' So I said, No.' Then the minister came in. He didn't abuse me, but he just asked me. Then the prime min- ister came. He said, 'sir' to me and he might have also said thank you' perhaps. And then came the king. You were extremely humble. You first touched my feet. You sat down on the Mother Earth, waited for me to ask, 'What do you want' and in a very humble you –" Because I am blind, way you said, 'If you have heard people around you didn't say something that would hurt me. You spoke in such a humble At way. least a hundred and eight names of the Guru asked me this. So you took before you I know you are learned, you are the humblest. So you must be the king." based on the words of From this story, we have to derive that the more we are learned into vidya, into Shri Mataji at Navaratri the technique of Sahaja Yoga, we have to be humble. That is our decoration. That is our certificate. That is the path into the entrance of every human being. Puja 1982

 Credits and Notes2 Front cover: Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi (Calin Chiriou) “After visiting Daglio, Shri Mataji was in the car for a return to Cabella. We were two Sahaja Yogis near the car and we made namaskar to our Mother. That's the moment!" Contents pages name: the 349th name of the Goddess from the Sri Lalita Sahasranama Contents pages quote: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, birthday celebration 1977 Contents pages photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in India, circa 1980 Page 3: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 10 February 2008 (Suneel Janakwar) Page 5: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Sankranti Puja 2008 (Suneel Janakwar) Pages 6 and 11: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Pages 14 and 15: Shri Mataji and Sir CP, Pune India, 18 January 2008 Page 19: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Guru Puja 1994 Page 21: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Guru Puja 2002 (Michal Markl) Page 22: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Pratishthan Pune India, 26 January 2008 (Suneel Janakwar) Page 23: Sahaja Yogis celebrate Indian Republic Day, 26 January 2008 (Suneel Janakwar) Pages 25, 26, 27, 29, 30: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Page 32: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Shri Durga Puja 1982 (Pamela Bromley) This page: Niranjan Rai waiting to offer flowers to Shri Mataji, International Sahaja Yoga Research and Health Centre, Belapur India, 23 December 2007 (Paul Anant) Back cover photo: the crown of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Shri Ganesha Puja 2007 (Matthew Cooper) Back cover quote: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Guru Puja 1986 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE www.divinecoolbreeze.org SUBSCRIPTIONS: The Divine Cool Breeze c/o Sarvesh Singh 42036 Glynn Tarra Place, Leesburg, VA 20176 USA – dcb108@yahoo.com CONTENT: The Divine Cool Breeze, 881 Frederick Road North Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V7K 2Y5 – coolbreeze@shaw.ca Printed by King Printing Company Inc, 181 Industrial Avenue East Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA CDEPARTMENT AitieNTIODEPA

 When you become Sahaja Yogis you have become gold. Now the second job is to keep this gold shining. And the third would be to get a part in the crown of your Mother so that you can never be tarnished.



----------------------

2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breezes
March and April 2008 volume twenty-one number twO
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 VANDÂRU-JANA-VATSALÂ
SHE LOVES HER DEVOTEES AS HER CHILDREN
2 Shri Ganesha's Birthday 4 Sankranti Puja 6 Commitment 8 Trust 14 Unending Blessings 16 Security
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 They are ordinary villagers.
They have never read any yoga.
They don't understand anything more about
vibrations than these feelings that you get....
This is what is Sahaja, such loving people.
And at that time, I just thought of how
once with Rama, how you felt those things
with people, with very simple people,
of very simple heart and shraddha,
how they had those feelings
of receiving your love and feeling it.
Everyone needs love in this world.
You cannot exist without love.
Your whole being is based on love.
22 Republic Day 24 Secret of Mahamaya 32 The King and the Blind Man
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Shri Ganesha's Birthday Puja • Pratishth an • 10 February 2008
Mỹ Own
He is the Purest and
translated from Hindi: Today is a very important day for all of us Sahaja Yogis because today Shri Ganesha
was born. Shri Ganesha is who we worship and because of whom we got our Realiza-
tion. However much you may remember Him, until you know His special qualities, you
cannot attain Him. His special quality is that He is the embodiment of purity (shuddha
The actual swaroop) and the complete master of the universe. He is the incarnation of the Supreme,
of Brahma.
By coming into this world, He has created music (sangeet), rhythm (taal) and notes
(sur). By His grace only, people become one with music (talleen) – a small boy who came
into the world and did such great work. He has given so many things to everyone and
pure spirit
has taken
even today He is active. Shri Ganesha's puja, no matter how much you do it, it is not
enough. A lot of people say we don't see Shri Ganesha so much, that even after worship-
ping Him we do not attain Him.
He is omnipotent, omnipresent and in everything, but you cannot recognize Him
until you are realized. After your Realization you can recognize what Shri Ganesha is.
Shri Ganesha is purity, the pure spirit. When He is awakened within us, then we have
no questions left. Then we are successful in whichever task we undertake. We find joy in
everything we do. He is the embodiment of joy and gives joy to everyone. To serve Him is
the ultimate dharma (paramdharma). To serve Him means to look after small children, to
serve them, to make sure there is no cruelty towards them. This pleases Him very much.
Such an embodiment of love, such a pure-hearted Shri Ganesha was born today.
This is the importance of this day. Today, if you ask for any wish, then Shri Ganesha
will fulfill it. It is His right to fulfill all desires because you are all realized. Ask Him
with all your heart and He will help you in every way, every moment, every instant.
Today is a very big day because the actual pure spirit has taken birth today and He
already had such an eternal state that many people could not comprehend it or write
about it. They wrote only what they understood. But now that you are realized, you can
understand that by the of Shri Ganesha's name you can get your Realization. By
birth today.
your
power
taking His name alone, any disease or any pain will disappear. He is eternal. He is always
present within us. When you get your Realization, you can feel Him. And if
not realized, you cannot understand Him. That is why people get misled and do wrong
things.
But with Shri Ganesha's blessings you can do so many things and neither will
greedy, nor will you have any problems because He does all the work for you. He takes
care of you. Though He is a little boy, He looks after you. Shri Ganesha is a very great
power by which so much work is getting done. For Me, He is the purest and My own. I
trouble Him a lot. When somebody tries to trouble Me, I ask Him to handle this fellow
and to make him all right. When this fellow is unmanageable for Me, when there is a dif-
ficult person and it is impossible for Me to handle him, then He does the job.
you are
you feel
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 So today is a very auspicious, as today He is born. Secondly, today is Panchami [the
fifth day]. This Panchami is recognized because on this day we wear a dress. Whatever we
wear today is so that our body is properly covered. The sense of shame and chastity that
our body has is because of Him – Lajja Rupena Samsthitah. So if you have any sense of
chastity and shame, it is because of Him. That will benefit you immensely.
You cannot feel joyous until you worship Shri Ganesha. By worshipping Shri Gane-
serve Him
TO
sha,
your joy increases. You become joyous because He is the personification of joy (anand
swaroop). Because of this, both things are today – His birthday and His help. We take
His help in any work that we do. Such is our way. But we don't see what we have to do to
awaken Him. In that direction our attention does not go. We do not feel that we should
become like Him, that we should have a state in which Shri Ganesha is awakened within dharma.
us with which we may never venture on the wrong path.
Those who are rooted in Ganesha are special. They despise all the wrong things in this
world and they do not do anything wrong because Shri Ganesha stops them. They cannot
enjoy any wrong activities. This is Shri Ganesha's great blessing, that you have come into
such a joyous life.
So today, in His service, you sing His praise and glory so that He may be pleased.
My eternal blessings to all of you.
is the ultimate
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 translated from Hindi: Sankranti means that today there should be some-
thing new. The kundalini has awakened within you, so
have become a new
as compared to what you were,
you
person. But on the day of Sankranti should know
to please the Goddess who is sitting within
you
that
you have
you do to make Her happy? Distribute
you. What should
sesame seeds and jaggery. This is for love. To increase the
love for each other, we give sesame seeds and jaggery.
Today the Sun left its place and, in its northward move-
Sankranti Puja ment, came towards us. At this moment we should be
very
17 January 2008 thankful to the Sun. It is by the
of the Sun that so
grace
Pratishth an
many things take place in our country of which we are
quite unaware. We should do namaskar to the Sun today
and His power, His knowledge should come into us.
I would say that all of you have become realized and
vibrations are flowing through you. Now you
use of these vibrations, establish the shakti within
should make
you,
establish the peace within you and show the world that
this power within is for us and we have to acquire it. Nur-
ture this with your good qualities and truthful speech.
Today is special because the Sun is particularly benevo-
lent towards us and we should thank Him for all this.
You have received a lot. There is more to come. You will
get more. We should increase it.
You have performed so many pujas to Me. I am sur-
prised. What do you want by doing so many pujas?
I want you all to become great Sahaja Yogis and to lead
I
thousands of people, lay a virtuous path in this world,
teach goodness and feel the shakti that is flowing within
you.
I am feeling very happy to see you all. O
4.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 You have to please the Goddess who is sitting within you
Sankranti
Become great Sahaja Yogis and lead thousands of people,
lay a virtuous path in this world, teach goodness
and feel the shakti that is flowing within you.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 the
commitment
If Sahaja Yoga can be carried for ten centuries, this world would be a different place.
So one has to learn that we have to dedicate. We must fully dedicate ourselves. We are not
here to gain everything out of Sahaja Yoga. Like in the beginning, people have problems
about their families, so they think that God should solve the problems because they have
come to Sahaja Yoga to oblige Sahaja Yoga now, so God must solve their problems. Now
they have problems of their jobs, God must solve the problems. If they have problems
with their relations, so God must solve their problems. That's the sort of a job given to
God because they have very graciously joined Sahaja Yoga. Then, after that, God must
give them money. He must provide them with everything. And He must look after them
for no commitment at all. There is no commitment. Nobody has any commitment in
Paithan India Sahaja Yoga, but God is committed and God has to work it out. Then they start – some
people – foolishly start using Sahaja Yoga for other purposes, like earning money or earn-
11 January 1987 ing power or name or fame or domination or anything.
not upwards. And then, once you go
don't realize whether you are going upward or downward. So in dedication,
These are the steps which are going down –
down,
you
one has to see "what have I dedicated for Sahaja Yoga? All the time I have problems. Al
the time I say I can't do this because of that, I can't do that because of this. There's the
problem. This I would like to do, this I would like to do." All the time there's an I – “I, I
and I." "But what have I dedicated? What time have I given to Sahaja Yoga? How much
money have I given to Sahaja Yoga?" Nothing at all. People don't even take leave for
Sahaja Yoga. They can't do anything for Sahaja Yoga.
These people [who created the Ajanta Caves in India] not only took leave, but
nently went and settled in that place, in that far-fetched place. Without any machinery,
without anything, they did that whole painting and the whole excavation and all that,
CC
perma-
what
call the entire work of such a tremendous volume that is impossible in these
you
modern times. Nobody can recreate something like that – with all your machinery, with
everything – because people don't have dedication.
So for Sahaja Yoga, we have to put ourselves onto a point – "What did I do? What did
I sacrifice for Sahaja Yoga?" Nothing. It's only for my own child or maybe for my wife or
for myself or for my job or for something.
What is our commitment? And without commitment, purity cannot come in. You
will go up and down like a yo-yo.... Committed means even if we have to give our life,
we should do it. Even if we have to give up everything, we should do it. But all other
considerations are to be taken there. Everything should work out...
Of course, Sahaja Yoga is blessings, is blissful. It blesses you all the time. It gives you
a very long rope to hang you also sometimes. One must know that it's a blessing of that
6.
kind also.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 So one has to be very, very alert that
God has chosen us for such a special work
and we have to be fully committed to Sahaja
Yoga. All those who are wise will take to this
and understand that life is only worth this,
otherwise it's useless. It's good for nothing.
It has no meaning. And this has to come
first from the leaders and then from others
complete commitment to Sahaja Yoga.
It doesn't mean that you have to give up
anything. For My sake you don't have to do
anything. But for your own sake, for your
own betterment, you have to do it...
It's not only money, it's not only your
talking about it, your saying about it, writ-
ing about it, but it is through your own
being it should happen.
You all should become the source of
that I want to emit all over the world,
energy
that light which is going to enlighten. No
amount of artificiality is going to work it
out, but complete genuineness within you.
Look at these saints, they had nobody,
they didn't have Mother to help them. This
Gyaneshwara's life, if
shocked. He didn't have even shoes to walk.
out,
will be
you read,
you
He was treated so badly because his father
was a sanyasi and was married, so they said
that these are the children of a sanyasi. They
had no food to eat. They had to walk for
miles together in bare feet. They had no
blessings of the Mother on them. Despite
that, they kept to Sahaja Yoga, kept to their
blessings of being one with God because
they achieved that state.
Now all this is for your good, for
benevolence that you get all the blessings,
but that doesn't mean that you should stag-
I am committed to Sahaja Yoga
your
and that is what you have to be
not progress. One has
to progress higher and higher. One has to
decide the commitment “I am committed
should
nate, that
you
- committed.
to Sahaja Yoga." And that is what you have
to be – committed....
The commitment has to be there. That's
the main point. O
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 the day I saw you.
I trusted
I
you
The day you came to Me I trusted you.
And I worked on you from the very first day,
knowing what you are,
but I trusted your spirit that it would shine.
In the
same way, trust.
Anything
We laugh at others. I have seen Sahaja Yogis laugh at others, make fun of them when they
will trust them, you
will
come to Me. Trust them. When
respect them also.
you
I may do for
have to believe in yourself and enjoy the way gently you are sweeping into the
So
you
current of your Mother's love. Just enjoy that. Like a flower that falls into the current and
flows and enjoys all the beauties of that current, in the same way you should enjoy. When
that enjoyment comes into you, you will start trusting.
Trust your Mother. I try many things to correct you, but trust in one thing, that ...
anything I may do for you, it is just to clean you. That's My job....
With all this, trust in heart. First trust yourself. Trust others, other Sahaja Yogis.
Love thy neighbour as thyself. Who is your neighbour? He is a Sahaja Yogi. Stand by him
and trust your Mother. As I have trusted you, you have to trust Me and it will work out.
Open your heart to this trust. You should not worry whether it would be protocol-
ish, all right or not, whether it would be absolutely respectable or not because the heart
knows. Whatever your heart will do in its genuine form will be respectable because there
resides your spirit, which manifests. That will look after
By outer forms, whatever you try is not going to work out. It is that trust in your
loving heart that is going to work...
Love gives all the sophistication and the fragrance and all the breeding that is required.
Not talking of love, but really loving is the way it is most enjoyable...
You are the people who are going to bring Sahaja Yoga on this Earth. You are the
people who are going to do it. I am nothing... They will believe you much more. They will
believe. They will not believe Me at all. They'll say I'm fantastic, I cannot be understood,
so they won't believe Me. They will believe you. They will not trust Me, but they will trust
you. They would not trust Christ, but they will trust you because you are one of them.
That is why it is important that you should improve in all sincerity, in all truthfulness
to yourself. Become a perfect mechanism of God.
vou, it is just
to clean you.
That's My job.
your
you.
8
2 August 1981
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Trust
Trust and security
Once you start Sahaj culture in your life, you'’ll be amazed. Others will I trust everyone very
be amazed how you are having rapport with each other, how you are
looking after everything so well. This is the best way to live in this world
- as Sahaja Yogis, where there is no ego, there is no conditioning, noth-
ing. You are just absolutely free from all these horrible attributes and
then you will be amazed how people will trust you. Christmas Puja 2000 And they are sinking, sinking,
тиch.
I never doubt to begin with.
you emit out of
ocean of security, you can call it. Everyone feels secured, secure with
you and that security will be felt by everyone. Trust others. You must
trust. That is very important – trust for everything. I have seen some
people are very serious on money. Some are very serious about posses-
sions. Some are this.
What
your love to others is a sense of security - an
but still I have faith that theyll
come around, will be all right
I know they are sometimes weak people – could be weak about and I'll give them a chance.
money, weak about possessions, could be even insulting to things that
should not be so, but don't lose your temper. Just have forgiveness for Birthday Felicitations 2002
them and let them feel secured, absolutely secured. Trust...
We must grow. And for growth, security is the most important thing.
If there is no security for a tree, it will never grow. So everybody should
feel secured in the company of Sahaja Yogis.... There should be a healthy
growth. But growth must take place and for that you must trust.
Somebody might make mistakes. All right, it doesn't matter. Some-
body may be dishonest. It doesn't matter. But give them security... This
trust has to be there, trusting in God that He will give him the right
path.
Easter Puja 1984
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 TRUST
Trust, love and forgiveness
We have to trust in ourselves and we have to really love people. We should be
humble and love. All this love will help you all your life. This is the message of
Christ. Christ has said, "Forgive them..." Very lovingly, He pleads for all the
bad people who crucified Him, that "Oh Lord, please forgive them because
they don't know what they are doing." Can you imagine such a loving char-
CC
acter of Christ...?
We have to worship that character within us, that we are also loving
people. We love each other. All over the world, all the Sahaja Yogis love each
other.
Easter Puja 2002
God Almighty is the ocean of love, ocean of compassion and ocean of forgive-
ness and He loves you so much that you cannot love yourself that much, so
trust in Him. Nothing will go wrong.
19 September 1984
Trust of a mother
Supposing you show your love.. It's so subtle. It's so innate within
We are a very
Supposing you show your love.... It's so subtle. It's so innate within you,
in. It's there. We have to just open out. Every human being is a bundle of
love....
built-
beautiful group
In pure love, there is a kind of a beautiful light which protects you, v
guides you and which enlightens your life completely. This light is just nour-
ished and also, we can say, like the lamp has to have the oil, this is the one that
which
is for our spirituality – the love of a person. You are the embodiment of love,
of
people who
take it from Me, because you are a human being.... If you try to love anybody
who is very cruel and very bad, gradually he will calm down. He will harm
you a little bit, he will do this, he will see things and he might be mean with
you, do all kinds of things, but then gradually you find your love works and
works and works. And ultimately it is your love which is important to that
person. Now your love is really firstly appreciated more by innocent people
like children. Children know what love is....
are something
out of the blue,
out
With all this telling
"How can this be?" You have no trust in yourself. You have no faith in your-
self.... At the end of the whole thing, I must tell you that when you are a guru,
you are also a mother. You have to express yourself like a mother. She is kind.
She is gentle. She forgives. She also corrects whenever it's necessary, but in
her own sweet way she corrects so the correction takes place. It is not that a
you are not confident. You get upset. You feel,
who are
so
much
in
iIn peace and rebellion starts
So all that wisdom of a mother is within you. It is already there, so please
try to use it. I am sure it will all work out and, as it is, we are a very beautiful
group of people who are something out of the blue, who are so much in peace
Guru Puja 1995
in joy together. ånd in joy together.
Trust in the other
Once you are born of your spirit, you feel the oneness that all cells belong in
one great being. The microcosm becomes the macrocosm and you do not feel
that separateness from another personality. As you all the time feel you have
fear,
you trust and you know that another one is a great human being.
have apprehensions, you are bothered, but once you become that,
you
10 May 1985
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 There should be
a competition in
trusting, in being
honest, in being kind,
of being in service.
Trust your spouse
To think that the woman is dominated by the man or the man is dominated
by the woman comes from a kind of a complex and this complex must be
given up. You are complementary to each other. You decorate each other.
Never talk ill of your husbands and never talk ill of your wives. This is the key
of having an exclusive married life... You have to trust each other. The trust
in God, children imbibe when they start learning from their parents how they
trust each other.
The whole world is to be transformed, once we learn this trust – not in
money alone, but in every way, a trust, a complete trust. As you trust yourself,
you must trust the other, who is not the other any more. 29 November 1981
Go on trusting more and more. There should be a competition in loving.
There should be a competition in trusting, in being honest, in being kind, of
being in service. Let there be a competition like that.
3 March 1980
11
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Trust yourself
We cannot believe ourselves that we are capable of getting Realization and secondly that
we are afraid to get Realization. Thirdly, we do not trust anyone who talks of Realiza-
tion.... But at least trust yourself. See, start from that point. You trust yourself that you
should get your Realization, otherwise why do you call yourself a seeker? You have to get
your Realization, no doubt about it, but when it comes to trust, whom do we trust?
4 June 1981
Trust Shri Mataji
I'm like a mouthpiece of this All-Pervading Power. It doesn't have a mouthpiece to talk to
but I'm like a mouthpiece and if I tell you something, you have to just trust Me and
do not do something which I have said not to do.... You have to trust Me and believe Me,
You have that when I tell you, you are to believe in Me, that I am telling you the truth and which
is for your benevolence and for your safety, for your caution. I hope you'll understand
to trust this this and must know that I love you very much and I care for all of you individually.
you
I know about every one of you, what you are doing, where are you. I know everything
23 December 1991
Power fully. somehow.
Trust God
You have to trust this Power fully. Those days when people were in difficulties, they were
always attacked. They had not got their Self Realization. They had to put their trust into
the Divine Power. They had to put. But now when you have got Realization, you have got
your freedom. You should never forget that you have to trust this Divine Power, all the
time that It will look after
Navaratri Puja 1990
you.
The trust that is in Sahaja Yoga
Supposing I have someone in whom I have faith, naturally I will give him all the work.
I will trust everything. I'll keep the keys with him or the money with him, never doubt
such a person. In the same way, if you have faith – faith in yourself, faith in Sahaja Yoga
where you are established – you'll be surprised how things will work out, how life will
improve and you will be standing on the rocks. You'll feel that way. You'll have no doubts.
You'll have no problems, no diseases.
So this is such a state, only with faith.... How to get to this faith? There's no course
about it. There's no literature about it. There's no lecture about it, but there is an awaken-
ing within you which will ask this, "What am I?" This awakening – "What am I? What
have I achieved...? What is it that I have achieved? What have I got out of Sahaja Yoga?
All these questions will come to you....
In Sahaja Yoga we trust people. We trust. One among a hundred might deceive us. It
doesn't matter. We trust. That faith you put in that person works in his mind also, that
"They have put so much faith in Me." But what about the Deities? You show faith in
Them, They work. Immediately They work it out...
When we talk of faith, it is the challenge to this All-pervading Power which organizes,
which knows everything, which is so intelligent, efficient. Above all, it loves
then
And
you.
show faith. The resurrection in Sahaja Yoga is that your faith is solid. This you
you
have to achieve – solid faith.
Easter Puja 1993
That is what we have to be. But if we cannot trust other Sahaja Yogis, we cannot love each
other, we cannot understand each other. That means we are something low, lower than
Mahalakshmi Puja 1990
others.
12
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 TRUST
Trust yourself, trust others
To love God is ... difficult. Without seeing Him, without knowing Him, without know- How to please others
ing His bounties, without getting Realization, it is very difficult. But today that is not the should be the priority,
case, but still have to have no fear in your mind. Trust – you trust yourself and trust how to make the other
others. First of all, try to trust yourself. If you have made mistakes, you have to say, "Yes, person feel the trust.
I have made mistakes. All right – so what?" Trust yourself that you can correct yourself 7 April 1980
you
also.
Trusting doesn't mean a blind ego trip. It does not mean that. Trust means that "Yes,
I can correct myself. I can improve. I can do better.... I have been faltering, but I can
correct. I have that strength within me. I can rise above all these things. I have that thing
within me which I can use to my advantage."
Trust yourself. Trust that you are realized souls. Trust that God loves you, that He has
chosen you to be His instrument.
Love yourself.... You have to perfect yourself and trust in yourself that you can perfect
yourself through your kundalini awakening...
A clean heart, transparent open heart – trust others. Talk to everyone with an open
heart. Trust others.
Why do you doubt? If you do not doubt yourself, you'll not doubt others.... What is
there to be afraid of anyone? What is there not to trust anyone? What is there to be
with anyone? Talk to everyone. Shake hands with everyone. Be nice to everyone. On the
way, if you find somebody's difficulty, give him a hand...
If somebody cannot sit properly or has a problem, you try to remove the problem.
If the person cannot stand, give the place.... Allow your heart to be drenched in your
Mother's love. Just allow.
angry
2 August 1981
If you trust your joy-giving quality of your spirit,
that you're not going to lose that quality of the spirit at any cost,
then that acts as a guide and you understand
the flexibility of all these worldly, transitory things.
They are all changeable.
Only you cannot change because you are the spirit.
4 April 1985
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Anant Aashirwad
unending blessings
Shri Mataji and Sir CP went shopping in
a fabric store in Pune on January 18th.
Shri Mataji spent quite some time choosing
fabrics in various colours and choosing suit
pieces, ties and slippers. She made everyone
laugh many times with Her wit and humour.
A sales person in the fabric shop bowed at
Shri Mataji's Feet and She blessed him,
saying, "Anant Aashirwad.’
15
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Many a times, She has taken birth
to protect human beings from the evil forces
and to give them a sense of security.
the one who
It's like this: Suppose you drop somebody in the ocean. He'll be
so frightened and he’ll die before even he's sunk –
really.
But supposing a person there is, with all his things
to watch and he's the one who's going to see all the
beauty of the underworld. He's very nicely secured.
He's got beautiful glasses and all that and he's wearing
nice paddles. He doesn't have to bother. He just goes
there, nicely enjoys everything, takes photographs.
The ocean is the same for him or for the one who is
dropped in the ocean, but the one who is secure, the
6-
one who has all the equipment, the one who knows
what is to be seen is enjoying it.
In the same way, you are equipped with wisdom,
with security and you know what you are doing. The
same thing starts becoming so very beautiful and
enjoyable.
16
13 September 1992
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 This personality may be living in the turmoil of the world, but inside he's
completely peaceful. Such a personality emits peace and confidence and
security. And being very active, extremely active, such a personality is
never tired – and so dynamic and knows so much that you are sometimes
surprised that these people who have not even learned how to read and
write, how they have got so much of knowledge. Such people you can find
in
13 June 1985
in any strata of life.
is security
The truth is that we are part and parcel of the whole and the
spirit is the one which is the collective being. That means it connects you
with everyone. When, in your awareness, in consciousness, you become
the spirit, you feel the spirit of another person and this spirit is the power
behind this love. This spirit, once you feel it, you never change your ideas.
In this spirit, you see the truth, you see the beauty of another person, you
enjoy the love of another person. And this truth – that you are a part and
parcel of the whole – fills you up with tremendous security.... But I have
to just tell you very lovingly and with great request
that you have to just
enter into that and you will see that reality is the most beautiful thing that
all the security that you want.
gives you
28 August 1984
There is no need at all for you to make money or to find for yourself a
kind of a security in money. Your security is inbuilt within you.... Medita-
tion will give you security. It will give you are a real enlightenment and
a complete connection with the Divine. Without the connection of the
Divine, what's the use of doing Sahaja Yoga?
Diwali Puja 2002
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 This oneness with the whole gives you all the security that you want,
all the joy you want. And that's why kundalini awakening means collectivity.
Unless and until you want pure collectivity in your being, the kundalini won't rise.
Shri Adi Kundalini Puja 1991
Sahaja Yoga gives security
Nothing should disturb you which is trivial, useless. If you have faith in Sahaja Yoga, then
you must know you are here for a tremendous work of human emancipation. You have a
very great responsibility. You represent that part of creation which is the most important,
the most vital. And if you fail it, it's absolutely fatal also. All this works out in such a
manner that it builds up a tremendous sense of security within
are standing on the truth. Hold it with both your hands. You'll grow on it. You'll enjoy
yourself. Life will be so much better, much more beautiful. And it is only through you
the whole world is going to be saved. So strengthen yourself, strengthen your arms and
strengthen your feet. The faith is the strength of Sahaja Yoga, not the brainwaves that you
have about it.... Develop that faith that gives you the sense of security.
Women are there to
give joy and happiness
and emotional security
to the whole society.
SS
that you
know
Birthday Puja 1985
you,
you
8 September 1980
As soon as you'll meet a Sahaja Yogi, immediately into thoughtlessness, the other person,
you both will go. Everything you start enjoying in a very different manner. And such
beautiful feelings come in, such beautiful security is built up that you're surprised, "How
could I be like that? How could I feel these securities just expressing themselves in such a
6 April 1991
beautiful manner?"
With this complete joy, which Buddha has described as Sangham Sharanam Gachami,
you develop such a collectivity of complete security and joy. You must see how the Sahaja
Yogis, when they meet each other, the joy is much, much, much more than when they
6 September 1983
would meet their own kith and kin.
I asked why people, women, are not looking after their chastity.
That's very important. That is the security of a woman.
Why the men are not looking after their virtues? Because that is the security of man.
I mean that's the natural security you are.
20 July 1981
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 106
This centre of the Heart is
the centre that is responsible
for giving you security.
It is the centre of the Mother.
This gives you the sense of
security.
31 March 1980
The Heart gives security
In small, small things we destroy our security.... The complete security within yourself is
that you are the Self and these things are not important. If you are a secured man, your
children will also find that out, that their security lies in finding their own security. They
"Now don't try to help us, to spoil us. Do not give us things by which
we feel more insecure." And such children will be really brave children like Shivaji was.
him all the protection, no doubt, but she made a Shivaji out of him....
your own security and then the joy of that security will take you to your depth. Why
are you insecure in life? Money? The person who has got, who has got now the blessings
of the Divine, what more does he want? Because your God is almighty, nobody's might
is greater than that of your Father. Nobody can touch you on any point. But your faith
is lacking and that's why you should start with your faith in yourself. Make the faith sit
in your Heart chakra and that faith is going to give you the joy of security. Faith is the
themselves will
say,
те
His mother
gave
Feel
answer for all the insecurities of the world.... The essence of the Heart chakra is to feel
your own security, your own Self. Feel your own security within yourself. Only the real-
ized can feel their security because they know they have their atma, their spirit.
20 December 1979
When this chakra ... is awakened, you get all the security of the world, you are never
insecure, you are never bothered, you have no fear of anyone. You do not have to suggest
to yourself that you should not have fear or anything. You just become fearless. There is
nothing like fear. There's no reaction to any threat or anything... So you get rid of all your
fear, but
by domination, but the security that you are love, you are compassion. And the
love is the highest of all, that you stand in complete peace and bliss.
do not dominate anyone. You love. In your love, you are secured. It is not
of
you
power
26 September 1983
The centre Heart is governed by the Mother of the universe. She gives us the sense of
security... We call Her Jagadamba.
11 July 1982
19
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 God gives security
It's all God's work you are entering into. Who is greater than God? Who is more powerful
than Him? Once you enter into His kingdom, everything works out. You know it works
out.... The joy of those happenings, the joy of that blissfulness, that security of God fills
you up. And when it fills you up, you feel absolutely relaxed. You feel it's all done for
10 July 1984
you.
She
gives you You want Mahakali to protect you. In your discrimination, in your mistake, you might do
something wrong, may do something that is not good for you. It could be very danger-
ous for you. But She's the person who guides you how to avoid all the dangers. Now She
protects your life. She protects your body. She protects all the organs of your body. She's
need. the one who gives you all the security of life. In Her realm you feel completely secure.
You are never afraid of anything.... If you are under Her beautiful guidance and Her
You can hold blessings, you will never feel afraid to do anything. You'll never do anything wrong also.
As soon as you'll try to do wrong She'll hold your hand. She's really the guiding person.
. She's the one who actually gives us our existence. Without Her we cannot exist because
because
all the security ous
that you
on to Her Feet.
She is the one who is the power of Shri Shiva.... She's the one who relaxes
you
She takes over all your responsibilities. She takes over all your problems. She's the one
who solves all the problems. It is we who forget to leave all the problems to Her. If you
just leave problems to Her, all your problems are solved. Not only that, but you really feel
blessed. It's not only physical. Also it is mental that She makes your mind absolutely free
of worries. She doesn't worry and She doesn't want you to worry. If you worry, then She
tries to show that, by your worrying, you are denying Her, you are not accepting Her.
Worrying is something that is very common and people take great pride in saying, “Oh,
CC
I was worried."
How can you be worried when your Mother is Sakshat Mahakali? She can kill all the
demons. She can finish all of them. She knows how to manage things and, when you are
like a child before Her, how can you worry about it? So your worries are finished. She
You shouldn't worry about yourself. That's the point of it. Her security
is so great, She's so secure Herself that She gives you all the security that you need. You can
hold on to Her Feet. You can hold on to Her image or to anything. You can even pray to
worries about
you.
Her. Many people are being cured only by praying to Her because She cures you.... The
main thing is that we are ourselves worshipping Her. She likes that Her children should
worship Her, that on that level She can be one with them. She can give them Her compas-
sion, love and protection from all the evil.
Navaratri Puja 1999
We are all human beings created by one God, on one Earth, in complete unison. We are
part and parcel of that one Primordial Being. We are cells in that body of that great being.
part of that, then
fragmentation goes away and you become that. You become that. Then all your sense of
security is established. All your self-esteem is established. All your glory comes to you.
9 August 1980
And we are fragmented. Thať's why once you know that you are the
your
There is no need to be nervous. If Mother is late, there must be some plan. If She is early,
there must be some plan. If She's going by this plane and not by the other, there must
be some plan – not to doubt it. If She's doing something, there must be some plan. You
know, Mother has Her own plans. It is a nice idea to think like that. “She has Her own
plans, you know." Once you start feeling that way, such security and such beautiful peace
will spread in your being. And you will be quite satisfied.
CC
Shri Buddha Puja 1988
20
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 You give security
You should be a comfortable person to another, not an uncomfortable person.
You should not be a difficult person to others. Your tongue should be such
that it should give great solace to others. Your eyes should be such that it We have to have the security of the
should give a very great benediction to others. When you look at people, Mother and the protection of the
people should feel that "Here is my security." Not to enjoy others, but give Mother and that all the evil forces
enjoyment out of you. Enjoyment out of you is the way you should act and must be finished from this world.
then the laws of the Divine work better.
27 September 1982
Shri Krishna Puja 1990
As the blessing of the Heart chakra, you become a person completely secured
within yourself, absolutely settled with yourself. You neither aggress others
nor take aggression upon yourself. You feel so
give happiness to others and security to others. And others feel nice in your
company.... So one develops that sense of security within yourself because
are the spirit.
happy with yourself and you
you
17 September 1984
This transformation that has taken place within you has brought out all the
beauty of your heart, of your compassion, of your love. And you give, want
to give security to others without expecting anything, without demanding
anything.
29 February 1992
The Parabrahma has come to look after you.
Cling on to it. Even the death has to go
back.
Then what about these minor things?
31 July 1982
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 59*
REPUBLIC
DAY
Shri Mataji celebrated the 59th
Republic Day of India with Sir C.P.
and the entire collective of Pune on
the sprawling lawns of Pratishthan.
She said in Hindi that, by seeing
everything today, “Mera jee (man)
bhar aaya hai," implying She was
overwhelmed with joy.
22
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Pratishtha,n26 January 2008
Lndian
Republic Day
0BLIC
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-25.txt 
 et of
everything is there:
the
secret
I have never talked about Mahamaya,
as it is not to be talked about or told.
It's a secret, as they say.
It's the basis of Sahaja Yoga, I should say, because it's described
Mahamaya Puja
10 April 1994
Aukland that when the Goddess comes in the Sahasrara, the Shakti,
She is Mahamaya– Sahasrare Mahamaya - already described.
She has to be the Mahamaya. It means She should camou-
flage Herself fully. Nobody should be able to know Her as
the Goddess to begin with and even if they get
Realization,
they should not reach to the end of it. There are many rea-
sons for that.
24
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Mahamaya
The job, the closeness and the body
The first thing is the job. The job of Mahamaya was to give Realization. Now if I had The Mahamaya
come on a tiger with a sword in My hand, nobody would have stood near Me. You all
would have run away from Me. In any other form, if the Goddess had come, She could incarnation
not have done what She was supposed to do.... The Mother of Christ or Shri Sitaji or
Fatima, they all ended their lives. They had to go away from this world so early. They has to come so
couldn't do
work whatsoever. Now this difficult work of giving Realization to others
any
intricate. It has to work out in such a manner that nobody feels that it is done by
is
that people can
very
some great personality or with a great awe or fear.
So the Mahamaya incarnation has to come so that people can come closer. Also it has
come closer.
very great advantages that when a simple person who's just a housewife starts giving Real-
ization, people are flabbergasted. They think, "If She can do it, why not we do it? After
all, She's just an ordinary housewife, so it's all right. If She can do something, we can also
do it." So they have self-confidence. And being a Mother, She does Her loving part, Her
compassion, but the greatest is the patience. You see, none of them had so much patience.
All these incarnations who came, you see how they disappeared from this Mother Earth
quickly by some excuse or other. But I had to stay. I don't know how long, but it has to
be done up to a point, this work of giving Realization.
The third thing was that you have to be identified into My body, into the cells of
My body, but this is a more difficult task because supposing one of you becomes stupid,
becomes foolish, quarrelsome. Anything you
but I don't think about Myself. I always think about So it's an indication to Me that
something has gone wrong somewhere. Somebody is doing something wrong to some-
body. Some Sahaja Yogis are being tortured. Some are sick. Anything like that, I work it
out very intensely and intimately.
do, any small thing, it hurts Me. It has to,
you.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Mahamaya's secret
Mahamaya's blessings are like this. You can't see how
you are inside Me. You can't see your reflection within
Me. You can't see. This is Mahamaya. This is the secret
part of it that you don't know.... I have the
cure, so you get cured. You dont know how it hap-
pens.... It's My doing. I have taken you into Myself.
You haven't. So you don't have to worry as if you are
power to
troubling Me. It's My own doing. It's My own work.
It's My own responsibility. And if I have done it, it's
done because I am supposed to do it. That's the job I
have to do, so there's nothing to feel bad about.
But now, what is the purpose? As I told
is that I could come close to you and I need not fill
it
you,
you with fear or awe or even a feeling that I am not a
human being. I behave exactly like a human being, I
react exactly like human beings and all these powers are
hidden within Myself.
Unless and until you are a realized soul,
understand. Whatever you may do, you won't under-
stand. Or maybe in the previous life you had your Real-
ization or maybe also you have done such tremendous
punyas that you can recognize. There are people like
that who have done it. But to make it more congenial
won't
you
to you is to become absolutely a human being, so I
married, I have children, I have grandchildren and I do
shopping, as you see. People are surprised how I take
Coca-Cola. I'm not supposed to take Coca-Cola or eat
popcorn. They're surprised, but I have to be just like
you. But inside I am not. Outside I
I am.
To make it more
congenial to you is to
become absolutely
a human being,
so I married,
I have children,
I have grandchildren
and I do shopping.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-28.txt 
 МАНАМАYА
Nothing is a miracle
My attention is such that it penetrates into everything and I remember each
and every thing very well. My memory's very good, even at this age. So you
see, this attention itself is very penetrating and, when it penetrates, it carries
with it all the powers that are required and it acts. It's a tremendous machin-
ery, which is very subtle and works wonders.
So you start telling Me that there is a miracle that has happened. Nothing
is a miracle because if you're all in My body and if My body is divine, then
what is a miracle? It's all the communication. As this hand can communicate
with this hand, I communicate with you.
should not get
But one thing is definite, that
Mahamaya. It's a very dangerous thing because once you get lost ...
doesn't act, it doesn't work out. It's not a casual thing, but I want to live very
lost with this
of
rupa
then it
you
casually Myself to show that I'm casual, but I am not. You should not pay
your attention casually. That won't work out because you are in My body.
Every cell in My body is aware and every cell has a reflector. I don't know
about it – you know about it – but there is a reflector in us, which works on
remote control. So it works on remote control on your attention also. If your
attention is not all right, it corrects. That's the best way we could evolve human
beings. There was no other way out because the attention of the people is, on
the whole, in the whole world, not yet on the spirit. But suddenly, they get a
glimpse that there must be something beyond.
The maya that God has created is this whole universe,
but this illusive life is created by human beings
The need for camouflage
So many religions have come. So many have talked about it. So they may
say about it, they may talk about it, but still the consciousness that we have
to be the spirit is among very few people and they are the ones called as the
seekers of truth, while the rest of the people are not. They are busy with this
or that....
So under these circumstances, one had to come in a camouflage... They
are like enemies of God's love, so you have to enter into them like a spy,
camouflaging yourself and make them dance here, here and there. Let them
lost a little bit here and there. Let them see for themselves because, with
get
Mahamaya, She allows you....
If you are with Me, if you are in Sahaja Yoga, you are protected, you are
looked after. But you have to stick on. You have to have faith and even if
there's any problem, it gets solved. But those who have gone out of it, who go
beyond My reach, then they suffer.... One side, you are spiritual, you want to
be spiritual. Another side you have this paradoxical culture, which takes you
down to hell.
27
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-29.txt 
 МАНАМАYA
The maya of man
The whole world is a camouflage. If you see, this is an anti-Mahamaya. So they say that
this maya is created by God. No – the maya that God has created is this world, this whole
universe and all that. But this illusive life is created by human beings. Absolutely, through
their projections of their brains and mental capacities, they have projected because money
is everything.... This is one of the illusions that human beings have created. It is what you
call as “money maya" and in that comes also the wealth, possessions, materialism. Every-
thing is created by human beings and this creation of materialism then boils down to
a personality which is involved in all sinful acts. Everything is all right because, if money
is all right, materialism is all right....
Because Mahamaya has come, so anti-maya has come.. You should see this clearly
because now you have come into the of God. Maya also means love, God's love,
CC
you
Mahamaya
maya
integrates all and, in that, your eyes should open out and see what horrible things they are doing...?
This is the anti-maya that is there and, for that, you need a Mahamaya to correct it and
to solve the problem.
The complete working of the Divine depends on you people, wherever you are. How
many you are is not the point. Wherever you are, how intense you are, how you want to
work it out, how you want to put your attention to it – it's very important how you are
going to do it because you people should understand the responsibility. This world is get-
ting drowned and I feel that at least eighty percent people will be finished. Ten percent
would be hanging in between in limbo and ten percent will be Sahaja Yogis, the way it is
moving in the West....
Another maya is of power. And the power of money if they can avoid, then they try to
power over territory, of the land, this, that. That also made them mad quite a lot in
the past, but now they're all fighting for some nonsensical land, which will never belong
to them. It stays here permanently, eternally, but the fights are going on.
Then, in the name of religion, they're fighting for this area, that area or they're fighting
just for changing their religion or getting more people in that religion. I don't know what
is their idea of religion. Is religion meant for that?
the religions.
have
The illusive mirage
So here again, the Mahamaya has to work and the Mahamaya works this way, that She
integrates all the religions. She shows that all religions are the same, have the same spiri-
tuality. It's on the same tree of spirituality they have grown. Instead of making people
spiritual, they have made them money-oriented or they have made them power-oriented.
I mean it's the other way around. It's like the tree growing underneath or something,
something absurd that you cannot explain and that is the thing that is illusive.
That illusiveness is called maya. And this illusiveness appeals to many people. Appeals
- that's the point I'm worried about. Something is illusive, then they go on running after
that like a mirage and ultimately they are destroyed.
So what
will be saved, at the most. But this is a very sad affair because it has taken so much effort
to make human beings, to make them all right, to make them sensible and now what
find is that they are going to be all finished. It's too much to bear, too much to believe in,
but it is going to happen, if you people do not take it up seriously and work it out.
For you also, there should not be any illusions because many of you are more busy
with other things. To you other things are more important than Sahaja Yoga. But what-
ever you are doing, you can bring Sahaja Yoga into that. Into anything you can bring in
Sahaja Yoga. I said in politics, in agriculture, in social life, in your jobs, everywhere you
you see – a picture just now – is that at least so many – ten percent of people
you
28
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Mahamaya
is that which
brings you
back to reality.
can bring Sahaja Yoga. By your own behavior, by your own intelligence, you can bring in
Sahaja Yoga into every field....
This is what is to get into the maya of God, that you get rid of all the illusions which
are false, which do not allow you to see the right thing and then seriously to get into the
productive side of Sahaja Yoga.
Can you imagine how productive is Sahaja Yoga, how the miracles work out, how
there is this Divine Power that is anxious to help?
Mahamaya brings you back
So this is it. The maya is like this, that it allows you to do what you like. You use your
freedom. You go places to places, do what you want to do. Whatever
do it. All right, this is a part of the maya, but Mahamaya is that which brings you
back, brings you back to normal, brings you back to reality, to understand. It is at that
point when you understand Mahamaya....
In the
think is proper,
you
you
of your Mother, you just enjoy. Maya should give you enjoyment. That's
the best thing that this maya can give and you can enjoy it so much. I think it is a very
beautiful atmosphere created by this Mahamaya so you can enjoy each other, you can
maya
enjoy My company, you can enjoy nature – such a rapport, such a beautiful understand-
ing between everything... Nobody is bothered as to who is higher, who is lower, what is
the position, how much money he has got or what he has got, nothing – just you're all
enjoying. If somebody has a talent, he enjoys because he has a talent and the others also
enjoy because he has talent – no jealousies, no rivalries, nothing. Somebody sings better,
it is all right.... All these differences which are skin deep are finished and I find everybody
appreciates everybody's talent...
All this appreciation and all this beautiful feeling for others is only possible through
Sahaj – no jealousies, no rivalries, nothing. These come because of an ignorance, which
creates the maya about yourself, also "I am this, I am that." And then the "I" comes down.
So all conditionings also can create a maya. Many conditionings are there that "I am
from such a family. I am from such a
dissolving has to be started. Gradually, you should try to understand.
thing." That all has to be stopped.... Mahamaya's
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Everything is in
that vision of
Mahamaya.
30
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-32.txt 
 МАНАМAYA
CONTINUED
Everything is there
Many people ask Me, “Mother, how did You do it?"
Forget it. It's Mahamaya....
That part you
need not go into. Just enjoy. Just enjoy that
and you
are enjoying it. It's the best way
maya
you are in that
to enjoy this Mahamaya..
I thought something unique must be done which
encompasses everything of Sahaja Yoga. It's not one
incarnation.
It's not one nadi, it's not one Goddess, but all of it is there.
It's like a film. It is audio, visual, everything is there –
drama, music, also acting. Everything is there in a film now.
I mean that far, everything integrated.
In the same way, I think Mahamaya has everything in it
every part that you tell Me, everything that you enjoy,
– every
everything that you discover.
Everything is in that vision of Mahamaya, which has been
created for you.
May God bless you.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-33.txt 
 KING
AND THE BLIND MAN
a story about knowledge and humiltiy
otedo
THERE IS A SAYING IN SANSKRIT, which is very common: “Vidya vinaye na shob-
hate."Even the knowledge is decorated. Shobhate means "gets
decorations"
CC
or “beau-
tified through humility." If there is an educated man he has to be a humble
person.
If he is not a humble person, then he is not educated at all, in any way.
I don't know if I have told you a story about one saint who was meditating and
was blind. A king came there and asked him, “Did you see some people around?"
CC
The saint said, “Yes, my King. Sit down. I saw your servant come in and then
your minister came and then the prime minister came and now
have come.
you
The king said, “You are blind. How did you know? Through your
meditation?"
"No, common sense."
"What is the common sense?"
The blind saint answered, "First the servant came in. He said, 'What, you are a
bogus fellow sitting down here, wasting your time.' He gave me two or three abuses,
used bad language and said, 'Have you seen any person here?' So I said, No.' Then
the minister came in. He didn't abuse me, but he just asked me. Then the prime min-
ister came. He said, 'sir' to me and he might have also said thank you' perhaps. And
then came the king. You were extremely humble. You first touched my feet. You sat
down on the Mother Earth, waited for me to ask, 'What do you want' and in a very
humble
you –" Because I am blind,
way you said, 'If you have heard people around
you didn't say something that would hurt me. You spoke in such a humble
At
way.
least a hundred and eight names of the Guru
asked me this. So
you took before
you
I know you are learned, you are the humblest. So you must be the king."
based on
the words of
From this story, we have to derive that the more we are learned into vidya, into
Shri Mataji
at Navaratri
the technique of Sahaja Yoga, we have to be humble. That is our decoration. That is
our certificate. That is the path into the entrance of every human being.
Puja 1982
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Credits and Notes2
Front cover: Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi (Calin Chiriou) “After
visiting Daglio, Shri Mataji was in the car for a return to Cabella. We were
two Sahaja Yogis near the car and we made namaskar to our Mother. That's
the moment!" Contents pages name: the 349th name of the Goddess from
the Sri Lalita Sahasranama Contents pages quote: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi,
birthday celebration 1977 Contents pages photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala
Devi in India, circa 1980 Page 3: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 10 February 2008
(Suneel Janakwar) Page 5: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Sankranti Puja 2008
(Suneel Janakwar) Pages 6 and 11: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Pages 14 and
15: Shri Mataji and Sir CP, Pune India, 18 January 2008 Page 19: Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi, Guru Puja 1994 Page 21: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Guru Puja
2002 (Michal Markl) Page 22: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Pratishthan Pune
India, 26 January 2008 (Suneel Janakwar) Page 23: Sahaja Yogis celebrate
Indian Republic Day, 26 January 2008 (Suneel Janakwar) Pages 25, 26, 27,
29, 30: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Page 32: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Shri
Durga Puja 1982 (Pamela Bromley) This page: Niranjan Rai waiting to offer
flowers to Shri Mataji, International Sahaja Yoga Research and Health Centre,
Belapur India, 23 December 2007 (Paul Anant) Back cover photo: the crown
of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Shri Ganesha Puja 2007 (Matthew Cooper) Back
cover quote: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Guru Puja 1986
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
www.divinecoolbreeze.org
SUBSCRIPTIONS: The Divine Cool Breeze c/o Sarvesh Singh
42036 Glynn Tarra Place, Leesburg, VA 20176 USA – dcb108@yahoo.com
CONTENT: The Divine Cool Breeze, 881 Frederick Road
North Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V7K 2Y5 – coolbreeze@shaw.ca
Printed by King Printing Company Inc, 181 Industrial Avenue East
Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA
CDEPARTMENT
AitieNTIODEPA
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-35.txt 
 When you become Sahaja Yogis you have become gold.
Now the second job is to keep this gold shining.
And the third would be to get a part in
the crown of your Mother
so that you can never be tarnished.
