YUVADRISHTI Volume 9 December 2008 SSue 4 DOUDI FO24

 Index Divine Leelas of Shri Krishna & I Their Significance 4. Prayers to Shri Buddha Yuvashakti Reporter.. Rendezvous 10 Spiritual Heritage of Karnataka 13 Sahaja Yoga in Karnataka This Happened. 14 16 Shri Mataji's Vision for Cabella Schools विश्व निर्मल प्रेम आश्रम के बच्चो के साथ एक मुलाकात, 17 श्री माताजी द्वारा सहज योगियों को ध्यान धारणा. 21 ****** Kr*n********** 8.

 YUVADRISHTI Published by Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 8, Chandragupt Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 038 Tel : 020-25286537, Fax: 020-25286722 For queries regarding delay in receiving the magazine, please call: Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd., Tel : 020-25286537, E-Mail : Sale@nitl.co.in Please mail your experiences, poems, articles, suggestions, comments, etc. to: Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 8, Chandragupt Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 038 yuvadrishti@gmail.com Printed by Re-Prints Pune We solemnly thank our article writers, editors, designers/professionals etc. for their help in making this issue.

 Yuvadrishti December 2008 Divine Leelas Of Shri Krishna And Their Significance Leela and Leeladhar Sri Krishna's incarnation came to show that this whole Creation is fun, is Leela. That's why He's Leeladhar, He's called as Leeladhara. He was the one who showed that everything is fun, there's nothing to be serious, nothing to be dry, nothing to be ascetic but the whole life is a fun. He gave this idea because people had become so austere. And then also a kind of a funny Brahminism started, like they would not eat, they created a caste system which started developing. The caste was determined by birth, which was wrong, and they could not eat food. Then the Brahminism started growing up, quite strong, and these Brahmins started dominating others. So Shri Krishna came and He came as a son of a milkman (gwale ki ladke). But they were rich milkmen, very rich milkmen. Now that is the time, you see, the whole play was brought forth, and the play was quite cruel I should make His friends help Him, and made a pyramid out of them, would climb up and break the butter because one horrible devil, rakshasa, somehow say, or other used a lady who was mother of Kamsa, and she is the mother also of, you can say grandmother of Shri Krishna. So she had a son who was also a rakshasa, so if's all a play of the same. So He had an uncle who was a devil, who was a rakshasa and He was supposed to kill this uncle see the play, this is a drama all, just see the drama as it worked out. He was supposed to kill this uncle who was very powerful and who was a devil. container and would eat all that butter like a little baby. So one day His mother said, "All right, why did you eat butter?" He said, "Inever ate." She said, "Then whatis this on your mouth?" He said, "This is, all these boys have put it on my mouth." You see, to Him, even telling such little, little lies also was a fun, with the mother to that extent. Like "don't tell lies! You must not!" No, there was no fun in this kind of thing. So in His childhood He used to play, He used to play with milkmaids and with other ladies. He was very So, you see, all His pranks and all His childish, sweet young, He was about five years of age. And He did all kinds of pranks and He did all kinds of leelas, like He killed one snake, very big snake - a cobra very well known cobra. And also He killed many rakshasas and rakshasinis with His power - in a ies, were just to create a feeling of understanding, and it's regarded as something very sweet, according to the Indians, or we can say according to the eastern ideas, that children are naughty like that with the mother. They all enjoy the naughtiness of the children, little naughtiness here, naughtiness there. And the strictness of children to a great extent, also is there because, I think, people are not attached to their children. They dor't love their ehildren. They love their carpets, love everything else because play. Justin a play, He used to do it... 1989-0814: Shri Krishna Avatara, Shri Krishna Puja, Saffron Walden, England Eating Butter and Telling Lies So He was very fond of butter and He would go and

 Yuvadrishti December 2008 they can sell it, but they can't sell their children. And that kills the joy. So the children and the parents are separated by materialistic ideas that this material is more important than theirown children. 1989-0814: Shri Krishna Avatara, Shri Krishna Puja, It's like this. Nobody can face such people. So you have to treat your children with great love and understanding but they should know if they misbehave then this love will be finished. So children only care for love. They don't know money. They don't know anything. So the love that you establish in your child becomes very precious thing. Saffron Walden, England Stealing Butter So the system of Sahaja Yoga is based on divine love and it can only work when people are loving. If they love money, if they love power, if they love their reputation, they love this, love that, and not their own children or their families then they are So in His childhood He has shown lots of pranks and lot of things, and the way He used to steal also. Now stealing is supposed to be bad. Some, belongs to somebody else, if you steal, is bad. But He was stealing only the butter of His mother that He had made them. And He used to steal the butter of all the absolutely losing a very big part of the society and God knows what's going to happen to these children ifyou do not have love for yourchildren. THE ladies who used to take down to Mathura, where Kamsa was ruling, and this butter was eaten by all the rakshasas there and they were becoming very powerful. So He thought best thing is to go and eat all the butter so that these ladies won't be able to go 1989-0814: Shri Krishna Avatara, Shri Krishna Puja, Saffron Walden, England Hiding the Clothes of Gopies and sell it. Also if you see it significantly is this that When He was a little boy, less than five years of age, we starve our children, we starve our families, juSE He used to climb upon the trees and the ladies used to have some money. Money orientation is there, to take their bath in the river Yamuna. So used to that you can go and sell your butter to somebody. hide their clothes just to raise their Kundalini and With this idea everything to be sold out, we have to sell out this, we have to sell out that. Nothing is see how it works. At the age of five years what does a going to be kept with ourselves. So the children are the only permanent liabilities, so the children are treated as if they are just burdens while all other Breaking the Pitchers of Gopies things are good because you can sell it. So the whole And then used to break the pitchers of these gopis, value system, if it runs down to money, then what was He doing? He was doing Kundalini children have no place in the family. child understand? 1986-0823: Shri Krishna Puja, Schwarzsee, Switzerland awakening. Because the gopis were taking out the According to Sahaja Yoga, children are more water from the river Jamuna, which was vibrated by important than all the wealth of the world and they Radha and used to break them on the back so that are to be looked after that way. Of course they the water would fall on their Kundalini and they should be told what is dignity is, how to behave would get their Realization in this lifetime. That's themselves. But their little, little pranks are fo be what's His purification. understood and enjoyed because only as children they can do pranks, not as grown ups, so they Now if you see His life, you'll find He is absolutely should have that much freedom to play pranks and very human the way He used to tease His mother, to play some tricks on you. Otherwise, they'll tease other ladies. All this is extremely human and become very serious people and might become childlike and extremely sweet. But behind that also ascetic. Those parents who are very strict, their there was a great significance. For example, Shri children are never normal; they either are extremely Radha as you know She was Mahalakshmi and as 1986-0823: Shri Krishna Puja, Schwarzsee, Switzerland perverse, rebellious or they are quiet down and they Mahalakshmi She used to put Her feet to take bath cannot face life. So both are of the same style because in the river Yamuna, and the ladies would take water one cannot face life another cannot be faced by life, from that same river, carry on their head the

 Yuvadrishti December 2008 Sixteen Thousand Wives pitchers. Now Shri Krishna wanted to raise their Kundalini, so He used to hit them from the back so that the water falls on their back and that vibrated water would raise their Kundalini. This was His Then came His life when He became the king. When He became the king He wanted, I should say in a way that, He wanted to establish people in dharma and He needed the help of the five elements. So He made them into five ladies whom He married; soHe has five wives but they are five elements, part and parcel of His being. But He was Yogeshwara, absolutely detached in His yoga, but He had, for childish trick, but it had a meaning. 1992-0816: Shri Krishna Puja, Cabella Raas Leela Another one, when we see Him in Raas, Ra means energy, Radha, Ra is energy, dha means the one who sustains it. So, it is Radhaji who had the energy. Sa means 'with', so when they played Raas, was nothing but to play with the energy. And that's how He wanted to have a collective awakening of people, of practical purposes we can say, five wives. And they were sixteen thousand women who became His wives. These sixteen thousand women are nothing but His sixteen thousand powers because you know His chakras they have got sixteen petals and these sixteen petals multiplied by the Virata's one thousand petals each so it comes to sixteen gopas and gopis, and He did it. 1992-0816: Shri Krishna Puja, Cabella Today I don't want to describe the qualities of Shri thousand powers. So these sixteen thousand powers Krishna because you know them. But how you people have gone away, in the West, from Shri Krishna's styles, His methods. Whatever He did was to destroy the evil, to destroy the negativity and to Now, even now it is so that even an old man, has a bring forth the joy, which is Raas, He started. "Raas" young lady with Him, people will never think that Rais energy with that. The Raas is the energy, which there is good relationship. They'll always think there you have and that's how you play the Raas, with that energy and enjoy. He brought it holy. Of course now "holy" can be anything, but very sensible holy he married them. But mother's position is different brought just to express your joy in a mirthful. because mother can have thousand children. But playful ways, because that was lacking in Shri poor man, even if he has one woman around him, Rama's life. So He said just allow yourself to eniov. everybody will say he's a bad person. So He had to but this was only for Sahaja Yogis. Not for others marry all of them, so-called marriage, and these Others, you know that they go to the pubs and what sixteen thousand powers stayed with Him by which happens. We have a certificate here that we are very peaceful, very good people, this and that. This is what Shri Krishna said and has done, that we have were incarnated as women, were taken away by some horrible king and He went there, fought that king and brought these ladies. must be something wrong. So He had to marry them, because He had to keep these ladies, so He He established our Vishuddhi Chakra. 1989-0814: 5hri Krishna Avatara, Shri Krishna Puja, Saffron Walden, England to enjoy everything, but in a dharmic way. We The eyes of an Yogeshwara, who was Shri Krishna. should not be adharmi. The dharma should give He was a witness, He, He was on this Earth, He you Joy. Otherwise, if you are dharmic, you know played, He played with Radha. He married five women, they were the five elements. Sixteen thousand women He married, they were His sixteen thousand powers, but He was Yogeshwara. He was Yogeshwara: He had no lust in His eyes, in His mind about them, at all. He was beyond them, He was Yogeshwara. That was the testing point of His, that He had no lust in His eyes about these women that what happens, that you become absolutely austere person, joyless person and sometimes cynical because you think others are all dharmic and this and that. But Shri Krishna's ways were that you should be mirthful, you should be joyful and this joy will communicate with others. Without this joyous nature you cannot be communicator. He had. Such an Yogeshwara is there! Of course, I don'texpect you to be Shri Krishna. 1986-0823: Shri Krishna Puja, Schwarzsee, Switzerland 1994-0828: Shri Krishna Puja, Cabella

 Yuvadrishti December 2008 Prayers to Shri Buddha Aum twameva säkshät Shri Gautama Buddha of Kapilavastu who became, by Thy grace, the såkshāt Shri Ādi Shakti Mātāji Shrī Nirmalā Devyai Buddha. Salutations to Thee again and again. Shri Mataji, Thou art, in solitary glory, the creator, the maker, the absolute doer. Thou art the slayer of the hosts of Mara and the only real Mahat'ahankar. Thou only namo namahil O Divine Mother, You are verily Shri Buddha. Salutations to You! Buddham sharanam gachāmi Isurrender myself to my Self-realisation and to all those who are realised souls (Buddhas) Dhamam sharanam gachāmi Isurrender myself to dharma, to the innate religion that is Vishwa Nirmala can save us from our karma and remove the threatof the impending doom, called upon ourselves by our own misdeeds. Please, Shri Mataji, undo the evil that men have done. Thou art the great avatar of the great Maitreya, expressing the three Mother goddesses Mahalakshmi, Mahasaraswati, Mahakali: Ma-treya3B divine love in human form, the master of the white Dharma Sangham sharanam gachāmi I surrender myself to collectivity and to the collective community of realised souls (Shri Mā sharanamgachāmi) (I surrender mnyself to Shri Adi Shakti Nirmala Devi) Aum Shri Mataji, salutations to Thee again and again. Shri Mataji, may all aspects of the bodhi- chitta, the enlightened consciousness, be awakened at Thy command. May all bodhisattvas perform Thy arti. May Thy grace prevail! Amen. May Amogha-siddhi, the all-accomplishing wisdom of becoming be awakened at Thy command, May Ratna-sama-bhava, who maintains balance in all things beawakened at Thy command. May Akshobhya, the wisdom of the all-reflecting mirror be awakened at Thy command. May Amit'ābha, who upholds the eternal light of discrimination be awakened at Thy command. May Vairochana, the universal harmony of the horse. And now the plagues of this modern world will be listed. Prayer: Cosmos be awakened at Thy command. And Avalokit'eshvara, displaying the thousand arms of acting compassion be awakened at Thy command. may Aum. Amen. Shri Mataji, salutations to Thee again and again. Thou art the primordial splendour of God, the Adi Shakti and Mother of the devatas. Thou art the roots of all action, the success in any action and the sole and only doer in the countless universes of Thy creation. Thou art Shri Mahamaya, the Mother of the Adi Ahankara, the primordial ego of God, the Prince

 Yuvadrishti December 2008 First and foremost, the ghost of materialism has empowered the rakshasas of the industrial production system with tremendous might to swallow the bodies and minds of the millions. done. The diseases of modern life such as cancer, AIDS and insanity are the direct result of our self-made hellish environment. Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have done. done. Drugs and alcohol throw people into a regression of As a result, the three elements of earth, water and air are polluted. We are releasing chemicals which deplete the ozone sphere and destroy marine life. We are cutting down the forests that used to protect the land, and acid rains are destroying the rest. Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have their consciousness. Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have done. Because people can no longer feel their heart, social services are breaking down. The hospital system tries to make money on its guinea pigs, and lawyers havegraduated to professional crooks. Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have done. We have manufactured hydrogen bombs and left behind atomic plants and radioactive wäste which representa threat for hundreds of years to come. Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have done. The banking system does not so much productive and useful activities to protect the unethical accumulation of wealth. Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have encourage done. Modern weaponry has transformed war into a faceless butchery of unprecedented proportion. Arms dealers are building economic empires by selling death. Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have done. Corrupt government and politicians cannot handle the problems of the Kali-yuga but, on the contrary, can only massively add to them. Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have done. As a consequence of this, and related genocides, there are millions of bhoots haunting the planet. Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have done. Political dictatorship and religious fanaticism have given an official seal to mindless violence. Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have done. Electronic machinery and mechanisation may transform the human brain into a collection of done. And finally, Shri Mataji, in this country (America) which should be the land of integration, the brain of the people has been atomised into little bits and fragments. Hence those brains are unable to get the vision of the whole, the vision of Your plan. Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have robotic processes. Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have done. Biotechnology and genetic manipulation may release harmful substances or lead to the creation of monstrous creatures. Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have done. These and other evils are the fruit of our karmas, done. The destruction of innocence dooms our children, our families, and heralds the dissolution of society. Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have May they be blown away by the wind of the Holy Spirit. Säkshāt Shri Adi Shakti Mātāji Shri Nirmalā Devyai namo namah done, Reference: Violence and the perversion of sex in the media pollute the consciousness of the masses. Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have Sahaja Yoga Mantra Book (International Edition)

 Yuvadrishti December 2008 YuvaShakti Reporter Yuvas Speak Questions and Answers worship. Our Yuvashakti reporter this time sighted Bangalore yuvashakti and asked them following questions - Megha Agarwal Collectivity in Sahaj Yoga means loving each other in the same way as Mother loves all of us. It is being and working together by giving up our Ego and Superego and by realising that we are the children of same Mother. What do you understand by 'Collectivity in Sahaja Yoga'? What do you understand by 'Sahaja Work'? Let's read what our brothers and sisters had to speak about these Sahaja aspects... - Neha Singh Collectivity in Sahaja Yoga means being together for improving our spiritual ascent and we are not in dragged by negative forces by which we don't go What do you understand by 'Collectivity in Sahaja Yoga'? Sahaja collective is an aspect through which the divine nourishes and guides us. to imbalance state. Once the collectivity gets strengthened, it becomes easy for us to spread - Dileep D Mother's message easily as there are many hands coming forward to spread Sahaja. Shri Mataji created the concept of collectivity out of her love for us. It's like, Supreme source of love, created more love, in the form of collectivity out of her love for us. So when we love each other, it means, we are loving the love; created by love and out of her love for us. - Sunila Gadi There are two level of collectivity. One is be physically present in the regular meditation centers and public programs. Second meaning about the collectivity is to be one with the all pervading power (Virat) that is flowing aroundus. It is very important for every Sahaja Yogi to be aware about both of the types and attend both type of collective. First one helps us in cleaning our energy centers and keeping our attention clean while working on the divine Vishal Kumar Collectivity in Sahaja Yoga is a group of Sahaja Yogis who are connected to each other by the power of love that is the "Lotus Feet of our Mother". - Ankit Kumar Collectivity is a collection of different people who task. If utilized correctly this helps in increasing love meditate together at Shri Mataji's Lotus Feet, for with everyone and improve upon brother and sister their spiritual ascent, for the transformation of collective center (as told by our Holy Mother) mankind to higher level and ultimately towards their union with the supreme power "The Lord Sada Shiva", hood. If a person doesn't attend at least one chances are that he/she is in left and Mahakali may throw that person out of Sahaja. The other one is also important as until and uless you are aware about the all pervading power around you and you are one with it, you can't ascend in your meditation, it helps you to develop surrender and being in witness. It makes you understand that we are playing a role in Leela and it is mere a play of the divine. It helps you to understand divine love, knowledge, how divine works or divine planing. Hitesh Bhardiya - Ashish Kumar Collectivity does not mean sticking together. Enjoying divine and pure love of Shri Mataji with each other while being with spirit. Physical presence is not a necessity. Getting collective with our chitta, heart and spirit. The joy is paramount which has no limits because when we are collective its not just the physical being who is with other beings. It is Sahajis with Sahaijs. When a sahaji is with other sahaji it really means something very great, very auspicious. We are really very fortunate that we are in Sahaja getting together, getting opportunity to meditate at Divine Lotus Feet of Shri Mataji, whom all lords Collectivity is the love that is between the Sahaja Yogis, which has no boundaries. It is this love that draws all of us towards each other. It removes all discrimination, groupism, complexities,

 Yuvadrishti December 2008 which we feel connected to the divine and work as hands of Mother. misunderstanding etc, within us. Collectivity is our Guru. It is our face to others, so once it is established and beautiful more are drawn towards it. - Neha Singh Nikhil Singh - Sahaja work means any kind of work that we do it for Knowing, Realizing, ever Remembering & Acting Mother and spreading the message of Her love, it on the Truth that Shri Mataji is the essence of the also includes all the cultural activities we do it to whole Cosmos and we, Sahaja Yogis are blood cells please Shri Mataji. in Her being. Even every thought has to be for the nourishing of this collective being. Keeping this intact is a direct and indirect responsibility of every activities like having food or going to office, I think Sunila Gadi If we feel that Sahaja work is separate from our daily SY. we are playing in the hands of Maya. Sahaja work should be a second nature to every Sahaja Yogi. Abhinay Raj Whatever we do in the name of Sahaja work divine gives thousand fold to it which we really can't What do you understand by 'Sahaja Work'? Sahaja wok is an opportunity to be divine magine (Practically seen and observed). We should instrument. ANA understand that by doing Sahaja work we are not doing any favour on anyone else but it's a favour on our self. More Sahaja work we do we are nearer to god and our attention becomes more powerful and enlightened. In a nutshell Sahaja work should be the nature of every Sahaja Yogi and it should be done - Dileep D Sahaja Work is antonym of Work and synonym of Jy. - Vishal Kumar with the surrender bhaav. Sahaja work is being an instrument of Shri Mataji Hitesh Bhardiya Once the candle is lit, it gives light to others. That is and spreading the message of love that is "Sahaja Yoga" throughout the world. its nature. Thus once we become Sahajis our nature becomes to spread our Mothers blessings of Love every where in different forms in different ways. On one level it can be seen as work, but finally it happens. - Ankit Kumar Any activity performed by any person towards the spreading of Sahaja Yoga is Sahaja work. It blesses the person with horizontal spiritual ascent. just - Ashish Kumar Nikhil Singh Sahaja work- it is not an ordinary or daily routine we Sahaja work is - do in day to day life. From lighting diyas on altar to selling books, every work is divine being a part of 1. Every Act of cleansing in deep understanding of Sahaja work is an honour. It must be done with full the collective (and not for limited individual gains). joy and regards. Itmust not be mechanical otherwise 2. Absorbing the Knowledge of Sahaja Yoga it would not hold any meaning. For eg- buying perceived through direct experience of the divine, flowers for Shri Mataji like we offer flowers which prayers & striving to please the Goddess by high have really nice fragrant actually these flowers are noble living. good for Mooladhara and if we offer beautiful 3. Every thought/word/action to share this flowers they are good for Swadishthan. Whatever invaluable light with dignity, humility & love to all we do we must do with our hearts in that. Pleasing mankind by the ways and means ever explored Our Mother Is Our Ultimate Goal Of This Life. Sometimes we think we are doing work butin Sahaja doer;She is the enjoyer" whatever we do is for our ascent. anew with undisturbed knowledge that "She is - Abhinay Raj Megha Agarwal Work for the divine is the Sahaja work. Working with the collective for the growth of Sahaja Yoga and of the collective by spreading Sahaja Yoga. Work in

 Yuvadrishti December 2008 RENDEZVOUS Discussions with a Sahaja Yogi of Bangalore Ques1: When & how you got Realization and when was seeking manifested? Sahaj Yogi: In April 1986, I got the opportunity to attend saakar Public Programs (of three days) when our Divine Mother visited Kolkatta. I do not remember if I was then an ardent seeker, in the true sense of the term. In those days, I was not a Sahaj Yogi: Ganapathi Pule (in 1988/89). I experienced an intense state of thoughtless awareness and joy while listening to Guruji (Dhakde) singing "Brahma Shodhile' in Mother's presence. Ques3: What unique thing you found about Sahaja Yoga? practitioner of 'conventional' religious rituals like periodically visiting temples, doing puja at home etc. My brother and I had started practicing some other yoga more because they had visited our colleges. But, Holy Mother recognizes the seeking in us. Mother's talk at the program had a tremendous impact on me and struck the right chords. I realized that there were a lot of questions about religion at the back of my mind, and Mother's beautiful and simple talk had provided the answers. That is when . Absence of a controlling human organization, I started practicing Sahaja Yoga and, therefore, gave up other yoga I was practicing. However, I felt the cool breeze very strongly only a couple of months later when I was reading Nirmala Yoga at home. Aloving, compassionate and generous guru who asks nothing of me but only desires my spiritual ascent. A profound knowledge that is transparent and available to all regardless of caste, religion, status, wealth, language or nationality. Unlike other sects, knowledge and blessings is not secretly given to those who are physically close to the Guru, or wealthier or be a celebrity. but is controlled by the subtle, loving and omniscient Shri Parama Chaitanya. • I have time and again found answers to mny questions in Mother's talks or 'spontaneously' as though I am now connected to the unseen source of all knowledge Ques4: How to balance the Sahaja life and Personal life? Sahaj Yogi: I have realized that understanding and appreciating the magnitude of Mother's love and blessings is most important. When this happens, the This was a distinct second milestone as I was now looking at Sahaja Yoga from a different state and with more conviction. Ques2: What difficulties were you faced- a) In meditation b) In life And how were these overcome? Sahaj Yogi: Fortunately, I did not expect Sahaja Yoga boundaries between Sahaja and personal life to dramatically solve all my worldly concerns. In the dissolve and we see the 'divine' in every aspect of early days, the state of thoughtless awareness was our lives. rare and I did not fully appreciate the magnitude of Rues5: Any significant learning or experience that gives the blessings, which Mother had showered on me. I Sahaj Yogi: Awareness that Mother has an intense continued to be involved in my worldly pursuits connection with each one of us helps us at every and Sahaja Yoga was more like a hobby. Some of the factors that helped me with my strength when things are not in favour? step. We should also remember that we are always. connected to Mother's niraakar form of the all- spiritual growth are: pervading power, which does everything. To keep this connection strong, make it a habit to remember all the divine blessings you have enjoyed. The warmth and family-like collective of Kolkatta. A desire to know more about Sahaja Yoga Ques6: How yuvashakti can improve their meditation through Mother's lectures and reading issues of attention? Nirmala Yoga. A profound experience at a program in Sahaj Yogi: This is still an age where peer acceptance 5GA GR

 Yuvadrishti December 2008 is important. If we spend more time with our non- Sahaja friends, our attention can waver. When we have matured (in Sahaja Yoga) it becomes easier to be detached from the views of our acquaintances who are not in Sahaja Yoga. To protect ourselves from this, we can: • Make it a habit to see the virtue in others rather than their faults. Ques7: What advice/suggestion would you like to give to yuvashakti? Sahaj Yogi: Be aware of your subtle system and meditate regularly Desire to become an instrument of Mother's • Seek, and enjoy the company of other Sahaja Yogis, even if you are going to see a movie! Try to involve other yuvashakti and do Sahaja work e love, compassion and concern for all human beings and creation. Have respect for all Sahaja Yogis we are connected through our Mother in teams. Talk about Sahaja Yoga to your friends. Let them beinfluenced by you! Try to learn more about Sahaja Yoga and acquire pure, divine knowledge. Become more aware of your subtle system and regularly cleanse your chakras before meditation. Enjoy working for Sahaja Yoga and make newcomers feel 'at home' in the collective. Discussions with a Sahaj Yogi (Bangalore) The Wise Elephant By Sia Reddy Do you know what wisdom is? No? Then listen to how an elephant showed his wisdom and his love towards other animals. am happy. So be happy with how you are, my dear friend!" "You are so right, Elephant!" said the parrot. "I am really glad to be colourful! Thank you dear wise Once upon a time there lived a very wise elephant. Elephant!" And the parrot continued on his way. Öne fine day, a little mouse came to the elephant and One fine day, a deer came to the elephant and complained, "Oh Elephant, I am so unhappy!I want compiained, "Oh Elephant, I am so unhappy! I want to be big and tall like you!" The elephant replied, "Really? If I were small like drink water! you, I would be so very happy! When a cat is chasing The elephant replied, "Really? If I had a nose like you, you can hide in a tiny hole. Me, I do not even fit you, I would be so very happy! When you are thirsty, into a bear's cave! If you want to eat the tiny nuts and you can drink from the tiniest water source. Me, I seeds, you find them easily. Me, I can barely see my need a big pond to drink. And how would you look own feet! Yet I am happy. So be happy with how you with a big trunk like this! You would not be able to are, my dearfriend!" "You are so right, Elephant!" said the mouse. "I am amslowand heavy. YetI am happy. So be happy with really glad to be tiny! Thank you dear wise how you are, my dear friend!" Elephant!" And the mouse continued on his way. One fine day, a parrot came to the elephant and really glad to have a small nosel Thank you dear wise complained, "Oh Elephant, I am so unhappy! I want Elephant!" And the deer continued her ways. to be grey like you so no one can see me in the dark!" to have a big trunk like you to shoo away the flies and flee from the tiger with a heavy trunk like this! Me, I "You are so right, Elephant!" said the deer. "I am Soon all animals knew how wise the elephant was. The elephant replied, "Really? IfI were colourful like And whenever they had any questions, they knew you, I would be so very happy! Merely by looking at your beauty, other animals feel cheerful and happy! Moral - Like these animals, we also have a unique My grey colour has rarely even been noticed! When beauty which is given to all of us by God. We must you fly in the sky, your family can find you easily recognise our beauty and should not try to be seeing your colourful wings! Me, I am just grey! Yet I something else. where to go!

 Yuvadrishti December 2008 Spiritual Heritage of Karnataka (Poets, Seers and Spiritual Movements in Karnataka) remembering the great souls who enriched the spiritual tradition of kannada, the language of Karnataka and its heritage. In India poetry has been a central force that shaped our life and our attitude towards life. Our history bears witness to the fact of how poetry has been instrumental in awakening people to the higher values in life from time immemorial. Such poetic traditions in India have been spread wide across Shri Madhvacharya There were many saintly voices heard in Karnataka, from north to south and east to west. Just like how a daughter shares resemblances to her mother, among them is Shri Madvacharya. Karnataka is Karnataka, shares this great heritage of poetic blessed to have had Shri Madhvacharya born in its traditions and seers of India and this resemblance is fold, in a small hamlet called Pajaka, near Udupi, a beautifully brought out in the lines of Karnataka's south canara region of Karnataka. Madhvacharya, state anthem, which says: Jai bharata jananiya tanujaate jai he karnataka mate Jai sundara nadi vanagaLanade jai he rasa rushigala The most celebrated commentaries are on bramha beede. Bhoodeviya mukutada nava maNiye sutras, all ten upanishadas, he also wrote Bhagavata gandhada chandada honnina ganiye Raghava Tatparya which highlights the essence of the madhusudhaaravatarisida bharata jananiya puranas and also composed forty hymns of Rig tanujaate Victory to you Mother Karnataka, the daughter of masterpieces he never wrote them with his own Mother India! Hail the land of beautiful rivers and hands, his disciples transcribed his dictations on forests, hail the abode of saints! You are a new jewel palm leaves and he used 'Ananda Thirtha' as his pen in the crown of Goddess Earth, mine of beautiful gold and sandal. Victory to you Mother Karnataka the daughter of Mother India where Rama and many generations and it eventually heralded the Krishna had their incarnations. the proponent of dwaita philosophy, travelled across India and has authored many commentaries. Veda. Although Madhvacharya authored these name for all his works. All his works are in Sanskrit. Shri Madhvacharya's dvaita philosophy inspired bhakthi movement in Karnataka led by the haridasa poets and seers. Shankara ramanuja vidyaranya basaveshvarariha divyaranya Ranna shadakshar ponna pampa lakumipati janna Kabbigarudisida mangala dhama is that the main idol (vigraha) in Udupi's Shri kavi kogilegala punyarama Nanaka ramananda Krishna temple is installed by Shri Madhvacharya. kabirara bharata jananiya tanujate You are a sacred forest where Shankara, Ramanuja, Vidyaranya and Basaveswara dwelt. You are the holy abode where Ranna, Shadakshari, Ponna, Pampa, Lakshmisha and Janna were born. You are the blessed resting place of many a poet- nightingales. Victory to Mother Karnataka, the spiritual poetry and music written in golden words daughter of Mother India who gave birth to Nanak, Another unforgettable work of Shri Madhvacharya The idol of Shri Krishna was found by him in the western oceannear Udupisea coast. Haridasa Movement Haridasa movement is a divine orchestra of in the history of Karnataka. This movement saw many great saintly poets who called themselves as Haridasa, i.e. servant of Shri Hari. Ramanand and Kabir. The anthem is apt to remember while we pay our homage to the seers and saintly poets of this land

 Yuvadrishti December 2008 The Haridasas, Vaishnava saints of Karnataka, are His songs carry a message of purity of heart, traditionally classified into the Vyasakuta and devotion to God and compassion to all beings. Dasakuta. The Vyasakuta were the saints who were Shri Purandara Dasa, who was initially a miserly known for their scholarship and exposition of the rich merchant, turned to God after a miraculous Madhva's philosophy. This order included the likes happening in his life. Shri Purandara Dasa was of Sripadaraya, Vyasaraya, Vadiraja, Vijayeendra called as Navakoti Narayana (i.e nine crore teertha and Raghavendra Teertha. The Dasakuta on narayana because of the huge wealth he the other hand were the wandering saint disciples possessed) and had a very pious wife, who gave of the Vyasakuta sanyasins. They were proficient away her nose ring to a poor brahmin who had singers and composers and extensively made use of classical music and the Kannada language as a medium to propagate the teachings and philosophy other than Shri Vishnu himself, who had of the dvaita. This order included the likes of disguised as a brahmin. Then the brahmin went to Purandaradasa, Kanakadasa, Prasanna come asking for alms for his son's Upanayana (thread ceremony). But the brahmin was none the Navakoti Narayana asking him to give him Venkatadasa, Vijayadasa, Gopaladasa, money for buying the nose ring. The miserly Mahipatiraya, Jagannathadasa and a host of others. While Sripadaraya is sometimes credited as having recognized his wife's ring and ruhed to find the started this musical movement, Vyasaraya, who went by titles such as Abhinava Bharatacharya, what was to come started praying to shri Vishnu Kalpana Chaturanana, Sangitasampradaya and to her wonder a similar nose ring was pravartaka etc., counted the likes of returned to her by Vishnu himself. This incident Purandaradasa, Vadiraja and Kanakadasa among changed the very track of navakoti narayana and his disciples. Among these, Purandaradasa became renowned as Karnataka Sangita Pitamaha. Shri Purandara Dasa is known to sahaj collectivity through the famous dasapada: merchant, navakoti narayana immediately nose ring with his wife Here his wife aware of he became the famous poet, who is even hailed by some as the father of carnatic music. Purandara Dasa's contribution to Carnatic music has been outstanding and exceptional. To this day, the method of teaching of Carnatic music was systematized by him. He set the path of Carnatic music by introducing folk ragas to Carnatic music and setting them to the tunes of this day, so that even a common man could sing. He was a music maestro, a musicologist, and the founder of music pedagogy and for the way he revolutionized Carnatic music he is called as the Sangeetha Pitamaha of Carnatic music (grandfather of Carnatic music). His influence can also be felt in Hindustani music, as the foremost Hindustani musician Tansen's teacher, Swami Haridasa was Bhagyaada lakshmi Barramma Omother of prosperity Shri lakshmi please come; Nammama nee Saubhagyada lakshmi barrmma My mother who brings auspicious blessings please come This composition of Shri Purandara, has been blessed to have been sung before Shri Mataji on many occasions. Although mythology credits Shri Purandara Dasa of composing as many as 475,000 songs, we have about 1000 soul stirring songs in praise of God which are mostly in kannada and some in Sanskrit. All his compositions have his signature with the pen name Purandara Vittala', after his favourite diety Vitthala, an incarnation of Shri Vishnu of Pandarapur. Purandara Dasa's disciple. So, Purandara Dasa's composition is as popular in Hindustani music as in Carnatic. , Another great soul who comes in the Vyasakuta tradition of Haridasa poetry is Shri Raghavendra

 Yuvadrishti December 2008 Swamy. Shri Mataji has spoken about Shri Raghavendra Swamy as a great saint in one of the public programs in Chennai. Shri Mataji has also said that he was an incarnation of bhakta Shri Prahalada. Another name that deserves a mention is a great soul of Karnataka called Shishunala Sharif. He is called as karnataka's kabir, who though was born in Islamic community, believed in Hinduism became a disciple of a Guru Govinda Bhatta and composed many spiritual poems. In many of his poems he refers to Kundalini and inner spirituality. Veerashaiva and Vachana Movement One unique movement that gripped the length and breadth of Karnataka in 12th century was the Kannada Spiritual poetry of 20th century Karnataka's spiritual poetic tradition has flown like a perennial river and can be seen even in the movement of Veerashaivas. As the name suggests, they were Shaivites, the worshippers of Shri Shiva in the form of lingu. Their spiritual experiences are recorded in the form of Vachanas. Vachanas literally modern poetic traditions. One of the modern mean the spoken word and vachans are a special literary works called "Mankutthimmana type of compositions which are neither prose nor kagga" (i.e. Ramblings of a Fool) a collection of 945 poetry but a pithy expression. The Vachans express most profound poems in kannada, by the doyen of the deep spiritual experiences of the Vachankars kannada literature D.V Gindappa. He has written (saints who wrote vachanas) who sought god other works as well, but Mankuthhimmana Kagga realization through their vocation. A. K Ramanujan is an absolute masterpiece, that explores deeper has translated a few of the hundred's of Vachana's, questions of life, contemplates on the meaning of ultimate truth (reality) and advises us to lead a balanced life in this complex, ever changing world. Thus Kagga advises us to follow the middle path extending one hand towards the ultimate truth and the other hand to the phenomenal world. The to cite an example: The rich will make temples for Siva. What shall I, a poor man, do? message of many of the songs from Kagga is My legs are pillars, the body the shrine, The head a cupola of gold. Listen, Olord of the meeting rivers, Things standing shall fall, but the moving ever shall samatwa. One of the popular poems from this work "Hullagu bettadadi" translated below conveys the spirit of Kagga. stay. ou can see, Vachanas poems told in most simple Be a (gentle) blade of grass at the foot of the language rendering the great truth and spiritual mountain; and jasmine flower athome experiences of the Veerashaiva saints. As you Be (strong) like a rock when the fate pours (torrential) rain of difficulties on you Be sweet like sugar and jaggery to the poor and There are thousands and thousands of Vachanas weak written by hundreds of Vachana poets, and among them the most prominent ones are Basavanna, Allama Prabhu, Akka Mahadevi, Aayadakki Kannada has great poets like kuvempu, Bender, Lakkamma, Ambigara chaudayya, Jedara Nissar Ahmed, Lakshmi Narayana Bhatta, B.M. Dasimmayya only to mention a few. To this day Shrikantaiyya, Pu. Ti. Narasimhachar have written Vachanas are very popular in Karnataka and they many poems giving the messages of universal are best sung in Hindustani classical. Akka brotherhood and spirituality. Mahadevi the saint poetess during the this movement is considered as the world's first poetess. Be one with all, Mankutimma.

 Yuvadrishti December 2008 Sahaja Yoga in Karnataka A Sahaja Yogi of Madras heard about the divine start in the nineties, Sahaja Yoga has taken deep powers of Shri Mataji Nimala Devi from his friend who too was a yogi. This Sahaja Yogi decided to go seekers have been regularly attending the puja. on a trip to visit Bombay later in 1983 to meet Divine However, on introspection and comparing with Mother along with his wife and took Self- Delhi, Maharashtra and UP, one can say that much roots in Bangalore. Currently, four hundred plus needs to be done. Realisation. For starters, there is little presence outside The following year in 1984, Shri Mataji decided to tread onto the south in Madras. This Sahaja Yogi's daughter, sat before Shri Mataji, when it was realized that her eyes were affected by herpes. The Divine Mother worked on her to heal this ailment the same day. The ophthalmologists who were already treating her for several weeks, stated that she was on the verge of losing her vision and were dumbfounded to see her improved condition in such a short time, attributing it to only divine healing. The faith and love was getting deeper and during the subsequent visits to Madras, Shri Mataji, as She always does, told This Sahaja Yogi that this divine love be spread to Bangalore. Bangalore. Many areas in Bangalore too need attention. Small towns have their problems and it is extremely difficult for people there to shake off their past conditionings, superstitions etc. for fear of being declared a social outcast. While one can always get lost in the city and form ones own circle of well wishers and friends, it is not so in the small towns. Just not visiting the neighborhood temple or not paying the obeisance to the local Swamiji can lead to serious problems. Hence success in small towns has been very limited and we have to bank on one or two families who have seemingly somewhat settled down in Sahaja Yoga. Besides distances, bad roads, traffic jams and infrastructural problems have severely hampered our progress. Mangalore, Karkal, Udupi, Kundapur though different districts are barely two hours apart and there are a total to 100 So it worked out that She stepped onto the soil in Bangalore in Feb' 1989. In 1990, when the second daughter of Mr Murthy, and his son-in-law,, based in Bangalore visited Madras, they were asked to Sahaja Yogis. They have been advised to perform seek the blessings of Shri Mataji and followed by pujas together. Belgaum wisely ties up with inviting Her to Bangalore. Shri Mataji then asked to Kolhapur, Shrirampur and nearby townships for the have a small Shri Ganesh Puja in the house of this Puja. Dharwad has been advised to join Belgaum. Sahaja Yogi's son-in-law. Unaware of the consequences, Mahishasura Kaduris still struggling with 15 to 20 seekers. Mardini stotram was recited and the Ganesha Puja got converted to a Mahishasura Mardini Puja, Jove for every Sahaja Yogi that there will be a charged with strong vibrations. During the Aarti, tremendous spurt in our growth. Mother is blessing Hassan a new entrant has steadied at 30 seekers and It is only when we work collectively and exhibit our our first ever in Bangalore, all the Yogis could actually clearly see Shri Ganesha in Her Bindi. All the collective and Bangalore Sahaja Yogis are going out and spreading Sahaja Yoga outside Bangalore. Now centers are established in Mysore, Tumkur, were dumbfounded. Kolar, Kadur, Hassan, Belgaum, Udupi, Karkala, apart from establishing ten centres inside Bangalore. Thereafter Shri Mataji visited Bangalore in 1992, 1994, and '96, Shri Mataji's visits in the nineties and the relentless drive of the Sahaja Yogis during that period have paid off handsomely. After a humble With Love, Bangalore Yuvashakti

 Yuvadrishti December 2008 This Happened Experiences of Sahaja Yogis of Karnataka there. Everybody was seated in their places. She was so close, next to me. I could see Her very clearly. She was stunning. She had worn a bright ink blue silk sari with red border and a blue blouse. She had Great Mother and Experienceof my first meeting I was only four months into Sahaja Yoga. I was not seriously into it. I had come in Sahaja Yoga with reluctance. Mother had come down to Bangalore for maroon colored sandals which looked so beautiful on Her feet. Her nails were painted with bright red nail polish. She kept Her lovely hand bag down on floor beside Her. I never expected a Guru to be like this, so colorful and in style. She was 73 and did not look so. What struck me most were Her feet in that slippers and polish. They are the loveliest feet Ihave a public program that was scheduled at National College, Basavanagudi grounds on 31st Jan 1996. That was the first time I saw Her in person. The next day all Sahaja Yogis of Bangalore were invited for a private program with Mother at RY College Auditorium in Jayanagar. I went to the venue quite early and sat in the auditorium. ever seen. They were so attractive, neat, fair and I was walking with difficulty and pain because of the onset of arthritis. I was sitting somewhere in the unbelievably young.. The same gentle man who had made me move from one place to other and had spoken on mike earlier was on stage. He began, "Welcome Shri Mataji.". left side, in the first row of the auditorium. A senior Sahaja Yogi shouted at me for some reason and he made me move from that place. I then sat at the first chair of the first row of the other side of the to give the mike to Her. Holding the mike She auditorium. After some time the same man was welcomed all the Sahaja Yogis. She said She was standing in front of me. On mike he was saying, happy to see the growth of Sahaja Yoga in Bangalore, "Where you sit is not important, actually you must and immediately started saying, "I find some people go back and sit at the last. I am feeling bhoots talk very harshly with people who are new to Sahaja here..." Though he was addressing every one, I thought he is referring it to me. I felt very hurt and told my friend sitting in the next chair, "I want to Shri Mataji stopped him in between and asked him Yoga. Senior Sahaja Yogis should be very kind and sweet when you talk to them. You should not use words such as 'I sense bhooth here.' Be nice to new leave this hall or go and sit in last row, best even to leave Sahaja Yoga, but I can't get up and walk alone and I have to sit now." While saying so a few drops of tears rolled down from eyes. She consoled me comers..." That moment these words stuck me likea thunder bolt. I was shocked, spell bound. Like me many Sahaja Yogis too must have been surprised, because they had watched the whole drama of the butI was hurt because of the incident. evening. They started staring at me. I was wonder struck and confused. How can She sense the scenes Mother came around 8:00 P.M. As soon as She came, and repeat the exact words which took place in this hall around 6:00 P.M., while She was far away in a guest house? No one would have reported all this to Her because everyone was here. Moreover I was such an ordinary and new person in whom no one would be interested in reporting to Her. I became emotional and this sequence led me to think that this lady may have the powers of knowing things from far beyond. every one stood up except me as I could not stand immediately due to my painful knees. She turned towards the steps to go on stage, but then stopped, and very loudly and clearly said, "Ah, you have put my chair on stage, put it down here..." She stretched Her right hand and showed the place where the chair has to be brought down and be placed. That was just besideme! Immediately the chair was moved, She came and sat Mother sat in the chair for nearly an hour, I kept on

 Yuvadrishti December 2008 a 2 year old sister and they regularly come for collective pujas in Bangalore. looking at Her. After an hour or so She asked the chair to be taken on stage and sat on stage till 11:00 P.M. Change in the attitude A Sahaja Yogi Even after coming to Sahaja Yoga it may take some time to realize that we are into some thing invaluable. Mother has her own ways to teach us Returned without food A memorable incident was in the year 1996 when 400 Sahaja Yogis from all over the world visited about her shakti and establish us. A yogi of Bangalore. Mother asked them to go to Mysore and Bangalore was attending center casually. Along walk in the Palace grounds to spread their with Sahaja Yoga he continued his earlier rituals of vibrations. The food that was carried to Mysore worshipping family deities. He was not able to over come his conditionings easily. He was not so could not reach them in time and all Sahaja Yogis seriously in Sahaja Yoga for nearly two years. Once returned to Bangalore without food. Next day he had to go out of Bangalore to Kodai Canal for Mother had a Puja, where She commented, How office work. He was halting in a lodge. In the can you have food in the place where Mahishasura morning before leaving to office work he did was killed? That is why you returned without any regular surya namaskaras, worshipped the photos of -Unkown Yogi food' deities placed on the table, burnet incense sticks., Then, later on, took out a small photo of Shri Mataji The dumb can speak A Sahaja Yogi went to Mysore for collecitivity few which he had carried in his shirt pocket. Even before years back and when he went there were hardly 6 to he could keep it on table, he clearly saw a dazzling 7 people. One Sahaja Yogi came and asked that her 2 sun shaped light on Shri Mataji's entire face of photo years old child, is not able to speak and whether Sahaja Yoga couid help. Child was found to have a hand. With surprise and joy he placed the photo on big front projection on the head and it was a clear table for worship. He realized that Mother's photo is case of overgrown ego and superego descending not just an ordinary photo. He came to an into the left and right Vishuddhi giving a heavy load understanding that this was the most mystifying on both the eardrums not allowing the child to hear. experience through which Mother is suggesting With a prayer to Mother, the child's mother was that he has Sun and all other Gods in his hold, right advised to clear the overgrown ego and superego in his hands! This experience changed his entire out with vibrations, After about two to three months, in look towards Sahaja Yoga and from then on he has collectivity the mother informed that the child had totally left all his old rituals. started hearing on one ear and when his name is MiraculouS Cures! called he would turm his head to only one side. The child started hearing in both the years after few months after this. In one of the later collective meditations, the child started saying 'Allah Hu for a few seconds. He could not believe his eyes and A Sahaja Yogi from Bangalore had Migraine head ache for more than 10 years. He was getting the head ache frequently and he would suffer for 2/3 days without any intake of food and only after he Akbar' sixteen times to the surprise of the collective and everybody wondered how the child was able to speak! Child's mother told that he was first able to hear and then speak. gets a triggering in the brain he would vomit and come back to normalcy. He was given only one glass of vibrated water on one such occasion, and the triggering came in 20 minutes and he got a complete permanent cure for his migraine headache. Henever got his head ache again. We have to feel the joy of the mother of the child, when her child started speaking for the first time, when all the treatment given by Deaf and Dumb A Sahaja Yogi's Mother, was suffering from asthma School in Mysore had failed. Now, the boy is having THE

 Yuvadrishti December 2008 the room and the strong affinity to flowers made them remain so fresh. Shri Mataji herself in and had developed swollen legs with weeping eczema by the use of continuous medication for more than 15 years. She was given a photograph of undertone and subtle expression said "see how Mother and was asked to foot soak for 24 days. She these flowers are'! did it only for 11 days and got a complete cure for her problem of asthma and also for her swollen legs. In another incident, one of the yogis in Bangalore She was able to walk easily and had come to who was good at flower arrangements and tissue Mother's pubic programme in the year 1996. culture was fortunate to have Mother's attention. She enquired about who had done the flower arrangements at Her guest house where She was staying during Her 1995 visit. After knowing about the yogi She expressed Her desire to see his tissue culture laboratory. A Sahaja Yogi from Bangalore had fibrosis in her womb and was suffering. She used Mother's Lotus feet for worshipping the same with pure butter and in 2 week's time theentire fibrosis vanished. person, who had not bowed to anybody in Another She visited the yogi's lab. The lab was a part of the house of Krishnanda and Rekha. In joy and bhakti they spread silk saris on the pathway from the gate to the lab. Mother observed this, and immediately removed the chappals and then walked on the silk sari. She showed a keen interest on the bottles his life, took Self-Realisation. For the sake of his daughter, who was hospitalized for blood cancer. He was given a photograph of Mother which he used in the hospital. Instead of dying, she got a complete cure in 3 months time, and their entire family has taken to Sahaja Yoga and have become deep Sahaja Yogis. stacked with cultured tissues of differentplants and flowers. She wanted to know about it in detail. She had all smiles and joy. While talking, She asked as to A Sahaja Yogi came to Ganapathipule and had a heart attack just on the day of arrival. Mother in Her compassion, asked the collective to meditate on the heart chakra the next day, and he got cured of his heart problem, and he is leading a healthy life today with the blessings of our divine Mother. what is the name they have kept for their little daughter. When She came to know that they have yet to name the child, the divine Mother spontaneously named the child with a beautiful name Alakananda. These yogis have kept the chair, on which Mother sat, in the Lab in their altar from then on, even the saris on which Mother walked and Mother's Love for Flowers sat are worshiped by them in dedicationeven to this day. In the following year of Christmas Puja at Ganapatipule, She remembered this Sahaja Yogi's love for flowers and was so gracious and kind to send three lovely silver vases to the Bangalore camp where he stayed. This shows the simplicity, generosity and magnanimity of our Mother who can be so down to earth in expressing Her love Every one knows the love of our Mother for natural flowers and plants. She has a keen eye for beautiful flowers. She appreciates the love of any yogi even when she is offered a single rose or a daisy. She recognizes our love through flowers. In Her divine attention flowers can be fragrant and fresh as long as She desires. Bangalore's Manohar, along with a few other yogis, had one such experience in 1992 when they had gone to Ganapatiphule. They were about to leave on the concluding day and were last to leave. Shri Mataji called them to Her room and asked them to take roses that were arranged six days earlier. It was incredible to see the flowers so fresh, as though they were plucked just that day. The divine vibrations in towards her children.

 Yuvadrishti December 2008 Let's Introspect Cooking With Love 1. Do I sit for meditate morning and evening regularly? 2. Do I become completely nirvichar in my meditation? 3. DoI do appropriate treatments regularly for my cleansing? 4. Do I feel cool breeze on my palms? 5. Do I listen or watch Shri Mataji's audios and videos? 6. Do I behave in the manner Shri Mataji has advised time to time in Her speeches? 7. What do I do about the things that are not in my Marwari Aloo Bhaji (Potato Vegetable) Ingredients: 250 gr. Potatoes, peeled and sliced (medium size) O 2 tablespoon ghee 1 teaspoon asafoetida (hing) o 1% teaspoon coriander powder ½ teaspoon turmeric powder (haldi) 14 teaspoon cumin powder (jeera) e teaspoon red chilli powder 1 behaviour? 8. Do I read Sahaja related literature? 9. Do I remain in balance in difficult conditions? 10.Do I use vibrations to make important decisions? 11.When I am doing my work, how much time do I remain thoughtless? 12Through out the day how much time my attention remains in a Sahastrara? Salt to taste Preparation: •Mix the spices (A) together in a small bowl • Heat ghee in frying pan, add the mixture of spices 13.How much time do I feel my vibration in a day? 14.Do I regularly participate in Self-Realisation (A) programs? 15D0 I follow up with the new people? Do I help to establish them in Sahaja Yoga? 16.Do I get angry or depressed? 17.Do I forgive all the people around me (Sahaja Yogis and Non-Sahaja Yogis)? 18.Do I pay attention to beauty of nature, do we enjoy it? Fry the mixture for 15 seconds without letting it burn Add sliced potatoes and keep frying on a low heat, for 15 to 20 minutes, until they are cooked e Add salt Source: 19.Am I proud to be a Sahaja Yogi? 20.Do I neglect my duties (of family, school/college, job etc) for Sahaja Yoga work? Cooking with Love by HH Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi विश्व निर्मल प्रेम आश्रम में सामूहिक राखी 3 अगस्त को सुबह के ध्यान के बाद से लगातार चित्त में एक विचार आ रहा था कि युवाशक्ति सामूहिक होकर ग्रैटर नोएडा विश्व निर्मल प्रेम आश्रम (NGO) जायें और वहाँ छोटी छोटी बहनों के साथ राखी का त्योहार मनायें। यह विचार युवाशक्ति के सामने रखा गया तो सभी लोग बहुत खुश हुऐ और हमने 17-8-2008 को (राखी के अगले दिन) NGO जाने का निश्चय किया। 17-3-2008 को सुबह 9:00 बजे निर्मल दरबार मन्डोली सेन्टर से श्री गणेश मंत्र के साथ अपनी बहनों से मिलने के लिए हम निकल पड़े। बस में हम 31 युवाशक्ति 3 बच्चे और 1 आन्टी भजन करते हुए 11:00 बजे NGO पहुचे गये। वहाँ जैसे ही हम बस से उतर कर गेट पर पहुँचे तो वहाँ के चैतन्य को हमने अपने पूरे शरीर में बहते हुआ महसूस किया। हमारी छोटी छोटी बहनों ने हमारा स्वागत किया। अन्दर का वातावरण पूर्णतः चैतन्य से भरा हुआ था। हम सभी शांति पूर्वक पानी पीकर सीधे Meditation Hall में पहुँचे, जहाँ NGO के संगीत के अध्यापक के साथ बच्चों के द्वारा हमारा चक्रों पर ध्यान हुआ। हर चक्र पर प्रार्थना की गई, साथ ही साथ भजन भी किये गये। आरती के बाद बहुत ही सुन्दर वातावरण में छोटी-छोटी बहनें आरती की थाली जिसमें राखी, कुमकुम, मिठाई, चावल, दीपक धा सजाकर लाई और भाईयों की आरती उतार कर उनको राखी बाँधी और एक दूसरे को मिठाई खिलाई। हम सभी लोग अपने साथ उपहार, चाक्लेट, टाफी, मिठाई, आदि लेकर गये थे जो वहाँ GieselaAunty को दे दिया ताकि वे सभी बच्चों में बाटे दिये जायें। फिर हम सभी लोगों ने मिलकर वहाँ की हर एक वस्तु को देखा और चैतन्य का आन्नद लिया। हम सभी लोग अपने साथ दोपहर के भोजन की व्यवस्था करके ले गये थे, जो कि ्s के आंगन में सब भाई बहनों ने मिलकर भोजन का आनन्द लिया और फिर से Meditation Hall में जाकर ध्यान करके हम सभी से विदा लेकर अपने घर के लिए वापिस चल पड़े। यह श्री माताजी का प्रेम की शक्ति ही है, श्री माताजी को हमारा अनेकानेक धन्यवाद। दीपक शर्मा, दिल्ली

 Yuvadrishti December 2008 Shri Mataji's Vision for Cabella Schools Schedule for the School • Morning wake-up and preparation e Morning meditation e Tea, milk and breakfast Departure to school Singing of the prayer to Shri Vidya Devi Sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Nirmala Devi • Two lessons of 40 minutes ench e Small break Two more lessons of 40 minutes each Lunch Two lessons of 40 minutes each with Art and Recreation • Back to home Shri Mataji Inaugurates the Cabella Sahaja Primary School in Centrassi Snack and go to playground • Dinner according to the merits, they should be awarded with prizes for first, second and third. Nobody should fail in exams, everybody should be well • Meditation Values and Other Information We should teach them value system; we should teach them simplicity, innocence, goodwill. We should teach them to have friendship in all the prepared. She wants to prepare children in the school and college so that they can go to university and become doctors, lawyers, compounders (nurses), architects, engineers. nations. They should know how to speak sweetly. The children should learn honesty, they should know In the syllabus we should add also Marathi and Hindi, where Kalpana Didi and Sadhana Didi will help in that. From 5t standard we can teach them how to be collective, and also they should know how to make jokes. They should have friendship Indian classical music and Indian classical dance, amongst them. embroidery. They should know about Sahaja Yoga knowledge, Sadhana Didi wil1 be the principal of the school. Five about Shri Mataji, which comes automatically with Sahaja Yoga. We should teach children about their own nation, about India, about world, they should learn to love their nation and world peace. People to look after the accounting and general administration. A small committee to look after the work of the school. At least two dorm aunties per wing, one for boys and one for girls. We have to start collecting CV's so that They should know songs like Vandana, Prayer to Shri Vidya Devata. They should be patriotic, they we can look into teachers appointment and teachers should protect their Mother. should know English and Italian, possible more lady They should play sports like kabaddi, teachers for primary school. We have to see for teachers stay, for their food, organize their the sand in collective). Then they can have transportation. Fees will be taken for nine months, hututu..(Indian sport played on the ground or in KhoKho....hide and seek Small changes according to the classes, for second, third. Ask Duilio about permission and expansion of There should be final exams every year, and Continued on pg 20

 व Yuvadrishti December 2008 विश्व निर्मल प्रेम आश्रम के बच्चो के साथ एक मुलाकात हमारे युवादृष्टि संवाददाता के विश्व निर्मल प्रेम आश्रम के बच्चों के साथ हुए वार्तालाप के कुछ उद्धरण त निशा: यहाँ पर सब कुछ अच्छा लगता है। प्रश्न: आपको क्या नाम है? निशा: मेरा नाम निशा है । प्रश्न: खाना? निशा: खाना अच्छा लगता है। प्रश्न: आप कितने साल के हैं? निशा: १४ साल। प्रश्न: रहना? निशा: रहना अच्छा लगता है। प्रश्न: कौन सी कक्षा में हो? निशा: पाँचवी में| प्रश्न: पहले और अब में क्या परिवर्तन महसूस करते हो? प्रश्नु: यहाँ आने से पहले आप क्या करते थे?आपके माता पिता उस निशा: अब मुझे अच्छा लगता है। पहले तो इधर-ऊधर जाती थी। दो समय कहाँ थे? निशा: मेरी माता तो बचपन में ही चली गयी थीं। मेरे पापा ने मुझे पाला बोलते थे... और इतना बड़ा किया। अपने मकान में थे हम जब पापा की तबीयत प्रश्न: तो अब अपने अन्दर विश्वास आ गया कि अब आदिशक्ति माँ के बिगड़ने लगी और बाद में मेरे पापा की मृत्यु हो गयी मृत्यु होने के बाद बच्चे हैं हम? मैं अपने ताऊ के घर जाने लगी। वो मुझे अपने साथ रखने लगे। मैं दो निशा: हाँ, मेरी जो बुआ है वो पहले से सहजयोगी थीं। मेरे जो ताऊजी महीने ताऊजी के घर रहती थी और दो महीने बुआ के घर रहती थीं। हैं (छोटे वाले ताऊजी और बड़े वाले ताऊजी हैं), सब सहजयोगी हैं। फिर एक दिन मेरी बुआ ने बोला कि, "मेरी भाभी की तबीयत खराब है নो नातू (घर का नाम) को बुला लेती हूँ।" तब उन्होंने मुझे बलाया और अश्नः तो आगे चल कर क्या करना चाहते हो आप? भाभी का मैं काम करती थी। महीने उसके घर...दो महीने उसके, तो अच्छा नहीं लगता था सब ऐसे (युप) निशा: मैं आगे चल कर...जो श्रीमाताजी करवाना चाहेंगे वो ही करूँगी। प्रश्न: कोई ख़ास अनुभव जो आपके साथ हुआ हो यहाँ, आप बताना प्रश्न: स्कूल जाते थे उस समय? निशा: जब पापा थे तब मैं स्कूल खुलने के दो-तीन दिन पहले ही मेरे पापा चले गए थे। चाहते हो? निशा: हुआ है। एक बार रात को मैं जब सो रही थी तो मुझे सोते-सीति जाती थी। उसके बाद नहीं। स्कूल सपने में श्रीमाताजी दिखाई दिए। हम यहाँ पर उमकपजंजपदव में बैठे ये। नानी भी बैठे थे और दो तीन बच्चे बैठे थे। श्रीमाताजी यहाँ कंगम से प्रश्न: आप विश्व निमल प्रेम आश्रम में कैसे आए? निशा: मेरे बुआ के यहाँ एक सहजयोगिनी आन्टी आतीं थी। उन्होंने अन्दर आए। हम सब यहीं पर बैठे थे। श्रीमाताजी सफेद साड़ी में आए पूछा, "ये लड़की कौन है?" बुआ ने बोला, "मेरे भाई की लड़की है। थे। मैंने पूछा, "श्रीमाताजी आप यहाँ पर आओगे?" श्रीमाताजी बोले, इसके पापा नहीं हैं, इसका कोई नहीं है, अब हम ही है।" फिर उन्होंने हाँ मैं आऊँगी।" श्रीमाताजी बस थोड़ी देर बैठी हुई थीं। मैंने पूछा, पूछा "ये पढ़ती भी है?" बुआ ने बोला, "पहले पढ़ती थी अब बिलकुल श्रीमाताजी आप दोबारा आओगे यहाँ पर?" श्रीमाताजी बोले "हाँ मैं नहीं पढ़ती।" फिर आन्टी बोले, "इसको होस्टल में डाल दो सबसे आऊँगी। तो बस इतना ही दिखाई दिया और फिर मेरी ऑँख खुल अच्छा रहेगा। इसकी ज़िन्दगी बन जाएगी।" मुझ से सहजयोगिनी आन्टी गई। श्रीमाताजी एक बार यहाँ पर आए थे। यहाँ पर सब सजा रहे थे ने पूछा, "होस्टल में जाओगी?" मेरे मुँह से कोई जवाब ही नहीं निकला। मेरी बुआ मुझे विश्व निर्मल आश्रम ले आईं। उन्होंने पूछा, "कुछ बनना चाहती हो?" मैंने हाँ बोला। उन्होंने बोला, "यहाँ पर तुम्हे अच्छा लगेगा।" मैंने कहा, "पहले आश्रम देखूँगी फिर यहाँ रहँगी। यहाँ निशाः पहले मुझे पढ़ना नहीं आता था। तो फिर मैं बोलती थी. दो-तीन सहजयोगी आन्टी थीं और मेरी बुआ थी। मुझे बहुत अच्छा लगा। मैंने बताया कि मेरे पापा की मृत्यु हो गयी। ये सब बताने के बाद उन्होंने मुझसे पूछा, "पहले किसी स्कूल में पढ़ती थी?" उन्होंने पूछा, %23 भाम आश्रम को। प्रश्न: कोई और अनुभव? श्रीमाताजी आप चसमेन मुझे पढ़ना सिखा दीजिए। मैं आगे जाके बन जाऊँगी और अपने पापा मम्मी का नाम रौशन कर सकूंगी इतना करवा दीजिए श्री माताजी।" मैं ऐसे बोलती थी, बन्धन देती थी, shoe- beating करती थी, श्री माताजी से प्रार्थना करती थी। मैंने ऐसे बोला और मुझे पढ़ना आ गया। तुम यहाँ रहना चाहती हो?" मैंने हाँ कहा। बाद में मैंने सारा आश्रम देखा। मुझे यहाँ अच्छा लगा। यहाँ पर बच्चे अच्छे लगे। मैंने कहा, "एक हफ्ते के बाद आऊँगी।" मैं कपड़े नहीं लाई थी। एक हफ्ते बाद यहाँ पर आई। बच्चों के साथ अच्छा लगा। प्रश्न: और क्या क्या आता है आपको? निशा; मुझे खाना बनाना आता है। प्रश्न: यहाँ पर क्या अच्छा लगता है आपको? ২ e ১

 Yuvadrishti December 2008 प्रश्न: स्कूल जाते हो? मोना: हा। प्रश्न: आपका नाम? मोनाः मेरा नाम मोना है। प्रश्न: कौन सी कक्षा में हो आप? मोना: छठी। प्रश्नु: आपकी उम्र कितनी है? मोनाः 13 साल। प्रश्न: कभी किसी प्रतियोगिता में भाग लिया? मोना: हा, एक बार कंदबम में लिया था, मबवदक आयी थी। प्रश्नु: तो आप सहज में आने से पहले क्या करते थे? मोना: हम घर पे रहते थे। हमारी मम्मी को दिखता नहीं है। हम उनके साथ रहते थे। हमारी मामी ने हमें यहाँ पर छोड़ा। प्रश्नः बहुत अच्छे! पढ़ाई में कैसे हो? मोना: अच्छी हूँ। प्रश्न: आपकी बहन का क्या नाम है? मोनाः मनीशा। प्रश्न: कितने प्रतिशत अंक आते हैं? मोनाः याद नहीं है। স्रश्न: आपको यहाँ कैसे लेकर आए? मोनाः हम घर पर रहते थे। मेरे मम्मी को पहले दिखता था। उनके सिर में tumour हो गया था। उसके वजह से उनकी आखें चली गया था। हमारे मामा ने दिल्ली में ज़ो सबसे बड़ा अस्पताल है उसमें इलाज करवाया था, तो भी कुछ नहीं हुआ, नहीं आई ऑँखें वापिस। फिर हमारी मामी ने बोला कि एक आश्रम है और हमारी नानी ने हमें यहाँ पर छोड़ दिया। प्रश्न: NGO में क्या क्या अच्छा लगता है? मोनाः NGO में सब लोग बहुत अच्छे लगते हैं। प्रश्न: सबसे अच्छा कौन लगता है? मनाः पहले एक दीदी थे, राजेश्ररी दीदी, फिर उनकी शादी हो गई तो फिर उनके बाद टीना दीदी आ गए। वो बहुत अच्छे लगते हैं। प्रश्न: आगे क्या करना चाहते हो? मोना: पता नहीं प्रश्नु: आप स्कूल जाते थे उस समय जब मम्मी के साथ थे? मोना: नहीं। जब नाना थे तब हम जाते थे फिर नाना की और हमारा स्कूल छूट गया। हो गई मृत्यु प्रश्न: कोई खास अनुभव जो आपके साथ हुआ हो यहाँ, आप बताना चाहते हो? मोना: श्रीमाताजी की यहाँ पर नवरात्रि पूजा हुई थी गुड़गाँव में। वहाँ पर प्रश्न: यहाँ आने के बाद आत्म-साक्षात्कार कैसे मिला आपको? मोनाः हम सब सुबह ध्यान करते थे। देख-देख के हमें भी आ गया। आ मातीजिी आए थे। सब हपजि दे रहे थे श्रीमाताजी को। मैंने भी कहा. श्रीमाताजी मुझे भी आपके पास आना है हपि देने।" तो उस समय में प्रश्न: जो ये आत्म-साक्षात्कार मिला, उसके बाद कोई बदलाव लगता है. आपको पहले और अभी में? मोनाः डर नहीं लगता। बड़ा अच्छा लगता है। म भी गयी थी। प्रश्न: यहाँ आने के बाद आपको कोई परेशानी हुई?जैसे आप अपनी मम्मी से हो कर आ रहे थे यहाँ पर, कुछ बुरा लगता था? दूर मोनाः नहीं Continued from pg 18 the building. Set aside space for Sadhana Didi at Palazzo Doria. Organize kitchen for the children and teachers. The kitchen should be well furnished and equipped with washing machines, cookers, etc... They should have big laundry with washing machines and iron machines. For the school we have to organize a school bus, we should have two school buses. She was happy to hear that he School Bus is arriving of the12th and She wanted to see that. She was happy to know that all the Sahajayogis of the world will and are going to help with the School project in Cabella and Centrassi. Om twameva sakshat Shri Vidya Devata Sakshat Shri Adishakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyei Namo Namaha. Source: http://www.sahajworldfoundation.org/en/index.php?option%=com_content&task-view&id-157&Itemid%-61 (१७ र ও

 ে Yuvadrishti December 2008 श्री माताजी द्वारा सहज योगियों को ध्यान धारणा शुदी कैम्प, इंग्लैंड (१८-०६-८८) यह सत्य ही है कि हम एक बहुत विचित्र समय से गुजर रहे हैं। यह अति महत्वपूर्ण है और हमें इसमें संघर्ष करना ही है। यह किसी भी लडे गए युद्ध से कहीं ज्यादा है। यह अभी तक मानवों द्वारा किए गए किसी भी संघर्ष से बहुत बड़ा है । एक भयावह विश्व बना दिया गया है और हमें ठीक करना है। यह एक विशाल कार्य है क्योंकि इसमें आपको पूरे अपनेपन तथा ईमानदारी से कार्य करना है और मुझे विश्वास है कि इस विश्व के इतिहास में एक दिन आएगा जब सहजयोगियों का नाम स्वर्णा्षरों में लिखा जाएगा। मुझे विश्वास है कि यह हो पाएगा। मुझे विश्वास है कि यह होगा ही और आप सबको यह पाना ही है, सामूहिकता में, एक मन तथा एक हृदय होकर। मैं क्या बलिदान दूँ?-मुझे क्या करना चाहिए?में कैसे सहायता करू?मेरा सहयोग क्या है? मेरी इच्छा है कि मैं अपने जीवनकाल में यह समय देख सकेँ (जब सभी सहजयोगी ऊपर बताए डंग से सोचे ।) अतः आज वह दिन है जब हम सबको अन्त्तवालोकन करना है। | हैं। कृपया आप सब अपनी आँखें बंद कर लें। जैसे हम जन-कार्यक्रम में करते है वैसे ही आज हम ध्यान करेंगे। मैंने देखा है कि यदि पति अगूआ है तो पत्नी को सहज योग का एक शब्द भी नहीं आता। यदि पत्नी को सहज योग का ज्ञान हे तो पांत इसके बारे में कुछ नहीं जानता। प्रार्थना कीजिए कि: "श्री माताजी, मुझे इस ज्ञान में निपुण कीजिए, ताकि में लोगों को आत्म- साक्षात्कार दे सकूँ तथा उन्हें देवी कुंडलिनी व चक्रों के विषय में समझा सकूं। श्री माताजी कृपा कीजिए कि मेरा चित्त सांसारिक क्स्तुओं की 1000 बं अपना बायां हाथ मेरी ओर करके शरीर के बाएँ भाग में आप सब कार्य करेंगे। सर्वप्रथम अपने हृदय पर दायां हाथ रखना है। हृदय में शिव का निवास है। आत्मा का स्थान है। अतः अपनीआत्मा का धन्यवाद करना है कि इसने आपके चित्त को प्रकाशमय किया है। क्योंकि आप संत है। अतः जो प्रकाश आपके हृदय में हुआ है उससे आपको पूरे विश्व को ज्योतिर्मय करना है। अतः कृपया अपने हृदय में प्रार्थना कीजिए कि 'श्री माताजी, परमात्मा के प्रति मेरे प्रेम का प्रकाश पूरे विश्व में फैले। अपने प्रति पूर्ण सच्चाई तथा समझदारी रखते हुए कि आप परमात्मा से जुड़े हुए हैं और पूर्ण आत्मविश्वास से आप जो इच्छा करेंगे वह पूरी होगी। माव य क अपेक्षा सहज योग में अधिक हो।" अब दायां हाथ पेट के ऊपरी हिस्से पर बाई ओर रखें। आँखें बंद रखें। पेट को हाथ से थोड़ा दबाएँ। यहाँ पर कहें कि: ॥श्री माताजी ने मुझे आत्मा प्रदान की है, वह आत्मा ही मेरी गुरु है।" पूर्ण हृदय से कहें, "श्री माताजी, मैं स्वयं का गुरु हूँ। में किसी भी वस्तु का असंयमित त्याग न करू। मेरे चरित्र में गरिमा और आचरण में उदारता हो। अन्य सहज योगियों के लिए मुझमें करुणा तथा प्रेम हो। श्री माताजी मुझमें बनावटीपन न हो। बल्कि परमात्मा के प्रेम तथा उसके कार्यों का गहन ज्ञान मुझे हो ताकि जब लोग मेरे पास आएँ तो मैं उन्हें प्रेम तथा नम्रता पूर्वक सहज योग के विषय में बता सकूँ और यह महान अब अपना दायां हाथ अपने पेट के ऊपरी हिस्से पर बाई ओर रखें। यह आपके धर्म का केंद्र है। यहाँ आपको कहना है कि: श्री माताजी, विश्व निर्मला धर्म पूरे विश्व में फेले । हमारे धार्मिक जीवन तथा धर्म परायणता लोगों को प्रकाश दिखाए। अपनी धर्म परायणता लोगों को देखने दें ताकि वे विश्व निर्मला धर्म स्वीकार करें, जिसके द्वारा ज्ञान उन्हें दे सके उन्हें ज्ञान, हितैषिता, उच्च जीवन तथा उत्थान की इच्छा प्राप्त होती है।" अब अपना दायों हाथ अपने हृदय पर रखें। यहाँ पूर्ण हृदय से कहें: श्री माताजी, आनंद तथा क्षमा के सागर का आपने हमें जो अनुभव प्रदान किया है, अपनी ही तरह अथाह क्षमाशीलता आपने हमें दी है। श्री माताजी, उसके लिए आपको कोटी-कोर्टी प्रणाम। कृपा करके मेरे हृदय अब अपना दायों हाथ अपने पेट के निचले हिस्से पर बाई ओर रखें। इसे थोड़ा सा दबाएँ। यह आपकी शुद्ध विद्या का केंद्र है। सहज योगी होने के नाते आप यह कहें कि परमात्मा की कार्य प्रणाली का पूर्ण ज्ञान हमें हमारी श्री माताजी ने प्रदान किया है। हमारी सुझबूझ तथा सहनशक्ति के अनुसार श्री माताजी ने हमें सारे मंत्र तथा शुद्ध विद्या दी है। हम सबको पूर्ण ज्ञान होना चाहिए। को इतना विशाल कीजिए कि पूरा ब्रह्मांड इसमें समा जाए। मेरा प्रेम आपके नाम का गुंजन करे। मेरा हर श्वास में आपके प्रेम की संदर अभिव्यक्ति हो। 1 ২ 2

 व Yuvadrishti December 2008 चाहिए। अब सहस्रार पर आपको मेरा धन्यवाद करना होगा अपना दायाँ हाथ सहस्रार पर रख कर सात बार घड़ी की सुई की दिशा में इस प्रकार घुमाएँ कि सिर की चमड़ी भी हलकी-हलकी घूमे। सात बार मेरा धन्यवाद करें। कहें कि: १. श्री माताजी, आत्म साक्षात्कार प्रदान करने के लिए हम आपके आभारी हैं। आपको कोर्टी-कोटी प्रणाम । अब अपना दायाँ हाथ बाई विशुद्धि की ओर ले जाकर गर्दन और कंधे के बीच में कोने में रखें। पूर्ण विश्वास के साथ कहें: "में दोष भाव की असत्यता में लिप्त नहीं होऊँगा। क्योंकि मुझे मालूम है कि यह झूठ है। अपने दोषों को मैं छिपाऊँगा नहीं, बल्कि उनका सामना करके उनसे मुक्त होऊँगा। मैं दूसरों में दोष नहीं खोजूँगा। अपने २. श्री माताजी, हमारी महानता हमें समझाने के लिए हम आपके आभारी हैं। आपको कोटी-कोटी प्रणाम। ३. श्री माताजी, परमात्मा के सभी आशीर्वाद हम तक लाने के लिए हम आपके आभारी हैं। आपको कोटी-कोटी प्रणाम। ४. श्री माताजी, तुच्छता से उठाकर उच्च स्थिति पर लाने के लिए हम आपके आभारी है। आपको कोटी-कोटी प्रणाम ।" हम इतने सारे तरीक़े सहज योग के ज्ञान द्वारा उन्हें दोष-मुक्त करूगा जानते हैं कि उनसे हम गुप्त रूप से दूसरों के दोषों को दूर कर सकते हैं। श्री माताजी, मेरी सामूहिकता को इतना महान बनाइए कि पूर्ण सहज योग जाति मेरा परिवार, मेरे बच्चे, मेरा घर तथा मेरा सर्वस्व बन जाएँ। क्योंकि हम सब की एक ही माँ हैं। अत: मुझमें पूरी तरह तथा अंतर्जात रूप से यह जागृत हो जाए कि मैं विराट का ही अंग- प्रत्यंग हू। मेरे विचारों में पूरे विश्व की समस्याओं को जानने की तथा ५. श्री माताजी, जो आश्रय आपने हमें प्रदान किया तथा आत्मोन्नति के लिए जो सहायता आपने कृपा करके हमें दी उसके लिए हम हृदय से आपके आभारी हैं। आपको कोटी-कोटी प्रणाम। ६. श्री माताजी, हम हृदय से आभारी हैं कि आप पृथ्वी पर अवतरित हुए, मानव जन्म लिया और हम सबके उत्थान के लिए घोर परिश्रम कर रहे हैं। आपको कोटी-कोटी प्रणाम। ७. श्री माताजी, हमारा रोम-रोम आपका ऋणी हैं। आपको कोटी- कोटी प्रणाम । अपनी शुद्ध इच्छा तथा शक्ति से उनका समाधान करने का प्रयोजन हो। विश्व की समस्याओं को मैं अपने हृदय में महसूस करू और सहज रूप से उनको जड़ से, जहाँ से वे शुरू हुई हैं, ख़त्म करने की कोशिश करू । मुझे इन समस्याओं के मूल तक पहुँचाइए ताकि मैं अपनी सहज सुलभ शक्तियों द्वारा इन्हें दूर करने का प्रयास करू। जি इसे ज़ोर से दबाएँ । इसे ज़ोर से घुमाएँ। अब अपना हाथ नीचे ले आएँ। सिर बहुत गर्म हैं। अब हम अपने आप को एक सुंदर सा बंधन देगे। माँ अब अपने दायाँ हाथ से अपने माथे को आड़ा पकड़िए, यहां पर आपको पहले कहना होगा किः "श्री माताजी, मैं उन सभी लोगों को क्षमा करता हूँ जो सहज योग में नहीं आए हैं, जो अभी परिधि रेखा पर हैं, जो आते हैं और जाते हैं, जो कभी सहज-सागर के अंदर कूदते हैं और कभी इससे बाहर। परंतु सर्वप्रथम में सारे सहज योगियों को क्षमा करता हूँ, क्योंकि वे सब मुझसे कहीं ज़्यादा अच्छे हैं। मैं ही उनके दोष खोजने की चेष्टा करता हूँ पर के बंधन के लिए हम अपनी बाईं नाड़ी को दाई तरफ़ डालेंगे। पहला, अच्छे से। जानिए आप क्या हैं। आपके प्रभामंडल (ऋहद्ध्छ) क्या हैं। अब दूसरा, तीसरा, चौथा, पाँचवाँ, छठा और अंत में अब सातवाँ । अब आप अपनी कुंडलिनी को धीरे-धीरे ऊपर उठाएँ- बहुत धीरे-धीरे। अपने सिर को थोड़ा पीछे करें और उसको वहाँ एक गाँठ बाँध दें। पुनः कुंडलिनी को दूसरी बार ऊपर उठाएँ धीरेधी रे यह जानते हुए कि आप कौन है, आप एक संत हैं। इसको आराम से करें, जल्दबाज़ी न करें। अपने सिर को थोड़ा पीछे करें और उसको वहाँ दो गाँठें बाँध दें अब तीसरी बार । सिर के ऊपर उसको तीन बार बाँधें। अब अपनी चैतन्य- लहरियों को महसूस करें। अपनी चैतन्य-लहरियों को सिर के ऊपर सब महसूस करें। बहुत सुंदर । मुझे आप लोगों से चैतन्य-लहरियाँ आ रही हैं। वास्तव में में उन सबसे तुच्छ हूँ। मुझे स्वयं को सुधारना है। यह नम्रता हममें आनी चाहिए, अतः यहाँ आपको कहना होगा किः श्री माताजी, मेरे हृदय में बनावटीपने को हटा कर सच्ची नम्रता व क्षमा भाव उत्पन्न करें ताकि मैं वास्तविकता, परमात्मा तथा सहज योग के प्रति नतमस्तक हो जाऊँ। अब अपना दायों हाथ सिर के पीछे के भाग पर रखें। सिर को अपने हाथ पर पीछे की ओर झुका लें। यहाँ पर आप कहे कि: "श्री माताजी, अभी तक आपके प्रति हमने जो भी अपराध किए हैं, हमारे मस्तिष्क में जो भी बुराई आती है, जो भी तुच्छता आपके प्रति दिखाई है, किसी भी प्रकार से आपको दुख पहुँचाया है या आपको चुनौती दी है तो कृपा करके हमें क्षमा कर दीजिए परमात्मा का अनंत आशीर्वाद। आपको क्षमा माँगनी पड़ेगी। अपने विवेक से आपको जानना चाहिए कि मैं क्या हूँ। मुझे बार-बार यह बताने की आवश्यकता नहीं होनी ७

 Cabella Sahaja Primary School in Centrassi



----------------------

2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 YUVADRISHTI
Volume 9
December
2008
SSue 4
DOUDI
FO24
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Index
Divine Leelas of Shri Krishna &
I
Their Significance
4.
Prayers to Shri Buddha
Yuvashakti Reporter..
Rendezvous
10
Spiritual Heritage of Karnataka
13
Sahaja Yoga in Karnataka
This Happened.
14
16
Shri Mataji's Vision for Cabella Schools
विश्व निर्मल प्रेम आश्रम के बच्चो के साथ एक मुलाकात,
17
श्री माताजी द्वारा सहज योगियों को ध्यान धारणा.
21
******
Kr*n**********
8.
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 YUVADRISHTI
Published by
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 8, Chandragupt Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 038
Tel : 020-25286537, Fax: 020-25286722
For queries regarding delay in receiving
the magazine, please call:
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.,
Tel : 020-25286537, E-Mail : Sale@nitl.co.in
Please mail your experiences, poems,
articles, suggestions, comments, etc. to:
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 8, Chandragupt Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 038
yuvadrishti@gmail.com
Printed by
Re-Prints
Pune
We solemnly thank our article writers, editors,
designers/professionals etc. for their help in making this issue.
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Yuvadrishti December 2008
Divine Leelas Of Shri Krishna
And Their Significance
Leela and Leeladhar
Sri Krishna's incarnation came to show that this
whole Creation is fun, is Leela. That's why He's
Leeladhar, He's called as Leeladhara. He was the
one who showed that everything is fun, there's
nothing to be serious, nothing to be dry, nothing to
be ascetic but the whole life is a fun. He gave this
idea because people had become so austere. And
then also a kind of a funny Brahminism started, like
they would not eat, they created a caste system
which started developing. The caste was
determined by birth, which was wrong, and they
could not eat food. Then the Brahminism started
growing up, quite strong, and these Brahmins
started dominating others. So Shri Krishna came
and He came as a son of a milkman (gwale ki ladke).
But they were rich milkmen, very rich milkmen.
Now that is the time, you see, the whole play was
brought forth, and the play was quite cruel I should
make His friends help Him, and made a pyramid out
of them, would climb up and break the butter
because one horrible devil, rakshasa, somehow
say,
or other used a lady who was mother of Kamsa, and
she is the mother also of, you can say grandmother
of Shri Krishna. So she had a son who was also a
rakshasa, so if's all a play of the same. So He had an
uncle who was a devil, who was a rakshasa and He
was supposed to kill this uncle see the play, this is a
drama all, just see the drama as it worked out. He
was supposed to kill this uncle who was very
powerful and who was a devil.
container and would eat all that butter like a little
baby. So one day His mother said, "All right, why did
you eat butter?"
He said, "Inever ate."
She said, "Then whatis this on your mouth?"
He said, "This is, all these boys have put it on my
mouth."
You see, to Him, even telling such little, little lies also
was a fun, with the mother to that extent. Like "don't
tell lies! You must not!" No, there was no fun in this
kind of thing.
So in His childhood He used to play, He used to play
with milkmaids and with other ladies. He was very
So, you see, all His pranks and all His childish, sweet
young, He was about five years of age. And He did
all kinds of pranks and He did all kinds of leelas, like
He killed one snake, very big snake - a cobra very
well known cobra. And also He killed many
rakshasas and rakshasinis with His power - in a
ies, were just to create a feeling of understanding,
and it's regarded as something very sweet,
according to the Indians, or we can say according to
the eastern ideas, that children are naughty like that
with the mother. They all enjoy the naughtiness of
the children, little naughtiness here, naughtiness
there. And the strictness of children to a great extent,
also is there because, I think, people are not attached
to their children. They dor't love their ehildren.
They love their carpets, love everything else because
play. Justin a play, He used to do it...
1989-0814: Shri Krishna Avatara, Shri Krishna Puja,
Saffron Walden, England
Eating Butter and Telling Lies
So He was very fond of butter and He would go and
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Yuvadrishti December 2008
they can sell it, but they can't sell their children. And
that kills the joy. So the children and the parents are
separated by materialistic ideas that this material is
more important than theirown children.
1989-0814: Shri Krishna Avatara, Shri Krishna Puja,
It's like this. Nobody can face such people.
So you have to treat your children with great love
and understanding but they should know if they
misbehave then this love will be finished. So
children only care for love. They don't know money.
They don't know anything. So the love that you
establish in your child becomes very precious thing.
Saffron Walden, England
Stealing Butter
So the system of Sahaja Yoga is based on divine love
and it can only work when people are loving. If they
love money, if they love power, if they love their
reputation, they love this, love that, and not their
own children or their families then they are
So in His childhood He has shown lots of pranks
and lot of things, and the way He used to steal also.
Now stealing is supposed to be bad. Some, belongs
to somebody else, if you steal, is bad. But He was
stealing only the butter of His mother that He had
made them. And He used to steal the butter of all the
absolutely losing a very big part of the society and
God knows what's going to happen to these children
ifyou do not have love for yourchildren.
THE
ladies who used to take down to Mathura, where
Kamsa was ruling, and this butter was eaten by all
the rakshasas there and they were becoming very
powerful. So He thought best thing is to go and eat
all the butter so that these ladies won't be able to go
1989-0814: Shri Krishna Avatara, Shri Krishna Puja,
Saffron Walden, England
Hiding the Clothes of Gopies
and sell it. Also if you see it significantly is this that
When He was a little boy, less than five years of age,
we starve our children, we starve our families, juSE He used to climb upon the trees and the ladies used
to have some money. Money orientation is there, to take their bath in the river Yamuna. So used to
that you can go and sell your butter to somebody. hide their clothes just to raise their Kundalini and
With this idea everything to be sold out, we have to
sell out this, we have to sell out that. Nothing is see how it works. At the age of five years what does a
going to be kept with ourselves. So the children are
the only permanent liabilities, so the children are
treated as if they are just burdens while all other Breaking the Pitchers of Gopies
things are good because you can sell it. So the whole And then used to break the pitchers of these gopis,
value system, if it runs down to money, then what was He doing? He was doing Kundalini
children have no place in the family.
child understand?
1986-0823: Shri Krishna Puja, Schwarzsee, Switzerland
awakening. Because the gopis were taking out the
According to Sahaja Yoga, children are more water from the river Jamuna, which was vibrated by
important than all the wealth of the world and they Radha and used to break them on the back so that
are to be looked after that way. Of course they the water would fall on their Kundalini and they
should be told what is dignity is, how to behave would get their Realization in this lifetime. That's
themselves. But their little, little pranks are fo be what's His purification.
understood and enjoyed because only as children
they can do pranks, not as grown ups, so they Now if you see His life, you'll find He is absolutely
should have that much freedom to play pranks and very human the way He used to tease His mother,
to play some tricks on you. Otherwise, they'll tease other ladies. All this is extremely human and
become very serious people and might become childlike and extremely sweet. But behind that also
ascetic. Those parents who are very strict, their there was a great significance. For example, Shri
children are never normal; they either are extremely Radha as you know She was Mahalakshmi and as
1986-0823: Shri Krishna Puja, Schwarzsee, Switzerland
perverse, rebellious or they are quiet down and they Mahalakshmi She used to put Her feet to take bath
cannot face life. So both are of the same style because in the river Yamuna, and the ladies would take water
one cannot face life another cannot be faced by life, from that same river, carry on their head the
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Yuvadrishti December 2008
Sixteen Thousand Wives
pitchers. Now Shri Krishna wanted to raise their
Kundalini, so He used to hit them from the back so
that the water falls on their back and that vibrated
water would raise their Kundalini. This was His
Then came His life when He became the king. When
He became the king He wanted, I should say in a
way that, He wanted to establish people in dharma
and He needed the help of the five elements. So He
made them into five ladies whom He married; soHe
has five wives but they are five elements, part and
parcel of His being. But He was Yogeshwara,
absolutely detached in His yoga, but He had, for
childish trick, but it had a meaning.
1992-0816: Shri Krishna Puja, Cabella
Raas Leela
Another one, when we see Him in Raas, Ra means
energy, Radha, Ra is energy, dha means the one who
sustains it. So, it is Radhaji who had the energy. Sa
means 'with', so when they played Raas, was
nothing but to play with the energy. And that's how
He wanted to have a collective awakening of people,
of
practical purposes we can say, five wives. And they
were sixteen thousand women who became His
wives. These sixteen thousand women are nothing
but His sixteen thousand powers because you know
His chakras they have got sixteen petals and these
sixteen petals multiplied by the Virata's one
thousand petals each so it comes to sixteen
gopas and gopis, and He did it.
1992-0816: Shri Krishna Puja, Cabella
Today I don't want to describe the qualities of Shri thousand powers. So these sixteen thousand powers
Krishna because you know them. But how you
people have gone away, in the West, from Shri
Krishna's styles, His methods. Whatever He did was
to destroy the evil, to destroy the negativity and to Now, even now it is so that even an old man, has a
bring forth the joy, which is Raas, He started. "Raas" young lady with Him, people will never think that
Rais energy with that. The Raas is the energy, which there is good relationship. They'll always think there
you have and that's how you play the Raas, with that
energy and enjoy. He brought it holy. Of course now
"holy" can be anything, but very sensible holy he married them. But mother's position is different
brought just to express your joy in a mirthful. because mother can have thousand children. But
playful ways, because that was lacking in Shri poor man, even if he has one woman around him,
Rama's life. So He said just allow yourself to eniov. everybody will say he's a bad person. So He had to
but this was only for Sahaja Yogis. Not for others marry all of them, so-called marriage, and these
Others, you know that they go to the pubs and what sixteen thousand powers stayed with Him by which
happens. We have a certificate here that we are very
peaceful, very good people, this and that. This is
what Shri Krishna said and has done, that we have
were incarnated as women, were taken away by
some horrible king and He went there, fought that
king and brought these ladies.
must be something wrong. So He had to marry
them, because He had to keep these ladies, so He
He established our Vishuddhi Chakra.
1989-0814: 5hri Krishna Avatara, Shri Krishna Puja,
Saffron Walden, England
to enjoy everything, but in a dharmic way. We The eyes of an Yogeshwara, who was Shri Krishna.
should not be adharmi. The dharma should give He was a witness, He, He was on this Earth, He
you Joy. Otherwise, if you are dharmic, you know played, He played with Radha. He married five
women, they were the five elements. Sixteen
thousand women He married, they were His sixteen
thousand powers, but He was Yogeshwara. He was
Yogeshwara: He had no lust in His eyes, in His mind
about them, at all. He was beyond them, He was
Yogeshwara. That was the testing point of His, that
He had no lust in His eyes about these women that
what happens, that you become absolutely austere
person, joyless person and sometimes cynical
because you think others are all dharmic and this
and that. But Shri Krishna's ways were that you
should be mirthful, you should be joyful and this joy
will communicate with others. Without this joyous
nature you cannot be communicator.
He had. Such an Yogeshwara is there! Of course, I
don'texpect you to be Shri Krishna.
1986-0823: Shri Krishna Puja, Schwarzsee, Switzerland
1994-0828: Shri Krishna Puja, Cabella
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Yuvadrishti December 2008
Prayers to Shri Buddha
Aum twameva säkshät Shri Gautama Buddha of Kapilavastu who became, by Thy grace, the
såkshāt Shri Ādi Shakti Mātāji Shrī Nirmalā Devyai Buddha.
Salutations to Thee again and again. Shri Mataji,
Thou art, in solitary glory, the creator, the maker, the
absolute doer. Thou art the slayer of the hosts of
Mara and the only real Mahat'ahankar. Thou only
namo namahil
O Divine Mother, You are verily Shri Buddha.
Salutations to You!
Buddham sharanam gachāmi
Isurrender myself to my Self-realisation
and to all those who are realised souls (Buddhas)
Dhamam sharanam gachāmi
Isurrender myself to dharma,
to the innate religion that is Vishwa Nirmala
can save us from our karma and remove the threatof
the impending doom, called upon ourselves by our
own misdeeds. Please, Shri Mataji, undo the evil
that men have done.
Thou art the great avatar of the great Maitreya,
expressing the three Mother goddesses
Mahalakshmi, Mahasaraswati, Mahakali: Ma-treya3B
divine love in human form, the master of the white
Dharma
Sangham sharanam gachāmi
I surrender myself to collectivity
and to the
collective community of realised souls
(Shri Mā sharanamgachāmi)
(I surrender mnyself to Shri Adi Shakti Nirmala Devi)
Aum Shri Mataji, salutations to Thee again and
again. Shri Mataji, may all aspects of the bodhi-
chitta, the enlightened consciousness, be awakened
at Thy command. May all bodhisattvas perform Thy
arti. May Thy grace prevail! Amen.
May Amogha-siddhi, the all-accomplishing
wisdom of becoming be awakened at Thy
command, May Ratna-sama-bhava, who maintains
balance in all things beawakened at Thy command.
May Akshobhya, the wisdom of the all-reflecting
mirror be awakened at Thy command. May
Amit'ābha, who upholds the eternal light of
discrimination be awakened at Thy command.
May Vairochana, the universal harmony of the
horse.
And now the plagues of this modern world will be
listed.
Prayer:
Cosmos be awakened at Thy command. And
Avalokit'eshvara, displaying the thousand arms of
acting compassion be awakened at Thy command.
may
Aum. Amen.
Shri Mataji, salutations to Thee again and again.
Thou art the primordial splendour of God, the Adi
Shakti and Mother of the devatas. Thou art the roots
of all action, the success in any action and the sole
and only doer in the countless universes of Thy
creation. Thou art Shri Mahamaya, the Mother of the
Adi Ahankara, the primordial ego of God, the Prince
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Yuvadrishti December 2008
First and foremost, the ghost of materialism has
empowered the rakshasas of the industrial
production system with tremendous might to
swallow the bodies and minds of the millions.
done.
The diseases of modern life such as cancer, AIDS and
insanity are the direct result of our self-made hellish
environment.
Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have
Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have
done.
done.
Drugs and alcohol throw people into a regression of
As a result, the three elements of earth, water and air
are polluted. We are releasing chemicals which
deplete the ozone sphere and destroy marine life.
We are cutting down the forests that used to protect
the land, and acid rains are destroying the rest.
Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have
their consciousness.
Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have
done.
Because people can no longer feel their heart, social
services are breaking down. The hospital system
tries to make money on its guinea pigs, and lawyers
havegraduated to professional crooks.
Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have
done.
We have manufactured hydrogen bombs and left
behind atomic plants and radioactive wäste which
representa threat for hundreds of years to come.
Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have
done.
The banking system does not so much
productive and useful activities to protect the
unethical accumulation of wealth.
Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have
encourage
done.
Modern weaponry has transformed war into a
faceless butchery of unprecedented proportion.
Arms dealers are building economic empires by
selling death.
Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have
done.
Corrupt government and politicians cannot handle
the problems of the Kali-yuga but, on the contrary,
can only massively add to them.
Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have
done.
As a consequence of this, and related genocides,
there are millions of bhoots haunting the planet.
Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have
done.
Political dictatorship and religious fanaticism have
given an official seal to mindless violence.
Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have
done.
Electronic machinery and mechanisation may
transform the human brain into a collection of done.
And finally, Shri Mataji, in this country (America)
which should be the land of integration, the brain of
the people has been atomised into little bits and
fragments. Hence those brains are unable to get the
vision of the whole, the vision of Your plan.
Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have
robotic processes.
Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have
done.
Biotechnology and genetic manipulation may
release harmful substances or lead to the creation of
monstrous creatures.
Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have
done.
These and other evils are the fruit of our karmas,
done.
The destruction of innocence dooms our children,
our families, and heralds the dissolution of society.
Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have
May they be blown away by the wind of the Holy
Spirit.
Säkshāt Shri Adi Shakti Mātāji
Shri Nirmalā Devyai namo namah
done,
Reference:
Violence and the perversion of sex in the media
pollute the consciousness of the masses.
Shri Adi Shakti, please undo the evil that men have
Sahaja Yoga Mantra Book (International Edition)
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Yuvadrishti December 2008
YuvaShakti Reporter
Yuvas Speak Questions and Answers
worship.
Our Yuvashakti reporter this time sighted Bangalore
yuvashakti and asked them following questions
- Megha Agarwal
Collectivity in Sahaj Yoga means loving each other
in the same way as Mother loves all of us. It is being
and working together by giving up our Ego and
Superego and by realising that we are the children
of same Mother.
What do you understand by 'Collectivity in
Sahaja Yoga'?
What do you understand by 'Sahaja Work'?
Let's read what our brothers and sisters had to speak
about these Sahaja aspects...
- Neha Singh
Collectivity in Sahaja Yoga means being together for
improving our spiritual ascent and we are not
in
dragged by negative forces by which we don't go
What do you understand by 'Collectivity in Sahaja
Yoga'?
Sahaja collective is an aspect through which the
divine nourishes and guides us.
to imbalance state. Once the collectivity gets
strengthened, it becomes easy for us to spread
- Dileep D Mother's message easily as there are many hands
coming forward to spread Sahaja.
Shri Mataji created the concept of collectivity out of
her love for us. It's like, Supreme source of love,
created more love, in the form of collectivity out of
her love for us. So when we love each other, it means,
we are loving the love; created by love and out of her
love for us.
- Sunila Gadi
There are two level of collectivity. One is be
physically present in the regular meditation centers
and public programs. Second meaning about the
collectivity is to be one with the all pervading power
(Virat) that is flowing aroundus. It is very important
for every Sahaja Yogi to be aware about both of the
types and attend both type of collective. First one
helps us in cleaning our energy centers and keeping
our attention clean while working on the divine
Vishal Kumar
Collectivity in Sahaja Yoga is a group of Sahaja Yogis
who are connected to each other by the power of
love that is the "Lotus Feet of our Mother".
- Ankit Kumar
Collectivity is a collection of different people who task. If utilized correctly this helps in increasing love
meditate together at Shri Mataji's Lotus Feet, for with everyone and improve upon brother and sister
their spiritual ascent, for the transformation of collective center (as told by our Holy Mother)
mankind to higher level and ultimately towards
their union with the supreme power "The Lord Sada
Shiva",
hood. If a person doesn't attend at least one
chances are that he/she is in left and Mahakali may
throw that person out of Sahaja. The other one is also
important as until and uless you are aware about
the all pervading power around you and you are
one with it, you can't ascend in your meditation, it
helps you to develop surrender and being in
witness. It makes you understand that we are
playing a role in Leela and it is mere a play of the
divine. It helps you to understand divine love,
knowledge, how divine works or divine planing.
Hitesh Bhardiya
- Ashish Kumar
Collectivity does not mean sticking together.
Enjoying divine and pure love of Shri Mataji with
each other while being with spirit. Physical presence
is not a necessity. Getting collective with our chitta,
heart and spirit. The joy is paramount which has no
limits because when we are collective its not just the
physical being who is with other beings. It is Sahajis
with Sahaijs. When a sahaji is with other sahaji it
really means something very great, very auspicious.
We are really very fortunate that we are in Sahaja
getting together, getting opportunity to meditate at
Divine Lotus Feet of Shri Mataji, whom all lords
Collectivity is the love that is between the Sahaja
Yogis, which has no boundaries. It is this love that
draws all of us towards each other. It removes all
discrimination, groupism, complexities,
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Yuvadrishti December 2008
which we feel connected to the divine and work as
hands of Mother.
misunderstanding etc, within us. Collectivity is our
Guru. It is our face to others, so once it is established
and beautiful more are drawn towards it.
- Neha Singh
Nikhil Singh
-
Sahaja work means any kind of work that we do it for
Knowing, Realizing, ever Remembering & Acting Mother and spreading the message of Her love, it
on the Truth that Shri Mataji is the essence of the also includes all the cultural activities we do it to
whole Cosmos and we, Sahaja Yogis are blood cells please Shri Mataji.
in Her being. Even every thought has to be for the
nourishing of this collective being. Keeping this
intact is a direct and indirect responsibility of every activities like having food or going to office, I think
Sunila Gadi
If we feel that Sahaja work is separate from our daily
SY.
we are playing in the hands of Maya. Sahaja work
should be a second nature to every Sahaja Yogi.
Abhinay Raj
Whatever we do in the name of Sahaja work divine
gives thousand fold to it which we really can't
What do you understand by 'Sahaja Work'?
Sahaja wok is an opportunity to be divine magine (Practically seen and observed). We should
instrument.
ANA
understand that by doing Sahaja work we are not
doing any favour on anyone else but it's a favour on
our self. More Sahaja work we do we are nearer to
god and our attention becomes more powerful and
enlightened. In a nutshell Sahaja work should be the
nature of every Sahaja Yogi and it should be done
- Dileep D
Sahaja Work is antonym of Work and synonym of
Jy.
- Vishal Kumar
with the surrender bhaav.
Sahaja work is being an instrument of Shri Mataji
Hitesh Bhardiya
Once the candle is lit, it gives light to others. That is
and
spreading the message of love that is "Sahaja
Yoga" throughout the world.
its nature. Thus once we become Sahajis our nature
becomes to spread our Mothers blessings of Love
every where in different forms in different ways. On
one level it can be seen as work, but finally it
happens.
- Ankit Kumar
Any activity performed by any person towards the
spreading of Sahaja Yoga is Sahaja work. It blesses
the person with horizontal spiritual ascent.
just
- Ashish Kumar
Nikhil Singh
Sahaja work- it is not an ordinary or daily routine we Sahaja work is -
do in day to day life. From lighting diyas on altar to
selling books, every work is divine being a part of 1. Every Act of cleansing in deep understanding of
Sahaja work is an honour. It must be done with full the collective (and not for limited individual gains).
joy and regards. Itmust not be mechanical otherwise 2. Absorbing the Knowledge of Sahaja Yoga
it would not hold any meaning. For eg- buying perceived through direct experience of the divine,
flowers for Shri Mataji like we offer flowers which prayers & striving to please the Goddess by high
have really nice fragrant actually these flowers are noble living.
good for Mooladhara and if we offer beautiful 3. Every thought/word/action to share this
flowers they are good for Swadishthan. Whatever invaluable light with dignity, humility & love to all
we do we must do with our hearts in that. Pleasing mankind by the ways and means ever explored
Our Mother Is Our Ultimate Goal Of This Life.
Sometimes we think we are doing work butin Sahaja doer;She is the enjoyer"
whatever we do is for our ascent.
anew with undisturbed knowledge that "She is
- Abhinay Raj
Megha Agarwal
Work for the divine is the Sahaja work. Working
with the collective for the growth of Sahaja Yoga and
of the collective by spreading Sahaja Yoga. Work in
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Yuvadrishti December 2008
RENDEZVOUS
Discussions with a Sahaja Yogi of Bangalore
Ques1: When & how you got Realization and when was
seeking manifested?
Sahaj Yogi: In April 1986, I got the opportunity to
attend saakar Public Programs (of three days) when
our Divine Mother visited Kolkatta. I do not
remember if I was then an ardent seeker, in the true
sense of the term. In those days, I was not a Sahaj Yogi:
Ganapathi Pule (in 1988/89). I experienced an
intense state of thoughtless awareness and joy
while listening to Guruji (Dhakde) singing
"Brahma Shodhile' in Mother's presence.
Ques3: What unique thing you found about Sahaja
Yoga?
practitioner of 'conventional' religious rituals like
periodically visiting temples, doing puja at home
etc. My brother and I had started practicing some
other yoga more because they had visited our
colleges. But, Holy Mother recognizes the seeking in
us. Mother's talk at the program had a tremendous
impact on me and struck the right chords. I realized
that there were a lot of questions about religion at
the back of my mind, and Mother's beautiful and
simple talk had provided the answers. That is when . Absence of a controlling human organization,
I started practicing Sahaja Yoga and, therefore, gave
up other yoga I was practicing. However, I felt the
cool breeze very strongly only a couple of months
later when I was reading Nirmala Yoga at home.
Aloving, compassionate and generous guru who
asks nothing of me but only desires my spiritual
ascent.
A profound knowledge that is transparent and
available to all regardless of caste, religion,
status, wealth, language or nationality. Unlike
other sects, knowledge and blessings is not
secretly given to those who are physically close to
the Guru, or wealthier or be a celebrity.
but is controlled by the subtle, loving and
omniscient Shri Parama Chaitanya.
• I have time and again found answers to mny
questions in Mother's talks or 'spontaneously' as
though I am now connected to the unseen source
of all knowledge
Ques4: How to balance the Sahaja life and Personal life?
Sahaj Yogi: I have realized that understanding and
appreciating the magnitude of Mother's love and
blessings is most important. When this happens, the
This was a distinct second milestone as I was now
looking at Sahaja Yoga from a different state and
with more conviction.
Ques2: What difficulties were you faced-
a) In meditation
b) In life
And how were these overcome?
Sahaj Yogi: Fortunately, I did not expect Sahaja Yoga boundaries between Sahaja and personal life
to dramatically solve all my worldly concerns. In the dissolve and we see the 'divine' in every aspect of
early days, the state of thoughtless awareness was
our lives.
rare and I did not fully appreciate the magnitude of Rues5: Any significant learning or experience that gives
the blessings, which Mother had showered on me. I Sahaj Yogi: Awareness that Mother has an intense
continued to be involved in my worldly pursuits connection with each one of us helps us at every
and Sahaja Yoga was more like a hobby.
Some of the factors that helped me with my
strength when things are not in favour?
step. We should also remember that we are always.
connected to Mother's niraakar form of the all-
spiritual growth are:
pervading power, which does everything. To keep
this connection strong, make it a habit to remember
all the divine blessings you have enjoyed.
The warmth and family-like collective of
Kolkatta.
A desire to know more about Sahaja Yoga Ques6: How yuvashakti can improve their meditation
through Mother's lectures and reading issues of attention?
Nirmala Yoga.
A profound experience at a program in
Sahaj Yogi: This is still an age where peer acceptance
5GA GR
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Yuvadrishti December 2008
is important. If we spend more time with our non-
Sahaja friends, our attention can waver. When we
have matured (in Sahaja Yoga) it becomes easier to
be detached from the views of our acquaintances
who are not in Sahaja Yoga. To protect ourselves
from this, we can:
• Make it a habit to see the virtue in others rather
than their faults.
Ques7: What advice/suggestion would you like to give
to yuvashakti?
Sahaj Yogi:
Be aware of your subtle system and meditate
regularly
Desire to become an instrument of Mother's
• Seek, and enjoy the company of other Sahaja
Yogis, even if you are going to see a movie! Try
to involve other yuvashakti and do Sahaja work
e
love, compassion and concern for all human
beings and creation.
Have respect for all Sahaja Yogis we are
connected through our Mother
in teams.
Talk about Sahaja Yoga to your friends. Let them
beinfluenced by you!
Try to learn more about Sahaja Yoga and acquire
pure, divine knowledge.
Become more aware of your subtle system and
regularly cleanse your chakras before
meditation.
Enjoy working for Sahaja Yoga and make
newcomers feel 'at home' in the collective.
Discussions with a Sahaj Yogi (Bangalore)
The Wise Elephant
By Sia Reddy
Do you know what wisdom is? No? Then listen to
how an elephant showed his wisdom and his love
towards other animals.
am happy. So be happy with how you are, my dear
friend!"
"You are so right, Elephant!" said the parrot. "I am
really glad to be colourful! Thank you dear wise
Once upon a time there lived a very wise elephant. Elephant!" And the parrot continued on his way.
Öne fine day, a little mouse came to the elephant and One fine day, a deer came to the elephant and
complained, "Oh Elephant, I am so unhappy!I want compiained, "Oh Elephant, I am so unhappy! I want
to be big and tall like you!"
The elephant replied, "Really? If I were small like drink water!
you, I would be so very happy! When a cat is chasing The elephant replied, "Really? If I had a nose like
you, you can hide in a tiny hole. Me, I do not even fit you, I would be so very happy! When you are thirsty,
into a bear's cave! If you want to eat the tiny nuts and you can drink from the tiniest water source. Me, I
seeds, you find them easily. Me, I can barely see my need a big pond to drink. And how would you look
own feet! Yet I am happy. So be happy with how you with a big trunk like this! You would not be able to
are, my dearfriend!"
"You are so right, Elephant!" said the mouse. "I am amslowand heavy. YetI am happy. So be happy with
really glad to be tiny! Thank you dear wise how you are, my dear friend!"
Elephant!" And the mouse continued on his way.
One fine day, a parrot came to the elephant and really glad to have a small nosel Thank you dear wise
complained, "Oh Elephant, I am so unhappy! I want Elephant!" And the deer continued her ways.
to be grey like you so no one can see me in the dark!"
to have a big trunk like you to shoo away the flies and
flee from the tiger with a heavy trunk like this! Me, I
"You are so right, Elephant!" said the deer. "I am
Soon all animals knew how wise the elephant was.
The elephant replied, "Really? IfI were colourful like And whenever they had any questions, they knew
you, I would be so very happy! Merely by looking at
your beauty, other animals feel cheerful and happy! Moral - Like these animals, we also have a unique
My grey colour has rarely even been noticed! When beauty which is given to all of us by God. We must
you fly in the sky, your family can find you easily recognise our beauty and should not try to be
seeing your colourful wings! Me, I am just grey! Yet I something else.
where to go!
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Yuvadrishti December 2008
Spiritual Heritage of Karnataka
(Poets, Seers and Spiritual Movements in Karnataka)
remembering the great souls who enriched the
spiritual tradition of kannada, the language of
Karnataka and its heritage.
In India poetry has been a central force that shaped
our life and our attitude towards life. Our history
bears witness to the fact of how poetry has been
instrumental in awakening people to the higher
values in life from time immemorial. Such poetic
traditions in India have been spread wide across
Shri Madhvacharya
There were many saintly voices heard in Karnataka,
from north to south and east to west. Just like how a
daughter shares resemblances to her mother, among them is Shri Madvacharya. Karnataka is
Karnataka, shares this great heritage of poetic blessed to have had Shri Madhvacharya born in its
traditions and seers of India and this resemblance is fold, in a small hamlet called Pajaka, near Udupi, a
beautifully brought out in the lines of Karnataka's south canara region of Karnataka. Madhvacharya,
state anthem, which says:
Jai bharata jananiya tanujaate jai he karnataka mate
Jai sundara nadi vanagaLanade jai he rasa rushigala The most celebrated commentaries are on bramha
beede. Bhoodeviya mukutada nava maNiye sutras, all ten upanishadas, he also wrote Bhagavata
gandhada chandada honnina ganiye Raghava Tatparya which highlights the essence of the
madhusudhaaravatarisida bharata jananiya puranas and also composed forty hymns of Rig
tanujaate
Victory to you Mother Karnataka, the daughter of masterpieces he never wrote them with his own
Mother India! Hail the land of beautiful rivers and hands, his disciples transcribed his dictations on
forests, hail the abode of saints! You are a new jewel palm leaves and he used 'Ananda Thirtha' as his pen
in the crown of Goddess Earth, mine of beautiful
gold and sandal. Victory to you Mother Karnataka
the daughter of Mother India where Rama and many generations and it eventually heralded the
Krishna had their incarnations.
the proponent of dwaita philosophy, travelled
across India and has authored many commentaries.
Veda. Although Madhvacharya authored these
name for all his works. All his works are in Sanskrit.
Shri Madhvacharya's dvaita philosophy inspired
bhakthi movement in Karnataka led by the haridasa
poets and seers.
Shankara ramanuja vidyaranya basaveshvarariha
divyaranya Ranna shadakshar ponna pampa
lakumipati janna Kabbigarudisida mangala dhama is that the main idol (vigraha) in Udupi's Shri
kavi kogilegala punyarama Nanaka ramananda Krishna temple is installed by Shri Madhvacharya.
kabirara bharata jananiya tanujate
You are a sacred forest where Shankara, Ramanuja,
Vidyaranya and Basaveswara dwelt. You are the
holy abode where Ranna, Shadakshari, Ponna,
Pampa, Lakshmisha and Janna were born. You are
the blessed resting place of many a poet-
nightingales. Victory to Mother Karnataka, the spiritual poetry and music written in golden words
daughter of Mother India who gave birth to Nanak,
Another unforgettable work of Shri Madhvacharya
The idol of Shri Krishna was found by him in the
western oceannear Udupisea coast.
Haridasa Movement
Haridasa movement is a divine orchestra of
in the history of Karnataka. This movement saw
many great saintly poets who called themselves as
Haridasa, i.e. servant of Shri Hari.
Ramanand and Kabir.
The anthem is apt to remember while we pay our
homage to the seers and saintly poets of this land
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Yuvadrishti December 2008
The Haridasas, Vaishnava saints of Karnataka, are His songs carry a message of purity of heart,
traditionally classified into the Vyasakuta and devotion to God and compassion to all beings.
Dasakuta. The Vyasakuta were the saints who were Shri Purandara Dasa, who was initially a miserly
known for their scholarship and exposition of the rich merchant, turned to God after a miraculous
Madhva's philosophy. This order included the likes happening in his life. Shri Purandara Dasa was
of Sripadaraya, Vyasaraya, Vadiraja, Vijayeendra called as Navakoti Narayana (i.e nine crore
teertha and Raghavendra Teertha. The Dasakuta on narayana because of the huge wealth he
the other hand were the wandering saint disciples possessed) and had a very pious wife, who gave
of the Vyasakuta sanyasins. They were proficient away her nose ring to a poor brahmin who had
singers and composers and extensively made use of
classical music and the Kannada language as a
medium to propagate the teachings and philosophy other than Shri Vishnu himself, who had
of the dvaita. This order included the likes of disguised as a brahmin. Then the brahmin went to
Purandaradasa, Kanakadasa, Prasanna
come asking for alms for his son's Upanayana
(thread ceremony). But the brahmin was none
the Navakoti Narayana asking him to give him
Venkatadasa, Vijayadasa, Gopaladasa, money for buying the nose ring. The miserly
Mahipatiraya, Jagannathadasa and a host of others.
While Sripadaraya is sometimes credited as having recognized his wife's ring and ruhed to find the
started this musical movement, Vyasaraya, who
went by titles such as Abhinava Bharatacharya, what was to come started praying to shri Vishnu
Kalpana Chaturanana, Sangitasampradaya and to her wonder a similar nose ring was
pravartaka etc., counted the likes of returned to her by Vishnu himself. This incident
Purandaradasa, Vadiraja and Kanakadasa among changed the very track of navakoti narayana and
his disciples. Among these, Purandaradasa became
renowned as Karnataka Sangita Pitamaha. Shri
Purandara Dasa is known to sahaj collectivity
through the famous dasapada:
merchant, navakoti narayana immediately
nose ring with his wife Here his wife aware of
he became the famous poet, who is even hailed by
some as the father of carnatic music.
Purandara Dasa's contribution to Carnatic music
has been outstanding and exceptional. To this day,
the method of teaching of Carnatic music was
systematized by him. He set the path of Carnatic
music by introducing folk ragas to Carnatic music
and setting them to the tunes of this day, so that
even a common man could sing. He was a music
maestro, a musicologist, and the founder of music
pedagogy and for the way he revolutionized
Carnatic music he is called as the Sangeetha
Pitamaha of Carnatic music (grandfather of
Carnatic music). His influence can also be felt in
Hindustani music, as the foremost Hindustani
musician Tansen's teacher, Swami Haridasa was
Bhagyaada lakshmi Barramma
Omother of prosperity Shri lakshmi please come;
Nammama nee Saubhagyada lakshmi barrmma
My mother who brings auspicious blessings please
come
This composition of Shri Purandara, has been
blessed to have been sung before Shri Mataji on
many occasions. Although mythology credits Shri
Purandara Dasa of composing as many as 475,000
songs, we have about 1000 soul stirring songs in
praise of God which are mostly in kannada and
some in Sanskrit. All his compositions have his
signature with the pen name Purandara Vittala',
after his favourite diety Vitthala, an incarnation of
Shri Vishnu of Pandarapur.
Purandara Dasa's disciple. So, Purandara Dasa's
composition is as popular in Hindustani music as
in Carnatic.
,
Another great soul who comes in the Vyasakuta
tradition of Haridasa poetry is Shri Raghavendra
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Yuvadrishti December 2008
Swamy. Shri Mataji has spoken about Shri
Raghavendra Swamy as a great saint in one of the
public programs in Chennai. Shri Mataji has also
said that he was an incarnation of bhakta Shri
Prahalada.
Another name that deserves a mention is a great
soul of Karnataka called Shishunala Sharif. He is
called as karnataka's kabir, who though was born
in Islamic community, believed in Hinduism
became a disciple of a Guru Govinda Bhatta and
composed many spiritual poems. In many of his
poems he refers to Kundalini and inner spirituality.
Veerashaiva and Vachana Movement
One unique movement that gripped the length and
breadth of Karnataka in 12th century was the
Kannada Spiritual poetry of 20th century
Karnataka's spiritual poetic tradition has flown
like a perennial river and can be seen even in the
movement of Veerashaivas. As the name suggests,
they were Shaivites, the worshippers of Shri Shiva
in the form of lingu. Their spiritual experiences are
recorded in the form of Vachanas. Vachanas literally modern poetic traditions. One of the modern
mean the spoken word and vachans are a special literary works called "Mankutthimmana
type of compositions which are neither prose nor kagga" (i.e. Ramblings of a Fool) a collection of 945
poetry but a pithy expression. The Vachans express most profound poems in kannada, by the doyen of
the deep spiritual experiences of the Vachankars kannada literature D.V Gindappa. He has written
(saints who wrote vachanas) who sought god other works as well, but Mankuthhimmana Kagga
realization through their vocation. A. K Ramanujan is an absolute masterpiece, that explores deeper
has translated a few of the hundred's of Vachana's, questions of life, contemplates on the meaning of
ultimate truth (reality) and advises us to lead a
balanced life in this complex, ever changing world.
Thus Kagga advises us to follow the middle path
extending one hand towards the ultimate truth and
the other hand to the phenomenal world. The
to cite an example:
The rich will make temples for Siva.
What shall I, a poor man, do?
message of many of the songs from Kagga is
My legs are pillars, the body the shrine,
The head a cupola of gold.
Listen, Olord of the meeting rivers,
Things standing shall fall, but the moving ever shall
samatwa.
One of the popular poems from this work "Hullagu
bettadadi" translated below conveys the spirit of
Kagga.
stay.
ou can see, Vachanas poems told in most simple Be a (gentle) blade of grass at the foot of the
language rendering the great truth and spiritual mountain; and jasmine flower athome
experiences of the Veerashaiva saints.
As you
Be (strong) like a rock when the fate pours
(torrential) rain of difficulties on you
Be sweet like sugar and jaggery to the poor and
There are thousands and thousands of Vachanas
weak
written by hundreds of Vachana poets, and among
them the most prominent ones are Basavanna,
Allama Prabhu, Akka Mahadevi, Aayadakki Kannada has great poets like kuvempu, Bender,
Lakkamma, Ambigara chaudayya, Jedara Nissar Ahmed, Lakshmi Narayana Bhatta, B.M.
Dasimmayya only to mention a few. To this day Shrikantaiyya, Pu. Ti. Narasimhachar have written
Vachanas are very popular in Karnataka and they many poems giving the messages of universal
are best sung in Hindustani classical. Akka brotherhood and spirituality.
Mahadevi the saint poetess during the this
movement is considered as the world's first poetess.
Be one with all, Mankutimma.
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Yuvadrishti December 2008
Sahaja Yoga in Karnataka
A Sahaja Yogi of Madras heard about the divine start in the nineties, Sahaja Yoga has taken deep
powers of Shri Mataji Nimala Devi from his friend
who too was a yogi. This Sahaja Yogi decided to go seekers have been regularly attending the puja.
on a trip to visit Bombay later in 1983 to meet Divine However, on introspection and comparing with
Mother along with his wife and took Self- Delhi, Maharashtra and UP, one can say that much
roots in Bangalore. Currently, four hundred plus
needs to be done.
Realisation.
For starters, there is little presence outside
The following year in 1984, Shri Mataji decided to
tread onto the south in Madras. This Sahaja Yogi's
daughter, sat before Shri Mataji, when it was
realized that her eyes were affected by herpes. The
Divine Mother worked on her to heal this ailment
the same day. The ophthalmologists who were
already treating her for several weeks, stated that
she was on the verge of losing her vision and were
dumbfounded to see her improved condition in
such a short time, attributing it to only divine
healing. The faith and love was getting deeper and
during the subsequent visits to Madras, Shri Mataji,
as She always does, told This Sahaja Yogi that this
divine love be spread to Bangalore.
Bangalore. Many areas in Bangalore too need
attention. Small towns have their problems and it is
extremely difficult for people there to shake off their
past conditionings, superstitions etc. for fear of
being declared a social outcast. While one can
always get lost in the city and form ones own circle
of well wishers and friends, it is not so in the small
towns. Just not visiting the neighborhood temple or
not paying the obeisance to the local Swamiji can
lead to serious problems. Hence success in small
towns has been very limited and we have to bank on
one or two families who have seemingly somewhat
settled down in Sahaja Yoga. Besides distances, bad
roads, traffic jams and infrastructural problems
have severely hampered our progress. Mangalore,
Karkal, Udupi, Kundapur though different districts
are barely two hours apart and there are a total to 100
So it worked out that She stepped onto the soil in
Bangalore in Feb' 1989. In 1990, when the second
daughter of Mr Murthy, and his son-in-law,, based
in Bangalore visited Madras, they were asked to Sahaja Yogis. They have been advised to perform
seek the blessings of Shri Mataji and followed by pujas together. Belgaum wisely ties up with
inviting Her to Bangalore. Shri Mataji then asked to Kolhapur, Shrirampur and nearby townships for the
have a small Shri Ganesh Puja in the house of this Puja. Dharwad has been advised to join Belgaum.
Sahaja Yogi's son-in-law.
Unaware of the consequences, Mahishasura Kaduris still struggling with 15 to 20 seekers.
Mardini stotram was recited and the Ganesha Puja
got converted to a Mahishasura Mardini Puja, Jove for every Sahaja Yogi that there will be a
charged with strong vibrations. During the Aarti, tremendous spurt in our growth. Mother is blessing
Hassan a new entrant has steadied at 30 seekers and
It is only when we work collectively and exhibit our
our first ever in Bangalore, all the Yogis could
actually clearly see Shri Ganesha in Her Bindi. All
the collective and Bangalore Sahaja Yogis are going
out and spreading Sahaja Yoga outside Bangalore.
Now centers are established in Mysore, Tumkur,
were dumbfounded.
Kolar, Kadur, Hassan, Belgaum, Udupi, Karkala,
apart from establishing ten centres inside Bangalore.
Thereafter Shri Mataji visited Bangalore in 1992,
1994, and '96, Shri Mataji's visits in the nineties and
the relentless drive of the Sahaja Yogis during that
period have paid off handsomely. After a humble
With Love,
Bangalore Yuvashakti
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Yuvadrishti December 2008
This Happened
Experiences of Sahaja Yogis of Karnataka
there. Everybody was seated in their places. She was
so close, next to me. I could see Her very clearly. She
was stunning. She had worn a bright ink blue silk
sari with red border and a blue blouse. She had
Great Mother and Experienceof my first meeting
I was only four months into Sahaja Yoga. I was not
seriously into it. I had come in Sahaja Yoga with
reluctance. Mother had come down to Bangalore for
maroon colored sandals which looked so beautiful
on Her feet. Her nails were painted with bright red
nail polish. She kept Her lovely hand bag down on
floor beside Her. I never expected a Guru to be like
this, so colorful and in style. She was 73 and did not
look so. What struck me most were Her feet in that
slippers and polish. They are the loveliest feet Ihave
a public program that was scheduled at National
College, Basavanagudi grounds on 31st Jan 1996.
That was the first time I saw Her in person. The next
day all Sahaja Yogis of Bangalore were invited for a
private program with Mother at RY College
Auditorium in Jayanagar. I went to the venue quite
early and sat in the auditorium.
ever seen. They were so attractive, neat, fair and
I was walking with difficulty and pain because of
the onset of arthritis. I was sitting somewhere in the
unbelievably young..
The same gentle man who had made me move from
one place to other and had spoken on mike earlier
was on stage. He began, "Welcome Shri Mataji.".
left side, in the first row of the auditorium. A senior
Sahaja Yogi shouted at me for some reason and he
made me move from that place. I then sat at the first
chair of the first row of the other side of the to give the mike to Her. Holding the mike She
auditorium. After some time the same man was welcomed all the Sahaja Yogis. She said She was
standing in front of me. On mike he was saying, happy to see the growth of Sahaja Yoga in Bangalore,
"Where you sit is not important, actually you must and immediately started saying, "I find some people
go back and sit at the last. I am feeling bhoots talk very harshly with people who are new to Sahaja
here..." Though he was addressing every one, I
thought he is referring it to me. I felt very hurt and
told my friend sitting in the next chair, "I want to
Shri Mataji stopped him in between and asked him
Yoga. Senior Sahaja Yogis should be very kind and
sweet when you talk to them. You should not use
words such as 'I sense bhooth here.' Be nice to new
leave this hall or go and sit in last row, best even to
leave Sahaja Yoga, but I can't get up and walk alone
and I have to sit now." While saying so a few drops
of tears rolled down from eyes. She consoled me
comers..." That moment these words stuck me likea
thunder bolt. I was shocked, spell bound. Like me
many Sahaja Yogis too must have been surprised,
because they had watched the whole drama of the
butI was hurt because of the incident.
evening. They started staring at me. I was wonder
struck and confused. How can She sense the scenes
Mother came around 8:00 P.M. As soon as She came,
and repeat the exact words which took place in this
hall around 6:00 P.M., while She was far away in a
guest house? No one would have reported all this to
Her because everyone was here. Moreover I was
such an ordinary and new person in whom no one
would be interested in reporting to Her. I became
emotional and this sequence led me to think that this
lady may have the powers of knowing things from
far beyond.
every one stood up except me as I could not stand
immediately due to my painful knees. She turned
towards the steps to go on stage, but then stopped,
and very loudly and clearly said, "Ah, you have put
my chair on stage, put it down here..." She
stretched Her right hand and showed the place
where the chair has to be brought down and be
placed. That was just besideme!
Immediately the chair was moved, She came and sat
Mother sat in the chair for nearly an hour, I kept on
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Yuvadrishti December 2008
a 2 year old sister and they regularly come for
collective pujas in Bangalore.
looking at Her. After an hour or so She asked the
chair to be taken on stage and sat on stage till 11:00
P.M.
Change in the attitude
A Sahaja Yogi
Even after coming to Sahaja Yoga it may take some
time to realize that we are into some thing
invaluable. Mother has her own ways to teach us
Returned without food
A memorable incident was in the year 1996 when
400 Sahaja Yogis from all over the world visited about her shakti and establish us. A yogi of
Bangalore. Mother asked them to go to Mysore and Bangalore was attending center casually. Along
walk in the Palace grounds to spread their with Sahaja Yoga he continued his earlier rituals of
vibrations. The food that was carried to Mysore worshipping family deities. He was not able to over
come his conditionings easily. He was not so
could not reach them in time and all Sahaja Yogis seriously in Sahaja Yoga for nearly two years. Once
returned to Bangalore without food. Next day he had to go out of Bangalore to Kodai Canal for
Mother had a Puja, where She commented, How office work. He was halting in a lodge. In the
can you have food in the place where Mahishasura morning before leaving to office work he did
was killed? That is why you returned without any regular surya namaskaras, worshipped the photos of
-Unkown Yogi
food'
deities placed on the table, burnet incense sticks.,
Then, later on, took out a small photo of Shri Mataji
The dumb can speak
A Sahaja Yogi went to Mysore for collecitivity few which he had carried in his shirt pocket. Even before
years back and when he went there were hardly 6 to he could keep it on table, he clearly saw a dazzling
7 people. One Sahaja Yogi came and asked that her 2 sun shaped light on Shri Mataji's entire face of photo
years old child, is not able to speak and whether
Sahaja Yoga couid help. Child was found to have a hand. With surprise and joy he placed the photo on
big front projection on the head and it was a clear table for worship. He realized that Mother's photo is
case of overgrown ego and superego descending not just an ordinary photo. He came to an
into the left and right Vishuddhi giving a heavy load understanding that this was the most mystifying
on both the eardrums not allowing the child to hear. experience through which Mother is suggesting
With a prayer to Mother, the child's mother was that he has Sun and all other Gods in his hold, right
advised to clear the overgrown ego and superego in his hands! This experience changed his entire out
with vibrations, After about two to three months, in look towards Sahaja Yoga and from then on he has
collectivity the mother informed that the child had totally left all his old rituals.
started hearing on one ear and when his name is MiraculouS Cures!
called he would turm his head to only one side. The
child started hearing in both the years after few
months after this. In one of the later collective
meditations, the child started saying 'Allah Hu
for a few seconds. He could not believe his eyes and
A Sahaja Yogi from Bangalore had Migraine head
ache for more than 10 years. He was getting the
head ache frequently and he would suffer for 2/3
days without
any intake of food and only after he
Akbar' sixteen times to the surprise of the collective
and everybody wondered how the child was able to
speak! Child's mother told that he was first able to
hear and then speak.
gets a triggering in the brain he would vomit and
come back to normalcy. He was given only one
glass of vibrated water on one such occasion, and
the triggering came in 20 minutes and he got a
complete permanent cure for his migraine
headache. Henever got his head ache again.
We have to feel the joy of the mother of the child,
when her child started speaking for the first time,
when all the treatment given by Deaf and Dumb
A Sahaja Yogi's Mother, was suffering from asthma
School in Mysore had failed. Now, the boy is having
THE
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Yuvadrishti December 2008
the room and the strong affinity to flowers made
them remain so fresh. Shri Mataji herself in
and had developed swollen legs with weeping
eczema by the use of continuous medication for
more than 15 years. She was given a photograph of undertone and subtle expression said "see how
Mother and was asked to foot soak for 24 days. She these flowers are'!
did it only for 11 days and got a complete cure for
her problem of asthma and also for her swollen legs. In another incident, one of the yogis in Bangalore
She was able to walk easily and had come to who was good at flower arrangements and tissue
Mother's pubic programme in the year 1996.
culture was fortunate to have Mother's attention.
She enquired about who had done the flower
arrangements at Her guest house where She was
staying during Her 1995 visit. After knowing about
the yogi She expressed Her desire to see his tissue
culture laboratory.
A Sahaja Yogi from Bangalore had fibrosis in her
womb and was suffering. She used Mother's Lotus
feet for worshipping the same with pure butter and
in 2 week's time theentire fibrosis vanished.
person, who had not bowed to anybody in
Another
She visited the yogi's lab. The lab was a part of the
house of Krishnanda and Rekha. In joy and bhakti
they spread silk saris on the pathway from the gate
to the lab. Mother observed this, and immediately
removed the chappals and then walked on the silk
sari. She showed a keen interest on the bottles
his life, took Self-Realisation. For the sake of his
daughter, who was hospitalized for blood cancer.
He was given a photograph of Mother which he
used in the hospital. Instead of dying, she got a
complete cure in 3 months time, and their entire
family has taken to Sahaja Yoga and have become
deep Sahaja Yogis.
stacked with cultured tissues of differentplants and
flowers. She wanted to know about it in detail. She
had all smiles and joy. While talking, She asked as to
A Sahaja Yogi came to Ganapathipule and had a
heart attack just on the day of arrival. Mother in Her
compassion, asked the collective to meditate on the
heart chakra the next day, and he got cured of his
heart problem, and he is leading a healthy life today
with the blessings of our divine Mother.
what is the name they have kept for their little
daughter. When She came to know that they have
yet to name the child, the divine Mother
spontaneously named the child with a beautiful
name Alakananda. These yogis have kept the chair,
on which Mother sat, in the Lab in their altar from
then on, even the saris on which Mother walked and
Mother's Love for Flowers
sat are worshiped by them in dedicationeven to this
day. In the following year of Christmas Puja at
Ganapatipule, She remembered this Sahaja Yogi's
love for flowers and was so gracious and kind to
send three lovely silver vases to the Bangalore camp
where he stayed. This shows the simplicity,
generosity and magnanimity of our Mother who
can be so down to earth in expressing Her love
Every one knows the love of our Mother for natural
flowers and plants. She has a keen eye for beautiful
flowers. She appreciates the love of any yogi even
when she is offered a single rose or a daisy. She
recognizes our love through flowers. In Her divine
attention flowers can be fragrant and fresh as long as
She desires.
Bangalore's Manohar, along with a few other yogis,
had one such experience in 1992 when they had
gone to Ganapatiphule. They were about to leave on
the concluding day and were last to leave. Shri
Mataji called them to Her room and asked them to
take roses that were arranged six days earlier. It was
incredible to see the flowers so fresh, as though they
were plucked just that day. The divine vibrations in
towards her children.
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Yuvadrishti December 2008
Let's Introspect
Cooking
With Love
1. Do I sit for meditate morning and evening regularly?
2. Do I become completely nirvichar in my meditation?
3. DoI do appropriate treatments regularly for my
cleansing?
4. Do I feel cool breeze on my palms?
5. Do I listen or watch Shri Mataji's audios and videos?
6. Do I behave in the manner Shri Mataji has advised
time to time in Her speeches?
7. What do I do about the things that are not in my
Marwari Aloo Bhaji (Potato Vegetable)
Ingredients:
250 gr. Potatoes, peeled and sliced (medium size)
O 2 tablespoon ghee
1 teaspoon asafoetida (hing)
o 1% teaspoon coriander powder
½ teaspoon turmeric powder (haldi)
14 teaspoon cumin powder (jeera)
e teaspoon red chilli powder
1
behaviour?
8. Do I read Sahaja related literature?
9. Do I remain in balance in difficult conditions?
10.Do I use vibrations to make important decisions?
11.When I am doing my work, how much time do I
remain thoughtless?
12Through out the day how much time my attention
remains in a Sahastrara?
Salt to taste
Preparation:
•Mix the spices (A) together in a small bowl
• Heat ghee in frying pan, add the mixture of spices
13.How much time do I feel my vibration in a day?
14.Do I regularly participate in Self-Realisation
(A)
programs?
15D0 I follow up with the new people? Do I help to
establish them in Sahaja Yoga?
16.Do I get angry or depressed?
17.Do I forgive all the people around me (Sahaja Yogis
and Non-Sahaja Yogis)?
18.Do I pay attention to beauty of nature, do we enjoy
it?
Fry the mixture for 15 seconds without letting it
burn
Add sliced potatoes and keep frying on a low heat,
for 15 to 20 minutes, until they are cooked
e Add salt
Source:
19.Am I proud to be a Sahaja Yogi?
20.Do I neglect my duties (of family, school/college, job
etc) for Sahaja Yoga work?
Cooking with Love by HH Shri Mataji Nirmala
Devi
विश्व निर्मल प्रेम आश्रम में सामूहिक राखी
3 अगस्त को सुबह के ध्यान के बाद से लगातार चित्त में एक विचार आ रहा था कि युवाशक्ति सामूहिक होकर ग्रैटर नोएडा विश्व निर्मल प्रेम
आश्रम (NGO) जायें और वहाँ छोटी छोटी बहनों के साथ राखी का त्योहार मनायें। यह विचार युवाशक्ति के सामने रखा गया तो सभी लोग बहुत
खुश हुऐ और हमने 17-8-2008 को (राखी के अगले दिन) NGO जाने का निश्चय किया। 17-3-2008 को सुबह 9:00 बजे निर्मल दरबार मन्डोली
सेन्टर से श्री गणेश मंत्र के साथ अपनी बहनों से मिलने के लिए हम निकल पड़े। बस में हम 31 युवाशक्ति 3 बच्चे और 1 आन्टी भजन करते हुए
11:00 बजे NGO पहुचे गये। वहाँ जैसे ही हम बस से उतर कर गेट पर पहुँचे तो वहाँ के चैतन्य को हमने अपने पूरे शरीर में बहते हुआ महसूस
किया। हमारी छोटी छोटी बहनों ने हमारा स्वागत किया।
अन्दर का वातावरण पूर्णतः चैतन्य से भरा हुआ था। हम सभी शांति पूर्वक पानी पीकर सीधे Meditation Hall में पहुँचे, जहाँ NGO के संगीत के
अध्यापक के साथ बच्चों के द्वारा हमारा चक्रों पर ध्यान हुआ। हर चक्र पर प्रार्थना की गई, साथ ही साथ भजन भी किये गये। आरती के बाद बहुत
ही सुन्दर वातावरण में छोटी-छोटी बहनें आरती की थाली जिसमें राखी, कुमकुम, मिठाई, चावल, दीपक धा सजाकर लाई और भाईयों की आरती
उतार कर उनको राखी बाँधी और एक दूसरे को मिठाई खिलाई। हम सभी लोग अपने साथ उपहार, चाक्लेट, टाफी, मिठाई, आदि लेकर गये थे जो
वहाँ GieselaAunty को दे दिया ताकि वे सभी बच्चों में बाटे दिये जायें। फिर हम सभी लोगों ने मिलकर वहाँ की हर एक वस्तु को देखा और चैतन्य
का आन्नद लिया। हम सभी लोग अपने साथ दोपहर के भोजन की व्यवस्था करके ले गये थे, जो कि ्s के आंगन में सब भाई बहनों ने मिलकर
भोजन का आनन्द लिया और फिर से Meditation Hall में जाकर ध्यान करके हम सभी से विदा लेकर अपने घर के लिए वापिस चल पड़े। यह श्री
माताजी का प्रेम की शक्ति ही है, श्री माताजी को हमारा अनेकानेक धन्यवाद।
दीपक शर्मा, दिल्ली
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Yuvadrishti December 2008
Shri Mataji's Vision for Cabella Schools
Schedule for the School
• Morning wake-up and preparation
e Morning meditation
e Tea, milk and breakfast
Departure to school
Singing of the prayer to Shri Vidya Devi Sakshat Shri
Adi Shakti Mataji Nirmala Devi
• Two lessons of 40 minutes ench
e Small break
Two more lessons of 40 minutes each
Lunch
Two lessons of 40 minutes each with Art and
Recreation
• Back to home
Shri Mataji Inaugurates the Cabella Sahaja
Primary School in Centrassi
Snack and go to playground
• Dinner
according to the merits, they should be awarded
with prizes for first, second and third. Nobody
should fail in exams, everybody should be well
• Meditation
Values and Other Information
We should teach them value system; we should
teach them simplicity, innocence, goodwill. We
should teach them to have friendship in all the
prepared. She wants to prepare children in the
school and college so that they can go to university
and become doctors, lawyers, compounders
(nurses), architects, engineers.
nations.
They should know how to speak sweetly. The
children should learn honesty, they should know
In the syllabus we should add also Marathi and
Hindi, where Kalpana Didi and Sadhana Didi will
help in that. From 5t standard we can teach them
how to be collective, and also they should know
how to make jokes. They should have friendship
Indian classical music and Indian classical dance,
amongst them.
embroidery.
They should know about Sahaja Yoga knowledge,
Sadhana Didi wil1 be the principal of the school. Five
about Shri Mataji, which comes automatically with
Sahaja Yoga. We should teach children about their
own nation, about India, about world, they should
learn to love their nation and world peace.
People to look after the accounting and general
administration. A small committee to look after the
work of the school.
At least two dorm aunties per wing, one for boys and
one for girls. We have to start collecting CV's so that
They should know songs like Vandana, Prayer to
Shri Vidya Devata. They should be patriotic, they
we can look into teachers appointment and teachers
should protect their Mother.
should know English and Italian, possible more lady
They should play sports like kabaddi, teachers for primary school. We have to see for
teachers stay, for their food, organize their
the sand in collective). Then they can have transportation. Fees will be taken for nine months,
hututu..(Indian sport played on the ground or in
KhoKho....hide and seek
Small changes according to the classes, for second,
third. Ask Duilio about permission and expansion of
There should be final exams every year, and
Continued on pg 20
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 व
Yuvadrishti December 2008
विश्व निर्मल प्रेम आश्रम के बच्चो के साथ एक मुलाकात
हमारे युवादृष्टि संवाददाता के विश्व निर्मल प्रेम आश्रम के बच्चों के साथ हुए वार्तालाप के कुछ उद्धरण
त
निशा: यहाँ पर सब कुछ अच्छा लगता है।
प्रश्न: आपको क्या नाम है?
निशा: मेरा नाम निशा है ।
प्रश्न: खाना?
निशा: खाना अच्छा लगता है।
प्रश्न: आप कितने साल के हैं?
निशा: १४ साल।
प्रश्न: रहना?
निशा: रहना अच्छा लगता है।
प्रश्न: कौन सी कक्षा में हो?
निशा: पाँचवी में|
प्रश्न: पहले और अब में क्या परिवर्तन महसूस करते हो?
प्रश्नु: यहाँ आने से पहले आप क्या करते थे?आपके माता पिता उस निशा: अब मुझे अच्छा लगता है। पहले तो इधर-ऊधर जाती थी। दो
समय कहाँ थे?
निशा: मेरी माता तो बचपन में ही चली गयी थीं। मेरे पापा ने मुझे पाला बोलते थे...
और इतना बड़ा किया। अपने मकान में थे हम जब पापा की तबीयत प्रश्न: तो अब अपने अन्दर विश्वास आ गया कि अब आदिशक्ति माँ के
बिगड़ने लगी और बाद में मेरे पापा की मृत्यु हो गयी मृत्यु होने के बाद बच्चे हैं हम?
मैं अपने ताऊ के घर जाने लगी। वो मुझे अपने साथ रखने लगे। मैं दो निशा: हाँ, मेरी जो बुआ है वो पहले से सहजयोगी थीं। मेरे जो ताऊजी
महीने ताऊजी के घर रहती थी और दो महीने बुआ के घर रहती थीं। हैं (छोटे वाले ताऊजी और बड़े वाले ताऊजी हैं), सब सहजयोगी हैं।
फिर एक दिन मेरी बुआ ने बोला कि, "मेरी भाभी की तबीयत खराब है
নो नातू (घर का नाम) को बुला लेती हूँ।" तब उन्होंने मुझे बलाया और अश्नः तो आगे चल कर क्या करना चाहते हो आप?
भाभी का मैं काम करती थी।
महीने उसके घर...दो महीने उसके, तो अच्छा नहीं लगता था
सब ऐसे
(युप)
निशा: मैं आगे चल कर...जो श्रीमाताजी करवाना चाहेंगे वो ही करूँगी।
प्रश्न: कोई ख़ास अनुभव जो आपके साथ हुआ हो यहाँ, आप बताना
प्रश्न: स्कूल जाते थे उस समय?
निशा: जब पापा थे तब मैं स्कूल
खुलने के दो-तीन दिन पहले ही मेरे पापा चले गए थे।
चाहते हो?
निशा: हुआ है। एक बार रात को मैं जब सो रही थी तो मुझे सोते-सीति
जाती थी। उसके बाद नहीं। स्कूल
सपने में श्रीमाताजी दिखाई दिए। हम यहाँ पर उमकपजंजपदव में बैठे ये।
नानी भी बैठे थे और दो तीन बच्चे बैठे थे। श्रीमाताजी यहाँ कंगम से
प्रश्न: आप विश्व निमल प्रेम आश्रम में कैसे आए?
निशा: मेरे बुआ के यहाँ एक सहजयोगिनी आन्टी आतीं थी। उन्होंने अन्दर आए। हम सब यहीं पर बैठे थे। श्रीमाताजी सफेद साड़ी में आए
पूछा, "ये लड़की कौन है?" बुआ ने बोला, "मेरे भाई की लड़की है। थे। मैंने पूछा, "श्रीमाताजी आप यहाँ पर आओगे?" श्रीमाताजी बोले,
इसके पापा नहीं हैं, इसका कोई नहीं है, अब हम ही है।" फिर उन्होंने हाँ मैं आऊँगी।" श्रीमाताजी बस थोड़ी देर बैठी हुई थीं। मैंने पूछा,
पूछा "ये पढ़ती भी है?" बुआ ने बोला, "पहले पढ़ती थी अब बिलकुल श्रीमाताजी आप दोबारा आओगे यहाँ पर?" श्रीमाताजी बोले "हाँ मैं
नहीं पढ़ती।" फिर आन्टी बोले, "इसको होस्टल में डाल दो सबसे आऊँगी। तो बस इतना ही दिखाई दिया और फिर मेरी ऑँख खुल
अच्छा रहेगा। इसकी ज़िन्दगी बन जाएगी।" मुझ से सहजयोगिनी आन्टी गई। श्रीमाताजी एक बार यहाँ पर आए थे। यहाँ पर सब सजा रहे थे
ने पूछा, "होस्टल में जाओगी?" मेरे मुँह से कोई जवाब ही नहीं निकला।
मेरी बुआ मुझे विश्व निर्मल आश्रम ले आईं। उन्होंने पूछा, "कुछ बनना
चाहती हो?" मैंने हाँ बोला। उन्होंने बोला, "यहाँ पर तुम्हे अच्छा
लगेगा।" मैंने कहा, "पहले आश्रम देखूँगी फिर यहाँ रहँगी। यहाँ निशाः पहले मुझे पढ़ना नहीं आता था। तो फिर मैं बोलती थी.
दो-तीन सहजयोगी आन्टी थीं और मेरी बुआ थी। मुझे बहुत अच्छा
लगा। मैंने बताया कि मेरे पापा की मृत्यु हो गयी। ये सब बताने के बाद
उन्होंने मुझसे पूछा, "पहले किसी स्कूल में पढ़ती थी?" उन्होंने पूछा,
%23
भाम
आश्रम को।
प्रश्न: कोई और अनुभव?
श्रीमाताजी आप चसमेन मुझे पढ़ना सिखा दीजिए। मैं आगे जाके
बन जाऊँगी और अपने पापा मम्मी का नाम रौशन कर सकूंगी इतना
करवा दीजिए श्री माताजी।" मैं ऐसे बोलती थी, बन्धन देती थी, shoe-
beating करती थी, श्री माताजी से प्रार्थना करती थी। मैंने ऐसे बोला
और मुझे पढ़ना आ गया।
तुम यहाँ रहना चाहती हो?" मैंने हाँ कहा। बाद में मैंने सारा आश्रम
देखा। मुझे यहाँ अच्छा लगा। यहाँ पर बच्चे अच्छे लगे। मैंने कहा, "एक
हफ्ते के बाद आऊँगी।" मैं कपड़े नहीं लाई थी। एक हफ्ते बाद यहाँ पर
आई। बच्चों के साथ अच्छा लगा।
प्रश्न: और क्या क्या आता है आपको?
निशा; मुझे खाना बनाना आता है।
प्रश्न: यहाँ पर क्या अच्छा लगता है आपको?
২ e
১
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Yuvadrishti December 2008
प्रश्न: स्कूल जाते हो?
मोना: हा।
प्रश्न: आपका नाम?
मोनाः मेरा नाम मोना है।
प्रश्न: कौन सी कक्षा में हो आप?
मोना: छठी।
प्रश्नु: आपकी उम्र कितनी है?
मोनाः 13 साल।
प्रश्न: कभी किसी प्रतियोगिता में भाग लिया?
मोना: हा, एक बार कंदबम में लिया था, मबवदक आयी थी।
प्रश्नु: तो आप सहज में आने से पहले क्या करते थे?
मोना: हम घर पे रहते थे। हमारी मम्मी को दिखता नहीं है। हम उनके
साथ रहते थे। हमारी मामी ने हमें यहाँ पर छोड़ा।
प्रश्नः बहुत अच्छे! पढ़ाई में कैसे हो?
मोना: अच्छी हूँ।
प्रश्न: आपकी बहन का क्या नाम है?
मोनाः मनीशा।
प्रश्न: कितने प्रतिशत अंक आते हैं?
मोनाः याद नहीं है।
স्रश्न: आपको यहाँ कैसे लेकर आए?
मोनाः हम घर पर रहते थे। मेरे मम्मी को पहले दिखता था। उनके सिर
में tumour हो गया था। उसके वजह से उनकी आखें चली गया था।
हमारे मामा ने दिल्ली में ज़ो सबसे बड़ा अस्पताल है उसमें इलाज
करवाया था, तो भी कुछ नहीं हुआ, नहीं आई ऑँखें वापिस। फिर
हमारी मामी ने बोला कि एक आश्रम है और हमारी नानी ने हमें यहाँ
पर छोड़ दिया।
प्रश्न: NGO में क्या क्या अच्छा लगता है?
मोनाः NGO में सब लोग बहुत अच्छे लगते हैं।
प्रश्न: सबसे अच्छा कौन लगता है?
मनाः पहले एक दीदी थे, राजेश्ररी दीदी, फिर उनकी शादी हो गई तो
फिर उनके बाद टीना दीदी आ गए। वो बहुत
अच्छे लगते हैं।
प्रश्न: आगे क्या करना चाहते हो?
मोना: पता नहीं
प्रश्नु: आप स्कूल जाते थे उस समय जब मम्मी के साथ थे?
मोना: नहीं। जब नाना थे तब हम जाते थे फिर नाना की
और हमारा स्कूल छूट गया।
हो गई
मृत्यु
प्रश्न: कोई खास अनुभव जो आपके साथ हुआ हो यहाँ, आप बताना
चाहते हो?
मोना: श्रीमाताजी की यहाँ पर नवरात्रि पूजा हुई थी गुड़गाँव में। वहाँ पर
प्रश्न: यहाँ आने के बाद आत्म-साक्षात्कार कैसे मिला आपको?
मोनाः हम सब सुबह ध्यान करते थे। देख-देख के हमें भी आ गया।
आ मातीजिी आए थे। सब हपजि दे रहे थे श्रीमाताजी को। मैंने भी कहा.
श्रीमाताजी मुझे भी आपके पास आना है हपि देने।" तो उस समय में
प्रश्न: जो ये आत्म-साक्षात्कार मिला, उसके बाद कोई बदलाव लगता है.
आपको पहले और अभी में?
मोनाः डर नहीं लगता। बड़ा अच्छा लगता है।
म
भी गयी थी।
प्रश्न: यहाँ आने के बाद आपको कोई परेशानी हुई?जैसे आप अपनी
मम्मी से
हो कर आ रहे थे यहाँ पर, कुछ बुरा लगता था?
दूर
मोनाः नहीं
Continued from pg 18
the building. Set aside space for Sadhana Didi at Palazzo Doria.
Organize kitchen for the children and teachers. The kitchen should be well furnished and equipped with
washing machines, cookers, etc...
They should have big laundry with washing machines and iron machines. For the school we have to
organize a school bus, we should have two school buses. She was happy to hear that he School Bus is arriving
of the12th and She wanted to see that.
She was happy to know that all the Sahajayogis of the world will and are going to help with the School
project in Cabella and Centrassi.
Om twameva sakshat Shri Vidya Devata Sakshat Shri Adishakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devyei Namo Namaha.
Source: http://www.sahajworldfoundation.org/en/index.php?option%=com_content&task-view&id-157&Itemid%-61
(१७
र
ও
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-23.txt 
 ে
Yuvadrishti December 2008
श्री माताजी द्वारा सहज योगियों को ध्यान धारणा
शुदी कैम्प, इंग्लैंड (१८-०६-८८)
यह सत्य ही है कि हम एक बहुत विचित्र समय से गुजर रहे हैं। यह अति महत्वपूर्ण है और हमें इसमें संघर्ष करना ही है। यह किसी भी लडे
गए युद्ध से कहीं ज्यादा है। यह अभी तक मानवों द्वारा किए गए किसी भी संघर्ष से बहुत बड़ा है । एक भयावह विश्व बना दिया गया है और
हमें ठीक करना है। यह एक विशाल कार्य है क्योंकि इसमें आपको पूरे अपनेपन तथा ईमानदारी से कार्य करना है और मुझे विश्वास है कि इस
विश्व के इतिहास में एक दिन आएगा जब सहजयोगियों का नाम स्वर्णा्षरों में लिखा जाएगा। मुझे विश्वास है कि यह हो पाएगा। मुझे
विश्वास है कि यह होगा ही और आप सबको यह पाना ही है, सामूहिकता में, एक मन तथा एक हृदय होकर। मैं क्या बलिदान दूँ?-मुझे क्या
करना चाहिए?में कैसे सहायता करू?मेरा सहयोग क्या है? मेरी इच्छा है कि मैं अपने जीवनकाल में यह समय देख सकेँ (जब सभी सहजयोगी
ऊपर बताए डंग से सोचे ।) अतः आज वह दिन है जब हम सबको अन्त्तवालोकन करना है।
| हैं।
कृपया आप सब अपनी आँखें बंद कर
लें। जैसे हम जन-कार्यक्रम में करते है
वैसे ही आज हम ध्यान करेंगे।
मैंने देखा है कि यदि पति अगूआ है तो
पत्नी को सहज योग का एक शब्द भी
नहीं आता। यदि पत्नी को सहज योग
का ज्ञान हे तो पांत इसके बारे में कुछ
नहीं जानता। प्रार्थना कीजिए कि:
"श्री माताजी, मुझे इस ज्ञान में निपुण
कीजिए, ताकि में लोगों को आत्म-
साक्षात्कार दे सकूँ तथा उन्हें देवी
कुंडलिनी व चक्रों के विषय में समझा
सकूं। श्री माताजी कृपा कीजिए कि
मेरा चित्त सांसारिक क्स्तुओं की
1000
बं
अपना बायां हाथ मेरी ओर करके
शरीर के बाएँ भाग में आप सब कार्य
करेंगे। सर्वप्रथम अपने हृदय पर दायां
हाथ रखना है। हृदय में शिव का
निवास है। आत्मा का स्थान है। अतः
अपनीआत्मा का धन्यवाद करना है
कि इसने आपके चित्त को प्रकाशमय
किया है। क्योंकि आप संत है। अतः
जो प्रकाश आपके हृदय में हुआ है उससे आपको पूरे विश्व को
ज्योतिर्मय करना है। अतः कृपया अपने हृदय में प्रार्थना कीजिए कि
'श्री माताजी, परमात्मा के प्रति मेरे प्रेम का प्रकाश पूरे विश्व में फैले।
अपने प्रति पूर्ण सच्चाई तथा समझदारी रखते हुए कि आप परमात्मा से
जुड़े हुए हैं और पूर्ण आत्मविश्वास से आप जो इच्छा करेंगे वह पूरी
होगी।
माव
य
क
अपेक्षा सहज योग में अधिक हो।"
अब दायां हाथ पेट के ऊपरी हिस्से पर बाई ओर रखें। आँखें बंद रखें।
पेट को हाथ से थोड़ा दबाएँ। यहाँ पर कहें कि:
॥श्री माताजी ने मुझे आत्मा प्रदान की है, वह आत्मा ही मेरी गुरु है।"
पूर्ण हृदय से कहें, "श्री माताजी, मैं स्वयं का गुरु हूँ। में किसी भी वस्तु
का असंयमित त्याग न करू। मेरे चरित्र में गरिमा और आचरण में
उदारता हो। अन्य सहज योगियों के लिए मुझमें करुणा तथा प्रेम हो। श्री
माताजी मुझमें बनावटीपन न हो। बल्कि परमात्मा के प्रेम तथा उसके
कार्यों का गहन ज्ञान मुझे हो ताकि जब लोग मेरे पास आएँ तो मैं उन्हें
प्रेम तथा नम्रता पूर्वक सहज योग के विषय में बता सकूँ और यह महान
अब अपना दायां हाथ अपने पेट के ऊपरी हिस्से पर बाई ओर रखें। यह
आपके धर्म का केंद्र है। यहाँ आपको कहना है कि:
श्री माताजी, विश्व निर्मला धर्म पूरे विश्व में फेले । हमारे धार्मिक जीवन
तथा धर्म परायणता लोगों को प्रकाश दिखाए। अपनी धर्म परायणता
लोगों को देखने दें ताकि वे विश्व निर्मला धर्म स्वीकार करें, जिसके द्वारा
ज्ञान उन्हें दे सके
उन्हें ज्ञान, हितैषिता, उच्च जीवन तथा उत्थान की इच्छा प्राप्त होती है।"
अब अपना दायों हाथ अपने हृदय पर रखें। यहाँ पूर्ण हृदय से कहें:
श्री माताजी, आनंद तथा क्षमा के सागर का आपने हमें जो अनुभव
प्रदान किया है, अपनी ही तरह अथाह क्षमाशीलता आपने हमें दी है। श्री
माताजी, उसके लिए आपको कोटी-कोर्टी प्रणाम। कृपा करके मेरे हृदय
अब अपना दायों हाथ अपने पेट के निचले हिस्से पर बाई ओर रखें। इसे
थोड़ा सा दबाएँ। यह आपकी शुद्ध विद्या का केंद्र है। सहज योगी होने के
नाते आप यह कहें कि परमात्मा की कार्य प्रणाली का पूर्ण ज्ञान हमें
हमारी श्री माताजी ने प्रदान किया है। हमारी सुझबूझ तथा सहनशक्ति के
अनुसार श्री माताजी ने हमें सारे मंत्र तथा शुद्ध विद्या दी है। हम सबको
पूर्ण ज्ञान होना चाहिए।
को इतना विशाल कीजिए कि पूरा ब्रह्मांड इसमें समा जाए। मेरा प्रेम
आपके नाम का गुंजन करे। मेरा हर श्वास में आपके प्रेम की संदर
अभिव्यक्ति हो।
1
২ 2
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-24.txt 
 व
Yuvadrishti December 2008
चाहिए। अब सहस्रार पर आपको मेरा धन्यवाद करना होगा अपना
दायाँ हाथ सहस्रार पर रख कर सात बार घड़ी की सुई की दिशा में इस
प्रकार घुमाएँ कि सिर की चमड़ी भी हलकी-हलकी घूमे। सात बार मेरा
धन्यवाद करें। कहें कि:
१. श्री माताजी, आत्म साक्षात्कार प्रदान करने के लिए हम आपके
आभारी हैं। आपको कोर्टी-कोटी प्रणाम ।
अब अपना दायाँ हाथ बाई विशुद्धि की ओर ले जाकर गर्दन और कंधे
के बीच में कोने में रखें। पूर्ण विश्वास के साथ कहें:
"में दोष भाव की असत्यता में लिप्त नहीं होऊँगा। क्योंकि मुझे मालूम
है कि यह झूठ है। अपने दोषों को मैं छिपाऊँगा नहीं, बल्कि उनका
सामना करके उनसे मुक्त होऊँगा। मैं दूसरों में दोष नहीं खोजूँगा। अपने
२. श्री माताजी, हमारी महानता हमें समझाने के लिए हम आपके
आभारी हैं। आपको कोटी-कोटी प्रणाम।
३. श्री माताजी, परमात्मा के सभी आशीर्वाद हम तक लाने के लिए
हम आपके आभारी हैं। आपको कोटी-कोटी प्रणाम।
४. श्री माताजी, तुच्छता से उठाकर उच्च स्थिति पर लाने के लिए हम
आपके आभारी है। आपको कोटी-कोटी प्रणाम
।" हम इतने सारे तरीक़े
सहज योग के ज्ञान द्वारा उन्हें दोष-मुक्त करूगा
जानते हैं कि उनसे हम गुप्त रूप से दूसरों के दोषों को दूर कर सकते
हैं।
श्री माताजी, मेरी सामूहिकता को इतना महान बनाइए कि पूर्ण सहज
योग जाति मेरा परिवार, मेरे बच्चे, मेरा घर तथा मेरा सर्वस्व बन जाएँ।
क्योंकि हम सब की एक ही माँ हैं। अत: मुझमें पूरी तरह तथा अंतर्जात
रूप से यह जागृत हो जाए कि मैं विराट का ही अंग-
प्रत्यंग हू। मेरे विचारों में पूरे विश्व की समस्याओं को जानने की तथा
५. श्री माताजी, जो आश्रय आपने हमें प्रदान किया तथा आत्मोन्नति के
लिए जो सहायता आपने कृपा करके हमें दी उसके लिए हम हृदय
से आपके आभारी हैं। आपको कोटी-कोटी प्रणाम।
६. श्री माताजी, हम हृदय से आभारी हैं कि आप पृथ्वी पर अवतरित
हुए, मानव जन्म लिया और हम सबके उत्थान के लिए घोर परिश्रम
कर रहे हैं। आपको कोटी-कोटी प्रणाम।
७. श्री माताजी, हमारा रोम-रोम आपका ऋणी हैं। आपको कोटी-
कोटी प्रणाम ।
अपनी शुद्ध इच्छा तथा शक्ति से उनका समाधान करने का प्रयोजन हो।
विश्व की समस्याओं को मैं अपने हृदय में महसूस करू और सहज रूप
से उनको जड़ से, जहाँ से वे शुरू हुई हैं, ख़त्म करने की कोशिश करू ।
मुझे इन समस्याओं के मूल तक पहुँचाइए ताकि मैं अपनी सहज सुलभ
शक्तियों द्वारा इन्हें दूर करने का प्रयास करू।
जি
इसे ज़ोर से दबाएँ । इसे ज़ोर से घुमाएँ। अब अपना हाथ नीचे ले आएँ।
सिर बहुत गर्म हैं। अब हम अपने आप को एक सुंदर सा बंधन देगे। माँ
अब अपने दायाँ हाथ से अपने माथे को आड़ा पकड़िए, यहां पर
आपको पहले कहना होगा किः
"श्री माताजी, मैं उन सभी लोगों को क्षमा करता हूँ जो सहज योग में
नहीं आए हैं, जो अभी परिधि रेखा पर हैं, जो आते हैं और जाते हैं, जो
कभी सहज-सागर के अंदर कूदते हैं और कभी इससे बाहर। परंतु
सर्वप्रथम में सारे सहज योगियों को क्षमा करता हूँ, क्योंकि वे सब मुझसे
कहीं ज़्यादा अच्छे हैं। मैं ही उनके दोष खोजने की चेष्टा करता हूँ पर
के बंधन के लिए हम अपनी बाईं नाड़ी को दाई तरफ़ डालेंगे। पहला,
अच्छे से। जानिए आप क्या हैं। आपके प्रभामंडल (ऋहद्ध्छ) क्या हैं।
अब दूसरा, तीसरा, चौथा, पाँचवाँ, छठा और अंत में अब सातवाँ ।
अब आप अपनी कुंडलिनी को धीरे-धीरे ऊपर उठाएँ- बहुत धीरे-धीरे।
अपने सिर को थोड़ा पीछे करें और उसको वहाँ एक गाँठ बाँध दें। पुनः
कुंडलिनी को दूसरी बार ऊपर उठाएँ धीरेधी रे यह जानते हुए कि आप
कौन है, आप एक संत हैं। इसको आराम से करें, जल्दबाज़ी न करें।
अपने सिर को थोड़ा पीछे करें और उसको वहाँ दो गाँठें बाँध दें अब
तीसरी बार । सिर के ऊपर उसको तीन बार बाँधें। अब अपनी चैतन्य-
लहरियों को महसूस करें। अपनी चैतन्य-लहरियों को सिर के ऊपर सब
महसूस करें। बहुत सुंदर । मुझे आप लोगों से चैतन्य-लहरियाँ आ रही
हैं।
वास्तव में में उन सबसे तुच्छ हूँ। मुझे स्वयं को सुधारना है।
यह नम्रता हममें आनी चाहिए, अतः यहाँ आपको कहना होगा किः
श्री माताजी, मेरे हृदय में बनावटीपने को हटा कर सच्ची नम्रता व
क्षमा भाव उत्पन्न करें ताकि मैं वास्तविकता, परमात्मा तथा सहज योग
के प्रति नतमस्तक हो जाऊँ।
अब अपना दायों हाथ सिर के पीछे के भाग पर रखें। सिर को अपने
हाथ पर पीछे की ओर झुका लें। यहाँ पर आप कहे कि:
"श्री माताजी, अभी तक आपके प्रति हमने जो भी अपराध किए हैं,
हमारे मस्तिष्क में जो भी बुराई आती है, जो भी तुच्छता आपके प्रति
दिखाई है, किसी भी प्रकार से आपको दुख पहुँचाया है या आपको
चुनौती दी है तो कृपा करके हमें क्षमा कर दीजिए
परमात्मा का अनंत आशीर्वाद।
आपको क्षमा माँगनी पड़ेगी। अपने विवेक से आपको जानना चाहिए
कि मैं क्या हूँ। मुझे बार-बार यह बताने की आवश्यकता नहीं होनी
७
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Cabella Sahaja Primary School in Centrassi
