The Divine Cool Breeze July and Äugust 2008 volume twenty-one numiber four

 This place is called as Bhavasagara. It is the ocean of illusion in which we live. And we are seekers.... If we are in the ocean, our ship should be seaworthy. Then any kind of illusion is not going to deter us if we are seaworthy. But seaworthy means we must know if there is a fog, how to move in right direction. We should know how to overcome all the hazards of all kinds of storms and all the knowledge should be built-in within us. And that built-in knowledge is this dharma. It is a religion within you - not without, but within you. Navigate

 5- Within us there is a complete map of what we are going to become. Like the ship is built, is brought to the sea, tried and found to be seaworthy to sail out now into the sea, so you have to sail out when you know everything about the ship, everything about the sea. With complete freedom and wisdom, you have to sail now, 50 you not afraid of any storms or any hails or any typhoons because now you know your job through. is to cross LEGEND 2 Mother's Day 6 Diwali Puja 2007 18 Thoughtless Now 24 God Created 26 The Journey 32 Bhavasagara

 talians are remarkable. You are very loving people... Mother's Day was celebrated last year. That was the first time. I never knew that you people believed in the Mother's Day Mother's Day... because this is a very big thing to thank Cabella Ligure 11 May 2008 Mother.... I am happy because this is a very big thing to thank Mother.... You have been very kind. I can't say anything. I'm so full of love and full of feel- ings that I can't say anything except that it is something that I never expected. And so many Indian girls are married here and there will be more coming. Also you people should marry Indian girls and come to India. Nobody believes Me that people ... of this country or of your countries have any love for the mother. any one Nobody believes in you because they have not known such people, such nice people who are Italians, you see. Now they are amazed how you are showing your love for your Mother - amazed. In India really they can't under- the Italians have come to become stand it how the yogis, so much obliged to Mother. They can't understand. It's a very big thing that has happened, a very big understanding for Italians now, all over - a big under- standing. 2.

 I'm so full I don't know what to say. And there are all these children. And I always wanted to come to Italy. I know the reason must be this. So may God bless you. +a

 And meditate and see what beautiful hearts you have got. You have given Me such love that I really don't know what to say. It's just like My own children here.

 decide that we shall never commi. write poems Нарру Happy Diwali. I wish you all a very happy Diwali. You saw all these varieties of dances. Take a lesson from them that whoever it was or whoever has composed or spoken of it have all been speaking of the same thing. And the most important thing that they all spoke about was that the Paramatma (God Almighty) is one. They all incarnated in different forms, but the Paramatma is one. There is no dispute amongst them. They incarnate on Earth to bring about the destruction of evil and to condemn the bad people – and this is happening everywhere. I find everywhere all the evil people are getting exposed. And now it is your duty also to identify those who are evil-doers, working against the will of God and who can go to any extent for the sake of money. They all will go to hell. We are not aware of how many hells exist. The environment in which you are seated, the place where you are sitting is far away from hell. This has no relation to hell at all. But by being here, if you practise adharm or commit wrongs, then it can also lead you to hell. There are several types of hells and arrangements are also done up very well to get there. Because the people who there do not know where are they going - and those who are saved they go go to the heaven - so nobody knows on this level of Earth that he has to go to hell. We will go to hell if we commit wrong. Independence of the Self And the meaning of Diwali is this: that, as the lamps are lit outside, similarly they should be lit within you. And you must also realize that you are like the lights in this world of darkness. You are the lamps and you have to emit the light. But if it has not been able to be enlightened fully from within, then how can you emit light? Think it over, too. That is why in the first place, the Sahaja Yogis should ensure that the light is fully established. And possibly it could be the means by which we have translated from Hindi, ar preblished in Chaitanya Lahiri come to this world. Until Jesus Christ no one ever spoke of these matters. January-Felruary 2008 He descended at the level of Agnya Chakra and revealed to the world that

 dishonesty even if we have to die. on honesty Diwali Puja • 10 November 2007 • Delhi He did not have any ego within Him. He was the son of the Almighty, yet He had no ego. Those who came before Him barely revealed anything, while Jesus Christ desired that our Agnya chakra be set right. And that Agnya chakra catches too much in your Delhi. What could be the reason? At first the English came here to stay and then the Englishmen taught us how to be ghamand (proud and egoistical). It can easily be made out from discussions. I have also seen all those days when our country was depen- your Today's speech dent (upon them), but you have come out of that dependency. Now there is swatantranta (independence). And what is swatantranta? Swa – to know is a little your own Self and whoever has known his own Self, he knows the tantra (the mechanism or system) of his swa (to master the knowledge of the system different. that drives the Self). Through Sahaja Yoga you have come to know about yourself. And now you know that you are the tantra. Therefore, you have to It is unique. be guided by that tantra yourself. There has been a lot of development in Delhi that is visible. A lot of it has also been done beyond Delhi. The shortcomings and the faults in the people here are known to you. I need not tell you that. Now that you have become swatantra (independent), you should ensure that whether you possess such faults in you or not, the first and foremost trouble is that your own Agnya Chakra is catching. Jesus Christ died. He was put on the cross, yet we did not learn anything from it. On the contrary, wherever there are Christian countries, they possess tremendous ego in them. They had their influence on us too. But the worst part here is that now we do not recognize each other. There is quarrelling everywhere fights everywhere. There is no purity of mind amongst each other. So the first thing is that our minds are to be purified. Everything is pos- sible in Sahaja Yoga. People can reach any position from anywhere. It is not necessary to go and sit in the Himalayas for that reason. You can do it in this city of Delhi itself. But if you look around, you will find egoistical people. They have their Agnya chakra severely caught up. So it is really very difficult.

 Now God has sent one new thing called cancer. If you are caught up with cancer and in case your Agnya chakra is not set right, then it can never be cured. Instead there will be trouble. That is why those who have cancer should take to Sahaja Yoga and try great to get rid of the ego that is possessed within because wherever you have government, ego creeps into the people. We have so many government servants here and they have a lot of within them. But it is more prominent with the people who have come from outside. ego They are veterans in comparison to the ones that we have here. And on top of it, they all take alcohol. Just imagine they call themselves Christians, yet they all consume alcohol. So by taking alcohol, you are going against yourself only. You are opposing your own Agnya chakra. You are not accepting it. The person whose Agnya chakra has been cleared, he can never take alcohol. He can never ever consume alcohol. You find people everywhere taking alcohol and they have no remedy cither to overcome it. Instead they prefer to consume it. Stealing and corruption When you are Any sort of bad habit [laat] puts us in slavery be it of any kind. Now there is a severe addiction to chewing paan (betel leaves with betel nuts) here and then adding tobacco not all into it. Just imagine God has created you with such great affection to be born in this country so that you could become unique from the rest of the world. It is possible. Only yourself, then Hindustanis are like that. Bur now I find a few diseases [bimari] are more pronounced in them- that is, they eat money instead of meals (earn money illegally through corruption). how can the Now, the road by which we came here was not there earlier, but it pained Me so much to find that such a road has been constructed now and no one can claim that it is new. This right can be done by the Indians only. I have not seen such shameless people anywhere else in the world who could do such acts and they are of no use at all. Anyone with a higher status with respect to the other can do such acts here at any time. Therefore, today we have to swear in the first place that we have to get our Agnya all right. The greatest play at the Agnya level is that we start thinking that we are the best and we believe that we can rule over the world, we can reform the world. When right yourself, then how can the world be set right? Well, you must have seen a number of people who respect and place you in high esteem and yet commit a lot of wrong. In this country people earn money illegally through corruption (paise khatey hain]. Tell Me how shall God ever forgive us. The greatest of all sins committed are stealing and (earning money illegally through corruption). The person who commits these types of offenses, you may try anything on him he may try anything, offer pujas, prayers, chant mantras, recite text from holy scriptures, read namaz, pray in the name of Allah or he may do any such thing - nothing is going to be of any use to him. world be set right? you are not all khana paise гурes IS Lies and dishonesty Today is your new year. I wish you all the best. And I want to take a resolution that from today onwards we will not tell lies. Never ever will you tell lies. I have been to places across the world and I learnt that Indians are infamous everywhere as great liars. I do not understand why such brandings have come upon our country that people are liars. Here we had so many great saints and prophets, where so many became Sufis. I wonder how people could speak so many lies here. So you promise today that you will not tell lies whatever may be the consequences, For that, you need courage. But now that you are realized, what more courage do you need? You cannot lie. And when you become like this, then only people will have faith in you, that these people are truthful. you

 HONESTY So the Sahaja Yogis have to be truthful. In whatever occupation - may be in business. or whatever, he may be an engineer constructing roads or a doctor treating people spite of all these, yer it will be hell for you if you still lie. Now you have transformed own self, now that you are realized now. So the realized people, if they ever lie, they can never derive any benefit out of it.I feel sad when I hear about our country abroad, that people of this country are great frauds, liars and earn money by illegal means. in your great Today is your very auspicious day. Today you should all take an oath thar we will never ever lie whatever may come. I, Myself am a woman and that too of India. I have never told a lie. By lying you only would be at a loss. By deceitful actions you only will be at a loss. By all these means, even if you afford to earn a little more or you pursue petty objectives by feigning, yet you can never go to heaven. You will land up in hell. It is very important to know that there is a very bad reputation about our country across the world. Why is there a bad reputation? Because we have such type of people here. When you come to know that someone is a liar, you must form a committee and approach him to inquire, "Hello Mister, what is the matter?" For example, supposing a road is constructed that has not been constructed properly, then set up an inquiry to investigate the expenditure incurred and then be after them to see what they are doing about it. Earning such money illegally will ultimately be used for consuming alcohol only, which is our enemy. Why do you want all this? You have a very good living standard, but there are many countries where people are poor, yet I found them to be honest. So honesty is the first thing. Today it should be ensured that we shall not commit dishonesty any more. Also we shall not be in the company of dishonest people and if anyone commits dishonesty, we report it. Now it is like this: people complain, "Mother, similar incidents prevail in the police force" or "Such cases are reported there also." But you are Sahaja Yogis. Those who are Sahaja Yogis are by no means any less than a policeman or any person with a high position. They may possess great powers within them, but the entire powers are of truth only. Truthfulness should be there. I am very glad that a lot of Sahaja Yogis are very truth- ful, but we still need more Sahaja Yogis who can become truthful. will Beyond slavery Truthfulness is a very important aspect or else you can never get rid of your Agnya. The WVe can Agnya is there where you have something as the ego. When ego develops in a person he may commit any offences (blunders), any sin, can harm anyone, carn illegally by corrup- no more tion. They all will go to hell. I want to warn you that you should never indulge in earn- ing illegally by corruption. You are not dying, for that matter. What have you done by remain slaves. earning more? What are you doing? You may have fitted a few more extra bulbs to light up your house or kept a few more women to give you company-that's all, nothing more than that. Now what will be your condition when you go to hell? I am discussing all this on this day of Diwali because Diwali was celebrated on the occasion when Sitaji returned to reunite with Shri Rama. Once we imbibe the character within, then we can not more remain slaves any more. We are our own slaves only and, of course, not of the others. One should not lie for any reason. I have stayed in Delhi for a long time and I am so astonished to see how much the people lie here. My God - they are not at all afraid. Speaking blatant lies at face and suing benefit out of it, may probably help him achieve something here. It may even help pur- him earn a few extra rupees, but for sure he never can go to heaven.

 I want the Sahaja Yogis to promise that from today onwards, neither we will ever lie nor we will ever support the liar. People speak about our country, that we are very dishonest. Everywhere I have trav- elled into far remote areas and found that the people of Russia are the best amongst them. They are indeed half-Sahaja Yogis already and many are Sahaja Yogis as well. I could not go to Russia this year. I shall definitely visit next year. However, this means that we could not harness democracy. We too should have been communist. There are no perty offenses or crime [chori chakari] in those places, no lies and they all love you. There is great respect for Me too. But it is to be understood, after all, where we are leading. Just for the sake of earning a few more (rupees), where are we going? What are we going to achieve? Therefore, in the first place you must be honest. Your dishonesty will cause trouble to your own people only. People blame India, claiming that pcople of this place are very dishonest. I am ashamed to hear all this. You have had so many great saints, so many great souls in the past and people here are very corrupt and cheat a lot and criticize. So, right at the beginning only, your Agnya is scared. People will become very rich and wealthy. You will find at the end of the day, Mr. Rich is making his journey into hell. Today I want to rell you that Diwali means that the hell is dark and you have become the light. What is expected of you is that you should fight it out wherever there is darkness and announce what is wrong. With this, our country will improve. And this is yet another job that you have to carry out. We are already performing pujas and rituals. That is all right, but the innate power which we have within us is the one which stands opposed to all that is untrue. Many people are unaware that earning (illegal) money is a disease and they will go directly to hell. I am telling you all this because no one spoke about it like this before. I am telling you on the day of Diwali that we are going to celebrate the joy and light the lamps within our hearts. In it, with that light, we can see who is what and who is cheating. We have to Fighting and quarrels Now, I find one fighting with the other. Fights amongst Hindus and Muslims are now over, while the fighting of others has begun. It means there is another issue: we are very quarrelsome as well. At least in the other countries one does not have religions of so many countries. But, here at our place, whenever you get an opportunity you start a fight. Fighting becomes the priority. Fighting is between husband and wife, then amongst children and then, if there is someone else with them, it is with them too. What is Sahaja Yoga? Sahaja Yoga is love. It is love. Awaken that power of love that is within us. Today is a very auspicious day and we have to light the lamps in our hearts and take up the resolution that, even if we have to die, we won't tell lies. We already have such people with us. But it has earned such a bad reputation across the world that the Indians are basically dishonest. Well, I have never at least seen ane, but whenever I hear of it, I feel very sad. India is such a holy place where so many great saints have taken their birth, as nowhere else. Sufis are there who were born here, all those who became great. They all were from India only. No other countries had such a number of great souls. A few countable ones have been there, but we had many great souls here. But subsequently, leave aside light the lamps in our hearts. their SL may whatever they taught us, we became branded as cheats and frauds. Yet the offence of cheating is sustained. They can never ascend to heaven. And what- ever is the lifespan one may have here, he will have to spend a thousand times more lifespans than this in hell.

 HONESTY The darkness of hell The reason I am speaking about hell on this day is only because the hell means the dark- ness and that is the hell that we witness. Now your lamps are lit. In that light, you must recognize the types of hells. You must support the government. Try to help to identify the dishonest. You may be in a junior or a senior position in society, but you must speak out as to who are the culprits. You must catch the culprits. Expose those who are liars. Now you have the powers with you - for what purpose? You are awakened. For what that light, you must see yourself. In the darkness nothing was visible, but watch light to see for yourself what you are. And what are you going to achieve by telling lies? We are householders. Whenever you are compelled to lie, you have the powers within you, you are all lamps. You should see judge them in this darkness. You are the lamps and the lamps are to sustain the light. We have to wipe out this darkness. We all have earned a bad name from far across. Well, nowhere on Earth will you find people like that of our country. I am in pain when I learn what a gross misunderstanding people have developed about us. And what does one achieve by dishonesty? God knows! And what- ever is pursued is horrible. No one will be spared. Whoever has become dishonest will be caught. There are arrangements for all that. You have received your Realization because you are not dishonest. You love truth and respect the truth. I want that you should stand purpose did you have the enlightenment? In your own on truth. Now for example, these days people throw litter into Yamunaji (the River Yamuna). It means they are stupid. Yamunaji directly descends down to hell, but you will be saved from that hell. You are realized souls. The ones who have the light with them, they gener- ally do not descend. But if you really want to establish Sahaja Yoga fully within yourself, then you have to swear in the beginning that you will never commit dishonesty of any гуpe. Passion to earn money seems to be the only business left out in this world. What is the outcome? Nobody even remembers them. If you love your country, then in the first place you muLst establish the truth or else where lays the trust for love from a person who is a liar? It is a great struggle for you when you realize "our neighbour is of such a so let us also become like that." туpe, But on the contrary, why don't we ever think that we are like this, so why can't we mold our neighbour also like us? First of all, today let us promise that we will never commit any dishonesty nor support any dishonest person. I do not know why, but false- hood seems to be a curse on our country. There are several people who speak at least ten lies right from morning until evening, yet it does not satisfy them. Beyond lies and liars your state of poverty has gone. Everything seems to be all right. You have enough to eat. None of you is a beggar either, yet why do you have to tell lies? So take a decision of this day that we shall not tell lies any more and, if anyone is a liar, we shall not support that person. We shall not have any relationship with him. There is plenty of happiness and great joy in it. Are you aware that a liar will have to go to hell and you too will have to follow him from behind? God has awakened you (through Self Realization). You have the light within you. You must see in that light. If like-minded people like you take up a firm decision of nor lying, whatever may be the consequences, even if our heads are chopped off - in these matters the Indians are very good. I know that, but when I hear such things abroad, then I feel very sad. Now 11

 Now for example, the way this road has been constructed, does it resemble a road by any means? It seemed to Me as if I was travelling in the forest. Whenever you come across such things, you have an organization; you all collectively should inquire who was involved behind such construction. Why was it constructed that way? Who consumed the money? All of you, Sahaja Yogis, should get united and try to focus your attention in that direction to drive out the bhoots who have intruded into India. Wherever you go, Nurturing people say, "Brothers, don't believe in the Indians." What a shameful thing to speak s about. The irony is in whom one should trust the most are we, the Indians. Never- truthfulness is theless, we had several people who became great leaders, great people and great souls, very essential - but we have ignored them and their great fame that they enjoyed, also the amount respect people had for them. They have respect for you too - I know that- but truth in every you should never stand together with the cheats to extend support. The moment you realize that a certain person is a cheat, immediately avoid accepting any invitation for of having meals at his place. It will become difficult for the cheats to survive. matter. I am telling you that you are all the police force of God. Keep track of all those cheats that you come across. Try to inculcate the courage in your children as well. If someone is doing wrong or telling lies, track them. This very country of ours has been blessed (jagrut) along with the advent of a number of saints – and you all are saints. There is basically no need for you to tell lies. Well, what is going to happen if you have meals only once a day? No one dies if he forgoes a meal. We have food to eat and drink, but over and above they take alcohol. By taking alcohol, we take another step forward. We will ultimately be destroyed by it. The benefits of honesty If there is alcohol we can never be all right. Now for example, in America, they always come up with newer issues, that as their child turns sixteen years of age he becomes a burden to them. This means they are all like servants. They are paid for their works they do, for example servicing vehicles and so on. And what do they claim at their age of sixteen? "Well, we have now turned sixteen and so it is the time to go out for a living." I have seen this happening with the poor children of sixteen everywhere, whereas we (in India) think, "He is just turning sixteen, where is he going to go? What should pursue next for his study?" Well, he has become sixteen years of age, so he is driven out of the house both by his mother as well as father. How long is this going to last with the Americans? You have to see for yourself. They are in ruins. Nobody becomes great by buying one or two airplanes. Where do you think you are? What are your ultimate limitations [aukat]? Hindusthan is such a country that it can save the entire world – the entire world. But there should be truthfulness in it. To imbibe the truthfulness is very essential truthfulness in every matter. What is the need for nurturing falsehood? I can't under- stand – people who are mostly rich should first of all realize that they are rich. So it is better, sit back quietly and stop thinking of earning any more. Who is happy by carning a lot of money? I have yet to see any one of them to this day. You are a Sahaja Yogi and you have the light within you. In the light you can see your own path and the path is of truth. May you be a Muslim, a Hindu or a Chris- tian. It makes no difference. You all are human. And if honesty is lacking within a human being, then he is dishonest. No one will recognize him. he

 HONESTY We do have life beyond this also. How will that be? There are many benefits of hon- greatest of all is thar you have the blessings [ashirwad) of God on you. Blessings esty. The come upon you effortlessly in such a manner that you will be astonished to realize it. Everything gets done on its own – effortlessly [baithe bithay). But now in India, however may the person be or may nor be, all of them run money. There are still many poor around. That is why today should be the Diwali celebra- tions for them too. They too should be happy. We are citizens of that same country, we have been deceiving ourselves only, We are very clever. By this, ego develops within us. And when ego is developed, nobody can save by any means. You will develop cancer with ego. Thus, you will not be able to save yourself. If you develop cancer, you cannot save yourself. I cannot save you. I am relling you the truth. At first, the ego that you possess within, burn it in a fire. Next, be ashamed if you have ego. "Ego for what, Mister?" We have it for everything in our country. For example, someone who graduates with a BA degree, he develops ego. Acquiring some other quali- fication higher than that gives him double ego. Someone achieves something, graduates. s an engineer or a doctor, he develops ego. Thus, when this Agnya chakra gets caught, where does it ultimately lead you to? To hell and hell is a very horrible place. God has nobody spoke blessed you with intelligence and now you have got your Realization. Still if you want to go to the hell, you can go. Until this day nobody spoke about it or told after but Until this day about it. you. The promise of honesty Today - the day is considered auspicious because several great events happened. For example, Sitaji returned home, during the period of Ramachandraji, during Krishna's times and several other great events that took place. They were all worked out by these great realized souls. That is why, in the first place, you must take an oath today that "We will not commit dishonesty any more for sure and if anyone does, then we shall ensure that he is caught." But I find the blacks are at war with the whites in this country-any one fighting with the other. What they want is India to be divided into fragments. It is not going difference. How is it going to benefit? It is only when you remain honest and you possess a good moral character. Whatever you have learnt from the British, there is nothing worth learning from them. They are all in a bad state these days. But we have to save our own country and also to make any to save the entire world. It is a great responsibility. You have been realized and the light has come within you. Yet if you want to jump into the ditch, then what can anyone do? Everyone should come up together to make an effort. I want the Sahaja Yogis to constitute a committee. In case you come across any cheat- ing, you should report to the committee. Then let us see what the committee does. In this way, you will be recognized. In this way, you will be elevated to higher positions. So first of all, you should not become dishonest and also prevent others from becom- ing. This is very important. It is a great blemish on your country. There is adulteration in the edible oil, adulteration in the ghee. At every nook and corner you will find people laughing at us in mockery. No one has faith in us. In fact, the best of the people are in India. Nowhere, so many people have not been realized. They have not earned any punyas. Therefore, it is nobler to earn punyas than to earn money. There are innumerable poor people. Look at them. So today is a very auspicious day and also a day of anand. Why joy? Because on this day we are blessed with heaven and we desire to be in heaven only. But cowards can never ascend to heaven. There is no need to be scared of anything. 13

 Well, what on Earth is going to happen if you earn a few paise less or more? All of you have become rich. I can see that. I have been coming here for the past seventeen or eighteen years now. All of you have become richer than before. The standard of living now has become better than before. But from morning until evening there is dishonesty, dis- honesty and dishonesty. Thus the path is laid before you. All right, just take a resolution today that we shall not do any dishonesty and, if there is anyone, then we shall collectively oppose him. Why were you blessed with Sahaja Yoga? Why were you given Realization? It was because you will emit light. If you do not possess light within, then how can you enlighten the outside? And focus that light to realize whether you are helping the dishonest? Noth- ing happens if you earn a little less or more. If you are honest, then God helps you. Why do so many people die in our country and nowhere else? The reason behind it is that they As you are remembering the Sufis, are to go to hell. So you should know thar if you commit dishonesty, then you have already established your first step to hell and you don't need to utter lies in the second place at all. You must speak the truth. The man who speaks the truth becomes unique. If he practises Sahaja Yoga, then it can be remarkable. Like today, as you are remembering the Sufis, similarly people will remember you. You don't need to do anything- only expose those who are dishonest. That is important. People are protesting here over the issue of the dumping of garbage [kachda] into the Yamunaji. Don't throw this or that. Now, is this also to be taught? I have been to so many countries. Nowhere is waste disposed into any river. Then why are you so lazy? There are so many facilities available over here, like you can hand it over to the municipality or dis- pose of it elsewhere. But if you are accumulating the waste yourself, then what can you similarly people will remember you. do? The resolution of honesty All of you should think in your mind and decide today. It is a very good day today. It is a good day to dedicate that neither we shall ever commit any dishonesty nor shall we accept the dishonest. I have seen such people who neither were dishonest themselves nor ever visited the house of any dishonest person. They never kept any connection with them. By šuch action, they not only ensured their wellbeing in their own interest, but also helped the entire natrion. Now you are a Sahaja Yogi. It is expected you should promise that we shall never commit any dishonesty. You just have to recognize the dishonest and only confide in your inner spirit that he is dishonest. And for the Sahaja Yogis- even if twelve Sahaja Yogis can get united together, realize that this particular person is dishonest, then God is with you. The welfare of this country cannot be improved merely by a handful of rich people, but with honest people, certainly it can. So the greatest drawback is the blemish on us that we are dishonest. And those who are Sahaja Yogis can never be dishonest by any means. This is My belief. We all have to united. Leave aside all differences. And that we are all honest people, India's reputa- get tion is very much tarnished. That is why take a vow from today that we shall not commit dishonesty and if there is any other dishonest, we shall collectively be after him. He will experience a sleepless night right on the very next day. Nevertheless, it has far. I tell you I am astonished. There is dishonesty in everything - dishonesty in every- thing. In the earlier days people used to outcast others on very petry matters and boycott on every minor issue, yet our country remained so honest. Why have we forgotten such great qualities? Where have they all gone? I find there is dishonesty everywhere. There is dishonesty at every step. any gone too

 HONESTY You must teach the children here that they should not become dishonest. In case there are, or in the utter case of dying or say, dying out of hunger, suitable arrangements can be made available provided they are honest- and if honesty is not there, then leave aside God, no one is going to help you. You will have all kinds of diseases of the world on you. Likewise our country has developed several good traditions, so many of them. For example, they will take alcohol, drink liquor, just imagine. Have you come here to be stupid fools? And one who does it, avoid being friendly to him. Don't support him. I have observed with the person who takes alcohol, when others visit his house and they also start taking alcohol with him. But if you realize that people are like this or realize that this person is dishonesr, then stop visiting his house on the invitation for having meals. You have no business with him. We have to work towards the benevolence of our country because God has already given us the light. See in that light. His powers are tremendous. If you accept fact only, that those who had been dishonest to the nation will be taken care of by God, that is enough. But you become a deaf person. You are not able to understand at all. Such people can neither contribute nor can ever deliver anything good. I don't understand how they live so shamelessly. I don't know how, but they do live. For that reason, the message of today for you is that you should take a vow today that we shall never ever commit any dishonesty and if someone is found dishonest, then we shall not support him. That is enough. Many more realized souls will come to our coun- try. But who wvould prefer to come to such a dishonest country like this? EC this very The vow of honesty The only message for you today is that you have the light within and you navigate in that light and that is going to provide you the strength. Whatever you may wish, you are wel- come. Look, we have achieved our swatantrata. Swa-tantra - try to know own Self). Now I want many children to be born. They should be realized. That is why you You have the your swa (your must realize at the beginning, today is a great day. Take a vow today that neither will we commit any dishonesty nor be in the company of the dishonest or be scared of them. God is not there with them. God is with you. If you are good, then God is with you. Those light within who were born in this land of India- of course, it was not merely for the sake of fighting amongst each other and dying. Great idiots [mahamurkh) – we fight each other and then and you have die. You must tell the people there is no use in fighting. "Well, my dear brothers, what are you fighting for? What do you want? Why? After all, what do you want? You have all to navigate in nice things to eat and drink. That's enough. What more do you want?" But nowadays the demands are like "Well, I need that dress, I want that type of house and not this." Are we that light. going to take along all those belongings to hell? At this moment, like those who had become Sufis, you too are all Sufis because you have been cleansed. Now all of you should write poems - on honesty. This dishonesty needs to exit in the first place and secondly, there are several issues that need to be taken care of. But first of all, do not commit dishonesty. No one is that needs to commit dishonesty. I am saying that there is a blemish on our country and it needs to be wiped out. And you are Sahaja Yogis. You can do it. You have the light with you. With this light, you can spread the light everywhere. Instill courage in everyone, assuring them that everything is all right. Particularly those who are young amongst you, who have friends, all of them should think about the possible ways that they could contribute towards honesty. poor in India that he 15

 HONESTY Giving courage to all Now there is a campaign initiated not to dump anything into Yamunaji. That is all right, but it is not as important. The important thing is losing your hon- esty. That is why this day is considered auspicious everywhere. Lamps are lit at places. Everything can be done and if we can't do this, then what is the use of being a Sahaja Yogi? The largest collective of Sahaja Yogis is in India - the largest collectivity. Next to it is in Russia. Now the Russians are very They do not commit any petty offences like cheating or stealing [chori cha- karil. Don't understand why? Maybe if communism influences us here, then probably we too would have become like them. But that does not make very big sense. It is not good to impose anything out of compulsion. Let us impose it on ourselves. Decide it for good. Resolve it [nischay] from today onwards. Today is a very good day, that neither shall we commit dishonesty nor ler others commit dishonesty. Your country will become very prosperous. And after all what a country is, I have seen all other countrics. All are useless people. But the people of our country still have a lot of dharma in them. The dharma here has been destroyed, since the dishonest people became all powerful jabardast). So there is only one message today, that neither we will ever commit dishonesty nor allow others to commit dishonesty. But the people here are very tolerant in this matter. They tolerate. This is the greatest mistake. When you have got the light, then why are you afraid? What is the reason for you to be afraid? That is why I am requesting you today to workout everything with courage. And now you have got a kind of swatan- trata (freedom). You will attain the knowledge of the tantra (the system which drives) of the swa (Self). You have already attained it, but try to make use of it. humble. God is thnere to support that everyone. Never to be dishonest Today so many of you have gathered here. I never had seen so many in Delhi before. Thus, every one of you should decide today in your mind that we will not tolerate any dishonest person at all. And that is the reason why all the rak- shasas also take their birth - because they believe something or other is there within us, which will compel us to accept them. Indians should never accept them. And besides them, those who are realized souls, especially they should never ever (accept). There is a great infamy [lunchhan] on our country everywhere. But this is not true. There are many people in India who are honest- very honest. But that is not true. Nevertheless, I have seen certain things. There will be differ- ences amongst each other- "This land is mine and that land is yours." Well whatever is yours is yours. It is swarajya (one's own kingdom) - that is, the rajya (kingdom) of the stwa (Self). You will have the kingdom of your Self. It can happen only when you really become swatantra in the true sense. There is no need to be afraid of anyone. There is no need to tell anything to anyone. I am surprised to see so many people. I had never seen so many people in Delhi before. Thus, I have only one request to you and that is today, on this occasion of a very auspicious day, decide that we shall never commit dishon- esty even if we have to die. Our country has deteriorated a lot in the last ten years. You are Sahaja Yogis in so many numbers. Who are you all afraid of? I

 I have full faith in you that you no. will carefully listen to My lecture. What is the reason behind getring scared? God is there. from behind. Just imagine, as soon as the Sufis realized that God was behind them, they got all, but a few of them. Similarly, you should all follow them. In My opinion, the only message for today is that now you are neither a cheat [chor) yourself, nor going to support any cheat. But I read in the news- papers the differences are over other types of issues. The differences are over the caste and creed. Well Mister, are you here for protecting the country or to sink it deep down? You have a great responsibility on you. You are born in the Kali Yuga. That is why this Kali Yuga is to be transformed and you are all realized in the thousands. Nowhere else on Earth have so many people been realized. That is why time and again I shall be repeating to you to stand on truth. I am with you. And God is also with you. to support everyone rid of all those unwanted things that were around them - not гурes So I have a request to you all roday to assert within yourself that we shall not encourage or allow any offenses like cheating or stealing [chori-chakari] to happen. Wherever we come to know of it, we will fight it out. But I wonder whether the people have been intoxicated under the influence of alcohol or what? After all, what did you receive from this light? Courage fight with more courage. Whatever things that are wrong with this country should be forsaken. It has carned a very bad reputation. Your Mother There are many more issues, but the most important one is that there is no honesty at all, so how is God going to help you out? To get money is no kind of support from God, but to be established in dharma is. And that is what you stands for There aren't as many people who are Sahaja Yogis here, anywhere have got. else in the world. And Sahaja Yogis are never involved in such activities too. But I am telling you all this because the atmosphere here is bad and we have earned such a bad name all over. honesty. You have everything with you. You have food to eat and drink, clothes to wear. What else do you need? You enjoy movies, you enjoy that, you do have that much money. But first of all, the disease [bimari) for the money should be got rid of. I have full faith in you that you will carefully listen to My lecture of today. And let us swear from today itself that we shall not commit dishonesty at all, but will also oppose those who commit dishonesty. The most important mes- sage that is to be understood is our country needs honesty today. Nothing is more important than that. Your Mother stands for honesty, So what if you have only one shirt instead of ten? Convey these things similarly to the women also. It will work out. It will happen. Today's speech is a little bit different. It is unique. And you all have liked it. It was very kind of you. Well then, thank you. 17

 The Thoughtless SS NOW Every year we have birthdays of various people and every year we make a vow that "this Birthday Puja 21 March 1994 year I will not do this or I will not do that." This is a very good way of seeing how far we have come in life. Many people who really have achieved a very great height in their spiritual life did not need a birthday, but every day they felt it's a birthday to sStart, to go ahead, to understand, to learn. Every day is a new year for them. In our own life we see that our surroundings change very slowly. Sometimes it is shocking. Sometimes you are surprised how the surroundings are not changing. But in a subtle way, there is a tremendous change that is happening within us and without. The whole atmosphere today is governed by human beings. I don't know how far Paramachaitanya works it out, but it is for us to open ourselves to new dimensions in our lives. Kolkata The tree of Sahaja Yoga Firstly, through your meditation, in that state of meditation, you expand within yourself. You stay in the present. The other day, somebody asked Me, "Where was Your last birth- day?" I just forgot where it was. Otherwise My memory is very good, like an elephant. But this I forgot. Perhaps every time, every day you live in the present and you grow, so you forget when and where this growth has taken place. My own growth has been like this, that every time I go to a place, I find very nice new people coming in and some of the horrible ones from the ald lot disappearing. It's something like when the tree grows, the leaves go on falling and new leaves start coming. But in Sahaja Yoga it's something different. I find that on the tree of Sahaja Yoga very few very, very few leaves fall off and you sometimes face a lush garden of beautiful people, To Me it's like a miraculous fireworks. It starts like a small line and then opens up into several beautiful patterns. It is impossible to envisage or to visualize what will happen to us, to Sahaja Yoga and to all of you. I have never learned to imagine things, but the vision that you see is really remarkable. It's very remarkable that I see all Sahaja Yogis drenched in divine love and expressing themselves in a very beautiful and very deep manner. This, when comes in, that really makes your attention absolutely enwrapped in such divine bliss that you forget that moment. 18

 The thoughtless moment One of those moments is when you celebrate My birthday. I even forget how many years I have lived on this Earth .. because, as I told you, it does not leave any mark of time, of date, of years in that blissful state. As if sometimes you can think that you went to see something very beautiful like the Taj Mahal, without knowing what it is and suddenly you find such a beautiful building unexpectedly. You just get blindfolded, as they say. In Hindi, they say "awak." You don't know how to express it. You become speechless and invariably you'll find at that time you'll forget the time. You will forget how you came there. All the story behind all that finishes off as soon as you see the reality of the vision. This reality of the vision is something beyond even My thinking and imagination. I cannot, even now somerimes, believe that there are so many Sahaja Yogis who have this subtle knowledge. I never knew that there are so many seekers to begin with. I never knew that there are such subtle people on this Earth. All over the world, wherever I went, whether I went to Nepal or to Brazil, suddenly I find facing so many beautiful seekers. If you ask Me, "When did You go to Brazil?" I won't be able to tell you the dates. I have a very bad memory for dates for the same reason I think because every time I see a vision and the time also just stops for that moment. It doesn't express itself. Nothing is recorded except for the experience. And this experience is in an abstract form. You cannot describe it. It is beyond words and beyond any description. At that time, you really become thoughtless and that is the time we have to really enjoy.... So when we start thinking of time and time and time, we have to understand that time is our slave. We are not slaves of the time. There are a thousand and one stories I can tell you how, by delaying in a place, by getting late in I have seen such beautiful manifestations, such beautiful dramas - the art of the Divine Power that I was amazed how people worry so much about the time. You wil| forget how you came there. got 1 a place, by not caring for the time, If time is really if we are all watching our time every year, as our birthday, and if you think that necessary, time is very important, it is in a way. In these modern times, we really need the time for meditation, for collective meetings and for Sahaja Yoga...

 If there is no thought, like a rippleless lake, the whole joy of that creation is reflected in it. Peace within The first and foremost thing is we have no peace within our hearts. We talk of peace. I know of people who have got awards in peace, have no peace within their heart, no peace at all. Unless and until we human beings have peace, there cannot be peace in the whole world. It is we who creare wars. It is we who do all kinds of violence.... We ruin the pos- sibility of people getting into the kingdom of God. So peace can be only achieved by establishing peace in the hearts of the people. And that is only possible, if you achieve the state of thoughtless awareness. You remain in the present and there, where you'll be amazed, you will be standing like a rock because you will have reality in your hand. You can work out the way you like. Actually, I don't work our anything whatsoever – really. You may say, "You do this and You do that." I don't. It's the Paramchaitanya which works it. In the same way, work for you also. But you must have faith in yourself and absolute faith in Sahaja Yoga absolute. Thar's the only way we can achieve this, that many, many, many people, most of the people of the world- I wouldn't say all of them rather difficult to say that, but may be possible - should enter into the kingdom of God with us. That's the most important thing, more than all these worldly things and more than all these nonsensical things.... That will take its own course. You don't have to worry. That works out automatically. Only thing where you really need your own diversion or your own focusing is Sahaja Yoga, in and out. If we really want peace on this Earth, if we want really progress for ourselves, if we want all kinds of physical, mental and emotional problems being solved, all for our good, why not we come to Sahaja Yoga, where we don't have to do anything except our Kundalini, except for meditating for it for very little time and to achieve that state of joy? it will for raising Faith and sincerity Today My feelings are really full of joy, full of joy because now I can see how things are happening, how one person can produce thousands and thousands of Sahaja Yogis. I saw one miracle. I told once that one seed has all the thousand trees it is going to produce and when I saw a new technique of tissue culture, I was amazed that on one little seed there were so many little, little primules who had come out. In the same way, you are all capable and you all can do it, but what is needed is faith in yourself and also complete sincerity about Sahaja Yoga. If that happens today, you have really celebrated My Birthday. If you think that My Birthday's important, that for Me very important is that everybody gets their spiritual birthday. May God bless you. 20

 As soon as the kundalini crosses over the Agnya, you enter into the realm where there is no thought. You are aware, but you become thoughtless. In thoughtlessness only, you can see things much more clearly. Because supposing you see a particular scene, there is a thought ... and you cannot enjoy that scene directly. But if there is no thought, like a rippleless lake, the whole joy of that creation is reflected in it and you start enjoying it ... and inside you can feel absolutely peaceful in your brain. You become absolutely thoughtless and aware of it. 20 July 1979

 THOUGHTLESS NOW you Thoughtlessness in a crisis He takes you People should see that we are joyous, that we are happy people, that we are out of it and not like others who start crying for small things. Like when My father died, I was surprised that suddenly I became thoughtless, absolutely thought- makes you less. For about three days I was thoughtless – neither the thought of pain or thought of unhappiness or anything came up, but just thoughtless. And absolutely everybody was surprised because I looked after him, and he was very attached to Me, very fond of Me, everything was there. But I was surprised, how is it thoughtless. I became suddenly thoughtless? So if you are a Sahaja Yogini, then at the time of crisis you should become thoughtless. That's one of the signs. I have seen with Myself, if there is any crisis in the family, I just become thoughtless. That means what? That God just takes you in, your problems, He puts His hand, He puts His protection and He takes you out of it and makes you absolutely thoughtless. And in that thoughtless awareness you discover what is right, what is wrong. So even in crisis, this thoughtless awareness is all the time extremely alert. It becomes much more alert than normal. That's the sign of a Sahaja Yogi and the sign of a Sahaja Yogini. Diwali Puja 1991 Attention and thoughtlessness When your attention is fixed, you will find you will definitely rise into thoughtless awareness, a state where you grow spiritually. You have to rise up to that state of thoughtless awareness where you grow spiritually. If you're not in thoughtless awareness, you cannot grow in your spirituality. So it's very to see where is your attention. Where are you putting your atten- important tion? If the attrention could be controlled then things will be all right.... The mantra is, as you know, "Nirvichara." You should use the mantra of Nirvichara for coming to the state of thoughtlessness and try to increase this area, this space of thoughtless awareness and that is how you will find you will be growing very much. Shri Athena Puja 1993 Thoughtlessness is a state There are certain faculties, which we have to develop to begin with. The first faculty is if we can become thoughtless. In meditation you can become thoughtless for a short time. Gradually this short time should go on increas- ing, that you are without any thought. This happens also, as we can say, is a state. How do we achieve that again? Because human beings cannot understand that anything can happen spontaneously, it has to be done. Something has to be done. For that, in Sahaj, you have something very, very it simple, that you have got a mantra of Nirvichar. So now you watch anything saying the mantra, "Twameva Sakshat Nir- vichar." Then you'll start seeing that, witnessing that without thinking. Just see - witness. Just seeing itself creates that state within us.... 22

 Now supposing you go and meet someone with whom you have to deal. He's talking, talking, talking. Just become thoughtless. So now what is the thing that will happen as soon as you become thoughtless? First his thoughts, his bombardment will not touch you because you are in a different realm altogether. But in that realm, your power will manifest. It may cool him down, it may shut him down or maybe he may just feel tremendous love for you.. When you start witnessing something without thought, there's no obsession for absorbing the knowledge about that because there's no thought. Complete absorption takes place and then it manifests. This is how the Divine Power works within us. 19 July 1994

 Birthday Celebrations 30 March 1983 why God created Mumbai O. Many people have always asked me that why God created this universe. Of course, That we are not supposed to ask questions of God. It's easy to ask questions to Mataji when She is giving a lecture, but God is a person who is beyond questions. And beautiful why He created the universe is something like why I wore all these ornaments. As I am not habituated in wearing ornaments, but I have to do it. I have to do it just arena of to please you people. Or we can say that God created this Earth just to please His own children, just to make them happy, just to make them enter into the kingdom heavenly joy of God, to give all that what He has got. So He had to create this creation in such a way that He could create His own image, reflect it and make it enjoy itself. It's a very mutual appreciation, as we call it, andolan. Whatever He does for us is for His own pleasures. But the beauty of it is that your pleasure is His pleasure. And the other way around is His pleasure should be your pleasure, too. Once that becomes the fact that the pleasure of God becomes your pleasure, you enter into that beautiful arena of heavenly joy, swargiya anand. Only if it is a one-sided enterprise or a one-sided effort it gets lost. Human efforts are one-sided, but God's efforts are such that they cannot be enjoyed unless and until they are reflected. So whatever He has given us, we cannot count them. We can only say they are blessings because it's an abstract way of saying things. That is the blessing of God, that He has given all the blessings. It's an abstract thing because we cannot count, we cannot give it a form, we cannot say what He has done for us. And when this joy of His creation is felt in our heart, once we start enjoying that joy within ourselves, then it becomes a complete picture. When it is complete you cannot describe it because it is not relative. You can just enjoy it. And that is how the depth of enjoy- ment is described, that at that depth what are we to say? We are lost. The drop has become the ocean and the ocean has become the drop. First the ocean becomes the drop and then drop becomes the ocean. And then the ocean tries to become the drop. It's a beautiful system of give and take, which can only be appreciated by people who have tasted the nectar of the beauty of God's love. It's very easy to say there is no God. It's the easiest thing to say. But it is even easier than that to enjoy God. It is the easiest thing to enjoy Him because He is so available. He is so anxious. The whole purpose of creation is to give you joy, to give you happiness. 24

 this universe 1S As today when I had to go to the bank, I was wondering, "I have never worn these ornaments anytime in life and today, as the time has come, I have to wear." I just thought of it, "It's just for My children." If I have to wear them, what does it matter? Just to make them happy, what does it matter? If they feel happy, then My happiness is complete. Bur felt for Me, that I should wear, itself shows that you wanted to see them on Me. It you is also such esteem of your very subtle bhakti, very subtle love for your Mother. In these modern times, to have such bhaktas itself is a big blessing for Me. So as you say, "Mother, bless us," I say, "You also bless Me." You have already blessed Me by this beautiful arrangement you have made, the way you have put yourself, surren- dered yourself for this great puja because all is such an interdependent process. You do the puja. I can't do the puja. You have to do the puja. When you do the puja the chakras are awakened. Mine are awakened, but in you they are awakened, Now how to explain to people what is the importance of puja? If you have not tasted the fruit of a puja, it is impossible to explain. It is at a higher level only one can under- stand all these things. But so far, whatever was done, was at such a lower level by such low type of people that everything became absolutely unholy, It was all an unholy doing and, because of that unholy doing, God Himself is unhappy. So He has created this universe to create realized souls, not to create useless people, not to create people who do not believe in God, who do not believe in a higher life, who do not believe in leading a life of purity. He never created this universe for them. They are just existing, just like dead people. They are not living people. So those who believe in God, those who worship Him with all purity are actually, in a way, giving blessings to God because it is so pleasurable for Him to sce that they have understood, that they have felt it, that they have liked it. Sahaj Yogis also, some of them, have problems. It doesn't matter. But as long as the desire is pure, your kundalini is pure. As long as you feel you that you have to do your ascent in a proper way, in a surrendered way, everything is going to become a complete, beautiful picture. And to create this elevated kingdom of God within our heart and without, one has to know that God's efforts are absolutely complete. He has made you. Now only a little less is there. It's from the other side. He has created this universe so beautifully and after creating that beautiful universe, that universe has to reflect God fully. That's all. So fifty percent of the job is done. Only the other fifty percent of the job you do. You should not worry if there are people who are not interested in Sahaja Yoga- those who are not going to do meditation, those who are not going to do puja, those who do not enjoy this higher life. Just don't worry about them. But you jiest have to to plense know that you are special people and that you have to create the nucleus, the complete body of that part, which is going to complete this work of great faith. must children IS

 Dharma gives you the balance. It gives you the establishment into proper behavior, proper understanding, proper living, but it doesn't give you the completion of your journey. It doesn't give you the satisfaction of reaching the destination and your personality is still incomplete. Completing the journey Com So one has to have the experience of the spirit.. Those who do not have the experience of the spirit are not only incomplete, but are limited people. So whatever they see or whatever they know or whatever they criticize is lim- ited. As in English, we say that "hate the sin and not the sinner"- like many 19 December 1987 people who find something wrong with Christianity start blaming Christ. Aurangabad Christ did not create Christianity, first of all. He did not create Christian- ity. He did not create Christians, so there is no relationship between the two. know, recently they have found the books written by Thomas, the As you disciple of Christ who was coming to India. On his way, he went to Egypt When you know yourselves, and there he wrote this treatise and had put them in a big earthen vessel, or then you will be knowm, nd you will understand perhaps it was a metallic thing, and it was discovered forty-two years that you are children of the living Father But if you do [19451. The people whom he considers to be authorized Christians, he calls not know yourselves, then live in poverty and you them as gnostic. Gne in the Sanskrit language means "to know." Gne means back jou are the ponerty. Jestus said, "Know what is in front of "to know." And he has written that to know and to have the personal experi- your face and what is hidden from you will be ence is the only way to follow Christ clearly. Not only that, it's said that disclosed to yau. The Gospel of Thomas God Almighty, who is so kind, why will He ask you to suffer.

 NO 27

 This mire of ignorance has to be crossed. B. THE 28

 тн COMPLETING THE JOURNEY So it challenges all the Christian principles of suffering. In the same way, in all reli- gions people have diverted from the right path and have come to the wrong path and are indulging into self-created delusions, which have no relationship with reality or with the incarnations, those who started the religion or who gave the ideas of the religion. I hope you don't do that to Me because you are gnostic people. You are the ones who know, who 10 You are have had Self Realization. Without Self Realization you cannot have a complete personal- ity. But as you see in Sahaja Yoga, you don't have to go to the Himalayas or to give up gnostic people. your families. You don't have to be away from the society to get your Realization. You get your Realization in the circumstances where you are born- in the same society, in the You are the same family life. But you rise higher than them and try to pull them out of the mire in ones who which they are existing. This mire of ignorance has to be crossed and some of you have do it. And when you realize that, then you should know thar you all have to be very to know. strong people. You all have to be extremely strong. If you are not strong enough, how can you pull out the rest of them? There are only two problems People who are mediocre think that gradually they'll be all right and that they'll come up. But I would suggest that you should make an all-out effort to become strong Sahaja Yogis. To become strong Sahaja Yogis is not difficult because you have all the powers within yourselves. You have the kundalini within yourselves and you know the way become a realized soul. The problems are of you being dragged into your ego or into your conditioning - only two problems, not more. Like somebody asked, "How many turns are there in London?" Only two: left or right. So either you go to the left or to the right. All the permutations and combinations of this left and right starts working and then you get into trouble. And you get into problems. But actually it is a very simple thing. To get out of your ego should be the simplest and that is where you try to understand yourself. You see yourself. – how to then How you are reacting: Where is your attention? What are you doing? What is your atti- tude towards Sahaja Yoga? So many people think that "this is my house, this is my family, this is my car, this my horse, this is my dog." I don't know how far it goes-"my, my, my, my, my." But nothing "- that is the death - "will come and is yours.. As Kabira has said it, that "some cheat take away everything that is not yours." Then "my family," then "my children"- all this a nonsense. And so, when you start getting attached to this word "my," there is where you fail completely into your own understanding of your ego, you're completely blinded by this ego. First of all, you should say that "nothing is mine." Kabira has said that when the goat is living she goes on saying "Maie, maie, maie." It means "I, I, I, I" in the Hindi language. He made a pun on the word "maie." And when she dies and her intestines are taken out and are made into something that spins the cotton, they go on the street, these people, Thave done nothing and telling people that they are around. They go on playing on that string which is made from nothing can I do. This body is the intestines of these goats which says, "Toohee, toohee, toohee," meaning "you are, you capable of nothing. Whatever are, you are." So one need not be like a goat, that until you leave you go on saying "I, I, maie, maie, Ir is He who made Kabir maie." When you die, then your intestines have to be taken out and put on that thing just "Kabir" to make the sound "toohee, toohee, toohee." So this sound of "I, I, I" is made only by egoistical human beings, but this ego is so much identified with you that you think that "I am this ego and ego is me." And in s is done is the wark of Hari.

 that ego, you start doing all kinds of nonsensical things. This ego takes you nowhere. It takes you nowhere bur into a complete mire of ignorance about yourself. Ultimately, you stupid, Others can tell you thatr you are stupid or you become idioric or you ger become a bad name and everybody knows that you are doing all wrong things, but nobody dare tell you because you are to be reached with a barge pole. Such a hot-tempered personality you become that nobody dare come to you and say that this is wrong, it should not be done, it's stupid, idiotic. And you, yourself, in that idiocy and stupidity think no end of yourself. This is the extreme of your ego. With attention to the spirit The second side of ours, which looks very morbid and very mild, is the left side. The movement on the left side is the emotional side. You develop habits with the left side. Now some people have very dangerous habits. Some have simple habits.... As Sahaja Yogis, all your habits should be under your control. Now the habits we have formed through drugs, from drinking, from anything are very dangerous habits. Also people have their attention being all the time around. All the time the attention here, there and there, attracting people, looking after them, not looking after yourself. This attention has to be brought under control. It is very important. That's very simple, that whenever it happens, you just put down your eyes. Keep your eyes down. That's one of the ways we allow our attention to fritter away. And also our growth becomes stunned. This is a very, very dangerous thing, which in the West especially, we have devel- oped.. Indians have a bad habit because they just now started reading, so they want to read everything that they find, anything. So on the road, if there is a road of shops, they Whatever adventure you are into, your attention read every name of every shop, turn around again and see if they have missed anything. Ir sounds stupid, but they all do it. And all the time they are doing it. So the attention, wherever it goes, has to be under our control. We have to keep it, all the time under our should be on your spirit. control. As Namadeva has said very clearly in Guru Grant Sahib, he has written that when a little child is flying the kite, he's talking to everyone. He's playing in a way, but his atten tion is on the kite. And when a housewife is carrying out her duties, putting her child on her waist and working, then she's doing all kinds of work, but her attention is on the child. The ladies who are carrying three, four earthen pots on their heads, water filled up to the brim, are walking, talking to each other, having mirth and enjoyment, but the attention is on the earthen pot on their heads. In the same way, whatever adventure you are into, whatever you are doing, your attention should be on your spirit. Then everything is under control and you can never get enveloped into anything where attention should not be lost. So these two problems we have and those problems, even after Realization people have it. So please try, when you are not meditating, to keep your attention on your spirit. Now, the person who is left-sided or right-sided, he has developed a mechanism within himself to justify himself through his intellect. Or maybe, if they are ladies, they have water power. They will start crying and you just don't know what to say to them. If tell them anything, first thing they'll do is to cry. It means sometimes I feel there are you a thousand arrows on My head when they start crying. It's impossible to say anything to them. And if you talk to some men, they'll give so many explanations that you would fecel like just going off to sleep. It's so boring. It's easier to read some book like War and Peace than to listen to the arguments of such people. But they don't want to see that this is all ego which is talking... It is not their spirit. 30

 COMPLETING THE JOURNEY Become like lotuses If the spirit has to evolve, we have to be extremely witnessing in a full way, very alert, extremely alert and witnessing ourselves, what are we doing. Then only will we reach the completion of our Realiza- tion. Unless and until you reach the completion of Realization, you can never be masters of your your attention and you can never be the enjoyer of your joy and you can never know the truth fully. To achieve this Sat-Chit-Ananda swarupa, have to be extremely careful about the instru- you ment that God has given you – this body, mind and emotions. You have to keep them in check because, wherever your habits are, they can never be joy-giving. It's a joyless pursuit. And wherever your ego is, it's a destructive effort. So what things are detrimental to your growth? Apart from that, they are extremely dangerous thing for yogis. So as you are, in whatever conditions you in whatever situations you are, whatever may the surroundings, like a dirty mire full of creatures and filth, can become like lotuses. When are, be you become like lotuses, all that is filth, all that is hor- rible can become fragrant. And this is what we you have to achieve. When people will see the lotuses, they'll come to you, not to see the worms and to see the filth, but to see the lotuses. So please, this time, correct yourself. You don't need anybody to correct you. You just correct yourself, watch out for yourself and see for yourself. If something doesn't work out, just give up. Don't go to extremes for any- thing. You must learn to give up at a point and be happy about it. If you are contained within yourself, if your hand is attached to your body, then you reach up to a point and then leave it. But if it is not attached, if it is disintegrated, then it goes round and round and round and comes back without anything. That understanding has to be there in you people because you're standing in the central path and you're attached to the central path not only, but you are identified with it. So you cannot go too far to the left, cannot go too far to the right. If you do that, you get lost. Then you are no more a Sahaja Yogi and then no use having you here artificially or superficially because it will be hypocrisy. all Whatever is needed to put you back into the right frame, you must accept. And whatever is needed to understand Sahaja Yoga, you have to do.

 Bhavasagara WHAT IS THIS BHAVASAGARA? This is the symbol or this is the reflection of the whole entire universe that is created. All this universe is created by Brahmadeva. He is the of this world, who created this beautiful one who is the creator ... universe. In that, especially He created the Mother Earth. He has placed the moon and the sun on both the sides of this Mother Earth. They represented to you the Mother Earth within us. It is the Kundalini, the Mooladhara. Now this universe is existing within us. That is the Bhavasagara. This Bhavasagara exists in many stages in its evolutionary form and today it is Kali Yuga in this Bhavasagara. I would it is a dawn of Satya Yuga, at the end of Kali Yuga, in say this Bhavasagara. It is placed in the centre of the Nabhi chakra and around it moves the centre of Swadisthana. The Nabhi chakra, as you know, is governed by Shri Lakshmi as the power of Shri Vishnu and the Swadisthana moves around it, which delimits our own personality and which creates all these different stars within us or 7 February 1981 the planets within us.

 Notes Front cover Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi 21 May 2008, Cabella Italy Jai falan) Contents pages left quoter Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. 9 March 1983, Melbourne Contents pages right quotei Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, July 1982, Cowley Manor UK Pages 3, 4 and 5: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 11 May 2008. Cabella Italy (Culin Chirsiu) Page 19: the Taj Mahal (Anjan Upadhya) Page 21: a lake at sunset, USA Jim Gellagher) Page 23: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Brighton UK Pages 24 and 25: the River Ganges at Pulchati India. (Bjoern Kurt) Pages 27, 28 and 31: Shri Mataji near Rahuri India circa 1983 Right: havan at Christmas Puja 2006, Pune India (Paul Anant) Back cover: cedar forest, North Vancouver Canada THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE www.divinecoolbbreeze.org SUBSCRIPTIONS: contact@divinecoolbreeze org CONTENT editorodivinecoolbreeze.org 881 Frederick Road Narth Vancouver British Columbia, Canada PRINTING King Printing Company Inc 181 Industrial Avenue East Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA and Nimal Transformation Pvt Ltd No.8 Chandragupta Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411038 Maharashtra, India

 An ordinary grass can become a cedar. There's no limits to it. But you must have confidence in yourself and confidence in Sahaja Yoga. If you don't have confidence in yourself or in Sahaja Yoga, nothing can work it out. But the highest of all is the sincerity, which nobody can instill in you.



----------------------

2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
July and Äugust 2008 volume twenty-one numiber four
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-1.txt 
 This place is called as Bhavasagara.
It is the ocean of illusion in which we live. And we are seekers....
If we are in the ocean, our ship should be seaworthy.
Then any kind of illusion is not going to deter us if we are seaworthy.
But seaworthy means we must know if there is a fog, how to move in right direction.
We should know how to overcome all the hazards of all kinds of storms
and all the knowledge should be built-in within us.
And that built-in knowledge is this dharma.
It is a religion within you - not without, but within you.
Navigate
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 5-
Within us there is a complete map of what we are going to become.
Like the ship is built,
is brought to the sea,
tried and found to be seaworthy
to sail out now into the sea,
so you have to sail out
when you know
everything about the ship,
everything about the sea.
With complete freedom and wisdom,
you have to sail now,
50
you
not afraid of any storms
or any hails or any typhoons
because now you know your job
through.
is to cross
LEGEND
2 Mother's Day
6 Diwali Puja 2007
18 Thoughtless Now
24 God Created
26 The Journey
32 Bhavasagara
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 talians are remarkable.
You are very loving people...
Mother's Day was celebrated last year. That was the
first time. I never knew that you people believed in the
Mother's Day
Mother's Day...
because this is a very big thing to thank
Cabella Ligure
11 May 2008 Mother....
I am happy because this is a very big thing to thank
Mother.... You have been very kind.
I can't say anything. I'm so full of love and full of feel-
ings that I can't say anything except that it is something
that I never expected.
And so many Indian girls are married here and there
will be more coming. Also you people should marry
Indian girls and come to India.
Nobody believes Me that people ... of this country or
of
your countries have any love for the mother.
any one
Nobody believes in you because they have not known
such people, such nice people who are Italians, you see.
Now they are amazed how you are showing your love for
your Mother - amazed. In India really they can't under-
the Italians have come to become
stand it how the
yogis,
so much obliged to Mother. They can't understand.
It's a very big thing that has happened, a very big
understanding for Italians now, all over - a big under-
standing.
2.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 I'm so full I don't know what to say.
And there are all these children.
And I always wanted to come to Italy.
I know the reason must be this.
So may God bless you.
+a
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 And meditate and see
what beautiful hearts you have got.
You have given Me such love
that I really don't know what to say.
It's just like My own children here.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 decide that we shall never commi.
write
poems
Нарру
Happy Diwali. I wish you all a very happy Diwali.
You saw all these varieties of dances. Take a lesson from them that whoever
it was or whoever has composed or spoken of it have all been speaking of
the same thing. And the most important thing that they all spoke about was
that the Paramatma (God Almighty) is one. They all incarnated in different
forms, but the Paramatma is one. There is no dispute amongst them. They
incarnate on Earth to bring about the destruction of evil and to condemn the
bad people – and this is happening everywhere.
I find everywhere all the evil people are getting exposed. And now it is
your duty also to identify those who are evil-doers, working against the will
of God and who can go to any extent for the sake of money. They all will go
to hell.
We are not aware of how many hells exist. The environment in which
you
are seated, the place where you are sitting is far away from hell. This has no
relation to hell at all. But by being here, if you practise adharm or commit
wrongs, then it can also lead you to hell. There are several types of hells and
arrangements are also done up very well to get there. Because the people who
there do not know where are they going - and those who are saved they
go
go to the heaven - so nobody knows on this level of Earth that he has to go
to hell. We will go to hell if we commit wrong.
Independence of the Self
And the meaning of Diwali is this: that, as the lamps are lit outside, similarly
they should be lit within you. And you must also realize that you are like the
lights in this world of darkness. You are the lamps and you have to emit the
light. But if it has not been able to be enlightened fully from within, then
how can you emit light? Think it over, too.
That is why in the first place, the Sahaja Yogis should ensure that the light
is fully established. And possibly it could be the means by which we have
translated from Hindi,
ar preblished in
Chaitanya Lahiri come to this world. Until Jesus Christ no one ever spoke of these matters.
January-Felruary 2008 He descended at the level of Agnya Chakra and revealed to the world that
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 dishonesty even if we have to die.
on honesty
Diwali Puja • 10 November 2007 • Delhi
He did not have any ego within Him. He was the son of the Almighty, yet
He had no ego. Those who came before Him barely revealed anything, while
Jesus Christ desired that our Agnya chakra be set right. And that Agnya
chakra catches too much in your Delhi. What could be the reason?
At first the English came here to stay and then the Englishmen taught us
how to be ghamand (proud and egoistical). It can easily be made out from
discussions. I have also seen all those days when our country was depen-
your
Today's speech
dent (upon them), but you have come out of that dependency. Now there
is swatantranta (independence). And what is swatantranta? Swa – to know is a little
your own Self and whoever has known his own Self, he knows the tantra (the
mechanism or system) of his swa (to master the knowledge of the system different.
that drives the Self). Through Sahaja Yoga you have come to know about
yourself. And now you know that you are the tantra. Therefore, you have to It is unique.
be guided by that tantra yourself.
There has been a lot of development in Delhi that is visible. A lot of it has
also been done beyond Delhi. The shortcomings and the faults in the people
here are known to you. I need not tell you that. Now that you have become
swatantra (independent), you should ensure that whether you possess such
faults in you or not, the first and foremost trouble is that your own Agnya
Chakra is catching. Jesus Christ died. He was put on the cross, yet we did
not learn anything from it. On the contrary, wherever there are Christian
countries, they possess tremendous ego in them. They had their influence on
us too. But the worst part here is that now we do not recognize each other.
There is quarrelling everywhere fights everywhere. There is no purity of
mind amongst each other.
So the first thing is that our minds are to be purified. Everything is pos-
sible in Sahaja Yoga. People can reach any position from anywhere. It is not
necessary to go and sit in the Himalayas for that reason. You can do it in this
city of Delhi itself. But if you look around, you will find egoistical people.
They have their Agnya chakra severely caught up. So it is really very difficult.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Now God has sent one new thing called cancer. If you are caught up with cancer and
in case your Agnya chakra is not set right, then it can never be cured. Instead there will
be
trouble. That is why those who have cancer should take to Sahaja Yoga and try
great
to get rid of the ego that is possessed within because wherever you have government, ego
creeps into the people. We have so many government servants here and they have a lot of
within them. But it is more prominent with the people who have come from outside.
ego
They are veterans in comparison to the ones that we have here. And on top of it, they all
take alcohol.
Just imagine they call themselves Christians, yet they all consume alcohol. So by taking
alcohol, you are going against yourself only. You are opposing your own Agnya chakra. You
are not accepting it. The person whose Agnya chakra has been cleared, he can never take
alcohol. He can never ever consume alcohol. You find people everywhere taking alcohol
and they have no remedy cither to overcome it. Instead they prefer to consume it.
Stealing and corruption
When you are Any sort of bad habit [laat] puts us in slavery be it of any kind. Now there is a severe
addiction to chewing paan (betel leaves with betel nuts) here and then adding tobacco
not all into it. Just imagine God has created you with such great affection to be born in this
country so that you could become unique from the rest of the world. It is possible. Only
yourself, then Hindustanis are like that. Bur now I find a few diseases [bimari] are more pronounced in
them- that is, they eat money instead of meals (earn money illegally through corruption).
how can the Now, the road by which we came here was not there earlier, but it pained Me so much to
find that such a road has been constructed now and no one can claim that it is new. This
right
can be done by the Indians only. I have not seen such shameless people anywhere else in
the world who could do such acts and they are of no use at all. Anyone with a higher status
with respect to the other can do such acts here at any time.
Therefore, today we have to swear in the first place that we have to get our Agnya all
right. The greatest play at the Agnya level is that we start thinking that we are the best and
we believe that we can rule over the world, we can reform the world. When
right yourself, then how can the world be set right? Well, you must have seen a number of
people who respect and place you in high esteem and yet commit a lot of wrong. In this
country people earn money illegally through corruption (paise khatey hain]. Tell Me how
shall God ever forgive us. The greatest of all sins committed are stealing and
(earning money illegally through corruption). The person who commits these types of
offenses, you may try anything on him he may try anything, offer pujas, prayers, chant
mantras, recite text from holy scriptures, read namaz, pray in the name of Allah or he may
do any such thing - nothing is going to be of any use to him.
world be set
right?
you are not all
khana
paise
гурes
IS
Lies and dishonesty
Today is your new year. I wish you all the best. And I want to take a resolution that
from today onwards we will not tell lies. Never ever will you tell lies. I have been to places
across the world and I learnt that Indians are infamous everywhere as great liars. I do not
understand why such brandings have come upon our country that people are liars. Here we
had so many great saints and prophets, where so many became Sufis. I wonder how people
could speak so many lies here.
So you promise today that you will not tell lies whatever may be the consequences, For
that, you need courage. But now that you are realized, what more courage do you need?
You cannot lie. And when you become like this, then only people will have faith in you,
that these people are truthful.
you
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 HONESTY
So the Sahaja Yogis have to be truthful. In whatever occupation - may be in business.
or whatever, he may be an engineer constructing roads or a doctor treating people
spite of all these, yer it will be hell for you if you still lie. Now you have transformed
own self, now that you are realized now.
So the realized people, if they ever lie, they can never derive any benefit out of it.I feel
sad when I hear about our country abroad, that people of this country are great frauds,
liars and earn money by illegal means.
in
your
great
Today is your very auspicious day. Today you should all take an oath thar we will
never ever lie whatever may come. I, Myself am a woman and that too of India. I have
never told a lie. By lying you only would be at a loss. By deceitful actions you only will be
at a loss. By all these means, even if you afford to earn a little more or you pursue petty
objectives by feigning, yet you can never go to heaven. You will land up in hell.
It is very important to know that there is a very bad reputation about our country
across the world. Why is there a bad reputation? Because we have such type of people
here. When you come to know that someone is a liar, you must form a committee and
approach him to inquire, "Hello Mister, what is the matter?" For example, supposing
a road is constructed that has not been constructed properly, then set up an inquiry to
investigate the expenditure incurred and then be after them to see what they are doing
about it.
Earning such money illegally will ultimately be used for consuming alcohol only,
which is our enemy. Why do you want all this? You have a very good living standard,
but there are many countries where people are poor, yet I found them to be honest. So
honesty is the first thing.
Today it should be ensured that we shall not commit dishonesty any more. Also we
shall not be in the company of dishonest people and if anyone commits dishonesty, we
report it. Now it is like this: people complain, "Mother, similar incidents prevail in
the police force" or "Such cases are reported there also." But you are Sahaja Yogis. Those
who are Sahaja Yogis are by no means any less than a policeman or any person with a high
position. They may possess great powers within them, but the entire powers are of truth
only. Truthfulness should be there. I am very glad that a lot of Sahaja Yogis are very truth-
ful, but we still need more Sahaja Yogis who can become truthful.
will
Beyond slavery
Truthfulness is a very important aspect or else you can never get rid of your Agnya. The WVe can
Agnya is there where you have something as the ego. When ego develops in a person he
may commit any offences (blunders), any sin, can harm anyone, carn illegally by corrup- no more
tion. They all will go to hell. I want to warn you that you should never indulge in earn-
ing illegally by corruption. You are not dying, for that matter. What have you done by remain slaves.
earning more? What are you doing? You may have fitted a few more extra bulbs to light
up your house or kept a few more women to give you company-that's all, nothing more
than that. Now what will be your condition when you go to hell?
I am discussing all this on this day of Diwali because Diwali was celebrated on the
occasion when Sitaji returned to reunite with Shri Rama. Once we imbibe the character
within, then we can not more remain slaves any more. We are our own slaves only and, of
course, not of the others. One should not lie for any reason.
I have stayed in Delhi for a long time and I am so astonished to see how much the
people lie here. My God - they are not at all afraid. Speaking blatant lies at face and
suing benefit out of it, may probably help him achieve something here. It may even help
pur-
him earn a few extra rupees, but for sure he never can go to heaven.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 I want the Sahaja Yogis to promise that from today onwards, neither we will ever lie
nor we will ever support the liar.
People speak about our country, that we are very dishonest. Everywhere I have trav-
elled into far remote areas and found that the people of Russia are the best amongst them.
They are indeed half-Sahaja Yogis already and many are Sahaja Yogis as well. I could not
go to Russia this year. I shall definitely visit next year.
However, this means that we could not harness democracy. We too should have been
communist. There are no perty offenses or crime [chori chakari] in those places, no lies
and they all love you. There is great respect for Me too. But it is to be understood, after
all, where we are leading. Just for the sake of earning a few more (rupees), where are we
going? What are we going to achieve?
Therefore, in the first place you must be honest. Your dishonesty will cause trouble
to your own people only. People blame India, claiming that pcople of this place are very
dishonest. I am ashamed to hear all this. You have had so many great saints, so many great
souls in the past and people here are very corrupt and cheat a lot and criticize. So, right at
the beginning only, your Agnya is scared. People will become very rich and wealthy. You
will find at the end of the day, Mr. Rich is making his journey into hell.
Today I want to rell you that Diwali means that the hell is dark and you have become
the light. What is expected of you is that you should fight it out wherever there is darkness
and announce what is wrong. With this, our country will improve. And this is yet another
job that you have to carry out. We are already performing pujas and rituals. That is all
right, but the innate power which we have within us is the one which stands opposed to
all that is untrue. Many people are unaware that earning (illegal) money is a disease and
they will go directly to hell.
I am telling you all this because no one spoke about it like this before. I am telling you
on the day of Diwali that we are going to celebrate the joy and light the lamps within our
hearts. In it, with that light, we can see who is what and who is cheating.
We have to Fighting and quarrels
Now, I find one fighting with the other. Fights amongst Hindus and Muslims are now
over, while the fighting of others has begun. It means there is another issue: we are very
quarrelsome as well. At least in the other countries one does not have religions of so many
countries. But, here at our place, whenever you get an opportunity you start a fight.
Fighting becomes the priority. Fighting is between husband and wife, then amongst
children and then, if there is someone else with them, it is with them too.
What is Sahaja Yoga? Sahaja Yoga is love. It is love. Awaken that power of love that
is within us. Today is a very auspicious day and we have to light the lamps in our hearts
and take up the resolution that, even if we have to die, we won't tell lies. We already have
such people with us.
But it has earned such a bad reputation across the world that the Indians are basically
dishonest. Well, I have never at least seen ane, but whenever I hear of it, I feel very sad.
India is such a holy place where so many great saints have taken their birth, as nowhere
else. Sufis are there who were born here, all those who became great. They all were from
India only. No other countries had such a number of great souls. A few countable ones
have been there, but we had many great souls here. But subsequently, leave aside
light the lamps
in our hearts.
their
SL
may
whatever they taught us, we became branded as cheats and frauds.
Yet the offence of cheating is sustained. They can never ascend to heaven. And what-
ever is the lifespan one may have here, he will have to spend a thousand times more
lifespans than this in hell.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 HONESTY
The darkness of hell
The reason I am speaking about hell on this day is only because the hell means the dark-
ness and that is the hell that we witness.
Now your lamps are lit. In that light, you must recognize the types of hells. You must
support the government. Try to help to identify the dishonest. You may be in a junior or
a senior position in society, but you must speak out as to who are the culprits. You must
catch the culprits. Expose those who are liars. Now you have the powers with you - for
what purpose? You are awakened. For what
that light, you must see yourself. In the darkness nothing was visible, but watch
light to see for yourself what you are. And what are you going to achieve by telling lies?
We are householders. Whenever you are compelled to lie, you have the powers within
you, you are all lamps. You should see judge them in this darkness. You are the lamps
and the lamps are to sustain the light. We have to wipe out this darkness. We all have
earned a bad name from far across. Well, nowhere on Earth will you find people like that
of our country. I am in pain when I learn what a gross misunderstanding people have
developed about us. And what does one achieve by dishonesty? God knows! And what-
ever is pursued is horrible. No one will be spared. Whoever has become dishonest will be
caught. There are arrangements for all that. You have received your Realization because
you are not dishonest. You love truth and respect the truth. I want that you should stand
purpose did you have the enlightenment? In
your own
on truth.
Now for example, these days people throw litter into Yamunaji (the River Yamuna).
It means they are stupid. Yamunaji directly descends down to hell, but you will be saved
from that hell. You are realized souls. The ones who have the light with them, they gener-
ally do not descend. But if you really want to establish Sahaja Yoga fully within yourself,
then you have to swear in the beginning that you will never commit dishonesty of any
гуpe.
Passion to earn money seems to be the only business left out in this world. What is
the outcome? Nobody even remembers them. If you love your country, then in the first
place you muLst establish the truth or else where lays the trust for love from a person
who is a liar? It is a great struggle for you when you realize "our neighbour is of such a
so let us also become like that."
туpe,
But on the contrary, why don't we ever think that we are like this, so why can't we
mold our neighbour also like us? First of all, today let us promise that we will never
commit any dishonesty nor support any dishonest person. I do not know why, but false-
hood seems to be a curse on our country. There are several people who speak at least ten
lies right from morning until evening, yet it does not satisfy them.
Beyond lies and liars
your state of poverty has gone. Everything seems to be all right. You have enough
to eat. None of you is a beggar either, yet why do you have to tell lies?
So take a decision of this day that we shall not tell lies any more and, if anyone is a
liar, we shall not support that person. We shall not have any relationship with him. There
is plenty of happiness and great joy in it. Are you aware that a liar will have to go to hell
and you too will have to follow him from behind?
God has awakened you (through Self Realization). You have the light within you.
You must see in that light. If like-minded people like you take up a firm decision of nor
lying, whatever may be the consequences, even if our heads are chopped off - in these
matters the Indians are very good. I know that, but when I hear such things abroad, then
I feel very sad.
Now
11
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Now for example, the way this road has been constructed, does it resemble a
road by any means? It seemed to Me as if I was travelling in the forest. Whenever
you come across such things, you have an organization; you all collectively should
inquire who was involved behind such construction. Why was it constructed that
way? Who consumed the money?
All of you, Sahaja Yogis, should get united and try to focus your attention in that
direction to drive out the bhoots who have intruded into India. Wherever you go,
Nurturing
people say, "Brothers, don't believe in the Indians." What a shameful thing to speak
s about. The irony is in whom one should trust the most are we, the Indians. Never-
truthfulness is
theless, we had several people who became great leaders, great people and great souls,
very essential - but we have ignored them and their great fame that they enjoyed, also the amount
respect people had for them. They have respect for you too - I know that- but
truth in every you should never stand together with the cheats to extend support. The moment you
realize that a certain person is a cheat, immediately avoid accepting any invitation for
of
having meals at his place. It will become difficult for the cheats to survive.
matter.
I am telling you that you are all the police force of God. Keep track of all those
cheats that you come across. Try to inculcate the courage in your children as well.
If someone is doing wrong or telling lies, track them. This very country of ours has
been blessed (jagrut) along with the advent of a number of saints – and you all are
saints.
There is basically no need for you to tell lies. Well, what is going to happen if you
have meals only once a day? No one dies if he forgoes a meal. We have food to eat
and drink, but over and above they take alcohol. By taking alcohol, we take another
step forward. We will ultimately be destroyed by it.
The benefits of honesty
If there is alcohol we can never be all right. Now for example, in America, they
always come up with newer issues, that as their child turns sixteen years of age he
becomes a burden to them. This means they are all like servants. They are paid for
their works they do, for example servicing vehicles and so on. And what do they
claim at their age of sixteen? "Well, we have now turned sixteen and so it is the time
to go out for a living."
I have seen this happening with the poor children of sixteen everywhere, whereas
we (in India) think, "He is just turning sixteen, where is he going to go? What should
pursue next for his study?" Well, he has become sixteen years of age, so he is
driven out of the house both by his mother as well as father. How long is this going
to last with the Americans? You have to see for yourself. They are in ruins.
Nobody becomes great by buying one or two airplanes. Where do you think you
are? What are your ultimate limitations [aukat]?
Hindusthan is such a country that it can save the entire world – the entire world.
But there should be truthfulness in it. To imbibe the truthfulness is very essential
truthfulness in every matter. What is the need for nurturing falsehood? I can't under-
stand – people who are mostly rich should first of all realize that they are rich. So it
is better, sit back quietly and stop thinking of earning any more. Who is happy by
carning a lot of money? I have yet to see any one of them to this day.
You are a Sahaja Yogi and you have the light within you. In the light you can see
your own path and the path is of truth. May you be a Muslim, a Hindu or a Chris-
tian. It makes no difference. You all are human. And if honesty is lacking within a
human being, then he is dishonest. No one will recognize him.
he
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 HONESTY
We do have life beyond this also. How will that be? There are many benefits of hon-
greatest of all is thar you
have the blessings [ashirwad) of God on you. Blessings
esty. The
come upon you effortlessly in such a manner that you will be astonished to realize it.
Everything gets done on its own – effortlessly [baithe bithay). But now in India, however
may the person be or may nor be, all of them run money.
There are still many poor around. That is why today should be the Diwali celebra-
tions for them too. They too should be happy. We are citizens of that same country,
we have been deceiving ourselves only, We are very clever. By this, ego develops within us.
And when ego is developed, nobody can save by any means. You will develop cancer with
ego. Thus, you will not be able to save yourself. If you develop cancer, you cannot save
yourself. I cannot save you. I am relling you the truth.
At first, the ego that you possess within, burn it in a fire. Next, be ashamed if you
have ego. "Ego for what, Mister?" We have it for everything in our country. For example,
someone who graduates with a BA degree, he develops ego. Acquiring some other quali-
fication higher than that gives him double ego. Someone achieves something, graduates.
s an engineer or a doctor, he develops ego. Thus, when this Agnya chakra gets caught,
where does it ultimately lead you to? To hell and hell is a very horrible place. God has nobody spoke
blessed you with intelligence and now you have got your Realization. Still if you want to
go to the hell, you can go. Until this day nobody spoke about it or told
after
but
Until this day
about it.
you.
The promise of honesty
Today - the day is considered auspicious because several great events happened. For
example, Sitaji returned home, during the period of Ramachandraji, during Krishna's
times and several other great events that took place. They were all worked out by these
great realized souls.
That is why, in the first place, you must take an oath today that "We will not commit
dishonesty any more for sure and if anyone does, then we shall ensure that he is caught."
But I find the blacks are at war with the whites in this country-any one fighting with the
other. What they want is India to be divided into fragments. It is not going
difference. How is it going to benefit? It is only when you remain honest and you possess
a good moral character.
Whatever you have learnt from the British, there is nothing worth learning from
them. They are all in a bad state these days. But we have to save our own country and also
to make
any
to save the entire world. It is a great responsibility. You have been realized and the light
has come within you. Yet if you want to jump into the ditch, then what can anyone do?
Everyone should come up together to make an effort.
I want the Sahaja Yogis to constitute a committee. In case you come across any cheat-
ing, you should report to the committee. Then let us see what the committee does. In this
way, you will be recognized. In this way, you will be elevated to higher positions.
So first of all, you should not become dishonest and also prevent others from becom-
ing. This is very important. It is a great blemish on your country. There is adulteration
in the edible oil, adulteration in the ghee. At every nook and corner you will find people
laughing at us in mockery. No one has faith in us. In fact, the best of the people are
in India. Nowhere, so many people have not been realized. They have not earned any
punyas. Therefore, it is nobler to earn punyas than to earn money. There are innumerable
poor people. Look at them.
So today is a very auspicious day and also a day of anand. Why joy? Because on this
day we are blessed with heaven and we desire to be in heaven only. But cowards can never
ascend to heaven. There is no need to be scared of anything.
13
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Well, what on Earth is going to happen if you earn a few paise less or more? All of
you have become rich. I can see that. I have been coming here for the past seventeen or
eighteen years now. All of you have become richer than before. The standard of living now
has become better than before. But from morning until evening there is dishonesty, dis-
honesty and dishonesty. Thus the path is laid before you. All right, just take a resolution
today that we shall not do any dishonesty and, if there is anyone, then we shall collectively
oppose him.
Why were you blessed with Sahaja Yoga? Why were you given Realization? It was
because you will emit light. If you do not possess light within, then how can you enlighten
the outside? And focus that light to realize whether you are helping the dishonest? Noth-
ing happens if you earn a little less or more. If you are honest, then God helps you. Why
do so many people die in our country and nowhere else? The reason behind it is that they
As you are
remembering
the Sufis,
are to go to hell.
So you should know thar if you commit dishonesty, then you have already established
your first step to hell and you don't need to utter lies in the second place at all. You must
speak the truth. The man who speaks the truth becomes unique. If he practises Sahaja
Yoga, then it can be remarkable. Like today, as you are remembering the Sufis, similarly
people will remember you. You don't need to do anything- only expose those who are
dishonest. That is important.
People are protesting here over the issue of the dumping of garbage [kachda] into the
Yamunaji. Don't throw this or that. Now, is this also to be taught? I have been to so many
countries. Nowhere is waste disposed into any river. Then why are you so lazy? There are
so many facilities available over here, like you can hand it over to the municipality or dis-
pose of it elsewhere. But if you are accumulating the waste yourself, then what can you
similarly
people will
remember you.
do?
The resolution of honesty
All of you should think in your mind and decide today. It is a very good day today. It is a
good day to dedicate that neither we shall ever commit any dishonesty nor shall we accept
the dishonest. I have seen such people who neither were dishonest themselves nor ever
visited the house of any dishonest person. They never kept any connection with them. By
šuch action, they not only ensured their wellbeing in their own interest, but also helped
the entire natrion.
Now
you are a Sahaja Yogi. It is expected you should promise that we shall never
commit any dishonesty. You just have to recognize the dishonest and only confide in your
inner spirit that he is dishonest. And for the Sahaja Yogis- even if twelve Sahaja Yogis can
get united together, realize that this particular person is dishonest, then God is with you.
The welfare of this country cannot be improved merely by a handful of rich people, but
with honest people, certainly it can.
So the greatest drawback is the blemish on us that we are dishonest. And those who
are Sahaja Yogis can never be dishonest by any means. This is My belief. We all have to
united. Leave aside all differences. And that we are all honest people, India's
reputa-
get
tion is very
much tarnished. That is why take a vow from today that we shall not commit
dishonesty and if there is any other dishonest, we shall collectively be after him. He
will experience a sleepless night right on the very next day. Nevertheless, it has
far. I tell you I am astonished. There is dishonesty in everything - dishonesty in every-
thing. In the earlier days people used to outcast others on very petry matters and boycott
on every minor issue, yet our country remained so honest. Why have we forgotten such
great qualities? Where have they all gone? I find there is dishonesty everywhere. There is
dishonesty at every step.
any
gone too
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 HONESTY
You must teach the children here that they should not become dishonest. In case
there are, or in the utter case of dying or say, dying out of hunger, suitable arrangements
can be made available provided they are honest- and if honesty is not there, then leave
aside God, no one is going to help you. You will have all kinds of diseases of the world
on you.
Likewise our country has developed several good traditions, so many of them. For
example, they will take alcohol, drink liquor, just imagine. Have you come here to be
stupid fools? And one who does it, avoid being friendly to him. Don't support him. I have
observed with the person who takes alcohol, when others visit his house and they also
start taking alcohol with him. But if you realize that people are like this or realize that this
person is dishonesr, then stop visiting his house on the invitation for having meals. You
have no business with him.
We have to work towards the benevolence of our country because God has already
given us the light. See in that light. His powers are tremendous. If you accept
fact only, that those who had been dishonest to the nation will be taken care of by God,
that is enough. But you become a deaf person. You are not able to understand at all. Such
people can neither contribute nor can ever deliver anything good. I don't understand how
they live so shamelessly. I don't know how, but they do live.
For that reason, the message of today for you is that you should take a vow today that
we shall never ever commit any dishonesty and if someone is found dishonest, then we
shall not support him. That is enough. Many more realized souls will come to our coun-
try. But who wvould prefer to come to such a dishonest country like this?
EC
this
very
The vow of honesty
The only message for you today is that you have the light within and you navigate in that
light and that is going to provide you the strength. Whatever you may wish, you are wel-
come. Look, we have achieved our swatantrata. Swa-tantra - try to know
own Self).
Now I want many children to be born. They should be realized. That is why you You have the
your swa (your
must realize at the beginning, today is a great day. Take a vow today that neither will we
commit any dishonesty nor be in the company of the dishonest or be scared of them. God
is not there with them. God is with you. If you are good, then God is with you. Those light within
who were born in this land of India- of course, it was not merely for the sake of fighting
amongst each other and dying. Great idiots [mahamurkh) – we fight each other and then and you have
die. You must tell the people there is no use in fighting. "Well, my dear brothers, what
are you fighting for? What do you want? Why? After all, what do you want? You have all to navigate in
nice things to eat and drink. That's enough. What more do you want?" But nowadays the
demands are like "Well, I need that dress, I want that type of house and not this." Are we that light.
going to take along all those belongings to hell?
At this moment, like those who had become Sufis, you too are all Sufis because you
have been cleansed. Now all of you should write poems - on honesty. This dishonesty
needs to exit in the first place and secondly, there are several issues that need to be taken
care of. But first of all, do not commit dishonesty. No one is that
needs to commit dishonesty.
I am saying that there is a blemish on our country and it needs to be wiped out. And
you are Sahaja Yogis. You can do it. You have the light with you. With this light, you can
spread the light everywhere. Instill courage in everyone, assuring them that everything is
all right. Particularly those who are young amongst you, who have friends, all of them
should think about the possible ways that they could contribute towards honesty.
poor in India that he
15
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 HONESTY
Giving courage to all
Now there is a campaign initiated not to dump anything into Yamunaji. That
is all right, but it is not as important. The important thing is losing your hon-
esty. That is why this day is considered auspicious everywhere. Lamps are lit
at places. Everything can be done and if we can't do this, then what is the use
of being a Sahaja Yogi? The largest collective of Sahaja Yogis is in India - the
largest collectivity. Next to it is in Russia. Now the Russians are very
They do not commit any petty offences like cheating or stealing [chori cha-
karil. Don't understand why? Maybe if communism influences us here, then
probably we too would have become like them. But that does not make very
big sense. It is not good to impose anything out of compulsion. Let us impose
it on ourselves. Decide it for good. Resolve it [nischay] from today onwards.
Today is a very good day, that neither shall we commit dishonesty nor ler
others commit dishonesty.
Your country will become very prosperous. And after all what a country
is, I have seen all other countrics. All are useless people. But the people of
our country still have a lot of dharma in them. The dharma here has been
destroyed, since the dishonest people became all powerful jabardast). So
there is only one message today, that neither we will ever commit dishonesty
nor allow others to commit dishonesty.
But the people here are very tolerant in this matter. They tolerate. This is
the greatest mistake. When you have got the light, then why are you afraid?
What is the reason for you to be afraid? That is why I am requesting you today
to workout everything with courage. And now you have got a kind of swatan-
trata (freedom). You will attain the knowledge of the tantra (the system
which drives) of the swa (Self). You have already attained it, but try to make
use of it.
humble.
God is thnere
to
support
that
everyone.
Never to be dishonest
Today so many of you have gathered here. I never had seen so many in Delhi
before. Thus, every one of you should decide today in your mind that we will
not tolerate any dishonest person at all. And that is the reason why all the rak-
shasas also take their birth - because they believe something or other is there
within us, which will compel us to accept them. Indians should never accept
them. And besides them, those who are realized souls, especially they should
never ever (accept).
There is a great infamy [lunchhan] on our country everywhere. But this is
not true. There are many people in India who are honest- very honest. But
that is not true. Nevertheless, I have seen certain things. There will be differ-
ences amongst each other- "This land is mine and that land is yours." Well
whatever is yours is yours. It is swarajya (one's own kingdom) - that is, the
rajya (kingdom) of the stwa (Self). You will have the kingdom of your Self. It
can happen only when you really become swatantra in the true sense. There is
no need to be afraid of anyone. There is no need to tell anything to anyone.
I am surprised to see so many people. I had never seen so many people in
Delhi before. Thus, I have only one request to you and that is today, on this
occasion of a very auspicious day, decide that we shall never commit dishon-
esty even if we have to die. Our country has deteriorated a lot in the last ten
years. You are Sahaja Yogis in so many numbers. Who are you all afraid of?
I
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 I have full faith in you that you
no.
will carefully listen to My lecture.
What is the reason behind getring scared? God is there.
from behind. Just imagine, as soon as the Sufis realized that God was behind
them, they got
all, but a few of them. Similarly, you should all follow them.
In My opinion, the only message for today is that now you are neither a
cheat [chor) yourself, nor going to support any cheat. But I read in the news-
papers the differences are over other types of issues. The differences are over
the caste and creed. Well Mister, are you here for protecting the country or
to sink it deep down? You have a great responsibility on you. You are born in
the Kali Yuga. That is why this Kali Yuga is to be transformed and you are all
realized in the thousands. Nowhere else on Earth have so many people been
realized. That is why time and again I shall be repeating to you to stand on
truth. I am with you. And God is also with you.
to support everyone
rid of all those unwanted things that were around them - not
гурes
So I have a request to you all roday to assert within yourself that we shall
not encourage or allow any offenses like cheating or stealing [chori-chakari] to
happen. Wherever we come to know of it, we will fight it out. But I wonder
whether the people have been intoxicated under the influence of alcohol or
what? After all, what did you receive from this light? Courage fight with
more courage. Whatever things that are wrong with this country should be
forsaken. It has carned a very bad reputation.
Your
Mother
There are many more issues, but the most important one is that there is no
honesty at all, so how is God going to help you out? To get money is no kind
of support from God, but to be established in dharma is. And that is what you
stands for
There aren't as many people who are Sahaja Yogis here, anywhere
have
got.
else in the world. And Sahaja Yogis are never involved in such activities too.
But I am telling you all this because the atmosphere here is bad and we have
earned such a bad name all over.
honesty.
You have everything with you. You have food to eat and drink, clothes to
wear. What else do you need? You enjoy movies, you enjoy that, you do have
that much money. But first of all, the disease [bimari) for the money should
be got rid of.
I have full faith in you that you will carefully listen to My lecture of today.
And let us swear from today itself that we shall not commit dishonesty at all,
but will also oppose those who commit dishonesty. The most important mes-
sage that is to be understood is our country needs honesty today. Nothing is
more important than that. Your Mother stands for honesty,
So what if you have only one shirt instead of ten? Convey these things
similarly to the women also. It will work out. It will happen.
Today's speech is a little bit different. It is unique. And you all have liked
it. It was very kind of you. Well then, thank you.
17
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-19.txt 
 The Thoughtless
SS
NOW
Every year we have birthdays of various people and every year we make a vow that "this
Birthday Puja
21 March 1994 year I will not do this or I will not do that." This is a very good way of seeing how far
we have come in life. Many people who really have achieved a very great height in their
spiritual life did not need a birthday, but every day they felt it's a birthday to sStart, to go
ahead, to understand, to learn. Every day is a new year for them.
In our own life we see that our surroundings change very slowly. Sometimes it is
shocking. Sometimes you are surprised how the surroundings are not changing. But in a
subtle way, there is a tremendous change that is happening within us and without.
The whole atmosphere today is governed by human beings. I don't know how far
Paramachaitanya works it out, but it is for us to open ourselves to new dimensions in our
lives.
Kolkata
The tree of Sahaja Yoga
Firstly, through your meditation, in that state of meditation, you expand within yourself.
You stay in the present. The other day, somebody asked Me, "Where was Your last birth-
day?" I just forgot where it was. Otherwise My memory is very good, like an elephant.
But this I forgot. Perhaps every time, every day you live in the present and you grow, so
you forget when and where this growth has taken place.
My own growth has been like this, that every time I go to a place, I find very nice
new people coming in and some of the horrible ones from the ald lot disappearing. It's
something like when the tree grows, the leaves go on falling and new leaves start coming.
But in Sahaja Yoga it's something different. I find that on the tree of Sahaja Yoga very few
very, very few leaves fall off and you sometimes face a lush garden of beautiful people,
To Me it's like a miraculous fireworks. It starts like a small line and then opens up into
several beautiful patterns. It is impossible to envisage or to visualize what will happen to
us, to Sahaja Yoga and to all of you. I have never learned to imagine things, but the vision
that you see is really remarkable. It's very remarkable that I see all Sahaja Yogis drenched
in divine love and expressing themselves in a very beautiful and very deep manner. This,
when comes in, that really makes your attention absolutely enwrapped in such divine
bliss that you forget that moment.
18
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 The thoughtless moment
One of those moments is when you celebrate My birthday. I even forget how many years
I have lived on this Earth .. because, as I told you, it does not leave any mark of time,
of date, of years in that blissful state. As if sometimes you can think that you went to see
something very beautiful like the Taj Mahal, without knowing what it is and suddenly
you find such a beautiful building unexpectedly. You just get blindfolded, as they say. In
Hindi, they say "awak." You don't know how to express it. You become speechless and
invariably you'll find at that time you'll forget the time. You will forget how you came
there. All the story behind all that finishes off as soon as you see the reality of the vision.
This reality of the vision is something beyond even My thinking and imagination. I
cannot, even now somerimes, believe that there are so many Sahaja Yogis who have
this subtle knowledge. I never knew that there are so many seekers to begin with. I never
knew that there are such subtle people on this Earth. All over the world, wherever I went,
whether I went to Nepal or to Brazil, suddenly I find facing so many beautiful seekers. If
you ask Me, "When did You go to Brazil?" I won't be able to tell you the dates. I have a very
bad memory for dates for the same reason I think because every time I see a vision and the
time also just stops for that moment. It doesn't express itself. Nothing is recorded except
for the experience. And this experience is in an abstract form. You cannot describe it. It is
beyond words and beyond any description. At that time, you really become thoughtless
and that is the time we have to really enjoy....
So when we start thinking of time and time and time, we have to understand that
time is our slave. We are not slaves of the time. There are a thousand and one stories I can
tell you how, by delaying in a place, by getting late in
I have seen such beautiful manifestations, such beautiful dramas - the art of the Divine
Power that I was amazed how people worry so much about the time.
You wil|
forget how
you came
there.
got
1
a place, by not caring for the time,
If time is really
if we are all watching our time every year, as our birthday, and if you think that
necessary,
time is very important, it is in a way. In these modern times, we really need the time for
meditation, for collective meetings and for Sahaja Yoga...
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 If there is no thought, like a rippleless lake,
the whole joy of that creation
is reflected in it.
Peace within
The first and foremost thing is we have no peace within our hearts. We talk of peace. I
know of people who have got awards in peace, have no peace within their heart, no peace
at all. Unless and until we human beings have peace, there cannot be peace in the whole
world. It is we who creare wars. It is we who do all kinds of violence.... We ruin the
pos-
sibility of people getting into the kingdom of God.
So
peace can be only achieved by establishing peace in the hearts of the people. And
that is only possible, if you achieve the state of thoughtless awareness. You remain in the
present and there, where you'll be amazed, you will be standing like a rock because you
will have reality in your hand. You can work out the way you like.
Actually, I don't work our anything whatsoever – really. You may say, "You do this
and You do that." I don't. It's the Paramchaitanya which works it. In the same way,
work for you also. But you must have faith in yourself and absolute faith in Sahaja Yoga
absolute. Thar's the only way we can achieve this, that many, many, many people, most
of the people of the world- I wouldn't say all of them rather difficult to say that, but may
be possible - should enter into the kingdom of God with us. That's the most important
thing, more than all these worldly things and more than all these nonsensical things....
That will take its own course. You don't have to worry. That works out automatically.
Only thing where you really need your own diversion or your own focusing is Sahaja
Yoga, in and out.
If we really want peace on this Earth, if we want really progress for ourselves, if we
want all kinds of physical, mental and emotional problems being solved, all for our good,
why not we come to Sahaja Yoga, where we don't have to do anything except
our Kundalini, except for meditating for it for very little time and to achieve that state of
joy?
it will
for
raising
Faith and sincerity
Today My feelings are really full of joy, full of joy because now I can see how things are
happening, how one person can produce thousands and thousands of Sahaja Yogis.
I saw one miracle. I told once that one seed has all the thousand trees it is going to
produce and when I saw a new technique of tissue culture, I was amazed that on one
little seed there were so many little, little primules who had come out. In the same way,
you are all capable and you all can do it, but what is needed is faith in yourself and also
complete sincerity about Sahaja Yoga. If that happens today, you have really celebrated
My Birthday. If you think that My Birthday's important, that for Me very important is
that everybody gets their spiritual birthday.
May God bless you.
20
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-22.txt 
 As soon as the kundalini crosses over the Agnya,
you enter into the realm where there is no thought.
You are aware, but you become thoughtless.
In thoughtlessness only, you can see things much more clearly.
Because supposing you see a particular scene,
there is a thought ... and you cannot enjoy that scene directly.
But if there is no thought, like a rippleless lake,
the whole joy of that creation is reflected in it and you start enjoying it ...
and inside you can feel absolutely peaceful in your brain.
You become absolutely thoughtless and aware of it.
20 July 1979
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-23.txt 
 THOUGHTLESS NOW
you Thoughtlessness in a crisis
He takes you People should see that we are joyous, that we are happy people, that we are
out of it and not like others who start crying for small things. Like when My father died,
I was surprised that suddenly I became thoughtless, absolutely thought-
makes you less. For about three days I was thoughtless – neither the thought of pain
or thought of unhappiness or anything came up, but just thoughtless. And
absolutely everybody was surprised because I looked after him, and he was very attached
to Me, very fond of Me, everything was there. But I was surprised, how is it
thoughtless. I became suddenly thoughtless?
So if you are a Sahaja Yogini, then at the time of crisis you should become
thoughtless. That's one of the signs. I have seen with Myself, if there is any
crisis in the family, I just become thoughtless.
That means what? That God just takes you in, your problems, He puts
His hand, He puts His protection and He takes you out of it and makes you
absolutely thoughtless. And in that thoughtless awareness you discover what
is right, what is wrong.
So even in crisis, this thoughtless awareness is all the time extremely
alert. It becomes much more alert than normal. That's the sign of a Sahaja
Yogi and the sign of a Sahaja Yogini.
Diwali Puja 1991
Attention and thoughtlessness
When your attention is fixed, you will find you will definitely rise into
thoughtless awareness, a state where you grow spiritually. You have to rise up
to that state of thoughtless awareness where you grow spiritually. If you're not
in thoughtless awareness, you cannot grow in your spirituality. So it's
very
to see where is your attention. Where are you putting your atten-
important
tion? If the attrention could be controlled then things will be all right....
The mantra is, as you know, "Nirvichara." You should use the mantra of
Nirvichara for coming to the state of thoughtlessness and try to increase this
area, this space of thoughtless awareness and that is how you will find you
will be growing very much.
Shri Athena Puja 1993
Thoughtlessness is a state
There are certain faculties, which we have to develop to begin with. The
first faculty is if we can become thoughtless. In meditation you can become
thoughtless for a short time. Gradually this short time should go on increas-
ing, that you are without any thought. This happens also, as we can say,
is a state. How do we achieve that again? Because human beings cannot
understand that anything can happen spontaneously, it has to be done.
Something has to be done. For that, in Sahaj, you have something very, very
it
simple, that you have got a mantra of Nirvichar.
So now you watch anything saying the mantra, "Twameva Sakshat Nir-
vichar." Then you'll start seeing that, witnessing that without thinking. Just
see - witness. Just seeing itself creates that state within us....
22
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Now supposing you go and meet someone with whom you have to
deal. He's talking, talking, talking. Just become thoughtless. So now
what is the thing that will happen as soon as you become thoughtless?
First his thoughts, his bombardment will not touch you because you
are in a different realm altogether. But in that realm, your power will
manifest. It may cool him down, it may shut him down or maybe he
may just feel tremendous love for you..
When you start witnessing something without thought, there's no
obsession for absorbing the knowledge about that because there's no
thought. Complete absorption takes place and then it manifests.
This is how the Divine Power works within us.
19 July 1994
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Birthday Celebrations
30 March 1983
why God created
Mumbai
O.
Many people have always asked me that why God created this universe. Of course,
That we are not supposed to ask questions of God. It's easy to ask questions to Mataji
when She is giving a lecture, but God is a person who is beyond questions. And
beautiful why He created the universe is something like why I wore all these ornaments. As
I am not habituated in wearing ornaments, but I have to do it. I have to do it just
arena of to please you people. Or we can say that God created this Earth just to please His
own children, just to make them happy, just to make them enter into the kingdom
heavenly joy of God, to give all that what He has
got.
So He had to create this creation in such a way that He could create His own
image, reflect it and make it enjoy itself. It's a very mutual appreciation, as we call
it, andolan.
Whatever He does for us is for His own pleasures. But the beauty of it is that
your pleasure is His pleasure. And the other way around is His pleasure should be
your pleasure, too. Once that becomes the fact that the pleasure of God becomes
your pleasure, you enter into that beautiful arena of heavenly joy, swargiya anand.
Only if it is a one-sided enterprise or a one-sided effort it gets lost. Human efforts
are one-sided, but God's efforts are such that they cannot be enjoyed unless and
until they are reflected.
So whatever He has given us, we cannot count them. We can only say they are
blessings because it's an abstract way of saying things. That is the blessing of God,
that He has given all the blessings. It's an abstract thing because we cannot count,
we cannot give it a form, we cannot say what He has done for us. And when this joy
of His creation is felt in our heart, once we start enjoying that joy within ourselves,
then it becomes a complete picture. When it is complete you cannot describe it
because it is not relative. You can just enjoy it. And that is how the depth of enjoy-
ment is described, that at that depth what are we to say? We are lost. The drop has
become the ocean and the ocean has become the drop. First the ocean becomes
the drop and then drop becomes the ocean. And then the ocean tries to become
the drop. It's a beautiful system of give and take, which can only be appreciated by
people who have tasted the nectar of the beauty of God's love.
It's very easy to say there is no God. It's the easiest thing to say. But it is even
easier than that to enjoy God. It is the easiest thing to enjoy Him because He is
so available. He is so anxious. The whole purpose of creation is to give you joy, to
give you happiness.
24
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-26.txt 
 this universe
1S
As today when I had to go to the bank, I was wondering, "I have never worn these
ornaments anytime in life and today, as the time has come, I have to wear." I just thought
of it, "It's just for My children." If I have to wear them, what does it matter? Just to make
them happy, what does it matter? If they feel happy, then My happiness is complete. Bur
felt for Me, that I should wear, itself shows that you wanted to see them on Me. It
you
is also such esteem of your very subtle bhakti, very subtle love for your Mother. In these
modern times, to have such bhaktas itself is a big blessing for Me.
So as you say, "Mother, bless us," I say, "You also bless Me." You have already blessed
Me by this beautiful arrangement you have made, the way you have put yourself, surren-
dered yourself for this great puja because all is such an interdependent process.
You do the puja. I can't do the puja. You have to do the puja. When you do the puja
the chakras are awakened. Mine are awakened, but in you they are awakened,
Now how to explain to people what is the importance of puja? If you have not tasted
the fruit of a puja, it is impossible to explain. It is at a higher level only one can under-
stand all these things. But so far, whatever was done, was at such a lower level by such low
type of people that everything became absolutely unholy, It was all an unholy doing and,
because of that unholy doing, God Himself is unhappy.
So He has created this universe to create realized souls, not to create useless people,
not to create people who do not believe in God, who do not believe in a higher life, who
do not believe in leading a life of purity. He never created this universe for them. They are
just existing, just like dead people. They are not living people.
So those who believe in God, those who worship Him with all purity are actually, in
a way, giving blessings to God because it is so pleasurable for Him to sce that they have
understood, that they have felt it, that they have liked it.
Sahaj Yogis also, some of them, have problems. It doesn't matter. But as long as the
desire is pure, your kundalini is pure. As long as you feel you that you have to do your
ascent in a proper way, in a surrendered way, everything is going to become a complete,
beautiful picture.
And to create this elevated kingdom of God within our heart and without, one has
to know that God's efforts are absolutely complete. He has made you. Now only a little
less is there. It's from the other side. He has created this universe so beautifully and after
creating that beautiful universe, that universe has to reflect God fully. That's all.
So fifty percent of the job is done. Only the other fifty percent of the job you
do. You should not worry if there are people who are not interested in Sahaja Yoga- those
who are not going to do meditation, those who are not going to do puja, those who do
not enjoy this higher life. Just don't worry about them.
But you
jiest
have
to
to plense
know that you are special people and that you have to create the nucleus,
the complete body of that part, which is going to complete this work of great faith.
must
children
IS
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Dharma gives you the balance. It gives you the establishment into proper
behavior, proper understanding, proper living, but it doesn't give you the
completion of your journey. It doesn't give you the satisfaction of reaching
the destination and your personality is still incomplete.
Completing the journey
Com
So one has to have the experience of the spirit.. Those who do not have the
experience of the spirit are not only incomplete, but are limited people. So
whatever they see or whatever they know or whatever they criticize is lim-
ited. As in English, we say that "hate the sin and not the sinner"- like many
19 December 1987
people who find something wrong with Christianity start blaming Christ.
Aurangabad
Christ did not create Christianity, first of all. He did not create Christian-
ity. He did not create Christians, so there is no relationship between the two.
know, recently they have found the books written by Thomas, the
As
you
disciple of Christ who was coming to India. On his way, he went to Egypt
When you know yourselves, and there he wrote this treatise and had put them in a big earthen vessel, or
then you will be knowm,
nd you will understand perhaps it was a metallic thing, and it was discovered forty-two years
that you are children of the
living Father But if you do [19451. The people whom he considers to be authorized Christians, he calls
not know yourselves, then
live in poverty and you them as gnostic. Gne in the Sanskrit language means "to know." Gne means
back
jou
are the ponerty. Jestus said,
"Know what is in front of "to know." And he has written that to know and to have the personal experi-
your face and what is
hidden from you will be ence is the only way to follow Christ clearly. Not only that, it's said that
disclosed to yau.
The Gospel of Thomas God Almighty, who is so kind, why will He ask you to suffer.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-28.txt 
 NO
27
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-29.txt 
 This mire of
ignorance
has to be
crossed.
B.
THE
28
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-30.txt 
 тн
COMPLETING THE JOURNEY
So it challenges all the Christian principles of suffering. In the same way, in all reli-
gions people have diverted from the right path and have come to the wrong path and are
indulging into self-created delusions, which have no relationship with reality or with the
incarnations, those who started the religion or who gave the ideas of the religion. I hope
you don't do that to Me because you are gnostic people. You are the ones who know, who
10
You are
have had Self Realization. Without Self Realization you cannot have a complete personal-
ity.
But as you see in Sahaja Yoga, you don't have to go to the Himalayas or to give up gnostic people.
your families. You don't have to be away from the society to get your Realization. You
get
your Realization in the circumstances where you are born- in the same society, in the You are the
same family life. But you rise higher than them and try to pull them out of the mire in
ones who
which they are existing. This mire of ignorance has to be crossed and some of you have
do it. And when you realize that, then you should know thar you all have to be very
to
know.
strong people. You all have to be extremely strong. If you are not strong enough, how can
you pull out the rest of them?
There are only two problems
People who are mediocre think that gradually they'll be all right and that they'll come up.
But I would suggest that you should make an all-out effort to become strong Sahaja Yogis.
To become strong Sahaja Yogis is not difficult because you have all the powers within
yourselves. You have the kundalini within yourselves and you know the way
become a realized soul.
The problems are of you being dragged into your ego or into your conditioning - only
two problems, not more. Like somebody asked, "How many turns are there in London?"
Only two: left or right. So either you go to the left or to the right. All the permutations
and combinations of this left and right starts working and then you get into trouble. And
you get into problems. But actually it is a very simple thing. To get out of your ego
should be the simplest and that is where you try to understand yourself. You see yourself.
– how to
then
How you are reacting: Where is your attention? What are you doing? What is your atti-
tude towards Sahaja Yoga?
So many people think that "this is my house, this is my family, this is my car, this my
horse, this is my dog." I don't know how far it goes-"my, my, my, my, my." But nothing
"- that is the death - "will come and
is yours.. As Kabira has said it, that "some cheat
take away everything that is not yours." Then "my family," then "my children"- all this
a nonsense. And so, when you start getting attached to this word "my," there is where
you fail completely into your own understanding of your ego, you're completely blinded
by this ego.
First of all, you should say that "nothing is mine." Kabira has said that when the goat
is living she goes on saying "Maie, maie, maie." It means "I, I, I, I" in the Hindi language.
He made a pun on the word "maie." And when she dies and her intestines are taken out
and are made into something that spins the cotton, they go on the street, these people, Thave done nothing and
telling people that they are around. They go on playing on that string which is made from nothing can I do. This body is
the intestines of these goats which says, "Toohee, toohee, toohee," meaning "you are, you capable of nothing. Whatever
are, you are."
So one need not be like a goat, that until you leave you go on saying "I, I, maie, maie, Ir is He who made Kabir
maie." When you die, then your intestines have to be taken out and put on that thing just "Kabir"
to make the sound "toohee, toohee, toohee."
So this sound of "I, I, I" is made only by egoistical human beings, but this ego is
so much identified with you that you think that "I am this ego and ego is me." And in
s
is done is the wark of Hari.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-31.txt 
 that ego, you start doing all kinds of nonsensical things. This ego takes you nowhere. It
takes you nowhere bur into a complete mire of ignorance about yourself. Ultimately, you
stupid, Others can tell you thatr you are stupid or you become idioric or you ger
become
a bad name and everybody knows that you are doing all wrong things, but nobody dare
tell you because you are to be reached with a barge pole. Such a hot-tempered personality
you become that nobody dare come to you and say that this is wrong, it should not be
done, it's stupid, idiotic. And you, yourself, in that idiocy and stupidity think no end of
yourself. This is the extreme of your ego.
With attention to the spirit
The second side of ours, which looks very morbid and very mild, is the left side. The
movement on the left side is the emotional side. You develop habits with the left side.
Now some people have very dangerous habits. Some have simple habits....
As Sahaja Yogis, all your habits should be under your control. Now the habits we have
formed through drugs, from drinking, from anything are very dangerous habits. Also
people have their attention being all the time around. All the time the attention here,
there and there, attracting people, looking after them, not looking after yourself. This
attention has to be brought under control. It is very important. That's very simple, that
whenever it happens, you just put down your eyes. Keep your eyes down. That's one of
the ways we allow our attention to fritter away. And also our growth becomes stunned.
This is a very, very dangerous thing, which in the West especially, we have devel-
oped.. Indians have a bad habit because they just now started reading, so they want to
read everything that they find, anything. So on the road, if there is a road of shops, they
Whatever
adventure
you are into,
your attention
read every name of every shop, turn around again and see if they have missed anything.
Ir sounds stupid, but they all do it. And all the time they are doing it. So the attention,
wherever it goes, has to be under our control. We have to keep it, all the time under our
should be on
your spirit. control.
As Namadeva has said very clearly in Guru Grant Sahib, he has written that when a
little child is flying the kite, he's talking to everyone. He's playing in a way, but his atten
tion is on the kite. And when a housewife is carrying out her duties, putting her child
on her waist and working, then she's doing all kinds of work, but her attention is on the
child. The ladies who are carrying three, four earthen pots on their heads, water filled
up to the brim, are walking, talking to each other, having mirth and enjoyment, but the
attention is on the earthen pot on their heads.
In the same way, whatever adventure you are into, whatever you are doing, your
attention should be on your spirit. Then everything is under control and you can never
get enveloped into anything where attention should not be lost.
So these two problems we have and those problems, even after Realization people
have it. So please try, when you are not meditating, to keep your attention on your
spirit.
Now, the person who is left-sided or right-sided, he has developed a mechanism
within himself to justify himself through his intellect. Or maybe, if they are ladies, they
have water power. They will start crying and you just don't know what to say to them. If
tell them anything, first thing they'll do is to cry. It means sometimes I feel there are
you
a thousand arrows on My head when they start crying. It's impossible to say anything to
them. And if you talk to some men, they'll give so many explanations that you would fecel
like just going off to sleep. It's so boring. It's easier to read some book like War and Peace
than to listen to the arguments of such people. But they don't want to see that this is all
ego which is talking... It is not their spirit.
30
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-32.txt 
 COMPLETING THE JOURNEY
Become like lotuses
If the spirit has to evolve, we have to be extremely
witnessing in a full way, very alert, extremely alert
and witnessing ourselves, what are we doing. Then
only will we reach the completion of our Realiza-
tion. Unless and until you reach the completion
of
Realization, you can never be masters of
your
your attention and you can never be the enjoyer of
your joy and you can never know the truth fully.
To achieve this Sat-Chit-Ananda swarupa,
have to be extremely careful about the instru-
you
ment that God has given you – this body, mind
and emotions. You have to keep them in check
because, wherever your habits are, they can never
be joy-giving. It's a joyless pursuit. And wherever
your ego is, it's a destructive effort.
So what things are detrimental to your growth?
Apart from that, they are extremely dangerous
thing for yogis.
So as you are, in whatever conditions you
in whatever situations you are, whatever may
the surroundings, like a dirty mire full of creatures
and filth, can become like lotuses. When
are,
be
you
become like lotuses, all that is filth, all that is hor-
rible can become fragrant. And this is what we
you
have to achieve.
When people will see the lotuses, they'll come
to you, not to see the worms and to see the filth,
but to see the lotuses. So please, this time, correct
yourself. You don't need anybody to correct you.
You just correct yourself, watch out for yourself
and see for yourself. If something doesn't work
out, just give up. Don't go to extremes for any-
thing. You must learn to give up at a point and be
happy about it.
If you are contained within yourself, if your
hand is attached to your body, then you reach
up to a point and then leave it. But if it is not
attached, if it is disintegrated, then it goes
round and round and round and comes back
without anything. That understanding has to be
there in you people because you're standing in
the central path and you're attached to the central
path not only, but you are identified with it. So
you cannot go too far to the left, cannot go too far
to the right. If you do that, you get lost. Then you
are no more a Sahaja Yogi and then no use having
you here artificially or superficially because it will
be hypocrisy.
all
Whatever is needed to put you back
into the right frame, you must accept.
And whatever is needed to understand
Sahaja Yoga, you have to do.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Bhavasagara
WHAT IS THIS BHAVASAGARA?
This is the symbol or this is the reflection of the whole entire universe
that is created. All this universe is created by Brahmadeva. He is the
of this world, who created this beautiful
one who is the creator ...
universe. In that, especially He created the Mother Earth.
He has placed the moon and the sun on both the sides of this Mother
Earth. They represented to you the Mother Earth within us. It is the
Kundalini, the Mooladhara.
Now this universe is existing within us. That is the Bhavasagara.
This Bhavasagara exists in many stages in its evolutionary form and
today it is Kali Yuga in this Bhavasagara.
I would
it is a dawn of Satya Yuga, at the end of Kali Yuga, in
say
this Bhavasagara. It is placed in the centre of the Nabhi chakra and
around it moves the centre of Swadisthana. The Nabhi chakra, as
you know, is governed by Shri Lakshmi as the power of Shri Vishnu
and the Swadisthana moves around it, which delimits our own
personality and which creates all these different stars within us or
7 February 1981 the planets within us.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Notes
Front cover Her Holiness
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
21 May 2008, Cabella Italy
Jai falan)
Contents pages left quoter
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi.
9 March 1983, Melbourne
Contents pages right quotei
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi,
July 1982, Cowley Manor UK
Pages 3, 4 and 5: Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi, 11 May 2008.
Cabella Italy (Culin Chirsiu)
Page 19: the Taj Mahal
(Anjan Upadhya)
Page 21: a lake at sunset, USA
Jim Gellagher)
Page 23: Shri Mataji Nirmala
Devi, Brighton UK
Pages 24 and 25: the River
Ganges at Pulchati India.
(Bjoern Kurt)
Pages 27, 28 and 31:
Shri Mataji near Rahuri India
circa 1983
Right: havan at Christmas Puja
2006, Pune India (Paul Anant)
Back cover: cedar forest,
North Vancouver Canada
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
www.divinecoolbbreeze.org
SUBSCRIPTIONS:
contact@divinecoolbreeze org
CONTENT
editorodivinecoolbreeze.org
881 Frederick Road
Narth Vancouver
British Columbia, Canada
PRINTING
King Printing Company Inc
181 Industrial Avenue East
Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA
and
Nimal Transformation Pvt Ltd
No.8 Chandragupta Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411038
Maharashtra, India
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-35.txt 
 An ordinary grass can become a cedar.
There's no limits to it.
But you must have confidence in yourself
and confidence in Sahaja Yoga.
If you don't have confidence in yourself
or in Sahaja Yoga, nothing can work it out.
But the highest of all is the sincerity,
which nobody can instill in you.
