The Divine Cool Breezes May and June 2008 volume twenty-one number three

 If you understand that although My physical being is here, I am all over, it should also be realized that even this body is an unreal (mithya) appearance. 2 Birthday Puja 2008 4 Easter Puja 2008 10 Sahaja Samadhi 14 Little Children 16 Parents and Children 20 So Many Children 22 Talking to New People 30 Truth is 32 Shri Rama and the Fight TAMOPAHÂ THE REMOVER OF IGNORANCE

 It is difficult to come to this stage, but if gradually the unreal is discerned, the truth will be established effortlessly and waves of great bliss will envelope your being.

 49 BIRTHDAY PUJA ou are the student, you are the examiner one who has to give yourself a certificate.... and you are the one Just imagine you are the one who is the curator, the correcting influence on yourself. Birthday Puja 2001

 555 हरन्टे

 just ive It is a very important day today, for all of us because you know how Christ Easter Puja died. He was crucified. He was put on a cross 23 March 2008 and He died. It's wonderful the way He said about you people. He asked for Nagpur forgiveness from God. What we have to learn from His life is the way He knew how to forgive all of us. We have to also forgive people. That seems to be very difficult for people to forgive and if they are angry, they are angry. They cannot forgive. Then you are no more Sahaja Yogis. Sahaja Yogis must forgive from Christ – to forgive. have very important because that is the power you got Human beings make mistakes. That is a part of their lives, but at the same time, as Sahaja Yogis, you have to realize that you have to forgive. That is much more important than getting angry. So to forgive people for doing something wrong, according to you or according to God, you have to forgive. And you will be surprised that the forgiveness is such a great, satisfying quality. If you can forgive people, you become extremely pure because the dirt of the anger that is within us goes out. 4

 Forgiveness is such a great, satisfying quality. So to forgive is the biggest blessing human beings have. Even Christ said the same thing. "I forgive them because they know not what they are doing." So if Christ had to say, те so what about you? We are ordinary human beings and if we have done mistakes, people and upset with can get angry you. But the best thing for you is to forgive. Forgive for doing something that should not have been done. This was the biggest quality of Christ, that He knew how to forgive. And He forgave people who had made horrible mistakes. Still He forgave them because He loved them. And that is what you should also forgive. Today is a special day for that, a special day for forgiveness and that is why I said, whatever you would think, it's very late, but we have arranged it because I didn't want to miss the time. Forgiveness comes by people who are always generous, who are good-hearted. You know, everybody makes mistakes and so we can also make mistakes. But that means we have a right to forgive and we have a heart to forgive. If we don't have, then we are not Sahaja Yogis. We must learn to forgive and forgive without any remarks behind it.

 FORGIVENESS Today is a very special day because that's what Christ did. He was one of the most power- ful Deities or Gods, you can say – most powerful. He could do anything. He could punish them, all of them for misbehaving, but what is it he did say? He said, "I forgive" and He asked God also to forgive. So whatever may be your power, whatever you might have achieved in your life, whatever position you must be occupying, but you must learn the way to forgive, otherwise you are nowhere near Christ. You must learn to forgive. That's a very great quality. If you can forgive, all the time forgive. And that's why today I take a great joy. I wanted to meet you all and tell you that today is a day to forgive. That doesn't mean you sit down and think how many people you have to forgive. That would be absurd. But something that haunts your mind and you think you have been troubled and have been put to turmoil, then just think that you don't know how you have all these powers. The many powers you have and you can't even forgive when got greatest power you have got is to forgive. And today is the day for forgiving, forgiving people whom think they have done wrong to you or they have been unkind to you. you Please try to remember with how many you are still angry. Just forgive them, then you have punished them. If you forgive them from your heart, then you have punished them. You have given them back whatever they wanted, they deserve. So this is not a very difficult thing, to forgive, but people think it's very difficult to for- give because they have certain great understandings about themselves and then they think how can they forgive. I don't know what things upset you. Anything can upset you. After you are all realized souls. You have got your second birth and you are special people. So all, you should have a special quality and the special quality is to forgive – to forgive, not to go on remembering on what should be angry and you should be upset, but just remember you what things you have to forgive. Just forgive for what is going on. Practical thing, most practical – supposing somebody slaps Me. All right, if somebody SO slaps Me, what should I do? I should slap him back? No. Then why should I think, "Why did he slap me?" Then I should think he must be a stupid fool to do like that. Even that won't help. On the contrary, if you can just forgive, forgive that person who has done something for- it is important that you must forgive because it has no effect. Once wrong, for you you give, it will have no effect on you, your goodness, your righteousness. But I think human beings find it difficult to forgive normally – normally.

 FORGIVENESS But you are all realized souls. You are not only human beings. That's why I'm requesting you that you have the power to forgive, to forgive everyone who hurts you, who tortures you, who troubles you. How far can you go? Just think of forgiving him and you will be amazed. He will change. He will change and you will also enjoy yourself. is the This is the It's a difficult thing for people to understand, but just try. Just try what I am saying. If somebody does any harm to you, just forgive that person and see message for the reaction, reaction in that person and in yourself, what happens. But if you want to carry the burden of anger or of stupidity, whatever it is, today and then you are unnecessarily loaded with useless things. We should not waste our energy on deciding what's wrong, what did he do and what it is you should do permanently. with him. That we should not. Just leave him alone and you just forgive, say that “I forgive." Look at Christ – today Christ, such a powerful person, such a powerful God and, when He was crucified, how He asked for forgiveness for them. Why did He do it? Because that has power, saying, "I forgive." It's very powerful. You don't lose your power, but, on the contrary, you go higher in your power. You go higher in your personality. Just forgive, as simple as that, to say that "I forgive." Just like that, that's how I live because people have their own ways and they do whatever they like. But I don't get angry on their point and I am not upset on that point, neither am I concerned. I just say, "I forgive." That's all and you'll be amazed. Within Myself, it helps so much – really very helpful. So this is a very big quality for which today is a special day. On the cross, Christ said that “Oh God, forgive them for they don't know what they are doing." On the cross ... He said this and what we have to learn is to forgive – for our sake, not for others. This helps us. If we forgive, it will help us very much within ourselves. This is the message for today and permanently – per- manently. Always, if you are angry with anyone, just say, "I forgive." If you find some- body hurting you or troubling you or torturing you, how will you work on it? Just forgive. Just forgive. It is the only way. Today that's why it's a very important day for us. And I am so very happy that some of us are here and that I can speak to Thank 9. you. you.

 About two thousand years back, one of the great astrologers ... described about this thing so clearcut that you'll be amazed. This is Samadı hi Sahaja He said that a great yogi will come on this Earth.... He said that gradually, we'll start seeing some miracles from 1964 to °66.... But he says -The Kundalini the real change - manvantar – in the new will start from 1970 and by 1980 it will take its grip. At that time, by this new method, the new age will be formed.... A new age of active divinity, Kruta Yuga, will start. At that time, the sun will move in a new way. The axis of the Earth will age Shakti will be be reduced and the speed of the Earth will be reduced gradually. And at that awakened and will time a great Mahayogi will be born who will be completely Parambrahma.... He will possess all the powers to do or not to do. That means Mahakali and be enlightening. Mahalakshmi – all the Before this, people used to go into bhakti, devotion. Jnana means reading – Patanjali Yoga. And then they used to get their mokshas. But with this new method that this Mahayogi will bring in – the pure power within powers. in your chakras – will rise and, as a result, the Kundalini shakti will be awakened and you, will be enlightening. Because of this new method of Mahayoga, you will see your own eyes and you'll get it in this body in your lifetime, the Realiza- tion. And you'll get the joy of Realization. Imagine, two thousand years back – he's greater than Blake, I must say. His name was Acharya Kaka Bhujandar-Sattvachari. You don't have to sacrifice this body. Many people, great saints sacrificed 27January 19 82 their body in the living condition. They went into a cave and shut in them- Sholapur India with selves and died. That's not necessary with this new method. And die either. It means you will achieve your spirit. And the sakshatkari sant, the realized souls, the saints who are realized – the Brahmananda, the joy of the you won't Brahma by this new yoga – they won't have to go into samadhi. Samadhi is where people just sit down, go on meditating for hours together and the ants grow upon them. All that is not necessary. Just without doing anything like that, they will get their Realization and they will enjoy the joy of Brahma, the Sahaja Samadhi. This is Sahaja Samadhi... Among millions, first, one will get Realization. So you understand your own positions. You see the way sometimes we fritter away our attention on nonsensical things. You realize that, among millions, you are one. This is writ- ten here. We fritter away our attention in useless things like “my husband, wife, my CC children...." It is written here that, among millions, one will be my selected. Please follow that point. 11

 SAHAJA SAMADHI Then all the human race can get over their death, their destruction, by this yoga. You'll have to lead a life, a married life, a normal life. You may or may not marry, but be like a normal householder, otherwise you siddhi.... Samsari means living on this cannot get Yoga this Earth.... You will be able to see these subtle things with your own eyes. You can see them. This will not only happen of in India, but all over the world. India is a country great punyas. That's why there are powers which will look after the protection of this country and this coun- try will gradually rise. that they may have to go for a third world war and they will have to suffer for it. After that, this Не says Great Incarnation will interfere and all the countries will come together with the understanding of collective oneness and they will understand that war is so horrible. In a very big city a conference of all the countries will be held. There, not the politicians, but the yogis will direct them. Yogis – he has called you yogis through- out.... Through prayers, we'll be able to unite all the countries. By the new inventions of science, the divine knowl- edge and the science will become one. With the science, we’ll be able to establish the existence of God and of the spirit. That is how there will be no difference. There will be coordination between the science and the co-rela- tionship between the science and the spirit or the divine knowledge. Already we are getting it because on My photograph people get vibrations. It's a science.... Then he says that because of ignorance and because of maya, yogis had to suffer a lot to become collectively conscious – Brahmamayi – to feel the Brahma. And they had to do a lot of penance that was so difficult to become sahaja. This is the word – "sahaja," sahaja prapta. Sahaja – and to achieve Brahma. In the new yoga system, when it will manifest in the different countries in the new age, CC you don't have to give up anything the administration will be governed by people who have on how far they are in their yoga and their qualities as yogis. That will will come together þe the determining factor. They will be able to create All the countries their own powers of yoga, depending a society which will completely fulfill their desires and with the understanding their necessities and people won't need to have money accumulated with them. The be completely finished and, in their absence, the coun- try, the samaj, the society will be healthy and restful and without any anger. and sickness will poverty of collective oneness. 12

 they are Shri Ganehsa Puja 13 September 2003 Cabella Italy Little children – they are the ones who are incarnations. They are the ones who are going to lead humanity into some great advance- ment. The humanity has to be looked after. They are tomorrow's humanity and we are today's. And what are we giving to them for them to follow? What is their aim in life? It is very, very difficult to say. But with the Sahaja Yoga they will all They'll behave in a proper way and the whole thing will be a different mass of Sahaja Yogis coming up. But it is the duty of bigger Sahaja Yogis to look after them, to have better moral standards, to have better lives so that they follow your life and become genuinely good Sahaja Yogis. It's a very big responsibility. Perhaps we don't recognize it, we don't understand, but all these are little creatures who are after the image of great souls and they should be brought up in that way, respected in that manner and loved with great care. This is to be understood. in the proper way. go The problem with our elderly people is this: that we do not consider children to be considered, to be bothered about, to be understood about. We think we are too intel- ligent, too good and we need not waste our energy with them. This is the trouble of the elderly people.. We should know they are all incarnations of Shri Ganesha and they should be given proper attention, proper understanding about themselves. I find a certain amount of chil- dren who are very well-behaved, who are very sensible and there are some who have no idea as to what they are doing. So it is the duty of the elders to put ideas into their head, to properly understand about themselves and the self-respect. The same thing I would say for the elder Sahaja Yogis who have to look after their younger brothers and sisters. In this family of ours, which we call as Sahaja Yogis, there are all kinds of people, all all behaviors. Of course, they should not be regimented, there should not be uni- types, formity, but in that variety there should be this beauty, there should be a beautiful trend of being one with each other... What should the elders do to achieve that? What is our solid contribution to their lives? The first will be to tell them who is Shri Ganesha and what are the qualities of Gane- sha, what does He represent... Once they start understanding that – though being a little boy, He's so generous, He's so kind, He's so forgiving – they'll be amazed because they are also small and they'll also take to that kind of life. I find some children very sensible, very good here. Some are naughty and some don't understand what we are doing here. Whatever it is, they are, after all, children. And what you have to do is to look after them, respect them and give them the full idea about Shri Ganesha. 14

 the ones You are grown-up only if you can imbibe the qualities of Shri Ganesha. I think everybody must have a statue of Shri Ganesha in their house so the children will see it and ask, "Who is He? What is He doing?" And you will be amazed how they will understand Him, how they will understand His qualities and how they will work it out. It is important for all of you to have at least one Shri Ganesha in your house so that you can tell your children that “You all have to become like Him." Now what are the qualities of Shri Ganesha? They won't understand chastity. They are too small. They won't understand all those qualities. But one quality they will understand is to be honest.... Gradually you will find all difficult ones will go down. It will work out that way because you see they don't understand My lecture, they don't understand what I am saying. But one thing is there – if there are some oppositions within, they will show – well. Because they are so innocent and so simple, their innocence will help show very them, expose them to reality. I hope you all look after your children, guide them properly and take them to a level of understanding that they understand what is their position, what qualities they should have, why will they be respected. You'll be amazed that their behavior will change the behavior of all the other children. What I have to say is that nobody should think that you are very grown-up because you can keep quiet, sit quietly and all that. You are grown-up only if you can imbibe the qualities of Shri Ganesha. I have seen people who are very grown-up still do not have the simple qualities of chastity, of honesty. They don't have and they can't have because they don't think it is important. So I leave it to you to find out Shri Ganesha within yourself. I enjoy their company because they're so innocent and so simple-hearted and I like them very, very much. So the contrary, you should know they deserve much more love, much more understanding and much more scope to grow. should not get afraid or frightened of their mischief. On you I hope by the time they will be of your age, theyll be great Sahaja Yogis. They'll under- stand what we are doing here. I had to face mountains of nonsense with the older people, but these won't have that. They'll be very simple, very sweet and they'll understand love. O

 Delhi India 15 December 1983 parents & What I am going to tell you today is a little about the relationship of parents with their children and how it is supposed to be. First of all, we develop two kinds of relationships with our children, in that one is emotional and the other is responsibility. Emotions and responsibility remain two different things. 16

 children Suppose there is one mother and her child learns or does something wrong. and Still, because of emotions, she says, “All right, let him do it. Nowadays all Emotion children are like this. What to say to the child? Everything is fine." CC Another mother is there who wants to make her children dutiful and responsible. For that, she says to her children to get up early in the morning, be active, study hard, go to school on time, sit here, sit there, wear the clothes properly, etc. And she is always behind her child to correct him. Now I should tell you that this is not integrated. Today in Sahaj Yoga we have integration. Both the things – emotion and responsibility - have to be integrated. There has to be integration, not combination. The difference between combination and integration comes because our emotions should be responsibility and responsibility should be our emotions. Like we love our children – then we will say that because we love him, so it is our duty and responsibility that he should walk on the right path and he should walk on the right path because we love him. If we don't correct our child or don't tell him the right way to live, then it means that we are emo- responsibility have to be integrated. tionally dominating. Then you say, "What is there in correcting them? Let it be. Let them do what they want. They will be hurt if we correct them or scold them. Why to hurt them?" Another person will think, “No, even if they feel bad or get hurt, we have to purify them, cleanse them and make them shining." But when integration comes, then the person makes his own behavior and nature, such that it affects the child. For example, the father is a very lazy person. He is a drunkard, smokes and does all filthy things. The mother is very short-tempered, beats and scolds the children a lot, speaks harshly. Then all this affects on the children spontaneously. Then, even if you try to give them a thousand preachings, ior. “How are these people?" Nothing is going to affect by teaching or telling the children. They learn by seeing. They see the behavior of their parents and learn. They see how you behave with others and how you behave with translated from Hindi them, how you behave with each other. Children always keep noticing all this. reprinted from Nirmala Yoga magazine nice education, etc., they see what is your behav-

 Integrated knowledge There is a small story. There was one lady with a very bad nature. She had her old father- in-law. She used to give him milk in a very dirty utensil made of clay. The used to drink in the same pot without complaining. The son of the lady used to take that milk and give it to his grandfather. One day that clay pot got broken. The child started My eternal fellow poor love flowS crying loudly. The mother asked the child, "Why are you crying so loudly? What is there to cry for a small clay pot? If it has broken, it doesn't matter." Then the child said, “Mother, I am crying because I am thinking that when you get old, then in which utensil will I give you the milk, as this dirty clay pot is broken.' After listening this, the mother understood and said that "If another pot will be pur- chased, then So the children always keep on observing your behaviour and whatever you do affects your child deeply, rather than giving him big lectures about righteousness from morning until night. Therefore, all the Sahaja Yogis who are here and whose children are studying here should understand whether they have the integrated knowledge or not. After getting the integrated knowledge, one doesn't feel bad if made to understand things and doesn't get spoiled even if he is loved a lot. My eternal love flows towards you all and I keep on telling you things and making you understand, but have not hurt, neither do you got spoiled. The reason is because it is done with integrated knowledge. If the children know that you love them with full heart, then even one scolding is enough. But instead if you always keep on scolding them, then they think that it is your habit to scold and they don't pay attention or respect. So the children should be handled very carefully and with love. In fact, I would say you must keep them with love. If you find any bad behaviour in them or negative activity, then observe it three or four times and then peacefully sit with them and tell them that it is not good. You will be surprised to see that if you behave with them properly and with love, then they will be afraid to lose your love and will correct themselves fully. But if you have never shown your love to your child and always tried to correct him – "Keep this here, keep this there, arrange this, do like this, do like that," etc. – then the children will think that it is your habit to always say like this and they will not give importance to what you say. So your behaviour has to be integrated. towards you. old." will not cry and give me the milk in that when I get you you got that >כ 18

 PARENTS AND CHILDREN The instruction of the spirit In our country, we see that people speak lies, steal, do this, do that for their children. Even if they have to sell their country, they won't mind to do it for the children. And it is the reverse in the West, that they are not at all bothered to put water in the mouth if he is dying of thirst. Both these things are not integrated. In the West, parents think that our carpet should not get spoiled, our door should be neat and clean, our car should be all right and the children should work. They are always behind their children to clean here and there. Here in India, we spoil the children. Especially the mother spoils the children very much. Sometimes your university. even the father spoils the children. So first of all, we should face ourselves and see why we are spoiling them. You should not love them in a way that they don't respect you or don't listen to you they should not think that they can convince you and justify themselves. In this way, by giving them blind love, we spoil them and put them in a wrong direction. In the Sahaja Yoga is and same way, by being too strict with them, we make our children such that they turn their faces from us. Then they don't want to look at your face. In between these two things is Sahaj Yoga on our Sushumna. Therefore we should remain on Sushumna. Neither should we flow with too much love nor go with too much responsible behavior. We should flow with the spirit. And when with the instruction of spirit, then you will see that you will be looked after and your will move you children will also be looked after... The same way is the condition of teachers. If teachers are irritable, short tem- pered, every time shouting, "This is bad, that is wrong," etc., then the children will get spoiled and become like them – materialistic. If teachers are over-indulgent and spoil them with love without being strict, then the children will also become like them. This is why teachers have a big responsibility to make their life such that the children learn and they have a great personality as an example for them. Children should remember in the future that they had a teacher who had this special quality CC in him. So this work is of very great people. In ancient times there used to be a used to be a realized soul and used to be a very great personality. This is why your gotra is Sahaja Yoga, which is your university. And our teachers from Sahaj schools gotra: the ancestral university should be qualified as Sahaja Yogis and also the students. The best and extraordinary idealistic children should come out of this school after education. This doesn't mean that they will become very rich and very domi- who guru nating personalities. But they will be such that they will become foundations of this world like Shri Ganesha is the foundation of this universe. In the same way, we have to build many such foundations. This is why I am behind opening a school based on Sahaj Yoga.... I hope that all of you will cleanse and open your hearts and move in the direc- tion that you will make your children idealistic personalities – and everyone will collectively do this. How we have to remove the fighting and aggressive tendency in children and how to destroy the negative attitude of children, I want to teach you all who are the parents. But when this work will begin, then you will see how the parents will change and how the children will change. In the same way, the whole world can change. I don't see any other way. So you all must understand your importance.... I bless all with the success. you

 20

 I HAVE SO MANY CHILDREN ALL OVER THE WORLD, apart from the ones whom I actually physically gave birth. We have to think of all those today who are away from us, thousands of miles, praying to God Almighty for their spiritual ascent. One has to only pray for the spiritual ascent because, as you ascend, you get all the rest of it.... If you decide that you have to ascend spiritually within, then everything you have to receive – all the blessings that God wants to shower upon you, to make you the citizen of His great kingdom, where you are no more judged, you are no more chastised, you are no more put to any test, will reside in eternal love of God and in His glory.... where you Very deep down within us lies that source of joy. So we have to go deep down within ourselves and feel the joy of this Mother of yours, that I have within Myself. Go deep down. It is there. Enjoy it and then give it to others. Like a fountain of joy, you should give. Birthday Puja 1983

 Basies The how to talk to new people Hampstead UK |I bow to all the Sahaja Yogis and all the seekers of truth. May God bless you all. It is such a great thing to be back home with all of you and to see you here blooming with joy and happiness. That's the fate of a mother who has so many children, that she from places to places, leaving some children behind, but looking forward to meeting 12 May 1983 goes others. Somehow that compensates for the separation. Today I think we should start on very subtler ideas about Sahaja Yoga because you people have understood it on the other plane of the mechanism that works it out, the kundalini, the chakras and all those things. But we have to see what is the problem that actually faces human beings and why we make such mistakes in our seeking. It is a very important thing to understand because, unless and until we understand why we really make mistakes or others make mistakes, we can never forgive them and we might have a kind of a high-handed attitude towards others who are now coming to Sahaja Yoga, thinking why did they do like that and why did they commit this mistake and they could have done better. But I personally think that, if you look at yourself, you will know that you also committed mistakes. Everybody has committed mistakes. Some have committed more mistakes and some have committed less. But what is the reason why a human being has been committing mistake? That's what we should look into it. 22

 What is going to help you is a simple attitude toward yourself and toward these Sahaja Yogis and towards Sahaja Yoga that "You have come here to become the spirit. We have to gain nothing from you. There's no clientele, as such. There's no money proposition – nothing. It is you who have come to the Ganges, to take the holy water. It is you who has to take it. We are here to help you." If that attitude is developed ... we can change the face of this world.

 The spirit empowers us Those who have got Realization and those who have felt the cool breeze and have matured in Sahaja Yoga know that automatically you drop out many things – automatically. Now why do we do it? You see, why do we drop things? Even I don't ask you for it. You just drop them. Why? The reason is the light of the spirit within ourselves empowers us to see that this is wrong. Like as we have got eyes – once we have eyes, we know whether we are going to fall here or we are going to slip or what's going to happen. In the same way, Without Self Realization what happens is that reality when you get this vibratory awareness, it is not an awareness only of the fingers. It is the awareness of the whole being and you just drop out everything that is against your spirit. I don't have to tell you. But without Self Realization what happens is that reality is just a myth. It's only a mental projection with which you live. You project your mind and you think this is real- ity. You can call anything as reality. Any hallucination can be a reality. Any theory can be a reality. Any absurd ideas could be a reality. I mean all religions have taken that form now. It's very sad, but all religions which came from truth and from reality are nothing but mental projections and they're very far away from reality. You can only feel, understand and assimilate reality if you are a self-realized person. Unless and until this Self has expressed itself or manifested within yourself, the light has come into you, how are you to manage? Whatever you try is a mental projection- like many people who came first, "Oh, we believe that we are born again." All right, now how can you challenge it if you believe into something? is just a myth. CC

 NEW PEOPLE Myth, reality and balance "I believe" is the one of the great sentences we use. But what is that "I" that believes? That is that ego. That's not your Self because you have not yet felt the Self. So to feel the Self is the most important thing if you have to know the real- ity. So you must excuse all others who have not felt the Self, who have their own mental projections. They might look like a fanatic. They might look like stupid people. They may look to be very high-handed or maybe you might think they are these ego-orientated pseudo-intellectuals and all sorts of things. But all that is mythical because that plane on which they move is mythical itself. Whatever you know through your mental projection is imagination itself. But the spirit is the reality and to know the reality you have to be the spirit. And once the spirit starts shining within you, you just drop everything like a hot brick. Like I would say, as I've many times told you, that in our human aware- ness we know what beauty is, we know what cleanliness is. For a dog, he doesn't understand cleanliness. If you don't give him a bath, he'll be quite happy. Actually to give him a bath is a problem. But to a human being, you see, what is a sin or what is wrong? A sin is nothing but whatever is against the spirit is sin. Even fear is a sin. Any such small little sins or the big sins, all are nothing, but they are all against the spirit. But if you have not felt the spirit, whatever you do will amount the ascent. to something like anti-spirit because you don't know what you are doing. Now the prophets have tried their level best to tell you that you must keep your balance, you have to follow a certain religion, as they call it, or as we call it dharma within yourself. But that, too, for what? Why to have the balance within you? People will always say, "“What's wrong?" "What's wrong if we are not in balance. Whať's there? Whatť's wrong in drinking?" Before Realization I never said don't drink. After Realization, you yourself drop out. But they say, wrong? Why does he tell us like this? Why should we listen to them?" Why the balance? The balance is needed for the ascent. Unless and until have a balance how will you ascend? Imagine an aeroplane without any balance. Say a wing is missing, will it be able to take off from the ground? It cannot. So for the ascent, it is necessary to have the necessary balance. So they said, "Keep in the balance." The balance is needed for “What's you But even when we're just told the simple thing to keep to the central path, to lead a life of balancing yourself or moderation in your life, in that also – the moderation part into an extreme because religion also they want to follow through their mental conception. That's why you find all these religions are a mess. But I would not blame them for that because they had no other instrument to go ahead and they wanted to go ahead. They had no other way to proceed further, so they used only one engine they had. That was this mental projection. And they made all these various projections and that's how they are so diversified and separated from each other. of it – they have made it an extreme. Everything has been made But as soon as your spirit shines, then everything drops out by itself because it is beyond the mind. The spirit is beyond the mind. I don't have to tell anything, that you must have balance, you develop a balance. If you don't have a balance, you'll just get vibrations in one hand. The other hand will be just cold or will be hot, so you start giving your balance. But I don't say that giving a bal- ance means following a particular religion or anything because, if I say that, half you 25 of you may run away.

 The secret working of Self Realization The beauty of Self Realization lies in secretly working out within you everything that is virtuous, that is beautiful, that is joyful – secretly. It doesn't tell you. For example, now supposing somebody has an imbalance on the right-hand side – very intellectual fellow and thinking for the future and a futuristic man, you see, forgetting all his past. Even there are people I've known, they have forgotten their names and the names of their wives, but they are so futuristic. For such a person, if you tell them don't think about the future, he can't do it because he's put his attention like this. The whole ego portion has gone that side and he's all looking forward to the future. But if you put him, somehow or other, in a state where his Self-Realization takes place, then immediately he will “Mother, my right hand is burning and there's nothing in the left hand." So She works it out and She say, כ you start talking in a very mundane way, not in a very subtle manner like all the philosophers talk. All right that means your right is not getting proper vibrations, so you raise your left to the right. Now, for an intellectual, he can't understand. "What is this raising left to the right. I have read the Bhagavad Gita. I have read the Bible. I've done raises you and gradually She the Qur'an. I have done this. Nowhere is it written 'left to the right.' What do you mean by this kind of a nonsense?" You see that you have to put your hand just left to the right transforms you get the balance. I cannot appeal to a mind which has been thinking about God, religion, everything, all right. So the secretive working of the Kundalini is such, that She goes in that portion where you need help. She works it out and She raises you and gradually She transforms you. But if it is not awakened, if it has not yet touched the Sahasrara, it means if it has not and you. touched the feet of your spirit, it may not be interested. It may not be interested. So the first and foremost thing is to raise the Kundalini and to let Her, at least once, know that She has touched the spirit. Then She has interest. Otherwise She hasn't got any interest. That's why you must have seen some people who come to Sahaja Yoga and just dropped out. The reason is the Kundalini itself is not interested. 26

 NEW PEOPLE The beauty of Self Realization lies in secretly working out within you everything that is virtuous, that is beautiful, that is joyful. Two duties of a Sahaja Yogi The foremost duty of every Sahaja Yogi is, first of all, not to be angry or annoyed with people who have done lots of wrong. But be very kind to them and gentle because they are just seekers of truth. How can you be angry with them? Already we have lost so many of them because of their stupidity. But we must try to salvage as many as possible. And then the second duty of every Sahaja Yogi is to slowly, steadily convince the person that he should become the spirit. Of course you'll meet so many who will be self-appointed people. They'll say, "Oh, I've already met the spirit. I am the spirit. I'm Christ." They can say anything, so soothe them down a little. Bring them down and raise their kundalini, but don't leave it half way. It must touch the Sahasrara. I have seen some of the Sahaja Yogis – even in India I've seen – they just give up. They'll sit down, “Oh Mother, forget it. We don't want to do it. It's like a mountain. We can't raise it." But we have to work. That's what we have to do, is to work it out. Raise the kundalini, CC pierce through the Sahasrara and then the kundalini will work it out. It was a question asked to Me, “Mother, we gave Realization to so many people. Out of that, only about thirty percent of people are coming up. The rest are lost." The reason is you have left it half done. So this is one of the reasons why we have lost some people and there is no connection still estab- lished. Now those people who come to Sahaja Yoga, you have to really work hard on them instead of arguing with them because what you will argue is all mental projection. On what point are you going to argue with them because that is not going to give them the light of the spirit. So somehow or other work it out in such a way that they feel the light of the spirit, then talk. But we think that if we talk to them it will help. It's not a question of conviction. It is the question of happening. It is a question of becoming which is important. Unless and until they become, what is the use of argument? There's no law court here. There is no debate going on. There is no election. There's nothing of the kind. It is something that has to happen to all those people, that they should get their light of their spirit. And once they get it, then it is very much easier for you to talk to them and tell them about it. It is made easy. It has to be, as it is the most vital force that has to take place in the realm of spirituality.

 The philosophy of Sahaja Yoga The philosophy of Sahaja Yoga is extremely simple. It is the simplest of all philosophies you can think of. It is a very simple philosophy. It is that once you get your Realization you start feeling for the first time the all-pervading power and forget everything else. wn Once you get that feeling of the all-pervading power, only you know how to manoeuvre Let the bird find its o you get it, how to work it out and how to use it for your own growth. It is made easy. It has to be, as it is the most vital force that has to take place in the realm of spirituality... wings and fly. The grace of God is so great that, once you get Realization, you become such a dif- ferent person that everything drops out. You are really a transformed personality and so that one should know whatever was the is finished now. It is no more there. The past egg is finished. It is the bird. And whom to blame, whom to talk about that the bird is there? Now let the bird find its own wings and fly. Once you understand this simple thing of Sahaja Yoga – it is that we have to make everyone feel the all-pervading power of God to begin with. Unless and until they have felt it, we have not to accept them as realized souls. They have to feel it. Now, of course, as you know, if the Vishuddhi chakra is not all right they may not feel it in the hands. But still, it is no use if you tell them that, according to us, you are a real- ized soul, but according to you, you are not feeling, you see, because the mind is working. Instead of feeling a little disturbed about it, upset about it, they may just think that "You see, it's just a make-believe or psychological stuff and I didn't feel it. I'm a person of great will-power." That attitude – yes, many feel like that, so they can be lost... Understand that wisdom is higher than intellect and discretion is higher than debat- ing. Take a very kind and a compassionate attitude towards the rest of the people and then work it out that they should, somehow or other, feel this subtle force of God's love. Then gradually try to bring them around and teach them what you've got. It is easy to blame their ego. It's easy to say that. But that's not their mistake. That's not their doing. It was because they never felt the spirit before. Whatever they have, they have used that instrument, whether CC very easy to say, “Oh, they're ego-orientated. Throw them away." It is very ego or super-ego, and they have built up their own self in that kind of a fort. But this bar- rier can be broken very easily as soon as they get their Realization. 28

 NEw PEOPLE Understand that wisdom is higher than intellect and discretion is higher than debating. A simple attitude Now for the new people, I have to tell, you have to have patience with yourself. You have to have patience. As I have patience for you, I have love for you, I am here only because of you, you also must have patience for yourself and full confidence in yourself that you'll become the spirit. have these two things, I'm sure it will work out. It is going to If you work out. Once you get your Realization, you have to work it out on other people and gradually you will be amazed that it will grow and it will have become the realized convince you and you will know that you soul. But the realized souls are very simple people. If they say, "I am a realized soul," nobody can believe them because there are no horns SOi around them, no gurudom around them – nothing of the kind. They're extremely simple people. So what is going to help you is a simple attitude toward yourself and towards these Sahaja Yogis and towards Sahaja Yoga, that "“You have CC come here to become the spirit. We have to gain nothing from you. There's no clientele, as such. There's no money proposition – nothing. It is you who have come to the Ganges to take the holy water. It is you who has to take it. We are here to help you." If that attitude is devel- oped, I'm sure, with your cooperation, we can change the face of this world. And as William Blake has said in this Hampstead, "We have to build up Jerusalem here." all. May God Bless you

 RUT SEEKER: I searched for the truth for so long. I know the truth is in You. I know that... Thirty-three years I've searched for someone who really speaks the truth and doesn't bend the truth. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI: That's why you find it. Also if you accept something as truth and you linger on it, then it is a wrong thing and what happens then, you are identified with it and it is very difficult because these misidentifications cannot drop out. You have to give up these misidentifications. Then only the truth comes within you. And truth is the most joy-giving thing. I mean it is joy. Truth is joy and that's beauty, satchitanand. It is not a harsh thing. Truth is not harsh. People think truth means harsh stuff. No, it is not. It is the most beautiful thing. It is the most delicate thing. It's a very subtle thing and it's the most joy-giving thing. It's the truth that when it ripples, see when it pulsates, then you get the joy. The pulsation of truth is joy. It's not harsh. It's extremely kind, CC compassionate. The love of God is truth. They say that "God is love and love is God," but people don't understand what does that mean. Truth is silent. It doesn't speak. It just works. Start getting the cool breeze in your hand and go into meditation, breeze-like. 29 October 1979 30

 THE TRUTH is not always stark like a scorching sun, but it slowly comes out of the clouds and shows you its face and just disappears to tease you a little bit because it loves you. AND LOVE is the thing that understands how to excite your joyous points, how to give joy to you through your spirit. It leaves you drenched in love. Nowhere will you find in the world such a play of beauty. So we reach the conclusion that TRUTH IS JOY It is beauty and it plays with you. And one should not be worried. It sometimes becomes like a little naughty child and sometimes like an old ancient sage, sometimes fresh like a morning breeze. Or it could be a dark night for you to rest. 9 October 1985

 Shri Rama and the fight a story about sankocha THE SOFTNESS OF SHRI RAMA goes to the extremes which I call the sankocha, the formality, the formal... Once when He was fighting Ravana, He was taking out with His arrows his ten heads one after another. And if He took out one, then took out the second, the first one would come back because he had a kind of a blessing that nobody could kill him by hitting him on his head. So Lakshmana said, "You know for definite that this Ravana cannot be killed by hitting on his head, so why don't You hit him in his heart?" Shri Rama said, "The reason is this: that just now in his heart is Mahalakshmi, the Sita. Sita is sitting in his heart. And how can I hit him on his heart because She's there? She might be hurt." "So what's the use of hitting on the head?" he said. CC He said, "Because, once I start hitting him on the head CC there. As soon as his attention will fast, his attention will go go into his head, then I can hit him on his heart." >כ Shri Rama See the sankoch? See the sankoch, the He talked. way Puja 1987

 Credits and Notes Front cover: Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi (Calin Chiriou) Contents pages name: the 361st name of the Goddess from the Sri Lalita Sahasranama Contents pages quote: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 1975 letter Contents pages photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in India, circa 1980 Page 2: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Birthday Puja 2008 (Calin Chiriou) Page 3: Sir CP Srivastava and Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Birthday felicitations 2008 (Calin Chiriou) Page 5, 6 and 8: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Easter Puja 2008 (Calin Chiriou) Page 10, 12 and 13: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Page 18: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Easter Puja 1988 Page 20: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Guru Puja 1983 Page 23: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 14 April 2006 Page 24: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Brighton UK, circa 1981 (Pamela Bromley) Page 26: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Page 28: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Hove UK, circa 1982 Above: Sahaja Yoginis at Holi celebration, Birthday Puja 2008 (Calin Chiriou) Back cover photo: lamps at Diwali Puja 2007 (Paul Anant) Back cover quote: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Navaratri Puja 1994 (“You are the light. Light is not afraid of darkness, is it? – because it can remove the darkness. That's what don't know what you are and you live with very small, very small ideas about yourself.") you are, but you THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE www.divinecoolbreeze.org SUBSCRIPTIONS: Contact@divinecoolbreeze.org CONTENT: editor@divinecoolbreeze.org The Divine Cool Breeze, 881 Frederick Road North Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada PRINTED BY King Printing Company Inc., 181 Industrial Avenue East Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA and Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. No.8, Chandragupta Housing Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411038, Maharashtra India

 You are the light. Light is not afraid of darkness.



----------------------

2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breezes
May and June 2008 volume twenty-one number three
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-1.txt 
 If you understand that although
My physical being is here, I am all over,
it should also be realized that even this body
is an unreal (mithya) appearance.
2 Birthday Puja 2008
4 Easter Puja 2008
10 Sahaja Samadhi
14 Little Children
16 Parents and Children
20 So Many Children
22 Talking to New People
30 Truth is
32 Shri Rama and the Fight
TAMOPAHÂ
THE REMOVER OF IGNORANCE
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-2.txt 
 It is difficult to come to this stage,
but if gradually the unreal is discerned,
the truth will be established effortlessly
and waves of great bliss will envelope your being.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-3.txt 
 49
BIRTHDAY PUJA
ou are the student, you are the examiner
one who has to give yourself a certificate....
and you are the one
Just imagine you are the one who is the curator,
the correcting influence on yourself.
Birthday Puja 2001
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-4.txt 
 555
हरन्टे
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-5.txt 
 just
ive
It is a very important day today, for
all of us because you know how Christ
Easter Puja
died. He was crucified. He was put on a cross
23 March 2008
and He died. It's wonderful the way He said about you people. He asked for
Nagpur
forgiveness from God.
What we have to learn from His life is the way He knew how to forgive all of us. We
have to also forgive people.
That seems to be very difficult for people to forgive and if they are angry, they are
angry. They cannot forgive. Then you are no more Sahaja Yogis. Sahaja Yogis must forgive
from Christ – to forgive.
have
very important because that is the power you
got
Human beings make mistakes. That is a part of their lives, but at the same time, as
Sahaja Yogis, you have to realize that you have to forgive. That is much more important
than getting angry. So to forgive people for doing something wrong, according to you
or according to God, you have to forgive. And you will be surprised that the forgiveness
is such a great, satisfying quality. If you can forgive people, you become extremely pure
because the dirt of the anger that is within us goes out.
4
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Forgiveness
is such a great,
satisfying
quality.
So to forgive is the biggest blessing human beings have. Even Christ said the same
thing. "I forgive them because they know not what they are doing." So if Christ had to say,
те
so what about you? We are ordinary human beings and if we have done mistakes, people
and upset with
can get angry
you.
But the best thing for you is to forgive. Forgive for doing something that should not
have been done. This was the biggest quality of Christ, that He knew how to forgive. And
He forgave people who had made horrible mistakes. Still He forgave them because He
loved them. And that is what you should also forgive.
Today is a special day for that, a special day for forgiveness and that is why I said,
whatever you would think, it's very late, but we have arranged it because I didn't want to
miss the time.
Forgiveness comes by people who are always generous, who are good-hearted. You
know, everybody makes mistakes and so we can also make mistakes. But that means we
have a right to forgive and we have a heart to forgive. If we don't have, then we are not
Sahaja Yogis. We must learn to forgive and forgive without any remarks behind it.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-8.txt 
 FORGIVENESS
Today is a very special day because that's what Christ did. He was one of the most power-
ful Deities or Gods, you can say – most powerful. He could do anything. He could punish
them, all of them for misbehaving, but what is it he did say? He said, "I forgive" and He
asked God also to forgive.
So whatever may be your power, whatever you might have achieved in your life, whatever
position you must be occupying, but you must learn the way to forgive, otherwise you are
nowhere near Christ. You must learn to forgive. That's a very great quality. If you can forgive,
all the time forgive.
And that's why today I take a great joy. I wanted to meet you all and tell
you that today
is a day to forgive. That doesn't mean you sit down and think how many people you have
to forgive. That would be absurd. But something that haunts your mind and
you think
you
have been troubled and have been put to turmoil, then just think that you don't know how
you have
all these powers. The
many powers you have and you can't even forgive when
got
greatest power you have got is to forgive. And today is the day for forgiving, forgiving people
whom
think they have done wrong to you or they have been unkind to you.
you
Please try to remember with how many you are still angry. Just forgive them, then
you
have punished them.
If you forgive them from your heart, then you have punished them. You have given them
back whatever they wanted, they deserve.
So this is not a very difficult thing, to forgive, but people think it's very difficult to for-
give because they have certain great understandings about themselves and then they think
how can they forgive. I don't know what things upset you. Anything can upset you. After
you are all realized souls. You have got your second birth and you are special people. So
all,
you should have a special quality and the special quality is to forgive – to forgive, not to go
on remembering on what
should be angry and you should be upset, but just remember
you
what things you have to forgive. Just forgive for what is going on.
Practical thing, most practical – supposing somebody slaps Me. All right, if somebody
SO
slaps Me, what should I do? I should slap him back? No. Then why should I think, "Why did
he slap me?" Then I should think he must be a stupid fool to do like that. Even that won't
help. On the contrary, if you can just forgive, forgive that person who has done something
for-
it is important that you must forgive because it has no effect. Once
wrong, for
you
you
give, it will have no effect on you, your goodness, your righteousness. But I think human
beings find it difficult to forgive normally – normally.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-10.txt 
 FORGIVENESS
But you are all realized souls. You are not only human beings. That's why
I'm requesting you that you have the power to forgive, to forgive everyone who
hurts you, who tortures you, who troubles you. How far can you go? Just think
of forgiving him and you will be amazed. He will change. He will change and
you will also enjoy yourself.
is the
This is the
It's a difficult thing for people to understand, but just try. Just try what I
am saying. If somebody does any harm to you, just forgive that person and see
message for
the reaction, reaction in that person and in yourself, what happens.
But if you want to carry the burden of anger or of stupidity, whatever it is,
today and
then
you are unnecessarily loaded with useless things. We should not waste our
energy on deciding what's wrong, what did he do and what it is you should do
permanently.
with him. That we should not. Just leave him alone and you just forgive, say
that “I forgive."
Look at Christ – today Christ, such a powerful person, such a powerful
God and, when He was crucified, how He asked for forgiveness for them. Why
did He do it? Because that has power, saying, "I forgive." It's very powerful. You
don't lose your power, but, on the contrary, you go higher in your power. You
go higher in your personality.
Just forgive, as simple as that, to say that "I forgive." Just like that, that's
how I live because people have their own ways and they do whatever they like.
But I don't get angry on their point and I am not upset on that point, neither
am I concerned. I just say, "I forgive." That's all and you'll be amazed. Within
Myself, it helps so much – really very helpful.
So this is a very big quality for which today is a special day. On the cross,
Christ said that “Oh God, forgive them for they don't know what they are
doing." On the cross ... He said this and what we have to learn is to forgive
– for our sake, not for others. This helps us. If we forgive, it will help us very
much within ourselves. This is the message for today and permanently – per-
manently.
Always, if you are angry with anyone, just say, "I forgive." If you find some-
body hurting you or troubling you or torturing you, how will you work on it?
Just forgive. Just forgive. It is the only way.
Today that's why it's a very important day for us. And I am so very happy
that some of us are here and that I can speak to
Thank
9.
you.
you.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-12.txt 
 About two thousand years back,
one of the great astrologers ... described
about this thing so clearcut that you'll be amazed.
This is
Samadı
hi
Sahaja
He said that a great yogi will come on this Earth.... He said that gradually,
we'll start seeing some miracles from 1964 to °66.... But he says -The Kundalini
the real change
- manvantar – in the new will start from 1970 and by 1980 it will take its
grip. At that time, by this new method, the new age will be formed.... A new
age of active divinity, Kruta Yuga, will start.
At that time, the sun will move in a new way. The axis of the Earth will
age
Shakti will be
be reduced and the speed of the Earth will be reduced gradually. And at that awakened and will
time a great Mahayogi will be born who will be completely Parambrahma....
He will possess all the powers to do or not to do. That means Mahakali and be enlightening.
Mahalakshmi – all the
Before this, people used to go into bhakti, devotion. Jnana means reading
– Patanjali Yoga. And then they used to get their mokshas. But with this new
method that this Mahayogi will bring in – the pure power within
powers.
in your
chakras – will rise and, as a result, the Kundalini shakti will be awakened and
you,
will be enlightening. Because of this new method of Mahayoga, you will see
your own eyes and you'll get it in this body in your lifetime, the Realiza-
tion. And you'll get the joy of Realization.
Imagine, two thousand years back – he's greater than Blake, I must say.
His name was Acharya Kaka Bhujandar-Sattvachari.
You don't have to sacrifice this body. Many people, great saints sacrificed 27January 19 82
their body in the living condition. They went into a cave and shut in them- Sholapur India
with
selves and died. That's not necessary with this new method. And
die either. It means you will achieve your spirit. And the sakshatkari sant, the
realized souls, the saints who are realized – the Brahmananda, the joy of the
you won't
Brahma by this new yoga – they won't have to go into samadhi. Samadhi is
where people just sit down, go on meditating for hours together and the ants
grow upon them. All that is not necessary. Just without doing anything like
that, they will get their Realization and they will enjoy the joy of Brahma, the
Sahaja Samadhi. This is Sahaja Samadhi...
Among millions, first, one will get Realization. So you understand your
own positions. You see the way sometimes we fritter away our attention on
nonsensical things. You realize that, among millions, you are one. This is writ-
ten here. We fritter away our attention in useless things like “my husband,
wife, my
CC
children...." It is written here that, among millions, one will be
my
selected. Please follow that point.
11
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-13.txt 
 SAHAJA SAMADHI
Then all the human race can get over their death,
their destruction, by this yoga. You'll have to lead a
life, a married life, a normal life. You may or may not
marry, but be like a normal householder, otherwise you
siddhi.... Samsari means living on
this
cannot get
Yoga
this Earth....
You will be able to see these subtle things with your
own eyes. You can see them. This will not only happen
of
in India, but all over the world. India is a country
great punyas. That's why there are powers which will
look after the protection of this country and this coun-
try will gradually rise.
that they may have to go for a third world
war and they will have to suffer for it. After that, this
Не
says
Great Incarnation will interfere and all the countries
will come together with the understanding of collective
oneness and they will understand that war is so horrible.
In a very big city a conference of all the countries will
be held. There, not the politicians, but the yogis will
direct them. Yogis – he has called you yogis through-
out.... Through prayers, we'll be able to unite all the
countries.
By the new inventions of science, the divine knowl-
edge and the science will become one. With the science,
we’ll be able to establish the existence of God and of the
spirit.
That is how there will be no difference. There will
be coordination between the science and the co-rela-
tionship between the science and the spirit or the divine
knowledge. Already we are getting it because on My
photograph people get vibrations. It's a science....
Then he says that because of ignorance and because
of maya, yogis had to suffer a lot to become collectively
conscious – Brahmamayi – to feel the Brahma. And they
had to do a lot of penance that was so difficult to become
sahaja. This is the word – "sahaja," sahaja prapta.
Sahaja – and
to achieve Brahma. In the new yoga system, when it
will manifest in the different countries in the new age,
CC
you don't have to give up anything
the administration will be governed by people who have
on how far they
are in their yoga and their qualities as yogis. That will
will come together þe the determining factor. They will be able to create
All the countries
their own powers of yoga, depending
a society which will completely fulfill their desires and
with the understanding their necessities and people won't need to have money
accumulated with them. The
be completely finished and, in their absence, the coun-
try, the samaj, the society will be healthy and restful and
without any anger.
and sickness will
poverty
of collective oneness.
12
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-15.txt 
 they are
Shri Ganehsa Puja
13 September 2003
Cabella Italy
Little children – they are the ones who are
incarnations. They are the ones who are going to lead humanity into some great advance-
ment.
The humanity has to be looked after. They are tomorrow's humanity and we are
today's. And what are we giving to them for them to follow? What is their aim in life? It
is very, very difficult to say. But with the Sahaja Yoga they will all
They'll behave in a proper way and the whole thing will be a different mass of Sahaja Yogis
coming up. But it is the duty of bigger Sahaja Yogis to look after them, to have better
moral standards, to have better lives so that they follow your life and become genuinely
good Sahaja Yogis. It's a very big responsibility. Perhaps we don't recognize it, we don't
understand, but all these are little creatures who are after the image of great souls and they
should be brought up in that way, respected in that manner and loved with great care.
This is to be understood.
in the proper way.
go
The problem with our elderly people is this: that we do not consider children to be
considered, to be bothered about, to be understood about. We think we are too intel-
ligent, too good and we need not waste our energy with them. This is the trouble of the
elderly people..
We should know they are all incarnations of Shri Ganesha and they should be given
proper attention, proper understanding about themselves. I find a certain amount of chil-
dren who are very well-behaved, who are very sensible and there are some who have no
idea as to what they are doing. So it is the duty of the elders to put ideas into their head,
to properly understand about themselves and the self-respect. The same thing I would say
for the elder Sahaja Yogis who have to look after their younger brothers and sisters.
In this family of ours, which we call as Sahaja Yogis, there are all kinds of people, all
all behaviors. Of course, they should not be regimented, there should not be uni-
types,
formity, but in that variety there should be this beauty, there should be a beautiful trend
of being one with each other...
What should the elders do to achieve that? What is our solid contribution to their
lives? The first will be to tell them who is Shri Ganesha and what are the qualities of Gane-
sha, what does He represent... Once they start understanding that – though being a little
boy, He's so generous, He's so kind, He's so forgiving – they'll be amazed because they are
also small and they'll also take to that kind of life.
I find some children very sensible, very good here. Some are naughty and some don't
understand what we are doing here. Whatever it is, they are, after all, children. And what
you have to do is to look after them, respect them and give them the full idea about Shri
Ganesha.
14
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-16.txt 
 the ones
You are grown-up only if you
can imbibe the qualities of Shri Ganesha.
I think everybody must have a statue of Shri Ganesha in their house so the children
will see it and ask, "Who is He? What is He doing?" And you will be amazed how they
will understand Him, how they will understand His qualities and how they will work it
out. It is important for all of you to have at least one Shri Ganesha in your house so that
you can tell your children that “You all have to become like Him."
Now what are the qualities of Shri Ganesha? They won't understand chastity. They are
too small. They won't understand all those qualities. But one quality they will understand
is to be honest....
Gradually you will find all difficult ones will go down. It will work out that way
because you see they don't understand My lecture, they don't understand what I am
saying. But one thing is there – if there are some oppositions within, they will show –
well. Because they are so innocent and so simple, their innocence will help
show
very
them, expose them to reality.
I hope you all look after your children, guide them properly and take them to a level
of understanding that they understand what is their position, what qualities they should
have, why will they be respected. You'll be amazed that their behavior will change the
behavior of all the other children.
What I have to say is that nobody should think that you are very grown-up because
you can keep quiet, sit quietly and all that. You are grown-up only if you can imbibe the
qualities of Shri Ganesha. I have seen people who are very grown-up still do not have the
simple qualities of chastity, of honesty. They don't have and they can't have because they
don't think it is important.
So I leave it to you to find out Shri Ganesha within yourself.
I enjoy their company because they're so innocent and so simple-hearted and I like
them very, very much. So
the contrary, you should know they deserve much more love, much more understanding
and much more scope to grow.
should not get afraid or frightened of their mischief. On
you
I hope by the time they will be of your age, theyll be great Sahaja Yogis. They'll under-
stand what we are doing here. I had to face mountains of nonsense with the older people,
but these won't have that. They'll be very simple, very sweet and they'll understand love. O
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Delhi India
15 December 1983
parents &
What I am going to tell you today is a little about
the relationship of parents with their children and how it is supposed to be.
First of all, we develop two kinds of relationships with our children,
in that one is emotional and the other is responsibility.
Emotions and responsibility remain two different things.
16
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-18.txt 
 children
Suppose there is one mother and her child learns or does something wrong.
and
Still, because of emotions, she says, “All right, let him do it. Nowadays all Emotion
children are like this. What to say to the child? Everything is fine."
CC
Another mother is there who wants to make her children dutiful and
responsible. For that, she says to her children to get up early in the morning,
be active, study hard, go to school on time, sit here, sit there, wear the clothes
properly, etc. And she is always behind her child to correct him.
Now I should tell you that this is not integrated. Today in Sahaj Yoga we
have integration. Both the things – emotion and responsibility - have to be
integrated. There has to be integration, not combination.
The difference between combination and integration comes because our
emotions should be responsibility and responsibility should be our emotions.
Like we love our children – then we will say that because we love him, so it
is our duty and responsibility that he should walk on the right path and he
should walk on the right path because we love him. If we don't correct our
child or don't tell him the right way to live, then it means that we are emo-
responsibility
have to be
integrated.
tionally dominating. Then you say, "What is there in correcting them? Let it
be. Let them do what they want. They will be hurt if we correct them or scold
them. Why to hurt them?"
Another person will think, “No, even if they feel bad or get hurt, we have
to purify them, cleanse them and make them shining."
But when integration comes, then the person makes his own behavior
and nature, such that it affects the child. For example, the father is a very lazy
person. He is a drunkard, smokes and does all filthy things. The mother is
very short-tempered, beats and scolds the children a lot, speaks harshly. Then
all this affects on the children spontaneously. Then, even if you try to give
them a thousand preachings,
ior. “How are these people?" Nothing is going to affect by teaching or telling
the children. They learn by seeing. They see the behavior of their parents
and learn. They see how you behave with others and how you behave with translated from Hindi
them, how you behave with each other. Children always keep noticing all this. reprinted from Nirmala Yoga magazine
nice education, etc., they see what is your behav-
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Integrated knowledge
There is a small story. There was one lady with a very bad nature. She had her old father-
in-law. She used to give him milk in a very dirty utensil made of clay. The
used to drink in the same pot without complaining. The son of the lady used to take that
milk and give it to his grandfather. One day that clay pot got broken. The child started
My eternal
fellow
poor
love flowS
crying loudly. The mother asked the child, "Why are you crying so loudly? What is there
to cry for a small clay pot? If it has broken, it doesn't matter."
Then the child said, “Mother, I am crying because I am thinking that when you get
old, then in which utensil will I give you the milk, as this dirty clay pot is broken.'
After listening this, the mother understood and said that "If another pot will be pur-
chased, then
So the children always keep on observing your behaviour and whatever you do affects
your child deeply, rather than giving him big lectures about righteousness from morning
until night. Therefore, all the Sahaja Yogis who are here and whose children are studying
here should understand whether they have the integrated knowledge or not. After getting
the integrated knowledge, one doesn't feel bad if made to understand things and doesn't
get spoiled even if he is loved a lot.
My eternal love flows towards you all and I keep on telling you things and making you
understand, but have not hurt, neither do you got spoiled. The reason is because
it is done with integrated knowledge. If the children know that you love them with full
heart, then even one scolding is enough. But instead if you always keep on scolding them,
then they think that it is your habit to scold and they don't pay attention or respect.
So the children should be handled very carefully and with love. In fact, I would say
you must keep them with love. If you find any bad behaviour in them or negative
activity, then observe it three or four times and then peacefully sit with them and tell them
that it is not good. You will be surprised to see that if you behave with them properly and
with love, then they will be afraid to lose your love and will correct themselves fully. But
if you have never shown your love to your child and always tried to correct him – "Keep
this here, keep this there, arrange this, do like this, do like that," etc. – then the children
will think that it is your habit to always say like this and they will not give importance to
what you say. So your behaviour has to be integrated.
towards you.
old."
will not cry and give me the milk in that when I
get
you
you
got
that
>כ
18
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-20.txt 
 PARENTS AND CHILDREN
The instruction of the spirit
In our country, we see that people speak lies, steal, do this, do that for their children.
Even if they have to sell their country, they won't mind to do it for the children.
And it is the reverse in the West, that they are not at all bothered to put water in the
mouth if he is dying of thirst. Both these things are not integrated.
In the West, parents think that our carpet should not get spoiled, our door
should be neat and clean, our car should be all right and the children should work.
They are always behind their children to clean here and there. Here in India, we
spoil the children. Especially the mother spoils the children very much. Sometimes your university.
even the father spoils the children.
So first of all, we should face ourselves and see why we are spoiling them. You
should not love them in a way that they don't respect you or don't listen to you
they should not think that they can convince you and justify themselves. In this way,
by giving them blind love, we spoil them and put them in a wrong direction. In the
Sahaja Yoga is
and
same way, by being too strict with them, we make our children such that they turn
their faces from us. Then they don't want to look at your face.
In between these two things is Sahaj Yoga on our Sushumna. Therefore we should
remain on Sushumna. Neither should we flow with too much love nor go with too
much responsible behavior. We should flow with the spirit. And when
with the instruction of spirit, then you will see that you will be looked after and your
will move
you
children will also be looked after...
The same way is the condition of teachers. If teachers are irritable, short tem-
pered, every time shouting, "This is bad, that is wrong," etc., then the children will
get spoiled and become like them – materialistic. If teachers are over-indulgent and
spoil them with love without being strict, then the children will also become like
them. This is why teachers have a big responsibility to make their life such that the
children learn and they have a great personality as an example for them. Children
should remember in the future that they had a teacher who had this special quality
CC
in him.
So this work is of very great people. In ancient times there used to be a
used to be a realized soul and used to be a very great personality. This is why your
gotra is Sahaja Yoga, which is your university. And our teachers from Sahaj schools gotra: the ancestral university
should be qualified as Sahaja Yogis and also the students.
The best and extraordinary idealistic children should come out of this school
after education. This doesn't mean that they will become very rich and very domi-
who
guru
nating personalities. But they will be such that they will become foundations of this
world like Shri Ganesha is the foundation of this universe.
In the same way, we have to build many such foundations. This is why I am
behind opening a school based on Sahaj Yoga....
I hope that all of you will cleanse and open your hearts and move in the direc-
tion that you will make your children idealistic personalities – and everyone will
collectively do this.
How we have to remove the fighting and aggressive tendency in children and
how to destroy the negative attitude of children, I want to teach you all who are the
parents. But when this work will begin, then you will see how the parents will change
and how the children will change. In the same way, the whole world can change. I
don't see any other way. So you all must understand your importance....
I bless all with the success.
you
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-21.txt 
 20
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-22.txt 
 I HAVE SO MANY CHILDREN ALL OVER THE WORLD,
apart from the ones whom I actually physically gave birth.
We have to think of all those today who are away from us,
thousands of miles, praying to God Almighty for their spiritual ascent.
One has to only pray for the spiritual ascent because,
as you ascend, you get all the rest of it....
If you decide that you have to ascend spiritually within,
then everything you have to receive –
all the blessings that God wants to shower upon you,
to make you the citizen of His great kingdom,
where you are no more judged,
you are no more chastised,
you are no more put to any test,
will reside in eternal love of God and in His glory....
where
you
Very deep down within us lies that source of joy.
So we have to go deep down within ourselves
and feel the joy of this Mother of yours, that I have within Myself.
Go deep down. It is there.
Enjoy it and then give it to others.
Like a fountain of joy, you should give.
Birthday Puja 1983
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Basies
The
how to talk to new people
Hampstead UK |I bow to all the Sahaja Yogis and all the seekers of truth. May God bless you all.
It is such a great thing to be back home with all of you and to see you here blooming
with joy and happiness. That's the fate of a mother who has so many children, that she
from places to places, leaving some children behind, but looking forward to meeting
12 May 1983
goes
others. Somehow that compensates for the separation.
Today I think we should start on very subtler ideas about Sahaja Yoga because you
people have understood it on the other plane of the mechanism that works it out, the
kundalini, the chakras and all those things. But we have to see what is the problem that
actually faces human beings and why we make such mistakes in our seeking. It is a very
important thing to understand because, unless and until we understand why we really
make mistakes or others make mistakes, we can never forgive them and we might have
a kind of a high-handed attitude towards others who are now coming to Sahaja Yoga,
thinking why did they do like that and why did they commit this mistake and they could
have done better. But I personally think that, if you look at yourself, you will know that
you also committed mistakes. Everybody has committed mistakes. Some have committed
more mistakes and some have committed less. But what is the reason why a human being
has been committing mistake? That's what we should look into it.
22
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-24.txt 
 What is going to help you is a simple attitude toward yourself
and toward these Sahaja Yogis and towards Sahaja Yoga that
"You have come here to become the spirit.
We have to gain nothing from you.
There's no clientele, as such.
There's no money proposition – nothing.
It is you who have come to the Ganges,
to take the holy water.
It is you who has to take it.
We are here to help you."
If that attitude is developed ...
we can change
the face of this world.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-25.txt 
 The spirit empowers us
Those who have got Realization and those who have felt the cool breeze and have matured
in Sahaja Yoga know that automatically you drop out many things – automatically. Now
why do we do it? You see, why do we drop things? Even I don't ask you for it. You just
drop them. Why? The reason is the light of the spirit within ourselves empowers us to
see that this is wrong. Like as we have got eyes – once we have eyes, we know whether we
are going to fall here or we are going to slip or what's going to happen. In the same way,
Without Self
Realization
what happens
is that reality when you get this vibratory awareness, it is not an awareness only of the fingers. It is the
awareness of the whole being and you just drop out everything that is against your spirit.
I don't have to tell you.
But without Self Realization what happens is that reality is just a myth. It's only a
mental projection with which you live. You project your mind and you think this is real-
ity. You can call anything as reality. Any hallucination can be a reality. Any theory can
be a reality. Any absurd ideas could be a reality. I mean all religions have taken that form
now. It's very sad, but all religions which came from truth and from reality are nothing
but mental projections and they're very far away from reality.
You can only feel, understand and assimilate reality if you are a self-realized person.
Unless and until this Self has expressed itself or manifested within yourself, the light has
come into you, how are you to manage? Whatever you try is a mental projection- like
many people who came first, "Oh, we believe that we are born again." All right, now how
can you challenge it if you believe into something?
is just a myth.
CC
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-26.txt 
 NEW PEOPLE
Myth, reality and balance
"I believe" is the one of the great sentences we use. But what is that "I" that
believes? That is that ego. That's not your Self because you have not yet felt the
Self. So to feel the Self is the most important thing if you have to know the real-
ity. So you must excuse all others who have not felt the Self, who have their own
mental projections. They might look like a fanatic. They might look like stupid
people. They may look to be very high-handed or maybe you might think they
are these ego-orientated pseudo-intellectuals and all sorts of things. But all that is
mythical because that plane on which they move is mythical itself. Whatever you
know through your mental projection is imagination itself.
But the spirit is the reality and to know the reality you have to be the spirit.
And once the spirit starts shining within you, you just drop everything like a hot
brick. Like I would say, as I've many times told you, that in our human aware-
ness we know what beauty is, we know what cleanliness is. For a dog, he doesn't
understand cleanliness. If you don't give him a bath, he'll be quite happy. Actually
to give him a bath is a problem. But to a human being, you see, what is a sin or
what is wrong? A sin is nothing but whatever is against the spirit is sin. Even fear
is a sin. Any such small little sins or the big sins, all are nothing, but they are all
against the spirit. But if you have not felt the spirit, whatever you do will amount the ascent.
to something like anti-spirit because you don't know what you are doing.
Now the prophets have tried their level best to tell you that you must keep
your balance, you have to follow a certain religion, as they call it, or as we call it
dharma within yourself. But that, too, for what? Why to have the balance within
you? People will always say, "“What's wrong?" "What's wrong if we are not in
balance. Whať's there? Whatť's wrong in drinking?" Before Realization I never
said don't drink. After Realization, you yourself drop out. But they say,
wrong? Why does he tell us like this? Why should we listen to them?"
Why the balance? The balance is needed for the ascent. Unless and until
have a balance how will you ascend? Imagine an aeroplane without any balance.
Say a wing is missing, will it be able to take off from the ground? It cannot. So
for the ascent, it is necessary to have the necessary balance. So they said, "Keep
in the balance."
The balance
is needed for
“What's
you
But even when we're just told the simple thing to keep to the central path,
to lead a life of balancing yourself or moderation in your life, in that also – the
moderation part
into an extreme because religion also they want to follow through their mental
conception. That's why you find all these religions are a mess. But I would not
blame them for that because they had no other instrument to go ahead and they
wanted to go ahead. They had no other way to proceed further, so they used only
one engine they had. That was this mental projection. And they made all these
various projections and that's how they are so diversified and separated from each
other.
of it – they have made it an extreme. Everything has been made
But as soon as your spirit shines, then everything drops out by itself because
it is beyond the mind. The spirit is beyond the mind. I don't have to tell
anything, that you must have balance, you develop a balance. If you don't have
a balance, you'll just get vibrations in one hand. The other hand will be just cold
or will be hot, so you start giving your balance. But I don't say that giving a bal-
ance means following a particular religion or anything because, if I say that, half
you
25
of you may run away.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-27.txt 
 The secret working of Self Realization
The beauty of Self Realization lies in secretly working out within you everything that is
virtuous, that is beautiful, that is joyful – secretly. It doesn't tell you. For example, now
supposing somebody has an imbalance on the right-hand side – very intellectual fellow
and thinking for the future and a futuristic man, you see, forgetting all his past. Even
there are people I've known, they have forgotten their names and the names of their
wives, but they are so futuristic. For such a person, if you tell them don't think about the
future, he can't do it because he's put his attention like this. The whole ego portion has
gone that side and he's all looking forward to the future. But if you put him, somehow
or other, in a state where his Self-Realization takes place, then immediately he will
“Mother, my right hand is burning and there's nothing in the left hand."
So
She works it
out and She
say,
כ
you start talking in a very mundane way, not in a very subtle manner like all the
philosophers talk. All right that means your right is not getting proper vibrations, so you
raise your left to the right. Now, for an intellectual, he can't understand. "What is this
raising left to the right. I have read the Bhagavad Gita. I have read the Bible. I've done
raises you and
gradually She
the Qur'an. I have done this. Nowhere is it written 'left to the right.' What do you mean
by this kind of a nonsense?" You see that you have to put your hand just left to the right
transforms
you get the balance. I cannot appeal to a mind which has been thinking about God,
religion, everything, all right.
So the secretive working of the Kundalini is such, that She goes in that portion where
you need help. She works it out and She raises you and gradually She transforms you.
But if it is not awakened, if it has not yet touched the Sahasrara, it means if it has not
and
you.
touched the feet of your spirit, it may not be interested. It may not be interested.
So the first and foremost thing is to raise the Kundalini and to let Her, at least once,
know that She has touched the spirit. Then She has interest. Otherwise She hasn't got any
interest. That's why you must have seen some people who come to Sahaja Yoga and just
dropped out. The reason is the Kundalini itself is not interested.
26
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-28.txt 
 NEW PEOPLE
The beauty of Self Realization
lies in secretly working out within you
everything that is virtuous, that is beautiful, that is joyful.
Two duties of a Sahaja Yogi
The foremost duty of every Sahaja Yogi is, first of all, not to be angry or annoyed with people who
have done lots of wrong. But be very kind to them and gentle because they are just seekers of truth.
How can you be angry with them? Already we have lost so many of them because of their stupidity.
But we must try to salvage as many as possible.
And then the second duty of every Sahaja Yogi is to slowly, steadily convince the person that he
should become the spirit. Of course you'll meet so many who will be self-appointed people. They'll
say, "Oh, I've already met the spirit. I am the spirit. I'm Christ." They can say anything, so soothe
them down a little. Bring them down and raise their kundalini, but don't leave it half way. It must
touch the Sahasrara. I have seen some of the Sahaja Yogis – even in India I've seen – they just give
up. They'll sit down, “Oh Mother, forget it. We don't want to do it. It's like a mountain. We can't
raise it." But we have to work. That's what we have to do, is to work it out. Raise the kundalini,
CC
pierce through the Sahasrara and then the kundalini will work it out.
It was a question asked to Me, “Mother, we gave Realization to so many people. Out of that,
only about thirty percent of people are coming up. The rest are lost." The reason is you have left it
half done.
So this is one of the reasons why we have lost some people and there is no connection still estab-
lished. Now those people who come to Sahaja Yoga, you have to really work hard on them instead
of arguing with them because what you will argue is all mental projection. On what point are you
going to argue with them because that is not going to give them the light of the spirit.
So somehow or other work it out in such a way that they feel the light of the spirit, then talk.
But we think that if we talk to them it will help. It's not a question of conviction. It is the question
of happening. It is a question of becoming which is important. Unless and until they become, what
is the use of argument? There's no law court here. There is no debate going on. There is no election.
There's nothing of the kind. It is something that has to happen to all those people, that they should
get their light of their spirit. And once they get it, then it is very much easier for you to talk to them
and tell them about it.
It is made easy. It has to be,
as it is the most vital force that has to take place
in the realm of spirituality.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-29.txt 
 The philosophy of Sahaja Yoga
The philosophy of Sahaja Yoga is extremely simple. It is the simplest of all philosophies
you can think of. It is a very simple philosophy. It is that once you get your Realization
you start feeling for the first time the all-pervading power and forget everything else.
wn Once you get that feeling of the all-pervading power, only you know how to manoeuvre
Let the bird
find its o
you get
it, how to work it out and how to use it for your own growth. It is made easy. It has to be,
as it is the most vital force that has to take place in the realm of spirituality...
wings and fly.
The grace of God is so great that, once you get Realization, you become such a dif-
ferent person that everything drops out. You are really a transformed personality and so
that one should know whatever was the
is finished now. It is no more there. The
past
egg
is finished. It is the bird. And whom to blame, whom to talk about that the bird is there?
Now let the bird find its own wings and fly. Once you understand this simple thing of
Sahaja Yoga – it is that we have to make everyone feel the all-pervading power of God to
begin with. Unless and until they have felt it, we have not to accept them as realized souls.
They have to feel it.
Now, of course, as you know, if the Vishuddhi chakra is not all right they may not feel
it in the hands. But still, it is no use if you tell them that, according to us, you are a real-
ized soul, but according to you, you are not feeling, you see, because the mind is working.
Instead of feeling a little disturbed about it, upset about it, they may just think that "You
see, it's just a make-believe or psychological stuff and I didn't feel it. I'm a person of great
will-power." That attitude – yes, many feel like that, so they can be lost...
Understand that wisdom is higher than intellect and discretion is higher than debat-
ing. Take a very kind and a compassionate attitude towards the rest of the people and then
work it out that they should, somehow or other, feel this subtle force of God's love. Then
gradually try to bring them around and teach them what you've got. It is easy to blame
their
ego. It's
easy to say that. But that's not their mistake. That's not their doing. It was because they
never felt the spirit before. Whatever they have, they have used that instrument, whether
CC
very easy to say, “Oh, they're ego-orientated. Throw them away." It is very
ego or super-ego, and they have built up their own self in that kind of a fort. But this bar-
rier can be broken very easily as soon as they get their Realization.
28
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-30.txt 
 NEw PEOPLE
Understand that wisdom is higher than intellect
and discretion is higher than debating.
A simple attitude
Now for the new people, I have to tell, you have to have patience with
yourself. You have to have patience. As I have patience for you, I have
love for you, I am here only because of you, you also must have patience
for yourself and full confidence in yourself that you'll become the spirit.
have these two things, I'm sure it will work out. It is going to
If
you
work out.
Once you get your Realization, you have to work it out on other
people and gradually you will be amazed that it will grow and it will
have become the realized
convince you and you will know that
you
soul. But the realized souls are very simple people. If they say,
"I am
a realized soul," nobody can believe them because there are no horns
SOi
around them, no gurudom around them – nothing of the kind. They're
extremely simple people.
So what is going to help you is a simple attitude toward yourself and
towards these Sahaja Yogis and towards Sahaja Yoga, that "“You have
CC
come here to become the spirit. We have to gain nothing from you.
There's no clientele, as such. There's no money proposition – nothing.
It is you who have come to the Ganges to take the holy water. It is
you
who has to take it. We are here to help you." If that attitude is devel-
oped, I'm sure, with your cooperation, we can change the face of this
world.
And as William Blake has said in this Hampstead, "We have to build
up Jerusalem here."
all.
May God Bless
you
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-31.txt 
 RUT
SEEKER: I searched for the truth for so long.
I know the truth is in You. I know that...
Thirty-three years I've searched for someone who
really speaks the truth and doesn't bend the truth.
SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI: That's why you find it. Also if
you
accept something as truth and you linger on it, then it is a wrong
thing and what happens then, you are identified with it and it is
very difficult because these misidentifications cannot drop out.
You have to give up these misidentifications. Then only the
truth comes within you. And truth is the most joy-giving thing. I
mean it is joy. Truth is joy and that's beauty, satchitanand. It is not
a harsh thing. Truth is not harsh. People think truth means harsh
stuff. No, it is not. It is the most beautiful thing. It is the most
delicate thing. It's a very subtle thing and it's the most joy-giving
thing. It's the truth that when it ripples, see when it pulsates, then
you get the joy.
The pulsation of truth is joy. It's not harsh. It's extremely kind,
CC
compassionate. The love of God is truth. They say that "God is
love and love is God," but people don't understand what does that
mean.
Truth is silent. It doesn't speak. It just works. Start getting the
cool breeze in your hand and go into meditation, breeze-like.
29 October 1979
30
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-32.txt 
 THE TRUTH
is not always stark like a scorching sun,
but it slowly comes out of the clouds and shows you its face
and just disappears to tease you a little bit because it loves you.
AND LOVE
is the thing that understands how to excite your joyous points,
how to give joy to you through your spirit.
It leaves you drenched in love.
Nowhere will you find in the world such a play of beauty.
So we reach the conclusion that
TRUTH IS JOY
It is beauty and it plays with you.
And one should not be worried.
It sometimes becomes like a little naughty child
and sometimes like an old ancient sage,
sometimes fresh like a morning breeze.
Or it could be a dark night for you to rest.
9 October 1985
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Shri
Rama
and the fight
a story about sankocha
THE SOFTNESS OF SHRI RAMA goes to the extremes which I
call the sankocha, the formality, the formal...
Once when He was fighting Ravana, He was taking out
with His arrows his ten heads one after another. And if He
took out one, then took out the second, the first one would
come back because he had a kind of a blessing that nobody
could kill him by hitting him on his head.
So Lakshmana said, "You know for definite that this
Ravana cannot be killed by hitting on his head, so why don't
You hit him in his heart?"
Shri Rama said, "The reason is this: that just now in his
heart is Mahalakshmi, the Sita. Sita is sitting in his heart.
And how can I hit him on his heart because She's there? She
might be hurt."
"So what's the use of hitting on the head?" he said.
CC
He said, "Because, once I start hitting him on the head
CC
there. As soon as his attention will
fast, his attention will
go
go into his head, then I can hit him on his heart."
>כ
Shri Rama
See the sankoch? See the sankoch, the
He talked.
way
Puja 1987
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Credits and Notes
Front cover: Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi (Calin Chiriou) Contents pages name: the 361st
name of the Goddess from the Sri Lalita Sahasranama Contents pages quote: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi,
1975 letter Contents pages photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in India, circa 1980 Page 2: Shri
Mataji Nirmala Devi, Birthday Puja 2008 (Calin Chiriou) Page 3: Sir CP Srivastava and Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi, Birthday felicitations 2008 (Calin Chiriou) Page 5, 6 and 8: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi,
Easter Puja 2008 (Calin Chiriou) Page 10, 12 and 13: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Page 18: Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi, Easter Puja 1988 Page 20: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Guru Puja 1983 Page 23: Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi, 14 April 2006 Page 24: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Brighton UK, circa 1981 (Pamela
Bromley) Page 26: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Page 28: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Hove UK, circa 1982
Above: Sahaja Yoginis at Holi celebration, Birthday Puja 2008 (Calin Chiriou) Back cover photo: lamps
at Diwali Puja 2007 (Paul Anant) Back cover quote: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Navaratri Puja 1994
(“You are the light. Light is not afraid of darkness, is it? – because it can remove the darkness. That's what
don't know what you are and you live with very small, very small ideas about yourself.")
you are, but
you
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
www.divinecoolbreeze.org
SUBSCRIPTIONS: Contact@divinecoolbreeze.org
CONTENT: editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
The Divine Cool Breeze, 881 Frederick Road
North Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
PRINTED BY
King Printing Company Inc., 181 Industrial Avenue East
Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA
and
Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd.
No.8, Chandragupta Housing Society, Paud Road,
Kothrud, Pune 411038, Maharashtra India
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-35.txt 
 You are the light.
Light is not afraid
of darkness.
