Yuvaclcishti Val 9 Issue 2 AJune 2008 "No doubt, we must care for our young people. And look after them and give them their due respect and they must know their due duties towards Sahaja Yoga. I found them to be excellent workers, very dedicated innocent hands that I have got. I am very proud of them." 1988-0104: Yuva Shakti, Ganapatipule BA

 ire If your job is to spread Sahaja Yoga MOGA you will never SALAJA VOA be unemployed

 ndcs श्री ज्ञानेश्वर NIRMAL VANI : LAJJA SHOULD IWEAR JEANS/TROUSERS? (Self Introspection of a Yuva Yogini) 10 Jumble Words Shri Ganesha's Qualitative Manifestation 11 12 उघड सहस्त्रार माते THE श्रीमाताजी की आरती 14 अनुभव 16 Detachment and Responsibility 17 Awaken Your Creativity 19 YuvaShakti Reporter 20 आदिगुरू श्री राजा जनक 22 Kr**************** u*****************

 YUVADRISHTI Published by Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 8, Chandragupt Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 038 Tel : 020-25286537, Fax : 020-25286722 For queries regarding delay in receiving the magazine, please call: Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd., Tel : 020-25286537, E-Mail : Sale@nitl.co.in Please mail your experiences, poems, articles, suggestions, comments, etc. to: Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. Plot No. 8, Chandragupt Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 038 yuvadrishti@gmail.com Printed by Re-Prints Pune We solemnly thank our article writers, editors, designers/professionals etc. for their help in making this issue.

 सु Yuvadrishti June 2008 ० श्री ज्ञानेश्वर महाराष्ट्र के महानतम् संत कवि श्री ज्ञानेश्वर का जन्म आलन्दी में सन 1275 में हुआ । उनके पिता विठ्ठलपन्त तथा माता रुक्मणी बाई थी। उनका परिवार आपेगाँव में रहता था। इस क परिवार के सभी सदस्य पुण्य आत्मा थे तथा परमात्मा की भक्ति के लिए जाने जाते थे त्र्यंबकपन्त, श्री ज्ञानेश्वर के पड़दादा, ने नाथपन्थी गोरखनाथ से तथा उनके दादा गोविन्दपन्त ने गाहिनीनाथ से आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्राप्त किया। श्री रा आरर ि ज्ञानेश्वर के नाना सिद्धोपन्त कुल्कर्णी आलन्दी के निवासी थे। श्री ज्ञानेश्वरजी के पिता विठ्ठलपन्त को, जो कि बाल्यावस्था से ही धार्मिक प्रवृत्ति के थे, सन्यासियों की संगत अच्छी लगती थी तथा उन्हें तीर्थयात्राओं का बड़ा चाव था। भ्रमण के दौरान वे आलन्दी पहुँचे। वहाँ सिद्धोपन्त कुलकर्णी ने जब इस होनहार के आदेश पर सामान्य गृहस्थ जीवन फिर से अपना लिया तब युवक को देखा तो अत्यन्त प्रभावित होकर उन्होंने विठ्ठलपन्त उनके यहाँ चार बच्चों ने जन्म लिया - निवृत्ति, ज्ञानेश्वर, सोपान तथा मुक्ताबाई। को अपना दामाद बना लिया। विठ्ठलपन्त तथा रुक्मणी बाई ने अपना प्रारम्भिक वैवाहिक जीवन पवित्र स्थलों की यात्राओ में एक सन्यासी के बच्चे होने के कारण समाज के तथाकथित बिताया। विठ्ठलपन्त को सांसारिक जीवन में कोई सुख अनुभव नहीं विद्वानों व ब्राह्मण पंडितों द्वारा इन बालकों को प्रभु भक्ति के हुआ। उनकी ब्रह्मज्ञान प्राप्त करने की तीव्र इच्छा हुई और भजन कीर्तन में शामिल होना उन्हें और अधिक भाने लगा। अयोग्य ठहराया गया, जाति से बहिष्कृत किया गया तथा उन्हें र घोर रुप से प्रताड़ित किया गया। परन्तु इन बालकों के हृदय जो उन्हें सांसारिक सुखों तथा मामलों से निर्लिप्त रहने में महानू परमात्मा की भक्ति से परिपूर्ण थे, घोर विरोध के बावजूद आत्मिक ज्ञान पाने के लिए अटल थे। उन्होनें अपनी प्रभु भक्ति आनन्द मिलता था। परिणामस्वरूप जब विठ्ठलपन्त काशी की तीर्थ यात्रा पर गए तो श्रीपदस्वामी से ज्ञान प्राप्त करके वे ज्ञानेश्वर तथा उनके को जारी रखा। धर्म शास्त्रों के भाईयों के जनेऊ संस्कार करने का प्रयास किया गया परन्तु अनुसार सन्यासी बन गए। परन्तु कुछ समय बाद जब श्रीपादस्वामी को यह ज्ञात हुआ कि उन्होनें आत्मिक ज्ञान अपनी पत्नी रुक्मणी बाई की स्वीकृति के बिना प्राप्त किया है तब विठ्ठलपन्त की इनका घोर विरोध करते हुए ब्राह्मण वर्ग ने उनके जनेऊ संस्कार को स्वीकार करने से इन्कार कर दिया क्योंकि वे एक उन्होनें वापिस जाकर फिर से अपना गृहस्थजीवन यापने करने ऐसे व्यक्ति की सन्तान थे जो सन्यास धारण करने के उपरान्त का आदेश दिया। यद्यपि एक बार सन्यासी बनने के बाद पुनः गुहस्थ बने थे जिसे घोर पाप माना जाता था। गृहस्थ जीवन मे लौटना उस समय सिद्धान्तों के विरुद्ध था विट्ठलपन्त अपने बच्चों के साथ इस कठोर व्यवहार को सहन न कर पाए तथा इस तथाकथित पाप के प्रायश्चित हेतु उन्होनें परन्तु उसकी परवाह ना करते हुए विटूठलपन्त ने अपने गुरु

 Yuvadrishti June 2008 अपनी पत्नि रुक्मणी बाई के साथ इलाहबाद जाकर अधिकार पा जाता है और अत्यन्त आन्दित हो उठता है (यह जलसमाधि ले ली । प्रायश्चित का ये उपाय उस समय के बात श्रीमाताजी ने भी दोहराई है।) इस ग्रन्थ के उपरान्त सन्त तथाकथित विद्वानों ने उन्हें बताया था । अब निवृत्ति नाथ जो ज्ञानेश्वर ने एक और महान ग्रन्थ रचा जो सुप्रसिद्ध अपने बहन-भाईयों में ज्येष्ठ थे, वे ही उनके माता, पिता तथा "अमृतानुभव" के नाम से जाना जाता है। गुरु बन गए। वे पैठण में ब्राह्मण पंडितों के पास आवश्यक रस्म की स्वीकृति हेतु गए। आखिरकार ब्राह्मण ने इन बच्चों के इसके बाद ज्ञानेश्वर जी पन्ढरपुर के प्रसिद्ध सन्त नामदेव तथा पवित्र हृदयों के गहन आत्मिक अध्ययन तथा ज्ञान से प्रभावित अन्य कई सन्तों के साथ उत्तर भारत की तीर्थयात्रा पर गए। कहा जाता है कि इस दौरान उन्होंने अपने असंख्य अभंगों (भक्ति गीतों) की रचना की । उनके ये अभंग ब्रह्माण्डीय श्री ज्ञानेश्वर तब अपने अन्य भाईयों के साथ नेवासे नामक भाईचारे, आजीवन पूर्ण समर्पित प्रभु चरणों की भक्ति, गहन स्थान पर गए जहाँ उन्होनें अपने बड़े भाई गुरु निवृत्तिनाथ की आत्मिक ज्ञान तथा गरीबों एवं त्रस्तों के प्रति हार्दिक प्रेम की आज्ञा तथा कृपा से ज्ञानेश्वरी नामक पावन ग्रन्थ की मराठी ऐसी अभिव्यक्ति है जो मानव की आत्मा पर पड़े अज्ञान तथा होकर उन्हे शुद्धिकरण का प्रमाण पत्र दे ही दिया। भाषा में रचना की, जो पावन भगवतु गीता पर टीका है। यह बात 1290 की है जब वे केवल सोलह वर्ष के थे। पापों के प्रभावों की सारी परतों को तेजी से हटाने में समर्थ है। भगवत् ये अभंग प्राणी के समस्त अज्ञान के अन्वकार को मिटाकर गीता पर उनके इस टीका को सर्वोत्तम माना जाता है। उनकी उसको नव प्रकाश दिलाने, प्रभु की अनन्य भक्ति, पूर्ण सर्मपण, आत्मज्ञान की गहनता, भाषा तथा शैली की सुन्दरताऐँ जिससे अबोधिता, पवित्रता, विवेक, सद्बुद्धि, निर्मल विद्या, निरीच्छ उन्होंने ज्ञानेश्वरी नामक ग्रन्थ को सजाया है, वह हम ज्ञानेश्वरी भाव, निर्लिप्तता, चित्त शैथिल्य, अखण्ड शान्ति पढ़ कर ही जान सकते हैं। इस ग्रन्थ को मराठी भाषा के दूसरे निर्विकल्पावस्था, मुमुक्षता आदि की स्थिती में उतारने में सक्षम ग्रन्थों के सामने अतुलनीय माना जा चुका है। मात्र टीका न है। इनके पठन से ज्ञात होता है कि सन्त ज्ञानेश्वर अपने हृदय होकर ज्ञानेश्वरी परमचैतन्य के अनुभव की गहनता, महानता में कितनी श्रद्धा, समर्पण भाक्ति तथा मानव जाति के प्रति तथा ऊँचाई का एक ज्वलंत उदाहरण है जो उन्होंने ज्ञानेश्वरी कितना प्रेम रखते हैं। के छठे अध्याय में व्यक्त किया है। उन्होंने कहा है की मनुष्य इस संसार को निरंतर प्रभु भक्ति के द्वारा परमानन्द प्राप्त करने के उपाय तथा योग की महानता बताकर ईश्वर को पूर्ण की कुण्डलिनी शक्ति सर्पिणी की भाँति साढ़े तीन कर उसके मूलाधार में सुप्त अवस्था में होती है। प्राणी की शुद्ध कुण्डल लगा समर्पित होकर उसकी सत्ता को पहचानने तथा स्वीकार करने के लिए प्रेरित करके उनको यह आभास हुआ कि मानव को इच्छा, सद्गुरु की कृपा तथा पूर्व जन्मों में के फलस्वरूप जागृत होती है और मूलाधार से उठकर सभी चक्रों सुकृत्यो सन्मार्ग दर्शाने का उनके जीवन का उद्देश्य पूरा हो गया है। को पोषण प्रदान करती हुई, उनको निरंजित तथा पावन करती हुई सहस्त्रार के पार हो जाती है। मानव के चक्रों में उसके तब 1296 में कार्तिक मास की तेरंहवीं तारीख को आलन्दी में अखण्ड समाधि ग्रहण की। श्री ज्ञानेश्वर जी जो मात्र 22 वर्ष द्वारा अज्ञान वश किए पापों या दुष्कर्मों के फलस्वरुप रुग्णता तक ही जीवित रहे। उन्होंने अपने लिए कुछ नहीं किया अपितु या विष इकट्ठा हो जाता है। जागृत होकर कुण्डलिनी उन सारी मानव जाति के लिए आजीवन समाधान एवं सहज जीवन सबको पी जाती है तथा अपने इस आत्मसाक्षात्कार पाने की इच्छा करनेवाले बालक पर कृपा करके विष के बदले में अमृत उगलती है। इसके बाद प्राणी जीवित अवस्था में ही मुक्ति का उतरने के रास्ते ही परमात्मा से माँगते रहे। 23 ৫ ॐ

 Yuvadrishti June 2008 NIRMAL VANI : LAJJA या देवी सर्वभूतेषु लज्जाखूपेण संस्थिता। नमस्तस्यै नमस्तस्यै नमो नमः ॥ Meaning of Lajja Lajja, I don't know how to describe, it's not shyness. It is a kind of a shame about your body. Lajja rupena samasthita means you have to have shame of your body. That's specially for women As a child you will see, women are very shy. See, little girls, they are very shy. That shyness gradually disappears, but in the beginning they are even shy of Me. They come before Me, they'll put down their head. They'll not even say, Namaste. Very sweet. And they don't like people wearing funny dresses... [Ref #1] Panchami is recognized because on this day we wear a dress, whatever we wear today is so that our body is properly covered. The sense of shame and chastity that our body has is because of Him (Shri Ganesha). Lajja Rupena Samasthita. So if you have any sense of chastity and shame, it is because of Him. That will benefit you immensely. [Ref #3] Wave of Adharma So, I've met one lady who traveled with Me. She was wearing a burkha... and by the time we landed in London, she took out the burkha and the dress was much above the knees. (Shri Mataji laughing) I said, "What kind of...woman is she? No Lajja, no shame, nothing, shamelessness!.. In these modern times - exposure of body is regarded as a great achievement of women. They are trying to become aboriginals, you see. That time they (aboriginals) never had these ideas and they were not so confused, you see. So, even if their (aboriginal) women were scantily dressed, it didn't mean that it was some sort of a sex or some sort of an attraction for men. Or men behaving in funny manners to show that they have a special attraction for women. I mean, why should you? It is absolutely absurd that men should be attracted to women and women should be attracted to men - and on the road, on the street, you go, you see, just that going on! This adharma is the worst I think, for it's a curse. Because after coming to Sahaja Yoga also people start doing this nonsense, you know. They should all go to lunatic asylum, I think, they are no good for Sahaja Yoga. But dharma gets established as soon as you have the light of the spirit. [Ref #5] Respecting the body But the way nowadays we are going about with the show of our body, and sometimes I feel that all these designers will die or will get bankrupt, because people wear such little clothes these days. There is no space for any artist to show his work or to show his art how he can dress you up. In Japan I asked them how- this is long time back... Isaid, "Howis it you wear these dresses, these kimonos,

 Yuvadrishti June 2008 done so well, very expensive and it takes time to wear that?" So they said, "That's easy, if God has made a beautiful body then it is His art and we have to make our art decorate it. So what we do is to make our art to decorate it. Ireally liked it, because in India same thing, if there is a lady she has to wear a sari, which is being made very artfully, very beautifully, just to decorate her body, just to respect the body. But this seems to have gone with the influence of west.... ...You are notsupposed to sell your body. That's not what Goddess has done to you. But you should dress up well, different, different occasions are there, for those occasions you have to wear the way it is. The other dayI gavea very nice sari which we call as paithani to one lady as a present. And we had a function for a book was inaugurated, and this lady came there. So I said, "Why didn't you wear a paithani?" She said, "What, there is no wedding on. How can Iwear for this function paithani? There has to be a wedding." Very sweet "in the wedding I can wear." It is all, see occasions, places which are to be celebrated. Like in India, to when women go to the temple or to worship the idols or anything then they will wear all that is necessary face the Goddess, after all. Imagine people coming for this program here wearing, I don't know what they call it, but like jute clothes like hippies, what would happen to Me? I would disappear in thin air, I can tell this much. So, one has to have respect for the body. That is what She has said first - that lajja rupena you samstithan. Now you might say that there are people who are taking their bath in the river and this and that, and give justification. But you are saints, you are realized souls, you don't have to see those people who are not yet realized and who are misbehaving. You must do what a saint should do.[Ref #1] So, you should beshy, you should be humble and respect your body-it's very important. [Ref #5] Innocence of a Child As the children don't care for what you suggest to them-to be nasty, to be horrid-in the same way, if you are innocent, you will not accept. You may listen to anything. Let them (non-realized people) they want to, doesn't matter. You'll never do that because you cannot, because you are innocent and the innocent will guard you, it will give you proper guidance-whatis to be done, what is not to be done. tell you anything Now try to introspect and see for yourself, are you innocent or not? People think that somebody is trying to overpower you, is trying to harm you, is trying to put you down. Nobody can put down innocence. Innocence is a quality that survives all kinds of nonsense. And not only that, but age, your health, your mind, your thinking, and your emotions are extremely innocent and you enjoy yourself. Nowadays there is a big wave of shamelessness sometimes. The people, I have seen, they have no 'lajja'. I

 Yuvadrishti June 2008 don't know, some men wvant to attract women and some women want to attract men. Children never do like that. They don't know what is this, to attract men, or to attract women, or attract anyone. They will try to please the dog, they'll try to please a horse, but they never, I have seen, going all out to attract someone. The reason is this- that their self-esteem is complete. They know about themselves fully. So, why should they do all this nonsense- of running after women, running after men and creating problems for themselves? Their self-esteem is complete. Innocence is like that. It gives you a complete self-esteem. You don't bow to anyone, nor do you make anybody else to bow. This is the beauty of innocence, which works out so well within you. That's why always say that worship Shri Ganesha... ...Worshipping Shri Ganesha improves your 'Mooladhara', improves your sense of shame, improves of... your own dignity, self-esteem. You dress up in a way that shows that you respect your body. You talk in such a way that that shows that you respect your tongue, your language; you cannot have a foul mouth if you are innocent person. You cannot have a mind that cari abuse or can say horrible words...There is no need to use these dirty words to express yourself. With that your tongue is spoilt. So innocence is gone from your tongue. If you have lost innocence from your tongue, whatever you say will never come true... will never come true. But if you are innocent and your tongue is innocent, and respects... So the basic as you can see- respect your innocence in every manner. [Ref # 2] I remember My granddaughter once, she saw onme magazine in which there was a lady in a swimming dress. She said, "What are you doing? Better wear your dress, otherwise my Grandma will come and hit you hard." To that lady that was in and then she opened and saw a man's dress with just a small, little knickers. I don't know why they do it. And she said, "This one seems to be an absolutely shameless fellow. He is going to have bad time now." And she closed it. And then she told the maid servant, "Burn this, burn this. I don't want to see." Such a little girl she knew that it was wrong. [Ref#1] Primordial taboos/dharmas Now what does She (Kundalini) do for us, for us human beings? She's the primordial Power. What she does is to build in us a primordial we can call "restrictions" or "primordial taboos" or "primordial dharmas." We have in the same way primordial taboos built within us which are dharma. Ahuman being has to be like that. If he tries to be something else, something goes wrong with his life. It's like say if you have a glass, you drop it on the ground, it will break that is the dharma. In the same way when human beings start deviating from the line of dharma, they get into trouble. But it's only human beings who can do that. They can only cross over these taboos, these primordial taboos, and can become horrible... ..Now these primordial taboos are in you built in, they are there. These are existing maybe in a potential state; maybe you have curbed them down, maybe you have turned them out, but they are there, all the time they are there. And that's what we say that you are leaving the maryadas, or else we say that you are insulting Shri Ganesh... But I must say for the aboriginal people, or people who...were made aware of their primordial taboos somehow, as the animals know what is bad for them; and that knowledge was there with aboriginals. In India we have aboriginals... we call them Gond, Korku, Bhil. We had a lady who was a maid with us, Genabai was her name. She was an excellent cook, but she had her maryadas. All the time, like if My father came she would immediately cover her head and go in the other room, to respect him. Nobody told her to do that.

 Yuvadrishti June 2008 .But when they met with this so-called advanced people so many of them started living like them. They said, "You have no freedom, you are just bound by something, by some..." But actually they were bound by the sacredness, by the divine understanding. And then they started changing. She was all right, her husband was all right, but her son started drinking this is the beginning of the end then gambling, and all other sorts of things he started. And her grandson started going to prostitutes. And the idea was only that "We are free now. What's wrong?"... They gave them skirts and blouses, I don't know what all they did. But Genabai did not. She said, "What is this? Why should Iwear a dress like this where the whole body is exposed? No, I'll wear a sari;Ican never do it. Why shouldI wear this kind of a useless dress?" [Ref # 4] So, Sahaj Dharma is that you have shame, you have sense of shame. What you talk to others, what you say to others, how misused Her and made Her into a sort of a Romeo - Juliet business. It was not that. She was a very pure behave towards them...This sweetness comes from Radhaji. Now, of course they have you woman and She was Mahalakshmi. So, to be a Mahalaksmi, after coming to Sahaja Yoga, you should know that you should dress up in a way that's perfectly all right. Once I remember, I was in a big party and one gentleman came and he sat down, "Aaaaaah!" I said, "What happened?" "What a relief, Mother, Mrs. Srivastava, to see you. See these women, I'm fed up. Butyou came, I felt such a relief."Isaid, "What is so relieving?" "You are so serene." So, women are serene in Sahaj Dharma. They are not stupid, frivolous, laughing at anything. That's not the way for a woman. Anything happens, they must laugh. I mean, there is something laughable, all right, but some things are not even laughable, they'll laugh. That's not the way. That can be ridiculous also, can ridicule others. But, laugh of appreciation, laugh of enjoyment, is so pure and creates such beautiful atmosphere. I think the whole ecological problem is in our brains. It is not outside. It is inside us, which is reflected outside. [Ref #5] References: 2000-0916:Shri Ganesha Puja, Cabella 1997-1005:Navaratri Puja, Cabella 2. 1. 1997-0907:Shri Ganesha Puja, The Innate Dharma, Cabella 2008-0210Shri Ganesh Birthday 4. 3. 1997-0823: Shri Krishna Puja: Primordial Taboos and Sahaja Dharma, Cabella 5. For example our Vishuddhi Chakra, you have sixteen thousand powers, and all these sixteen powers are awakened in you today as you are. Sixteen thousand powers are awakened in you as you are today, but you speak you don't understand that when you are speaking, you are a Sahaja Yogi. With all these powers you are speaking. When you eat, you don't understand that this tongue belongs to a Sahaja Yogi; you should not hanker after anything. Like if somebody likes tea, he'll go on taking fifteen cups. That's no good. If he's fond of one sort of a food, he won't take another food. Thinking too much about food all the time, asking for food and organizing food all the time, thatspoils Vishuddhi very badly. Then talking ill about anyone, complaining about anyone to Me will spoil your Vishuddhi. If there's some sense, if I ask, then it's all right; but all the time talking ill about each other will spoil your Vishuddhi. 1980-0127: Powers Bestowed upon Sahaja Yogis, Formal talk, Bordi, India when

 Yuvadrishti June 2008 SHOULD I WEAR JEANS/TROUSERS? (Self Introspection of a Yuva Yogini) My introspection started I always wondered why I shouldn't wear jeans/trousers in centers, Pujas and outside sahaja collectives? I could never get an answer. I wore trousers and jeans before coming to Sahaja yoga, and to first collective center I was wearing jeans, and when my after center I was interacting with fellow yogis I was thinking that what they must be thinking about me that I do not have sense of decency and respect to our culture that I am wearing jeans. But why this thought came to my mind, may be because I realized even before coming to Sahaja yoga trousers are not part of our culture. And thanks to Shri Mataji, that one day in 2003 all of my three jeans were washed and were drying outside in the courtyard and somebody picked them all! Now there are too many coincidences that all 3 trousers to get washed on same day and all three get picked up in daylight, when no cloth before and after was stolen, must be some work of a Gana So I intuitively realized that we should not wear jeans or trousers but for next five years why was itnot Ianswered. Sahaja Fashion The things would have been easier, if Shri Mataji would have said that do not wear jeans at all. But I never came across such a lecture. But then I read lots of advices by Shri Mataji in September'07 issue of Nirmal Vani. In which Mother told that to respect ourselves and to give us dignity we should wear clothes of our own culture, we should wear clothes with vibrations, we should not wear short tops, indecent tops, tight jeans etc. To this list I would like to add low-rise jeans. You are saints do you realize? Do you realize your self-esteem? You are saints now. What clothes you wear, you are not vagabonds. You are not tramps. You are not on the street. So you have to wear dignified dress. I have told everyone of you that wear something dignified, not undignified. It has to be majestic, because you are a saint now. So the dress you wear need not be absurd or something funny but should give you dignity. false but a real dignity. You see the vibrations of a dress. Wear your country's dress. You need not Not any wear somebody else's dress or something but the interest in the dress should be that it should give you dignity and a sense of respectability. It is to preserve your respect that you have to wear a dress. That is the Lutility of a dress.[Ref# 1] Now if I look back and see why Iused to prefer jeans and trousers over salwar-kurtas with duppattas, which are our culture dresses. Few reasons which Icould think of are as follows: Duppattas are difficultin handling. Salwar-kurtasneed very frequent washing. Salwar-kurtas needs ironingevery time they are worn. Jeans/trousers are very easy to wear and handle. Jeans don't need frequent ironing and washing. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.

 Yuvadrishti June 2008 SoIstopped wearing salwar-kurtas and started wearing jeans, less work, easy to handle, lots of effort saving (or we may call it lethargy). And last but not least, all friends wear and if I don't wear I would be called conservative, I would be laughed at. Shri Mataji has said, "In Sahaja Yoga there's a Sahaja fashion" [Ref# 2] But then I ask myself, "If fashion and fear of being called 'behanji' is the reason of taking on to western dresses then should not we Sahaja yoginis be setting fashion trends now for the satya yuga and not follow the remaining trends of Kaliyuga. Why don't we start Sahaja fashion of salwar kurtas, with dupattas, oiled and combed hair rather than all these jeans, short tops and open hair without oil?" Subtle effects of Wearing Ieans/trousers After answering that Why I should not wear jeans/trousers from external aspects which are of very superficial nature I asked, "Are the above mentioned reasons are only reasons? There has to be something more to it. But whatit is?" Imyself was amazed at the soundness of the explanation! Jeans out rightly are not refused by Shri Mataji because western country culture is like that, but short tops are refused, but girls do wear short and tight tops, if not in Sahaja collective but outside it, but what are we loosing by wearing such indecent clothes, we can't bow to our Mother, we can't bend down in front of our brothers, but in front of unchaste friends we do! We attract negative attention of these unchaste 'friends'and spoil our chakras and catch on our Mooladhara and Left Vishuddhi! We can't stand and talk to our brothers without spoiling their attention by wearing such clothes. We are already loosing our chastity outside collective and now we are becoming responsible for adulteration in the of our brothers rather than helping them in establishing their Shri Ganesha principle. We are spoiling eyes their attention and eyes and their Shri Ganesha gets angry, and ours was already angry because we are wearing inauspicious clothes, which are short, tight, unwashed. The responsibility of a Sahaja Yogini sister towards her Sahaja yogi brother, as described by Shri Mataji, is- "Now this Vishnumaya is a female Power, as you know that. She didn't care for anything mundane. Can you think of Vishnumaya going after all these nonsensical things? And to protect Her brothers, and to give all the strength to those brothers, what did She do? What did She do? She came in Her purest form, as a Sister. You all have here so many Sahaja Yogis as your brothers. You must be having other people also as your brothers. This purity has to be brought into women. Unless and until this purity comes into them, they have no powers, they are powerless. So we come down to the main thing that is : where the women are chaste, there resides the powers of all the deities. So it's such a responsibility for us to be very chaste, and to be very pure, and to be sisters to our brothers so that their brothers are also protected from the temptations of the world; so that they, too, have their attention onto something higher and greater."[Ref# 3] and pure Trousers with Long tops are safe! I concluded.. So I concluded that jeans and trousers are okay to wear even in Sahaja collectives but with long and loose till knees, but it is all the more important to wear them with long tops outside Sahaja collective as well. tops But, aren't we forgetting dupattas to cover and protect our center hearts? I have to confess here that Imyself feel very clumsy in handling duppattas... Shri Mataji please give me tips in this regard Now after my above conclusion the next question is, "Can I imagine Shri Sita, Shri Radha, Mother Mary wearing these dresses? If we can then we should go ahead with those dresses, butif can't then why wear such inauspicious dresses. Shri Mataji has transformned us with all the qualities of the deities, then why not dress auspiciously which pleases and respects these deities inside us? Yes, it is very right, there are so many other

 Yuvadrishti June 2008 things which these deities have in them which I do not have, but let me start with such a gross aspect of dressing and then move towards subtler aspects. Epilogue "So in India it is not possible to introduce all these (jeans) dresses; in the school maybe but later on they all give up because they like Saris." [Ref# 4] When Shri Mataji said the above sentence She was putting so much of the confidence in us, the Indian yuvashakti who is out of the school, and are we supporting Her in the confidence She has put in this sentence? Last but not the least, if it requires so many of justifications and explanations for wearing jeans, then isn't it safer not to wear jeans, because it will cause no harm if we don't wear jeans, even if they are un-harmful. But if we wear and it is causing us some harm in subtle way, it would be damaging to our chakras without our knowing. Poem presented to Shri Mataji on Mother's Day (I Ith May'08) in Cabella Yours truly, Supreme Source of Eternal Grace Highest Queen of the Highest Light Realm of Bliss beyond time and space Sahaja Yuva Yogini References In your eyes You rule day and night 1. 1980-0927: Lethargy Most Anti God, Chelsham Road, London Myriads of suns shines from Your face All the Creation's a play for Your delight 2. 1990-0304: Informal Talk te Sahaja Yogis, The whole Universe is Your immense shrine Melbourne, Australia All the demons with Your sight You destroy 3. 1980-0808: Opening Address, evening before Vishnumaya Puja, New York, USA Joyful Incarnation of the Bliss Divine Immeasurable Peace and absolute Joy 4. 1998-1025: Significance of Diwali, Diwali Puja No word can tell Your Beauty that shines Ineffable Empress the Cosmos is Your toy Reaching Your Feet is the purest desire Mother You art the Holiest Dove All the evil is slayed by your fire Love is your Essence You are the Essence of Love All the Beauty that exists Your Beauty inspires Divine shower of Grace you bestow from above Eternal Source of what is gracious and sweet Verily You art sakshat Shri Adi Shakti I humbly surrender to Your Lotus Feet

 Yuvadrishti June 2008 JUMBLE WORDS Position in Head (NABHI CHAKRA) (KLUAIHMGHRS) principle governs left Nabhi and reflects our relationship with our wife, qualities of family and of 1. household. (LENEPS) is the organ of peace within us and it gets spoiled when while eating we read something or watch TV. In Hands Giving too much attention to matter is called TLMM R) and is problem of left Nabhi and is absolutely against (SAIEIA 3. dharma. (NOIOESSSSP) of material things should be given up. Matter has been given to us to enjoy and to share with others. The of ours is our Mother. 4. In Feet greatest If we have Lakshmi Principle within us then only we can have (CIOAANTTISSF) in us with everything that is material. (YOEEINRSG T), giving and sharing solves the problem of materialism and greed. It gives us satisfaction and the joy of Shiva i.e. shivaananda. Problem of materialism are solved because 6. circulation starts when two doors are open. Gross Expression in Vertebral Coloumn (SEMKAH) or well-being and Shri Laxmi is the deity of 7. Shri Krishna had said that when we get connected to the God after self-realization then only He can give us our well-being. (HLAIJMARSK) is deity of right nabhi and She represents the power of king, dignity of king like behaviour in us. 8. As a Sahaja yogi, we should know that we are specially chosen people, and we should not involve ourselves in cheap and frivolous things like non-realised people rather live a life with YGD). So that others see royalty and majesty of our behavior. 9. -(NTII Solar Plexus 10. We should have special personality which has innocence of a child coupled with maturity and (VRAYITG) of a guru. These powers come from void. Answers on pg 15 5. 2.

 Yuvadrishti June 2008 Shri Ganesha's Qualitative Manifestations The human being is said to be the replica of the Virata's body i.e. the body of the God almighty. Perhaps it is in the divine plan that the human being should manifest divine nature embodied within him and should ultimately be one with his creator. Hence there is a mechanism within him to attain the purpose of his creation. He is also therefore endowed with the ego, conditioning, intellect and attention. Each of these institutions has distinct functions. Shri Ganesha is worshipped first in the Pujas to all deities. Saints and artists have praised him at the beginning of their works. According to Shri Ganesha Atharvasheersha, Shri Ganesha manifested before the creation. As Shri Mataji has advised, since innocence had to be established before creation of the universe, Shri Ganesha was created first. Likewise in the human beings he is the firm foundation for spiritual evolution at the Mooladhara chakra. The qualities of innocence, wisdom, purity and dedication come from him. His presence purifies the mind, the ego and the intellect. It works as a catalyst to clear the chakras. As Shri Mataji has advised, he resides on all the chakras and in the heart he is spirit. Shri Ganesha's first manifestation in human consciousness comes in the form of his creativity. A child, soon after holding a pen makes some figures in its spontaneity. It is the expression of his innate creativity. Simnilarly, people who lived in the monolithic period through their untutored mind carved different figures on stones, which are still available at Carnac in France. They emit vibrations. Such expressions of creativity have their own beauty. When an artist or a writer is connected with divine, his works emit vibrations Creativity of polluted minds examples are galore are devoid of vibrations and beauty. A child's innocence impels him to close its eyes to the display of vulgarity, violence and other anti-Ganesha scenes. A realized person may ignore them or laugh at their stupidity but will feel concerred about their impact on the immature minds. A child grows and at the same time interacts with others. His senses are getting developed, new needs and attractions come into play and temptations around beckon his attention. Environments in the family and surroundings in addition to inborn virtues give shape to his personality. At this time his strong grounding of Shri Ganesha's qualities enables him to stick to virtues, accept what conforms to them and reject what is contrary. His wisdom and inner purity guide him to keep away from the misbehaving children and also to make friends with likeminded ones. In the adulthood without strong Shri Ganesha self-interest may be allowed to override ethical or moral propriety when faced with an opportunity of a material advantage. It takes Gandhji's righteousness to send some other boy to England for education financed by a rich man when Gandhiji's own son was keen to go. Continued on pg 15 11

 Yuvadrishti June 2008 उघड सहस्रार माते प्रेमाची शिदोरी अज्ञाचक्रावरी उषड सहसार माते उघड सहसार हमारे आज्ञा चक्र पर प्रेमरूपी पुंजी है। अब सहस्रार खोलिए माता सहसार खोलिए। निर्मिलेसी विश्व जेव्हां जिवामध्ये आलो, जन्म तुझा खेळ झाला माते परी न विसावा, उघड सहसार माते उषड सहस्ार ॥ मूत्युच्या या फेन्यामध्ये सापडली जब आपने इस विश्व की निर्मिति कि और मेरे जीव की उत्तपती हुई तो मैं इस जन्म मृत्यु के फेरे में फसा हुआ हूँ। हे माते, आपका खेल हुआ पर मुझे जरा भी शांती नहीं है। हे माते सहस्रार खोलिए। रानोमाळी भटकत होते जीव जीवनात, कम, क्रोध, मोहमाया याच बंधनात पापपुण्याचा हा मेळ न दिसावा, उघड सहार माते उघड सहसार ।। इस जीव रूपी जीवन में कहाँ कहाँ भटक रहा हूँ। काम, क्रोध, मोह माया इन्हीं बंधनों में जकड़ा हुआ हूँ। पाप पुण्य के इस भोग में कहीं मेल बैठता हुआ नजर नहीं आ रहा है। सहस्त्रार खोले अब माता। वेदपाठ करिती कोणी गीता पठण केले, तेच तेच ग्रंथी ज्ञान जना उपदेशिले आयुष्य ते गेले वाया कृष्ण न दिसावा, उघड सहार माते उघड सहसार ।। कोई वेद पठन करते है तो कोई गीता का पठन करते हैं, वही वही ज्ञान ग्रथों में लोगों को बताते है। इसी में सारी आयु व्यर्थ हुई है तो भी कृष्ण का भी दर्शन नहीं हुआ। सहस्त्रार खोलिए अब माता कोणी योगीराज कोणी सिध्द शिवनाथ, संत साध म्हणती कोणी सिध्दि दावितात अनुभव शुन्य सारे त्रासलो ह्या जीवा, उघड सहसार माते उघड सहसार ।। ...

 Yuvadrishti June 2008 कोई योगीराज आए कोई सिद्ध शिवनाथ आए कोई संत साधू कहते है हम सिद्धी दिखाते है पर ये सब कुछ अनुभव शून्य है। अब मैं इस जीवन से बिलकुल त्रस्त हो चूका हूँ। सहस्रार खोलिए माता। तुझ्या चरणासी माते जेव्हां आम्ही आलो, कृष्णखूप पाहून जेव्हां मनी दंग झालो ध्यानामध्ये मूलाधारी शक्तिरूप देवा, उघड सहस्रार माते उघड सहसार । जब हम आप के चरणों में आ गए तो कृष्णस्वरूप देखकर मन में दंग हो गये। ध्यान में जाकर मूलाधार पें शक्ती रूपी भगवान के दर्शन हुए। सहस्त्रार खोलिए माता। तुझ्या कृपे निद्धित शक्ती उध्ध्वमुखे येई, सात चक्रे तिच्या स्पर्शेजागृत ती होई अज्ञास्थानी येता माते का ग विसावा, उघड सहसार मते उघड सहसार ॥ आपकी कृपा से हमारी सोयी हुई शक्ती हुई शक्ती उपर उठती है। (आपकी कृपा से हमारी निद्रित शक्ती उच्चगती की आस होती है।) उसके स्पर्श से हमारे सातों चक्र जागृत हो गये। परंतु आज्ञा के स्थान पर आकर आप रूक क्यों गए सहस्रार खोलिए माते IM तेज जेव्हा त्या शक्तिचे इडा पिंगलात, थंड थंड चैतन्याच्या लहरी वाहतात सहसार भेद नामे अनंतत्व ठेवा, उघड सहसरार माते उघड सहसार ।। जब उस शक्ति का तेज इडा पिंगला में आता है तब हम में ठंण्डी ठंण्डी चैतन्य लहरें बहती है। सहस्त्रार भेदन मतलब अनंत तत्त्व की पुंजी जोड़ना। सहस्त्रार खोलिए माता। Donation Request For NGO 4. Kindly Speed Post (ONLY) your Cheque/DD at: Mrs. Gisela Matzer, c/o Vishwa Nirmal Prem Ashram, Plot No.9, Institulional Area, Near Park Knowledgel, Greater Noida, UP-201308. Ph: (0120)2322023, (0120)2230681. Jai Shri Mataji Dear Sahaja Yogis, We all know that Shri Mataji founded Vishwa Nirmal Prem Ashram, Greater Noida (an NGO for destitute women and children) in 2000. For upbringing & care taking of the children/women and running & maintenance of the Ashram the NGO regularly needs funds. Following is the information for people who may wish to donate: Contacts: (1) Mrs. Gisela-09810774865: email-gisela_oma 7@yahoo.com (i) Mr. Jaswant Singh-09891924990 1. The Cheque/DD must be made in favour of HH Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Foundation. 2. If the donation is greater than or equal to Rs.5000 then please mention your PAN number. If donation amount is less than Rs.5000 then please mention your postal address. 5.Donation options for a child (permonth): (1) Rs. 3000- Includes food, school, dress, maintenance (11) Rs.1700-School and Food (only) (iii) Rs. 500-Schooling (only) We request readers to announce this in their collectives, so as to spread the awareness among people. 3. Donation can also ba given in form of kinds like cotton dress, shoes, undergarments (all NEW and NOT old and used ones). For further details: www.nirmalprem.org ey

 Yuvadrishti June 2008 श्रीमाताजी की आरती जब हम परमात्मा को प्रकाश दिखाते हैं, तब हम यह करते हैं, कि हम अपने अन्दर के प्रकाश की आराधना करते हैं। तब प्रकाश तत्व हमारे अन्दर प्रकाशित होता है। प्रकाश तत्त्व यहाँ आज्ञा पर है। जब आप आरती करते हैं या परमात्मा के आगे प्रकाश जलाते हैं, जब आप परमात्मा के आगे प्रकाश दिखाते हैं, तब आपके अन्दर का प्रकाश तत्त्व प्रकाशित हो जाता है।" संस्कृत में "आ" का अर्थ होता है "के प्रति" और "रती" का परमात्मा के लिए सर्वोच्च प्रेम"। हम सभी जानते हैं कि पूजा के अर्पण में अन्तिम स्थिति आरती की होती है। यह देवी के प्रेम तथा उनकी कृपा को जागृत करने के लिए तथा भक्तों को अनुकम्पित करने के लिए भक्तों द्वारा देवी की प्रशस्ति तथा प्रार्थना में हृदय से गाया हुआ गीत है। हम सभी इस तथ्य से अवगत हैं कि आरती के पश्चात परम चैतन्य का प्रवाह अति तीव्र होता है। म पार स् म म्म सबको दुआ व्यक्तियों को आशीर्वादित करने के लिए प्रार्थना करते हैं क्योंकि मात्र श्री माताजी की कृपा से ही मानवता में प्रेम आ सकता है। माँ के तेज से ही कई बार यह सृष्टि आपदाओं से बची है। देनाः हम सहजयोगियाँ के साथ साथ अन्य सभी व्यक्ति योग में रहते हैं अर्थात् उनके साथ एकरूप होते हैं उनके कुशलक्षेम दिल में सदा रहनाः यह प्रार्थना कि श्री माताजी सदैव हमारे (हानि-लाभ) का वहन "मैं" करूँगा। इसी प्रकार से हृदय में निवास करें। उनकी उपस्थिति मात्र दुर्भावनाओं को दूर श्रीमाताजी के प्रति समर्पण आत्मसाक्षात्कार की वर्षा करता है, करती है और हमारे हृदय में प्रेम, करुणा, क्षमाशीलता आदि साथ ही उनके चित्र, प्रेम, सुरक्षा, मार्गदर्शन तथा कृपाओं की दैवी गुणों को जागृत करती है। ये गुण हमारी क्रिया एवं भी वर्षा करते हैं। हमारी यह प्रार्थना की "माँ हमारे हृदय में प्रतिक्रिया में परिलक्षित होते हैं। आत्मा हमारे हृदय में रहती है आने के पश्चात इसे छोड़कर न जाना" हमारे इस वचन का और श्रीमाताजी मानव रूप में परम आत्मा हैं। अतः हृदय में द्योतक है कि हम सदैव अपने हृदय को स्वच्छ रखेंगे। उनकी उपस्थिति हमें अहंकार कें बंधनों आदतों तथा पूर्वकर्मं मानव में अवतर केः अपने पूर्व अवतरणों में माँ ने राक्षसों का संहार किया तथा सृष्टि की रक्षा की। अब श्री माताजी गुरुओं से मुक्त कर देती है। जग में संकट कारणः पूर्व काल में भी श्रीमाताजी कई बार न के वेष में छिपे राक्षसों को नष्ट करने के साथ जन सामान्य को केवल मनुष्यों के लिए अपितु देवताओं की रक्षा के लिए भी जागृत करने तथा आध्यात्मिक उत्थान देने आयी हैं। यद्यपि अवरतरित हुई। अतः देवता और उनका स्तुति गान करते हैं। श्री माताजी के चरण कमल से साधकों ने उन्हें पहचाना और उनके चरण कमलों में शरण ली। निकलने वाला अमृतमय परमचैतन्य गंगा और यमुना नदियों की भाँति संसार के पापों को दूर कर देता है। मनुष्य दोनों ही चिरकाल से मानव कलियुग के भ्रामक जीवन में पूर्णतः लिप्त है, फिर भी संत जनों की धरतीः भारतवर्ष आध्यात्म का प्राचीन स्थान है। कहा जाता है कि श्री जीसस क्राइस्ट ने भी यहाँ पर लगभग तेरह वरषों तक निवास किया था । शेष जगत के लिए प्रेम, शान्ति जो भी शरण में आयाः श्री कृष्ण ने गीता में कहा है कि जो

 Yuvadrishti June 2008 संगीत का गान कर सकें। अंत में हम स्वयं को समर्पित करके श्री माताजी से विनती करते हैं कि हमें अपना माध्यम बनाकर जो यथायोग्य सेवा हम से करवा लें। और आध्यात्मिक जागृति का यही स्रोत है। यद्यपि नकारात्मक तत्वों के कारण कई शताब्दियों के विदेशी शासन में लोगों को अत्यंत कष्ट से गुजरना पड़ा। श्री माताजी ने स्वतंत्रता संग्राम में भाग लिया। भारतवर्ष के स्वतंत्र होते ही लगभग सभी देश जो कि औपनिवेशिक शासन के अंतर्गत थे, स्वतंत्र हो गए। श्रीमाताजी ने बताया है कि आरती के उपरान्त देवी अत्यन्त प्रसन्न होती हैं। अतः यह समय वरदान माँगने के लिए बहुत जब दिल में आये तबः हम श्री माताजी को वचन देते हैं कि वे उपयुक्त होता है। स्वयं के लिए तो हम प्रायः प्रार्थना करते हैं हमारे हृदयों में आत्मा के मधुर संगीत को सुन सकेंगी। जितना किन्तु पूजा की आरती के उपरान्त हमें बड़ी चीज़ माँगनी पवित्र हृदय उतना ही मधुर संगीत होगा। अतः हम सभी को चाहिए। हमें सम्पूर्ण विश्व के लिए वरदान माँगना चाहिए। अपने हृदयों को ईष्ष्या व अन्य बुरी भावनाओं से मुक्त रखना है ताकि हमारी आत्माऐं श्री माताजी के लिए अति आनन्दमय t it ft Continued on pg 11 During the formative stages of a child, his inborn self-confidence and thes parents help nourish his centre heart. His faith and dedication to his parents, which he draws from their love, forgiveness and encouragement, make strong sources of inspiration and inner strength. It stimulates and activates those qualities within him with strong centre heart and open left heart. support and guidance of his In the course of time one may face adverse situations when the mind may be overcome by fear imagining possible consequences. In a difficult situation thoughtless awareness is a strong fort that can shield a person from stress and fear. Then his innate wisdom can guide him to take right action. Born realized children of Sahaja Yogis who have Shri Ganesha's blessings are seen to be sticking to their inborn virtues even in the environments found in the western countries as well as in the identical conditions in India. They may maintain the strong presence of Shri Ganesha even during the later years feel isolated being different from others. It is however necessary that they are observed and but may taken proper care of, to avoid bloating of their egos or developing inferiority complexes and also to allow their discretion and discrimination to grow. If one gives into temptations the person through his innocence and wisdom would understand his mistakes and correct his ideas and outlooks. Then he naturally respects the purity of relationships. Shri Ganesha's qualities are immensely beneficial for physical, mental, psychic and spiritual balance and health through the process of elimination and prevention for the cleansing of the body and the mind. Due to their close relationship one helps or affects the other, besides expelling the toxic substances from the body, the mind also has to be cleansed of the thoughts, feelings, desires and ideas unfriendly to health and spirituality, from the mind. It is also to be kept clean by restraining and steadying the attention and the eyes and clearing the Agnya. The need for the blessings of Shri Ganesha the Chitteshwara, the lord of attention and also Vigatajwara the one who is devoid of heat or fever is much greater in adulthood than before. His bhakti, dedication and surrender to Shri Mataji have to be ingrained within for our all round benevolence and spiritual depth. Answers for Jumble Words 1. GruhLakshmi 2. Spleen 3. Materialism 4. Possession 5. Satisfaction 6. Generosity 7. Kshema 8. RajLakshmi 9. Dignity 10. Gravity

 র Yuvadrishti June 2008 अनुभव अन्तर्राष्ट्रीय सहज पब्लिक स्कूल (धर्मशाला) के बच्चों का वाघा सीमा पर भारत माता को नमन 26 नवम्बर 2006: विश्वभर से आए सहज योगी बच्चों का भारत-पाकिस्तान की वाघा सीमा पर आगमन एक अत्यन्त सुखद अनुभूति का अनुभव रहा। अन्तर्राष्ट्रीय सहज पब्लिक स्कूल, धर्मशाला के छोटे बच्चों ने एक साथ कतार में खडे होकर वन्दे मातरम् गाया और उसके बाद सष्ट्रीय गान प्रस्तुत किया। वाघा सीमा पर उपस्थित सभी जनसमूह एवं सीमा सुरक्षा बल के जवान धर्मशाला के बच्चों का राष्ट्रीय गान व राष्ट्रीय गीत उनके मधुर कण्ठ से सुनकर स्तब्धता के साथ गौरवमय क्षणों को देखकर गौरवान्वित महसूस कर रहे थे। यह अनुपम दृश्य अपने आप में विशेष एवं अनूठा था। यह पहले कभी देखने को नहीं मिला जब विश्वभर से आए सहजयोगी बच्चे एक साथ भारत माता के रूप में आदिशक्ति माँ का ही नमन कर रहे थे। बड़े बच्चों ने वाघा सीमा पर हमारी सीमाओं की शान्ति के लिए बन्धन दिए। ठीक उसी समय काली अँधेरी पाकिस्तान की ओर से आयी और वाघा सीमा पर पूरी तरह छा गयी। जोरों से वर्षा होने लगी। यह दृश्य देख कर ऐसा प्रतीत हो रहा था कि जो नकारात्मकता थी यह सीमा पर बन्धन देने के बाद समाप्त हो गयी है। स्कूल के सभी बच्चे एवं उनके साथ आए उनके अध्यापक ने वाघा सीमा पर ध्वज समारोह के अनुपम दृश्य का आनन्द लिया। बच्चों का अमृतसर में यह निःशब्द संदेश कि सम्पूर्ण विश्व एक है एवं सम्पूर्ण सृष्टि का रचयिता भी एक ही है, हमें अपने अन्तस में मनन के लिए विवश कर देता है। ा TULL पर कर कै॥ मैलिग्नेन्सी का चमत्कारिक निवारण मेरा बेटा तीन वर्ष का है और मैं सिख धर्म से सम्बन्ध रखती हूँ। मुझे सहज में आए दो वर्ष हुए हैं परन्तु पारिवारिक बन्धनों के कारण मैं माँ का ध्यान बिना फोटो के स्मरण से ही करती थी। मेरा बेटा, गुरतेज ( 3.5 साल), अक्सर बीमार रहता था, वजन भी नहीं बढ़ता था हर डॉक्टर को दिखाया, महंगी से महंगी दवाईयाँ दीं, मगर वह अच्छा नहीं हुआ। फिर हम एक सहजयोगी होमियोपैथी डा० नरेन्द्र गुप्ता जी के पास गए। डाक्टर साहब ने कुछ टेस्ट करवाये और जब रिपोर्ट आई तो घर में हम सबै स्तब्ध रह गये कि गुरतेज को मैलिग्नेन्सी थी। इलाज के सिलसिले में हम डा० के पास हर सप्ताह जाने लगे। डा० साहब ने सहज योग के माध्यम से इस रोग के ठीक होने के वैज्ञानिक और आध्यात्मिक पक्ष बताए। मेरे पति ने कम्प्यूटर पर मैलिग्नेन्सी और सहज योग पर पूरी खोज की। फिर, मेरे देवर (जो ऑस्ट्रेलिया में रहते हैं) ने भी इस रोग के बारे में पूरी जानकारी कम्प्यूटर द्वारा एकत्रित करी और श्रीमाताजी की कृपा से परिणाम यह निकला कि इस रोग के इलाज में आध्यात्मिक बातावरण सहायक होता है डा० साहब ने विश्वास दिलाया कि हौमियोपिथिक दवाई और सहजयोग द्वारा इस बीमारी को ठीक किया जा सकता है। उन्होंने यह भी समझाया कि सिख धर्म भी सहज योग का ही एक हिस्सा है। हीमोग्लोबिन बहुत कम था और उसका मेरी प्रार्थना और डा० साहब का प्रयास रंग लाया और मैरे पति ने आत्मसाक्षात्कार लिया। हम दोनों प्रतिदिन माँ का ध्यान करने लगे और गुरतेज को भी चैतन्य देने लगे। कुछ ही सप्ताहों में मेरे घर में माँ का मंदिर स्थापित हो गया और मेरे सभी बंधन खुल गए। गुरतेज के स्वास्थ्य में भी सुधार आने लगा। एक महीने में ही उसका वजन बढ़ना शुरू हो गया तथा उसके व्यवहार में भी परिवर्तन आने लगा। डा० साहब की दवाई और हमारा ध्यान निरंतर चलता रहा। एक दिन मेरे पति ने मन ही मन श्री माताजी से हमारे बच्चे की बीमारी ठीक कर देने के लिये प्रार्थना की। उसी सप्ताह डा० साहब ने भी सभी परीक्षा दोबारा करवाने के लिये कहा और चमत्कार हो गया... हमारे बच्चे की सभी रिपोर्ट बिल्कुल सामान्य (normal) थीं केवल दो ही महीने में इतनी भयानक बीमारी का ठीक हो जाना एक चमत्कार ही है। हम समझ गए कि श्री माताजी की कृपा हम पर हो गयी । अब हम दोनों पति-पत्नी, हमारी तरह के और माता-पिता को, जिनके बच्चे कैंसर की लाईलाज बीमारी के शिकार हैं, सहजयोग के बारे में बताते हैं और श्री माताजी से प्रार्थना करते है कि माँ आप इन सब पर भी कृपा करें और सबकी कुण्डलिनी जागृत करें। रमनजीत # ज 6 ২

 Yuvadrishti June 2008 Detachment and Responsibility am not a crane that will die by your fiery gaze." This story from Mahabharata brings to light that our spiritual achievementis useless The sage was amazed. "How does she know about the crane?" he wondered. if weneglect our duties or Dharma. Kaushika was his parents' only son. The lady continued, "Oh holy onel You are a learned Brahmin but you have not understood the truth about virtue. If you want to be enlightened, go to Dharmavyadha who lives in Mathura. Any one will tell you where he lives. "Mother," he said one day, "I want to go off into the jungle and devote myself to spiritual studies. "His mother said with concern, "But son, your father and I are very old. Your father is so sick he can hardly move. If you go away, what will happen to us? Who will attend to ourneeds?" The sage thanked the lady and hurried to Mathura. "He must be a great and learned sage indeed," Kaushika thought to himself. But when he finally reached Dharmavyadaha's place, he found it to be a butcher shop! Kaushika did not listen. He was determined to study the Vedas. His mother cried in vain as she watched her son turn his back on her and leave for the jungle. A very ordinary looking man came out and said, "Welcome holy one. I am Dharmavyadaha, the man Eventually Kaushika acquired great mystical powers. One afternoon, as he was meditating under a tree, a you seek." crane flew up, and perched herself on a branch "How can a butcher be spiritually enlightened?" above Kaushika. Some bird droppings fell on Kaushika's head. Kaushika furiously threw a fiery Dharmavyadaha smiled and said with compassion, Kaushika asked in amazement. gaze at the crane. "Iknow the story of the crane and of the woman who sentyou here. Come, let us go to my house." The crane immediately fell dead. The sage could not contain himself and blurted out, "But butchering animals is such a sinful profession! Are you not ashamed?" The sage felt sorry for what he had done. "How could I have allowed my anger to take over me that way?" He mourned. Later in the day, he went to a village to beg for alms. The lady of the house asked him to wait and went to get some food. Right then her husband arrived. She immediately set aside the pot of food she was taking "I am not," the butcher calmly said. "Iam engaged in a family trade. I work hard and honestly at it. There isnoreason for me to be ashamed of my work!" "Holy one," continued the butcher. "If I do injury to to the sage and went to attend her husband. other creatures, so do you as you did to the crane. " After washing his feet, attending to his needs, she came back out to give the alms to the sage. The sage was very insulted. "You put your husband before a pious sage? Do you know the power of a Brahmin? giving him food, and "As we walk on the soil, we are trampling on numerous creatures. Nor is the air devoid of creatures." "You see that farmer tilling the land? He is killing so many animals that thrive under the soil." She calmly replied, "Yes, a true Brahmin is he who has mastered his anger. Please do not threaten me. I They reached the butcher's house. The butcher's

 Yuvadrishti June 2008 wife was doing her house hold chores and his two boys were playing. Abhay Mudra of the Devi The butcher introduced the sage to his wife and boys. Then the butcher entered the house and touched his parents' feet. "Here is a learned Brahmin who has come from a far-off place." the butcher told his old father. "Welcome, holy one," the father said. Before leaving the room, the butcher remarked, "My parents are my Gods. My wife and my children attend to them with devotion and love. We consider caring for them to be our greatest duty." "In doing one's duty cheerfully, lies true virtue. This is what the dutiful wife sent you to learn." "Oh learned one!" the butcher continued, "You have run away from your responsibilities and deserted your aged father and mother. Spiritual achievement is useless if one has neglected one's Dharma, or duties." The sage remembered his mother crying, "Who will look after us when you are gone my son?" The sage apologized, "You have shown me the path of true virtue, the true meaning of Dharma, Oh pious one. Iam deeply indebted to you." All of us have seen Shri Mataji's photograph. Kaushika immediately returned to his parents and served them lovingly till the end of their days. The photograph of Shri Mataji shows Her Adishakti form and Her posture is know as - Abhay Mudra. Love The Left Hand, directed downwards, shows the blessing nature of our Divine Mother. That, She takes care of Her bhaktas and Love seeketh not itself to please, Nor for itself hath any care; nourishes them. But for another gives its ease, The Right Hand, which is lifted, is called the Abhaya Hasta which means She is saying to us, "Do not be afraid, I am taking care of you." She protects us, also looks after our kshema. And builds a Heaven in Hell's despair. William Blake 1757-1827 "The Clod and the Pebble' (1794)

 Yuvadrishti June 2008 Awaken Your Creativity Tree Ego Mother Evil Man Egg Make a story using these words.. How to do this, example is given below Boy Love Creative Fight Villain Car Once there was a boy Amar who was very creative, everybody loved him but Vinay was jealous of Amar becausenobody used to talk to him due to his villainous nature. He fights with every body, hurts them, irritates them. It was their drawing exam & Vinay forgot his color box at home so he stole Amar's color box. Amar saw Vinay while doing that but he didn't say anything and gave his exam using his pen and pencil as he was creative enough. After exam got over Vinay was going home and a car came, hit him and threw him aside. Amar was passing thereby. He stopped his car and took him to his father's hospital. When Vinay got up and asked him, "Why did you after knowing that I stole your color box and ruined your exam"? Amar answered that, "My that Love and Compassion is the key to life and by holding grudges one can never do so even mother says forgive anybody". Vinay cried and hugged Amar. Send your creative story to yuvadrishti@gmail.com. Best stories will be published.

 Yuvadrishti June 2008 YuvaShakti Reporter governments what ReOeneration 2008 Hope for the Youth of World Celeste Jones, 25, an Italian Yuva Yogini and a young people are Musical therapist, is set to attend the 2008 World doing to achieve the Youth Congress in Quebec, Canada. Kurrajong United Nation's Heights' Celeste Jones is one of a select group of Millennium Development Goals, which include youths meeting in Canada later this year, to search halving poverty, halting the spread of HIV/AIDS, for ways to combat the many crises facing our promoting gender equality and reducing infant mortality. modern world. In August she will join 600 young leaders from Ms Jones, 25, will attend the congress along with a throughout the globe, to participate in the fourth group of yogis, as an advocate of Sahaja Yoga. "A World Youth Congress, "ReGeneration 2008", in group of us applied as delegates so we put in our Quebec. The World Youth Congress is a project application as the Sahaja Organisation," she said. funded by Peace Child International, which aims to The group travells internationally teaching Sahaja bring together young people from the age of 18 to 30 Yoga Meditation techniques and "Self Realisation", who have a passion for sustainable development. A As part of attending the World Youth Congress, Ms total of 15,000 youths applied to attend this year's Jones and the Sahaja group were asked to submit a congress. Delegates will join forces with young development project illustrating the ways her Canadians to undertake hands-on community organisation is taking action. action projects across Quebec. They will help shape Complete story at international policy by documenting and showing http://www.sahajayoga.com.au/news/2008/04/18/ce leste-gives-hope-to-youth/ Yuvashakti Seminar Barasat, Kolkata All yuvas started interacting and discussing about May 1", Thursday: On a pleasant summer morning the "LEELA" (108 instructions from Shri Mataji). all yuvashakti gathered for yet another memorable Everyone was saying his/her own instruction that collective experience. The day started by sharing came in through the chit. This laid the foundation each other's Sahaja experiences & their state of formeditation. Collectivity started with attention on morning meditation till everyone arrived. Then each chakra (left, right and center) till Sahastrara everyone started to organize leaflets (to be and above. Bringing downwards our attention distributed for a realization program). After a small through the Ida & Pingla and raising through the collective meditation and taking Mother's Sushmna. Then, taking the attention to each and permission for the Divine cause, yuvas made smal every chakra on our limbs, on our both legs, finger tips, the palm and feeling every bit of our chakras. Then taking the enlightened collective attention above the Sahasrara, to the entire creation to all living and non living beings. The meditation lasted for more than an hour. It was a different experience for everybody. After this, yuvas watched "The Vision" in thoughtless state and deeply enjoyed groups and got spread in the local areas for door to door campaigning and invitations. Hours just went by in a blink of an eye as Sahaja became a known thing for many households in Barasat. Now it was the time for some indoor collective activities. After a small drinks session everyone got into the mood of singing bhajans. After some bhajans, everyone's kundalini started dancing and one could see yogis getting up from their seats and started swinging in full joy. watching it. In the evening yuvas left with a goodbye and eager wait for another such a day long session. A tremendous collective experience with vibrations all over!

 Yuvadrishti June 2008 612 talks that have not been verified, is a long way The Book Project short of what it should be. This is a real problem with Sahaja Yoga The Book Project international is projects which involves listening to Shri Mataji's no short term solution, for verifiers need to be experienced in transcribing before they move on to English lectures and type them in a MS Word documenti.e. transcribing Shri Mataji's talks. this important work. The impact of this problem in terms of the subtitling of DVDS and the translation We have now transcribed over 955 talks. but the project is now slowing markedly as many people of talks into other languages can be readily aPpreciated. who were involved have dropped out for all kinds To maintain any sort of progress in this important of reasons. This is a great pity, for in the four years that this project has been running, we have always work, we urgently need more support from the | been losing people and having to recruit new world collective, and maybe the WF can help. We people, but the appeals for help we have made need people at all levels, transcribers, verifiers, managing editors and one or two people able and recently, have gone largely unanswered. Also, the database of transcribed talks serves a willing to clean up the MP3 files before sending number of important uses, including: them off for transcription. English as a firstlanguage has proved not to be a prerequisite of someone Providing subtitles for DVDS working on the Book Project. Indeed, surprisingly Translation of Shri Mataji's talks into other many people have joined and found that their • languages including Chinese, Russian, French, Italian, Hungarian, German, Portuguese, Spanish, written and spoken English improved dramatically as a result of working on the project. and Greek. Needless to say, the benefits of a deepening A yogi transcribes each talk, usually from an MP3 knowledge of Sahaja Yoga are apparent to everyone audio file; it is then checked by a second yogi. An working on the project. experienced transcriber, known as a Managing Editor then verifies the accuracy of the work. If you would like to help please contact: Maureen Despite this three s process, we still found Goodman (mgoodman@worldcom.ch) or Shankar sufficienterrors to warrant a fourth person checking the talk yet another time. In the early days, yogis Ramani (shankarramani9@gmail.com) or visit the used whatever talks they had in their personal Project page at libraries, but obviously, we soon exhausted this http://www.sahajayoga.org/current projects.asp? proj id=2 source, and now, Phil Ward supplies us with MP3 Jai Shri Mataji, files, but in some cases, the sound is so poor, the files The Book Project Team have to be digitally improved so that they can be properly heard. The person doing this work has recently retired from the project and we have not been able to find someone able to do this work. But, while we have transcribed 955 talks, only 343 have been verified which means that the accuracy of the

 ে Yuvadrishti June 2008 Volunteers Needed for International SY Book Project Following is an email sent by Mr Alan Wherry, member of WCASY, requesting Indian yuvas to actively volunteer for this divine project. We, in the West, are well aware of the energy of the India yuvas. Their enthusiasm is most admirable. In the Book Project we are struggling constantly to find new people. Maybe some of these yuvas would like to help us in the transcription of Shri Mataji's talks? For in doing so, they will themselves deepen in their knowledge of Mother's work, and make lifelong Sahaja friends in other countries. Ihave seen email lists of 400 Indian yuvas. If we could find 40 of sufficient quality, with high speed access to the Internet, it would be a huge help to our team working on the IPP, the Internet Publishing Project. Is there any way we may find such energetic people? Much love ु Alan फ़ 4 फ Send news of Yuvashakti events and activities from your collective at yuvadrishti@gmail.com क आदिगुरू श्री राजा जनक नारद जी बोले, "इस दूध के बर्तन के अलावा कुछ भी नहीं, ताकि दूध न छलके।" राजा जनक का एक नाम विदेहराज भी था। विदेह अर्थात् देह से परे। एक बार नारद जी राजा जनक के पास गए और पूछा, "आप एक राजा हैं, राजा की तरह जीवन व्यतीत करते हैं. लेकिन फिर भी आपको विदेह राज क्यों कहा जाता है?" राजा जनक ने कहा, "एक बहुत निकाली गई थी और फिर उसके बाद दरबार में नृत्य का एक कार्यक्रम हुआ था?क्या आपने कुछ भी नहीं देखा था?" बड़ी यात्रा मेरे सम्मान में राजा जनक ने कहा, "प्रश्न का उत्तर मैं आपको शाम को दूगाँ, िर से लेकिन आपको मेरा एक काम करना होगा। यह दूध भरा नारद जी ने उत्तर दिया, "नहीं राजन! मैंने कुछ भी नहीं देखा।" हुआ बर्तन लेकर आप सम्पूर्ण दिन मेरे साथ व्यतीत करें लेकिन ध्यान रहे कि इसमें से एक भी बूदै धरती पर न छलके। तभी मैं आपके प्रश्न का उत्तर दूँगा कि मुझे विदेहराज क्यों कहते हैं?" राजा जनक बोले, "नारद जी, इसी प्रकार मैं भी कुछ नहीं देखता, सदैव, मैं अपने चित्त को देखता रहता हूँ कि वह कहाँ जा रहा है और यह सुरक्षित करता रहता हूँ कि वह दूध की नारद जी ने वह बर्तन लिया और राजा जनक के पीछे-पीछे तरह बिल्कुल भी न छलके। " रहे। उनको अत्याधिक सावधानी पूर्ण यह कार्य करना पड़ा संकेतः- इसी प्रकार हमें भी सदैव अपने चित्त की रक्षा करनी क्योंकि उस बर्तन के किनारे भी नहीं थे और हल्की सी गलत चाहिए। इसे चित्त निरोध कहते हैं। चित्त कहाँ भागा जा रहा हरकत से दूध छलक सकता था। शाम तक वे बिल्कुल थक गए है?अब आप अपने चित्त की रक्षा कैसे करेंगे?चित्त एकाग्र और जब राजा जनक और नारद जी वापिस लौटे तो नारद जी करके। एकाग्र करने की कोशिश करें। अपने चित्त को इधर बोले "हे राजन! कृपया मुझे अब मेरे प्रश्न का उत्तर दीजिए, मैं उधर जाने न दें। धीर-धीरे आप एकाग्र चित्त हो जाएँगे। आप सुबह से यह बर्तन लेकर आपके पीछे पीछे चलते हुए थक गया मेरी फोटो को देखते रहें। यह सबसे अच्छा है। एकाग्र हो कर हूँ।" उसो अपने हृदय मैं लेकर आऐ, उसे अपने हृदय में स्थापित होने दें। "पहले आप मुझे ये बताइए कि आपने क्या राजा जनक ने पूछा 5 4े क्या देखा?" ২ ও

 NSYS LENS 2. Drawings by Children of Nirmal Prem Ashram, Greater Noida

 I to Shree Mataji a wistful heavy heart ohen I coulint find a drop of happiness NShe shotwered upon me ocean of fove as vast. Twent to Shre Mataji with the eyes filled with tears She turned thiem to smiles and T otercamefedrs went to Shee Mataj seeing the drans few to make theH Iwent to Shiue WA during the dank onely ni She blessed m he uiele Ieent te Matayi DuNiny y entirr Sahaja be for her warm blessings,I got I went to Shee Mataji with a pnis I made to fifl p che palir of Sahaja



----------------------

2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Yuvaclcishti
Val 9
Issue 2
AJune
2008
"No doubt, we must care for our young people. And look after them and give them their due
respect and they must know their due duties towards Sahaja Yoga. I found them to be excellent
workers, very dedicated innocent hands that I have got. I am very proud of them."
1988-0104: Yuva Shakti, Ganapatipule
BA
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 ire
If your
job
is
to spread Sahaja
Yoga
MOGA
you will never
SALAJA VOA
be
unemployed
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 ndcs
श्री ज्ञानेश्वर
NIRMAL VANI : LAJJA
SHOULD IWEAR JEANS/TROUSERS?
(Self Introspection of a Yuva Yogini)
10
Jumble Words
Shri Ganesha's Qualitative Manifestation
11
12
उघड सहस्त्रार माते
THE
श्रीमाताजी की आरती
14
अनुभव
16
Detachment and Responsibility
17
Awaken Your Creativity
19
YuvaShakti Reporter
20
आदिगुरू श्री राजा जनक
22
Kr****************
u*****************
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 YUVADRISHTI
Published by
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 8, Chandragupt Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 038
Tel : 020-25286537, Fax : 020-25286722
For queries regarding delay in receiving
the magazine, please call:
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.,
Tel : 020-25286537, E-Mail : Sale@nitl.co.in
Please mail your experiences, poems,
articles, suggestions, comments, etc. to:
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
Plot No. 8, Chandragupt Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune-411 038
yuvadrishti@gmail.com
Printed by
Re-Prints
Pune
We solemnly thank our article writers, editors,
designers/professionals etc. for their help in making this issue.
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 सु
Yuvadrishti June 2008
०
श्री ज्ञानेश्वर
महाराष्ट्र के महानतम् संत कवि श्री ज्ञानेश्वर का जन्म आलन्दी
में सन 1275 में हुआ । उनके पिता विठ्ठलपन्त तथा माता
रुक्मणी बाई थी। उनका परिवार आपेगाँव में रहता था। इस
क
परिवार के सभी सदस्य पुण्य आत्मा थे तथा परमात्मा की
भक्ति के लिए जाने जाते थे त्र्यंबकपन्त, श्री ज्ञानेश्वर के
पड़दादा, ने नाथपन्थी गोरखनाथ से तथा उनके दादा
गोविन्दपन्त ने गाहिनीनाथ से आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्राप्त किया। श्री
रा
आरर
ि
ज्ञानेश्वर के नाना सिद्धोपन्त कुल्कर्णी आलन्दी के निवासी थे।
श्री ज्ञानेश्वरजी के पिता विठ्ठलपन्त को, जो कि बाल्यावस्था से
ही धार्मिक प्रवृत्ति के थे, सन्यासियों की संगत अच्छी लगती थी
तथा उन्हें तीर्थयात्राओं का बड़ा चाव था। भ्रमण के दौरान वे
आलन्दी पहुँचे। वहाँ सिद्धोपन्त कुलकर्णी ने जब इस होनहार
के आदेश पर सामान्य गृहस्थ जीवन फिर से अपना लिया तब
युवक को देखा तो अत्यन्त प्रभावित होकर उन्होंने विठ्ठलपन्त उनके यहाँ चार बच्चों ने जन्म लिया - निवृत्ति, ज्ञानेश्वर,
सोपान तथा मुक्ताबाई।
को अपना दामाद बना लिया। विठ्ठलपन्त तथा रुक्मणी बाई ने
अपना प्रारम्भिक वैवाहिक जीवन पवित्र स्थलों की यात्राओ में
एक सन्यासी के बच्चे होने के कारण समाज के तथाकथित
बिताया। विठ्ठलपन्त को सांसारिक जीवन में कोई सुख अनुभव
नहीं
विद्वानों व ब्राह्मण पंडितों द्वारा इन बालकों को प्रभु भक्ति के
हुआ। उनकी ब्रह्मज्ञान प्राप्त करने की तीव्र इच्छा हुई और
भजन कीर्तन में शामिल होना उन्हें और अधिक भाने लगा।
अयोग्य ठहराया गया, जाति से बहिष्कृत किया गया तथा उन्हें
र
घोर रुप से प्रताड़ित किया गया। परन्तु इन बालकों के हृदय जो
उन्हें सांसारिक सुखों तथा मामलों से निर्लिप्त रहने में महानू
परमात्मा की भक्ति से परिपूर्ण थे, घोर विरोध के बावजूद
आत्मिक ज्ञान पाने के लिए अटल थे। उन्होनें अपनी प्रभु भक्ति
आनन्द मिलता था। परिणामस्वरूप जब विठ्ठलपन्त काशी की
तीर्थ यात्रा पर गए तो श्रीपदस्वामी से ज्ञान प्राप्त करके वे
ज्ञानेश्वर तथा उनके
को जारी रखा। धर्म शास्त्रों के
भाईयों के जनेऊ संस्कार करने का प्रयास किया गया परन्तु
अनुसार
सन्यासी बन गए। परन्तु कुछ समय बाद जब श्रीपादस्वामी को
यह ज्ञात हुआ कि उन्होनें आत्मिक ज्ञान अपनी पत्नी रुक्मणी
बाई की स्वीकृति के बिना प्राप्त किया है तब विठ्ठलपन्त की
इनका घोर विरोध करते हुए ब्राह्मण वर्ग ने उनके जनेऊ
संस्कार को स्वीकार करने से इन्कार कर दिया क्योंकि वे एक
उन्होनें वापिस जाकर फिर से अपना गृहस्थजीवन यापने करने
ऐसे व्यक्ति की सन्तान थे जो सन्यास धारण करने के उपरान्त
का आदेश दिया। यद्यपि एक बार सन्यासी बनने के बाद पुनः
गुहस्थ बने थे जिसे घोर पाप माना जाता था।
गृहस्थ जीवन मे लौटना उस समय सिद्धान्तों के विरुद्ध था
विट्ठलपन्त अपने बच्चों के साथ इस कठोर व्यवहार को सहन
न कर पाए तथा इस तथाकथित पाप के प्रायश्चित हेतु उन्होनें
परन्तु उसकी परवाह ना करते हुए विटूठलपन्त ने अपने गुरु
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Yuvadrishti June 2008
अपनी पत्नि रुक्मणी बाई के साथ इलाहबाद जाकर अधिकार पा जाता है और अत्यन्त आन्दित हो उठता है (यह
जलसमाधि ले ली । प्रायश्चित का ये उपाय उस समय के बात श्रीमाताजी ने भी दोहराई है।) इस ग्रन्थ के उपरान्त सन्त
तथाकथित विद्वानों ने उन्हें बताया था । अब निवृत्ति नाथ जो ज्ञानेश्वर ने एक और महान ग्रन्थ रचा जो सुप्रसिद्ध
अपने बहन-भाईयों में ज्येष्ठ थे, वे ही उनके माता, पिता तथा
"अमृतानुभव" के नाम से जाना जाता है।
गुरु बन गए। वे पैठण में ब्राह्मण पंडितों के पास आवश्यक
रस्म की स्वीकृति हेतु गए। आखिरकार ब्राह्मण ने इन बच्चों के इसके बाद ज्ञानेश्वर जी पन्ढरपुर के प्रसिद्ध सन्त नामदेव तथा
पवित्र हृदयों के गहन आत्मिक अध्ययन तथा ज्ञान से प्रभावित अन्य कई सन्तों के साथ उत्तर भारत की तीर्थयात्रा पर गए।
कहा जाता है कि इस दौरान उन्होंने अपने असंख्य अभंगों
(भक्ति गीतों) की रचना की । उनके ये अभंग ब्रह्माण्डीय
श्री ज्ञानेश्वर तब अपने अन्य भाईयों के साथ नेवासे नामक भाईचारे, आजीवन पूर्ण समर्पित प्रभु चरणों की भक्ति, गहन
स्थान पर गए जहाँ उन्होनें अपने बड़े भाई गुरु निवृत्तिनाथ की आत्मिक ज्ञान तथा गरीबों एवं त्रस्तों के प्रति हार्दिक प्रेम की
आज्ञा तथा कृपा से ज्ञानेश्वरी नामक पावन ग्रन्थ की मराठी ऐसी अभिव्यक्ति है जो मानव की आत्मा पर पड़े अज्ञान तथा
होकर उन्हे शुद्धिकरण का प्रमाण पत्र दे ही दिया।
भाषा में रचना की, जो पावन भगवतु गीता पर टीका है। यह
बात 1290 की है जब वे केवल सोलह वर्ष के थे।
पापों के प्रभावों की सारी परतों को तेजी से हटाने में समर्थ है।
भगवत् ये अभंग प्राणी के समस्त अज्ञान के अन्वकार को मिटाकर
गीता पर उनके इस टीका को सर्वोत्तम माना जाता है। उनकी
उसको नव प्रकाश दिलाने, प्रभु की अनन्य भक्ति, पूर्ण सर्मपण,
आत्मज्ञान की गहनता, भाषा तथा शैली की सुन्दरताऐँ जिससे अबोधिता, पवित्रता, विवेक, सद्बुद्धि, निर्मल विद्या, निरीच्छ
उन्होंने ज्ञानेश्वरी नामक ग्रन्थ को सजाया है, वह हम ज्ञानेश्वरी भाव, निर्लिप्तता, चित्त शैथिल्य, अखण्ड शान्ति
पढ़ कर ही जान सकते हैं। इस ग्रन्थ को मराठी भाषा के दूसरे
निर्विकल्पावस्था, मुमुक्षता आदि की स्थिती में उतारने में सक्षम
ग्रन्थों के सामने अतुलनीय माना जा चुका है। मात्र टीका न है। इनके पठन से ज्ञात होता है कि सन्त ज्ञानेश्वर अपने हृदय
होकर ज्ञानेश्वरी परमचैतन्य के अनुभव की गहनता, महानता में कितनी श्रद्धा, समर्पण भाक्ति तथा मानव जाति के प्रति
तथा ऊँचाई का एक ज्वलंत उदाहरण है जो उन्होंने ज्ञानेश्वरी कितना प्रेम रखते हैं।
के छठे अध्याय में व्यक्त किया है। उन्होंने कहा है की मनुष्य
इस संसार को निरंतर प्रभु भक्ति के द्वारा परमानन्द प्राप्त
करने के उपाय तथा योग की महानता बताकर ईश्वर को पूर्ण
की कुण्डलिनी शक्ति सर्पिणी की भाँति साढ़े तीन
कर उसके मूलाधार में सुप्त अवस्था में होती है। प्राणी की शुद्ध
कुण्डल लगा
समर्पित होकर उसकी सत्ता को पहचानने तथा स्वीकार करने के
लिए प्रेरित करके उनको यह आभास हुआ कि मानव को
इच्छा, सद्गुरु की कृपा तथा पूर्व जन्मों में के
फलस्वरूप जागृत होती है और मूलाधार से उठकर सभी चक्रों
सुकृत्यो
सन्मार्ग दर्शाने का उनके जीवन का उद्देश्य पूरा हो गया है।
को पोषण प्रदान करती हुई, उनको निरंजित तथा पावन करती
हुई सहस्त्रार के पार हो जाती है। मानव के चक्रों में उसके तब 1296 में कार्तिक मास की तेरंहवीं तारीख को आलन्दी में
अखण्ड समाधि ग्रहण की। श्री ज्ञानेश्वर जी जो मात्र 22 वर्ष
द्वारा अज्ञान वश किए पापों या दुष्कर्मों के फलस्वरुप रुग्णता
तक ही जीवित रहे। उन्होंने अपने लिए कुछ नहीं किया अपितु
या विष इकट्ठा हो जाता है। जागृत होकर कुण्डलिनी उन
सारी मानव जाति के लिए आजीवन समाधान एवं सहज जीवन
सबको पी जाती है तथा अपने इस आत्मसाक्षात्कार पाने की
इच्छा करनेवाले बालक पर कृपा करके विष के बदले में अमृत
उगलती है। इसके बाद प्राणी जीवित अवस्था में ही मुक्ति का
उतरने के रास्ते ही परमात्मा से माँगते रहे।
23
৫
ॐ
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Yuvadrishti June 2008
NIRMAL VANI : LAJJA
या देवी सर्वभूतेषु
लज्जाखूपेण संस्थिता।
नमस्तस्यै नमस्तस्यै
नमो नमः ॥
Meaning of Lajja
Lajja, I don't know how to describe, it's not shyness. It is a kind of a shame about your body. Lajja rupena
samasthita means you have to have shame of your body. That's specially for women As a child you will see,
women are very shy. See, little girls, they are very shy. That shyness gradually disappears, but in the
beginning they are even shy of Me. They come before Me, they'll put down their head. They'll not even say,
Namaste. Very sweet. And they don't like people wearing funny dresses... [Ref #1]
Panchami is recognized because on this day we wear a dress, whatever we wear today is so that our body
is properly covered. The sense of shame and chastity that our body has is because of Him (Shri Ganesha).
Lajja Rupena Samasthita. So if you have any sense of chastity and shame, it is because of Him. That will
benefit you immensely. [Ref #3]
Wave of Adharma
So, I've met one lady who traveled with Me. She was wearing a burkha... and by the time we landed in
London, she took out the burkha and the dress was much above the knees. (Shri Mataji laughing) I said,
"What kind of...woman is she? No Lajja, no shame, nothing, shamelessness!..
In these modern times - exposure of body is regarded as a great achievement of women. They are trying to
become aboriginals, you see. That time they (aboriginals) never had these ideas and they were not so
confused, you see. So, even if their (aboriginal) women were scantily dressed, it didn't mean that it was some
sort of a sex or some sort of an attraction for men.
Or men behaving in funny manners to show that they have a special attraction for women. I mean, why
should you? It is absolutely absurd that men should be attracted to women and women should be attracted
to men - and on the road, on the street, you go, you see, just that going on! This adharma is the worst I think,
for it's a curse. Because after coming to Sahaja Yoga also people start doing this nonsense, you know. They
should all go to lunatic asylum, I think, they are no good for Sahaja Yoga. But dharma gets established as
soon as you have the light of the spirit. [Ref #5]
Respecting the body
But the way nowadays we are going about with the show of our body, and sometimes I feel that all these
designers will die or will get bankrupt, because people wear such little clothes these days. There is no space
for any artist to show his work or to show his art how he can dress you up.
In Japan I asked them how- this is long time back... Isaid, "Howis it you wear these dresses, these kimonos,
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Yuvadrishti June 2008
done so well, very expensive and it takes time to wear that?" So they said, "That's easy, if God has made a
beautiful body then it is His art and we have to make our art decorate it. So what we do is to make our art to
decorate it.
Ireally liked it, because in India same thing, if there is a lady she has to wear a sari, which is being made very
artfully, very beautifully, just to decorate her body, just to respect the body. But this seems to have gone with
the influence of west....
...You are notsupposed to sell your body. That's not what Goddess has done to you. But you should dress up
well, different, different occasions are there, for those occasions you have to wear the way it is.
The other dayI gavea very nice sari which we call as paithani to one lady as a present. And we had a function
for a book was inaugurated, and this lady came there. So I said, "Why didn't you wear a paithani?" She said,
"What, there is no wedding on. How can Iwear for this function paithani? There has to be a wedding." Very
sweet "in the wedding I can wear." It is all, see occasions, places which are to be celebrated. Like in India,
to
when women go to the temple or to worship the idols or anything then they will wear all that is necessary
face the Goddess, after all. Imagine people coming for this program here wearing, I don't know what they
call it, but like jute clothes like hippies, what would happen to Me? I would disappear in thin air, I can tell
this much. So, one has to have respect for the body. That is what She has said first - that lajja rupena
you
samstithan.
Now you might say that there are people who are taking their bath in the river and this and that, and give
justification. But you are saints, you are realized souls, you don't have to see those people who are not yet
realized and who are misbehaving. You must do what a saint should do.[Ref #1]
So, you should beshy, you should be humble and respect your body-it's very important. [Ref #5]
Innocence of a Child
As the children don't care for what you suggest to them-to be nasty, to be horrid-in the same way, if you are
innocent, you will not accept. You may listen to anything. Let them (non-realized people)
they want to, doesn't matter. You'll never do that because you cannot, because you are innocent and the
innocent will guard you, it will give you proper guidance-whatis to be done, what is not to be done.
tell
you anything
Now try to introspect and see for yourself, are you innocent or not? People think that somebody is trying to
overpower you, is trying to harm you, is trying to put you down. Nobody can put down innocence.
Innocence is a quality that survives all kinds of nonsense. And not only that, but age, your health, your
mind, your thinking, and your emotions are extremely innocent and you enjoy yourself.
Nowadays there is a big wave of shamelessness sometimes. The people, I have seen, they have no 'lajja'. I
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Yuvadrishti June 2008
don't know, some men wvant to attract women and some women want to attract men. Children never do like
that. They don't know what is this, to attract men, or to attract women, or attract anyone. They will try to
please the dog, they'll try to please a horse, but they never, I have seen, going all out to attract someone. The
reason is this- that their self-esteem is complete. They know about themselves fully. So, why should they do
all this nonsense- of running after women, running after men and creating problems for themselves? Their
self-esteem is complete.
Innocence is like that. It gives you a complete self-esteem. You don't bow to anyone, nor do you make
anybody else to bow. This is the beauty of innocence, which works out so well within you. That's why
always say that worship Shri Ganesha...
...Worshipping Shri Ganesha improves your 'Mooladhara', improves your sense of shame, improves of...
your own dignity, self-esteem. You dress up in a way that shows that you respect your body. You talk in such
a way that that shows that you respect your tongue, your language; you cannot have a foul mouth if you are
innocent person. You cannot have a mind that cari abuse or can say horrible words...There is no need to use
these dirty words to express yourself. With that your tongue is spoilt. So innocence is gone from your
tongue. If you have lost innocence from your tongue, whatever you say will never come true... will never
come true. But if you are innocent and your tongue is innocent, and respects... So the basic as you can see-
respect your innocence in every manner. [Ref # 2]
I remember My granddaughter once, she saw onme magazine in which there was a lady in a swimming dress. She
said, "What are you doing? Better wear your dress, otherwise my Grandma will come and hit you hard." To that
lady that was in and then she opened and saw a man's dress with just a small, little knickers. I don't know why
they do it. And she said, "This one seems to be an absolutely shameless fellow. He is going to have bad time now."
And she closed it. And then she told the maid servant, "Burn this, burn this. I don't want to see." Such a little
girl she knew that it was wrong. [Ref#1]
Primordial taboos/dharmas
Now what does She (Kundalini) do for us, for us human beings? She's the primordial Power. What she does
is to build in us a primordial we can call "restrictions" or "primordial taboos" or "primordial dharmas."
We have in the same way primordial taboos built within us which are dharma. Ahuman being has to be like
that. If he tries to be something else, something goes wrong with his life. It's like say if you have a glass, you
drop it on the ground, it will break that is the dharma. In the same way when human beings start deviating
from the line of dharma, they get into trouble. But it's only human beings who can do that. They can only
cross over these taboos, these primordial taboos, and can become horrible...
..Now these primordial taboos are in you built in, they are there. These are existing maybe in a potential
state; maybe you have curbed them down, maybe you have turned them out, but they are there, all the time
they are there. And that's what we say that you are leaving the maryadas, or else we say that you are
insulting Shri Ganesh...
But I must say for the aboriginal people, or people who...were made aware of their primordial taboos
somehow, as the animals know what is bad for them; and that knowledge was there with aboriginals. In
India we have aboriginals... we call them Gond, Korku, Bhil. We had a lady who was a maid with us,
Genabai was her name. She was an excellent cook, but she had her maryadas. All the time, like if My father
came she would immediately cover her head and go in the other room, to respect him. Nobody told her to do
that.
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Yuvadrishti June 2008
.But when they met with this so-called advanced
people so many of them started living like them.
They said, "You have no freedom, you are just bound
by something, by some..." But actually they were
bound by the sacredness, by the divine
understanding. And then they started changing. She
was all right, her husband was all right, but her son
started drinking this is the beginning of the end
then gambling, and all other sorts of things he
started. And her grandson started going to
prostitutes. And the idea was only that "We are free
now. What's wrong?"...
They gave them skirts and blouses, I don't know what all they did. But Genabai did not. She said, "What is
this? Why should Iwear a dress like this where the whole body is exposed? No, I'll wear a sari;Ican never do
it. Why shouldI wear this kind of a useless dress?" [Ref # 4]
So, Sahaj Dharma is that you have shame, you have sense of shame. What you talk to others, what you say to
others, how
misused Her and made Her into a sort of a Romeo - Juliet business. It was not that. She was a very pure
behave towards them...This sweetness comes from Radhaji. Now, of course they have
you
woman and She was Mahalakshmi.
So, to be a Mahalaksmi, after coming to Sahaja Yoga, you should know that you should dress up in a way
that's perfectly all right. Once I remember, I was in a big party and one gentleman came and he sat down,
"Aaaaaah!" I said, "What happened?" "What a relief, Mother, Mrs. Srivastava, to see you. See these women,
I'm fed up. Butyou came, I felt such a relief."Isaid, "What is so relieving?" "You are so serene."
So, women are serene in Sahaj Dharma. They are not stupid, frivolous, laughing at anything. That's not the
way for a woman. Anything happens, they must laugh. I mean, there is something laughable, all right, but
some things are not even laughable, they'll laugh. That's not the way. That can be ridiculous also, can
ridicule others. But, laugh of appreciation, laugh of enjoyment, is so pure and creates such beautiful
atmosphere. I think the whole ecological problem is in our brains. It is not outside. It is inside us, which is
reflected outside. [Ref #5]
References:
2000-0916:Shri Ganesha Puja, Cabella
1997-1005:Navaratri Puja, Cabella
2.
1.
1997-0907:Shri Ganesha Puja, The Innate Dharma, Cabella
2008-0210Shri Ganesh Birthday
4.
3.
1997-0823: Shri Krishna Puja: Primordial Taboos and Sahaja Dharma, Cabella
5.
For example our Vishuddhi Chakra, you have sixteen thousand powers, and all these sixteen powers are
awakened in you today as you are. Sixteen thousand powers are awakened in you as you are today, but
you speak you don't understand that when you are speaking, you are a Sahaja Yogi. With all these
powers you are speaking. When you eat, you don't understand that this tongue belongs to a Sahaja Yogi;
you should not hanker after anything. Like if somebody likes tea, he'll go on taking fifteen cups. That's
no good. If he's fond of one sort of a food, he won't take another food. Thinking too much about food all
the time, asking for food and organizing food all the time, thatspoils Vishuddhi very badly. Then talking
ill about anyone, complaining about anyone to Me will spoil your Vishuddhi. If there's some sense, if I
ask, then it's all right; but all the time talking ill about each other will spoil your Vishuddhi. 1980-0127:
Powers Bestowed upon Sahaja Yogis, Formal talk, Bordi, India
when
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Yuvadrishti June 2008
SHOULD I WEAR
JEANS/TROUSERS?
(Self Introspection of
a Yuva Yogini)
My introspection started
I always wondered why I shouldn't wear jeans/trousers in
centers, Pujas and outside sahaja collectives? I could never get an
answer. I wore trousers and jeans before coming to Sahaja yoga,
and to
first collective center I was wearing jeans, and when
my
after center I was interacting with fellow yogis I was thinking that
what they must be thinking about me that I do not have sense of
decency and respect to our culture that I am wearing jeans. But
why this thought came to my mind, may be because I realized even before coming to Sahaja yoga trousers
are not part of our culture.
And thanks to Shri Mataji, that one day in 2003 all of my three jeans were washed and were drying outside in
the courtyard and somebody picked them all! Now there are too many coincidences that all 3 trousers to get
washed on same day and all three get picked up in daylight, when no cloth before and after was stolen, must
be some work of a Gana So I intuitively realized that we should not wear jeans or trousers but for next five
years why was itnot Ianswered.
Sahaja Fashion
The things would have been easier, if Shri Mataji would have said that do not wear jeans at all. But I never
came across such a lecture. But then I read lots of advices by Shri Mataji in September'07 issue of Nirmal
Vani. In which Mother told that to respect ourselves and to give us dignity we should wear clothes of our
own culture, we should wear clothes with vibrations, we should not wear short tops, indecent tops, tight
jeans etc. To this list I would like to add low-rise jeans.
You are saints do you realize? Do you realize your self-esteem? You are saints now. What clothes you wear,
you are not vagabonds. You are not tramps. You are not on the street. So you have to wear dignified dress. I
have told everyone of you that wear something dignified, not undignified. It has to be majestic, because you
are a saint now. So the dress you wear need not be absurd or something funny but should give you dignity.
false but a real dignity. You see the vibrations of a dress. Wear your country's dress. You need not
Not
any
wear somebody else's dress or something but the interest in the dress should be that it should give you
dignity and a sense of respectability. It is to preserve your respect that you have to wear a dress. That is the
Lutility of a dress.[Ref# 1]
Now if I look back and see why Iused to prefer jeans and trousers over salwar-kurtas with duppattas, which
are our culture dresses. Few reasons which Icould think of are as follows:
Duppattas are difficultin handling.
Salwar-kurtasneed very frequent washing.
Salwar-kurtas needs ironingevery time they are worn.
Jeans/trousers are very easy to wear and handle.
Jeans don't need frequent ironing and washing.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Yuvadrishti June 2008
SoIstopped wearing salwar-kurtas and started wearing jeans, less work, easy to handle, lots of effort saving
(or we may call it lethargy). And last but not least, all friends wear and if I don't wear I would be called
conservative, I would be laughed at.
Shri Mataji has said, "In Sahaja Yoga there's a Sahaja fashion" [Ref# 2]
But then I ask myself, "If fashion and fear of being called 'behanji' is the reason of taking on to western
dresses then should not we Sahaja yoginis be setting fashion trends now for the satya yuga and not follow
the remaining trends of Kaliyuga. Why don't we start Sahaja fashion of salwar kurtas, with dupattas, oiled
and combed hair rather than all these jeans, short tops and open hair without oil?"
Subtle effects of Wearing Ieans/trousers
After answering that Why I should not wear jeans/trousers from external aspects which are of very
superficial nature I asked, "Are the above mentioned reasons are only reasons? There has to be something
more to it. But whatit is?" Imyself was amazed at the soundness of the explanation!
Jeans out rightly are not refused by Shri Mataji because western country culture is like that, but short tops are
refused, but girls do wear short and tight tops, if not in Sahaja collective but outside it, but what are we
loosing by wearing such indecent clothes, we can't bow to our Mother, we can't bend down in front of our
brothers, but in front of unchaste friends we do! We attract negative attention of these unchaste 'friends'and
spoil our chakras and catch on our Mooladhara and Left Vishuddhi!
We can't stand and talk to our brothers without spoiling their attention by wearing such clothes. We are
already loosing our chastity outside collective and now we are becoming responsible for adulteration in the
of our brothers rather than helping them in establishing their Shri Ganesha principle. We are spoiling
eyes
their attention and eyes and their Shri Ganesha gets angry, and ours was already angry because we are
wearing inauspicious clothes, which are short, tight, unwashed.
The responsibility of a Sahaja Yogini sister towards her Sahaja yogi brother, as described by Shri Mataji, is-
"Now this Vishnumaya is a female Power, as you know that. She didn't care for anything mundane. Can you
think of Vishnumaya going after all these nonsensical things? And to protect Her brothers, and to give all the
strength to those brothers, what did She do? What did She do? She came in Her purest form, as a Sister. You
all have here so many Sahaja Yogis as your brothers. You must be having other people also as your brothers.
This purity has to be brought into women. Unless and until this purity comes into them, they have no
powers, they are powerless. So we come down to the main thing that is : where the women are
chaste, there resides the powers of all the deities. So it's such a responsibility for us to be very chaste, and to
be very pure, and to be sisters to our brothers so that their brothers are also protected from the temptations of
the world; so that they, too, have their attention onto something higher and greater."[Ref# 3]
and
pure
Trousers with Long tops are safe! I concluded..
So I concluded that jeans and trousers are okay to wear even in Sahaja collectives but with long and loose
till knees, but it is all the more important to wear them with long tops outside Sahaja collective as well.
tops
But, aren't we forgetting dupattas to cover and protect our center hearts? I have to confess here that Imyself
feel very clumsy in handling duppattas... Shri Mataji please give me tips in this regard
Now after my above conclusion the next question is, "Can I imagine Shri Sita, Shri Radha, Mother Mary
wearing these dresses? If we can then we should go ahead with those dresses, butif can't then why wear such
inauspicious dresses. Shri Mataji has transformned us with all the qualities of the deities, then why not dress
auspiciously which pleases and respects these deities inside us? Yes, it is very right, there are so many other
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Yuvadrishti June 2008
things which these deities have in them which I do
not have, but let me start with such a gross aspect of
dressing and then move towards subtler aspects.
Epilogue
"So in India it is not possible to introduce all these
(jeans) dresses; in the school maybe but later on they
all give up because they like Saris." [Ref# 4]
When Shri Mataji said the above sentence She was
putting so much of the confidence in us, the Indian
yuvashakti who is out of the school, and are we
supporting Her in the confidence She has put in this
sentence?
Last but not the least, if it requires so many of
justifications and explanations for wearing jeans,
then isn't it safer not to wear jeans, because it will
cause no harm if we don't wear jeans, even if they are
un-harmful. But if we wear and it is causing us some
harm in subtle way, it would be damaging to our
chakras without our knowing.
Poem presented to Shri Mataji
on Mother's Day
(I Ith May'08) in Cabella
Yours truly,
Supreme Source of Eternal Grace
Highest Queen of the Highest Light
Realm of Bliss beyond time and space
Sahaja Yuva Yogini
References
In your eyes You rule day and night
1. 1980-0927: Lethargy Most Anti God, Chelsham
Road, London
Myriads of suns shines from Your face
All the Creation's a play for Your delight
2. 1990-0304: Informal Talk te Sahaja Yogis,
The whole Universe is Your immense shrine
Melbourne, Australia
All the demons with Your sight You destroy
3. 1980-0808: Opening Address, evening before
Vishnumaya Puja, New York, USA
Joyful Incarnation of the Bliss Divine
Immeasurable Peace and absolute Joy
4. 1998-1025: Significance of Diwali, Diwali Puja
No word can tell Your Beauty that shines
Ineffable Empress the Cosmos is Your toy
Reaching Your Feet is the purest desire
Mother You art the Holiest Dove
All the evil is slayed by your fire
Love is your Essence You are the Essence of Love
All the Beauty that exists Your Beauty inspires
Divine shower of Grace you bestow from above
Eternal Source of what is gracious and sweet
Verily You art sakshat Shri Adi Shakti
I humbly surrender to Your Lotus Feet
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Yuvadrishti June 2008
JUMBLE WORDS
Position in Head
(NABHI CHAKRA)
(KLUAIHMGHRS) principle governs left Nabhi and
reflects our relationship with our wife, qualities of family and of
1.
household.
(LENEPS) is the organ of peace within us and it gets spoiled
when while eating we read something or watch TV.
In Hands
Giving too much attention to matter is called
TLMM R) and is problem of left Nabhi and is absolutely against
(SAIEIA
3.
dharma.
(NOIOESSSSP) of material things should be given
up. Matter has been given to us to enjoy and to share with others. The
of ours is our Mother.
4.
In Feet
greatest
If we have Lakshmi Principle within us then only we can have
(CIOAANTTISSF) in us with everything that is
material.
(YOEEINRSG T), giving and sharing solves the
problem of materialism and greed. It gives us satisfaction and the joy
of Shiva i.e. shivaananda. Problem of materialism are solved because
6.
circulation starts when two doors are open.
Gross Expression in
Vertebral Coloumn
(SEMKAH) or well-being and
Shri Laxmi is the deity of
7.
Shri Krishna had said that when we get connected to the God after
self-realization then only He can give us our well-being.
(HLAIJMARSK) is deity of right nabhi and She
represents the power of king, dignity of king like behaviour in us.
8.
As a Sahaja yogi, we should know that we are specially chosen
people, and we should not involve ourselves in cheap and frivolous
things like non-realised people rather live a life with
YGD). So that others see royalty and majesty of our behavior.
9.
-(NTII
Solar Plexus
10. We should have special personality which has innocence of a child
coupled with maturity and
(VRAYITG) of a guru. These
powers come from void.
Answers on pg 15
5.
2.
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Yuvadrishti June 2008
Shri Ganesha's
Qualitative Manifestations
The human being is said to be the replica of the Virata's
body i.e. the body of the God almighty. Perhaps it is in the
divine plan that the human being should manifest divine
nature embodied within him and should ultimately be one
with his creator. Hence there is a mechanism within him to
attain the purpose of his creation. He is also therefore
endowed with the ego, conditioning, intellect and attention.
Each of these institutions has distinct functions.
Shri Ganesha is worshipped first in the Pujas to all deities.
Saints and artists have praised him at the beginning of their
works. According to Shri Ganesha Atharvasheersha, Shri
Ganesha manifested before the creation. As Shri Mataji has
advised, since innocence had to be established before
creation of the universe, Shri Ganesha was created first.
Likewise in the human beings he is the firm foundation for spiritual evolution at the Mooladhara
chakra. The qualities of innocence, wisdom, purity and dedication come from him. His presence purifies
the mind, the ego and the intellect. It works as a catalyst to clear the chakras. As Shri Mataji has advised,
he resides on all the chakras and in the heart he is spirit.
Shri Ganesha's first manifestation in human consciousness comes in the form of his creativity. A child,
soon after holding a pen makes some figures in its spontaneity. It is the expression of his innate
creativity. Simnilarly, people who lived in the monolithic period through their untutored mind carved
different figures on stones, which are still available at Carnac in France. They emit vibrations. Such
expressions of creativity have their own beauty. When an artist or a writer is connected with divine, his
works emit vibrations Creativity of polluted minds examples are galore are devoid of vibrations and
beauty. A child's innocence impels him to close its eyes to the display of vulgarity, violence and other
anti-Ganesha scenes. A realized person may ignore them or laugh at their stupidity but will feel
concerred about their impact on the immature minds.
A child grows and at the same time interacts with others. His senses are getting developed, new needs
and attractions come into play and temptations around beckon his attention. Environments in the family
and surroundings in addition to inborn virtues give shape to his personality. At this time his strong
grounding of Shri Ganesha's qualities enables him to stick to virtues, accept what conforms to them and
reject what is contrary. His wisdom and inner purity guide him to keep away from the misbehaving
children and also to make friends with likeminded ones.
In the adulthood without strong Shri Ganesha self-interest may be allowed to override ethical or moral
propriety when faced with an opportunity of a material advantage. It takes Gandhji's righteousness to
send some other boy to England for education financed by a rich man when Gandhiji's own son was
keen to go.
Continued on pg 15
11
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Yuvadrishti June 2008
उघड सहस्रार माते
प्रेमाची शिदोरी अज्ञाचक्रावरी
उषड सहसार माते उघड सहसार
हमारे आज्ञा चक्र पर प्रेमरूपी पुंजी है।
अब सहस्रार खोलिए माता सहसार
खोलिए।
निर्मिलेसी विश्व जेव्हां जिवामध्ये आलो, जन्म
तुझा खेळ झाला माते परी न विसावा, उघड सहसार माते उषड सहस्ार ॥
मूत्युच्या या फेन्यामध्ये सापडली
जब आपने इस विश्व की निर्मिति कि और मेरे जीव की उत्तपती हुई तो मैं इस जन्म मृत्यु के फेरे में फसा हुआ हूँ।
हे माते, आपका खेल हुआ पर मुझे जरा भी शांती नहीं है।
हे माते सहस्रार खोलिए।
रानोमाळी भटकत होते जीव जीवनात, कम, क्रोध, मोहमाया याच बंधनात
पापपुण्याचा हा मेळ न दिसावा, उघड सहार माते उघड सहसार ।।
इस जीव रूपी जीवन में कहाँ कहाँ भटक रहा हूँ। काम, क्रोध, मोह माया इन्हीं बंधनों में जकड़ा हुआ हूँ।
पाप पुण्य के इस भोग में कहीं मेल बैठता हुआ नजर नहीं आ रहा है।
सहस्त्रार खोले अब माता।
वेदपाठ करिती कोणी गीता पठण केले, तेच तेच ग्रंथी ज्ञान जना उपदेशिले
आयुष्य ते गेले वाया कृष्ण न दिसावा, उघड सहार माते उघड सहसार ।।
कोई वेद पठन करते है तो कोई गीता का पठन करते हैं, वही वही ज्ञान ग्रथों में लोगों को बताते है। इसी में सारी
आयु व्यर्थ हुई है तो भी कृष्ण का भी दर्शन नहीं हुआ। सहस्त्रार खोलिए अब माता
कोणी योगीराज कोणी सिध्द शिवनाथ, संत साध म्हणती कोणी सिध्दि दावितात
अनुभव शुन्य सारे त्रासलो ह्या जीवा, उघड सहसार माते उघड सहसार ।।
...
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Yuvadrishti June 2008
कोई योगीराज आए कोई सिद्ध शिवनाथ आए कोई संत साधू कहते है हम सिद्धी दिखाते है पर ये सब कुछ अनुभव
शून्य है। अब मैं इस जीवन से बिलकुल त्रस्त हो चूका हूँ। सहस्रार खोलिए माता।
तुझ्या चरणासी माते जेव्हां आम्ही आलो, कृष्णखूप पाहून जेव्हां मनी दंग झालो
ध्यानामध्ये मूलाधारी शक्तिरूप देवा, उघड सहस्रार माते उघड सहसार ।
जब हम आप के चरणों में आ गए तो कृष्णस्वरूप देखकर मन में दंग हो गये। ध्यान में जाकर मूलाधार पें शक्ती
रूपी भगवान के दर्शन हुए। सहस्त्रार खोलिए माता।
तुझ्या कृपे निद्धित शक्ती उध्ध्वमुखे येई, सात चक्रे तिच्या स्पर्शेजागृत ती होई
अज्ञास्थानी येता माते का ग विसावा, उघड सहसार मते उघड सहसार ॥
आपकी कृपा से हमारी सोयी हुई शक्ती हुई शक्ती उपर उठती है। (आपकी कृपा से हमारी निद्रित शक्ती उच्चगती की
आस होती है।)
उसके स्पर्श से हमारे सातों चक्र जागृत हो गये। परंतु आज्ञा के स्थान पर आकर आप रूक क्यों गए सहस्रार खोलिए
माते
IM
तेज जेव्हा त्या शक्तिचे इडा पिंगलात, थंड थंड चैतन्याच्या लहरी वाहतात
सहसार भेद नामे अनंतत्व ठेवा, उघड सहसरार माते उघड सहसार ।।
जब उस शक्ति का तेज इडा पिंगला में आता है तब हम में ठंण्डी ठंण्डी चैतन्य लहरें बहती है। सहस्त्रार भेदन मतलब
अनंत तत्त्व की पुंजी जोड़ना। सहस्त्रार खोलिए माता।
Donation Request For NGO
4. Kindly Speed Post (ONLY) your Cheque/DD at:
Mrs. Gisela Matzer,
c/o Vishwa Nirmal Prem Ashram,
Plot No.9, Institulional Area,
Near Park Knowledgel,
Greater Noida, UP-201308.
Ph: (0120)2322023, (0120)2230681.
Jai Shri Mataji Dear Sahaja Yogis,
We all know that Shri Mataji founded Vishwa Nirmal
Prem Ashram, Greater Noida (an NGO for destitute
women and children) in 2000. For upbringing & care
taking of the children/women and running &
maintenance of the Ashram the NGO regularly needs
funds. Following is the information for people who may
wish to donate:
Contacts:
(1) Mrs. Gisela-09810774865:
email-gisela_oma 7@yahoo.com
(i) Mr. Jaswant Singh-09891924990
1. The Cheque/DD must be made in favour of HH Shri
Mataji Nirmala Devi Foundation.
2. If the donation is greater than or equal to Rs.5000
then please mention your PAN number. If donation
amount is less than Rs.5000 then please mention
your postal address.
5.Donation options for a child (permonth):
(1) Rs. 3000- Includes food, school, dress, maintenance
(11) Rs.1700-School and Food (only)
(iii) Rs. 500-Schooling (only)
We request readers to announce this in their collectives,
so as to spread the awareness among people.
3. Donation can also ba given in form of kinds like cotton
dress, shoes, undergarments (all NEW and NOT old and
used ones).
For further details: www.nirmalprem.org
ey
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Yuvadrishti June 2008
श्रीमाताजी की आरती
जब हम परमात्मा को प्रकाश दिखाते हैं, तब हम यह करते हैं,
कि हम अपने अन्दर के प्रकाश की आराधना करते हैं। तब
प्रकाश तत्व हमारे अन्दर प्रकाशित होता है। प्रकाश तत्त्व यहाँ
आज्ञा पर है। जब आप आरती करते हैं या परमात्मा के आगे
प्रकाश जलाते हैं, जब आप परमात्मा के आगे प्रकाश दिखाते
हैं, तब आपके अन्दर का प्रकाश तत्त्व प्रकाशित हो जाता है।"
संस्कृत में "आ" का अर्थ होता है "के प्रति" और "रती" का
परमात्मा के लिए सर्वोच्च प्रेम"। हम सभी जानते हैं कि पूजा
के अर्पण में अन्तिम स्थिति आरती की होती है। यह देवी के
प्रेम तथा उनकी कृपा को जागृत करने के लिए तथा भक्तों को
अनुकम्पित करने के लिए भक्तों द्वारा देवी की प्रशस्ति तथा
प्रार्थना में हृदय से गाया हुआ गीत है। हम सभी इस तथ्य से
अवगत हैं कि आरती के पश्चात परम चैतन्य का प्रवाह अति
तीव्र होता है।
म
पार
स् म
म्म
सबको दुआ
व्यक्तियों को आशीर्वादित करने के लिए प्रार्थना करते हैं
क्योंकि मात्र श्री माताजी की कृपा से ही मानवता में प्रेम आ
सकता है। माँ के तेज से ही कई बार यह सृष्टि आपदाओं से
बची है।
देनाः हम सहजयोगियाँ के साथ साथ अन्य सभी
व्यक्ति योग में रहते हैं अर्थात् उनके साथ एकरूप होते हैं उनके
कुशलक्षेम
दिल में सदा रहनाः यह प्रार्थना कि श्री माताजी सदैव हमारे (हानि-लाभ) का वहन "मैं" करूँगा। इसी प्रकार से
हृदय में निवास करें। उनकी उपस्थिति मात्र दुर्भावनाओं को दूर श्रीमाताजी के प्रति समर्पण आत्मसाक्षात्कार की वर्षा करता है,
करती है और हमारे हृदय में प्रेम, करुणा, क्षमाशीलता आदि साथ ही उनके चित्र, प्रेम, सुरक्षा, मार्गदर्शन तथा कृपाओं की
दैवी गुणों को जागृत करती है। ये गुण हमारी क्रिया एवं भी वर्षा करते हैं। हमारी यह प्रार्थना की "माँ हमारे हृदय में
प्रतिक्रिया में परिलक्षित होते हैं। आत्मा हमारे हृदय में रहती है आने के पश्चात इसे छोड़कर न जाना" हमारे इस वचन का
और श्रीमाताजी मानव रूप में परम आत्मा हैं। अतः हृदय में द्योतक है कि हम सदैव अपने हृदय को स्वच्छ रखेंगे।
उनकी उपस्थिति हमें अहंकार कें बंधनों आदतों तथा पूर्वकर्मं
मानव में अवतर केः अपने पूर्व अवतरणों में माँ ने राक्षसों का
संहार किया तथा सृष्टि की रक्षा की। अब श्री माताजी गुरुओं
से मुक्त कर देती है।
जग में संकट कारणः पूर्व काल में भी श्रीमाताजी कई बार न के वेष में छिपे राक्षसों को नष्ट करने के साथ जन सामान्य को
केवल मनुष्यों के लिए अपितु देवताओं की रक्षा के लिए भी जागृत करने तथा आध्यात्मिक उत्थान देने आयी हैं। यद्यपि
अवरतरित हुई। अतः देवता और
उनका स्तुति गान करते हैं। श्री माताजी के चरण कमल से साधकों ने उन्हें पहचाना और उनके चरण कमलों में शरण ली।
निकलने वाला अमृतमय परमचैतन्य गंगा और यमुना नदियों
की भाँति संसार के पापों को दूर कर देता है।
मनुष्य दोनों ही चिरकाल से
मानव कलियुग के भ्रामक जीवन में पूर्णतः लिप्त है, फिर भी
संत जनों की धरतीः भारतवर्ष आध्यात्म का प्राचीन स्थान है।
कहा जाता है कि श्री जीसस क्राइस्ट ने भी यहाँ पर लगभग
तेरह वरषों तक निवास किया था । शेष जगत के लिए प्रेम, शान्ति
जो भी शरण में आयाः श्री कृष्ण
ने गीता में कहा है कि जो
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Yuvadrishti June 2008
संगीत का गान कर सकें। अंत में हम स्वयं को समर्पित करके
श्री माताजी से विनती करते हैं कि हमें अपना माध्यम बनाकर
जो यथायोग्य सेवा हम से करवा लें।
और आध्यात्मिक जागृति का यही स्रोत है। यद्यपि नकारात्मक
तत्वों के कारण कई शताब्दियों के विदेशी शासन में लोगों को
अत्यंत कष्ट से गुजरना पड़ा। श्री माताजी ने स्वतंत्रता संग्राम
में भाग लिया। भारतवर्ष के स्वतंत्र होते ही लगभग सभी देश
जो कि औपनिवेशिक शासन के अंतर्गत थे, स्वतंत्र हो गए।
श्रीमाताजी ने बताया है कि आरती के उपरान्त देवी अत्यन्त
प्रसन्न होती हैं। अतः यह समय वरदान माँगने के लिए बहुत
जब दिल में आये तबः हम श्री माताजी को वचन देते हैं कि वे उपयुक्त होता है। स्वयं के लिए तो हम प्रायः प्रार्थना करते हैं
हमारे हृदयों में आत्मा के मधुर संगीत को सुन सकेंगी। जितना किन्तु पूजा की आरती के उपरान्त हमें बड़ी चीज़ माँगनी
पवित्र हृदय उतना ही मधुर संगीत होगा। अतः हम सभी को चाहिए। हमें सम्पूर्ण विश्व के लिए वरदान माँगना चाहिए।
अपने हृदयों को ईष्ष्या व अन्य बुरी भावनाओं से मुक्त रखना
है ताकि हमारी आत्माऐं श्री माताजी के लिए अति आनन्दमय
t it ft
Continued on pg 11
During the formative stages of a child, his inborn self-confidence and thes
parents help nourish his centre heart. His faith and dedication to his parents, which he draws from their
love, forgiveness and encouragement, make strong sources of inspiration and inner strength. It
stimulates and activates those qualities within him with strong centre heart and open left heart.
support and guidance of his
In the course of time one may face adverse situations when the mind may be overcome by fear
imagining possible consequences. In a difficult situation thoughtless awareness is a strong fort that can
shield a person from stress and fear. Then his innate wisdom can guide him to take right action.
Born realized children of Sahaja Yogis who have Shri Ganesha's blessings are seen to be sticking to their
inborn virtues even in the environments found in the western countries as well as in the identical
conditions in India. They may maintain the strong presence of Shri Ganesha even during the later years
feel isolated being different from others. It is however necessary that they are observed and
but
may
taken proper care of, to avoid bloating of their egos or developing inferiority complexes and also to
allow their discretion and discrimination to grow. If one gives into temptations the person through his
innocence and wisdom would understand his mistakes and correct his ideas and outlooks. Then he
naturally respects the purity of relationships.
Shri Ganesha's qualities are immensely beneficial for physical, mental, psychic and spiritual balance and
health through the process of elimination and prevention for the cleansing of the body and the mind.
Due to their close relationship one helps or affects the other, besides expelling the toxic substances from
the body, the mind also has to be cleansed of the thoughts, feelings, desires and ideas unfriendly to
health and spirituality, from the mind. It is also to be kept clean by restraining and steadying the
attention and the eyes and clearing the Agnya.
The need for the blessings of Shri Ganesha the Chitteshwara, the lord of attention and also Vigatajwara
the one who is devoid of heat or fever is much greater in adulthood than before. His bhakti, dedication
and surrender to Shri Mataji have to be ingrained within for our all round benevolence and spiritual
depth.
Answers for Jumble Words
1. GruhLakshmi 2. Spleen 3. Materialism 4. Possession 5. Satisfaction 6. Generosity 7. Kshema 8. RajLakshmi
9. Dignity 10. Gravity
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 র
Yuvadrishti June 2008
अनुभव
अन्तर्राष्ट्रीय सहज पब्लिक स्कूल (धर्मशाला) के बच्चों का
वाघा सीमा पर भारत माता को नमन
26 नवम्बर 2006: विश्वभर से आए सहज योगी बच्चों का भारत-पाकिस्तान की वाघा सीमा पर आगमन एक अत्यन्त सुखद अनुभूति का
अनुभव रहा। अन्तर्राष्ट्रीय सहज पब्लिक स्कूल, धर्मशाला के छोटे बच्चों ने एक साथ कतार में खडे होकर वन्दे मातरम् गाया और उसके बाद
सष्ट्रीय गान प्रस्तुत किया। वाघा सीमा पर उपस्थित सभी जनसमूह एवं सीमा सुरक्षा बल के जवान धर्मशाला के बच्चों का राष्ट्रीय गान व
राष्ट्रीय गीत उनके मधुर कण्ठ से सुनकर स्तब्धता के साथ गौरवमय क्षणों को देखकर गौरवान्वित महसूस कर रहे थे। यह अनुपम दृश्य अपने
आप में विशेष एवं अनूठा था। यह पहले कभी देखने को नहीं मिला जब विश्वभर से आए सहजयोगी बच्चे एक साथ भारत माता के रूप में
आदिशक्ति माँ का ही नमन कर रहे थे। बड़े बच्चों ने वाघा सीमा पर हमारी सीमाओं की शान्ति के लिए बन्धन दिए। ठीक उसी समय काली
अँधेरी पाकिस्तान की ओर से आयी और वाघा सीमा पर पूरी तरह छा गयी। जोरों से वर्षा होने लगी। यह दृश्य देख कर ऐसा प्रतीत हो रहा था
कि जो नकारात्मकता थी यह सीमा पर बन्धन देने के बाद
समाप्त हो गयी है। स्कूल के सभी बच्चे एवं उनके साथ
आए उनके अध्यापक ने वाघा सीमा पर ध्वज समारोह के
अनुपम दृश्य का आनन्द लिया। बच्चों का अमृतसर में
यह निःशब्द संदेश कि सम्पूर्ण विश्व एक है एवं सम्पूर्ण
सृष्टि का रचयिता भी एक ही है, हमें अपने अन्तस में
मनन के लिए विवश कर देता है।
ा
TULL
पर
कर
कै॥
मैलिग्नेन्सी का चमत्कारिक निवारण
मेरा बेटा तीन वर्ष का है और मैं सिख धर्म से सम्बन्ध रखती हूँ। मुझे सहज में आए दो वर्ष हुए हैं परन्तु पारिवारिक बन्धनों के कारण मैं माँ का
ध्यान बिना फोटो के स्मरण से ही करती थी। मेरा बेटा, गुरतेज ( 3.5 साल), अक्सर बीमार रहता था,
वजन भी नहीं बढ़ता था हर डॉक्टर को दिखाया, महंगी से महंगी दवाईयाँ दीं, मगर वह अच्छा नहीं हुआ। फिर हम एक सहजयोगी होमियोपैथी
डा० नरेन्द्र गुप्ता जी के पास गए। डाक्टर साहब ने कुछ टेस्ट करवाये और जब रिपोर्ट आई तो घर में हम सबै स्तब्ध रह गये कि गुरतेज को
मैलिग्नेन्सी थी। इलाज के सिलसिले में हम डा० के पास हर सप्ताह जाने लगे। डा० साहब ने सहज योग के माध्यम से इस रोग के ठीक होने के
वैज्ञानिक और आध्यात्मिक पक्ष बताए। मेरे पति ने कम्प्यूटर पर मैलिग्नेन्सी और सहज योग पर पूरी खोज की। फिर, मेरे देवर (जो ऑस्ट्रेलिया
में रहते हैं) ने भी इस रोग के बारे में पूरी जानकारी कम्प्यूटर द्वारा एकत्रित करी और श्रीमाताजी की कृपा से परिणाम यह निकला कि इस रोग के
इलाज में आध्यात्मिक बातावरण सहायक होता है डा० साहब ने विश्वास दिलाया कि हौमियोपिथिक दवाई और सहजयोग द्वारा इस बीमारी को
ठीक किया जा सकता है। उन्होंने यह भी समझाया कि सिख धर्म भी सहज योग का ही एक हिस्सा है।
हीमोग्लोबिन बहुत कम था और उसका
मेरी प्रार्थना और डा० साहब का प्रयास रंग लाया और मैरे पति ने आत्मसाक्षात्कार लिया। हम दोनों प्रतिदिन माँ का ध्यान करने लगे और गुरतेज
को भी चैतन्य देने लगे। कुछ ही सप्ताहों में मेरे घर में माँ का मंदिर स्थापित हो गया और मेरे सभी बंधन खुल गए। गुरतेज के स्वास्थ्य में भी
सुधार आने लगा। एक महीने में ही उसका वजन बढ़ना शुरू हो गया तथा उसके व्यवहार में भी परिवर्तन आने लगा। डा० साहब की दवाई और
हमारा ध्यान निरंतर चलता रहा। एक दिन मेरे पति ने मन ही मन श्री माताजी से हमारे बच्चे की बीमारी ठीक कर देने के लिये प्रार्थना की। उसी
सप्ताह डा० साहब ने भी सभी परीक्षा दोबारा करवाने के लिये कहा और चमत्कार हो गया... हमारे बच्चे की सभी रिपोर्ट बिल्कुल सामान्य
(normal) थीं केवल दो ही महीने में इतनी भयानक बीमारी का ठीक हो जाना एक चमत्कार ही है। हम समझ गए कि श्री माताजी की कृपा हम
पर हो गयी । अब हम दोनों पति-पत्नी, हमारी तरह के और माता-पिता को, जिनके बच्चे कैंसर की लाईलाज बीमारी के शिकार हैं, सहजयोग के
बारे में बताते हैं और श्री माताजी से प्रार्थना करते है कि माँ आप इन सब पर भी कृपा करें और सबकी कुण्डलिनी जागृत करें।
रमनजीत
# ज
6
২
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Yuvadrishti June 2008
Detachment
and
Responsibility
am not a crane that will die by your fiery gaze."
This story from Mahabharata brings to light that our
spiritual achievementis useless
The sage was amazed. "How does she know about
the crane?" he wondered.
if weneglect our duties or Dharma.
Kaushika was his parents' only son.
The lady continued, "Oh holy onel You are a learned
Brahmin but you have not understood the truth
about virtue. If you want to be enlightened, go to
Dharmavyadha who lives in Mathura. Any one will
tell you where he lives.
"Mother," he said one day, "I want to go off into the
jungle and devote myself to spiritual studies. "His
mother said with concern, "But son, your father and I
are very old. Your father is so sick he can hardly
move. If you go away, what will happen to us? Who
will attend to ourneeds?"
The sage thanked the lady and hurried to Mathura.
"He must be a great and learned sage indeed,"
Kaushika thought to himself.
But when he finally reached Dharmavyadaha's
place, he found it to be a butcher shop!
Kaushika did not listen. He was determined to study
the Vedas. His mother cried in vain as she watched
her son turn his back on her and leave for the jungle.
A very ordinary looking man came out and said,
"Welcome holy one. I am Dharmavyadaha, the man
Eventually Kaushika acquired great mystical
powers.
One afternoon, as he was meditating under a tree, a you seek."
crane flew up, and perched herself on a branch "How can a butcher be spiritually enlightened?"
above Kaushika. Some bird droppings fell on
Kaushika's head. Kaushika furiously threw a fiery Dharmavyadaha smiled and said with compassion,
Kaushika asked in amazement.
gaze at the crane.
"Iknow the story of the crane and of the woman who
sentyou here. Come, let us go to my house."
The crane immediately fell dead.
The sage could not contain himself and blurted out,
"But butchering animals is such a sinful profession!
Are you not ashamed?"
The sage felt sorry for what he had done. "How
could I have allowed my anger to take over me that
way?" He mourned.
Later in the day, he went to a village to beg for alms.
The lady of the house asked him to wait and went to
get some food. Right then her husband arrived. She
immediately set aside the pot of food she was taking
"I am not," the butcher calmly said. "Iam engaged in
a family trade. I work hard and honestly at it. There
isnoreason for me to be ashamed of my work!"
"Holy one," continued the butcher. "If I do injury to
to the sage and went to attend her husband.
other creatures, so do you as you did to the crane. "
After washing his feet,
attending to his needs, she came back out to give the
alms to the sage. The sage was very insulted. "You
put your husband before a pious sage? Do you know
the power of a Brahmin?
giving him food, and
"As we walk on the soil, we are trampling on
numerous creatures. Nor is the air devoid of
creatures."
"You see that farmer tilling the land? He is killing so
many animals that thrive under the soil."
She calmly replied, "Yes, a true Brahmin is he who
has mastered his anger. Please do not threaten me. I They reached the butcher's house. The butcher's
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Yuvadrishti June 2008
wife was doing her house hold chores and his two
boys were playing.
Abhay Mudra of the Devi
The butcher introduced the sage to his wife and
boys.
Then the butcher entered the house and touched his
parents' feet.
"Here is a learned Brahmin who has come from a
far-off place." the butcher told his old father.
"Welcome, holy one," the father said.
Before leaving the room, the butcher remarked, "My
parents are my Gods. My wife and my children
attend to them with devotion and love. We consider
caring for them to be our greatest duty."
"In doing one's duty cheerfully, lies true virtue. This
is what the dutiful wife sent you to learn."
"Oh learned one!" the butcher continued, "You have
run away from your responsibilities and deserted
your aged father and mother. Spiritual achievement
is useless if one has neglected one's Dharma, or
duties."
The sage remembered his mother crying, "Who will
look after us when you are gone my son?"
The sage apologized, "You have shown me the path
of true virtue, the true meaning of Dharma, Oh
pious one. Iam deeply indebted to you."
All of us have seen Shri Mataji's photograph.
Kaushika immediately returned to his parents and
served them lovingly till the end of their days.
The photograph of Shri Mataji shows Her
Adishakti form and Her posture is know as -
Abhay Mudra.
Love
The Left Hand, directed downwards, shows
the blessing nature of our Divine Mother.
That, She takes care of Her bhaktas and
Love seeketh not itself to please,
Nor for itself hath any care;
nourishes them.
But for another gives its ease,
The Right Hand, which is lifted, is called the
Abhaya Hasta which means She is saying to
us, "Do not be afraid, I am taking care of you."
She protects us, also looks after our kshema.
And builds a Heaven in Hell's despair.
William Blake 1757-1827 "The Clod and the
Pebble' (1794)
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Yuvadrishti June 2008
Awaken Your Creativity
Tree
Ego
Mother
Evil
Man
Egg
Make a story using these words..
How to do this, example is given below
Boy
Love
Creative
Fight
Villain
Car
Once there was a boy Amar who was very creative, everybody loved him but Vinay was jealous of
Amar becausenobody used to talk to him due to his villainous nature. He fights with every body,
hurts them, irritates them. It was their drawing exam & Vinay forgot his color box at home so he
stole Amar's color box. Amar saw Vinay while doing that but he didn't say anything and gave his
exam using his pen and pencil as he was creative enough. After exam got over Vinay was going
home and a car came, hit him and threw him aside. Amar was passing thereby. He stopped his car
and took him to his father's hospital. When Vinay got up and asked him, "Why did you
after knowing that I stole your color box and ruined your exam"? Amar answered that, "My
that Love and Compassion is the key to life and by holding grudges one can never
do so even
mother
says
forgive anybody". Vinay cried and hugged Amar.
Send your creative story to yuvadrishti@gmail.com. Best stories will be published.
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Yuvadrishti June 2008
YuvaShakti Reporter
governments what ReOeneration
2008
Hope for the Youth of World
Celeste Jones, 25, an Italian Yuva Yogini and a young people are
Musical therapist, is set to attend the 2008 World doing to achieve the
Youth Congress in Quebec, Canada. Kurrajong United Nation's
Heights' Celeste Jones is one of a select group of Millennium Development Goals, which include
youths meeting in Canada later this year, to search halving poverty, halting the spread of HIV/AIDS,
for ways to combat the many crises facing our promoting gender equality and reducing infant
mortality.
modern world.
In August she will join 600 young leaders from Ms Jones, 25, will attend the congress along with a
throughout the globe, to participate in the fourth group of yogis, as an advocate of Sahaja Yoga. "A
World Youth Congress, "ReGeneration 2008", in group of us applied as delegates so we put in our
Quebec. The World Youth Congress is a project application as the Sahaja Organisation," she said.
funded by Peace Child International, which aims to The group travells internationally teaching Sahaja
bring together young people from the age of 18 to 30 Yoga Meditation techniques and "Self Realisation",
who have a passion for sustainable development. A As part of attending the World Youth Congress, Ms
total of 15,000 youths applied to attend this year's Jones and the Sahaja group were asked to submit a
congress. Delegates will join forces with young development project illustrating the ways her
Canadians to undertake hands-on community organisation is taking action.
action projects across Quebec. They will help shape Complete story at
international policy by documenting and showing http://www.sahajayoga.com.au/news/2008/04/18/ce
leste-gives-hope-to-youth/
Yuvashakti Seminar Barasat, Kolkata
All yuvas started interacting and discussing about
May 1", Thursday: On a pleasant summer morning the "LEELA" (108 instructions from Shri Mataji).
all yuvashakti gathered for yet another memorable Everyone was saying his/her own instruction that
collective experience. The day started by sharing came in through the chit. This laid the foundation
each other's Sahaja experiences & their state of formeditation. Collectivity started with attention on
morning meditation till everyone arrived. Then each chakra (left, right and center) till Sahastrara
everyone started to organize leaflets (to be and above. Bringing downwards our attention
distributed for a realization program). After a small through the Ida & Pingla and raising through the
collective meditation and taking Mother's Sushmna. Then, taking the attention to each and
permission for the Divine cause, yuvas made smal every chakra on our limbs, on our both legs, finger
tips, the palm and feeling every bit of our chakras.
Then taking the enlightened collective attention
above the Sahasrara, to the entire creation to all
living and non living beings. The meditation lasted
for more than an hour. It was a different experience
for everybody. After this, yuvas watched "The
Vision" in thoughtless state and deeply enjoyed
groups and got spread in the local areas for door to
door campaigning and invitations. Hours just went
by in a blink of an eye as Sahaja became a known
thing for many households in Barasat.
Now it was the time for some indoor collective
activities. After a small drinks session everyone got
into the mood of singing bhajans. After some
bhajans, everyone's kundalini started dancing and
one could see yogis getting up from their seats and
started swinging in full joy.
watching it.
In the evening yuvas left with a goodbye and eager
wait for another such a day long session. A
tremendous collective experience with vibrations all
over!
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Yuvadrishti June 2008
612 talks that have not been verified, is a long way
The Book Project
short of what it should be. This is a real problem with
Sahaja Yoga
The
Book
Project
international
is
projects which involves listening to Shri Mataji's no short term solution, for verifiers need to be
experienced in transcribing before they move on to
English lectures and type them in a MS Word
documenti.e. transcribing Shri Mataji's talks.
this important work. The impact of this problem in
terms of the subtitling of DVDS and the translation
We have now transcribed over 955 talks. but the
project is now slowing markedly as many people of talks into other languages can be readily
aPpreciated.
who were involved have dropped out for all kinds
To maintain any sort of progress in this important
of reasons. This is a great pity, for in the four years
that this project has been running, we have always work, we urgently need more support from the
| been losing people and having to recruit new world collective, and maybe the WF can help. We
people, but the appeals for help we have made need people at all levels, transcribers, verifiers,
managing editors and one or two people able and
recently, have gone largely unanswered.
Also, the database of transcribed talks serves a willing to clean up the MP3 files before sending
number of important uses, including:
them off for transcription. English as a firstlanguage
has proved not to be a prerequisite of someone
Providing subtitles for DVDS
working on the Book Project. Indeed, surprisingly
Translation of Shri Mataji's talks into other many people have joined and found that their
•
languages including Chinese, Russian, French,
Italian, Hungarian, German, Portuguese, Spanish,
written and spoken English improved dramatically
as a result of working on the project.
and Greek.
Needless to say, the benefits of a deepening
A yogi transcribes each talk, usually from an MP3
knowledge of Sahaja Yoga are apparent to everyone
audio file; it is then checked by a second yogi. An
working on the project.
experienced transcriber, known as a Managing
Editor then verifies the accuracy of the work.
If you would like to help please contact: Maureen
Despite this three s process, we still found
Goodman (mgoodman@worldcom.ch) or Shankar
sufficienterrors to warrant a fourth person checking
the talk yet another time. In the early days, yogis
Ramani (shankarramani9@gmail.com) or visit the
used whatever talks they had in their personal Project page at
libraries, but obviously, we soon exhausted this http://www.sahajayoga.org/current projects.asp?
proj id=2
source, and now, Phil Ward supplies us with MP3
Jai Shri Mataji,
files, but in some cases, the sound is so poor, the files
The Book Project Team
have to be digitally improved so that they can be
properly heard. The person doing this work has
recently retired from the project and we have not
been able to find someone able to do this work. But,
while we have transcribed 955 talks, only 343 have
been verified which means that the accuracy of the
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-25.txt 
 ে
Yuvadrishti June 2008
Volunteers Needed for International SY Book Project
Following is an email sent by Mr Alan Wherry, member of WCASY, requesting Indian yuvas to actively
volunteer for this divine project.
We, in the West, are well aware of the energy of the India yuvas. Their enthusiasm is most admirable.
In the Book Project we are struggling constantly to find new people. Maybe some of these yuvas would like
to help us in the transcription of Shri Mataji's talks? For in doing so, they will themselves deepen in their
knowledge of Mother's work, and make lifelong Sahaja friends in other countries.
Ihave seen email lists of 400 Indian yuvas. If we could find 40 of sufficient quality, with high speed access to
the Internet, it would be a huge help to our team working on the IPP, the Internet Publishing Project.
Is there any way we may find such energetic people?
Much love
ु
Alan
फ़ 4 फ
Send news of Yuvashakti events and activities from your collective at yuvadrishti@gmail.com
क
आदिगुरू श्री राजा जनक
नारद जी बोले, "इस दूध के बर्तन के अलावा कुछ भी नहीं,
ताकि दूध न छलके।"
राजा जनक का एक नाम विदेहराज भी था। विदेह अर्थात् देह
से परे। एक बार नारद जी राजा जनक के पास गए और पूछा,
"आप एक राजा हैं, राजा की तरह जीवन व्यतीत करते हैं.
लेकिन फिर भी आपको विदेह राज क्यों कहा जाता है?"
राजा जनक ने कहा, "एक बहुत
निकाली गई थी और फिर उसके बाद दरबार में नृत्य का एक
कार्यक्रम हुआ था?क्या आपने कुछ भी नहीं देखा था?"
बड़ी यात्रा मेरे सम्मान में
राजा जनक ने कहा, "प्रश्न का उत्तर मैं आपको शाम को दूगाँ,
िर
से
लेकिन आपको मेरा एक काम करना होगा। यह दूध
भरा
नारद जी ने उत्तर दिया, "नहीं राजन! मैंने कुछ भी नहीं देखा।"
हुआ बर्तन लेकर आप सम्पूर्ण दिन मेरे साथ व्यतीत करें
लेकिन ध्यान रहे कि इसमें से एक भी बूदै धरती पर न छलके।
तभी मैं आपके प्रश्न का उत्तर दूँगा कि मुझे विदेहराज क्यों
कहते हैं?"
राजा जनक बोले, "नारद जी, इसी प्रकार मैं भी कुछ नहीं
देखता, सदैव, मैं अपने चित्त को देखता रहता हूँ कि वह कहाँ
जा रहा है और यह सुरक्षित करता रहता हूँ कि वह दूध की
नारद जी ने वह बर्तन लिया और राजा जनक के पीछे-पीछे तरह बिल्कुल भी न छलके। "
रहे। उनको अत्याधिक सावधानी पूर्ण यह कार्य करना पड़ा संकेतः- इसी प्रकार हमें भी सदैव अपने चित्त की रक्षा करनी
क्योंकि उस बर्तन के किनारे भी नहीं थे और हल्की सी गलत चाहिए। इसे चित्त निरोध कहते हैं। चित्त कहाँ भागा जा रहा
हरकत से दूध छलक सकता था। शाम तक वे बिल्कुल थक गए है?अब आप अपने चित्त की रक्षा कैसे करेंगे?चित्त एकाग्र
और जब राजा जनक और नारद जी वापिस लौटे तो नारद जी करके। एकाग्र करने की कोशिश करें। अपने चित्त को इधर
बोले "हे राजन! कृपया मुझे अब मेरे प्रश्न का उत्तर दीजिए, मैं उधर जाने न दें। धीर-धीरे आप एकाग्र चित्त हो जाएँगे। आप
सुबह से यह बर्तन लेकर आपके पीछे पीछे चलते हुए थक गया मेरी फोटो को देखते रहें। यह सबसे अच्छा है। एकाग्र हो कर
हूँ।"
उसो अपने हृदय मैं लेकर आऐ, उसे अपने हृदय में स्थापित
होने दें।
"पहले आप मुझे ये बताइए कि आपने क्या
राजा जनक ने
पूछा
5 4े
क्या देखा?"
২
ও
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-26.txt 
 NSYS LENS
2.
Drawings by Children of Nirmal Prem Ashram, Greater Noida
 2008_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-27.txt 
 I to Shree Mataji
a wistful heavy heart
ohen I coulint find a drop of happiness
NShe shotwered upon me ocean of fove as vast.
Twent to Shre Mataji
with the eyes filled with tears
She turned thiem to smiles
and T otercamefedrs
went to Shee Mataj
seeing the drans few
to make theH
Iwent to Shiue WA
during the dank onely ni
She blessed m he uiele
Ieent te Matayi
DuNiny y entirr Sahaja be
for her warm blessings,I got
I went to Shee Mataji
with a pnis I made
to fifl p che palir of Sahaja
