THEDIVINE COOLBREEZE PER January-February 2008 volume twenty-one number one

 More than you, the Divine wants this world to change, wants to transform the whole universe. M.. 2 Shri Mataji at Health Centre 4 Imbibe 10 Consolidation 16 My Vision 24 Gravity of the Guru 28 I am the One 101 30 World Addresses VISVA-GARBHÂ SHE IS THE MOTHER OF THE UNIVERSE

 HE

 DIVINE BLESSINGS On the most auspicious occasion of Datta Jayanti, Shri Adi Guru Dattatraya's birthday, December 23rd, 2007, the International Sahaja Yoga Research and Health Centre was once again blessed by the arrival of our most beloved holy Mother. Shri Mataji was keen to know all the details of the patients arriving at Health Centre, the number of patients, their countries, the ratio of yogis to yoginis, their diseases and their recovery. She said, "All the yogis CC should be cured at Health Centre as it is their own energy working." She also said, "I am happy that foreign yogis are coming to Health >כ Centre." Shri Mataji asked for the doctors to come forward and praised all of them for their dedicated work. She blessed all of them.

 SHOWER ON HEALTH CENTRE Shri Mataji then asked all the yogis if they were able to feel the cool breeze. "Yes, Mother," they replied and raised their hands. Everyone was overwhelmed and thanked Shri Mataji for all Her divine blessings. She and Sir CP congratulated all the staff for all their beautiful work. All the doctors affirmed, “Mother, You only do everything at Health Centre."

 im Try to imbibe all that is divine within yourself. Even if I give big lectures and say things, it may not have any effect whatsoever on you. It might be just wasted if you haven't got the capacity to imbibe what I am saying so important, so imminent. SO Christmas Puja 1988 Education doesn't mean listening to lectures after Realization. It means it should be imbibed within you, it should penetrate into veins your and into your every artery, into every cell of your being... I would say that I have talked a lot and the only thing that you have to do is to and not on others. That's all. To others imbibe it within have you you to be kind. You have to be sweet. You have to be patient, gentle. 23 November 1980 What is the quality that you have imbibed in Sahaja Yoga. You stand for all those ideals. You stand for all those sacrifices. And you stand for all that is to be achieved for bettering human beings. You have to achieve a great deal for others. You have to work within yourself what you can do for others, what you can achieve for others, what is the best way to imbibe those qualities within you that you become an absolutely unique personality. Birthday Puja 2001

 bibe Imbibing through meditation What happens in meditation is that your awareness crosses over the Agnya, goes above and is now stationed in the Sahasrara, in thoughtless awareness. Then the reality of Sahasrara, the beauty of Sahasrara starts pouring in your own character, in your own temperament. Unless and until you meditate – not meditate just to well or just to feel that "I must meditate" – but meditation is very important in CC get for all of you that you develop your Sahasrara in such a manner that the beauty of your Sahasrara. If you don't use your Sahasrara in this time you'll find Sahasrara will close down, you'll have no vibrations and you’ll have you imbibe after some way, no understanding of yourself. 10 May 1998 The main problem we have is how to imbibe this within our personality, how to know within our personality that we are facing this kind of an incarnation, that we are born in such-and-such era, which is very important, absolutely. It is very special times that we are here and that we have risen very high through our evolution- ary process, which was sort of accelerated by the kundalini awakening and we are residing in the space now beyond time and beyond sin. Shri Krishna Puja 1990 Imbibing nature Nature should really imbibe within It is the balance. And the balance should you. come in such a manner that your whole character, your own temperament should show that balance within Shri Ganesha Puja 1992 you. Try to imbibe things which will give you real enjoyment – for example, flowers, nature, garden. Instead of destroying this nature, try to build it up, try to see how you can make it a beautiful garden or a beautiful place. Shri Ganesha Puja 1997

 We have Our Sahaja culture with us. Imbibing dharma You are a special community I said. You are the ones who are going to create that great community. Now whatever are the dharma's points – or we can say dharma's aspects – you can imbibe them sahaj. “Sahaj" has a very special meaning. Spontaneously, you do not have to exert. You do not have to go into a penance or work it out. In a Sahaj way you can do it. “Sahaj" also means easy. You can have it in your heart, all these qualities, without any difficulty whatsoever. It's the easiest thing for you to be righteous than to be other- wise. It's easier for you to be honest than to be otherwise. So this speciality that you have got is the vision of all the saints, of all the prophets, of all the seers, of all the incarnations. It is you.... For you it is very easy, that you can imbibe all the aspects of dharma very easily. You don't have to do anything. CC Shivaratri Puja 1992 How can it be that religion makes you hate somebody? Religion is there to understand love, imbibe love and compassion.... In one of My lectures, I talked to you about the emo- tional intelligence. That is what we should try to imbibe – emotional intelligence. That means the intelligence that is based on emotions. Unless and until we become emotion- ally intelligent, our society cannot improve. In an emotional intelligence, you care and you enjoy caring. You do everything for others with a great emotional understanding. Shri Adi Shakti Puja 2000 Imbibing sweetness It is for you to use that tremendous power – the embodiment of madhurya, sweetness. That madhurya you have to imbibe and that madhurya you have to spread. That's important. So that relationship of sweetness between each other, the relation of enjoying each other, the relation of knowing each other has to be full of sweetness, just like honey. It is just there, but we have to be the bee to reach there. very 28 May 1990 What one has to imbibe within oneself is the sweetness. If you are sweet, you are filled with humour, you do not hurt others, you are not hurt either, you see everything so beau- tiful and nice. That's the quality of Shri Krishna, madhurya. Anything can be done with sweetness. That's very important. 6. 3 Jапuary 1988

 IMBIBE Imbibing the qualities of others What you have to do as soon as you know about somebody, then you have to think what goodness he has got, how can I imbibe that goodness within myself? Because we are here to enrich ourselves spiritually, so you must think, as the first and foremost thing, what can I do to get the goodness of that person within myself? So you'll be looking out for the goodness of that person then, instead of looking out for bad qualities. Virata Puja 1991 This tongue is not for saying harsh things, for making fun of others, for teasing others, but it is for saying something, such a beautiful thing that the other person also imbibes that beauty. I've seen some nice things people have said and that lingers in My mind and I said, "When will I have chance to say these things to others?" So think about it, that "Now this is a very nice sentence. This was a very sweet thing they said...." The care, the love, the affection, the wisdom and the patience is to be imbibed. CC Birthday Puja 1990 This kind of temperament is necessary for Sahaja Yoga, that we appreciate others, not to criticize others. If you are criticizing, then you cannot imbibe any good qualities in you. But to appreciate others also comes through good tradition. In Sahaja Yoga we have to develop good traditions. We have our Sahaja culture with us.... It's difficult to deal with this modern mind because it cannot imbibe the beauty of joy within itself, while God Almighty is the source of joy. When you see this beautiful Nature and the sun playing around with it, you just become thoughtless and you just get lost into the eternity... When you meditate, just ... believe that your auspiciousness and holiness is to be imbibed on your nerves, on your central nervous system because that is the epitome of chaitanya. The chaitanya that is flowing all around, if it is in the form of holiness, even one glance of yours can bring beautiful fruits, can bring peace and solace. 2 January 1987 Try to imbibe the dharma within yourself. And then you will see eventually you'll become very generously-hearted because you start tolerating 20 December 1979 a very generously-hearted person – everyone. The beauty of enjoying others – somebody has some great points, very good qualities in person – you'll imbibe it. In Sahaja Yoga, whatever you enjoy, you imbibe. You know that. Whatever you enjoy, you will imbibe just like that. You should be able to enjoy. Now supposing you enjoy creating rifts in people, creating problems with people, you'll have them yourself. Supposing you enjoy saying harsh things to others, you'll imbibe that in the sense that will have more of it. Whatever you want, you will have. that you New Year's Eve 1981 Whatever you бу, you imbibe. 1

 The culture of the spirit Anything you want can be done, but first of all what you need is maturity. And for matu- rity, one has to understand that there is a culture of the spirit. As we have human cultures, we have a culture of the spirit, which must be imbibed. The culture of the spirit is to be imbibed. If you go according to the culture of the spirit, then you cannot have problems and the foremost thing in the culture of spirit is that you must respect yourself because you are a yogi. The second thing is you must respect other yogis because they are yogis. Mahakali Puja 1987 You have to have a discipline, which is not imposed on you, but, very happily, which you have accepted and have imbibed.... I bless you all, that you should have this full idea about yourself, why you are on this Earth and what great work you are supposed to do. Each one of you is capable. Each one of you can do it.... I would request you that you imbibe these qualities within you, which are already there. I mean, I wouldn't say "imbibe," but you manifest them. And once you start manifesting, see your temperament, how it is. CC . Shri Bhavasagara Puja 1991 So far I am very happy that whatever I've been telling you and whatever I've been guiding you. You have accepted it very well, calmly and sweetly and you've tried to imbibe it in your lifestyle. Actually, after some time, I don't think that I will have to tell you. You will get your own light to see for yourself what is right and what is wrong. But still I would for all say the western people especially, that you must open your heart in the puja, in the music, in anything. Just see that you open your heart... All your conditionings, all your ego will disappear when you decide that “I have to open my heart in Sahaja Yoga." Sankranti Puja 1990

 IMBIBE Imbibing the deities Nobody should think that you are very grown-up because you can keep quiet, sit quietly and all that. You are grown-up only if you can imbibe the qualities of Shri Ganesha. I have seen people who are very grown-up still do not have simple qualities of chastity, of honesty – they don't have and they can't have because they don't think it is important. So I leave it to you to find out Shri Ganesha within yourself. Shri Ganesha Puja 2003 To surrender, to forgive – that is the quality of Christ we have to imbibe. Christmas Puja 1993 This innocence and holiness is the one which is peace-giving, which reduces frictions, tensions because you enjoy your chastity, because you enjoy your glory. Please aspire to be the epitome of holiness. If I am 2 January 1987 ideal Whatever things you can grasp and think, "this is Mother's quality," try to imbibe that your within yourself. That doesn't mean you start shouting at bhoots first. So first, what is the first quality of Mother? That She came on this Earth and She has worked for people who you should are nowhere near Her. She stood down to elevate others. And then gradually you can understand that this quality will take you to higher qualities... You have to concentrate on a deity to imbibe the qualities of that deity, otherwise you have no communication with the deity and there is no use saying the mantras. CC try to imbibe Sahasrara Puja 1984 My nature. You have seen that how much work I have been doing compared to you people and I am so much older compared to you people. All right, you can say that “Mother, you are Adi ideal, Shakti." It's all right. But I am your ideal. In any case, if somebody is become like that person, try to imbibe those qualities. try toi your 18 January1983 I never try to show off My powers to you in any way. It's only you who should imbibe all My powers. That's the only desire I have, that you should be as powerful as Myself... I want that you should forget as to what powers I have, but you should yourself have all these powers within yourself so that you can save the world. That's the only thing I want to give you. And I want to assure you that you all can have everything that I have. Shri Fatima Puja 1993 Imbibing the ideal You are the people who are going to take Sahaja Yoga to that position where it has to reach. Because as far as I am concerned, I have nothing to do any more. I have done it. Now it is for you to receive. You have to imbibe it and you have to change the whole thing. That is your job and that is why it is a serious matter. 18 November 1979 You must remember how many years you have spent doing Sahaja Yoga. You must under- stand all the nice times you had and how many, every year you have spent in enjoying My birthday, also in understanding how you have grown into it, how you changed it and how you enjoyed and how you have imbibed all the qualities of Sahaja Yoga. Birthday Puja 2001 try to imbibe My nature within yourself and then you'll be should If I am your ideal amazed how you are connected with Me. Then we all move like one wave, one being, one you Sahasrara Puja 1980 personality. 9.

 Basies The consolidation through introspection Shudy Camps UK| The consolidation of Sahaja Yogis is very important. The first thing, to con- 6 June 1988 solidate yourself, you must do introspection. You must do introspection. It's to reflect the light within and see for yourself what have you done so far in Sahaja Yoga. Where are you? How far gone and how far have you have you to go? What is the thing that is lacking in you? You'll be surprised when you start seeing yourself in a very unbiased manner, not justifying yourself, not blaming any bhoots or not blaming any badhas within you or somebody else. If you start with yourself – what has gone wrong with that you you could not consolidate yourself properly – you'll be amazed that there has been problems still lingering on, which must be corrected. Now these prob- lems you can see very clearly. In the light of the spirit, you can see them very clearly that "This has כ 10 gone wrong with me."

 The Basies of Sahaja Yoga sics

 Early blessings in Sahaja Yoga One of the most interesting things I've noticed is that Sahaja Yoga is all the time covered with some sort of a maya and this maya is ignorance – complete ignorance sometimes, sometimes partially. Now when you get into Sahaja Yoga you get blessed. You get blessed, maybe your family gets physical being. Also for the financial – you get jobs, you get money. You get something exceptional, which is really miraculous. Now people get very much lost in those achievements and start drifting, thinking that “Oh, this is the blessing we have got now. We don't have to do anything any more,' that you are being rewarded sufficiently for whatever you have done so far. That's not so. blessed. You get some sort of a blessing for your blessed, your children get Everything is CC just a means It's just a sort of a support to you comes so that your faith should be fully established in Sahaja Yoga – especially so you should know Me, what I am. But if you go on still drifting, then maybe some of these blessings may turn out to be curses and you might feel that "what a curse has fallen upon us and how it has the wrong way." For some people it takes time to get to the feeling of the blessings. For example, mostly according to the modern ideas, we think that to get more money is the biggest blessing, so many get that also. But actually, it is not. To get your peace within, to get to your witness state and to feel your vibrations all right and to be in the centre all the time ascending is the real blessing. Because with that, you get everything else. The completion is only possible when you have the complete joy bubbling within yourself. After all, everything is just a means to achieve joy, to feel the joy. It is not the end. If it was, those people who have money, those people who have good health, those people who have all the so-called success with them, they should have been happy and peaceful, but they are not. They are suffering. They are suffering too much. And they are, in a way, destroying themselves day by day because they hate their lives. They can't bear it. They cannot understand why they are on this Earth. So all these blessings that come to you, all these changes that come to you, all these new venues that open to you, one has to know that it is for your benevolence. Everything is for your benevolence. And your benevolence is your ascent, nothing else but ascent. The rest of it is all useless and fruitless. Once understand that this is what to achieve joy. in gone your you you have to achieve in life, that is what you have to enjoy, then it works out. Introspection In Sahaja Yoga, as you see, it's compassion and love. It is not so much restrictions. Youre left to yourself to develop yourself. It's your spirit which has to guide you. There's no coercing or correction going on all the time, but it is left to you to understand yourself, to see for yourself and work it out. But one of the criteria should be "What have I done for Sahaja Yoga? What have I done for Mother?" These two things are very important to understand. Whatever small thing you could do for Sahaja Yoga is important because, if you are intelligent, you can see that this is the greatest thing you have to do, to work for God. This is the most important thing so far human beings have indulged into. It is the highest type of enterprise that human beings have ever had a chance to indulge into. And what a chance it is, too. You may say that “Mother we are mediocres, we are no good, we are useless," but you are chosen. You are the one chosen, so there must be something about you. You might not have seen that part within yourself which is going to work out this great work of God. 12

 CONSOLIDATION So you have to locate and find out "Why am I selected for Sahaja Yoga, what can I do in Sahaja Yoga, what can I work out in Sahaja Yoga?" This should be a constant reminder to you that "I have been chosen for Sahaja Yoga, I want to take full advantage of Sahaja Yoga... This is another point of introspection. It is very important to see that we have to do something for Sahaja Yoga. It's not money. It's not work. It's not thinking. It's not any kind of a support. But one of them, the most important thing, is how many people you have given Realization to. You have to count how many people you have been able to give Realization to, how many people you have talked to about Sahaja Yoga. think that you give Realization to some people, they come, they You may disappear. It doesn't matter. They will ultimately come to you. Today you'll try on some. They’ll be lost. Again tomorrow. You have to relentlessly work for it. The role of Sahaja Yogis As Sahaja Yogis, you are powerful entities. You are very powerful people. We have got problems in the whole world. You know that very well. It's not neces- sary you have to be great intellectuals or you have to be people who are some sort of politicians or something. But you must be on the lookout for the prob- lems which are troubling this world. You have to. You cannot live in your own world, that that you have to live in this world. And you have to know all the problems of this world. And you have to think about them, not only your problems.... "You have to think, "What's happening in the world? What are the problems of the world?" You are responsible for that. Not only that, but you have to pray. In your prayers you have to say, "Mother, solve this problem." Collectively, individually, you have to take your attention from yourself, from your smaller life to a much wider thing. Then you are a saint. And you have to think that it is your duty to ask for divine help, that all these problems should be solved. This is your job for which you Stretch out your vibrations. Stretch out you are a saint.... You can't just be in nirananda. You have to know your attention. are selected. Your asking is going to work it out because, as you know, I am desireless. You have to desire for it. Whatever you desire will work out. The protection, the affection, the compassion of Mother is with after this world and show the concern that you have, not to live with have to look you. But lim- very ited areas and with very limited ways.... Your problems extend to all the places wherever there is Sahaja Yoga. And you have to worry about all of them... As soon as you spread your attention outside, your problems are solved in the house, in the smallest circumstance. You have to pay attention outside. There are important things that are happening which you can see for yourself. You can scan it out, what are the world problems, and you can see for yourself where you have to put your attention. You should become aware of your personality. It's not a personality that can be completely involved into a very small area. Your personality should get involved into all the problems of the universe, all the problems there are and you’ll be amazed that everything can work out in a very collective way.... So stretch out your vibrations. Stretch out your attention and you'll be amazed that all other stupid problems that you have will be finished....

 CONSOLIDATION So the attitude toward ourselves should be to be aware of our own glory of our own position to know that we are saints, that we have reached a stage where we are at the high- est and that now we have become the light and we have to give light to others.... You have the light on a pedestal ... at a very highest point to give light to others. And this is working both ways if you start understanding what you are, what you have to be aware of, what is your situation, what are your powers, what you have achieved in Sahaja Yoga, what is the debt you have toward Sahaja Yoga and what you have to give for Sahaja Yoga, how Sahaja Yoga has made you so capable, so good, so nice. Are you righteous enough? Are you behaving properly? Are you doing all the right- ful things which are necessary? Because it is only you who can do it. You are the people with very, very special energies and special contacts with the spiritual life. And if you start behaving like all other mundane, nonsensical people, limiting yourself to a family, your children, your nonsensical previous lives, you'd be lost - lost to yourself and lost to to put You are the saints whose feet were washed by the everyone. River Ganges. The problems are much more than what you know about. That is the understanding you have to reach, that "Mother has made us yogis. We are saints and we have to show to the world the right path. She has told us that we are the light and we have to show to people which way to go, how to go further..." Now it is for you to understand. It is for you to decide about yourself. It is your own desire. It is your own bigness, your own magnanimity which has to come forward, to see for yourself what you are capable of, what you can do. Try to under- stand your glory. One mind and one heart I have brought My children back to normal conditions. I've taken them to the kingdom of God. You have to do the same. You have to take them to the kingdom of God. But if you yourself are involved into your own mayas, you will be every day going down and down and down and down. I may shout. I may say anything. It will not go into your heads. It will never click with you. You'll be all stranded wherever you are because you don't want to see.... With your intelligence, you can understand that this is such an important work our Mother is doing. You'll go down in history, every word you say, everything you say, every way you behave. Everything is going to go down in history – not how many children you produced or what sort of a wife you have, but what you did for Sahaja Yoga. Remember that. History is going to record everything, whatever you have done and whatever you have achieved in Sahaja Yoga. It's not showing off. It's not just a demonstration. It's not talking big. It's nothing of that kind. It's actually, really, totally what you have achieved that is the point. It will be recorded. At least God knows hypocrisy and God knows bombastic temperaments. It's God who knows where you are and what you are up to. You cannot befool God. That is one thing you must realize. But when you are befooling God, you are befooling yourself, your spirit, your Realization, your own ascent. So we have to be careful. As a mother, I would say try to be introspecting yourself very carefully. "What have we done for Sahaja Yoga? What have we done for other people who are drifting? What has been our behavior towards other Sahaja Yogis? How much peace and love and compas- sion have we given to others? How much understanding and tolerance have we shown to others...?" You are the saints whose feet were washed by the River Ganges. Try to understand your glory. Try to understand your own powers, your own position as saintly people, Sahaja Yogis who are above all the saints because you know how to give Realiza- tion. You know everything about the kundalini... 14

 It is so obvious that it's a very precarious time we are passing through. It's very important we have to fight it out. It's much more than any wars you have fought. It's much more than any struggle human beings ever had. It's such a horrible world that has been created and we have to transform it. It's a tremendous task. For that, you have to work it out in a very sincere and an innate manner. And I'm sure one day will come in the history of this world that Sahaja Yogis will have their names written with golden letters. I'm sure this will work out. I'm sure this has to work out. And all have to that you achieve it collectively, with one mind, with one heart. “What should I sacrifice? What should I do? How should I help? What is my contribution?" I wish I could see those days in My lifetime. O

 MY VISION It's like miraculous fireworks. It starts like a small line and then opens up into several beautiful patterns. It is impossible to envisage or to visualize what will happen to us, to Sahaja Yoga and to all of you.

 MOTHER, WHAT IS YOUR VISION FOR SAHAJA YOGA? This is the one, started already. My vision for Sahaja Yoga is that all the good people, righteous people, God-loving people will rise above all that is useless, worldly, and reside in the heavens WC with all the blessings of God, forever and ever. 6 May 1987 My vision is that these right actions and the appropriate reac- tions will bear their fruit of a very beautiful world of brother- hood and peace, which will be worthy of its enlightenment. 1 September 1989 My only vision – I shouldn't say desire because I don't have desire – is that I should see all the Sahaja Yogis drenched in the power of love, enjoying each other's love, enjoying each other's relationships and improving relationships. Guru Puja 1996 It's a tremendous task and I'm working twenty-four hours. I have no sleep, nothing. You know that. It's all just a life that's so enjoyable. And itself, the whole vision, I can see so clearly, of those beautiful days when we all will be enjoying each other and the bliss of God together. That's the only thing I want. We have to pull out so many human beings from the clutches of the evil forces. 24 May 1981 You must understand the complete vision of Sahaja Yoga. It's a DIG very big thing you are doing. You are not small. You are doing a very great work because it is the solution of all the human- ity. This is the solution of all the problems, whether political, economic or anything – whatever you call it. It is not only that, but the more people you have, you will be surprised I'll work it out much better. 2 September 1980 17

 To Me, it's like miraculous fireworks. It starts like a small line and then opens up into several beautiful patterns. It is impossible to envisage or to visualize what will happen to us, to Sahaja Yoga and to all of you. I have never learned to imagine things, but the vision that you see is really I see all Sahaja remarkable. It's very remarkable that I see all Sahaja Yogis drenched in divine love and expressing themselves in a very beautiful and very deep Yogis drenched manner. This, when comes in, that really makes your attention abso- in divine love. lutely enwrapped in such divine bliss that you forget that moment. This reality of the vision is something beyond even My thinking and imagination. I cannot, even now sometimes, believe that there are so many Sahaja Yogis who have got this subtle knowledge. I never knew that there were so many seekers to begin with. I never knew that there were such subtle people on this Earth. Birthday Felicitations 1994 I don't think it's a very great achievement for Me because I have no vision, as such. I've heard this word, that Mother has a vision. No – I have no vision, I must tell you. My simple thing is that everybody must love. And a pure love will change your lives. It will change the whole world, no doubt about it. It should come to you naturally because now you have pierced through your Sahasrara. Birthday Felicitations 2002

 My vision is too great for one life. I want a global Realization. I want people all over the world to have Realization. MY VISION We have to show the results of kundalini awakening. It's not THE GLOBAL only for you people who are realized. It's for the whole world. EMANCIPATION That's My vision. And according to that vision I have been doing My work. And now, as you know, I leave this responsi- bility to you all. Diwali Puja 2000 I have a vision, no doubt, and I've been talking about it quite a lot.... I know some countries are very difficult. Try to find out what is the problem, why it is so very difficult. Attention has to be paid to this, what other human beings are doing to destroy themselves, as if it is the part and parcel of the same game which we call as the last judgement. But let us, through our compassion and love, save as many as possible. This is the work of the Adi Shakti, not the work of any saint or any incarnation. They're all there, no doubt. They're all We have to with us, all the time to help us, but you people have the power achieve a global of the Adi Shakti, which is very great, which is very penetrat- ing, which is miraculous. It's so effective, but unless and until emancipation. you become aware of your own powers, how will it out? It would be like a dead machine that has everything, you work I know that's My vision. but nobody is there to work it out. Shri Adi Shakti Puja 2001 After all, you have come to Sahaja Yoga not for anything else, but for your growth. And to keep that growth on, you have to acquire a sense of understanding, what should be your per- sonality relative to others, relative to other people who are still seeking, who are still blind. We have to achieve a global eman- cipation. I know that's My vision. Diwali Puja 2000 19

 MY VISION I hope you'll understand My vision and you'll stand by Me. You'll come CHANNEL THIS DIVINE LOVE up to that. I depend on you entirely for My vision. We have to change this whole world into a beautiful place. For that, not much sacrifice is needed. You're already blessed. You don't have to do much. The only thing is keep your attention on the Source of Power. Navaratri Puja 1990 Your first and foremost responsibility is Sahaja Yoga. Because you should know what a work it is. It's such a great work, to transform the whole world. That's My vision. At this old also I think the same way. Now, age, if that is My vision, what should be your attitude? That we should all out to spread Sahaja Yoga – that's the main thing. I call you for these go and all that, but if pujas just to renovate or to give you more of energy you are just taking it as great blessings and sitting at home, it's of no use. You must spread Sahaja Yoga. Shri Shivaratri Puja 2002 If that is My vision, Take My position. I'm all right. I am complete. I have no problem. But why did I work so hard and want so many Sahaja Yogis? Why? What was it? I don't have to grow either. I'm overgrown already. I don't have to do it. But why? What is the need? what should be your attitude? The need is like this: the need is of love. I have so much love that I have to channel it. If I don't, I'll suffocate. I can't love Myself. This love has to spread. For that, I have to have you people who can take this love to others and make them happy. This is a kind of a vision I have. In this special time, it was promised by many people, by many saints and it is so obvious that you are all specially chosen for this kind of thing. Now how far you understand your importance is a different point. You do for your emancipation. You meditate. But if you are not channelling the love, the divine love, what is the use? They have never known divine love. It has to be given to them. They have to feel this divine love, this power of the Adi Shakti. They have to know it, other- you are being selfish, that you had a nice time having all this and you have not given it to others. Shri Adi Shakti Puja 1997 It is something you have to do and find out why you can't do it. Like Me, I was not supported by anybody, not helped by anybody and how I have managed to break the Sahasrara. You can also break the Sahasraras of others. It's not difficult because My vision is that this world at least should have forty percent of people who are realized souls and who are prac- tising Sahaja Yoga, who are giving Realization to people and trying to change the people. Sahasrara Puja 2001 20

 Do not think that you are ordinary, otherwise I would never have chosen you. MY VISION It's a very big vision I have – a very big vision and that vision can be done through ASSUME YOUR you people. Do not think that you are ordinary, otherwise I would never have POSITION chosen you. But you have no recognition of yourself also, as you have no recogni- tion of Me. You have to recognize yourselves and respect your Self. 27 September 1980 All of you have to realize that you are not Sahaja Yogis for only your selfish ends, nor for your families, nor for your communities, nor for your country, but for the whole world. Expand yourself. You must have that vision before you that I have put many times before you people, that you have to emancipate humanity. Now don't have diffidence. First of all, you should not think that "We are very ordinary people. We haven't got something special about us." This work is not going to be done by special people because they are suffering from ego. It is going to be done by people who don't have that ego of great success or of great achievements or riches or anything. If they are rid of this, then only they can work it out. CC Sahasrara Puja 1990 Take a big vision of the whole thing – why this universe was created, why you were created as human beings. What was the need to do all these things? For what is it done? If you have a very big vision of the whole thing, then try to locate your posi- tion. "Where am I?" And then, "How the Divine has selected me and, now I've become a Sahaja Yogi, now what is my responsibility?" That, one has to see. Navaratri Puja 1993

 Get the whole view and vision. It's beyond the horizon. I am thinking of the collectivity of the whole world. That's My vision and, if Sahaja Yogis cannot be collective, who is going to be collective? Who is going to fulfill My vision? Shri Mahakali Puja 1990 To understand, first of all, the expanse of Sahaja Yoga, to get the whole view and vision, it's beyond the horizon, so great and you are working it out. You have got the powers to do it. You are especially chosen for it. Imagine – you should visualize yourself also, what you are. And once you understand what you are, relate If you yourself to the great vision. you are doing some work for Sahaja Yoga, then give it up, absolutely give it up. But if you think, "I am just doing it because I enjoy it. I am not doing it. Mother is doing it." Once such a feeling comes in, then you understand that the wisdom has come in. And this wisdom is the one that is really going to give you the light. In that wisdom, then you will understand what is the leela and how we have to enjoy ourselves. We have to know that's the leela and we have to also think כ know that it is the work of the Divine for which we are chosen and that Shri Krishna Puja 1990 we have to work it out. How you should be among yourselves, how you should talk, when you should sleep – everything will change if you really become aware of the fact that you are representing God Almighty, who is the source of discretion. In discretion, so many things you will learn. The first is the tolerance. “It's all right. We'll work it out. It will should get up, when you work out." You will learn what is the love which is detached. You will learn what is the humour which tickles, but does not hurt. You wil learn also what to say in lectures, what to listen to. And, of all your things, you will know how to fulfill the visions of God Almighty. Hamsa Puja 1991 22

 MY VISION Love should have no fear. It should have just free love, THE WORLD without any fear, without any aggression. Enjoy that pure BECOMES A LOTUS love. And that is what is missing in the human beings today, as it is. When the day will come when human beings will be understanding the beauty of love, then from the heavens there will be flowers falling on us. It will be such a tremen- dous day when Mahadeva will be able to close His third and will be peaceful in His heart. It is My vision. It's the future for you, to see how peace- eye fully you can talk to people, how sweetly you can love others, how much you can give to others. Shri Shivaratri Puja 2001 It is very difficult to speak, even for Me, to see so many You are the petals. Sahaja Yogis sitting here with such shining faces from all over the world, as if My vision has taken its form today. I You are the corona. see in you the saviours of tomorrow, who are going to save this world from all the Kali Yuga calamities that are sur- You are the colour. rounding us. It's coming from all sides, while you people have really taken your second birth from this pond of Kali| You are the beauty. Yuga and have really become beautiful lotuses of different colours, hues, fragrance and beauty. With your good wishes, with your prayers, this world will be so beautiful, so enchanting that, in history, people You are the pollen of that beautiful will describe that the world itself became a lotus full of the fragrance of divinity. You are the petals. You are the | lotus which is My corona. You are the colour. You are the beauty. You are the pollen of that beautiful lotus – which is My vision of this | vision of this world. world. Birthday Puja 1993

 the gravity of the guru THE WORD GURU COMES FROM "THE ONE WHO IS MAGNETIC," the The one who attracts who is magnetic. The one who attracts the attention person of the seekers is the guru. Also it means the heaviness or, you can the attention of the say, a person who is very steady, who is very deep, who has the seekers is the guru. knowledge and who can act like the Mother Earth. For the power of magnetism in the Mother Earth also is called as magnetic, but in Sanskrit it is Gurutwakareshwari, which means the attraction of the heaviness of the Mother Earth. But actually it is a power of the Mother Earth that makes us stand properly on our legs when it is rotating with such a tremendous speed, otherwise we would be all thrown away. With that velocity that She is moving, we are still attached or we are one in our balance. This is only because She has gravity. This gravity has to be in a guru. Gravity means a kind of a serious understanding of oneself and ones own responsibilities. So has to be very steady. 12 July 1998 24 a guru

 GRAVITY THROUGH SURRENDER you don't do any- Gravity means for the maturity. If one cannot surrender that doesn't mean that CC thing, but surrendering means “the worship," the respect higher, the obedience to the higher, not to argue it out, not to acceptance, absorption – like a child absorbs the milk of react the mother without questioning, without reasoning. That is why Christ has said, "You have to become like children." But if you are questioning, then you are no more a child. So the first state which you have to develop is a childlike state, but a child who is a real- ized child, who has to have gravity. If you can develop it in child- hood first, then everything takes a proper course because maturity cannot take place unless and until you start from the very begin- ning. And gravity means maturity. Guru Puja 1984

 DEVELOPING THE GRAVITY OF A GURU So the word guru means gravity, that the Mother Earth has gravity. In the same way, a person who is a guru has to have the gravity. But how do you develop this gravity? Some m your people just artificially become very grave and sometimes show that they are very serious or something like that. Gravity is within yourself. The second state of guru pada is when your gravity must manifest. As you become the witness your gravity starts expressing itself. It will not show as temper or seriousness or anything like that. But it will manifest can manifest in a way that the whole thing will become extremely dignified and majestic. It will just In people just artificially become silence you manifest by itself. So the state in which you rise now becomes effective. Before this, it was your gravity. not. You had to all the time manipulate, say this, say that. But in your silence you can manifest your gravity and this gravity acts like a magnet. As you know, there is a magnet in the Mother Earth that we call as the gravity, by which people are attracted. We are rest- ing on this Mother Earth because of Her gravity. Everything is attracted to the Mother Earth because of Her gravity. So you get a magnetic temperament, magnetic character, magnetic personality. And this magnetic personality that you develop immediately shows that it is manifesting its power. Try to understand. The light now is coming on Me. It is just giving light, but it is not manifesting anything. We can see the sun's rays. It is the best example. The sun's rays, when they fall onto the leaves – the rays which look simple - manifest their power of making it into chlorophyll. In the same way, when you are at that height or at that state, then – without saying anything, without doing anything, even a glance – you manifest. 26

 GRAVITY OF THE GURU MANIFEST OUR GRAVITY When you start witnessing something without thought, there is no obstruc- tion for absorbing the knowledge about that thing because there is no thought. It's complete absorption which takes place. And then it manifests. This is how the Divine Power works within us. So with our gravity, what we do is to touch that depth within us, which can carry the Divine Power and manifest. Unless and until we touch that depth within us, Sahaja Yoga is like Hare-Rama-Hare- Krishna – nothing better than that. And that's why I find so many Sahaja Yogis sometimes really go off their rails suddenly because they have no gravity to go down into their own being and to feel the beauty and the glory of their own being and to use that gravity for manifesting Divine Powe.... The most substantial thing in lives is this Divine Power, which looks very light. You never feel the weight of this Divine Power. You'll never feel the of this Divine Power, but if you are not clean, if your channel is not clean, then this Divine Power cannot flow properly. It cannot manifest. So when we say that we are the instruments of God Almighty, then like this instrument we are. Now we are connected to the mains. If this instrument is not all right, then it cannot manifest whatever it is supposed to do. your pressure INTROSPECT TO ACHIEVE SELF-ESTEEM We are much above all these ordinary instruments, even the most compli- cated, even the most advanced and developed by science, because we reach a state where we ourselves become the science, the science of truth, an absolute truth. So what is needed for a guru is self-esteem. This is a very important point people don't realize - the self-esteem. To achieve the self-esteem, we have to introspect and know that "Today I am not what I was before. I am a realized soul. I have got powers. Of course, I have powers – powers of love, powers of compassion, powers of grasping things, powers of creativity, powers of giving Realization to others." Nobody had these powers, but somehow or other in Sahaja Yoga you are not self-conscious and we should not be self- conscious because that can give you ego. But we should have self-esteem. Tam a guru. I am on the shores of truth. THE POWER OF SILENCE "I am a guru. I am a guru. I am not an ordinary person. I am not on the street. I am something special and on the shores of truth. I have to salvage the people who are blind, who are mad ... in the most chaotic conditions this world is today." So at that time, a kind of a silence will come within you. When there will be any such crisis, immediately you will become extremely silent. But this is again a state I am telling you. So now, if there is something that makes upset or makes you unhappy, try to reach that point, that axis which is just silence. And this silence will make you really powerful because this silence is not only yours. When you are in that silence, you are in the silence of the cosmos – the silence of the cosmos. And the silence of the cosmos works for you You are in connection with that cosmic power, we can call it, but it's you. more than that. It is divine power, I should say – the Divine Power, which is All words on pages 26 and 27 working all the cosmos. So if you just become silent within yourself, know from Guru Puja 1992. that you are sitting in the kingdom of God.

 I am the One Iam Guru Puja • 2 December 1979 • London Today is a very important day because a long time back, when Christ was just a child, He read from the scriptures and declared to the multitudes that He was the Advent, the incarnation who is the Saviour. They believed that a saviour was going to come. Today, a long time back, on a Sunday, He declared that He was the Saviour. That's why today is Advent Sunday. He had to live for a very, very short time, so at a very young age He had to declare that He was the Advent. Now it is remarkable to see that before this, no incarnation said publicly that they were incarnations. Rama, of course, had forgotten that He was an incarnation. In a way, He made Himself forget, played His maya upon Himself to become a complete human being – maryada purushottama. And Shri Krishna also only told one person, Arjuna, just before he was to start the war. Abraham never said that He was the incarnation, though He was the incarnation of the Primordial Master. Dattatreya Himself never said that He was the incarnation of the Primordial Master. All these three forces, acting through innocence, came on this Earth to guide. Moses never said that, though they knew He was Those who great. He had overpowered nature, but He never said that He was the incarnation. At the time of Christ, one felt it was necessary to say, otherwise people wouldn't understand. If, at that time, they had recognized Christ, there would have been no prob- know the shoot lem. But still, human beings had to evolve further. Somebody had to cross the Agnya chakra in the Virata, to go through that door. That's why Christ came on this Earth. It is do not want to most surprising that in this Tree of Life, when the roots give out the shoot and the shoot gives out the branches and the branches give out the leaves and the flowers also blossom recognize the out of the same tree, those who know the roots do not want to know the shoot, those who know the shoot do not want to recognize the flowers. This is typical human nature. flowers. I never said about Myself because it was felt that human beings have now achieved another dimension of ego even worse than at the time of Christ. You may thing. You can call it the Industrial Revolution because you were away from nature, or whatever you may call it, but human beings had lost all contact with reality. They were identified with artificiality and to accept such a great reality was going to be impossible for them. That's why I never said a word about Myself – until, of course, some of the saints told about Me. Some of the possessed people also told about Me. And also people started wondering how the most difficult thing of kundalini awakening takes place with that speed in the presence of Mataji... Through rational understanding, people reach the point that Mataji has to be some- thing exceptional because nowhere in the scriptures is it written down anywhere that such an incarnation came on this Earth whose mere glance, even thought, can raise the kund- alini. Many saints, who are away from the madding crowd, sitting in the jungles, in the Himalayas, all know about it because their awareness is at a point where they understand. They understand much more than do because you are still children, newly born. They blame any- you 28 are grown up.

 My love will nourish you and My nature will fill you with peace and joy. But today is the day I declare that I am the one who has to save humanity. I declare I am the one who is the Adi Shakti, who is the Mother of all the mothers, who is the Primordial Mother, the Shakti, the Desire of God, who has incarnated on this Earth to give its meaning to itself, to this creation, to human beings. And I'm sure, through My love and patience and My powers, I am going to achieve it. I was the one who was born again and again, but now, in My complete form and complete powers, I have come on this Earth, not only for the salvation of human beings, not only for their emancipation, but for granting them the kingdom of heaven, the joy, the bliss that your Father wants to bestow upon you. Today is the day of Guru Puja – not My puja, but your puja as gurus. I anoint all of you as gurus and today I will tell you what I have bestowed upon you and what great powers you already have within you. Among you, there are people who still have not been able to recognize. My announce- ment will work it out within them – the recognition. Without recognition, you cannot see the play. Without the play, you cannot have confidence within yourself. Without confidence, you cannot become a guru. Without becoming a guru, you cannot help others. And without helping others, you are not going to be in any way happy. So to break the chain is very easy, but to build the chain, one after another, is what have to do. This is what you were all wanting to be, so be confident and be joyous and be happy that all My powers will protect you. My love will nourish you and My nature will fill you with peace and joy. May God bless you you.

 a beautiful globe 111110000m Calle Berlin 158 y Mr. Emmanuel Awir Alex Henshaw Albania Patient Gudenon Sahaja Yoga Centre, 6D Lei Shun Court 116 Leighton Road, Causeway Bay Hong Kong SAR, China Phone: 852-29150092 Phone: 852-93570717 P.O. Box DS 428 Nueve de Octubre/Torre Benin Dansoman, Accra, Ghana Phone: 00233 246 573797 Mr. Mohamed Said Ait Chaalal Windsor/PB Local 2 purussotama@yahoo.fr Phone: +229 95844948 www.sahajayogabenin.com Quito, Ecuador Phone: 3464166 Phone: 2348079 27, Avenue Pasteur Algiers 16000 Algeria msaitchaalal@yahoo.fr Phone: 00 (213) 21.63.28.40 Fax: 00 (213)21.63.76.23 Aristidis Tsinaroglou 122 Ikoniou str., Nikea Gr 18450 alex_henshaw@yahoo.com sahaja_yoga@hongkong.com www.sahajayoga.org.hk Clare Wood Bermuda (British territory) Egypt info@sahajayoga-arabia.com www.sahajayoga-arabia.com Greece / Hellas Phone: +30 6942896535 Phone: +30 6942896535 Fax: +30 210 4921158 artsi@letusplay.gr contact@sahajayogahellas.org www.sahajayogahellas.org clare@the-woods.net Phone: +441 505 3557 Mr. Mariano Martinez Mrs. Marie-Laure Cernay Calle 112 No. 17-19, Bogotá Sahaja Yoga Centre Buenos Aires Corrientes 3327, (1407) Capital Federal, Argentina Eire – see Ireland Rajesh Kafley Bhutan Broadcasting Service Thimphu, Bhutan rajeshkafley@hotmail.com Phone: 00975-2-326460 (home) Phone: 00975 1762 1045 (cell) Colombia Phone: (00571) 214-3971 Fax: (00571) 629-8402 marielaurecernay@gmail.com sahajacolombia@gmail.com www.sahajacolombia.org.co Viktor Korotkov mmartinez@ciudad.com.ar Puru tee 18-32 info@sahajayoga.org.ar Phone: 5411 48633291 / 48547403 www.sahajayoga.org.ar 41532 Johvi, Ida-Virumaa, Estonia Phone: +372-6661143 Phone: +372-56265658 (cell) sahaja.yoga@neti.ee www.sahadzajooga.ee eneseteostus@hot.ee (Galina Kotlova) Guadaloupe (French territory) - see Martinique or France Mr. Sandor Szechy Nadorliget u. 7/D. 102 H-1117 Budapest, Hungary Phone: + 36 20 354 0381 Wendy Huen and Dorothy Jong Turibana #41, Noord, Aruba (Dutch territory) Phone: 297 7431258 wendy_lim64@hotmail.com La Paz, Bolivia Phone: 591-70621323 Sylvain Kamulombo B.P. 14554 Kinshasa I Democratic Republic of Congo teresavargassaenz@yahoo.com www.sahajayogabolivia.org sandor.szechy@sjmeditacio.org www.sahajajoga.hu bradkevitch@hotmail.com Rajeev Rajan G.P.O. Box 167, Suva, Fiji Phone: (679) 3315 622 (office) Phone: (679) 3383 533 (home) Phone: (679) 9207147 (cell) Phone: +243 81 898 15 26 (Boris) Mr. Eduardo Marino Chris Kyriacou РО Вох K888, Науmarket NSW 1240, Australia Chris.Kyriacou@BTFinancialgroup.com _ marino@if.ufrj.br info@sahajayoga.com.au Phone: +61 2 80132612 Fax: +61 2 92745892 www.sahajayoga.com.au Rua Aperana, 99 Ap. 201, Leblon 22450-190 Rio de Janeiro RJ, Brazil Phone: (55 21) 2274-1753 Anna Eliasdottir Costa Rica Kjarrholmi, 34 200 Kopavogur, Iceland Phone: 00354.5544699 ritadefruyt@yahoo.com Mrs. Sanja (Sanya) Susanj 51000 Rijeka, Croatia Phone: 00 385 98 289 415 rajeevrem@rediffmail.com consulta@sahajayoga.org.br www.sahajayoga.org.br Mr. Raine Salo sanja.susanj1@ri.t-com.hr info@sahajayogacroatia.org www.sahajayogacroatia.org Yliskalliontie 2 E 02210 Espoo, Finland Phone: (358 9) 855-0934 Phone: 358505851510 (cell) neuvostonlista@jooga.org pr.salo@kolumbus.fi www.jooga.org H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Sahaja Yoga Trust Dr. Rajiv Kumar 17-C Qutab Institutional Area New Delhi, India Phone: 91 11 26534769 Fax: 91 11 26534711 ndsytrust@yahoo.com www.sahajayoga.org.in Yancho Yankov kv. Nadejda bl. 463 entrance A, apartment 40 1231 Sofia, Bulgaria Phone: + 359 88 8268710 Sahaja Yoga ashram 10 Clarence Street, Burwood Sydney, NSW 2134, Australia Mr.Ravi Saundankar 201, Indigo house 12, Nikodimou Mylona 3095 Limassol, Cyprus Phone: +357 99206353 info.ravin@yahoo.co.uk Fax: + 359 2 9559171 yancho_yankov@yahoo.com www.sahajayoga-bg.org Dr. Wolfgang Hackl Eidechsengasse 6 1220 Vienna, Austria Phone/Fax: (00 43-1) 609 1131 Phone: 0043-676-777 444 1 (cell) wolfgang.hackl@aon.at www.sahajayoga.at Majid Golpour 49 rue de Verneuil 6. 75007 Paris, France Phone: (33-6) 63 53 73 33 mpgolpour@yahoo.fr www.sahajayoga.asso.fr Georges Kouwonou 01BP 2878 Ouaga 01 Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso sahajaburkinafaso@yahoo.fr gdjilkou@yahoo.fr Phone: 00226.50.39.82.59 Phone: 00 226 70.24.17.81 Dr. Madhur Rai International Sahaja Yoga Nirmal Dham Koziskova 511, 250 82 Uvaly, Czech Republic Phone: (+420) 281 982 310 Research and Health Centre Plot No.-1, H.H.Shri Nirmala Devi Marg Sector-8, CBD, Belapur Navi Mumbai – 400 614 India info@nirmala.cz Devi Javakhishvili Schindissi, 0123 Didgori Area, Tbilissi, Georgia Phone: (00995) 32 454650 Phone: (00995) 99 245499 (cell) devigeo@googlemail.com sy.tbilissi@mail.ru S. Prakash, c/o Seef Properties PO Box 20084, Kingdom of Bahrain prakashsahaj@yaho0.co.uk Phone: 00-973-17 822042 www.sahajayoga-arabia.com www.sahadzajoga.info Phone: (022) 27571341 Fax: (022) 27576795 sahaja_center@vsnl.net www.sahajahealthcentre.org SJ Borotin Centre (SY kindergarten) 679 37 Borotin 16, Czech Republic Phone: (+420) 516 477 019 Mr. Jean Seuleu B.P. 9200 Douala, Cameroon Phone: +237 75 14 84 14 seuleu2001@yahoo.fr borotin@nirmala.cz Igor Cherevichny ul. Efremova, 9, kv. 24 246000 Gomel, Belarus Phone: +375 232 50-60-19 gomelbreeze@gmail.com International Sahaja Public School Talnoo, Dharamshala Cantt. District Kangra HP – 176216 India www.school.borotin.info Mr. Philipp Zeiss Kastanienstrasse 19 Mr. Jay Chudasama 390 Dixon Road, Apt. 2111 Etobicoke, Ontario Canada M9R 1T4 Phone: (416) 614-7338 emadabihabib@aol.com Mads Sonne Bremholm D-14624 Dallgow, Germany Phone: (49 3322) 20 88 70 Phone: (49 30) 330 998 08 (work) zeiss@emd-germany.de info@sahaja-yoga.de www.sahaja-yoga.de Præstøgade 3, 2.tv DK-2100 Copenhagen OE, Denmark Phone: +45 3542 4837 Phone: +45 2757 4837 (cell) sahajayoga.dk@gmail.com www.sahajayoga.dk isps_principal@yaho0.com isps_office@yahoo.co.uk ispsoffice@rediffmail.com www.isps.edu.in Mr. Bernard Cuvellier Rue Piervenne 58 B 5590 Ciney, Belgium bcuvellier@gmail.com Phone: 32/83 21 47 31 wWw.sahajayoga.be www.sahajayoga.ca Felicianus Manurung Haiyan Hao 52# Xi Bian Men Nei Street, Xuan Posada de las Artes Kingman Av. Diego de Almagro 1550 y Pradera Quito, Ecuador Phone: 2220610 Jl. Cempaka Putih Raya no 33 Jakarta Pusat, Indonesia Phone: 61-21-4209716 Phone: 62-816-830306 fmanurung@bankmandiri.co.id suwidana@dps.gpi-g.com (Bali) purnomojaya@yaho0.com (Semarang) Tall Oaks International School and Little Acorns International Nursery Р.О. Вох GP 145 near Adwoa Wangara Hotel East Cantonments, Accra, Ghana srvalli2002@yahoo.co.in (Mrs. Srivalli Rao Potharaju) Wu District Beijing, China Phone: 86-13911204023 haiyan.hao@gmail.com sahajayoga@sahajayoga.org.cn www.sahajayoga.org.cn Nikhil and Rani Varde 1779 Seashore Drive Buttonwood Bay, Belize City, Belize Phone: 501 625-7777 Phone: 2263718 Phone: 099016909 (cell) sahajanet-ecuador@lycos.com 30 ranivarde@hotmail.com

 106 Sabaja Yoga nations and 7 territories 11111 Line Raphael and Fonteline Caron Martinique (French territory) line_r@ifrance.com Iran – see France Kuwait sahajayogakuwait@gmail.com Seamus Harten 77 Cherryfield Lawn Clonsilla, Dublin 15, Ireland Phone: 01 8238449 Phone: +0862520765 seamus.harten@gmail.com www.sahajayoga.ie Mrs. Zukhra Idinova 86-4, Patrice Lumumba str. Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan Phone: +996 312 64 23 13 Phone: +996 772 83 21 (cell) baktysha@mail.ru fonteline@wandoo.fr Phone: (596) 596 75 20 77 Graciela Vazquez-Diaz J. Tejocotes 56-201, Col. del Valle Mexico D.F., 03100 Mexico Phone: (52-55) 55751949 Phone: (52-55) 10194995 (cell) gracielamexico@hotmail.com www.smataji.org.mx C.A. Sivaramakrishnan B-91 Al Khor Housing Community Alkhor, Qatar Phone: 00974 5443812 Phone: 00974 4724663 Olga Dzhafarova Pernavas iela 74-8, Riga Goginda Fiamorih & Oyemike Mabel N°1 Dalberto Palmgrove Estate Lagos, Nigeria Phone: +234 80 20 76 31 27 Phone: +234 8023668576 www.sahajayoganigeria.org Valentin Popa 16/67 Eli Cohen Bat Yam, Israel Phone: 03-5531007 Phone: 0546610892 (cell) LV-1009, Latvia Phone: +371 25921038 (cell) olja_sy@mail.ru sahaja@inbox.lv sy_israel@hotmail.com valipop2000@yahoo0.com www.sahajayoga.org.il ca_siva@hotmail.com Ivascenco Maria Chisinau, Moldova Phone: 0037322724976 ivascenco@gmail.com Mrs. Sidsel Mugford Hala Sukarieh Reunion – see France (French territory) Building Tony Al-Attayek Myrveien 15a 1397 Nesoya, Norway Phone: +47 67412335 (home) Phone: +47 95288795 (cell) sahajnet@start.no www.sahajayoga.no Duilio Cartocci Street St. Jean, Bouar Keserouan, Lebanon Phone: 00961 9 445319 Phone: 00961 3 949258 (cell) Fax: 00961 9 440319 hala_suk@yahoo.com hala.sukarieh@gmail.com Mrs. Mihaela Balasescu Aleea Campul cu flori 12 Bl. A49/40 Sector 6 Bucharest 062025 Tighineanu Roman Balti, Moldova Phone: 0037369055353 lenasyroman@gmail.com Via della Libertà 11 22100 Como, Italy Phone: 0039 031 301777 Phone: 0039 348 7159152 (cell) atenaduilio@libero.it Romania Haliun Shagdarsuren Mongolia Phone: (976) 9918-9057 haliun108@yahoo.com www.sahajayoga.mn Jogesh Sethi Al Khuwair, Oman Phone: 00968-24501559 (home) Phone: 00968-99242284 (cell) sethijogesh@rediffmail.com latikasethi@yahoo.com Phone: 0040-21-7770802 Phone: 0040-749108108 (cell) MihaelaBalasescu @sahajayoga.ro mihaela.balasescu@gmail.com www.sahajayoga.ro www.sahaja-yoga.it Libya – c/o Günter Woltron (UK) Phone: (+44) (0)7739 456547 gwoltron@yahoo.com www.sahajayoga-arabia.com M. Charles Pogo Toure 22 BP 211 Abidjan 22 Ivory Coast / Côte d’Ivoire tourepogo@yahoo.fr Phone: (225) 22 43 16 26 Phone: (225) 07 57 78 30 www.ci.sahaja-yoga.net Dmitriy Korotayev st. Sverdlova 8-124 Togliatti Samara Oblast 445039 Morocco c/o Franz Mekyna Donaulaende Uferweg la/3 2000 Stockerau, Austria Phone: +43 650 7774098 Fax: +43 2266 61835-15 info@sahajayoga-arabia.com www.sahajayoga-arabia.com Vytautas Kontrimas Taikos g. 34-33, Vilnius, Lithuania Phone: +370 60025174 nirananda@gmail.com allekso@gmail.com www.sahadzajoga.lt Iraj Mahmoodi F-10/3 Isalamabad, Pakistan Phone: 00923015998609 iraj_irani2000@yaho0.com Russia Jay Shankar #1 Denehurst Avenue Phone: + 7 8482-30-98-90 om-center@mail.ru Hagley Park Road Kingston 10, Jamaica Phone: (876) 837 7238 / 870 0676 jayshankar99in@yaho0.com Reem Jobran West Bank, Palestine farhani@gmail.com soviet@sahajayoga.ru Mahesh Kandiyil Riyadh, Saudi Arabia Phone: 00966508837689 mahesh.kandiyil@gmail.com aathmaram@gmail.com info@sahajayoga-arabia.com www.sahajayoga-arabia.com Isabella Re, Luxembourg Phone: 00352 44 35 48 Tatiana Kovalenko g.S.m: 661 44 35 48 isa_re@hotmail.com lucien_schokert@yahoo.fr http://home.pi.be/~pin25815/lux C.P. 3274, Maputo, Mozambique Phone: 258-21416529 (home) Phone: 258-823239170 (cell) tatianak@uem.mz Carmen Rosa Ramos Mr. Hitoshi Igawa 2-15-1-1-601 Minamiosawa Av. Del Ejército 1050-1054 Magdalena del Mar, Lima 17 Peru Phone: (511) 264-6800 Phone: (511) 9278-0734 (cell) Hachioji-shi Tokyo192-0364 Japan Phone and Fax (81-42) 678-2923 hitoshii@t3.rim.or.jp www.sahajayogajp.org sy_mocambique@yahoo.com Gojcoo Stevkovski Partenie Zografski 77A 1000 Skopje, Macedonia Phone: (389 2) 3178184 Phone: (389 70) 225923 akademskipecat@yahoo.com crramosh@hotmail.com Karim Ouedraogo SPR International Aeroport Leopold S. Senghor Mr. Prem Basnet 54, Mayur Marg, KA. MA. PA -34 Bhimsengola, Old Baneshwor Kathmandu, Nepal Phone: 977-1-4473265 Phone: 9851035703 (cell) basnetprem@hotmail.com Mr. Pankaj V. Rajput 6B First Metro Strata Bldg S. Laurel, Shaw Boulevard (behind Cherry Foodorama) Mandaluyong City Manila, Philippines Phone: 632-7529080 Phone: 632-578-2068 (home) Phone : 63-920-2755333 (cell) pankajrajputv@yahoo.com Mrs. Galina Mazur Sakar Senegal Phone: 00221772585865 Zuldus-1, House no. 11 Flat no. 89, Almaty Kazakhstan - 050049 Phone: 007-7272-519239 okalfredo@hotmail.com Mr. Ivan Tan 58B, Jalan BRP 6/11 Bukit Rahman Putra, Sungai Buloh 47000 Selangor, Malaysia Phone: 60 (03) 6140 3388 Fax: 60 (03) 6140 1188 ivankttan@pd.jaring.my sahajayogamsia@pd.jaring.my www.sahajmalaysia.org Olgica Loncarevic Serbia Phone: 007-777-2671370 Mr. Henno de Graaf Kersegaarde 16 3436 GD Nieuwegein mazur-kz@yandex.ru loncarevico108@sbb.co.yu Phone: 38163644142 (cell) www.sahajasrbija.org semenbub@mail.ru aiguldatta@yahoo.co.in www.kazakhstan.sahajayoga.ru Netherlands Phone: (31 30) 630-1270 info@sahajayoga.nl hennodegraaf@xs4al.nl www.sahajayoga.nl Poland warszawa@sahajayoga.pl infos@sahajayoga.pl www.sahajayoga.pl Nimisha Shah Sierra Leone РО Вох 41565 Nairobi, Kenya Phone: 4181697 Phone: 1723 428721 (cell) Phone: 0735 809190 (H. Mutunga) nimishaca@yahoo.com www.sahajayogaafrica.org/kenya Vikas Vig Malta 54 Toh Tuck Road, #09-11 Curacao, Netherlands Antilles – see Netherlands (Dutch territory) Isabel Mateus c/o Vimala Gratz Singapore 596745 Phone: 6348 9769 vigemail@singnet.com.sg www.sahajayoga-sg.org Sahaja Yoga Centre Rua Braancamp, no. 84 20ESQ Lisboa, Portugal Phone: +351 96 970 77 10 Schluckergasse 9/3/9 A-1130 Vienna, Austria Phone: 0043 676 4413869 vimala108@yahoo.de New Zealand homepages.ihug.co.nz/~sahaj_nz

 Viktor Bondar vul. Gorkogo, 157, kv. 39 Kyiv, 03150, Ukraine Phone: 380 44 5280158 (home) Phone: 380 50 9251744 (cell) viktorbo108@gmail.com www.sahajayoga.org.ua Anil Mishra and Vijay Jain Dubai, United Arab Emirates Phone: 00-971-6-5560049 (Anil) Phone: 00-971-55-6037810 (Anil cell) Phone: 00-971-4-2724549 (Vijay) Phone: 00-971-50-6527825 (Vijay cell) anil70_m@eim.ae anil70_m@hotmail.com Lakshminarayanan, Swaziland rl_narayanan1966@yahoo.co.uk Mr. Jozef Skurla Selpice 111, 919 09 Bohdanovce nad Trnavou vijaykj_2000@yahoo0.com Sweden – see Norway Slovakia You are all Phone: +421 33 5529194 Sahaja Yoga UK P.O. Box 108, London W5 4WZ United Kingdom Phone: 020 8354 1674 Phone: +44 131 553 3255 (Scotland) www.sahajayoga.se ganadhip@stonline.sk Mr. Arneau de Kalbermatten 2 bis, Chemin Sous-Voie Sahadza Joga Slovensko (ashram) Kvetna 555/14 1295 Mies, Switzerland ipoindia@dircon.co.uk info@scotlandyoga.com www.sahajayoga.org.uk www.scotlandyoga.com info@sahajayoga.ch www.sahajayoga.ch 900 51, Zohor, Slovakia Mr. Dusan RadoS great yogis, Voljceva 06 SI-1360 Vrhnika, Slovenia dusan.rados@silvaprodukt.si www.jogaslovenija.org 6F, No.33, Lane 90 Mincyuan Road, Sindian City Taipei County 231, Taiwan (R.O.C.) Phone: +886 2 2660 7267 Mr. Dave Dunphy 3340 Palos Verdes Drive East sahajtw@mac.com (M. Staniforth) www.sahajayoga-tw.com Rancho Palos Verdes Jane Shafer P.O. Box 5459, Worcester West 6862 Worcester, South Africa Phone: 00 27 - 23 3471781 California 90275 United States of America S.B. Nag Phone: 310-832-6469 dunphitect@aol.com great people, РО. Вох 7094 c/o Mount Meru Millers janes@wam.co.za www.sahajayoga.co.za House No - B - 5 L International Sahaj School (Canajoharie) 293 Starkville Road Fort Plain, New York, USA Canajoharie.School@SahajaYoga.org Sunpark, Sunflag Housing Estate Arusha, Tanzania shiba_brata@yahoo.com South Korea c/o Tyrone and Gabriela Marsh lazarmarsh@gmail.com sykorea@gmail.com born to transform Mr. Pascal Sreshthaputra 84 Sukhumvit Soi 40 Adriana Añon Prakanong, Klongtoey Bangkok 10110, Thailand Phone: (662) 712-1418 Phone/fax: (662) 253 3398 (Ratana) senpascal@yahoo.com www.thaisahajayoga.com Mr. José Antonio Salgado Santa Virgilia, 16 Esc. Izq. 9oB 28033 Madrid, Spain Phone: (34) 91 381-0144 jose-antonio-sc@telefonica.net www.sahajayoga.es Pedro Vidal, 2217 Montevideo 11600, Uruguay Phone: (598) 99 607 247 anona@adinet.com.uy Uzbekistan the whole universe Suzanne Babooram Roberto Sanchez-Labrador Teresa Imparato Valle de Enmedio, 107 28035 Madrid, Spain Phone: (34) 917 392 637 sahajamadrid@yaho0.es 11A Golf Course Road c/o Dal Maso Fairways, Maraval Trinidad and Tobago Phone: 868 629 8853 Phone: 868 620 3803 (cell) Calle Isla Larga Quinta Raffaella Prados del Este Caracas, Venezuela Phone: 0058 212 9772067 tereimpa@yahoo.it www.sahajayoga.org.ve into a beautiful globe. Kingsley and Ruth Flint 80 Cumaratunga Munidasa Mawatha (Thurstan Road) Colombo 3, Sri Lanka Phone: 0094 11 2586 105 Fax: 0094 11 2596 546 suran41@hotmail.com sytrinidad@hotmail.com www.sahajayogatt.netfirms.com Ms. Dao Van Giang Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam Phone : 00 84 8 8441214 Phone: 00 84 903842081 (cell) Tunisia info@sahajayoga-arabia.com www.sahajayoga-arabia.com Nese Algan, Valikonagi cad 38/7 Engin Konak Apt. flintfam@sltnet.lk kingsleyflint@mac.com vangiang@ishan.vnn.vn celiatanaka111@yahoo.com Mrs. Devi Ponnudurai "Sri Pathy, " Kaithady South Kaithady, Jaffna, Sri Lanka Phone: 011-94- 773 608 821 Nisantasi, Istanbul 80200 Turkey Phone: (90) 212 248 3122 Fax: (90) 212 246 6718 nesealgan@superonline.com anapurna@superonline.com www.sahajayogaturkey.f2s.com Additional addresses, changes, corrections and deletions can be sent to: The Divine Cool Breze Suriname coolbreeze@shaw.ca - see Netherlands

 The Internatianal Juurnal af Saltja Yogi THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE home about subscribe newsletter blog contact store silence and quietude the curse of the west you are spiritual Materialism comes because people You are all Sahaja Yogis and there should not be controversy between you. People think too much all the time- thinking, thinking, thinking. That's from have gone mad with their greed.. You should all think of the same thing have found a solution for Sahaja Yogis, Swadisthan. You get that problem from what they should do. They should try to Swadisthan. Today in the shop there was a lady. She came and she wanted to have her To satisty the Swadisthan, you have to encourage handicrafts. Realization and she got it. She got it take to silence. You have to take to f you people take to sense- because you are the ones who can do it-if you quietude and look at yourself. What is very well. There are many who are www.divinecoolbreeze.org read more subscribe • contact A fresh, new website, store and blog where you can find out more about The Divine Cool Breeze, buy single copies of past issues on paper or pdf, send gifts and tell us what you feel about the magazine. PHOTOGRAPH CAPTIONS, CREDITS AND OTHER NOTES Front cover: Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Diwali music evening, 10 November 2007 (Paul Anant) Contents pages quote: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Guru Puja 1994 (“If you want, it can work out. The All- pervading Divine Power of love is absolutely working it out. More than you, the Divine wants this world to change, wants to transform the whole universe. Now you are the instruments and if you try to cheat yourself, who can stop it? Just to enjoy music or to enjoy the company or belonging to some club or to feel that it's a nice festival or at the most you seek the security Pages 2 and 3: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi at International Sahaja Yoga Reasearch and Health Centre, Belapur India, 23 December 2007 (Suneel Janakwar) Pages 6 and 1l: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Page 15: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi at Stonehenge UK Pages 17, 18, 21, 22, 25 and 26: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Page 29: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Guru Puja, Dollis Hill ashram London, 2 December 1979 Page 31: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in India Page 32: the sky near Calgary Canada (Ian Butterworth) Back cover photograph: the evening of the Diwali music program, 10 November 2007 (Paul Anant) Back cover quote: Shri Mataji Nirmal Devi, Shri Buddha Puja 1988 (“Despite all problems and anything, without feeling bad about it, just see that you move like a big elephant towards giving Realization to others, creating more Sahaja Yogis and more Sahaja Yogis in America. Those who have this aim in life that we have to give Realization to people, we have to achieve the establishment of Sahaja Yoga, they never will have any problems of any kind.") children and family and all that – it is not satisfying. It will never of your satisfy you. It will only satisfy you when you will become the lights to give thers, to work for others.") Contents pages photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Page 2: Sahaja Yogis at International Sahaja Yoga Reasearch and Health Centre, Belapur India, 23 December 2007 (Paul Anant) it to The Divine Cool Breeze is published six times a year by Vishwa Nirmala Dharma Divine Cool Breeze subscriptions are available worldwide at $30 US per year for six issues and can be easily and securely purchased at www.divinecoolbreeze.org. If you are unable to subscribe through the website, cheques or money orders payable to "The Divine Cool Breeze" can be sent to Sarvesh Singh, 42036 Glynn Tarra Place, Leesburg, VÀ 20176 USA (703 471-8484, dcb108@yahoo.com) Stories, photos and artwork can be sent to: The Divine Cool Breeze, 881 Frederick Road, North Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V7K 2Y5 (coolbreeze@shaw.ca) Printed by King Printing Company Inc., 181 Industrial Avenue East, Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA

 You move like a big elephant SAHAJA YOGA MAHOT towards giving Realization to others, Sahaja Yogis. creating more SWAGATA DIWALI PUJA IUNNTECH GRQUND, NEA NTERNATIONAL SCHOOL. SE GATE



----------------------

2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-0.txt 
 THEDIVINE COOLBREEZE
PER
January-February 2008 volume twenty-one number one
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-1.txt 
 More than you,
the Divine wants
this world to change,
wants to transform
the whole universe.
M..
2 Shri Mataji at Health Centre
4 Imbibe
10 Consolidation
16 My Vision
24 Gravity of the Guru
28 I am the One
101
30 World Addresses
VISVA-GARBHÂ
SHE IS THE MOTHER
OF THE UNIVERSE
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-2.txt 
 HE
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-3.txt 
 DIVINE BLESSINGS
On the most auspicious occasion of
Datta Jayanti, Shri Adi Guru Dattatraya's
birthday, December 23rd, 2007, the
International Sahaja Yoga Research and
Health Centre was once again blessed by the
arrival of our most beloved holy Mother.
Shri Mataji was keen to know all the details
of the patients arriving at Health Centre,
the number of patients, their countries,
the ratio of yogis to yoginis, their diseases
and their recovery. She said, "All the yogis
CC
should be cured at Health Centre as it is their
own energy working." She also said, "I am
happy that foreign yogis are coming to Health
>כ
Centre." Shri Mataji asked for the doctors to
come forward and praised all of them for their
dedicated work. She blessed all of them.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-4.txt 
 SHOWER ON HEALTH CENTRE
Shri Mataji then asked all
the yogis if they were able
to feel the cool breeze. "Yes,
Mother," they replied and
raised their hands. Everyone
was overwhelmed and
thanked Shri Mataji for all
Her divine blessings. She
and Sir CP congratulated
all the staff for all their
beautiful work. All the
doctors affirmed, “Mother,
You only do everything at
Health Centre."
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-5.txt 
 im
Try to imbibe
all that is divine
within yourself.
Even if I give big lectures and say things, it may not have any effect whatsoever on you.
It might be just wasted if you haven't got the capacity to imbibe what I am saying
so important, so imminent.
SO
Christmas Puja 1988
Education doesn't mean listening to lectures after Realization. It means
it should be imbibed within you, it should penetrate into
veins
your
and into your every artery, into every cell of your being... I would say
that I have talked a lot and the only thing that you have to do is to
and not on others. That's all. To others
imbibe it within
have
you
you
to be kind. You have to be sweet. You have to be patient, gentle.
23 November 1980
What is the quality that you have imbibed in Sahaja Yoga. You stand
for all those ideals. You stand for all those sacrifices. And
you stand
for all that is to be achieved for bettering human beings. You have to
achieve a great deal for others. You have to work within yourself what
you can do for others, what you can achieve for others, what is the best
way to imbibe those qualities within you that you become an absolutely
unique personality.
Birthday Puja 2001
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-6.txt 
 bibe
Imbibing through meditation
What happens in meditation is that your awareness crosses over the Agnya, goes
above and is now stationed in the Sahasrara, in thoughtless awareness. Then the
reality of Sahasrara, the beauty of Sahasrara starts pouring in your own character,
in your own temperament. Unless and until you meditate – not meditate just to
well or just to feel that "I must meditate" – but meditation is very important
in
CC
get
for all of you that you develop your Sahasrara in such a manner that
the beauty of your Sahasrara. If you don't use your Sahasrara in this
time you'll find Sahasrara will close down, you'll have no vibrations and you’ll have
you imbibe
after some
way,
no understanding of yourself.
10 May 1998
The main problem we have is how to imbibe this within our personality, how to
know within our personality that we are facing this kind of an incarnation, that we
are born in such-and-such era, which is very important, absolutely. It is very special
times that we are here and that we have risen very high through our evolution-
ary process, which was sort of accelerated by the kundalini awakening and we are
residing in the space now beyond time and beyond sin.
Shri Krishna Puja 1990
Imbibing nature
Nature should really imbibe within
It is the balance. And the balance should
you.
come in such a manner that your whole character, your own temperament should
show that balance within
Shri Ganesha Puja 1992
you.
Try to imbibe things which will give you real enjoyment – for example, flowers,
nature, garden. Instead of destroying this nature, try to build it up, try to see how
you can make it a beautiful garden or a beautiful place.
Shri Ganesha Puja 1997
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-7.txt 
 We have Our
Sahaja culture
with us.
Imbibing dharma
You are a special community I said. You are the ones who are going to create that great
community. Now whatever are the dharma's points – or we can say dharma's aspects – you
can imbibe them sahaj. “Sahaj" has a very special meaning. Spontaneously, you do not
have to exert. You do not have to go into a penance or work it out. In a Sahaj way you can
do it. “Sahaj" also means easy. You can have it in your heart, all these qualities, without
any difficulty whatsoever. It's the easiest thing for you to be righteous than to be other-
wise. It's easier for you to be honest than to be otherwise. So this speciality that you have
got is the vision of all the saints, of all the prophets, of all the seers, of all the incarnations.
It is you.... For you it is very easy, that you can imbibe all the aspects of dharma very easily.
You don't have to do anything.
CC
Shivaratri Puja 1992
How can it be that religion makes you hate somebody? Religion is there to understand
love, imbibe love and compassion.... In one of My lectures, I talked to you about the emo-
tional intelligence. That is what we should try to imbibe – emotional intelligence. That
means the intelligence that is based on emotions. Unless and until we become emotion-
ally intelligent, our society cannot improve. In an emotional intelligence, you care and
you enjoy caring. You do everything for others with a great emotional understanding.
Shri Adi Shakti Puja 2000
Imbibing sweetness
It is for you to use that tremendous power – the embodiment of madhurya, sweetness.
That madhurya you have to imbibe and that madhurya you have to spread. That's
important. So that relationship of sweetness between each other, the relation of enjoying
each other, the relation of knowing each other has to be full of sweetness, just like honey.
It is just there, but we have to be the bee to reach there.
very
28 May 1990
What one has to imbibe within oneself is the sweetness. If you are sweet, you are filled
with humour, you do not hurt others, you are not hurt either, you see everything so beau-
tiful and nice. That's the quality of Shri Krishna, madhurya. Anything can be done with
sweetness. That's very important.
6.
3 Jапuary 1988
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-8.txt 
 IMBIBE
Imbibing the qualities of others
What you have to do as soon as you know about somebody, then you have to think what
goodness he has got, how can I imbibe that goodness within myself? Because we are here
to enrich ourselves spiritually, so you must think, as the first and foremost thing, what
can I do to get the goodness of that person within myself? So you'll be looking out for the
goodness of that person then, instead of looking out for bad qualities. Virata Puja 1991
This tongue is not for saying harsh things, for making fun of others, for teasing others,
but it is for saying something, such a beautiful thing that the other person also imbibes
that beauty. I've seen some nice things people have said and that lingers in My mind and
I said, "When will I have chance to say these things to others?" So think about it, that
"Now this is a very nice sentence. This was a very sweet thing they said...." The care, the
love, the affection, the wisdom and the patience is to be imbibed.
CC
Birthday Puja 1990
This kind of temperament is necessary for Sahaja Yoga, that we appreciate others, not to
criticize others. If you are criticizing, then you cannot imbibe any good qualities in you.
But to appreciate others also comes through good tradition. In Sahaja Yoga we have to
develop good traditions. We have our Sahaja culture with us.... It's difficult to deal with
this modern mind because it cannot imbibe the beauty of joy within itself, while God
Almighty is the source of joy. When you see this beautiful Nature and the sun playing
around with it, you just become thoughtless and you just get lost into the eternity...
When you meditate, just ... believe that your auspiciousness and holiness is to be imbibed
on your nerves, on your central nervous system because that is the epitome of chaitanya.
The chaitanya that is flowing all around, if it is in the form of holiness, even one glance
of yours can bring beautiful fruits, can bring peace and solace.
2 January 1987
Try to imbibe the dharma within yourself. And then you will see eventually you'll become
very generously-hearted because you start tolerating
20 December 1979
a very generously-hearted person –
everyone.
The beauty of enjoying others – somebody has some great points, very good qualities in
person – you'll imbibe it. In Sahaja Yoga, whatever you enjoy, you imbibe. You know
that. Whatever you enjoy, you will imbibe just like that. You should be able to enjoy. Now
supposing you enjoy creating rifts in people, creating problems with people, you'll have
them yourself. Supposing you enjoy saying harsh things to others, you'll imbibe that in
the sense that will have more of it. Whatever you want, you will have.
that
you
New Year's Eve 1981
Whatever you
бу,
you imbibe.
1
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-9.txt 
 The culture of the spirit
Anything you want can be done, but first of all what you need is maturity. And for matu-
rity, one has to understand that there is a culture of the spirit. As we have human cultures,
we have a culture of the spirit, which must be imbibed. The culture of the spirit is to be
imbibed. If you go according to the culture of the spirit, then you cannot have problems
and the foremost thing in the culture of spirit is that you must respect yourself because
you are a yogi. The second thing is you must respect other yogis because they are yogis.
Mahakali Puja 1987
You have to have a discipline, which is not imposed on you, but, very happily, which you
have accepted and have imbibed.... I bless you all, that you should have this full idea about
yourself, why you are on this Earth and what great work you are supposed to do. Each one
of you is capable. Each one of you can do it.... I would request you that you imbibe these
qualities within you, which are already there. I mean, I wouldn't say "imbibe," but you
manifest them. And once you start manifesting, see your temperament, how it is.
CC .
Shri Bhavasagara Puja 1991
So far I am very happy that whatever I've been telling you and whatever
I've been guiding you. You have accepted it very well, calmly and sweetly
and you've tried to imbibe it in your lifestyle. Actually, after some time, I
don't think that I will have to tell you. You will get your own light to see
for yourself what is right and what is wrong. But still I would
for all
say
the western people especially, that you must open your heart in the puja,
in the music, in anything. Just see that you open your heart... All your
conditionings, all your ego will disappear when you decide that “I have
to open my heart in Sahaja Yoga."
Sankranti Puja 1990
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-10.txt 
 IMBIBE
Imbibing the deities
Nobody should think that you are very grown-up because you can keep quiet, sit quietly
and all that. You are grown-up only if you can imbibe the qualities of Shri Ganesha. I
have seen people who are very grown-up still do not have simple qualities of chastity, of
honesty – they don't have and they can't have because they don't think it is important. So
I leave it to you to find out Shri Ganesha within yourself.
Shri Ganesha Puja 2003
To surrender, to forgive – that is the quality of Christ we have to imbibe.
Christmas Puja 1993
This innocence and holiness is the one which is peace-giving, which reduces frictions,
tensions because you enjoy your chastity, because you enjoy your glory. Please aspire to be
the epitome of holiness.
If I am
2 January 1987
ideal
Whatever things you can grasp and think, "this is Mother's quality," try to imbibe that your
within yourself. That doesn't mean you start shouting at bhoots first. So first, what is the
first quality of Mother? That She came on this Earth and She has worked for people who you should
are nowhere near Her. She stood down to elevate others. And then gradually you can
understand that this quality will take you to higher qualities... You have to concentrate
on a deity to imbibe the qualities of that deity, otherwise you have no communication
with the deity and there is no use saying the mantras.
CC
try
to imbibe
Sahasrara Puja 1984 My nature.
You have seen that how much work I have been doing compared to you people and I am
so much older compared to you people. All right, you can say that “Mother, you are Adi
ideal,
Shakti." It's all right. But I am your ideal. In any case, if somebody is
become like that person, try to imbibe those qualities.
try toi
your
18 January1983
I never try to show off My powers to you in any way. It's only you who should imbibe
all My powers. That's the only desire I have, that you should be as powerful as Myself...
I want that you should forget as to what powers I have, but you should yourself have all
these powers within yourself so that you can save the world. That's the only thing I want
to give you. And I want to assure you that you all can have everything that I have.
Shri Fatima Puja 1993
Imbibing the ideal
You are the people who are going to take Sahaja Yoga to that position where it has to
reach. Because as far as I am concerned, I have nothing to do any more. I have done it.
Now it is for you to receive. You have to imbibe it and you have to change the whole
thing. That is your job and that is why it is a serious matter.
18 November 1979
You must remember how many years you have spent doing Sahaja Yoga. You must under-
stand all the nice times you had and how many, every year you have spent in enjoying My
birthday, also in understanding how you have grown into it, how you changed it and how
you enjoyed and how you have imbibed all the qualities of Sahaja Yoga.
Birthday Puja 2001
try to imbibe My nature within yourself and then you'll be
should
If I am your ideal
amazed how you are connected with Me. Then we all move like one wave, one being, one
you
Sahasrara Puja 1980
personality.
9.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Basies
The
consolidation through introspection
Shudy Camps UK| The consolidation of Sahaja Yogis is very important. The first thing, to con-
6 June 1988 solidate yourself, you must do introspection. You must do introspection. It's
to reflect the light within and see for yourself what have you done so far in
Sahaja Yoga. Where are you? How far
gone and how far have
you have
you
to go? What is the thing that is lacking in you? You'll be surprised when
you
start seeing yourself in a very unbiased manner, not justifying yourself, not
blaming any bhoots or not blaming any badhas within you or somebody
else. If you start with yourself – what has gone wrong with
that
you
you
could not consolidate yourself properly – you'll be amazed that there has
been problems still lingering on, which must be corrected. Now these prob-
lems you can see very clearly. In the light of the spirit, you can see them
very
clearly that "This has
כ
10
gone wrong with me."
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-12.txt 
 The Basies of Sahaja Yoga
sics
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Early blessings in Sahaja Yoga
One of the most interesting things I've noticed is that Sahaja Yoga is all the time covered
with some sort of a maya and this maya is ignorance – complete ignorance sometimes,
sometimes partially.
Now when you get into Sahaja Yoga you get blessed. You get blessed, maybe your
family gets
physical being. Also for the financial – you get jobs, you get money. You get something
exceptional, which is really miraculous.
Now people get very much lost in those achievements and start drifting, thinking
that “Oh, this is the blessing we have got now. We don't have to do anything any more,'
that you are being rewarded sufficiently for whatever you have done so far. That's not so.
blessed. You get some sort of a blessing for your
blessed,
your children
get
Everything is
CC
just a means
It's just a sort of a support to you comes so that your faith should be fully established in
Sahaja Yoga – especially so you should know Me, what I am.
But if you go on still drifting, then maybe some of these blessings may turn out to be
curses and you might feel that "what a curse has fallen upon us and how it has
the wrong way."
For some people it takes time to get to the feeling of the blessings. For example,
mostly according to the modern ideas, we think that to get more money is the biggest
blessing, so many get that also. But actually, it is not. To get your peace within, to get to
your witness state and to feel your vibrations all right and to be in the centre all the time
ascending is the real blessing. Because with that, you get everything else.
The completion is only possible when you have the complete joy bubbling within
yourself. After all, everything is just a means to achieve joy, to feel the joy. It is not the
end. If it was, those people who have money, those people who have good health, those
people who have all the so-called success with them, they should have been happy and
peaceful, but they are not. They are suffering. They are suffering too much. And they are,
in a way, destroying themselves day by day because they hate their lives. They can't bear
it. They cannot understand why they are on this Earth.
So all these blessings that come to you, all these changes that come to you, all these
new venues that open to you, one has to know that it is for your benevolence. Everything
is for your benevolence. And your benevolence is your ascent, nothing else but
ascent. The rest of it is all useless and fruitless. Once understand that this is what
to achieve joy.
in
gone
your
you
you
have to achieve in life, that is what you have to enjoy, then it works out.
Introspection
In Sahaja Yoga, as you see, it's compassion and love. It is not so much restrictions. Youre
left to yourself to develop yourself. It's your spirit which has to guide you. There's no
coercing or correction going on all the time, but it is left to you to understand yourself,
to see for yourself and work it out.
But one of the criteria should be "What have I done for Sahaja Yoga? What have I
done for Mother?" These two things are very important to understand. Whatever small
thing you could do for Sahaja Yoga is important because, if you are intelligent, you can
see that this is the greatest thing you have to do, to work for God.
This is the most important thing so far human beings have indulged into. It is the
highest type of enterprise that human beings have ever had a chance to indulge into. And
what a chance it is, too.
You may say that “Mother we are mediocres, we are no good, we are useless," but
you
are chosen. You are the one chosen, so there must be something about you. You might not
have seen that part within yourself which is going to work out this great work of God.
12
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-14.txt 
 CONSOLIDATION
So you have to locate and find out "Why am I selected for Sahaja Yoga,
what can I do in Sahaja Yoga, what can I work out in Sahaja Yoga?" This
should be a constant reminder to you that "I have been chosen for Sahaja
Yoga, I want to take full advantage of Sahaja Yoga...
This is another point of introspection. It is very important to see that we
have to do something for Sahaja Yoga. It's not money. It's not work. It's not
thinking. It's not any kind of a support. But one of them, the most important
thing, is how many people you have given Realization to. You have to count
how many people you have been able to give Realization to, how many people
you have talked to about Sahaja Yoga.
think that you give Realization to some people, they come, they
You
may
disappear. It doesn't matter. They will ultimately come to you. Today you'll
try on some. They’ll be lost. Again tomorrow. You have to relentlessly work
for it.
The role of Sahaja Yogis
As Sahaja Yogis, you are powerful entities. You are very powerful people. We
have got problems in the whole world. You know that very well. It's not neces-
sary you have to be great intellectuals or you have to be people who are some
sort of politicians or something. But you must be on the lookout for the prob-
lems which are troubling this world. You have to. You cannot live in your own
world, that
that you have to live in this world. And you have to know all the problems
of this world. And you have to think about them, not only your problems....
"You have to think, "What's happening in the world? What are the problems
of the world?" You are responsible for that.
Not only that, but you have to pray. In your prayers you have to say,
"Mother, solve this problem." Collectively, individually, you have to take your
attention from yourself, from your smaller life to a much wider thing. Then
you are a saint. And you have to think that it is your duty to ask for divine
help, that all these problems should be solved. This is your job for which you
Stretch out
your vibrations.
Stretch out
you are a saint.... You can't just be in nirananda. You have to know
your attention.
are selected.
Your asking is going to work it out because, as you know, I am desireless.
You have to desire for it. Whatever you desire will work out. The protection,
the affection, the compassion of Mother is with
after this world and show the concern that you have, not to live with
have to look
you. But
lim-
very
ited areas and with very limited ways.... Your problems extend to all the places
wherever there is Sahaja Yoga. And you have to worry about all of them...
As soon as you spread your attention outside, your problems are solved in
the house, in the smallest circumstance. You have to pay attention outside.
There are important things that are happening which you can see for
yourself. You can scan it out, what are the world problems, and you can see
for yourself where you have to put your attention. You should become aware
of your personality. It's not a personality that can be completely involved into
a very small area. Your personality should get involved into all the problems of
the universe, all the problems there are and you’ll be amazed that everything
can work out in a very collective way....
So stretch out your vibrations. Stretch out your attention and you'll be
amazed that all other stupid problems that you have will be finished....
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-15.txt 
 CONSOLIDATION
So the attitude toward ourselves should be to be aware of our own glory of our own
position to know that we are saints, that we have reached a stage where we are at the high-
est and that now we have become the light and we have to give light to others.... You have
the light on a pedestal ... at a very highest point to give light to others. And this is
working both ways if you start understanding what you are, what you have to be aware
of, what is your situation, what are your powers, what you have achieved in Sahaja Yoga,
what is the debt you have toward Sahaja Yoga and what you have to give for Sahaja Yoga,
how Sahaja Yoga has made you so capable, so good, so nice.
Are you righteous enough? Are you behaving properly? Are you doing all the right-
ful things which are necessary? Because it is only you who can do it. You are the people
with very, very special energies and special contacts with the spiritual life. And if you
start behaving like all other mundane, nonsensical people, limiting yourself to a family,
your children, your nonsensical previous lives, you'd be lost - lost to yourself and lost to
to put
You are the
saints whose
feet were
washed by the
everyone.
River Ganges.
The problems are much more than what you know about. That is the understanding
you have to reach, that "Mother has made us yogis. We are saints and we have to show
to the world the right path. She has told us that we are the light and we have to show to
people which way to go, how to go further..."
Now it is for you to understand. It is for you to decide about yourself. It is your own
desire. It is your own bigness, your own magnanimity which has to come forward, to see
for yourself what you are capable of, what you can do.
Try to under-
stand your
glory.
One mind and one heart
I have brought My children back to normal conditions. I've taken them to the kingdom
of God. You have to do the same. You have to take them to the kingdom of God. But if
you yourself are involved into your own mayas, you will be every day going down and
down and down and down. I may shout. I may say anything. It will not go into your
heads. It will never click with you. You'll be all stranded wherever you are because
you
don't want to see....
With your intelligence, you can understand that this is such an important work our
Mother is doing. You'll go down in history, every word you say, everything you say, every
way you behave. Everything is going to go down in history – not how many children you
produced or what sort of a wife you have, but what you did for Sahaja Yoga. Remember
that. History is going to record everything, whatever you have done and whatever you
have achieved in Sahaja Yoga.
It's not showing off. It's not just a demonstration. It's not talking big. It's nothing of
that kind. It's actually, really, totally what you have achieved that is the point. It will be
recorded. At least God knows hypocrisy and God knows bombastic temperaments. It's
God who knows where you are and what you are up to. You cannot befool God. That is
one thing you must realize. But when you are befooling God, you are befooling yourself,
your spirit, your Realization, your own ascent. So we have to be careful.
As a mother, I would say try to be introspecting yourself very carefully. "What have
we done for Sahaja Yoga? What have we done for other people who are drifting? What has
been our behavior towards other Sahaja Yogis? How much peace and love and compas-
sion have we given to others? How much understanding and tolerance have we shown
to others...?" You are the saints whose feet were washed by the River Ganges. Try to
understand your glory. Try to understand your own powers, your own position as saintly
people, Sahaja Yogis who are above all the saints because you know how to give Realiza-
tion. You know everything about the kundalini...
14
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-16.txt 
 It is so obvious that
it's a very precarious
time we are passing
through. It's very
important we have
to fight it out. It's
much more than any
wars you have fought.
It's much more than
any struggle human
beings ever had.
It's such a horrible
world that has been
created and we have
to transform it. It's
a tremendous task.
For that, you have
to work it out in a
very sincere and an
innate manner. And
I'm sure one day will
come in the history of
this world that Sahaja
Yogis will have their
names written with
golden letters. I'm
sure this will work
out. I'm sure this has
to work out. And
all have to
that
you
achieve it collectively,
with one mind, with
one heart. “What
should I sacrifice?
What should I
do? How should I
help? What is my
contribution?"
I wish I could see
those days in My
lifetime. O
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-17.txt 
 MY VISION
It's like miraculous fireworks.
It starts like a small line
and then opens up
into several beautiful patterns.
It is impossible to envisage
or to visualize
what will happen to us,
to Sahaja Yoga
and to all of you.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-18.txt 
 MOTHER, WHAT IS YOUR VISION FOR SAHAJA YOGA?
This is the one, started already. My vision for Sahaja Yoga is that
all the good people, righteous people, God-loving people will
rise above all that is useless, worldly, and reside in the heavens
WC
with all the blessings of God, forever and ever.
6 May 1987
My vision is that these right actions and the appropriate reac-
tions will bear their fruit of a very beautiful world of brother-
hood and peace, which will be worthy of its enlightenment.
1 September 1989
My only vision – I shouldn't say desire because I don't have
desire – is that I should see all the Sahaja Yogis drenched in the
power of love, enjoying each other's love, enjoying each other's
relationships and improving relationships.
Guru Puja 1996
It's a tremendous task and I'm working twenty-four hours.
I have no sleep, nothing. You know that. It's all just a life that's
so enjoyable. And itself, the whole vision, I can see so clearly,
of those beautiful days when we all will be enjoying each other
and the bliss of God together. That's the only thing I want. We
have to pull out so many human beings from the clutches of
the evil forces.
24 May 1981
You must understand the complete vision of Sahaja Yoga. It's a
DIG
very big thing you are doing. You are not small. You are doing
a very great work because it is the solution of all the human-
ity. This is the solution of all the problems, whether political,
economic or anything – whatever you call it. It is not only that,
but the more people you have, you will be surprised I'll work it
out much better.
2 September 1980
17
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-19.txt 
 To Me, it's like miraculous fireworks. It starts like a small line and then
opens up into several beautiful patterns. It is impossible to envisage or
to visualize what will happen to us, to Sahaja Yoga and to all of you. I
have never learned to imagine things, but the vision that you see is really
I see all Sahaja remarkable. It's very remarkable that I see all Sahaja Yogis drenched in
divine love and expressing themselves in a very beautiful and very deep
Yogis drenched
manner. This, when comes in, that really makes your attention abso-
in divine love. lutely enwrapped in such divine bliss that you forget that moment.
This reality of the vision is something beyond even My thinking and
imagination. I cannot, even now sometimes, believe that there are so
many Sahaja Yogis who have got this subtle knowledge. I never knew
that there were so many seekers to begin with. I never knew that there
were such subtle people on this Earth.
Birthday Felicitations 1994
I don't think it's a very great achievement for Me because I have no
vision, as such. I've heard this word, that Mother has a vision. No – I
have no vision, I must tell you. My simple thing is that everybody must
love. And a pure love will change your lives. It will change the whole
world, no doubt about it. It should come to you naturally because now
you have pierced through your Sahasrara.
Birthday Felicitations 2002
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-20.txt 
 My vision is too great for one life.
I want a global Realization.
I want people all over the world to have Realization.
MY VISION
We have to show the results of kundalini awakening. It's not THE GLOBAL
only for you people who are realized. It's for the whole world. EMANCIPATION
That's My vision. And according to that vision I have been
doing My work. And now, as you know, I leave this responsi-
bility to you all.
Diwali Puja 2000
I have a vision, no doubt, and I've been talking about it quite
a lot.... I know some countries are very difficult. Try to find
out what is the problem, why it is so very difficult. Attention
has to be paid to this, what other human beings are doing to
destroy themselves, as if it is the part and parcel of the same
game which we call as the last judgement. But let us, through
our compassion and love, save as many as possible.
This is the work of the Adi Shakti, not the work of any
saint or any incarnation. They're all there, no doubt. They're all We have to
with us, all the time to help us, but you people have the
power achieve a global
of the Adi Shakti, which is very great, which is very penetrat-
ing, which is miraculous. It's so effective, but unless and until emancipation.
you become aware of your own powers, how will
it out? It would be like a dead machine that has everything,
you work
I know that's
My vision.
but nobody is there to work it out.
Shri Adi Shakti Puja 2001
After all, you have come to Sahaja Yoga not for anything else,
but for your growth. And to keep that growth on, you have
to acquire a sense of understanding, what should be your per-
sonality relative to others, relative to other people who are still
seeking, who are still blind. We have to achieve a global eman-
cipation. I know that's My vision.
Diwali Puja 2000
19
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-21.txt 
 MY VISION
I hope you'll understand My vision and you'll stand by Me. You'll come
CHANNEL THIS
DIVINE LOVE up to that. I depend on you entirely for My vision. We have to change
this whole world into a beautiful place. For that, not much sacrifice is
needed. You're already blessed. You don't have to do much. The only
thing is keep your attention on the Source of Power.
Navaratri Puja 1990
Your first and foremost responsibility is Sahaja Yoga. Because you
should
know what a work it is. It's such a great work, to transform the whole
world. That's My vision. At this old also I think the same way. Now,
age,
if that is My vision, what should be your attitude? That we should
all out to spread Sahaja Yoga – that's the main thing. I call you for these
go
and all that, but if
pujas just to renovate or to give you more of
energy
you are just taking it as great blessings and sitting at home, it's of no use.
You must spread Sahaja Yoga.
Shri Shivaratri Puja 2002
If that is My vision, Take My position. I'm all right. I am complete. I have no problem. But
why did I work so hard and want so many Sahaja Yogis? Why? What
was it? I don't have to grow either. I'm overgrown already. I don't have
to do it. But why? What is the need?
what should be
your attitude?
The need is like this: the need is of love. I have so much love that I
have to channel it. If I don't, I'll suffocate.
I can't love Myself. This love has to spread. For that, I have to have
you people who can take this love to others and make them happy. This
is a kind of a vision I have.
In this special time, it was promised by many people, by many saints
and it is so obvious that you are all specially chosen for this kind of thing.
Now how far you understand your importance is a different point.
You do for your emancipation. You meditate. But if you are not
channelling the love, the divine love, what is the use? They have never
known divine love. It has to be given to them. They have to feel this
divine love, this power of the Adi Shakti. They have to know it, other-
you are being selfish, that you had a nice time having all this and
you have not given it to others.
Shri Adi Shakti Puja 1997
It is something you have to do and find out why you can't do it. Like
Me, I was not supported by anybody, not helped by anybody and how I
have managed to break the Sahasrara. You can also break the Sahasraras
of others.
It's not difficult because My vision is that this world at least should
have forty percent of people who are realized souls and who are prac-
tising Sahaja Yoga, who are giving Realization to people and trying to
change the people.
Sahasrara Puja 2001
20
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Do not think that you are ordinary,
otherwise I would never have chosen you.
MY VISION
It's a very big vision I have – a very big vision and that vision can be done through ASSUME YOUR
you people. Do not think that you are ordinary, otherwise I would never have POSITION
chosen you. But you have no recognition of yourself also, as you have no recogni-
tion of Me. You have to recognize yourselves and respect your
Self.
27 September 1980
All of you have to realize that you are not Sahaja Yogis for only your selfish ends,
nor for your families, nor for your communities, nor for your country, but for the
whole world. Expand yourself. You must have that vision before you that I have
put many times before you people, that you have to emancipate humanity. Now
don't have diffidence.
First of all, you should not think that "We are very ordinary people. We haven't
got something special about us." This work is not going to be done by special
people because they are suffering from ego. It is going to be done by people who
don't have that ego of great success or of great achievements or riches or anything.
If they are rid of this, then only they can work it out.
CC
Sahasrara Puja 1990
Take a big vision of the whole thing – why this universe was created, why you were
created as human beings. What was the need to do all these things? For what is it
done? If you have a very big vision of the whole thing, then try to locate your posi-
tion. "Where am I?" And then, "How the Divine has selected me and, now I've
become a Sahaja Yogi, now what is my responsibility?" That, one has to see.
Navaratri Puja 1993
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Get the whole
view and vision.
It's beyond
the horizon.
I am thinking of the collectivity of the whole world. That's My vision
and, if Sahaja Yogis cannot be collective, who is going to be collective?
Who is going to fulfill My vision?
Shri Mahakali Puja 1990
To understand, first of all, the expanse of Sahaja Yoga, to get the whole
view and vision, it's beyond the horizon, so great and you are working
it out. You have got the powers to do it. You are especially chosen for
it. Imagine – you should visualize yourself also, what you are. And once
you understand what you are, relate
If you
yourself to the great vision.
you are doing some work for Sahaja Yoga, then give it
up, absolutely give it up. But if you think, "I am just doing it because
I enjoy it. I am not doing it. Mother is doing it." Once such a feeling
comes in, then you understand that the wisdom has come in. And this
wisdom is the one that is really going to give you the light. In that
wisdom, then you will understand what is the leela and how we have
to enjoy ourselves. We have to know that's the leela and we have to also
think
כ
know that it is the work of the Divine for which we are chosen and that
Shri Krishna Puja 1990
we have to work it out.
How you
should be among yourselves, how you should talk, when you
should sleep – everything will change if you
really become aware of the fact that you are representing God Almighty,
who is the source of discretion. In discretion, so many things you will
learn. The first is the tolerance. “It's all right. We'll work it out. It will
should
get up, when
you
work out." You will learn what is the love which is detached. You will
learn what is the humour which tickles, but does not hurt. You wil
learn also what to say in
lectures, what to listen to. And, of all
your
things, you will know how to fulfill the visions of God Almighty.
Hamsa Puja 1991
22
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-24.txt 
 MY VISION
Love should have no fear. It should have just free love, THE WORLD
without any fear, without any aggression. Enjoy that pure BECOMES A LOTUS
love. And that is what is missing in the human beings
today, as it is.
When the day will come when human beings will be
understanding the beauty of love, then from the heavens
there will be flowers falling on us. It will be such a tremen-
dous day when Mahadeva will be able to close His third
and will be peaceful in His heart.
It is My vision. It's the future for you, to see how peace-
eye
fully you can talk to people, how sweetly you can love
others, how much you can give to others.
Shri Shivaratri Puja 2001
It is very difficult to speak, even for Me, to see so many
You are the petals.
Sahaja Yogis sitting here with such shining faces from all
over the world, as if My vision has taken its form today. I
You are the corona.
see in you the saviours of tomorrow, who are going to save
this world from all the Kali Yuga calamities that are sur-
You are the colour.
rounding us. It's coming from all sides, while you people
have really taken your second birth from this pond of Kali| You are the beauty.
Yuga and have really become beautiful lotuses of different
colours, hues, fragrance and beauty.
With your good wishes, with your prayers, this world
will be so beautiful, so enchanting that, in history, people
You are the pollen
of that beautiful
will describe that the world itself became a lotus full of
the fragrance of divinity. You are the petals. You are the | lotus which is My
corona. You are the colour. You are the beauty. You are the
pollen of that beautiful lotus – which is My vision of this | vision of this world.
world.
Birthday Puja 1993
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-25.txt 
 the gravity
of the guru
THE WORD GURU COMES FROM "THE ONE WHO IS MAGNETIC,"
the
The one who attracts
who is magnetic. The one who attracts the attention
person
of the seekers is the guru. Also it means the heaviness or, you can
the attention of the
say, a person who is very steady, who is very deep, who has the
seekers is the guru. knowledge and who can act like the Mother Earth. For the
power
of magnetism in the Mother Earth also is called as magnetic, but
in Sanskrit it is Gurutwakareshwari, which means the attraction of
the heaviness of the Mother Earth. But actually it is a power
of the
Mother Earth that makes us stand properly on our legs when it is
rotating with such a tremendous speed, otherwise we would be all
thrown away. With that velocity that She is moving, we are still
attached or we are one in our balance. This is only because She has
gravity. This gravity has to be in a guru. Gravity means a kind of a
serious understanding of oneself and ones own responsibilities. So
has to be very steady.
12 July 1998
24
a guru
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-26.txt 
 GRAVITY THROUGH SURRENDER
you don't do any- Gravity means
for the maturity.
If one cannot surrender that doesn't mean that
CC
thing, but surrendering means “the worship," the
respect
higher, the obedience to the higher, not to argue it out, not to
acceptance, absorption – like a child absorbs the milk of
react
the mother without questioning, without reasoning. That is why
Christ has said, "You have to become like children." But if you are
questioning, then you are no more a child. So the first state which
you have to develop is a childlike state, but a child who is a real-
ized child, who has to have gravity. If you can develop it in child-
hood first, then everything takes a proper course because maturity
cannot take place unless and until you start from the very begin-
ning. And gravity means maturity.
Guru Puja 1984
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-27.txt 
 DEVELOPING THE GRAVITY OF A GURU
So the word guru means gravity, that the Mother Earth has gravity. In the same way, a
person who is a guru has to have the gravity. But how do you develop this gravity? Some
m your people just artificially become very grave and sometimes show that they are very serious
or something like that. Gravity is within yourself. The second state of guru pada is when
your gravity must manifest. As you become the witness your gravity starts expressing
itself. It will not show as temper or seriousness or anything like that. But it will manifest
can manifest in a way that the whole thing will become extremely dignified and majestic. It will just
In
people just artificially become
silence you
manifest by itself. So the state in which you rise now becomes effective. Before this, it was
your gravity.
not. You had to all the time manipulate, say this, say that. But in your silence you can
manifest your gravity and this gravity acts like a magnet. As you know, there is a magnet
in the Mother Earth that we call as the gravity, by which people are attracted. We are rest-
ing on this Mother Earth because of Her gravity. Everything is attracted to the Mother
Earth because of Her gravity. So you get a magnetic temperament, magnetic character,
magnetic personality. And this magnetic personality that you develop immediately shows
that it is manifesting its power. Try to understand. The light now is coming on Me. It
is just giving light, but it is not manifesting anything. We can see the sun's rays. It is the
best example. The sun's rays, when they fall onto the leaves – the rays which look simple
- manifest their power of making it into chlorophyll. In the same way, when you are at
that height or at that state, then – without saying anything, without doing anything, even
a glance – you manifest.
26
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-28.txt 
 GRAVITY OF THE GURU
MANIFEST OUR GRAVITY
When you start witnessing something without thought, there is no obstruc-
tion for absorbing the knowledge about that thing because there is no thought.
It's complete absorption which takes place. And then it manifests. This is how
the Divine Power works within us. So with our gravity, what we do is to touch
that depth within us, which can carry the Divine Power and manifest. Unless
and until we touch that depth within us, Sahaja Yoga is like Hare-Rama-Hare-
Krishna – nothing better than that. And that's why I find so many Sahaja
Yogis sometimes really go off their rails suddenly because they have no gravity
to go down into their own being and to feel the beauty and the glory of their
own being and to use that gravity for manifesting Divine Powe.... The most
substantial thing in lives is this Divine Power, which looks very light.
You never feel the weight of this Divine Power. You'll never feel the
of this Divine Power, but if you are not clean, if your channel is not clean,
then this Divine Power cannot flow properly. It cannot manifest. So when we
say that we are the instruments of God Almighty, then like this instrument
we are. Now we are connected to the mains. If this instrument is not all right,
then it cannot manifest whatever it is supposed to do.
your
pressure
INTROSPECT TO ACHIEVE SELF-ESTEEM
We are much above all these ordinary instruments, even the most compli-
cated, even the most advanced and developed by science, because we reach a
state where we ourselves become the science, the science of truth, an absolute
truth. So what is needed for a guru is self-esteem. This is a very important
point people don't realize - the self-esteem. To achieve the self-esteem, we
have to introspect and know that "Today I am not what I was before. I am a
realized soul. I have got powers. Of course, I have powers – powers of love,
powers of compassion, powers of grasping things, powers of creativity, powers
of giving Realization to others." Nobody had these powers, but somehow or
other in Sahaja Yoga you are not self-conscious and we should not be self-
conscious because that can give you ego. But we should have self-esteem.
Tam a guru.
I am on the
shores of truth.
THE POWER OF SILENCE
"I am a guru. I am a guru. I am not an ordinary person. I am not on the street.
I am something special and on the shores of truth. I have to salvage the people
who are blind, who are mad ... in the most chaotic conditions this world is
today." So at that time, a kind of a silence will come within you. When there
will be any such crisis, immediately you will become extremely silent. But this
is again a state I am telling you. So now, if there is something that makes
upset or makes you unhappy, try to reach that point, that axis which is just
silence. And this silence will make you really powerful because this silence
is not only yours. When you are in that silence, you are in the silence of the
cosmos – the silence of the cosmos. And the silence of the cosmos works for
you
You are in connection with that cosmic power, we can call it, but it's
you.
more than that. It is divine power, I should say – the Divine Power, which is All words on pages 26 and 27
working all the cosmos. So if you just become silent within yourself, know from Guru Puja 1992.
that you are sitting in the kingdom of God.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-29.txt 
 I am the One
Iam
Guru Puja • 2 December 1979 • London
Today is a very important day because a long time back, when Christ was just a child,
He read from the scriptures and declared to the multitudes that He was the Advent, the
incarnation who is the Saviour. They believed that a saviour was going to come. Today,
a long time back, on a Sunday, He declared that He was the Saviour. That's why today is
Advent Sunday. He had to live for a very, very short time, so at a very young age He had
to declare that He was the Advent.
Now it is remarkable to see that before this, no incarnation said publicly that they
were incarnations. Rama, of course, had forgotten that He was an incarnation. In a way,
He made Himself forget, played His maya upon Himself to become a complete human
being – maryada purushottama. And Shri Krishna also only told one person, Arjuna, just
before he was to start the war. Abraham never said that He was the incarnation, though
He was the incarnation of the Primordial Master. Dattatreya Himself never said that
He was the incarnation of the Primordial Master. All these three forces, acting through
innocence, came on this Earth to guide. Moses never said that, though they knew He was
Those who
great. He had overpowered nature, but He never said that He was the incarnation.
At the time of Christ, one felt it was necessary to say, otherwise people wouldn't
understand. If, at that time, they had recognized Christ, there would have been no prob-
know the shoot
lem. But still, human beings had to evolve further. Somebody had to cross the Agnya
chakra in the Virata, to go through that door. That's why Christ came on this Earth. It is
do not want to
most surprising that in this Tree of Life, when the roots give out the shoot and the shoot
gives out the branches and the branches give out the leaves and the flowers also blossom
recognize the
out of the same tree, those who know the roots do not want to know the shoot, those who
know the shoot do not want to recognize the flowers. This is typical human nature.
flowers.
I never said about Myself because it was felt that human beings have now achieved
another dimension of ego even worse than at the time of Christ. You may
thing. You can call it the Industrial Revolution because you were away from nature, or
whatever you may call it, but human beings had lost all contact with reality. They were
identified with artificiality and to accept such a great reality was going to be impossible
for them. That's why I never said a word about Myself – until, of course, some of the
saints told about Me. Some of the possessed people also told about Me. And also people
started wondering how the most difficult thing of kundalini awakening takes place with
that speed in the presence of Mataji...
Through rational understanding, people reach the point that Mataji has to be some-
thing exceptional because nowhere in the scriptures is it written down anywhere that such
an incarnation came on this Earth whose mere glance, even thought, can raise the kund-
alini. Many saints, who are away from the madding crowd, sitting in the jungles, in the
Himalayas, all know about it because their awareness is at a point where they understand.
They understand much more than do because you are still children, newly born. They
blame
any-
you
28
are grown up.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-30.txt 
 My love will
nourish you
and My nature
will fill you
with peace
and joy.
But today is the day I declare that I am the one who has to save humanity.
I declare I am the one who is the Adi Shakti, who is the Mother of all the mothers,
who is the Primordial Mother, the Shakti, the Desire of God, who has incarnated on
this Earth to give its meaning to itself, to this creation, to human beings. And I'm sure,
through My love and patience and My powers, I am going to achieve it.
I was the one who was born again and again, but now, in My complete form and
complete powers, I have come on this Earth, not only for the salvation of human beings,
not only for their emancipation, but for granting them the kingdom of heaven, the joy,
the bliss that your Father wants to bestow upon you.
Today is the day of Guru Puja – not My puja, but your puja as gurus.
I anoint all of you as gurus and today I will tell you what I have bestowed upon you
and what great powers you already have within you.
Among you, there are people who still have not been able to recognize. My announce-
ment will work it out within them – the recognition.
Without recognition, you cannot see the play. Without the play, you cannot have
confidence within yourself. Without confidence, you cannot become a guru. Without
becoming a guru, you cannot help others. And without helping others, you are not going
to be in any way happy.
So to break the chain is very easy, but to build the chain, one after another, is what
have to do. This is what you were all wanting to be, so be confident and be joyous and
be happy that all My powers will protect you. My love will nourish you and My nature
will fill you with peace and joy.
May God bless
you
you.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-31.txt 
 a beautiful globe
111110000m
Calle Berlin 158 y
Mr. Emmanuel Awir
Alex Henshaw
Albania
Patient Gudenon
Sahaja Yoga Centre, 6D Lei Shun Court
116 Leighton Road, Causeway Bay
Hong Kong SAR, China
Phone: 852-29150092
Phone: 852-93570717
P.O. Box DS 428
Nueve de Octubre/Torre
Benin
Dansoman, Accra, Ghana
Phone: 00233 246 573797
Mr. Mohamed Said Ait Chaalal
Windsor/PB Local 2
purussotama@yahoo.fr
Phone: +229 95844948
www.sahajayogabenin.com
Quito, Ecuador
Phone: 3464166
Phone: 2348079
27, Avenue Pasteur
Algiers 16000 Algeria
msaitchaalal@yahoo.fr
Phone: 00 (213) 21.63.28.40
Fax: 00 (213)21.63.76.23
Aristidis Tsinaroglou
122 Ikoniou str., Nikea Gr 18450
alex_henshaw@yahoo.com
sahaja_yoga@hongkong.com
www.sahajayoga.org.hk
Clare Wood
Bermuda (British territory)
Egypt
info@sahajayoga-arabia.com
www.sahajayoga-arabia.com
Greece / Hellas
Phone: +30 6942896535
Phone: +30 6942896535
Fax: +30 210 4921158
artsi@letusplay.gr
contact@sahajayogahellas.org
www.sahajayogahellas.org
clare@the-woods.net
Phone: +441 505 3557
Mr. Mariano Martinez
Mrs. Marie-Laure Cernay
Calle 112 No. 17-19, Bogotá
Sahaja Yoga Centre Buenos Aires
Corrientes 3327, (1407)
Capital Federal, Argentina
Eire – see Ireland
Rajesh Kafley
Bhutan Broadcasting Service
Thimphu, Bhutan
rajeshkafley@hotmail.com
Phone: 00975-2-326460 (home)
Phone: 00975 1762 1045 (cell)
Colombia
Phone: (00571) 214-3971
Fax: (00571) 629-8402
marielaurecernay@gmail.com
sahajacolombia@gmail.com
www.sahajacolombia.org.co
Viktor Korotkov
mmartinez@ciudad.com.ar
Puru tee 18-32
info@sahajayoga.org.ar
Phone: 5411 48633291 / 48547403
www.sahajayoga.org.ar
41532 Johvi, Ida-Virumaa, Estonia
Phone: +372-6661143
Phone: +372-56265658 (cell)
sahaja.yoga@neti.ee
www.sahadzajooga.ee
eneseteostus@hot.ee (Galina Kotlova)
Guadaloupe (French territory) -
see Martinique or France
Mr. Sandor Szechy
Nadorliget u. 7/D. 102
H-1117 Budapest, Hungary
Phone: + 36 20 354 0381
Wendy Huen and Dorothy Jong
Turibana #41, Noord, Aruba
(Dutch territory)
Phone: 297 7431258
wendy_lim64@hotmail.com
La Paz, Bolivia
Phone: 591-70621323
Sylvain Kamulombo
B.P. 14554 Kinshasa I
Democratic Republic of Congo
teresavargassaenz@yahoo.com
www.sahajayogabolivia.org
sandor.szechy@sjmeditacio.org
www.sahajajoga.hu
bradkevitch@hotmail.com
Rajeev Rajan
G.P.O. Box 167, Suva, Fiji
Phone: (679) 3315 622 (office)
Phone: (679) 3383 533 (home)
Phone: (679) 9207147 (cell)
Phone: +243 81 898 15 26 (Boris)
Mr. Eduardo Marino
Chris Kyriacou
РО Вох K888, Науmarket
NSW 1240, Australia
Chris.Kyriacou@BTFinancialgroup.com _ marino@if.ufrj.br
info@sahajayoga.com.au
Phone: +61 2 80132612
Fax: +61 2 92745892
www.sahajayoga.com.au
Rua Aperana, 99 Ap. 201, Leblon
22450-190 Rio de Janeiro RJ, Brazil
Phone: (55 21) 2274-1753
Anna Eliasdottir
Costa Rica
Kjarrholmi, 34
200 Kopavogur, Iceland
Phone: 00354.5544699
ritadefruyt@yahoo.com
Mrs. Sanja (Sanya) Susanj
51000 Rijeka, Croatia
Phone: 00 385 98 289 415
rajeevrem@rediffmail.com
consulta@sahajayoga.org.br
www.sahajayoga.org.br
Mr. Raine Salo
sanja.susanj1@ri.t-com.hr
info@sahajayogacroatia.org
www.sahajayogacroatia.org
Yliskalliontie 2 E
02210 Espoo, Finland
Phone: (358 9) 855-0934
Phone: 358505851510 (cell)
neuvostonlista@jooga.org
pr.salo@kolumbus.fi
www.jooga.org
H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Sahaja Yoga Trust
Dr. Rajiv Kumar
17-C Qutab Institutional Area
New Delhi, India
Phone: 91 11 26534769
Fax: 91 11 26534711
ndsytrust@yahoo.com
www.sahajayoga.org.in
Yancho Yankov
kv. Nadejda bl. 463
entrance A, apartment 40
1231 Sofia, Bulgaria
Phone: + 359 88 8268710
Sahaja Yoga ashram
10 Clarence Street, Burwood
Sydney, NSW 2134, Australia
Mr.Ravi Saundankar
201, Indigo house
12, Nikodimou Mylona
3095 Limassol, Cyprus
Phone: +357 99206353
info.ravin@yahoo.co.uk
Fax: + 359 2 9559171
yancho_yankov@yahoo.com
www.sahajayoga-bg.org
Dr. Wolfgang Hackl
Eidechsengasse 6
1220 Vienna, Austria
Phone/Fax: (00 43-1) 609 1131
Phone: 0043-676-777 444 1 (cell)
wolfgang.hackl@aon.at
www.sahajayoga.at
Majid Golpour
49 rue de Verneuil
6.
75007 Paris, France
Phone: (33-6) 63 53 73 33
mpgolpour@yahoo.fr
www.sahajayoga.asso.fr
Georges Kouwonou
01BP 2878 Ouaga 01
Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso
sahajaburkinafaso@yahoo.fr
gdjilkou@yahoo.fr
Phone: 00226.50.39.82.59
Phone: 00 226 70.24.17.81
Dr. Madhur Rai
International Sahaja Yoga
Nirmal Dham
Koziskova 511, 250 82
Uvaly, Czech Republic
Phone: (+420) 281 982 310
Research and Health Centre
Plot No.-1, H.H.Shri Nirmala Devi Marg
Sector-8, CBD, Belapur
Navi Mumbai – 400 614 India
info@nirmala.cz
Devi Javakhishvili
Schindissi, 0123
Didgori Area, Tbilissi, Georgia
Phone: (00995) 32 454650
Phone: (00995) 99 245499 (cell)
devigeo@googlemail.com
sy.tbilissi@mail.ru
S. Prakash, c/o Seef Properties
PO Box 20084, Kingdom of Bahrain
prakashsahaj@yaho0.co.uk
Phone: 00-973-17 822042
www.sahajayoga-arabia.com
www.sahadzajoga.info
Phone: (022) 27571341
Fax: (022) 27576795
sahaja_center@vsnl.net
www.sahajahealthcentre.org
SJ Borotin Centre (SY kindergarten)
679 37 Borotin 16, Czech Republic
Phone: (+420) 516 477 019
Mr. Jean Seuleu
B.P. 9200 Douala, Cameroon
Phone: +237 75 14 84 14
seuleu2001@yahoo.fr
borotin@nirmala.cz
Igor Cherevichny
ul. Efremova, 9, kv. 24
246000 Gomel, Belarus
Phone: +375 232 50-60-19
gomelbreeze@gmail.com
International Sahaja Public School
Talnoo, Dharamshala Cantt.
District Kangra
HP – 176216 India
www.school.borotin.info
Mr. Philipp Zeiss
Kastanienstrasse 19
Mr. Jay Chudasama
390 Dixon Road, Apt. 2111
Etobicoke, Ontario
Canada M9R 1T4
Phone: (416) 614-7338
emadabihabib@aol.com
Mads Sonne Bremholm
D-14624 Dallgow, Germany
Phone: (49 3322) 20 88 70
Phone: (49 30) 330 998 08 (work)
zeiss@emd-germany.de
info@sahaja-yoga.de
www.sahaja-yoga.de
Præstøgade 3, 2.tv
DK-2100 Copenhagen OE, Denmark
Phone: +45 3542 4837
Phone: +45 2757 4837 (cell)
sahajayoga.dk@gmail.com
www.sahajayoga.dk
isps_principal@yaho0.com
isps_office@yahoo.co.uk
ispsoffice@rediffmail.com
www.isps.edu.in
Mr. Bernard Cuvellier
Rue Piervenne 58
B 5590 Ciney, Belgium
bcuvellier@gmail.com
Phone: 32/83 21 47 31
wWw.sahajayoga.be
www.sahajayoga.ca
Felicianus Manurung
Haiyan Hao
52# Xi Bian Men Nei Street, Xuan
Posada de las Artes Kingman
Av. Diego de Almagro 1550 y Pradera
Quito, Ecuador
Phone: 2220610
Jl. Cempaka Putih Raya no 33
Jakarta Pusat, Indonesia
Phone: 61-21-4209716
Phone: 62-816-830306
fmanurung@bankmandiri.co.id
suwidana@dps.gpi-g.com (Bali)
purnomojaya@yaho0.com (Semarang)
Tall Oaks International School and
Little Acorns International Nursery
Р.О. Вох GP 145
near Adwoa Wangara Hotel
East Cantonments, Accra, Ghana
srvalli2002@yahoo.co.in
(Mrs. Srivalli Rao Potharaju)
Wu District
Beijing, China
Phone: 86-13911204023
haiyan.hao@gmail.com
sahajayoga@sahajayoga.org.cn
www.sahajayoga.org.cn
Nikhil and Rani Varde
1779 Seashore Drive
Buttonwood Bay, Belize City, Belize
Phone: 501 625-7777
Phone: 2263718
Phone: 099016909 (cell)
sahajanet-ecuador@lycos.com
30
ranivarde@hotmail.com
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-32.txt 
 106 Sabaja Yoga nations and 7 territories
11111
Line Raphael and Fonteline Caron
Martinique
(French territory)
line_r@ifrance.com
Iran – see France
Kuwait
sahajayogakuwait@gmail.com
Seamus Harten
77 Cherryfield Lawn
Clonsilla, Dublin 15, Ireland
Phone: 01 8238449
Phone: +0862520765
seamus.harten@gmail.com
www.sahajayoga.ie
Mrs. Zukhra Idinova
86-4, Patrice Lumumba str.
Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan
Phone: +996 312 64 23 13
Phone: +996 772 83 21 (cell)
baktysha@mail.ru
fonteline@wandoo.fr
Phone: (596) 596 75 20 77
Graciela Vazquez-Diaz J.
Tejocotes 56-201, Col. del Valle
Mexico D.F., 03100 Mexico
Phone: (52-55) 55751949
Phone: (52-55) 10194995 (cell)
gracielamexico@hotmail.com
www.smataji.org.mx
C.A. Sivaramakrishnan
B-91 Al Khor Housing Community
Alkhor, Qatar
Phone: 00974 5443812
Phone: 00974 4724663
Olga Dzhafarova
Pernavas iela 74-8, Riga
Goginda Fiamorih & Oyemike Mabel
N°1 Dalberto Palmgrove Estate
Lagos, Nigeria
Phone: +234 80 20 76 31 27
Phone: +234 8023668576
www.sahajayoganigeria.org
Valentin Popa
16/67 Eli Cohen
Bat Yam, Israel
Phone: 03-5531007
Phone: 0546610892 (cell)
LV-1009, Latvia
Phone: +371 25921038 (cell)
olja_sy@mail.ru
sahaja@inbox.lv
sy_israel@hotmail.com
valipop2000@yahoo0.com
www.sahajayoga.org.il
ca_siva@hotmail.com
Ivascenco Maria
Chisinau, Moldova
Phone: 0037322724976
ivascenco@gmail.com
Mrs. Sidsel Mugford
Hala Sukarieh
Reunion – see France
(French territory)
Building Tony Al-Attayek
Myrveien 15a
1397 Nesoya, Norway
Phone: +47 67412335 (home)
Phone: +47 95288795 (cell)
sahajnet@start.no
www.sahajayoga.no
Duilio Cartocci
Street St. Jean, Bouar
Keserouan, Lebanon
Phone: 00961 9 445319
Phone: 00961 3 949258 (cell)
Fax: 00961 9 440319
hala_suk@yahoo.com
hala.sukarieh@gmail.com
Mrs. Mihaela Balasescu
Aleea Campul cu flori 12
Bl. A49/40 Sector 6
Bucharest 062025
Tighineanu Roman
Balti, Moldova
Phone: 0037369055353
lenasyroman@gmail.com
Via della Libertà 11
22100 Como, Italy
Phone: 0039 031 301777
Phone: 0039 348 7159152 (cell)
atenaduilio@libero.it
Romania
Haliun Shagdarsuren
Mongolia
Phone: (976) 9918-9057
haliun108@yahoo.com
www.sahajayoga.mn
Jogesh Sethi
Al Khuwair, Oman
Phone: 00968-24501559 (home)
Phone: 00968-99242284 (cell)
sethijogesh@rediffmail.com
latikasethi@yahoo.com
Phone: 0040-21-7770802
Phone: 0040-749108108 (cell)
MihaelaBalasescu @sahajayoga.ro
mihaela.balasescu@gmail.com
www.sahajayoga.ro
www.sahaja-yoga.it
Libya – c/o Günter Woltron (UK)
Phone: (+44) (0)7739 456547
gwoltron@yahoo.com
www.sahajayoga-arabia.com
M. Charles Pogo Toure
22 BP 211 Abidjan 22
Ivory Coast / Côte d’Ivoire
tourepogo@yahoo.fr
Phone: (225) 22 43 16 26
Phone: (225) 07 57 78 30
www.ci.sahaja-yoga.net
Dmitriy Korotayev
st. Sverdlova 8-124
Togliatti Samara Oblast 445039
Morocco
c/o Franz Mekyna
Donaulaende Uferweg la/3
2000 Stockerau, Austria
Phone: +43 650 7774098
Fax: +43 2266 61835-15
info@sahajayoga-arabia.com
www.sahajayoga-arabia.com
Vytautas Kontrimas
Taikos g. 34-33, Vilnius, Lithuania
Phone: +370 60025174
nirananda@gmail.com
allekso@gmail.com
www.sahadzajoga.lt
Iraj Mahmoodi
F-10/3 Isalamabad, Pakistan
Phone: 00923015998609
iraj_irani2000@yaho0.com
Russia
Jay Shankar
#1 Denehurst Avenue
Phone: + 7 8482-30-98-90
om-center@mail.ru
Hagley Park Road
Kingston 10, Jamaica
Phone: (876) 837 7238 / 870 0676
jayshankar99in@yaho0.com
Reem Jobran
West Bank, Palestine
farhani@gmail.com
soviet@sahajayoga.ru
Mahesh Kandiyil
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Phone: 00966508837689
mahesh.kandiyil@gmail.com
aathmaram@gmail.com
info@sahajayoga-arabia.com
www.sahajayoga-arabia.com
Isabella Re, Luxembourg
Phone: 00352 44 35 48
Tatiana Kovalenko
g.S.m: 661 44 35 48
isa_re@hotmail.com
lucien_schokert@yahoo.fr
http://home.pi.be/~pin25815/lux
C.P. 3274, Maputo, Mozambique
Phone: 258-21416529 (home)
Phone: 258-823239170 (cell)
tatianak@uem.mz
Carmen Rosa Ramos
Mr. Hitoshi Igawa
2-15-1-1-601 Minamiosawa
Av. Del Ejército 1050-1054
Magdalena del Mar, Lima 17 Peru
Phone: (511) 264-6800
Phone: (511) 9278-0734 (cell)
Hachioji-shi Tokyo192-0364
Japan
Phone and Fax (81-42) 678-2923
hitoshii@t3.rim.or.jp
www.sahajayogajp.org
sy_mocambique@yahoo.com
Gojcoo Stevkovski
Partenie Zografski 77A
1000 Skopje, Macedonia
Phone: (389 2) 3178184
Phone: (389 70) 225923
akademskipecat@yahoo.com
crramosh@hotmail.com
Karim Ouedraogo
SPR International Aeroport
Leopold S. Senghor
Mr. Prem Basnet
54, Mayur Marg, KA. MA. PA -34
Bhimsengola, Old Baneshwor
Kathmandu, Nepal
Phone: 977-1-4473265
Phone: 9851035703 (cell)
basnetprem@hotmail.com
Mr. Pankaj V. Rajput
6B First Metro Strata Bldg
S. Laurel, Shaw Boulevard
(behind Cherry Foodorama)
Mandaluyong City
Manila, Philippines
Phone: 632-7529080
Phone: 632-578-2068 (home)
Phone : 63-920-2755333 (cell)
pankajrajputv@yahoo.com
Mrs. Galina Mazur
Sakar
Senegal
Phone: 00221772585865
Zuldus-1, House no. 11
Flat no. 89, Almaty
Kazakhstan - 050049
Phone: 007-7272-519239
okalfredo@hotmail.com
Mr. Ivan Tan
58B, Jalan BRP 6/11
Bukit Rahman Putra, Sungai Buloh
47000 Selangor, Malaysia
Phone: 60 (03) 6140 3388
Fax: 60 (03) 6140 1188
ivankttan@pd.jaring.my
sahajayogamsia@pd.jaring.my
www.sahajmalaysia.org
Olgica Loncarevic
Serbia
Phone: 007-777-2671370
Mr. Henno de Graaf
Kersegaarde 16
3436 GD Nieuwegein
mazur-kz@yandex.ru
loncarevico108@sbb.co.yu
Phone: 38163644142 (cell)
www.sahajasrbija.org
semenbub@mail.ru
aiguldatta@yahoo.co.in
www.kazakhstan.sahajayoga.ru
Netherlands
Phone: (31 30) 630-1270
info@sahajayoga.nl
hennodegraaf@xs4al.nl
www.sahajayoga.nl
Poland
warszawa@sahajayoga.pl
infos@sahajayoga.pl
www.sahajayoga.pl
Nimisha Shah
Sierra Leone
РО Вох 41565
Nairobi, Kenya
Phone: 4181697
Phone: 1723 428721 (cell)
Phone: 0735 809190 (H. Mutunga)
nimishaca@yahoo.com
www.sahajayogaafrica.org/kenya
Vikas Vig
Malta
54 Toh Tuck Road, #09-11
Curacao, Netherlands Antilles
– see Netherlands (Dutch territory)
Isabel Mateus
c/o Vimala Gratz
Singapore 596745
Phone: 6348 9769
vigemail@singnet.com.sg
www.sahajayoga-sg.org
Sahaja Yoga Centre
Rua Braancamp, no. 84 20ESQ
Lisboa, Portugal
Phone: +351 96 970 77 10
Schluckergasse 9/3/9
A-1130 Vienna, Austria
Phone: 0043 676 4413869
vimala108@yahoo.de
New Zealand
homepages.ihug.co.nz/~sahaj_nz
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Viktor Bondar
vul. Gorkogo, 157, kv. 39
Kyiv, 03150, Ukraine
Phone: 380 44 5280158 (home)
Phone: 380 50 9251744 (cell)
viktorbo108@gmail.com
www.sahajayoga.org.ua
Anil Mishra and Vijay Jain
Dubai, United Arab Emirates
Phone: 00-971-6-5560049 (Anil)
Phone: 00-971-55-6037810 (Anil cell)
Phone: 00-971-4-2724549 (Vijay)
Phone: 00-971-50-6527825 (Vijay cell)
anil70_m@eim.ae
anil70_m@hotmail.com
Lakshminarayanan, Swaziland
rl_narayanan1966@yahoo.co.uk
Mr. Jozef Skurla
Selpice 111, 919 09
Bohdanovce nad Trnavou
vijaykj_2000@yahoo0.com
Sweden – see Norway
Slovakia
You are all
Phone: +421 33 5529194
Sahaja Yoga UK
P.O. Box 108, London W5 4WZ
United Kingdom
Phone: 020 8354 1674
Phone: +44 131 553 3255 (Scotland)
www.sahajayoga.se
ganadhip@stonline.sk
Mr. Arneau de Kalbermatten
2 bis, Chemin Sous-Voie
Sahadza Joga Slovensko (ashram)
Kvetna 555/14
1295 Mies, Switzerland
ipoindia@dircon.co.uk
info@scotlandyoga.com
www.sahajayoga.org.uk
www.scotlandyoga.com
info@sahajayoga.ch
www.sahajayoga.ch
900 51, Zohor, Slovakia
Mr. Dusan RadoS
great yogis,
Voljceva 06
SI-1360 Vrhnika, Slovenia
dusan.rados@silvaprodukt.si
www.jogaslovenija.org
6F, No.33, Lane 90
Mincyuan Road, Sindian City
Taipei County 231, Taiwan (R.O.C.)
Phone: +886 2 2660 7267
Mr. Dave Dunphy
3340 Palos Verdes Drive East
sahajtw@mac.com (M. Staniforth)
www.sahajayoga-tw.com
Rancho Palos Verdes
Jane Shafer
P.O. Box 5459, Worcester West
6862 Worcester, South Africa
Phone: 00 27 - 23 3471781
California 90275
United States of America
S.B. Nag
Phone: 310-832-6469
dunphitect@aol.com
great people,
РО. Вох 7094
c/o Mount Meru Millers
janes@wam.co.za
www.sahajayoga.co.za
House No - B - 5 L
International Sahaj School
(Canajoharie)
293 Starkville Road
Fort Plain, New York, USA
Canajoharie.School@SahajaYoga.org
Sunpark, Sunflag Housing Estate
Arusha, Tanzania
shiba_brata@yahoo.com
South Korea
c/o Tyrone and Gabriela Marsh
lazarmarsh@gmail.com
sykorea@gmail.com
born to transform
Mr. Pascal Sreshthaputra
84 Sukhumvit Soi 40
Adriana Añon
Prakanong, Klongtoey
Bangkok 10110, Thailand
Phone: (662) 712-1418
Phone/fax: (662) 253 3398 (Ratana)
senpascal@yahoo.com
www.thaisahajayoga.com
Mr. José Antonio Salgado
Santa Virgilia, 16 Esc. Izq. 9oB
28033 Madrid, Spain
Phone: (34) 91 381-0144
jose-antonio-sc@telefonica.net
www.sahajayoga.es
Pedro Vidal, 2217
Montevideo 11600, Uruguay
Phone: (598) 99 607 247
anona@adinet.com.uy
Uzbekistan
the whole universe
Suzanne Babooram
Roberto Sanchez-Labrador
Teresa Imparato
Valle de Enmedio, 107
28035 Madrid, Spain
Phone: (34) 917 392 637
sahajamadrid@yaho0.es
11A Golf Course Road
c/o Dal Maso
Fairways, Maraval
Trinidad and Tobago
Phone: 868 629 8853
Phone: 868 620 3803 (cell)
Calle Isla Larga
Quinta Raffaella
Prados del Este
Caracas, Venezuela
Phone: 0058 212 9772067
tereimpa@yahoo.it
www.sahajayoga.org.ve
into a beautiful globe.
Kingsley and Ruth Flint
80 Cumaratunga Munidasa Mawatha
(Thurstan Road)
Colombo 3, Sri Lanka
Phone: 0094 11 2586 105
Fax: 0094 11 2596 546
suran41@hotmail.com
sytrinidad@hotmail.com
www.sahajayogatt.netfirms.com
Ms. Dao Van Giang
Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam
Phone : 00 84 8 8441214
Phone: 00 84 903842081 (cell)
Tunisia
info@sahajayoga-arabia.com
www.sahajayoga-arabia.com
Nese Algan, Valikonagi cad 38/7
Engin Konak Apt.
flintfam@sltnet.lk
kingsleyflint@mac.com
vangiang@ishan.vnn.vn
celiatanaka111@yahoo.com
Mrs. Devi Ponnudurai
"Sri Pathy, " Kaithady South
Kaithady, Jaffna, Sri Lanka
Phone: 011-94- 773 608 821
Nisantasi, Istanbul 80200 Turkey
Phone: (90) 212 248 3122
Fax: (90) 212 246 6718
nesealgan@superonline.com
anapurna@superonline.com
www.sahajayogaturkey.f2s.com
Additional addresses, changes,
corrections and deletions
can be sent to:
The Divine Cool Breze
Suriname
coolbreeze@shaw.ca
- see Netherlands
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-34.txt 
 The Internatianal Juurnal af Saltja Yogi
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
home about
subscribe
newsletter
blog contact
store
silence and quietude
the curse of the west
you are spiritual
Materialism comes because people
You are all Sahaja Yogis and there
should not be controversy between you.
People think too much all the time-
thinking, thinking, thinking. That's from
have gone mad with their greed..
You should all think of the same thing
have found a solution for Sahaja Yogis,
Swadisthan. You get that problem from
what they should do. They should try to
Swadisthan.
Today in the shop there was a lady. She
came and she wanted to have her
To satisty the Swadisthan, you have to
encourage handicrafts.
Realization and she got it. She got it
take to silence. You have to take to
f you people take to sense- because
you are the ones who can do it-if you
quietude and look at yourself. What is
very well. There are many who are
www.divinecoolbreeze.org
read more
subscribe
• contact
A fresh, new website, store and blog where you can find out more about The Divine Cool Breeze,
buy single copies of past issues on paper or pdf, send gifts and tell us what you feel about the
magazine.
PHOTOGRAPH CAPTIONS, CREDITS AND OTHER NOTES
Front cover: Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Diwali music evening,
10 November 2007 (Paul Anant) Contents pages quote: Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi, Guru Puja 1994 (“If you want, it can work out. The All-
pervading Divine Power of love is absolutely working it out. More than
you, the Divine wants this world to change, wants to transform the whole
universe. Now you are the instruments and if you try to cheat yourself, who
can stop it? Just to enjoy music or to enjoy the company or belonging to
some club or to feel that it's a nice festival or at the most you seek the security
Pages 2 and 3: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi at International Sahaja Yoga Reasearch
and Health Centre, Belapur India, 23 December 2007 (Suneel Janakwar)
Pages 6 and 1l: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Page 15: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
at Stonehenge UK Pages 17, 18, 21, 22, 25 and 26: Shri Mataji Nirmala
Devi Page 29: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Guru Puja, Dollis Hill ashram
London, 2 December 1979 Page 31: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in India
Page 32: the sky near Calgary Canada (Ian Butterworth) Back cover photograph:
the evening of the Diwali music program, 10 November 2007 (Paul Anant)
Back cover quote: Shri Mataji Nirmal Devi, Shri Buddha Puja 1988 (“Despite
all problems and anything, without feeling bad about it, just see that you move
like a big elephant towards giving Realization to others, creating more Sahaja
Yogis and more Sahaja Yogis in America. Those who have this aim in life that
we have to give Realization to people, we have to achieve the establishment of
Sahaja Yoga, they never will have any problems of any kind.")
children and family and all that – it is not satisfying. It will never
of
your
satisfy you. It will only satisfy you when you will become the lights to give
thers, to work for others.") Contents pages photograph: Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi Page 2: Sahaja Yogis at International Sahaja Yoga Reasearch
and Health Centre, Belapur India, 23 December 2007 (Paul Anant)
it to
The Divine Cool Breeze is published six times a year by Vishwa Nirmala Dharma
Divine Cool Breeze subscriptions are available worldwide at $30 US per year for six issues
and can be easily and securely purchased at www.divinecoolbreeze.org.
If you are unable to subscribe through the website, cheques or money orders payable to
"The Divine Cool Breeze" can be sent to Sarvesh Singh, 42036 Glynn Tarra Place, Leesburg, VÀ 20176 USA
(703 471-8484, dcb108@yahoo.com)
Stories, photos and artwork can be sent to: The Divine Cool Breeze, 881 Frederick Road,
North Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V7K 2Y5 (coolbreeze@shaw.ca)
Printed by King Printing Company Inc., 181 Industrial Avenue East, Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-35.txt 
 You move like a big elephant
SAHAJA YOGA MAHOT
towards giving Realization to others,
Sahaja Yogis.
creating more
SWAGATA
DIWALI PUJA
IUNNTECH GRQUND, NEA
NTERNATIONAL SCHOOL. SE
GATE
