The Divine Cool Breezes November and December 2008 volume twenty-one number six

 2 The Extraordinary 10 Caxton Hall 16 Reality 26 I will be the same 28 Why worry? 30 Genoa 32 Padmini

 Love is the main thing. When there is love, there is energy, there is patience and there is wisdom. Love has to be there first. SAHA Α ΥOGI-PRIΥΑ THE ONE WHO IS LOVED BY SAHAJA YOGIS

 extraordinary of the ordinary Seminars like this are very useful because then you can pick out people who are very seriously interested in Sahaja Yoga, who are dedicated, who have passion for Sahaja Yoga, who feel that it is the most important thing of life. you must have realized that you are the people who are the men of God Now and women of God and that you have to be prepared to take this banner of the New Age, of transforming Sahaja Yoga into Maha Yoga, into a vast area of spiritu- ality. You are the channels and you are going to generate this energy through. If you were just channels, then your responsibility would have been much less. But Sahaja Yoga, it's a very different Perhaps you might have noticed it, that once you receive your Realization it starts transforming you firstly, then it starts transforming others. By your pres- type of a living process. 15 November 1980 ence, you start transforming them. By your existence, you start transforming other Plaw Hatch Seminar people. You start transforming the atmosphere, the subtler problems of negativity. United Kingdom They all work out. Like a tree, when it is blossoming, the fragrance of the blossom creates a different of aura around itself, that it attracts all the bees around to type gather the honey. In the same way, when a person is realized, is enlightened, the aura spreads and you start getting people attracted towards you. We have to remember a few points about Sahaja Yoga, that you receive the light first. The second step is that you generate the light – it is never done in any other process – that with your will, with your you generate the light on your own, understanding, with your freedom. For example, a tree may give rise to seeds and the seeds might become trees, but seeds do not regenerate. They do not have a will. But here the seeds are human beings. Only the human beings have the will.

 Now you've been enlightened with your will. With your will, you can regenerate or, should say, you can generate on your own, Sahaja Yoga, to go further. It's a very subtle you understanding, that when light comes into this candle, it cannot regenerate of its will any other. Somebody else has to take it to that. will is very important in Sahaja Yoga. What do you will? That is So very, very your CC important. "Will" does not mean "desire." Will means "desire put into action." So what do is to desire and then it into action. You can do it. you put you First of all, we have to know that we must have desire. That is there, no doubt. You are categorically seekers. I mean you are that category. You are born as seekers. You cannot get out of it. You are seekers. Whatever may be your problems, from whatever source you might have come, whatever mistakes you may commit, but you are seekers. Seekers are seekers.... Everybody is not a light. You are the light-givers and it is going to work out not to My will. through your will. So how powerful should our will be? How dedicated should we be about our will? It is left to your will, That one has to know. You have to fathom out that will within you. Once you start doing this Sahaja Yoga, then you recognize how important is Sahaja Yoga, that it gives a real meaning to the whole creation. In the eyes of God and the Divine Power, that has to work out. That's the purpose of life. And surprisingly, it is left to your will, not to My will. I have no will. I have no action. So it is your will which is going to work it out. So you have to dedicate and now you have to weigh yourself: “How much am I willed?" LEGO

 Being one with the spirit The seminars help you to see how much you really will that Sahaja Yoga should be suc- cessful. This is the second thing. To make it successful, what should we do? We must understand the basics of Sahaja Yoga and try to see within ourselves, do we understand the basics and do we have those qualities by which we sustain those basics? The first basic of Sahaja Yogis is that you have to become your spirit, so that body emits the power of the spirit alone. This is the first basic of Sahaja Yoga. So far, in all the religions, all the great books, even the Bible or Gita, it is written that you must have faith. You must have faith. The "faith" word was never clarified in any your CC one of these books and mostly people thought blind faith is the only way. To believe is to have blind faith. It should have been clarified, but it was kept a vague term as “faith." They do use “blind faith" and "faith." So the people started working it out. For example, you are walking on the road and you say, "I was thinking of God and suddenly I found a gold ring, so my faith was Sahaja Yoga is CC the revelation of all the substantiated. Yes, it is God who has helped me to get the gold ring." Or say that there was a divorce on or something like that and you prayed to God and the divorce did not vague terms take place. "It is God's help." But this kind of faith can have another side. People can say that the people who do not believe in God at all are quite successful. Then how do you explain that? They have no faith. They are actually heathen. They are very successful in life, so how do explain that side? Sahaja Yoga has another very great thing. That is it is the revelation of all the vague terms that were used before. Because people were not given Realization, one could not talk of faith or blind faith and the real faith. Because if they do not have their eyes, can you tell them about the light or the darkness? So at that time the faith was suste- nance – how to sustain yourself. The second was to have faith that you will be resur- rected, that you will be your spirit. Now the third stage is today, to know that Realization gives you experiences and then you how faith is established – not blind, but open, enlightened faith. For example, you your come into this house and see for yourself what it is and then have faith in that, that it is so – believe in that. That you have seen it, now you've seen Sakshat. To have Sakshat means to get the whole thing which you have felt through your organs, perception. It is as clear as sunlight to prove it. So this way is the real thing, no conjecture, no just talking about it. So all these words that were used in the scriptures are a revelation. It means in actual life you've seen these things happening.. But first and foremost is you have to become your spirit. Without knowing the spirit, you cannot know God. But the spirit itself is a sensitive thing. It is there, no doubt. It stays there, no doubt. But that it should shine in our attention, you have to know that your attention has to be congenial to the spirit. If the attention is not congenial, then the spirit doesn't shine. The spirit will shine on an attention which is steady. Steady it. By balancing, you bring a steady state. Balance your thoughts. Balance your eyes. Balance your desires. Try to bal- ance it. Ego and super-ego - you balance it. Attention is balanced much like that. Now how do you do it? With your will. First of all, you desire and then you act. "Where am I going? What am I doing? I am a seeker. Is this the thing I have to do as a seeker?" Immediately the balance is there. So this balancing has to come. The foremost thing is to balance yourself. Any extreme behaviour must be balanced. Any extreme attitude toward life must be brought of five organs very down.

 EXTRAORDINARY Now here we find that the will acts, opposed in an opposite direction. For people become obstinate. They do not want to accept that we have to balance and they say, “Oh, I'm all right," and they will give all explanations to show that they're all right. For whom are you giving the explanations? You are fighting with yourself. Why? Because you are not yet integrated fully within yourself. example, CC Integration of attention The second part is the integration – the integration of comes in when you do something, you wish something, you enjoy something, you want something. Then you find integration is also wobbly in your attention. But if you want your spirit, you just want your spirit to be happy because if the spirit is happy it means you're happy. The spirit is always happy. How are you going to make the spirit happy? The only thing when you say you want the spirit to be happy, what you are saying is this: that you want your attention to be happy. If you keep your attention happy and cheerful, completely integrated with your being, not with your ego, this is where the discretion has to be used. your attention. Integration Discretion From balancing and integration we go to the third point. It is discretion because you You cannot are very senior members of Sahaja Yoga, very senior students and now you know how to be discreet – what to take, what not to take. correct others. Its very easy to criticize others. It is very easy to say the others are wrong. But it should be the easiest to see what's wrong with you You can only correct yourself. It is as simple as that.... It is the easiest thing to correct yourself if you could look at your ego which is stopping it. And who is the gainer? Who is the person who receives the benediction and the bliss of Sahaja Yoga? So the old habits that are within us, which give us obstinacy, must be seen with great discretion and now, with all this training in Sahaja Yoga, you should be able to see even rationally the discretion part of it. I've seen people who go by the same road all the time are extremely discreet. They know how to turn, which turn to miss and which turn to take and how to reach. That's the sign of your maturity. So you have to be discreet. Another thing is that you have your vibrations there to teach you discretion, but sometimes you may be missing them. because you cannot correct others. You can only correct yourself. So with rationality, if you discriminate and try to find out, "What is wrong? Where am I going wrong," you will very easily understand ... because you are driving your own car. You can only control brakes and not the brakes of another It's such a funny situation that people are driving everybody else's cars, but not their own. So with discretion, you will know how to correct yourself, even rationally. person. your your rationality is absolutely logical. Before this, rationality was illogical. But Now now, with integration, your rationality becomes logical and it tells you, "No, this is wrong, this cannot be." You know about everything now – practically everything. I do not think there is anything that requires information for you people. When you just try to think about something and you will get the answer. That's all in your brains. It's opened up. The only thing that I said: develop your discretion. If you are indiscreet, then >כ you must develop it, you must grow up it, you must mature.... That's the quality you people are.... All the Gods and all the angels bow to you. They are in attention to you... 5

 Collectivity A small thing like collectivity – it's the beginning of Sahaja Yoga. If you do not want to become collective – Sahaja Yoga is not meant for individuals.... You are coming to become a collective being because the spirit is the collective being. The quality of the spirit is that it is a collective being. It is a part of the collective, which is absolutely one with the collective. It is so collective that you cannot imagine on a human level how much it is collective. For example, yesterday I was criticizing the Gita and the Vishuddhi was opening. Krishna is sitting here and talking through Me. There is no difference at all of that. It's just the same. And I am Krishna. I am Mataji. And I am Christ. So much, so one that you can't imagine how much oneness is there. It's such a unison that exists. So for the spirit to be absolutely enlivened within us, to be absolutely shining within us, we have to know that how do we articulate with others? How do we talk to others? What is our way of judging...? So in collectivity, those who are Sahaja Yogis, those who have joined Sahaja Yoga, there should be complete unison and articulation – absolutely. And enjoy each other's company. Everyone is a beautiful flower. You are My children It's You can't who speak the same language. It's you who know imagine how everything. You are the people who are coveted. You are the princes. They still have to become. That's a different point. You sit in your glory. The idea that all the saints should live at the feet of every third person. It's not that. You are kings. Behave like kings. You have to maintain a distance from others who are commoners. Don't allow your ego to 's you who are My children. It's you much oneness develop, of course. But know that you won't enjoy your kingdom unless and until you get more people into it. You have to get more and more and more, but keep your dignity. You are at that level. Keep your poise. And then deal with others in the same manner, that you are all joined together. You are the saints. One has to be. Assume – assuming one's powers. Assume. There's no pride. There's no pride. You are that. So you are that, what is there to be proud of? I mean you are real ized souls – finished. How to be conscious of it? You are that, so you are that. You are is there. knowledgeable. You are knowledge. Once you realize that, then discrimination will work out much better. That you do not put down anyone, you do not discard anyone, but they are not the same as you are. This principle you must know. You are not saying that low or high or anything. But you are different, they are different and they have to come and join you. They have to become. You cannot become like that, but they can become like So discretion is very important. In Sahaja Yoga, one of the very great basics for our growth is to discriminate. Trust Sahaja Yogis. Do not trust non-Sahaja Yogis. Never trust a non-Sahaja Yogi compared to a Sahaja Yogi. A Sahaja Yogi is your brother or sister, is a companion, is everything. And the others are others. They are another party. You are another party. you. They you are. This must come into you so the collectivity will grow strong. You should know that by fighting with each other, you are reducing the power of Sahaja Yoga. By getting angry with each other, you are reducing the power of Sahaja Yoga. Imagine if the channels start fighting with each other, how are you going to channelize the energy? So first of all, make your channel all right. And understand that we, all channels put together, are going to do the work better. We all have to be together. The togetherness is are not your enemies. They can come to this side, but they are not the same as 6. to be felt.

 EXTRAORDINARY I am a Mahamaya When the collectivity is disturbed, what is the centre you catch? Can tell Me? Vishud- dhi and Sahasrara because I am the collectivity of all the Gods and all the centres are in the brain, in the Sahasrara... You know the Sahasrara, what it is. People want to judge Me. They have a right to do it. I mean I cannot say no. You can judge Me. You can do whatever you like.... But what is the instrument you have got to judge Me? I am such a camouflage, just a bubble and such a receding personality. How are you going to judge Me? Is there any way of judging Me? You can never catch Me anywhere. It's a camouflage. Firstly I am prideless, I am egoless, I am actionless. Where are you going to catch Me? On the contrary, by all these attributes, I create a problem for you, that I am a Maha- maya.... How are you going to understand My position? You see there are no outside signs. There are no horns. There is nothing that I could be a cinema star. I am too simple, too sweet. There is no way by which you can really feel that I am great. I am absolutely you to be born, mundane, ordinary. But extraordinary of the ordinary I am. This is a thing which people do not understand. It's all right for those who are not realized – excused. But you have felt t o be with Me the vibrations and your Realization through Me. I must be something. Put your attention like that to understand. It must be a tremendous thing inside this body. It cannot be sible otherwise. It's so obvious, otherwise, to you people. you It was necessary for you to help. pos- This is to be understood, that so far – Krishna, Christ, Rama, all of the them – nobody gave Self Realization to people en masse. They had other powers... I have also al these powers with Me, but obviously I am a very simple, ordinary, mundane type of an Indian lady – finished. And Christ had a power to get Himself crucified. I too have that, but I am not going to do all that. I have a power to resurrect also. Why are these powers not used? One should understand: because now the main attention is to raise the kund- alini and, for that, these powers are not required. Give Realization to any number of people. What's the use of getting crucified? Who is going to raise the kundalini...? These powers are not required. Today the power of raising the kundalini of thousands and thousands and millions and millions of people is required. And I am going to be just like you all My life in the sense I am going to get old and you're going to. I mean the way I should be old I will be. I'll be just like you. I am not going to do anything outside. It's like a German car, but it is you who has to know the power of the German car. It's the best type. And once you realize that, that it is deliberately made like that – in the beginning, of course, you cannot even understand it. It goes on, "How CC can it be? How can it be? She does this. She does that." It on like that. goes You don't judge Me because that's not the way you will understand. Just realize and recognize that there has to be something tremendous. It was necessary to have someone like that to do this tremendous task. And it was necessary for you to be born, to be with Me to help. I know those who are with Me. They'll stand by Me throughout. I may test them a little here and there, but I know they'll come around. They have to stand by Me. Those who want to run away, they'll run away.... So we come to collectivity, to understand that you are cells in My body and I have awakened you. If you degenerate, My body degenerates.... When you take vibrations, I feel very happy. But those who have faith in themselves can only understand this.... You should have faith in yourself that you are the chosen ones. You are really the people spe- cially made for this great work. It's a tremendous thing that you are out for. Once you realize and recognize it, you won't bother about the small, small things of life. It's the quality in you that has to be nurtured and looked after through collectivity – but the col- lectivity of the Sahaja Yogis.

 x 15 aN

 EXTRAORDINARY Living as one This is a new race that is coming up. Others are human beings. You are not. You are not human beings any more. You are Sahaja Yogis. It's a dif- ferent race. All over the world, this race has to come, so we have to build ourselves in one group, in one understanding – absolute unison. up There should be no secrets. There should be no domination. Every- thing should articulate. Everyone should talk to each other. Everyone should know what's happening with what. You have to be absolutely This transition frank, open with each other absolutely. Tell them your problems. "I catch on this, what to do? I catch on that, what to do? How to clear it is the point out?" – not to feel shy. We have to enjoy ourselves, also enjoy our weak- nesses, so that we clear them out. Laugh it out. Somebody has some which you habits, laugh it out. That's the best way to do it... This I think we should decide today, that we all are going to live should catch. with one heart and one desire, with one head and with one liver – all of us. Let's see how it works out... Where is the time to argue? It's joy pouring in. Let's enjoy. May God bless you. Catch the transition You are a realized soul and a realized soul is something so unique that you cannot give a parallel to it. There cannot be a parallel. For example, if there is a wind blowing, then all the trees move in the same I I can say way. But human beings, if the wind is blowing, supposing any wind is that way because this way, somebody will coming, somebody will go go they have a will. But Sahaja Yogis, if the wind is blowing, all of them their heads against the wind and fight it. will put This is a thing which cannot be given any parallel because you are going above human things. So far never such a thing has existed. You are such unique creations that there is. I cannot compare you with anything that was below or, I should which was not of this level. The level say, is different. So when you do everything the same way, you are doing it because you are aware of that collectivity of the Primordial Being within you. That's why you are doing it. This transition is the point which you should catch. That's something I feel, that when you start giving any analogies and all that, how can you give an analogy for something that never existed before? Never. O 9.

 SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI at CAXTON HALL Great news for all Sahaja Yogis We have some very beautiful Sahaja Sahaja Yogis. The first know to enjoy your virtues: enjoy your love Yogis here, very beautiful and they have said sometimes such beautiful things about It is not hard. It is the easiest thing. Sup- others that I sometimes, in My vacant supposing. I mood, think of them and I feel very happy. advertised and have mean it is a big supposition for many, but It's just like poetry to say something good invited many people. supposing you really, genuinely love some- about others. Sometimes I have to go and one.... You have to go to meet that person then somebody says good words about Great news for all the CAXTON HALL – This is what you must public lecture is on the 24th of this month at and you will be rewarded by it. Caxton Hall. We have posing you love someone – Let us see how it fares. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi and ... you cannot get a taxi. You cannot others. I feel very happy. 16 October 1977 get a train. You are worried. Now how to Without love we are not going to solve get to that person now? He would be wait- any problems whatsoever. What's the use of ing. He would be worried.... "What must having, say even ten thousand people with be happening to them?" You are all the time vibrations flowing, without love among thinking and you are worried and you don't them? I mean I just can't think of such a know what to do? Should we walk? Then thing. Once you are realized, you should you walk a little distance and you come feel love, but you must fathom it because of back. No, might get a train. Let's try this. your rational habits. Because of these mis- You try all kinds of things, you see, just to identifications before, you cannot give it up. You see you are afraid. People are even Between 1977 and 1983 | reach that person and then iť's raining Shri Mataji gave almost don't have an umbrella. You get completely afraid to express their love. one hundred programs drenched. Absolutely flat out tired, but still in London's Caxton the moment you meet the person, see the I said, “For whom?" He said, "For Sahaja Hall. Beginning with person, all worries and all the turmoils, all Yogis." I said, “Why are you giving to Me?" the first public program the troubles and all the labour that you have He said, "Mother, if you give it would be in Europe, this series of put in vanish into thin air and the joy fills better, otherwise they may little bit doubt public programs covered your life completely. How love is reward- topics rich in variety and ing! depth, with titles such as "The Difference Between rationalize. There is a big scope in Sahaja will misunderstand – imagine, where are East and West" and "The Yoga to rationalize because you become we? What sort of human beings we have Meaning of Reality. Caxton Hall was also the I mean after Sahaja Yoga, if you want to go love. Then the recipients also, they do not site a Christmas Puja and to hell, you can go faster than anybody else want to have any love. How can that be? It's a celebration of Raksha can because you really become a free bird impossible. Somebody brought some sweets one day. me." Sometimes we want to love, we want So one must learn to love and not to to express, but we are afraid that people ." even a freer person. You really become free. become that we are afraid to express our Every human being wants to be loved. the same. So one has to know that we have They will be afraid today, tomorrow. Day after they will be all right. 13 March 1980 Bandhan. and if you want to go to heaven you can do to learn to compete in loving each other. 10

 Can you understand total love? "The temple had to come down to London to Caxton Hall to talk to people." CAXTON HALL – We have within us a being which I call the spirit – the spirit, which is also the part and parcel of the totality that is God ... can demolish all love, totality that is God, totality that is joy, the wealth of the world and totality that is knowledge. And that spirit He can recreate. For Him, within us is watching us. It is not watch- nothing is more impressive ing like a guard or a police inspector. That than your spirit. The spirit also, we human beings cannot understand. that is within, that's the most important thing, not what country you come The spirit is the one that is love. Can you from, what race you come CAXTON HALL – God has His own powers. understand total love? Can you understand from. All these nonsensical He has His own machinery. He has His something that just gives and enjoys giving differences do not exist in own government. He has everything. It's and not asking for anything? Can you the realm of God. You are a understand someone like that? Can you? seeker and your spirit has to You can't imagine in how many dimen- Loving for love's sake, that's what is your be enlightened. So maybe sions He can work it out. Just you have spirit. It is watching you with that love, that today we've got Caxton Hall. Tomorrow maybe we the spirit is watching, people get a If I say fright, "Oh God!" CC dynamic. to put it in the mouth of that machinery. total love. If you can do it, you get the results easily. Only one thing God cannot do. That is give you that what it is. Now here, I would That totality of love is watching you to could be sitting near a sea or maybe somewhere on a to make you sensible, to make you wise. say you are the spirit and you are this Self. hill. 5 November 1981 That's one thing that's your look out. Thať's Another one, which is this awareness, is this you have got. This This search is on and there in human awareness which your own choice because you are guided by your ego. You are identified with your ego and anything I say may upset you or may appeal to you. God knows how you are going to react. But the only way you human awareness has to be enlightened by are many shops people that totality, that spirit. When it enlightens have opened. This is not a that, then only, you know that you are a shop. This is a temple and a temple in the market- place has very little value. There's some times one feels a little bash- If you have to climb part and parcel of the totality and that you are beautiful, you are really beautiful. can grow is to be in the centre to see, not to go to extremes of anything – to be in the centre. Even listening to Me, try to be in up seven mountains to go to a ful to know how beautiful one is and so fra- temple, it has much more value. But only a few can To understand the totality of love, total reach there alive. So the love, you have to know that these are all just temple had to come down specks. The ocean, the oceans of oceans of to London to Caxton Hall grant and so grand and so dignified. That new dimension one has to achieve.... the centre. But human beings are funny. They must go to extremes. You give them any job they must go to the extremes. Anything you give them, they cannot keep to the centre. They to talk to people. love will wash off these specks in no time, can never keep the balance.... It has to be in balance, everything. But but have faith in yourself, that's all. Have 21 July 1980 in our behaviour towards God, we are very faith in yourself. After all, you are human 3 November 1980 13 March 1980 | beings. much imbalanced. SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI at CAXTON HALL Caxton Street, City of Westminster SW1

 SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI at CAXTON HALL Thy Will Be Done Sahaja Yoga is not for | CAXTON HALL – The attention can be con- Me at all. I don't have to do it. It is for you to do it, to gain that knowledge which is yourself. Only thing I can do is the shaktipath. But actually I don't do it either, why there is guru shopping also going on. I can tell you. I don't do We also cannot do our Sahaja Yoga in a anything. I'm just sitting concentrated manner.... It becomes mobile, and it will work out. Every time you get quiet. It's just managed. spread all over. It doesn't reach any depth your touching of the kundalini or, you can What can I do? That's My or height either. If you put them together, say, the breakthrough, every time you get nature. It just flows. It works out that way.... There should be no problem for you to understand that it is a special grace. Because you are special, maybe I am also special and special people needed somebody special. So I you, a peaceful space in which you will see hood. You enjoy the atmosphere on the hill- had to come down here. 26 November 1979 you, you observing it and seeing it mani- and try to keep it there. I know for some Is it too much that I'm asking? You started with a very humble heart as a child. Only centrated now, after Realization only. But even realized souls have to work it out. This in this life all this has been accumulated a is the biggest problem that I think I see, that our attention is so distributed we cannot do anything in a concentrated manner. That's bit too much. In past life you were not like that – much better off. Only in this lifetime you have crossed the limit a little bit. It's not difficult to recede. So just try to humble down in your heart that experience, keep it in your memory then it will work out... So to clear the attention, clear this gar- and desire for it and it will work out. Do bage into that clear cut, beautiful lake, you have to go within. You have to allow it to sediment. You have to take pride. By it's own nature it will come, the beauty. And then you will see a ripple in that lake within not keep in memory the faults that you have had, where you have been. When up on top of a hill or a mountain, you don't remember all the ditches you have fallen into in your child- you climb the bliss of God flowing into you, through top. Make it a strong memory within you festing into the other. That is what needs people it's difficult. They come down, again to be asked for. No mental activity can do go up. Because of the problems they've had that. It is only the desire to be that works it. before, the kundalini comes down. But in Only the desire to be one with God works it. Sahaja Yoga, there is all arrangement. But if Mental activity, rationality saps it. Through the desire is strong – not the mental activ- rationality, you cannot reach God... It is said, "Those who will be blessed have that's why I told you why it is to be, “Thy to humble down in their heart." It is very will be done." ity, but the desire – it will work out. And true. It is very, very true that we have to humble down in our hearts, so that it will the basis of how you are going to rise. work. And keep your attention steady. Accept it from the very beginning. This is 26 June 1978 12

 The Biggest Myth CAXTON HALL-How is it a particular flower becomes a fruit? That is not discussed in elite society. It is not to be discussed. At the most, you can talk about the weather because there cannot be any quarrelling... So to be compassionate to people who We are so careful as to what to discuss. But if people sit down and discuss it, they get Realization, you have to tell them that will know that there is a tremendous work- it is not that "you are overpowered by the ing of the Divine Power. Can you count the amount of work It is drop becomes the ocean, not that the ocean doing? It's an impossibility – like a flower overpowers. Then it may be that you can go becoming a fruit. Now take only one type further with the second step where ego is a of a flower. How many are there in the little bit, given the assurance that you won't whole world? I mean, if you think of it, you be finished. The infrastructure has this one just feel that it's too much how this Mother problem that ego has separated all Earth is moving with a tremendous speed inner being into different parts and any- and we are just settled down nicely. How thing that ego says or is pampered is good. many such suns and stars and constella- Good and ego's happiness are regarded as tions are moving? There is no end to it.... CC CC ocean," but "you become the ocean." The equal to each other. Now, if you can overcome that first | There's no end to My If man doesn't want to realize that there must be a power that is doing all these hurdle with people, that you become the speeches. I don't know how organized things and there must be one organized personality or may be a control- become empowered with your own powers, ling thing that is working it out, then it you have crossed some areas in a personal- just to make your attention means that they are trying to live with a ity. And it's a fact. To begin with, it's a fact. little steady, then the myth because they cannot solve it. The myth is that there is no God. This is the biggest myth I have ever heard. And will get the kingdom of heaven. "All right, cannot go inside. to believe into such a thing, that there is no God, is just to accept that as you are the kingdom of Europe. "Then?" Then the highest of all, the lord of all the world. will get the kingdom of England. And like How can there be anybody higher? This is one of the biggest hurdles of will get the kingdom of your own Self, they human beings in the modern times. In the will say, "What's there? The kingdom of ancient times, olden times, it was so, but it yourself – such insipid stuff!" ocean, that you become the guru, that you many speeches I've given now. I lost count. This is only But this area actually you get much later.| kundalini rises. Without that But better to promise the highest... You happening, your attention CC 10 November 1980 then what will you get?" Then you will get you that, it moves. But if you tell them that you So you have to start from the big stuff, was not so much to this extent, that now man thinks that he is on top of the world | saying that you become your own guru and that he is the one who can guide the whole world and who can manage this and which is a fact. You do become your own guru, but that happens much later. But still, if you tell them directly that become your own guru first, it will appeal manage that.... Not to accept anything comes from a fright that, if you accept something, if you to them... accept that there is a Divine Power, then perhaps you may have no position, no sig- point. nificance. you They will feel happy. And that's the 19 April 1982

 CAXTON HALL – Every time I face the new people I have to give an introductory talk and the Sahaja Yogis get sometimes impatient about You are transmitters it. But we have to under- stand that this is the knowl- | CAXTON HALL – Everywhere you are sit- These are living. These are moving, these edge of the Divine and ting in meditation you are transmitting are understanding. They manoeuvre. The those who have not known vibrations. Do you know that? At that time stones only emit vibrations to clear the about it are to be told. And if you are thinking of your jobs and your atmosphere. But you – you can raise the those who have known other things which you have been thinking kundalini. They cannot raise the kundalini. You can. And what are you doing about it? Such a precious thing you have got. should know that there are before, the transmission is poorer. many things they have not known, which they have to know. Still, there is a lot to Think of love. What Think of the whole country. are you doing about it? Is it because there is no business with it, that we are taking it You are transmitters of these waves of love so slowly? Supposing it's an enterprise, then everybody would be up and doing. Is it? you are made in the We have to change our ways and methods Think of the whole world at that time. be known. Supposing I tell you all and love will flow from you. about it and you do not get I told form of Ganesha. And that's what you have of understanding. to do. You know there are vibrations from you once that your Realization, you do not The reward of God is a thousand-fold get your yoga, you do not get your connection with you coming out. You are sending vibrations than any enterprise can bestow upon you. the Divine, then it is useless. Talk – well, you may talk. You may verify it. You womb and a big temple is raised and thou- He may find it the same written sands of people go to worship that. And in many scriptures. Many they say it is a temple, of a Jagrut Devta.... old ways? We have to change very much. saints have told you the "Jagrut" means enlightened, awakened. same thing. It has no use. The knowledge, gyana, is useless without that and go there and worship that, while talked to you today. Don't take to a life without the union with the there are so many already sitting here, so which has not brought any happiness to out. You know that. That means you are like When He blesses you, you wouldn't even any deity who is thrown out of the Earth's have words to thank Him. To that extent goes. Are we depending on Him or on our own We have to transform ourself into a new style of thinking. It is very, very important. I hope you'll think about it, what I have And that's just a stone – a stone that comes out and people build a temple on top of S. yoga, 8 October 1979 | many jagrut, realized souls. 15 October 1979 Divine. you.

 SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI at CAXTON HALL Sahaja Yoga is everywhere CAXTON HALL – Try to be humble in your | CAXTON HALL – Sahaja Yoga exists every- heart. You enjoy your humility. You really where. Within you it is working. Without enjoy your humility. Actually, humility you it is working. Everywhere it is working. gives you innocence. Humility is the only So you see for yourself. To see it, you have to go and see people and meet them and have all the powers of the talk to them and find it out how it works and develop that faith that gives you the way to achieve our lost innocence. Even if you world and you are humble, how beautiful you look. Any person who is in a big posi- sense of security. tion and if he is humble, people write leg- ends after such a personality. Try to develop a humble attitude towards Meet each other. As many times as you can, life, extremely humble. But with humility call each other for tea. Meet each other... we confuse inertia. That's a wrong thing. Humility never means inertia. Humility you have found out the reality, the faith means dynamism. And that dynamism is should be much greater than any of these extremely quiet, silent and beautiful. Sahaja Yoga is a tremendous thing. It is people have. But for faith, you must have Mahayoga. At this stage it is Mahayoga the quality. Only people of quality can have because it has reached it's highest peak now. Never in any incarnation were so many They will fall off. Realizations given... Today it's so fortunate that I am facing into the fruit state. You are transformed There are so many ways of cleansing your- self, which you know, you can find out. They judge you by your faith. And when fanatics have, any of these nonsensical that kind of faith, not ordinary people. All the flowers do not get transformed so many saints. It's My great faith and great into fruit state, but all the fruits do not fortune that you all have got Realization. come up to their maturity because they lack You don't know. My joy has no words to faith, the strength. Gather up your strength. It's all behind you. It's within you. express it. But let not this garden be ruined by aban- donment and by foolishness. It is a tender, newly blossoming, beautiful garden. Look after it with that care and gentleness, other- wise it can all fritter away. 18 August 1980 It's around you. Everywhere there is light, within and without. Try to work it out properly. Do not condemn yourself or condemn | Thank you for being here and others, but know that you are something, we'll have some meditation. Why are we here? What are we doing here? What is the purpose of our life? Why God has created us? To what purpose, to what end or it is just a joke going around? Are we just foolishly being born, getting married, having children and dying like ameba? Or have we any other purpose? you are standing on the truth and you I hope you'll catch some are in for the Kingdom of God, which is deeper stratas within yourself. promised to you, which walking in that. You are settled in there. that you are in, already May God bless you. 9 June 1980 Just enjoy that beauty. 24 July 1979 8 September 1980

 It's not very easy to explain Sahaja Yoga to anyone rationally, as you must have also faced the same difficulty. Not only that we are facing this difficulty, but it has been faced by all the saints and all the incarnations, including Christ, Blake – all of them. I've been reading Blake these days. He has written in his poems of such friends, who are the friends of sinners. But they could not commu- nicate to human beings in that way, as we can communicate, because we can give Realization. We can make them feel the vibrations first of all – like you can sprout the seed and we can show how the seed then developing. This is an advantage we have and today the time has gets come definitely to us, that what Blake has desired and asked for or pic- tured or visualized we can prove it. 16

 Reality It cannot be changed. It cannot compromise. is what it is Caxton Hall 22 March 1982 MEW The futuristic people When we explain Sahaja Yoga to someone, we have to talk relatively in the beginning because they haven't found their absolute. It can be quite difficult and frustrating in the beginning to talk about something that is such a living process of our evolution. We cannot explain how we evolved into a human being. And to explain how we are going to a newer dimension is also a difficult thing. How it is going to happen, how we are going to sprout, what is going to happen is unbelievably fantastic – absolutely fantastic – and we can't believe that we could achieve that. People just don't want to believe that you can achieve it in this lifetime. They live in the future..We are futuristic people. We always think of the future.... I told what happens to people by living in the future, physically, mentally and emotionally. But spiritually it happens in such a way that you think that in this lifetime you cannot get your Realization. You are quite convinced about it, that "we'll it in the future" because in the future. So you can't accept the present in which you can get your Realization. you CC you live get

 This is one of the biggest problems of Sahaja Yoga, that today we are facing the futur- istic society which always lives in the future. So explain to them that at this time, at this special moment, "you can get your Realization." This time is meant for that. In the this was the future and this future has been predicted by so many. So that future has come now and one has to face it as a present. Every future has to be present some time, not imaginary, but the real future that has to face you, which was seen by seers and predicted, has to be materialized. past, That future has come understand this point, then one can explain Sahaja Yoga, that this is the Once you now. time one has to expect Realization. Now, a man who thinks too much and who lives in the future would first shun it, saying that "how can we get our Realization in this lifetime?" One may say like that. Then the same person may accept it all right, if you convince him that "you can get your Realization...." CC The second point he may raise, as you must have also faced, is that even if you get Realization, because it's futuristic, it is imaginary. Everything he thinks is imaginary, isn't it? It is not reality. Reality is what it is. Supposing you want to think about this hall and you imagine this hall will be built like this, like that and this will happen. It doesn't happen. It is not like that. What you see, what you feel is the But the people who live in futuristic ways are never realistic because they are imagining things. So the second point that they tumble upon is their own conception about God and Realization. That's not reality. Reality is what it is. It cannot be changed. It cannot com- promise. It is what it is.... Whether they are futuristic or they are "pastistic" – the people who live in the all of them must resolve one thing very clearly: are you a seeker? Are you truly a seeker? Are you seeking the truth? Then truth has to be not rational, not imaginary, but free. If so, we should be pared to face the truth as it is. If you prepare the seeker like that – that as it is, whatever is the truth, you will face it – then the task is better. You prepare the person for Realization in a better way. have to understand is the reality. that you way CC past – pre- Materialistic people The second type of people are those who have lived in the materialistic world, in the life. We live in the gross life every day. For example, coming to Caxton Hall means gross money. Taking this hall on rent is money. We think of money. If not of futuristic things, we think of How we can do this hall? How can we take it on hire? How can we work it out? All these are problems of money... money. You cannot get God by paying money for it. God doesn't understand money, not at all. You have made money. God doesn't understand. Whether you pay Him or not, He will make the place rain or He can give you fertile land, He'll give you fruits. He will give all the bounties and all the beauties of life. Whether you do anything for Him or not, He is a giver. He will go on giving. He doesn't know money. He will do it for the rich. He will do it for the poor. He'll do it for everyone. But we think of money, naturally. It goes easier into your mind if there is some- body who must be worth something at least because we live in a relative world of money. Actually, money has nothing to do with God's kingdom. There is no money in His kingdom and you can understand rationally that how can there be. How much did Christ charge for you says you can pay two pounds for coming in. That sounds better because it 18

 REALITY His service? We have so many great people in this country who did not charge anything for what they said or what they gave, who were real people. And the reality is always proved in the human beings when it is done free. That is the reality. All other things that are sold out are the things which are not real.... You are not to pay for this. You are not to pay for what I say to you or for My lectures or anything or for your Realization – not at all, not a single paisa for that. You cannot pay for it. It's so invaluable. That's the only thing that's so invaluable. That one thing. You cannot bring it to the level of this gross existence that we have. It is absolutely overflowing. It is abso- lutely freely coming to you, so you cannot pay for it. It's love and love you cannot purchase. People caught in the past The second type of people who come in, who are not futuristic, are the people who believe in the past. Now they have faced another of problem. They come here. They will think, "Oh Mother, we are such sinners, we have done this sin." I mean all the past that they have, but love never sees any faults of a person. That's the sign of love. If you love someone, then you just love that person for love's sake... For example, you see a rich man comes in and there are ten people running around him. They are running around him for money. Of course, he doesn't give you anything, but type CC you want to be seen with him so that people also think that you are rich or whatever it is. Human beings have all kinds of funny ideas of living in an imaginary world. But such an imaginary world exists. So when such people, who live in the past, they come in, they think, "Oh God, I have done this and how will I face Mother?" or "How will I face reality? I am such CC a sinner. Now when you say you are the friends of that sinners ... I don't want to agree you are sinners. I mean once you come to this place, you are no more a sinner, I think. To My eyes, nobody is a sinner. I mean if there is so-called sin, it is because of your ignorance... Mostly it is a mistake which is committed out of igno- rance. You did not know that it was wrong.

 Learning from history I was reading some chapters of Bible and I found the punishment for doing wrong.... “A man who takes another man's wife should be killed. That should be done." That was the time. We were like that. Where we had to establish I CC our sustenance, we had to be like that, otherwise we would never have lis- tened to that. We could not listen to anything without fear. That's the sign of people who are still much more ignorant and absolutely under bondage.... But for people who are evolved and independent, fear is not going to help. We have reached a stage where we have evolved. It was the time of Moses that these things happened. It's long, long, long, long time back when human beings were not evolved to that extent to understand that righteous- ness and goodness are good. We do bad. We may do wrong things. We may try to harm our- may selves. People do it, but, in the heart of hearts, they know it is not good. They should not have done it. It is wrong even to hurt someone. And now human beings have evolved so much. Imagine the Romans, the way they behaved and the way they treated people.... They would go to any extent of killing people. But all that cruelty, that violence and that ruthlessness and, you can call it, even the licentiousness and the permissiveness were that with which they destroyed themselves and there was a fall of the Roman Empire. We can see clearly, because they have committed mistakes, we have improved. Because Hitler came, we know what violence is. And that's how we are correcting ourselves, through our own people who are doing wrong things like one cell in the body becomes malignant and teaches the whole body to behave itself. In the same way, any person who becomes overactive in any wrong- doing, he comes forward later on in the history as a person who should be abhorred, the person who should never be copied. He's the person whose name is never taken. That's how we went on learning and today we are at a stage where we are free to choose hell or heaven. If you understand the value of freedom, you are the right people for Sahaja Yoga. The end of sin When you reach that stage, then one should not think of sinning. That's over now. Because I have told you many a time that Christ, when He came on this Earth, He created that special spot for us which is called as the Agnya chakra, which is at the crossing of ego and superego, that if you awaken Him, He can suck our sins. So before His coming, there was no such arrangement.... Because of this conversion business and this nonsensical idea of spread- ing and conversion, because they think religion is also some sort of a politi- cal stunt, so they went into India and tried to convert people. They thought if all of them became Christians, then they will have a democracy of Chris- tians there and that will be under the rule of the English maybe. But ... Muslims now are going to India and converting them, thinking that it will become a Muslim majority.. They'll think on those levels. But one should know that everywhere human beings are evolving and they will always ask for the religion that is real and the God that is real. Whatever you may try – like the Muslims, Hindus, Christians, all of them have tried all these tricks of this gross level. That's not the point at all. many 20

 REALITY have to achieve is the understanding that you are a free Mine is a big problem. It is that My machinery is so different that I don't know how to What you first of all, absolutely free. There should be no fear and there should be no compulsion. You are absolutely free because, unless and until you are free, you cannot go to that realm which is complete freedom, though you are absolutely free to begin with. If you are not a free person, we'll have to make person explain to you people how I work it out. But your machinery also, I have understood very well how it works. So once I have understood your machinery, I can tell you. But you can go quite ahead of Me in handling human beings than I can handle. I could be a little less you free.... For a Mother to call Her children sinner is a bit too much and I just can't think of such a situation where I could ever condemn any one of My chil- dren as sinners. So I would not say that they are sinners, but I would say they are ignorant, they are stupid, they have been naughty and they have been dangerously playing with their lives. They have been unkind to themselves. You see, I cannot feel that way, that somebody is a sinner who has com- mitted sins and that such sins are there that cannot be rectified. It would expressive about it than these people can be. They can be much more expressive, you see. When they handle people, they can handle them better. I have some other ways of handling, which are not seen, which need not be seen, which is just done. But they can do it very well by talking, by making you understand because they have passed through that way. They have crossed that land and they know how to make have been all right before Christ's coming, that we would have talked of a karma theory, that we have done bad karmas and our karmas are there so we are sinners and we are born as sinners. But Christ's coming has a very big meaning, which I don't know how many of these preachers have understood. It means that He came on this Earth to rectify our sins, so we are no more sinners now. I mean it's there. He is someone who can rectify it. Why should we call ourselves sinners? And why should we worry about it? Knowing freedom The basic problem with human beings is this: they are ignorant. On one side, they are proud of it. On the other side, they are frightened of it. Both the sides, to My eye, is the same. Either you are frightened or you are proud of it. They are both one. The pride leads to stupidity and the frightening might lead to a sort of a destroying capacity in you, the way you go on destroying yourself by all the time cursing yourself and saying that “I am bad others cross also because I have not crossed anything. I'm not so good at all these things, I must confess. But I think I understand problems. and I have done this bad and that bad." One has to get out of both of these things and must know that a human being made out of so many genes, through which you have passed and come to this stage where you are a human being... A human being is a special thing, created for a special thing. But you are not the human being at the time of Moses. You are not the human being at the time when people were not evolved enough. You are people who are free to understand the value of freedom. If understand the value of freedom, you are the right people for Sahaja Yoga. When have freedom, then you must have discretion also, how to use the freedom and respect that freedom and not to indulge into abandonment which is stupidity. So going to extremes either on one side or the other is perhaps a sin. And the sin, so-called, gives you a fear. And aggression, which is also a sin, gives you a pride or I would say vanity, which spoils your vision completely. So to talk to anyone who is a newcomer, one has to be careful that either they are coming from this side or that side and, dealing with them, we have to be extremely patient and loving, for I have told you that love does not know faults. And when we start finding faults with others, we should know our love is not matured so much. you are you you

 REALITY The power of love I've tested your love also, whether you really love each other or not, because love is something that's a release. Actually, it is a release. Love is within you and, for exam- ple for Me, when I love you, it's a release of My boundless love within My heart. It gives Me such a release and such a relief and such a joy that I'm loving, it's flowing to If it doesn't flow, then I don't know how to work it out. If somebody is unkind, is not willing to receive it, then I don't know how to work it out, how to go around Meditation is a state of mind. You don't meditate, you. but you become meditative. And I'm not so good at conniving things and being artificial. Then I try the We do not prescribe any timing. person. some other tricks of working it out. But if they can receive your love, I'm sure they will realize that you are the people who are out here for love... I know it's very hard in these modern times to create a group of people who can love. You can create a group of people who can hate. Supposing tomorrow you start one big procession, "We hate God, we hate love, we hate this." You'll get thousands of them standing with you, "Yes, oh, we hate." You see, for hatred you'll get thou- sands of them with banners. They'll for it and come down to show that they hate because hatred is a very cementing force among human beings. Surprisingly, hatred is a cementing force. It looks like something, such a contrast, but it is so. I mean when you try to collect people in the name of hatred, people jump. They have never exploited the powers of love – never. I wish they had. All our wars, all our things have come out because we hate each other. Imagine, only human beings can hate that much. Animals can't hate so much as they can. So this love, which is divine love, which thinks, which coordinates, which under- stands, which is dynamic is so fantastic, is so all-pervading. It lives in every particle of the matter, of the emotion, of the mind, of the heart. Everywhere it exists. That апy I'm in meditation all the time and you could be also, but, CC because of the new birth, pay you're not yet identified fully with the spirit.... You have to cleanse yourself of all the things that are still hanging around, all the misidentifications. For that, whatever we do, power you can have within yourself. It's too much to believe, too much a tall story for anyone, but it's true. It's a fact. The time has come. It could not be done earlier, agreed, but the time has come. You have evolved to that state and that's why it has to also we call it meditation. happen. Now, if people do not accept, I must say this: futuristic problem. In case human beings do not accept it in a big number and become that, we cannot avoid the third world war. By that war, a new consciousness may rise, where people will understand this hatred is the worst thing. Perhaps we need a third shock. We have had two. Perhaps we need the third shock to give us that elevation, to get that position ofhigher consciousness, where we start realizing that these things based on the materialistic and on hatred, gross living are most dangerous to humanity. Then such people who really believe in love will rise and come up and they might be the ones who will be saved. So we should, at this stage, try to save as many as possible from this horrible sinking mire of hatred. Identification as a realized soul Talking about it has been done. Establishment of your sustenance has been done in the sense that, if you can awaken that sustenance within you on the Void, you can achieve it. But the main thing is, even after Realization, to identify yourself as a real- ized soul absolutely, that you have been given something very special, that you have your spirit, which is manifesting and that you have to make good out of it, that have to give it to others.... Expand yourself to that great world – which is Yehovah's world, which is Krishna's world, which is Virata's world – where you you become one with that Primordial Being, where you become an active cell of that Primordial Being. That is the thing one has to do. And that breakthrough has to take place. 22

 Now one may say that all the scriptures are wrong, everything is wrong, that all these manifestations are wrong, Christ was no good, that He was not practical. Anything one may say. You have freedom to say what you like, but you must have wisdom to see that if there is a way, what must be the way. If there is a way for the emancipation of human beings, there's only one way. There's no other way. I mean whatever you may be, an intel- lectual or an emotional person or anything, whatever it is, but you will reach one conclu- sion: there's only one way and the one way is the transformation of human beings. To that level, where they really say what they mean, they become. They talk of world brotherhood. They talk of everything. We have all kinds of organizations doing all this There's only one way and the one Way is the nonsensical work. You see we have a UN system and we have world government ideas, transformation we talk of love, helping Vietnamese, this, that. All sorts of things are there, but actually we are not. Face to face, we are not. Face to face, we become ourselves and that is why to become that, the becoming of it, is important. The transformation is important. Once of human you are transformed, to identify yourself with that transformed state is also important and that is only possible when you start allowing that transformation to take place within you Delings. in thoughtless awareness, where you do not think and impose things.... People get their Realization all right... and then they do not think that there is any- thing further needed because, once you get Realization, you can be very much in a joyous state, blissful state. You might feel the vibrations very well, you'll be very happy – and then you will unless and until you have manifested yourself. But such people may be very few. I do not know. It may be very few who will really take to that maturity. Once you have matured, it is joy, it is happiness. You become what you have to become. You find your absolute meaning. And that has to happen. For that ... a kundalini and there are chakras and all this is already in you, placed. The machinery is there. It is ... the machinery that understands and that loves you. this loving machinery of God and that is what it manifests. It is the divine love of God through you, But with that machinery, when it works, when it is put to the mains, it works out that divine power. lost. That's not the point. You have not achieved your complete growth get there's That's the part of which you can manoeuvre. By this, you may be able to manifest a voice.

 REALITY Three types of people To explain things to people of different, various types that they have come, we normally divide them into three, as you know: the people who are ignorant, fearful; the people who are aggressive and in vanity, who are vain about themselves, they think no end of themselves; and, thirdly, the people who are neither vain nor afraid. Those are friendly, pleasant people, good people, who lead a life of moderation, who ... like to share. That type of central type of people are best suited for Sahaja Yoga. And such people should be really tackled first. Then the people who are sort of humble people, they are Central type humbled down and those who think they have done some mistakes, they are better off. But aggressive people, you be careful dealing with them because you might get a punch on your nose as soon as you talk of love, so be careful.... There are some people whom you cannot tackle because they are so aggressive. It's better not to argue with them or deal with them. The best thing is to leave them alone as they are and let them of people are best suited for grow. Let them find out because all these people will develop bumps. All aggressive people will develop problems for themselves. First of all, they cannot sleep in the night. That's one thing that happens to them when they are aggressive, right-sided people. They'll have high blood pressure, they'll have hot tempers, they may have divorces, they may fight with everyone. Ultimately, they will find they're lost, not wanted by anyone. They would be meticulous. They will develop kidney troubles and they will develop a funny trouble where they won't remember their past. Even their names they may not remember. Then they will come Sahaja Yoga. around. So allow them to have their nice time, but don't butt with that.... They punish themselves by their stupidity that they are doing. You see, all their stupidness will be shown in different ways and they'll have to face it and then they will come around. The predictions of Sahaja Yoga I don't know how far to believe in the predictions of modern times, but the olden times predictions are so wonderful that I just can't imagine how people could see so many things about Sahaja Yoga. Two thousand years back, a great seer called Brughu has written something so great about Sahaja Yoga, that a new method will be devised by a Mahayogi – they called Me "Mahayogi" – who will be Parabrahma incarnate and will give Realization without any difficulties, raising the kundalini. People will All the details of Sahaja Yoga he has given two thousand years back. He's one of the greatest astrologers we have in India .. two thousand ing to the English standard, it may be two thousand, but I think it's much more when he has written – about five, six thousand years back. He has written about this just after get it.... years back, maybe more. Acord- Krishna.... So under these circumstances, one has to see ... all those who are aggressive by temperament should know that there must be some way of getting out of it. Even aggression is in the present state of human mind. It is very repulsive. You don't like it. You don't like your aggressive self. When you aggress anybody, you repent after that. You don't like it, that "Why was I so rude? I could have been better. Why should I be disturbing someone? Why should I be like that...?" As others don't like them, they also don't like themselves. When they are aggressive with others and very malignant by tem- perament, they don't like themselves. They want to change, so even this may happen. I would suggest that we must very gently go, but firmly and with the speed we have to work it out. And I'm sure it will work out and many people will Realization and will understand Sahaja Yoga. get 24

 Living for the whole After getting Realization, you must give some time to yourself. Be kind to yourself. Go with it. Learn everything. Master it. It's There is nothing much to be learned. It's very simple. It's a child's play. Even children are good at Realization. Even a little baby can do that, so one should learn and try to give Realization to others and one should not waste energy in running away from it.... It's a thing which is most enjoyable. You must give one day in your lifetime to God who has created you and the one little time to your Mother also, who wants that every- body must get Realization. If every one of you wants to escape it, then who is going to work it out? I know you are, seem to be, very busy people. Some of you are extremely busy, but escape it, then busy for what, business for what? What is the name you are going to leave in this world? As a man who earned a little money more than the others, that's all. I mean you cannot earn as much money as Mr. Ford can earn, so why is there a competition about it? The only thing is that you'll have no satisfaction of earning money. You will be always running work it out? mad with it. very simple. If every one of you wants to who is going to You must take out some time for your growth and your meditation, by which you understand yourself and you understand others and help others. Life is not worth living for yourself. It is a useless life which lives for oneself. You must live for the whole. You must understand that the whole, if you accept, you become the whole. If the drop accepts the ocean, you become the ocean. Why not we become the oceans, instead of little drops, which are just evaporated by the heat of the sun or by anything? You can be lost, so why not become the ocean – the ocean of love, the ocean of for- giveness and the ocean of compassion? May God bless you.

 1 AM SO ENAMOURED that the speed of everything has come down to zero for Me now. Nothing is moving. There is no gati in Me now left – so enamoured and overwhelmed by your cel- ebration, by your kindness, that I just don't know how to express Myself. All this is suggestive of such a tremendous depth and gratitude in your hearts for something. I have done nothing whatsoever. I have done nothing because I have not achieved anything in life Myself. I was what I am. I will be the same. I have not done any tapasya I was what I am or anything. I have not walked even an inch to achieve My goal. Its who have prepared yourself, who have come closer and you closer, just like a ready lamp, a deepak, and got yourself ignited, enlightened yourself because of your preparation. It's only your own doing which has given this light everywhere. You know very well that light cannot spread in a vacuum. It cannot spread. If there is a vacuum, light cannot spread. That's why without the Sahaj Yogis I have no existence at all, I don't exist. My whole existence is here because of you. I have no meaning. I have no work. I don't do work at all. I am the one who is the laziest and who doesn't do work whatsoever. It's only you who have achieved it. It is you who have raised any any yourself. Actually, your birthdays must be celebrated instead of Mine because neither am I getting old nor young. I am just the same. There is no difference in any way. And I think it should be the birthday of Sahaja Yoga which should be celebrated... At this stage, we have to understand that puja is an abstract achievement which can only be experienced. And all of you sit with that feeling that we are going to achieve nothingness within us, egoless, egolessness, emptiness, cleansing, so that the light of love should flood all the areas within us. And that is only possible when, of course, the chakras are to be awakened. That's going to work out and also that you should open out your hearts completely – not to doubt anything, not to think about anything, but just open your hearts. Just receive it with complete faith and understanding... should I feel that already we have touched every corner of the world. On this day, the only thing we have to declare is that let Sahaja Yoga become a Mahayoga in its full way, that everybody in the whole world should recognize that Sahaja Yoga is the only way people can rise in their evolution and a new world can be created. And this kind of a development, which is a collective development, which is not of the outer world, but of the inner world, generates the roots of this creation into a new dimension, into a new personality because, by that time, the roots would have reached the source, the source of this divine love, of this all-pervading power of this Brahmashakti. Birthday celebrations 1983

 Iwillbe the same W1 Neither am I getting old nor young 27

 Shri Durga Puja • 1 February 1982 • Rahuri India One should try to understand that if I am God, then why should you worry? The first quality, the highest quality – if it is seen in a I have one problem with the western mind. It is that if they cannot conceive it, they start criticizing. Instead of making human being from his heart – all his bad qualities will be yourself subtler and subtler to conceive the beauty of the destroyed. He will get light and attain moksha. That is why Divine, if you don't get it, you will start criticizing on any he has always praised the Devi. point... It is a much deeper significance. Much deeper work has books like Vivek Chudamani. Lastly, he said that by only to be done. So many things have to be worked out. It's a pleasing the Devi one can get everything. very subtle thing and the talk about it, you lose. You should keep quiet and absorb. So today is not a day of such a mundane type. It is very and one will get whatever one wants. His wisdom very few important in this small place where we are sitting. We are people have. When that intelligence comes into us, then doing a tremendous job and you people, who have suffered you will get the authority in the same way, without doing the most on account of these rakshasas, should be abso- anything. lutely intensive. Be careful that these sinners must go out. Something has to be done, instead of thinking about your- mistakes you make, I will forgive them all. Without doing self and your inconveniences, your troubles and whatever that, it will not be possible because I have come with a very you call them, which are not so important at all. You are saints and you must support all divine work Me you should not do. And all the time crying and repeat- with complete understanding. On the contrary, if you are edly saying that I have committed mistakes will also not so much worried about your own things, you are a fool.... do. Then it becomes a problem for the Devi. You should We have to be one with the subtleties. Sahaja Yoga is ask for forgiveness from the Devi and take a vow today that not possible if you want to see it from a gross level. You hereafter we will not repeat the mistakes.... cannot understand. I have already told you that without Realization, you cannot have Sahaja Yoga. But even after world will benefit from its fruits. You should not think how Realization, if you stick on to those old things which belong will it happen.... Whatever vow you take now, with com- In the beginning, he has described a lot, written lots of Then why do these things? Why to do debates? Why to do discourses and break one's head? Just praise the Devi more you discuss it, the more you Also I am prasanna chitta now and any number of big heart and will forgive all your mistakes, but cheating on You have to take a vow.... Because of this vow, all the to the subtler and subtler. And don't thịnk about it. You will relax. You will feel better.... you will have no advantage. So try to become plete devotion and utmost faith, the fruits will be for the egg whole world. That is how should think. you You are going to a level where nobody has reached. Shri Mataji speaks in English: With this understanding, if you surrender, it means not We should try to take a vow and, with that vow, you to give Me anything, but to get rid of your ego and your should be able to achieve something which has not been stuck-up ideas which there have been. yet achieved. This achievement is not only for these people. It's not only for Maharashtra. It is not only for India. It is not only Shri Mataji speaks in Marathi: If I am pleased, I will sit for the puja, otherwise not. It for the whole world, but for the whole universe. So you are depends on Me.... The Devi is not in need of the puja. You playing a very important, vital role and one should try to are in need of the puja. She has to be pleased... Adi Shankaracharya was asked which is the greatest that substantial quality, nothing is going to work out... quality. He said, “Devi bhakti, Mother's bhakti. She is the Devi." Your Mother is the Devi. Understanding that. Do Her atmosphere that will bring forth the great change that we bhakti. In that bhakti there should not be any false thing. are expecting of Mahayoga. improve one's quality of life.... Unless and until you have You are the seeds who are going to create that great

 34 29 सত

 Shri Mataji came to Genoa on the 11th of September and it was unbelievable. She was so happy and smiling. We all offered flowers to Her one by one. We were only about fifteen people and She asked us all our names and their meanings. It was beautiful.

 31

 Padmini and the palanquin a story about chastity WE HAD A QUEEN CALLED PADMINI and she was a very beautiful woman and one Muslim aggressor who became sultan heard about her beauty, so he wanted to see her. She refused. "I don't want to see him...." He said, "If you do not allow me to see her, I'll invade your country." So she agreed that "All right, he can see me in a mirror, so at least his bad eyes don't fall on me directly." She agreed to that and he saw her in a mirror and he saw that she was even more beautiful than he had thought her to be. So now he wanted to have her – so physical, so superficial. And he said, “If you now do not come to me, I will again attack." CC They made a plan, “Let us now decide whether we are going to surrender our queen or not." So everybody said, “Nothing doing. We are not going to surrender." Because the chastity of a woman is very important and that of a queen – and a queen who is representative of all the womanhood – should not be sacrificed like this. They could not bear the idea. So they said that "All right, we'll organize something and cheat these people." So they sent word, “All right, we are all coming and the queen is coming too." And they sent a hundred palanquins. We use palanquins for ladies in India, covered. And inside every palanquin there was one warrior sitting with all the weapons. And there were four carrying the palan- quin and all these four were also warriors. So thus, they had about five hundred warriors. It was a small kingdom, so when they went down, these people were very happy. "The queen is coming." And they were all getting drunk and celebrating it. "The queen is coming..." They had told these women that "In case we win, then we light a fire and will know that we have won. But if you do not see anything like that, then be sure that we have lost the war." you So the king sat in the front palanquin and with the rest of them, they went and attacked them in the sense that they first entered inside. And then, instead of the queen, the king came out and they all fought those people. But they were only five hundred, so they could not be saved and those people had better weapons, so they were killed. They did not light the fire. Now the women knew that all of them would be coming. Now they were very rich sul- tans, very rich Muslims and things like that. But they thought that now their chastity is in danger, so there was a big platform and they made a big pyre on that. And they all entered into it and killed themselves, before they could enter and touch their bodies. So for women especially, it is very important to have a great sense of chastity. And if they do not have the great sense of chastity, then they develop all kinds of funny ideas and mentally they become very imbalanced. So we have to now understand how we have to build ourselves as Sahaja Yogis. Men and women, all of them, have to go hand in hand because the first quality I told is wisdom, but the essence of the Muladhara is innocence. They are made of innocence. The Ganesha is innocence. of Shri Ganesha power Риjа 1991

 Era Credits and Notes MORE ABOUT CAXTON HALL Front cover: Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Contents pages quotation: Shri Ganesha Puja 2008 Contents pages photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Italy, 25 August 2008 (Calin Chirou) Content pages name: the 108th name of Shri Shiva Pages 3: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Page 8: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi (Mark Callaghan) Page 10: Caxton Hall, London Pages 11 and 13: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Caxton Hall, London 1979 Pages 14, 16, 17, 19, 20 and 23: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Page 25: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in a photograph of a photograph (Mark Callaghan) Pages 26 and 27: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi and children, UK Page 29: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Shri Durga Puja 1982 Page 30 and 31: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Genoa Italy, 11 September 2008 (Calin Chirou) Above: a new edition of Meta Modern Era, offered to Shri Mataji, Shri Ganesha Puja 2008 (Sno Bonneau) Back cover: a tulip (Omar Davis) That was a complete sea change. Sahaja Yoga just changed gear. Up to that time it had just been a small group of people going around to different houses with Shri Mataji. Then She announced that She would like to have a public program me and we were all mystified. We were quite frightened and didn't know what would happen. We put a big advert in Time Out magazine and hired a room in Caxton Hall, in central London close to Shri Mataji's new home in Victoria. We didn't know if anyone would come, and to our amazement about two hundred people came. We were rather embarrassed, because Shri Mataji asked us all to sit on chairs on stage with Her. As Shri Mataji gave Her talk I remember gritting my teeth at all of the aches and pains I could feel working out in the chakras and trying my best to look evolved! The next thing we knew we were all moving down into the audience with Shri Mataji and working on people, and in the space of one evening Sahaja Yoga completely changed. At the end of that meeting everyone in the hall felt part of one big family, it was as if the Sahaja Yoga we had known had changed gear and moved to a new level. Patrick Anslow THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE www.divinecoolbreeze.org SUBSCRIPTIONS: contact@divinecoolbreeze.org CONTENT: editor@divinecoolbreeze.org The Divine Cool Breeze, 881 Frederick Road North Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada The sixth volume of the book series "Eternally Inspiring Recollections of Our Holy Mother" is now available from Nirmal Tranformation Pvt. Ltd. (www.nitl.co.in). This new book is a collection of stories about Shri Mataji in the United Kingdom and includes more about PRINTED BY King Printing Company Inc., 181 Industrial Avenue East Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA and Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. Caxton Hall. No.8, Chandragupta Housing Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411038, Maharashtra India ODERN ERA META MODE ERA

 through your spirit: the beauty, the glory, the fragrance of a flower every flower is poetry



----------------------

2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breezes
November and December 2008 volume twenty-one number six
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-1.txt 
 2 The Extraordinary 10 Caxton Hall
16 Reality 26 I will be the same 28 Why worry? 30 Genoa 32 Padmini
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Love is the main thing.
When there is love,
there is energy,
there is patience
and there is wisdom.
Love has to be there first.
SAHA Α ΥOGI-PRIΥΑ
THE ONE WHO IS LOVED BY SAHAJA YOGIS
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-3.txt 
 extraordinary
of the ordinary
Seminars like this are very useful because then you can pick out people who
are very seriously interested in Sahaja Yoga, who are dedicated, who have
passion for Sahaja Yoga, who feel that it is the most important thing of life.
you must have realized that you are the people who are the men of God
Now
and women of God and that you have to be prepared to take this banner of the
New Age, of transforming Sahaja Yoga into Maha Yoga, into a vast area of spiritu-
ality.
You are the channels and you are going to generate this energy through. If you
were just channels, then your responsibility would have been much less. But Sahaja
Yoga, it's a very different
Perhaps you might have noticed it, that once you receive your Realization it
starts transforming you firstly, then it starts transforming others. By your pres-
type of a living process.
15 November 1980 ence, you start transforming them. By your existence, you start transforming other
Plaw Hatch Seminar people. You start transforming the atmosphere, the subtler problems of negativity.
United Kingdom They all work out. Like a tree, when it is blossoming, the fragrance of the blossom
creates a different
of aura around itself, that it attracts all the bees around to
type
gather the honey. In the same way, when a person is realized, is enlightened, the
aura spreads and you start getting people attracted towards you.
We have to remember a few points about Sahaja Yoga, that you receive the
light first. The second step is that you generate the light – it is never done in any
other process – that
with
your will, with your
you generate the light on your own,
understanding, with your freedom.
For example, a tree may give rise to seeds and the seeds might become trees,
but seeds do not regenerate. They do not have a will. But here the seeds are human
beings. Only the human beings have the will.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Now you've been enlightened with your will. With your will, you can regenerate or,
should
say, you can generate on your own, Sahaja Yoga, to go further. It's a very subtle
you
understanding, that when light comes into this candle, it cannot regenerate of its will any
other. Somebody else has to take it to that.
will is very important in Sahaja Yoga. What do you will? That is
So
very, very
your
CC
important. "Will" does not mean "desire." Will means "desire put into action." So what
do is to desire and then it into action. You can do it.
you put
you
First of all, we have to know that we must have desire. That is there, no doubt. You
are categorically seekers. I mean you are that category. You are born as seekers. You cannot
get out of it. You are seekers. Whatever may be your problems, from whatever source you
might have come, whatever mistakes you may commit, but you are seekers. Seekers are
seekers.... Everybody is not a light. You are the light-givers and it is going to work out not to My will.
through your will.
So how powerful should our will be? How dedicated should we be about our will?
It is left
to your will,
That one has to know. You have to fathom out that will within
you.
Once you start doing this Sahaja Yoga, then you recognize how important is Sahaja
Yoga, that it gives a real meaning to the whole creation. In the eyes of God and the Divine
Power, that has to work out. That's the purpose of life. And surprisingly, it is left to your
will, not to My will. I have no will. I have no action. So it is your will which is going to
work it out. So you have to dedicate and now you have to weigh yourself: “How much
am I willed?"
LEGO
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Being one with the spirit
The seminars help you to see how much you really will that Sahaja Yoga should be suc-
cessful. This is the second thing. To make it successful, what should we do? We must
understand the basics of Sahaja Yoga and try to see within ourselves, do we understand
the basics and do we have those qualities by which we sustain those basics?
The first basic of Sahaja Yogis is that you have to become your spirit, so that
body emits the power of the spirit alone. This is the first basic of Sahaja Yoga.
So far, in all the religions, all the great books, even the Bible or Gita, it is written that
you must have faith. You must have faith. The "faith" word was never clarified in any
your
CC
one of these books and mostly people thought blind faith is the only way. To believe is
to have blind faith. It should have been clarified, but it was kept a vague term as “faith."
They do use “blind faith" and "faith."
So the people started working it out. For example, you are walking on the road
and you say, "I was thinking of God and suddenly I found a gold ring, so my faith was
Sahaja Yoga is
CC
the revelation
of all the substantiated. Yes, it is God who has helped me to get the gold ring." Or say that there
was a divorce on or something like that and you prayed to God and the divorce did not
vague terms take place. "It is God's help."
But this kind of faith can have another side. People can say that the people who
do not believe in God at all are quite successful. Then how do you explain that? They
have no faith. They are actually heathen. They are very successful in life, so how do
explain that side?
Sahaja Yoga has another very great thing. That is it is the revelation of all the vague
terms that were used before. Because people were not given Realization, one could not
talk of faith or blind faith and the real faith. Because if they do not have their eyes,
can you tell them about the light or the darkness? So at that time the faith was suste-
nance – how to sustain yourself. The second was to have faith that you will be resur-
rected, that you will be your spirit.
Now the third stage is today, to know that Realization gives you experiences and
then
you
how
faith is established – not blind, but open, enlightened faith. For example, you
your
come into this house and see for yourself what it is and then have faith in that, that it
is so – believe in that. That you have seen it, now you've seen Sakshat. To have Sakshat
means to get the whole thing which you have felt through your organs,
perception. It is as clear as sunlight to prove it.
So this way is the real thing, no conjecture, no just talking about it. So all these
words that were used in the scriptures are a revelation. It means in actual life you've
seen these things happening.. But first and foremost is you have to become your spirit.
Without knowing the spirit, you cannot know God.
But the spirit itself is a sensitive thing. It is there, no doubt. It stays there, no doubt.
But that it should shine in our attention, you have to know that your attention has to
be congenial to the spirit. If the attention is not congenial, then the spirit doesn't shine.
The spirit will shine on an attention which is steady. Steady it. By balancing, you bring a
steady state. Balance your thoughts. Balance your eyes. Balance your desires. Try to bal-
ance it. Ego and super-ego - you balance it. Attention is balanced much like that.
Now how do you do it? With your will. First of all, you desire and then you act.
"Where am I going? What am I doing? I am a seeker. Is this the thing I have to do as a
seeker?" Immediately the balance is there.
So this balancing has to come. The foremost thing is to balance yourself. Any
extreme behaviour must be balanced. Any extreme attitude toward life must be brought
of
five
organs
very
down.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-6.txt 
 EXTRAORDINARY
Now here we find that the will acts, opposed in an opposite direction. For
people become obstinate. They do not want to accept that we have to balance and
they say, “Oh, I'm all right," and they will give all explanations to show that they're all
right. For whom are you giving the explanations? You are fighting with yourself. Why?
Because you are not yet integrated fully within yourself.
example,
CC
Integration of attention
The second part is the integration – the integration of
comes in when you do something, you wish something, you enjoy something, you
want something. Then you find integration is also wobbly in your attention. But if you
want your spirit, you just want your spirit to be happy because if the spirit is happy it
means you're happy. The spirit is always happy. How are you going to make the spirit
happy?
The only thing when you say you want the spirit to be happy, what you are saying
is this: that you want your attention to be happy. If you keep your attention happy and
cheerful, completely integrated with your being, not with your ego, this is where the
discretion has to be used.
your attention. Integration
Discretion
From balancing and integration we go to the third point. It is discretion because you You cannot
are very senior members of Sahaja Yoga, very senior students and now you know how
to be discreet – what to take, what not to take.
correct others.
Its
very easy to criticize others. It is very easy to say the others are wrong.
But it
should be the easiest to see what's wrong with you
You can only correct yourself. It is as simple as that.... It is the easiest thing to correct
yourself if you could look at your ego which is stopping it. And who is the gainer? Who
is the person who receives the benediction and the bliss of Sahaja Yoga?
So the old habits that are within us, which give us obstinacy, must be seen with
great discretion and now, with all this training in Sahaja Yoga, you should be able to see
even rationally the discretion part of it.
I've seen people who go by the same road all the time are extremely discreet. They
know how to turn, which turn to miss and which turn to take and how to reach.
That's the sign of your maturity. So you have to be discreet. Another thing is that you
have your vibrations there to teach you discretion, but sometimes you may be missing
them.
because
you cannot correct others.
You can only
correct yourself.
So with rationality, if you discriminate and try to find out, "What is wrong? Where
am I going wrong," you will very easily understand ... because you are driving your own
car. You can only control brakes and not the brakes of another It's such a
funny situation that people are driving everybody else's cars, but not their own.
So with discretion, you will know how to correct yourself, even rationally.
person.
your
your rationality is absolutely logical. Before this, rationality was illogical. But
Now
now, with integration, your rationality becomes logical and it tells you, "No, this is
wrong, this cannot be." You know about everything now – practically everything. I do
not think there is anything that requires information for you people. When you just
try to think about something and you will get the answer. That's all in your brains. It's
opened up. The only thing that I said: develop your discretion. If you are indiscreet,
then
>כ
you must develop it, you must grow up it, you must mature....
That's the quality you people are.... All the Gods and all the angels bow to you.
They are in attention to you...
5
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Collectivity
A small thing like collectivity – it's the beginning of Sahaja Yoga. If you do not want to
become collective – Sahaja Yoga is not meant for individuals.... You are coming to become
a collective being because the spirit is the collective being. The quality of the spirit is
that it is a collective being. It is a part of the collective, which is absolutely one with the
collective. It is so collective that you cannot imagine on a human level how much it is
collective.
For example, yesterday I was criticizing the Gita and the Vishuddhi was opening.
Krishna is sitting here and talking through Me. There is no difference at all of that. It's
just the same. And I am Krishna. I am Mataji. And I am Christ. So much, so one that you
can't imagine how much oneness is there. It's such a unison that exists.
So for the spirit to be absolutely enlivened within us, to be absolutely shining within
us, we have to know that how do we articulate with others? How do we talk to others?
What is our way of judging...?
So in collectivity, those who are Sahaja Yogis, those who have joined Sahaja Yoga,
there should be complete unison and articulation – absolutely. And enjoy each other's
company. Everyone is a beautiful flower.
You are My children
It's
You can't
who speak the same language. It's you who know
imagine how everything. You are the people who are coveted. You are the princes. They still have to
become. That's a different point. You sit in your glory. The idea that all the saints should
live at the feet of every third person. It's not that. You are kings. Behave like kings. You
have to maintain a distance from others who are commoners. Don't allow your ego to
's you
who are My children. It's
you
much oneness
develop, of course. But know that you won't enjoy your kingdom unless and until you get
more people into it. You have to get more and more and more, but keep your dignity. You
are at that level. Keep your poise. And then deal with others in the same manner, that you
are all joined together. You are the saints.
One has to be. Assume – assuming one's powers. Assume. There's no pride. There's
no pride. You are that. So you are that, what is there to be proud of? I mean you are real
ized souls – finished. How to be conscious of it? You are that, so you are that. You are
is there.
knowledgeable. You are knowledge. Once you realize that, then discrimination will work
out much better. That you do not put down anyone, you do not discard anyone, but they
are not the same as you are. This principle you must know. You are not saying that low or
high or anything. But you are different, they are different and they have to come and join
you. They have to become. You cannot become like that, but they can become like
So discretion is very important. In Sahaja Yoga, one of the very great basics for our
growth is to discriminate. Trust Sahaja Yogis. Do not trust non-Sahaja Yogis. Never trust
a non-Sahaja Yogi compared to a Sahaja Yogi. A Sahaja Yogi is your brother or sister, is
a companion, is everything. And the others are others. They are another party. You are
another party.
you.
They
you are. This must come into you so the collectivity will grow strong. You should know
that by fighting with each other, you are reducing the power of Sahaja Yoga. By getting
angry with each other, you are reducing the power of Sahaja Yoga. Imagine if the channels
start fighting with each other, how are you going to channelize the energy?
So first of all, make your channel all right. And understand that we, all channels put
together, are going to do the work better. We all have to be together. The togetherness is
are not your enemies. They can come to this side, but they are not the same as
6.
to be felt.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-8.txt 
 EXTRAORDINARY
I am a Mahamaya
When the collectivity is disturbed, what is the centre you catch? Can tell Me? Vishud-
dhi and Sahasrara because I am the collectivity of all the Gods and all the centres are in
the brain, in the Sahasrara...
You know the Sahasrara, what it is. People want to judge Me. They have a right to do
it. I mean I cannot say no. You can judge Me. You can do whatever you like.... But what
is the instrument you have got to judge Me? I am such a camouflage, just a bubble and
such a receding personality. How are you going to judge Me? Is there any way of judging
Me? You can never catch Me anywhere. It's a camouflage.
Firstly I am prideless, I am egoless, I am actionless. Where are you going to catch Me?
On the contrary, by all these attributes, I create a problem for you, that I am a Maha-
maya.... How are you going to understand My position? You see there are no outside
signs. There are no horns. There is nothing that I could be a cinema star. I am too simple,
too sweet. There is no way by which you can really feel that I am great. I am absolutely you to be born,
mundane, ordinary. But extraordinary of the ordinary I am. This is a thing which people
do not understand. It's all right for those who are not realized – excused. But you have felt t o be with Me
the vibrations and your Realization through Me. I must be something. Put your attention
like that to understand. It must be a tremendous thing inside this body. It cannot be
sible otherwise. It's so obvious, otherwise, to you people.
you
It was
necessary for
you
to help.
pos-
This is to be understood, that so far – Krishna, Christ, Rama, all of the them –
nobody gave Self Realization to people en masse. They had other powers... I have also al
these powers with Me, but obviously I am a very simple, ordinary, mundane type of an
Indian lady – finished. And Christ had a power to get Himself crucified. I too have that,
but I am not going to do all that. I have a power to resurrect also. Why are these powers
not used? One should understand: because now the main attention is to raise the kund-
alini and, for that, these powers are not required.
Give Realization to any number of people. What's the use of getting crucified? Who is
going to raise the kundalini...? These powers are not required. Today the power of raising
the kundalini of thousands and thousands and millions and millions of people is required.
And I am going to be just like you all My life in the sense I am going to get old and you're
going to. I mean the way I should be old I will be. I'll be just like you. I am not going to
do anything outside. It's like a German car, but it is you who has to know the power of
the German car. It's the best type. And once you realize that, that it is deliberately made
like that – in the beginning, of course, you cannot even understand it. It goes on, "How
CC
can it be? How can it be? She does this. She does that." It
on like that.
goes
You don't judge Me because that's not the way you will understand. Just realize and
recognize that there has to be something tremendous. It was necessary to have someone
like that to do this tremendous task. And it was necessary for you to be born, to be with
Me to help. I know those who are with Me. They'll stand by Me throughout. I may test
them a little here and there, but I know they'll come around. They have to stand by Me.
Those who want to run away, they'll run away....
So we come to collectivity, to understand that you are cells in My body and I have
awakened
you. If you degenerate, My body degenerates.... When you take vibrations, I
feel very happy. But those who have faith in themselves can only understand this.... You
should have faith in yourself that you are the chosen ones. You are really the people spe-
cially made for this great work. It's a tremendous thing that you are out for. Once you
realize and recognize it, you won't bother about the small, small things of life. It's the
quality in you that has to be nurtured and looked after through collectivity – but the col-
lectivity of the Sahaja Yogis.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-9.txt 
 x 15
aN
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-10.txt 
 EXTRAORDINARY
Living as one
This is a new race that is coming up. Others are human beings. You are
not. You are not human beings any more. You are Sahaja Yogis. It's a dif-
ferent race. All over the world, this race has to come, so we have to build
ourselves in one group, in one understanding – absolute unison.
up
There should be no secrets. There should be no domination. Every-
thing should articulate. Everyone should talk to each other. Everyone
should know what's happening with what. You have to be absolutely
This transition
frank, open with each other absolutely. Tell them your problems. "I
catch on this, what to do? I catch on that, what to do? How to clear it
is the point
out?" – not to feel shy. We have to enjoy ourselves, also enjoy our weak-
nesses, so that we clear them out. Laugh it out. Somebody has some
which you
habits, laugh it out. That's the best way to do it...
This I think we should decide today, that we all are going to live
should catch.
with one heart and one desire, with one head and with one liver – all of
us. Let's see how it works out...
Where is the time to argue? It's joy pouring in. Let's enjoy.
May God bless
you.
Catch the transition
You are a realized soul and a realized soul is something so unique that
you cannot give a parallel to it. There cannot be a parallel. For example,
if there is a wind blowing, then all the trees move in the same
I
I can say
way. But human beings, if the wind is blowing, supposing any wind is
that way
because
this way, somebody will
coming, somebody will
go
go
they have a will. But Sahaja Yogis, if the wind is blowing, all of them
their heads against the wind and fight it.
will
put
This is a thing which cannot be given any parallel because you are
going above human things. So far never such a thing has existed. You are
such unique creations that there is. I cannot compare you with anything
that was below or, I should
which was not of this level. The level
say,
is different. So when you do everything the same way, you are doing it
because
you are aware of that collectivity of the Primordial Being within
you. That's why you are doing it.
This transition is the point which you should catch. That's something
I feel, that when you start giving any analogies and all that, how can you
give an analogy for something that never existed before? Never. O
9.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-11.txt 
 SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI at CAXTON HALL
Great news for all
Sahaja Yogis
We have some very beautiful Sahaja
Sahaja Yogis. The first know to enjoy your virtues: enjoy your love Yogis here, very beautiful and they have
said sometimes such beautiful things about
It is not hard. It is the easiest thing. Sup- others that I sometimes, in My vacant
supposing. I mood, think of them and I feel very happy.
advertised and have mean it is a big supposition for many, but It's just like poetry to say something good
invited many people. supposing you really, genuinely love some- about others. Sometimes I have to go and
one.... You have to go to meet that person then somebody says good words about
Great news for all the CAXTON HALL – This is what you must
public lecture is on the
24th of this month at
and you will be rewarded by it.
Caxton Hall. We have posing you love someone –
Let us see how it fares.
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi and ... you cannot get a taxi. You cannot others. I feel very happy.
16 October 1977 get a train. You are worried. Now how to
Without love we are not going to solve
get to that person now? He would be wait- any problems whatsoever. What's the use of
ing. He would be worried.... "What must having, say even ten thousand people with
be happening to them?" You are all the time vibrations flowing, without love among
thinking and you are worried and you don't them? I mean I just can't think of such a
know what to do? Should we walk? Then thing. Once you are realized, you should
you walk a little distance and you come feel love, but you must fathom it because of
back. No, might get a train. Let's try this. your rational habits. Because of these mis-
You try all kinds of things, you see, just to identifications before, you cannot give it
up. You see you are afraid. People are even
Between 1977 and 1983 | reach that person and then iť's raining
Shri Mataji gave almost don't have an umbrella. You get completely afraid to express their love.
one hundred programs drenched. Absolutely flat out tired, but still
in London's Caxton the moment you meet the person, see the I said, “For whom?" He said, "For Sahaja
Hall. Beginning with person, all worries and all the turmoils, all Yogis." I said, “Why are you giving to Me?"
the first public program the troubles and all the labour that you have He said, "Mother, if you give it would be
in Europe, this series of put in vanish into thin air and the joy fills better, otherwise they may little bit doubt
public programs covered your life completely. How love is reward-
topics rich in variety and ing!
depth, with titles such as
"The Difference Between rationalize. There is a big scope in Sahaja will misunderstand – imagine, where are
East and West" and "The Yoga to rationalize because you become we? What sort of human beings we have
Meaning of Reality.
Caxton Hall was also the I mean after Sahaja Yoga, if you want to go love. Then the recipients also, they do not
site a Christmas Puja and to hell, you can go faster than anybody else want to have any love. How can that be? It's
a celebration of Raksha can because you really become a free bird impossible.
Somebody brought some sweets one day.
me."
Sometimes we want to love, we want
So one must learn to love and not to
to express, but we are afraid that people
." even a freer person. You really become free. become that we are afraid to express our
Every human being wants to be loved.
the same. So one has to know that we have They will be afraid today, tomorrow. Day
after they will be all right. 13 March 1980
Bandhan.
and if you want to go to heaven you can do
to learn to compete in loving each other.
10
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Can you understand total love?
"The temple had to come down to London to Caxton Hall to talk to people."
CAXTON HALL – We have within us a being
which I call the spirit – the spirit, which is
also the part and parcel of the totality that is God ... can demolish all
love, totality that is God, totality that is joy, the wealth of the world and
totality that is knowledge. And that spirit He can recreate. For Him,
within us is watching us. It is not watch- nothing is more impressive
ing like a guard or a police inspector. That than your spirit. The spirit
also, we human beings cannot understand. that is within, that's the
most important thing, not
what country you come
The spirit is the one that is love. Can you from, what race you come
CAXTON HALL – God has His own powers. understand total love? Can you understand from. All these nonsensical
He has His own machinery. He has His something that just gives and enjoys giving differences do not exist in
own government. He has everything. It's and not asking for anything? Can you the realm of God. You are a
understand someone like that? Can you? seeker and your spirit has to
You can't imagine in how many dimen- Loving for love's sake, that's what is your be enlightened. So maybe
sions He can work it out. Just you have spirit. It is watching you with that love, that today we've got Caxton
Hall. Tomorrow maybe we
the spirit is watching, people get a
If I
say
fright, "Oh God!"
CC
dynamic.
to put it in the mouth of that machinery. total love.
If you can do it, you get the results easily.
Only one thing God cannot do. That is give you that what it is. Now here, I would
That totality of love is watching you to
could be sitting near a sea
or maybe somewhere on a
to make you sensible, to make you wise. say you are the spirit and you are this Self. hill. 5 November 1981
That's one thing that's your look out. Thať's Another one, which is this awareness, is this
you have got. This
This search is on and there
in
human awareness which
your own choice because you are guided
by your ego. You are identified with your
ego and anything I say may upset you or
may appeal to you. God knows how you
are going to react. But the only way you
human awareness has to be enlightened by are many shops people
that totality, that spirit. When it enlightens have opened. This is not a
that, then only, you know that you are a shop. This is a temple and
a temple in the market-
place has very little value.
There's some times one feels a little bash- If you have to climb
part and parcel of the totality and that you
are beautiful, you are really beautiful.
can grow is to be in the centre to see, not
to go to extremes of anything – to be in the
centre. Even listening to Me, try to be in
up
seven mountains to go to a
ful to know how beautiful one is and so fra-
temple, it has much more
value. But only a few can
To understand the totality of love, total reach there alive. So the
love, you have to know that these are all just temple had to come down
specks. The ocean, the oceans of oceans of to London to Caxton Hall
grant and so grand and so dignified. That
new dimension one has to achieve....
the centre.
But human beings are funny. They must
go to extremes. You give them any job they
must go to the extremes. Anything you give
them, they cannot keep to the centre. They
to talk to people.
love will wash off these specks in no time,
can never keep the balance....
It has to be in balance, everything. But but have faith in yourself, that's all. Have 21 July 1980
in our behaviour towards God, we are very
faith in yourself. After all, you are human
3 November 1980
13 March 1980 | beings.
much imbalanced.
SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI at CAXTON HALL
Caxton Street, City of Westminster SW1
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-13.txt 
 SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI at CAXTON HALL
Thy Will Be Done
Sahaja Yoga is not for | CAXTON HALL – The attention can be con-
Me at all. I don't have to do
it. It is for you to do it, to
gain that knowledge which
is yourself. Only thing I can
do is the shaktipath. But
actually I don't do it either, why there is guru shopping also going on.
I can tell you. I don't do We also cannot do our Sahaja Yoga in a
anything. I'm just sitting concentrated manner.... It becomes mobile, and it will work out. Every time you get
quiet. It's just managed. spread all over. It doesn't reach any depth your touching of the kundalini or, you can
What can I do? That's My or height either. If you put them together, say, the breakthrough, every time you get
nature. It just flows. It
works out that way.... There
should be no problem for
you to understand that it is
a special grace. Because you
are special, maybe I am also
special and special people
needed somebody special. So I you, a peaceful space in which you will see hood. You enjoy the atmosphere on the hill-
had to come down here.
26 November 1979 you, you observing it and seeing it mani- and try to keep it there. I know for some
Is it too much that I'm asking? You started
with a very humble heart as a child. Only
centrated now, after Realization only. But
even realized souls have to work it out. This in this life all this has been accumulated a
is the biggest problem that I think I see, that
our attention is so distributed we cannot do
anything in a concentrated manner. That's
bit too much. In past life you were not like
that – much better off. Only in this lifetime
you have crossed the limit a little bit. It's
not difficult to recede.
So just try to humble down in your heart
that experience, keep it in your memory
then it will work out...
So to clear the attention, clear this gar- and desire for it and it will work out. Do
bage into that clear cut, beautiful lake, you
have to go within. You have to allow it to
sediment. You have to take pride. By it's
own nature it will come, the beauty. And
then you will see a ripple in that lake within
not keep in memory the faults that you
have had, where you have been.
When
up on top of a hill or
a mountain, you don't remember all the
ditches you have fallen into in your child-
you climb
the bliss of God flowing into you, through top. Make it a strong memory
within
you
festing into the other. That is what needs people it's difficult. They come down, again
to be asked for. No mental activity can do go up. Because of the problems they've had
that. It is only the desire to be that works it. before, the kundalini comes down. But in
Only the desire to be one with God works it. Sahaja Yoga, there is all arrangement. But if
Mental activity, rationality saps it. Through the desire is strong – not the mental activ-
rationality, you cannot reach God...
It is said, "Those who will be blessed have that's why I told you why it is to be, “Thy
to humble down in their heart." It is very will be done."
ity, but the desire – it will work out. And
true. It is very, very true that we have to
humble down in our hearts, so that it will the basis of how you are going to rise.
work. And keep your attention steady.
Accept it from the very beginning. This is
26 June 1978
12
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-14.txt 
 The Biggest Myth
CAXTON HALL-How is it a particular flower becomes a fruit?
That is not discussed in elite society. It is not to be discussed.
At the most, you can talk about the weather because there
cannot be any quarrelling...
So to be compassionate to people who
We are so careful as to what to discuss.
But if people sit down and discuss it, they get Realization, you have to tell them that
will know that there is a tremendous work- it is not that "you are overpowered by the
ing of the Divine Power.
Can you count the amount of work It is drop becomes the ocean, not that the ocean
doing? It's an impossibility – like a flower overpowers. Then it may be that you can go
becoming a fruit. Now take only one type further with the second step where ego is a
of a flower. How many are there in the little bit, given the assurance that you won't
whole world? I mean, if you think of it, you be finished. The infrastructure has this one
just feel that it's too much how this Mother problem that ego has separated all
Earth is moving with a tremendous speed inner being into different parts and any-
and we are just settled down nicely. How thing that ego says or is pampered is good.
many such suns and stars and constella- Good and ego's happiness are regarded as
tions are moving? There is no end to it....
CC
CC
ocean," but "you become the ocean." The
equal to each other.
Now, if you can overcome that first | There's no end to My
If man doesn't want to realize that there
must be a power that is doing all these hurdle with people, that you become the speeches. I don't know how
organized things and there must be one
organized personality or may be a control- become empowered with your own powers,
ling thing that is working it out, then it you have crossed some areas in a personal- just to make your attention
means that they are trying to live with a ity. And it's a fact. To begin with, it's a fact. little steady, then the
myth because they cannot solve it.
The myth is that there is no God. This
is the biggest myth I have ever heard. And will get the kingdom of heaven. "All right, cannot go inside.
to believe into such a thing, that there is
no God, is just to accept that as you are the kingdom of Europe. "Then?" Then
the highest of all, the lord of all the world. will get the kingdom of England. And like
How can there be anybody higher?
This is one of the biggest hurdles of will get the kingdom of your own Self, they
human beings in the modern times. In the will say, "What's there? The kingdom of
ancient times, olden times, it was so, but it yourself – such insipid stuff!"
ocean, that you become the guru, that you
many speeches I've given
now. I lost count. This is only
But this area actually you get much later.| kundalini rises. Without that
But better to promise the highest... You happening, your attention
CC
10 November 1980
then what will you get?" Then you will get
you
that, it moves. But if you tell them that
you
So you have to start from the big stuff,
was not so much to this extent, that now
man thinks that he is on top of the world | saying that you become your own guru
and that he is the one who can guide the
whole world and who can manage this and
which is a fact. You do become your
own guru, but that happens much later.
But still, if you tell them directly that
become your own guru first, it will appeal
manage that....
Not to accept anything comes from a
fright that, if you accept something, if you to them...
accept that there is a Divine Power, then
perhaps you may have no position, no sig- point.
nificance.
you
They will feel happy. And that's the
19 April 1982
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-15.txt 
 CAXTON HALL – Every time
I face the new people I have
to give an introductory talk
and the Sahaja Yogis get
sometimes impatient about
You are transmitters
it. But we have to under-
stand that this is the knowl- | CAXTON HALL – Everywhere you are sit-
These are living. These are moving, these
edge of the Divine and ting in meditation you are transmitting are understanding. They manoeuvre. The
those who have not known vibrations. Do you know that? At that time stones only emit vibrations to clear the
about it are to be told. And if you are thinking of your jobs and your atmosphere. But you – you can raise the
those who have known other things which you have been thinking kundalini. They cannot raise the kundalini.
You can. And what are you doing about it?
Such a precious thing you have got.
should know that there are
before, the transmission is poorer.
many things they have not
known, which they have to
know. Still, there is a lot to
Think of love.
What
Think of the whole country.
are you doing about it? Is it because there
is no business with it, that we are taking it
You are transmitters of these waves of love so slowly? Supposing it's an enterprise, then
everybody would be up and doing. Is it?
you are made in the We have to change our ways and methods
Think of the whole world at that time.
be known.
Supposing I tell you all and love will flow from you.
about it and you do not get
I told
form of Ganesha. And that's what you have of understanding.
to do. You know there are vibrations from
you once that
your Realization, you do not
The reward of God is a thousand-fold
get your yoga, you do not
get your connection with you coming out. You are sending vibrations than any enterprise can bestow upon you.
the Divine, then it is useless.
Talk – well, you may talk.
You may verify it. You womb and a big temple is raised and thou- He
may find it the same written sands of people go to worship that. And
in many scriptures. Many they say it is a temple, of a Jagrut Devta.... old ways? We have to change very much.
saints have told you the "Jagrut" means enlightened, awakened.
same thing. It has no use.
The knowledge, gyana,
is useless without that and go there and worship that, while talked to you today. Don't take to a life
without the union with the there are so many already sitting here, so which has not brought any happiness to
out. You know that. That means you are like When He blesses you, you wouldn't even
any deity who is thrown out of the Earth's have words to thank Him. To that extent
goes.
Are
we depending on Him
or on our own
We have to transform ourself into a new
style of thinking. It is very, very important.
I hope you'll think about it, what I have
And that's just a stone – a stone that comes
out and people build a temple on top of
S.
yoga,
8 October 1979 | many jagrut, realized souls.
15 October 1979
Divine.
you.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-16.txt 
 SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI at CAXTON HALL
Sahaja Yoga is everywhere
CAXTON HALL – Try to be humble in your | CAXTON HALL – Sahaja Yoga exists every-
heart. You enjoy your humility. You really where. Within you it is working. Without
enjoy your humility. Actually, humility you it is working. Everywhere it is working.
gives you innocence. Humility is the only So you see for yourself. To see it, you have
to go and see people and meet them and
have all the powers of the talk to them and find it out how it works
and develop that faith that gives you the
way to achieve our lost innocence.
Even if
you
world and you are humble, how beautiful
you look. Any person who is in a big posi- sense of security.
tion and if he is humble, people write leg-
ends after such a personality.
Try to develop a humble attitude towards Meet each other. As many times as you can,
life, extremely humble. But with humility call each other for tea. Meet each other...
we confuse inertia. That's a wrong thing.
Humility never means inertia. Humility you have found out the reality, the faith
means dynamism. And that dynamism is should be much greater than any of these
extremely quiet, silent and beautiful.
Sahaja Yoga is a tremendous thing. It is people have. But for faith, you must have
Mahayoga. At this stage it is Mahayoga the quality. Only people of quality can have
because it has reached it's highest peak now.
Never in any incarnation were so many They will fall off.
Realizations given...
Today it's so fortunate that I am facing into the fruit state. You are transformed
There are so many ways of cleansing your-
self, which you know, you can find out.
They judge you by your faith. And when
fanatics have, any of these nonsensical
that kind of faith, not ordinary people.
All the flowers do not get transformed
so many saints. It's My great faith and great into fruit state, but all the fruits do not
fortune that you all have got Realization. come up to their maturity because they lack
You don't know. My joy has no words to faith, the
strength.
Gather up your strength.
It's all behind you.
It's within you.
express it.
But let not this garden be ruined by aban-
donment and by foolishness. It is a tender,
newly blossoming, beautiful garden. Look
after it with that care and gentleness, other-
wise it can all fritter away. 18 August 1980
It's around
you.
Everywhere there is light, within and
without.
Try to work it out properly.
Do not condemn yourself or condemn | Thank you for being here and
others, but know that you are something, we'll have some meditation.
Why are we here? What are we doing
here? What is the purpose of our life?
Why God has created us? To what
purpose, to what end or it is just a joke
going around? Are we just foolishly being
born, getting married, having children
and dying like ameba? Or have we any
other purpose?
you are standing on the truth and you I hope you'll catch some
are in for the Kingdom of God, which is deeper stratas within yourself.
promised to you, which
walking in that.
You are settled in there.
that
you are in, already May God bless you.
9 June 1980
Just enjoy that beauty.
24 July 1979
8 September 1980
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-17.txt 
 It's not very easy to explain Sahaja Yoga to anyone rationally, as you
must have also faced the same difficulty. Not only that we are facing this
difficulty, but it has been faced by all the saints and all the incarnations,
including Christ, Blake – all of them.
I've been reading Blake these days. He has written in his poems of
such friends, who are the friends of sinners. But they could not commu-
nicate to human beings in that way, as we can communicate, because
we can give Realization. We can make them feel the vibrations first of
all – like you can sprout the seed and we can show how the seed then
developing. This is an advantage we have and today the time has
gets
come definitely to us, that what Blake has desired and asked for or pic-
tured or visualized we can prove
it.
16
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Reality
It cannot be changed.
It cannot compromise.
is what it is
Caxton Hall 22 March 1982
MEW
The futuristic people
When we explain Sahaja Yoga to someone, we have to talk relatively in the beginning because
they haven't found their absolute. It can be quite difficult and frustrating in the beginning to
talk about something that is such a living process of our evolution. We cannot explain how
we evolved into a human being. And to explain how we are going to a newer dimension is
also a difficult thing. How it is going to happen, how we are going to sprout, what is going
to happen is unbelievably fantastic – absolutely fantastic – and we can't believe that we could
achieve that. People just don't want to believe that you can achieve it in this lifetime.
They live in the future..We are futuristic people. We always think of the future.... I told
what happens to people by living in the future, physically, mentally and emotionally. But
spiritually it happens in such a way that you think that in this lifetime you cannot get your
Realization. You are quite convinced about it, that "we'll it in the future" because
in the future. So you can't accept the present in which you can get your Realization.
you
CC
you live
get
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-19.txt 
 This is one of the biggest problems of Sahaja Yoga, that today we are facing the futur-
istic society which always lives in the future. So explain to them that at this time, at this
special moment, "you can get your Realization." This time is meant for that. In the
this was the future and this future has been predicted by so many. So that future has come
now and one has to face it as a present. Every future has to be present some time, not
imaginary, but the real future that has to face you, which was seen by seers and predicted,
has to be materialized.
past,
That future
has come
understand this point, then one can explain Sahaja Yoga, that this is the
Once
you
now. time one has to expect Realization.
Now, a man who thinks too much and who lives in the future would first shun it,
saying that "how can we get our Realization in this lifetime?" One may say like that.
Then the same person may accept it all right, if you convince him that "you can get your
Realization...."
CC
The second point he may raise, as you must have also faced, is that even if you get
Realization, because it's futuristic, it is imaginary. Everything he thinks is imaginary, isn't
it? It is not reality.
Reality is what it is. Supposing you want to think about this hall and you imagine this
hall will be built like this, like that and this will happen. It doesn't happen. It is not like
that. What you see, what you feel is the
But the people who live in futuristic ways are never realistic because they are imagining
things.
So the second point that they tumble upon is their own conception about God and
Realization. That's not reality. Reality is what it is. It cannot be changed. It cannot com-
promise. It is what it is....
Whether they are futuristic or they are "pastistic" – the people who live in the
all of them must resolve one thing very clearly: are you a seeker? Are you truly a seeker?
Are you seeking the truth?
Then truth has to be not rational, not imaginary, but free. If so, we should be
pared to face the truth as it is. If you prepare the seeker like that – that as it is, whatever is
the truth, you will face it – then the task is better. You prepare the person for Realization
in a better way.
have to understand is the reality.
that you
way
CC
past –
pre-
Materialistic people
The second type of people are those who have lived in the materialistic world, in the
life. We live in the gross life every day. For example, coming to Caxton Hall means
gross
money. Taking this hall on rent is money. We think of money. If not of futuristic things,
we think of How we can do this hall? How can we take it on hire? How can we
work it out? All these are problems of money...
money.
You cannot get God by paying money for it. God doesn't understand money, not at
all. You have made money. God doesn't understand. Whether you pay Him or not, He
will make the place rain or He can give you fertile land, He'll give you fruits. He will give
all the bounties and all the beauties of life. Whether you do anything for Him or not,
He is a giver. He will go on giving. He doesn't know money. He will do it for the rich. He
will do it for the poor. He'll do it for everyone.
But we think of money, naturally. It goes easier into your mind if there is some-
body who
must be worth something at least because we live in a relative world of money. Actually,
money has nothing to do with God's kingdom. There is no money in His kingdom and
you can understand rationally that how can there be. How much did Christ charge for
you
says you can pay two pounds for coming in. That sounds better because it
18
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-20.txt 
 REALITY
His service? We have so many great people in
this country who did not charge anything for
what they said or what they gave, who were
real people. And the reality is always proved in
the human beings when it is done free. That is
the reality. All other things that are sold out are
the things which are not real....
You are not to pay for this. You are not to
pay for what I say to you or for My lectures or
anything or for your Realization – not at all,
not a single paisa for that. You cannot pay for
it. It's so invaluable. That's the only thing that's
so invaluable. That one thing. You cannot
bring it to the level of this gross existence that
we have. It is absolutely overflowing. It is abso-
lutely freely coming to you, so you cannot pay
for it. It's love and love you cannot purchase.
People caught in the past
The second type of people who come in, who
are not futuristic, are the people who believe
in the past. Now they have faced another
of problem. They come here. They will think,
"Oh Mother, we are such sinners, we have done
this sin." I mean all the past that they have, but
love never sees any faults of a person. That's the
sign of love. If you love someone, then you just
love that person for love's sake...
For example, you see a rich man comes
in and there are ten people running around
him. They are running around him for money.
Of course, he doesn't give you anything, but
type
CC
you want to be seen with him so that people
also think that you are rich or whatever it is.
Human beings have all kinds of funny ideas
of living in an imaginary world. But such an
imaginary world exists. So when such people,
who live in the past, they come in, they think,
"Oh God, I have done this and how will I face
Mother?" or "How will I face reality? I am such
CC
a sinner.
Now when you say you are the friends of
that
sinners ... I don't want to agree
you are
sinners. I mean once you come to this place,
you are no more a sinner, I think. To My eyes,
nobody is a sinner. I mean if there is so-called
sin, it is because of your ignorance... Mostly it
is a mistake which is committed out of igno-
rance. You did not know that it was wrong.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Learning from history
I was reading some chapters of Bible and I found the punishment for doing
wrong.... “A man who takes another man's wife should be killed. That should
be done." That was the time. We were like that. Where we had to establish
I
CC
our sustenance, we had to be like that, otherwise we would never have lis-
tened to that. We could not listen to anything without fear. That's the sign of
people who are still much more ignorant and absolutely under bondage....
But for people who are evolved and independent, fear is not going to
help. We have reached a stage where we have evolved. It was the time of
Moses that these things happened. It's long, long, long, long time back when
human beings were not evolved to that extent to understand that righteous-
ness and goodness are good.
We
do bad. We may do wrong things. We may try to harm our-
may
selves. People do it, but, in the heart of hearts, they know it is not good.
They should not have done it.
It is wrong even to hurt someone. And now human beings have evolved
so much. Imagine the Romans, the way they behaved and the way they
treated people.... They would go to any extent of killing people. But all that
cruelty, that violence and that ruthlessness and, you can call it, even the
licentiousness and the permissiveness were that with which they destroyed
themselves and there was a fall of the Roman Empire. We can see clearly,
because they have committed mistakes, we have improved. Because Hitler
came, we know what violence is. And that's how we are correcting ourselves,
through our own people who are doing wrong things like one cell in the
body becomes malignant and teaches the whole body to behave itself.
In the same way, any person who becomes overactive in any wrong-
doing, he comes forward later on in the history as a person who should be
abhorred, the person who should never be copied. He's the person whose
name is never taken. That's how we went on learning and today we are at a
stage where we are free to choose hell or heaven.
If you understand
the value of
freedom, you are
the right people
for Sahaja Yoga.
The end of sin
When you reach that stage, then one should not think of sinning. That's
over now. Because I have told you many a time that Christ, when He came
on this Earth, He created that special spot for us which is called as the
Agnya chakra, which is at the crossing of ego and superego, that if you
awaken Him, He can suck our sins. So before His coming, there was no such
arrangement....
Because of this conversion business and this nonsensical idea of spread-
ing and conversion, because they think religion is also some sort of a politi-
cal stunt, so they went into India and tried to convert people. They thought
if all of them became Christians, then they will have a democracy of Chris-
tians there and that will be under the rule of the English maybe. But ...
Muslims now are going to India and converting them, thinking that it will
become a Muslim majority.. They'll think on those levels.
But one should know that everywhere human beings are evolving and
they will always ask for the religion that is real and the God that is real.
Whatever you may try – like the Muslims, Hindus, Christians, all of them
have tried all these tricks of this gross level. That's not the point at all.
many
20
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-22.txt 
 REALITY
have to achieve is the understanding that you are a free
Mine is a big problem.
It is that My machinery is so
different that I don't know how to
What you
first of all, absolutely free. There should be no fear and there should be no
compulsion. You are absolutely free because, unless and until you are free,
you cannot go to that realm which is complete freedom, though you are
absolutely free to begin with. If you are not a free person, we'll have to make
person
explain to you people how I work it
out. But your machinery also,
I have understood very well how it
works. So once I have understood
your machinery, I can tell you.
But you can go quite ahead of Me
in handling human beings than I
can handle. I could be a little less
you free....
For a Mother to call Her children sinner is a bit too much and I just can't
think of such a situation where I could ever condemn any one of My chil-
dren as sinners. So I would not say that they are sinners, but I would say they
are ignorant, they are stupid, they have been naughty and they have been
dangerously playing with their lives. They have been unkind to themselves.
You see, I cannot feel that way, that somebody is a sinner who has com-
mitted sins and that such sins are there that cannot be rectified. It would
expressive about it than these people
can be. They can be much more
expressive, you see. When they
handle people, they can handle them
better. I have some other ways of
handling, which are not seen, which
need not be seen, which is just done.
But they can do it very well by
talking, by making you understand
because they have passed through
that way. They have crossed that
land and they know how to make
have been all right before Christ's coming, that we would have talked of a
karma theory, that we have done bad karmas and our karmas are there so we
are sinners and we are born as sinners. But Christ's coming has a very big
meaning, which I don't know how many of these preachers have understood.
It means that He came on this Earth to rectify our sins, so we are no more
sinners now.
I mean it's there. He is someone who can rectify it. Why should we call
ourselves sinners? And why should we worry about it?
Knowing freedom
The basic problem with human beings is this: they are ignorant. On one
side, they are proud of it. On the other side, they are frightened of it. Both
the sides, to My eye, is the same. Either you are frightened or you are proud
of it. They are both one. The pride leads to stupidity and the frightening
might lead to a sort of a destroying capacity in you, the way you go on
destroying yourself by all the time cursing yourself and saying that “I am bad
others cross also because I have not
crossed anything. I'm not so good at
all these things, I must confess. But
I think I understand problems.
and I have done this bad and that bad."
One has to get out of both of these things and must know that
a human being made out of so many genes, through which you have passed
and come to this stage where you are a human being... A human being is a
special thing, created for a special thing.
But you are not the human being at the time of Moses. You are not the
human being at the time when people were not evolved enough. You are
people who are free to understand the value of freedom. If understand
the value of freedom, you are the right people for Sahaja Yoga. When
have freedom, then you must have discretion also, how to use the freedom
and respect that freedom and not to indulge into abandonment which is
stupidity.
So going to extremes either on one side or the other is perhaps a sin. And
the sin, so-called, gives you a fear. And aggression, which is also a sin, gives
you a pride or I would say vanity, which spoils your vision completely.
So to talk to anyone who is a newcomer, one has to be careful that either
they are coming from this side or that side and, dealing with them, we have
to be extremely patient and loving, for I have told you that love does not
know faults. And when we start finding faults with others, we should know
our love is not matured so much.
you are
you
you
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-23.txt 
 REALITY
The power of love
I've tested your love also, whether you really love each other or not, because love is
something that's a release. Actually, it is a release. Love is within you and, for exam-
ple for Me, when I love you, it's a release of My boundless love within My heart. It
gives Me such a release and such a relief and such a joy that I'm loving, it's flowing to
If it doesn't flow, then I don't know how to work it out. If somebody is unkind,
is not willing to receive it, then I don't know how to work it out, how to go around
Meditation is a state of mind.
You don't meditate,
you.
but you become meditative.
And I'm not so good at conniving things and being artificial. Then I try
the
We do not prescribe any timing.
person.
some other tricks of working it out. But if they can receive your love, I'm sure they
will realize that you are the people who are out here for love...
I know it's very hard in these modern times to create a group of people who can
love. You can create a group of people who can hate. Supposing tomorrow you start
one big procession, "We hate God, we hate love, we hate this." You'll get thousands
of them standing with you, "Yes, oh, we hate." You see, for hatred you'll get thou-
sands of them with banners. They'll for it and come down to show that they hate
because hatred is a very cementing force among human beings. Surprisingly, hatred
is a cementing force. It looks like something, such a contrast, but it is so. I mean
when you try to collect people in the name of hatred, people jump. They have never
exploited the powers of love – never. I wish they had. All our wars, all our things
have come out because we hate each other. Imagine, only human beings can hate
that much. Animals can't hate so much as they can.
So this love, which is divine love, which thinks, which coordinates, which under-
stands, which is dynamic is so fantastic, is so all-pervading. It lives in every particle
of the matter, of the emotion, of the mind, of the heart. Everywhere it exists. That
апy
I'm in meditation all the time
and you could be also, but,
CC
because of the new birth,
pay
you're not yet identified fully with
the spirit.... You have to cleanse
yourself of all the things that
are still hanging around,
all the misidentifications.
For that, whatever we do,
power you can have within yourself. It's too much to believe, too much a tall story
for anyone, but it's true. It's a fact. The time has come. It could not be done earlier,
agreed, but the time has come. You have evolved to that state and that's why it has to
also we call it meditation.
happen. Now, if people do not accept, I must say this: futuristic problem.
In case human beings do not accept it in a big number and become that, we
cannot avoid the third world war. By that war, a new consciousness may rise, where
people will understand this hatred is the worst thing. Perhaps we need a third shock.
We have had two. Perhaps we need the third shock to give us that elevation, to get
that position ofhigher consciousness, where we start realizing that these things based
on the materialistic and on hatred, gross living are most dangerous to humanity.
Then such people who really believe in love will rise and come up and they might be
the ones who will be saved.
So we should, at this stage, try to save as many as possible from this horrible
sinking mire of hatred.
Identification as a realized soul
Talking about it has been done. Establishment of your sustenance has been done in
the sense that, if you can awaken that sustenance within you on the Void, you can
achieve it. But the main thing is, even after Realization, to identify yourself as a real-
ized soul absolutely, that you have been given something very special, that you have
your spirit, which is manifesting and that you have to make good out of it, that
have to give it to others.... Expand yourself to that great world – which is Yehovah's
world, which is Krishna's world, which is Virata's world – where
you
you become one
with that Primordial Being, where you become an active cell of that Primordial
Being. That is the thing one has to do. And that breakthrough has to take place.
22
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Now one may say that all the scriptures are wrong, everything is wrong, that all these
manifestations are wrong, Christ was no good, that He was not practical. Anything one
may say. You have freedom to say what you like, but you must have wisdom to see that
if there is a way, what must be the way. If there is a way for the emancipation of human
beings, there's only one way. There's no other way. I mean whatever you may be, an intel-
lectual or an emotional person or anything, whatever it is, but you will reach one conclu-
sion: there's only one way and the one way is the transformation of human beings.
To that level, where they really say what they mean, they become. They talk of world
brotherhood. They talk of everything. We have all kinds of organizations doing all this
There's only
one way
and the one
Way is the
nonsensical work. You see we have a UN system and we have world
government ideas,
transformation
we talk of love, helping Vietnamese, this, that. All sorts of things are there, but actually
we are not. Face to face, we are not. Face to face, we become ourselves and that is why to
become that, the becoming of it, is important. The transformation is important. Once of human
you are transformed, to identify yourself with that transformed state is also important and
that is only possible when you start allowing that transformation to take place within you Delings.
in thoughtless awareness, where you do not think and impose things....
People get their Realization all right... and then they do not think that there is any-
thing further needed because, once you get Realization, you can be very much in a joyous
state, blissful state. You might feel the vibrations very well, you'll be very happy – and
then you will
unless and until you have manifested yourself. But such people may be very few. I do not
know. It may be very few who will really take to that maturity.
Once you have matured, it is joy, it is happiness. You become what you have to
become. You find your absolute meaning. And that has to happen. For that ...
a kundalini and there are chakras and all this is already in you, placed. The machinery
is there. It is ... the machinery that understands and that loves you.
this loving machinery of God and that is what it manifests. It is the divine love of God
through you,
But with that machinery, when it works, when it is put to the mains, it works out that
divine power.
lost. That's not the point. You have not achieved your complete growth
get
there's
That's the part of
which
you can manoeuvre. By this, you may be able to manifest a voice.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-25.txt 
 REALITY
Three types of people
To explain things to people of different, various types that they have come, we normally
divide them into three, as you know: the people who are ignorant, fearful; the people
who are aggressive and in vanity, who are vain about themselves, they think no end of
themselves; and, thirdly, the people who are neither vain nor afraid. Those are friendly,
pleasant people, good people, who lead a life of moderation, who ... like to share.
That type
of central type of people are best suited for Sahaja Yoga. And such people
should be really tackled first. Then the people who are sort of humble people, they are
Central type humbled down and those who think they have done some mistakes, they are better off.
But aggressive people, you be careful dealing with them because you might get a punch
on your nose as soon as you talk of love, so be careful.... There are some people whom
you cannot tackle because they are so aggressive. It's better not to argue with them or
deal with them. The best thing is to leave them alone as they are and let them
of people are
best suited for
grow. Let
them find out because all these people will develop bumps. All aggressive people will
develop problems for themselves.
First of all, they cannot sleep in the night. That's one thing that happens to them
when they are aggressive, right-sided people. They'll have high blood pressure, they'll
have hot tempers, they may have divorces, they may fight with everyone. Ultimately,
they will find they're lost, not wanted by anyone. They would be meticulous. They
will develop kidney troubles and they will develop a funny trouble where they won't
remember their past. Even their names they may not remember. Then they will come
Sahaja Yoga.
around.
So allow them to have their nice time, but don't butt with that.... They punish
themselves by their stupidity that they are doing. You see, all their stupidness will be
shown in different ways and they'll have to face it and then they will come around.
The predictions of Sahaja Yoga
I don't know how far to believe in the predictions of modern times, but the olden times
predictions are so wonderful that I just can't imagine how people could see so many
things about Sahaja Yoga. Two thousand years back, a great seer called Brughu has
written something so great about Sahaja Yoga, that a new method will be devised by a
Mahayogi – they called Me "Mahayogi" – who will be Parabrahma incarnate and will
give Realization without any difficulties, raising the kundalini. People will
All the details of Sahaja Yoga he has given two thousand years back. He's one of the
greatest astrologers we have in India .. two thousand
ing to the English standard, it may be two thousand, but I think it's much more when
he has written – about five, six thousand years back. He has written about this just after
get it....
years back, maybe more. Acord-
Krishna....
So under these circumstances, one has to see ... all those who are aggressive by
temperament should know that there must be some way of getting out of it. Even
aggression is in the present state of human mind. It is very repulsive. You don't like it.
You don't like your aggressive self. When you aggress anybody, you repent after that.
You don't like it, that "Why was I so rude? I could have been better. Why should I be
disturbing someone? Why should I be like that...?" As others don't like them, they also
don't like themselves. When they are aggressive with others and very malignant by tem-
perament, they don't like themselves. They want to change, so even this may happen.
I would suggest that we must very gently go, but firmly and with the speed we have
to work it out. And I'm sure it will work out and many people will Realization and
will understand Sahaja Yoga.
get
24
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Living for the whole
After getting Realization, you must give some time to yourself. Be kind to yourself. Go
with it. Learn everything. Master it. It's
There is nothing much to be learned. It's very simple. It's a child's play. Even children
are good at Realization. Even a little baby can do that, so one should learn and try to give
Realization to others and one should not waste energy in running away from it....
It's a thing which is most enjoyable. You must give one day in your lifetime to God
who has created you and the one little time to your Mother also, who wants that every-
body must get Realization.
If every one of you wants to escape it, then who is going to work it out?
I know you are, seem to be, very busy people. Some of you are extremely busy, but escape it, then
busy for what, business for what? What is the name you are going to leave in this world?
As a man who earned a little money more than the others, that's all. I mean you cannot
earn as much money as Mr. Ford can earn, so why is there a competition about it? The
only thing is that you'll have no satisfaction of earning money. You will be always running work it out?
mad with it.
very simple.
If every one of
you wants to
who is going to
You must take out some time for your growth and
your meditation, by which
you
understand yourself and you understand others and help others. Life is not worth living
for yourself. It is a useless life which lives for oneself. You must live for the whole. You
must understand that the whole, if you accept, you become the whole. If the drop accepts
the ocean, you become the ocean. Why not we become the oceans, instead of little drops,
which are just evaporated by the heat of the sun or by anything?
You can be lost, so why not become the ocean – the ocean of love, the ocean of for-
giveness and the ocean of compassion?
May God bless you.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-27.txt 
 1 AM SO ENAMOURED that the speed of everything has
come down to zero for Me now. Nothing is moving. There is no
gati in Me now left – so enamoured and overwhelmed by your cel-
ebration, by your kindness, that I just don't know how to express
Myself.
All this is suggestive of such a tremendous depth and gratitude
in your hearts for something. I have done nothing whatsoever. I
have done nothing because I have not achieved anything in life
Myself.
I was what I am. I will be the same. I have not done any tapasya
I was what I am
or anything. I have not walked even an inch to achieve My goal.
Its
who have prepared yourself, who have come closer and
you
closer, just like a ready lamp, a deepak, and got yourself ignited,
enlightened yourself because of your preparation. It's only your
own doing which has given this light everywhere.
You know very well that light cannot spread in a vacuum. It
cannot spread. If there is a vacuum, light cannot spread. That's why
without the Sahaj Yogis I have no existence at all, I don't exist.
My whole existence is here because of you. I have no meaning.
I have no work. I don't do work at all. I am the one who is the
laziest and who doesn't do work whatsoever.
It's only you who have achieved it. It is you who have raised
any
any
yourself.
Actually, your birthdays must be celebrated instead of Mine
because neither am I getting old nor young. I am just the same.
There is no difference in any way. And I think it should be the
birthday of Sahaja Yoga which should be celebrated...
At this stage, we have to understand that puja is an abstract
achievement which can only be experienced. And all of you
sit with that feeling that we are going to achieve nothingness within
us, egoless, egolessness, emptiness, cleansing, so that the light of love
should flood all the areas within us. And that is only possible when,
of course, the chakras are to be awakened. That's going to work out
and also that you should open out your hearts completely – not to
doubt anything, not to think about anything, but just open your
hearts. Just receive it with complete faith and understanding...
should
I feel that already we have touched every corner of the world.
On this day, the only thing we have to declare is that let Sahaja Yoga
become a Mahayoga in its full way, that everybody in the whole
world should recognize that Sahaja Yoga is the only way people can
rise in their evolution and a new world can be created. And this
kind of a development, which is a collective development, which is
not of the outer world, but of the inner world, generates the roots of
this creation into a new dimension, into a new personality because,
by that time, the roots would have reached the source, the source of
this divine love, of this all-pervading power of this Brahmashakti.
Birthday celebrations 1983
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Iwillbe the same
W1
Neither am I getting old nor young
27
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-29.txt 
 Shri Durga Puja • 1 February 1982 • Rahuri India
One should try to understand that
if I am God, then why should you worry?
The first quality, the highest quality – if it is seen in a
I have one problem with the western mind. It is that if they
cannot conceive it, they start criticizing. Instead of making human being from his heart – all his bad qualities will be
yourself subtler and subtler to conceive the beauty of the destroyed. He will get light and attain moksha. That is why
Divine, if you don't get it, you will start criticizing on any he has always praised the Devi.
point...
It is a much deeper significance. Much deeper work has books like Vivek Chudamani. Lastly, he said that by only
to be done. So many things have to be worked out. It's a pleasing the Devi one can get everything.
very subtle thing and the
talk about it, you lose. You should keep quiet and absorb.
So today is not a day of such a mundane type. It is very and one will get whatever one wants. His wisdom very few
important in this small place where we are sitting. We are people have. When that intelligence comes into us, then
doing a tremendous job and you people, who have suffered you will get the authority in the same way, without doing
the most on account of these rakshasas, should be abso- anything.
lutely intensive. Be careful that these sinners must go out.
Something has to be done, instead of thinking about your- mistakes you make, I will forgive them all. Without doing
self and your inconveniences, your troubles and whatever that, it will not be possible because I have come with a very
you call them, which are not so important at all.
You are saints and you must support all divine work Me you should not do. And all the time crying and repeat-
with complete understanding. On the contrary, if you are edly saying that I have committed mistakes will also not
so much worried about your own things, you are a fool.... do. Then it becomes a problem for the Devi. You should
We have to be one with the subtleties. Sahaja Yoga is ask for forgiveness from the Devi and take a vow today that
not possible if you want to see it from a gross level. You hereafter we will not repeat the mistakes....
cannot understand. I have already told you that without
Realization, you cannot have Sahaja Yoga. But even after world will benefit from its fruits. You should not think how
Realization, if you stick on to those old things which belong will it happen.... Whatever vow you take now, with com-
In the beginning, he has described a lot, written lots of
Then why do these things? Why to do debates? Why
to do discourses and break one's head? Just praise the Devi
more you discuss it, the more you
Also I am prasanna chitta now and any number of
big heart and will forgive all your mistakes, but cheating on
You have to take a vow.... Because of this vow, all the
to the
subtler and subtler. And don't thịnk about it. You will relax.
You will feel better....
you will have no advantage. So try to become plete devotion and utmost faith, the fruits will be for the
egg
whole world. That is how
should think.
you
You are going to a level where nobody has reached. Shri Mataji speaks in English:
With this understanding, if you surrender, it means not We should try to take a vow and, with that vow, you
to give Me anything, but to get rid of your ego and your should be able to achieve something which has not been
stuck-up ideas which there have been.
yet achieved.
This achievement is not only for these people. It's not
only for Maharashtra. It is not only for India. It is not only
Shri Mataji speaks in Marathi:
If I am pleased, I will sit for the puja, otherwise not. It for the whole world, but for the whole universe. So you are
depends on Me.... The Devi is not in need of the puja. You playing a very important, vital role and one should try to
are in need of the puja. She has to be pleased...
Adi Shankaracharya was asked which is the greatest that substantial quality, nothing is going to work out...
quality. He said, “Devi bhakti, Mother's bhakti. She is the
Devi." Your Mother is the Devi. Understanding that. Do Her atmosphere that will bring forth the great change that we
bhakti. In that bhakti there should not be any false thing. are expecting of Mahayoga.
improve one's quality of life.... Unless and until
you have
You are the seeds who are going to create that great
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-30.txt 
 34
29
सত
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Shri Mataji came to Genoa
on the 11th of September
and it was unbelievable.
She was so happy and smiling.
We all offered flowers to Her one by one.
We were only about fifteen people
and She asked us all our names
and their meanings.
It was beautiful.
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-32.txt 
 31
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Padmini
and the palanquin
a story about chastity
WE HAD A QUEEN CALLED PADMINI and she was a very beautiful woman and one
Muslim aggressor who became sultan heard about her beauty, so he wanted to see her. She
refused. "I don't want to see him...."
He said, "If you do not allow me to see her, I'll invade your country."
So she agreed that "All right, he can see me in a mirror, so at least his bad eyes don't fall on
me directly." She agreed to that and he saw her in a mirror and he saw that she was even
more beautiful than he had thought her to be. So now he wanted to have her – so physical,
so superficial. And he said, “If you now do not come to me, I will again attack."
CC
They made a plan, “Let us now decide whether we are going to surrender our queen or not."
So everybody said, “Nothing doing. We are not going to surrender." Because the chastity of
a woman is very important and that of a queen – and a queen who is representative of all
the womanhood – should not be sacrificed like this. They could not bear the idea.
So they said that "All right, we'll organize something and cheat these people." So they sent
word, “All right, we are all coming and the queen is coming too." And they sent a hundred
palanquins. We use palanquins for ladies in India, covered. And inside every palanquin
there was one warrior sitting with all the weapons. And there were four carrying the palan-
quin and all these four were also warriors. So thus, they had about five hundred warriors. It
was a small kingdom, so when they went down, these people were very happy. "The
queen
is coming." And they were all getting drunk and celebrating it. "The queen is coming..."
They had told these women that "In case we win, then we light a fire and will know
that we have won. But if you do not see anything like that, then be sure that we have lost
the war."
you
So the king sat in the front palanquin and with the rest of them, they went and attacked
them in the sense that they first entered inside. And then, instead of the queen, the king
came out and they all fought those people. But they were only five hundred, so they could
not be saved and those people had better weapons, so they were killed. They did not light
the fire.
Now the women knew that all of them would be coming. Now they were very rich sul-
tans, very rich Muslims and things like that. But they thought that now their chastity is in
danger, so there was a big platform and they made a big pyre on that. And they all entered
into it and killed themselves, before they could enter and touch their bodies.
So for women especially, it is very important to have a great sense of chastity. And if they do
not have the great sense of chastity, then they develop all kinds of funny ideas and mentally
they become very imbalanced.
So we have to now understand how we have to build ourselves as Sahaja Yogis. Men and
women, all of them, have to go hand in hand because the first quality I told is wisdom,
but the essence of the Muladhara is innocence. They are made of innocence. The
Ganesha is innocence.
of
Shri Ganesha
power
Риjа 1991
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Era
Credits and Notes
MORE ABOUT CAXTON HALL
Front cover: Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Contents pages
quotation: Shri Ganesha Puja 2008 Contents pages photograph: Shri
Mataji Nirmala Devi, Italy, 25 August 2008 (Calin Chirou) Content
pages name: the 108th name of Shri Shiva Pages 3: Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi Page 8: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi (Mark Callaghan)
Page 10: Caxton Hall, London Pages 11 and 13: Shri Mataji Nirmala
Devi, Caxton Hall, London 1979 Pages 14, 16, 17, 19, 20 and 23:
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Page 25: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in a
photograph of a photograph (Mark Callaghan) Pages 26 and 27: Shri
Mataji Nirmala Devi and children, UK Page 29: Shri Mataji Nirmala
Devi, Shri Durga Puja 1982 Page 30 and 31: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi,
Genoa Italy, 11 September 2008 (Calin Chirou) Above: a new edition of
Meta Modern Era, offered to Shri Mataji, Shri Ganesha Puja 2008 (Sno
Bonneau) Back cover: a tulip (Omar Davis)
That was a complete sea change. Sahaja Yoga just changed gear.
Up to that time it had just been a small group of people going
around to different houses with Shri Mataji. Then She announced
that She would like to have a public program me and we were all
mystified. We were quite frightened and didn't know what would
happen. We put a big advert in Time Out magazine and hired a
room in Caxton Hall, in central London close to Shri Mataji's new
home in Victoria. We didn't know if anyone would come, and to
our amazement about two hundred people came. We were rather
embarrassed, because Shri Mataji asked us all to sit on chairs on
stage with Her. As Shri Mataji gave Her talk I remember gritting
my teeth at all of the aches and pains I could feel working out in
the chakras and trying my best to look evolved! The next thing we
knew we were all moving down into the audience with Shri Mataji
and working on people, and in the space of one evening Sahaja
Yoga completely changed. At the end of that meeting everyone in
the hall felt part of one big family, it was as if the Sahaja Yoga we had
known had changed gear and moved to a new level. Patrick Anslow
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
www.divinecoolbreeze.org
SUBSCRIPTIONS: contact@divinecoolbreeze.org
CONTENT: editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
The Divine Cool Breeze, 881 Frederick Road
North Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
The sixth volume of the book series "Eternally Inspiring Recollections
of Our Holy Mother" is now available from Nirmal Tranformation
Pvt. Ltd. (www.nitl.co.in). This new book is a collection of stories
about Shri Mataji in the United Kingdom and includes more about
PRINTED BY
King Printing Company Inc., 181 Industrial Avenue East
Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA
and Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd.
Caxton Hall.
No.8, Chandragupta Housing Society, Paud Road,
Kothrud, Pune 411038, Maharashtra India
ODERN ERA
META MODE
ERA
 2008_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-35.txt 
 through your spirit: the beauty, the glory, the fragrance of a flower
every flower is poetry
