The Divine Cool Breezes 2009 issue 4 – volume twenty-two n umber four It is said that God is love. We have heard that many times and many people have explained in their own way what is love. But to feel that love is the best way of understanding it. Even if you explain or describe in all details, although it is described in all detail, you cannot enjoy love without experiencing it.

 The ocean of love is your Sahasrara. When your Sahasrara is filled with love, then life is changed. You don't become a very intelligent man, a very dynamic personality, but you are nothing but love and this love is so self-satisfying. You are not bothered if others don't love you or they love you. just You don't see to that part. What you see is the enjoyment from that love. It's a tremendous ocean of love. You all have got it. And once you have entered into Sahaja Yoga, you know that you have entered into the Sahasrara. And the Sahasrara is, I tell you, the source of all the truth. recognize Truth is there – the complete truth. Truth is the knowledge. And also, truth is love. God is the ocean of compassion, ocean of love. He is the one who is so anxious that you all should enter into His kingdom to occupy your great seats as His children. He is the Father of the Fathers. He is the most loving Father you could think of.

 The Divine Cool Breeze This experience comes to us because God Himself has placed within us This issue features the mechanism to absorb this love and to manifest it. It is a very delicate one talk from mechanism within us – extremely delicate. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi This mechanism is placed in our heart and, by our ignorance, so many CKP Hall, Mumbai times we spoil this mechanism or disturb it or sometimes even completely 30 December 1979 destroy it. Advice on All Chakras The light of love is joy. Anything else cannot give you joy. It's only the love that you feel in your heart that gives you joy. Some words and sentences on the yellow pages are MULADHARA translated from Marathi. This mechanism acts in seven layers within us. In the periphery of these These appear in italics. seven layers, we have got ripples of this joy arising. They come to the shores of our brain and create the bubbles of joy. But again, if the brain is a very MORE ABOUT rational rock, then these bubbles dissolve, giving no effect to the rock. So a THE MULADHARA 13 January 1983 Left Muladhara and the Supraconscious Duhlia India loving person is a thousand times better than a rational person. But most of the people feel this love only on the periphery of the 5 February 1981 The Muladhara Chakra outermost layer, which is the light of the Muladhara. As you know, the New Delhi India Muladhara has got excretory effects and how important or relieved we MORE ABOUT LOVE feel when our excretions are all right. It's a basic thing that that relief gives Guru Puja 2001 Worship, Purity and Love in Yourself and in Others Cabella Italy you a kind of a joy and happiness. It is really gross. It is a low type, as they Diwali Puja 1987 The Light of Love Lecco Italy call it, but very important for us to get that joy. But to make this joy not so dominating over all other joys of deeper sensitivity is to be innocent. Sahasrara Puja 1989 Jump into the Ocean of Love Sorrento Italy I know one cannot be innocent. You have to be innocent yourself. But 26 October 1987 The Revolution of Love Rome Italy with Sahaja Yoga you can, by clearing your Muladhara. 2

 Innocence was created first of all before the universe was created and this exists within us. сетсе ren We are here to give joy, happiness to everyone, to make everyone happy... When you make them happy, then you feel that joy within yourself, “Oh, they're so happy." See their happiness. Then only this lotus opens out much more like a ripple moves and moves to the end of the shores and then, from the shore, it returns back to you. In the same way, when your joy reaches the joy of others, then the ripples that come up make a beautiful pattern of your life. Just think of such situations where you did something good to others, have been nice to others. And then you found the very joy in that person and how that joy came back to you. Think of that pattern that you felt so subtly in your life, how it is built in. Whenever you think of that time or that moment or that area, the whole picture comes to you and you think, “What a time!" But that time is eternally within you all the time... You are My light and the light is there, which is an eternal light.

 MORE ABOUT INNOCENCE So that's very important, that our Muladharas must be clear. Our 23 June 1980 The Essence Within innocence must be established, so that these gross joys do not cover the London United Kingdom 31 December 1985 entire spectrum of our life and make us slaves of these gross joy-giving The Innocence of a Child Ganapatipule India reliefs. But to clean your Muladhara does not mean, by any chance in Sahaja Sahasrara Puja 1984 Mesnieres de Brayes France Yoga, to get after any kind of obsession and obstruction, but to give a natural Mahakali Puja 1990 Purity and Collectivity Le Raincy France release, like an innocent child, to these ripples, which need not go back to all MORE ABOUT RIPPLES the other layers of joy. Diwali Puja 1994 The Lights of Pure Compassion Istanbul Turkey You must have seen when the ripples in a ocean touch the shores, they 7 June 1988 turn back. If the shores are made of very hard rocks, this turning can be very Recognition of the Adi Shakti Schwechat Austria deep and the waves can go much deeper. If the brain is very ego-oriented, 9 March 1983 Puja Talk Melbourne Australia is covered with ego, then these joys have a much greater significance in life In Sahaja Yoga there's no question of suppression. You just become innocent. than normal. Innocence is the only way one can neutralize those ripples coming back on the other six very important layers. That is the principle of Shiva. This Sahaj culture is in the SWADISTHAN centre, neither too much of licentiousness you go forward, you know in the second layer is the joy of creativity. As nor too much of suppression, but it is in the centre, which is Shiva's greatest When the joy of creativity comes within us, it again comes back to the periphery. For some people it is so important, so maddening to create principle. It is to be innocent. And this something – they are mad after it and they think it is something so important innocence just shines in you.... To be in the centre, in the Sahaj, is the best way to to do – to create some thought, to create some book, to create some artistic impressions or something. For some people it's very important, so they understand that what is so important for life is morality. And that comes from your create. And this creativity, when it hits some rational mind, it gives him the same kind of a deeper reaction, that a person starts thinking that he is the innocence. And that is the quality of Shri Ganesha, who is the greatest of all and whatever he does to the rest of the world is all right as son of Shiva. 3

 disthe Swadisthan is the chakra which gives you, first and foremost thing, creativity. A person who is a guru has to be creative by nature. If you are not a creative person, yoи саппot becoте a guru. For example, you are faced with disciples with whom you have to converse, you have to create a word of divine magic to impress on the disciples or the people who are attracted towards you NIRVICHAR SAMADHI After getting Realization, there is a period of doubts because first you get thoughtless awareness, which is called as nirvichar samadhi. When we say as gurus, to show that you have much more divine magic than them. If you are a very mundane type of a person, very ordinary, cannot create a beautiful couplet or a beautiful sentence or a humour or a joke or a beautiful painting or a beautiful tapestry or a beautiful house, if you lack in creativity you will lack in your guru principle because a guru has to create out of ordinary people something extraordinary. He should be able to create a new personality out of an old awareness in the normal terminology, it means alertness to anything. But when we say samadhi, it means enlightened awareness. You get thoughtless enlightened awareness. And then you get doubtless enlightened awareness. personality which is decayed. So the first principle you have to understand within yourself, that you should be able to create a new personality in a person. The stage between the two in some people is so little that they just are there... But here are mediocre and there are also absolutely bullock carts, I would call them. They cannot move with the time of the jet. In these modern times, imagine a bullock cart being pulled by a jet – big problem. But if you are of that calibre and that quality, you get both the stages just like that. There is no doubt after that. But then there are some who get into doubts. I don't know what they doubt here. They had the experience. They feel the vibrations coming. They see cool breeze flowing through them. They see it working on others. They see the pusation of the Kundalini, the rising of the Kundalini. They are getting better in health and everything is improving. Still they are doubting and wasting their time.. Everything is delayed because of that. All right, so we have here jet planes, we have here supersonics, we have missiles – and we have also bullock carts. Creativity With love, all kinds of creative action takes place ... and as love will increase, your creativity will develop. So the basis of all the creativity of Saraswati is love. If there is no love, there's no creativity. It's even there in the deeper sense. People who have created all the scientific things are also [acting] out of love for the masses, not for themselves. Nobody has produced anything for themselves. If they make something for themselves, it has to become for universal use, otherwise it has no meaning... So all the activity on the right-hand side of Saraswati, basically has to end up in love. ир It starts with love and ends up in love. ир

 long as he is a great creator of thought or ideas. Such a man can become very, very dogmatic, dominating and could be tyrannical because he thinks whatever he does is showing results, showing success according to him. He rationalizes the whole thing and the whole thing goes back, much deeper into him, covers all his chakras. So the neutralizing of this second layer is thoughtless awareness - nirvichar. When your awareness is enlightened – samadhi- and you are in the nirvichar state, then whatever you create, you just see it. In thoughtless awareness, you really enjoy whatever you see or whatever you create... That is how it is kept to the periphery. It is important that it should be kept, coming on the brain, because the brain is the one which records it. And if the brain is such a solid stuff that it cannot record, it is not sensitive, most of it is lost in giving it a reaction and the whole joy is finished. For example, you create some painting. You just create it and just look at it without any thought. The complete joy of your heart which you have poured onto that canvas will be filling you completely and you will feel the flow of joy going down. If the creation is done in thoughtless awareness, then it is the most pure. Apart from that, it is the most beautiful, it is the most perfect because such a painting or such an art or such a creation, such a thought, such a book, such an idea will emit vibrations. The coefficience MORE ABOUT CREATIVITY to emit vibrations will be complete if it is done in thoughtless awareness. Diwali Puja 2000 Lake Piru USA That is why those who are realized souls, when they create something or Saraswati Puja 1990 The Essence of Vishnumaya they produce something, you find it easy to find out whether it is giving Vancouver Canada vibrations or not – very easy. 4

 NABHI When the Kundalini In the same way, you go to the third very, very important centre of your rises, then only these Deities get awakened. And when they Nabhi – the Nabhi, or you can call it the navel chakra. The joy of feeling that get awakened, this Sushumna path, this central path of you have eaten the food cannot be described. In Marathi they will say .. if you are hungry, you won't even take to Sahaja Yoga, you won't take to God. Mahalakshmi starts acting as the balancing power to begin with at the Nabhi chakra. So the Nabhi chakra Even if God is standing before you, you will say, "First fill my stomach, oh God, then I will talk to You." And when you eat the food, the joy you get out of that also goes to the periphery, as usual. If it goes to a rational rock, as I is surrounded by ten gurus, the prophets who give you the then again the effect is deeper. If you start thinking about it, you feel, "I say, balance, who come on this Earth again and again to give you balance in life. have had my food, others must have" and this and that and all those things. And then think that "I must have more of this and more of that. I must you They tell you, "Don't do this, don't do that... So the balancing comes through the Nabhi and the Nabhi looks after you and teaches you how to behave. have something more to feed my stomach." Now when you have a limited stomach, you can't eat mounds of food... Normally people have very limited stomachs. Then when your stomach is limited, you start thinking, "Oh, my stomach is limited. Still the joy of the Nabhi chakra is not yet complete. Let me think of something else" So you end up with maybe alcohol because alcohol you think takes no space in the stomach. You think it has a different spacing in the stomach. I have seen people drinking beer. I was surprised you cannot drink so much of water as | MORE ABOUT THE NABHI 28 March 1981 people can drink beer. Most surprising, pints and pints of beer they can go The Nabhi Chakra Sydney Australia on drinking and they never feel satisfied. At such time, the movement starts 7 February 1981 Nabhi Chakra and Void Delhi India towards the left of the joy. This is the beginning of the left side, we start. Guru Puja 1979 London United Kingdom And at that time, you think that by getting drunk, you are getting into a very romantic mood or some sort of a nonsense like that. Then you start spending

 In Sahaj culture we have to be special people. We cannot be like other people who are just running after money and doing everything just to ruin themselves. In Sahaja culture we have to meditate, get our satisfaction about everything within ourselves. And also we have to be like the Lakshmi children... Unless and until we meditate, unless and until we reach that state of satisfaction, we cannot see the work of this Divine Power.. Whatever you gain, whatever joy, satisfaction, vibrations, knowledge, all that, you want to give it to others. You want to spread it because now you've got the reality and you don't want to keep it to yourself. You think it is very important that everyone in the world should know about reality. Have that satisfaction and glory of your own being and of your own standard and of your own calibre. The others are not of your calibre – all right, forget about it. That should not give you ego, but should give you a personality that does not react. We have something of our own. We do not react to things. We are not reactionaries. And things will disappear which are harmful. Everything will be perfectly all right because we are standing in our own perfection, in our own glory. What do we need? Nothing, just enjoying ourselves.

 This Principle of Lakshmi gives us all your time, wasting your life, taking to laziness, to inertia. You take may to drugs. This can reach up to the heart of a person or to the liver of the a great sense of satisfaction. If you don't have satisfaction, person. The liver goes on becoming solid and solid. The more you drink, the then any amount of Lakshmi cannot help worse you become. you. One becoтes very greedy. You have something, but you So man goes on wasting his time trying to get joy out of something which is so dangerous for your being. Anybody who says that drinking is very bad, want to have more and more and more. people immediately say that "Oh, he is absolutely Victorian." Or whatever it is, they brand the person. Now how to get rid of the Nabhi complication? Because these joys are so temporary, you will see in every case. The Nabhi joy is also very temporary. MORE ABOUT SATISFACTION Shri Krishna-Kubera Puja 2002 Canajoharie USA I mean you also do not enjoy it much. If you could, you would not go into it Diwali Puja 2000 Lake Piru USA again and again. So the neutralizing point is satisfaction. You should feel satisfied. You have eaten all right two morsels – feel satisfied. Even with two morsels you Bakasura A demon killed by Bhima, one of the Pandava brothers. will be much happier than, like a bakasur, if you eat a mound of rice. To be satisfied is the only way you can neutralize your Nabhi. In all your material wants, there is no end to it. You go on supplying any number of things. You will go on asking for more, but you have not enjoyed anything. You have bought one piece of cloth. You made a shirt for yourself. You want to have another one because a person who is working in your office has got this kind of a shirt. So run all over the world to find that shirt, but the one who is wearing the shirt, he's running all over the world to find a shirt as you have made.

 I could have been born a Japanese or a Chinese. And supposing I was speaking in Chinese with three thousand words. Then who'd have understood Me?

 So this madness goes on increasing and the Nabhi chakra remains in a big turmoil. So one of the neutralizing points, most important, is the satisfaction Pick up what of the Nabhi. At every point you should try to feel satisfied. "All right, if I Mataji is haven't got it, I am satisfied." At that moment you will get the joy. "I have got saying this thing. All right, I am satisfied." You will get the joy and others will be also in a happy disposition.. Satisfaction is the only way one can enjoy. Even say, I am speaking in It is the English, if you just see, are you enjoying the satisfaction of it? Supposing I essence. was not a Maharashtrian. I could have been born a Japanese or a Chinese. And supposing I was speaking in Chinese with three thousand words.. Then Pick it up. what, should you have understood Me? So again, here we come to the same question: are we satisfied? Whatever we get – those who are looking for amrut, for ambrosia, do not bother about That's how the words. They just want to pick up what Mataji is saying. It is the essence. you are Pick it That's how you are going to feel satisfied... •dn. There's no end to the madness, if you start with dissatisfaction. But if you going to start with satisfaction, then that's the point. You don't have to go further – feel satisfied. this You just go deep. Such a person is such a headache, I tell that way, way. Such a person, as soon as you see, you feel, "Oh God, what have I done you. today to deserve this?" A person should live in this world like the flowers. You can't see them, how they bloom, what time they bloom. But when they bloom, you can only feel their fragrance, their love.

 It is like going in a boat. Just keep quiet. Just be in the centre with the centre of gravity of the boat. Just be there. That is dharma. In your sustenance, stay there. I mean to remain there, you don't have to do anything. To become that, you have to do something. All these things will come to you automatically when there is light.

 Satisfaction you cannot have without Realization. So before that, if I "You should be satisfied," it's just brainwashing. You cannot be. After say, Realization, because you have found that which satisfies your spirit, that's why your priorities change. You get satisfied for nothing at all.. A person who is satisfied is the most efficient person. Our country suffers from the Nabhi chakra. That's why we are very inefficient people. VOID We have three For everything we have excuses – like "this is not working because this was identities within ourselves. On the not working." Our inefficiency comes out of the Nabhi chakra problem. If you heart is Shiva, in the brain is Shri Krishna, are a satisfied person, your work is very satisfying also. If a lady has a good the Virata, and in the liver, Brahmadeva. So we have three identities and in the stomach, in the Void, as you say, is Nabhi, when she cooks her food, with very little food you feel very satisfied. Whatever she will do will be excellent. all the Guru Tattwa So for all Nabhi problems, one mantra one must remember is of where all the great gurus, from Adi Nath, Mohammed-sahib satisfaction. and others, up to Shirdi Sai Nath, all of them are the Guru principle. VOID Now we go to the Void, although in the seven layers it is a little confused with Nabhi. But we have to see to the Void also. In dharma, in sustenance, we get happiness about it. When we try to be nice to someone we get happiness out of it. But some people who are supposed to be dharmic can be horrid, so boring that you would like to run away from such people all your life. They are supposed to be very religious people. They get up at four o'clock in the morning, torture everyone around, then they do their aarti, rubbing of the sandalwood, then having a bath MORE ABOUT SUSTENANCE Mahashivaratri Puja 1981 with a big stotra going on. Everybody must wake up.. They must disturb Mumbai India 8.

 in the same tradition, My disciples S What is your power? Where does your power lie? It lies in the spirit... illusive. So to improve your Void say, "Mother, It is your chastity. If a man is chaste, of chaste This guru is very You are our guru. temperament he has and he stands up in his chastity. Because of this illusiveness, that fear or that awe which which is necessary for the guru is not is necessary, that established. Unless and until you develop that awe, a complete awe within you, your Guru Principle won't develop.. You must find out about your own guru. Establish Her in your heart. I mean you have a wonderful guru otheruwise. I must say, I wish I had one like that. And She is desireless and sinless... You must know your guru and that She is on every chakra working. Imagine what a tremendous guru you have. With that you will feel the confidence... To understand your own guru power, you must know who is your guru – Sakshat Adi Shakti. “Oh God, it's too much. Then establish your Void. A guru does not bend his head before anybody else and especially My disciples. Except to mothers and sisters ... they do not bow to anybody else. And secondly, you must know that your guru has been the mother of very great people. The thought of them itself should establish your Guru Tattwa. What tremendous sons I have had, what great personalities. No words can describe them – and so many of them, one after another. And you are in the same tradition, My disciples. Keep them as your ideals. Try to follow them. Read about them, understand them, what they have said, how they have achieved such heights. Recognize them. Respect respect It acts. It works.... The vehicle we have is our chastity... You have everything within you. You are the storehouse of chastity, which is your power. Everything is within you. Nothing has gone out. It's all there. All that fragrance is within you. It is all preserved. Don't condemn yourself. And you are so fortunate I am here to tell you all about it. You are so fortunate I am with you.... You are nowhere if you have no chastity. That's like a broken glass, which is trying to reflect something. It can never give the right picture. It's so important. And I have to tell you this now. " The time has come for Me to tell you: this is the snake in our life.... Let what I say become the mantra to awaken that within you so that, them. You will establish your Guru Tattwa. Imbibe all the statutes within you and be proud about it. Don't be misguided by what people are saying. Multitudes are talking. We are going to pull the whole multitude towards as My children, you enjoy the bliss of chastity, as I have enjoyed all My human life and all My Divine lives. You enjoy the same quantity. That's what I want. ourselves. First of all, let us establish our weight, the gravity. As the Mother Earth keeps everybody pulled towards the Earth, we will be pulling all of them to ourselves... Promise that you will be a guru worthy of your Mother.

 everyone, saying that they are dharmis – very hot-tempered, angry people. These dharmis can be neutralized in a very, very simple way. That dharma is your own concentration inward. Like you want to donate something to someone, it's just between you and God. There is no expression of it outside at all... Some of these so-called honest can be so blunt that you cannot go near them. They think if they are honest then they have a right to cut MORE ABOUT CHASTITY everybody's throat. It is for you I have said it and not for anybody else. It Shri Ganesha Puja 1989 Chastity & the Collective Nature Les Diablerets Switzerland should be concentrated on yourself. The dharma is for ourselves.. It's your Shri Ganesha Puja 1985 The Importance of Chastity Brighton United Kingdom own clearing that is important in dharma and not anybody else's. There's a relationship between you and your guru – direct. Supposing you come and tell Me something, that "Mataji, this is between Respecting your chastity is really You and me." That is between you and Me, although I'm not bound by it, not respecting Me because I reside at all. If it is necessary I may speak it out, but ninety-nine percent l'll keep it within you as chastity. that as a secret, so it is the secrecy of your own dharma. The beauty of it is If Shri Ganesha is the auspiciousness, I reside within you like that. You see the subtleties... If you are a dharmic man, it's so sweet. Suddenly you'll find the shine appearing like a diamond suddenly, with as chastity. all the facets. Suddenly you will find a person who – what a beautiful man he you are not looking after yourself, looking after everybody's dharmas. is. But Then the same thing will happen, that the joy of dharma will only be felt if you limit it to yourself. That cannot be shared. Virtues cannot be shared. Can I share My virtues with you? I cannot. You can support it. Somebody is a MORE ABOUT THE VOID 7 February 1981 virtuous man, then you can support him. But the joy of that dharma, that raasa, Introduction to the Nabhi and the Void Delhi India falling into your heart, nobody else can enjoy it. You enjoy your own chastity. 6.

 Doma ea I am the Primordial Mother and I have to do the job of awakening the primordial nature, the dharma within human beings and that's what I have to do and nothing else. Dharma means our primordial taboos that are RELIGION Your inner religion is enlightened – inner religion. These chakras are created by great prophets. They have talked of religion in the real sense of the word, but be built-in, in the human beings.... The primordial taboos are only understood if people are trying to understand oneself or else whatever has come they do not follow religion. You may Christian, Hindu, Muslim, anything, to them through tradition. Now Sahaj Dharma you can commit any kind of sin, but become a saint, you is little bit different in the sense that it's much опce you do not. Nothing can tempt you. For that, you don't have to leave your houses, families, nothing. It's inside yourself.. All the religions are the signboards to enter into the Kingdom of God. But if you are just standing at the signboard and reading the signboard, will you enter? You have to leave the signboard пot. higher than the Sahaj ideas that we talk of, but it's much higher than even what Shri Krishna said or Shri Rama said.... Sahaja Dharma is that you are just free – complete freedom from lust, greed and all nonsense. You are above it. You are above. This Sahaj Dharma is above the and come up to this centre where resides all the peace, joy and happines.... Once you are enlightened, you don't do wrong things. You don't take to wrong things. Then you start understanding all these prophets, all these great incarnations. You start understanding what they were. Then you understand that all these religions have come out of one Tree of Life, which is spirituality. And we have plucked these flowers and we are fighting with the dead flowers. There's no life in it. dharma established by Shri Krishna or by Shri It is Rama because you have reached that stage. in complete freedom you have to be dharmic. Whatever is not good for you, you should not don't do this do. I don't have to tell that you you or you don't do that. Whatever I say may not be acceptable, but immediately your vibrations will tell you.

 It is, of course, written, "Thou shalt not do, thou shalt not do." These are all commandments that have come, but they can come only from God, not from you. Once you start doing it to others, you are finished. You have lost the joy of your dharma... Religion is You will never teach dharma to others. Preaching religion is against religion. You cannot preach. How can you preach religion...? We can respect. only evolve our own, imbibe our own, except for the people who are incarnations. They can tell what is religion, but they cannot put religion into you. And when you start enjoying that religion within you, you start having Dharma gives you the that more and more within yourself. Then you start respecting yourself. Your balance. It gives you self-respect comes. the establishment into So we take it to this, that religion is respect. The neutralization of using proper behavior, proper understanding, proper religion for wrong things is respect. Respect every other person. Respect his living, but it doesn't religion. Respect the principles of other religions – of religion I am saying. give you the completion of your journey. Otherwise you start running behind bhoots. It doesn't give you the Again discrimination should be there. I am saying respect the religion satisfaction of reaching that is within you and the religion in another person. Maybe secretly that the destination. And your personality person is very religious. Outwardly he doesn't show... is still incomplete. So we come to religion, which is a part of the Nabhi. The satisfaction of So one has to have the experience of the spirit. religion is only possible when you learn to respect other people and their religion, their styles. MORE ABOUT RELIGION Without telling that person, without talking to him about it, you can 7 February 1985 The Culture of Universal Religion Bordi India correct his catches and your own. Why are you catching? Because you have 12 July 1994 The Inner Religion some weakness. I never catch from anyone. So to denounce somebody or to Paris France 10

 This is Sahaj Dharma: In the Sahaj Dharma you get rid of all kinds of kaama, krodha, mada, matsa, lobha, moha. That means lust, anger, attractions, then greed... With Sahaj Dharma, you take people into your heart. You love them. Your love flows all the time. Your compassion flows all the time... You should have a heart which is open... You must try to see the beauty as Sahaja Yogis. You should be sensitive to see how you have been helped, how you have been guided, how you have been blessed. This is Sahaj Dharma.. This is the new dharma we have established now in this world a new race with a new dharma.... Sahaj Dharma is that you are your own. You are in your own. You are in your own realm and in your happiness and joy. Where is the time to criticize others? So the best thing is to show your maximum love to everyone.

 put down somebody is not proper. That shows that you have less strength. So you should say that "Mother, I have less strength and, because that person has so much of this kind of a vibration, I feel a little bad." If the whole world is all right and then you are going to feel all right, then what's the use of having this light? Just think of this – that we will say that "All right, I am the light and I have to give light. I am a realized soul. But when all the lights are all right, then only I will be with them." So a light and a half – what's the use of having such a light? We should have such lights that can go in the darkness and finish the darkness. That light is the light of dharma within us. It is not how many times you meditate, how many times you sit in the water, put your feet in the water or use My photograph or what you do and all these rituals. It is not that. You are all Sahaj Dharmis. You have It is how much dharma is within your heart... accepted Sahaj Dharma and in Sahaj Dharma Try to imbibe the dharma within yourself and then you will see we have to have pure eventually you will become a very generous-hearted person – very love of the heart – not hypocrisy – and a sensible life. generous-hearted because you are starting tolerating everyone – even generous as far as money is concerned. That is something so gross... Generosity just flows. It flows and emits by itself and you just start enjoying it. HEART MORE ABOUT DHARMA The most important chakra is that of Jagadamba. It is the Heart and this Shri Rama Puja 1987 Les Avants Switzerland gives you joy. At a point where you have relationships with children your Sahasrara Puja 1997 At Sahasrara You Stand on Truth and Go Beyond Dharma Cabella Italy the people who are generous, for them the whole world are their own 11

 Security Kundalini is a part, or we can Mahakali is the person who guides you how to say a reflection, of the Adi Shakti. avoid all the dangers. Now She protects your And also Jagadamba is part of the Adi life. She protects your body. She protects Shakti. She is placed in the centre of two Hearts, which is a very important organs of your body. She is the one who gives you point. Now all these powers are placed all the security of life. In Her realm, you feel com- in that chakra, so you imagine how pletely secure. You are never afraid of anything... all the If you are under Her beautiful guidance and Her many of these powers there must be. And Her powers are expressed through blessings, you will never feel afraid to do anything. the centre Heart in all the Ganas you You will never do anything wrong also. As soon as have around your body. Now these Ganas are the ones who do give you the you will try to do wrong, She will hold your hand. She is really the guiding person. She is the one who protection, give you the sleep, give you the energy, give you the blessings – all actually gives us our existence. Without Her, we of them are at work all the time - and cannot exist because She is the one who is the power these bodies are extremely dedicated and of Shri Shiva.... connected all the time to the Mother So your worries are finished. She worries about you. Amba. We can call Her Jagadamba. Now She is the Mother of the universe, You shouldn't worry about yourself. That's the point so you can imagine it, how busy She has of it. Her security is so great. She's so secure Herself to be to look after the whole universe... that She gives you all the security that It is Mother's centre. It is impossible to understand the love of the Mother. It's All this works out in such a manner, that it builds absolutely impossible. When the girls get married and they become mothers, then they start understanding how you you are standing on the truth. Hold it with much their mother must have done your hands. You will grow on it. You will enjoy for them to come up. In the same way, yourself. Life will be so much better, much more when Sahaja Yogis become good Sahaja beautiful. And it is only through you the whole world Yogis, like Ganas, they realize how is going to be saved. So strengthen yourself, strengthen much the Ganas had to have patience, had to have love and intelligence to fight the negativity. So all the forces of Jagadamba act towards hitting the brainwaves that you have about it.... Develop that you need. up a tremendous sense of security within know that you, both your arms and strengthen your feet. The faith is the strength of Sahaja Yoga, not the negativity of all kinds. faith that gives you the sense of security.

 children. For everyone the love flows. Everybody's worry is the worry of that person. This comes from the centre Heart, that you try to mother every person. That feeling is there.. The protection is given by the Goddess to Her bhaktas, not to abhaktas, not to rakshasas... First and foremost, the essence of the Heart chakra is security. It is to feel your own security yourself. Feel your own security within yourself. Only the realized can feel that security because they know they have their Atma, their Spirit. By small, small things, we destroy our security.. The complete security within yourself is that you are the Self and these You things are not important. If you are a secure man, your children will also find that out that their security lies in finding their own security. They themselves will say, "Now, don't try to help us to spoil us. Do not give us things by which are we feel more insecure!" And such children would be really brave children... Feel your own security and then the joy of that security will take to you your depth. Why are you insecure in life? Money...? The person who has the God, who has got now the blessings of the Divine, what more does he want? Because your God is almighty, nobody's might is greater than that of your Self. Father. Nobody dare touch you on any point. But your faith is lacking and that is why you start with your faith in your heart. Make the faith sit in your Heart chakra and that faith is going to give you the joy of security. Faith is the answer for all the insecurities of the world. You have made the Parmeshwar stand in front of you, what else do you want? 12

 Livata where we have to seek ourselves in others It is the totality – and the totality of everything. If that is the Virat, then that is in your brain, but reality is in your heart. So the totality you may see, you may witness. The reality is the subtlety behind it. The power of the Virata is that it can penetrate into the subtle side of human beings in such a manner that in everything we are connected. We are not separated. And every drop is connected with the ocean. We are connected with the whole universe. And when you become a citizen of the Virat, then all the things with which you are connected also get your vibrations, your ideas, your ambitions. Everything passes through that and it works... Once you are above your ego, you enter into the kingdom of the Virata. There the king is the Virat and you are the subjects who are looked after completely by the Virata Shakti, by the power of the Virata. But at that stage, you become really a universal personality... In the case of a person who rises above his ego and he is a part and parcel of that Virata Shakt, enters into the kingdom of Virata, he knows he is very small. He is very small compared to that and he just dissolves into that shakti. And this should happen to us, that we should humble down. We should humble down and know that our powers, whatever we have, if they give us ego, we should get rid of it. We should not have that ego. We should get rid of it and we should actually achieve that state where you can be called as citizens of the Virata's power... When you are entering into the kingdom of the Virata, have to be like children. You are children there. you As children you enter.

 VISHUDDHI Madhurya So now we come to the chakra of Vishuddhi. The Vishuddhi chakra Sweetness Krishna is the one who can be divided into two. It is the Vishuddhi and the Hamsa. There are two represents the madhurya, the sweetness, sweetness chakras and the Vishuddhi Chakra is, as you know, the chakra of the Virat, of your character... It's a very beautiful feeling of madhurya. You see, in little, little things they express madhurya, like in poetry, in relating some events. When you get a very sweet where we have to seek ourselves in others. We have to seek our Atma in another person. We have to feel his Atma. We have to feel everybody's feeling about the whole event. Krishna's leelas were Atma. We have to feel everyone else. We have to feel it. And how to do it all full of madhurya. It's like a sport. – Krishna has taught us – is madhurya. It is the sweetness. Madhurya is the essence of sweet. Feel others with the sweetness of it, that you are going to It is for you to use that tremendous power – the embodiment of feel a flower. You are going to smell the fragrance of the other flower, which madhurya, sweetness. That madhurya you have to imbibe and that madhurya you have to spread. That's very important. So that relationship of has a different fragrance from yours. Feel that person with that sweetness as feel the flower. How you catch the flower, how you smell it, how carefully you sweetness between each other, the relation of enjoying each other, the relation of knowing each other has to be full of you don't even break a little of that so that you get the complete fragrance, that fragrance you can only feel if you have that sweetness, that madhurya. sweetness, just like honey. It is just there, but we have to be the bee to reach there. And that sweetness of yours is so joy-giving, how you say things sweetly, how you express yourself sweetly... am sure it will work out. It should work out for all of you. I think the sharpness of the tongue, the cutting nature of the tongue, sarcasm, the so-called brilliance of expression, sometimes it is better to be MORE ABOUT MADHURYA Shri Krishna Puja 1988 The State of Witnessing Garlate Italy with a buddhu (fool) than to be with such an intelligent man who is all the time ... hitting you, morning until evening. Then you say harsh things.. Then 2 May 1985 Nirananda Vienna Austria you develop a guilt. Then you have to say more harsh things. It goes on. Mother Earth Puja 1983 Surbiton United Kingdom So this kind of a behavior is because, when we speak, we do not have a MORE ABOUT THE VIRATA sensitivity to feel another person. Put yourself in the same situation. How will Shri Virata Puja 1989 We Must Talk of Sahaja Yoga you feel? Connecticut USA 13

 it Atma we call The seeking of God starts when a person starts realizing or seeing that there must be something beyond, there must be something which is fulfilling, something that is really satisfying and he starts finding that absolute point from where there is no need to return, where there is no disgust, where there is no frustration, disappointment. And such a point resides within us in our heart as the Spirit. We call it Atma in the Sanskrit language. This spirit in the heart is the witness, which witnesses us, which looks after us. But we are not conscious of it. That means the Spirit is not flowing, is not radiating in our central nervous system, that we are not conscious of it. We know there is someone. We know someone inside is there. We're aware of it in a way, but it is not flowing through our conscious mind, through our central nervous system. And this is what the seeking is for. We are seeking our Spirit. As Krishna has said, through Atma only the Atma will know. That is, the Spirit will know Itself through the Spirit. It is a simple thing to be understood, that we are not yet the Spirit and we have to become the Spirit.

 So at the Vishuddhi level – madhurya, such a simple thing it is. Develop – We have you have to develop a method... The sweetness of your tongue, the sweetness of your talking, the to seek sweetness of meeting people, the whole thing – the sweetness itself gives you such a joy to meet such a person who is so sweet and nice... our atma It is important that the language should be extremely sweet for a Sahaja Yogi. On that point, they are going to judge you, I can tell you this much. | in another Sharp-tongued people, nobody is going to accept.. For Sahaja Yoga and for Sahaja Yogis, the centre is very easy, that when you speak to someone, say it with your heart. Say it with the blessings of your Atma... person. you establish your love in another person, then say. This is the way you can overcome this problem of Vishuddhi. And how do you learn? Just by witnessing. Like two nice friends talking to each other, just witness how GOPAS Shri Krishna played with the gopas by holding their hands – raasa. “Ra" is energy they are enjoying. Just witness the drama. You will pick it up in no time, just like that. The sweetness will be flowing into you. Become so soft in behavior, in your countenance, in your faith.. People should say that "You and sa" means with. He used to play with them.... On one side it's are a realized soul. I can see that." It should be so evident. So give up your a very beautiful, sweet madhurya.... You have to become those gopis and gopas who gave joy last practices and habits. Try to be friendly. Shri Krishna's beauty was that He had friends – gopas. And what was the to others quality of the gopas compared to Shri Krishna? But how he got friendly with MORE ABOUT THE ATMA them – friendship... In friendship, you will find that enjoyment. But if you 7 September 1980 How to Know Where You Are are not a witness, then what will you see...? In friendship it works both ways. London United Kingdom Shri Krishna Puja 1988 The State of Witnessing Garlate Italy You'd never trouble each other, but whenever there is difficulty, you can smell it, you can feel it... 25 January 1982 Open Your Heart Lonavala India 14

 sa The discretion of the right side is hum and the discretion of left side is sa. CC י> It means “You are the one." "Sa´ means you. “you." CC you know who is the I your case But for every human being, You is the Divine. You are the One. This comes from the left side. It is sa. So the word “Hamsa" is made of two types of discretion, where to see "I am" and where to see "You are." On these two balances are the Moon and the Sun. In the centre is the cross, which gives you the balance, which gives you the dharma. How all these things are connected, one after another, in layers after layers. You can see how dharma is connected with discretion.... So you can see on the Hamsa how many things are judged. I think the whole of Sahaja Yoga stands on the balance of Hamsa.

 So this samuhik chetana, this universality, you can feel it on your Vishuddhi chakra, so that you become a part and parcel of that Virat. Once you are fully part and parcel, all of you can feel each other. But without samuhik chetana: sweetness you cannot. Imagine the nose fighting the eyes and the mouth the new awareness of fights, biting the ears. What will happen to a person? The same is the collective consciousness condition of Virat today. Sometimes the ears are blowing, sometimes the head is blowing. The Virat doesn't know what to do because you all are fighting with each other. Think of something sweet. All brothers But in that universality is the point. Because you are born of the same and sisters of Mother, you have the same Mother. Out of Her Sahasrara we are all born. equal merit. That's why we are all brothers and sisters of equal merit and credit. This is what one has to feel. So for the Vishuddhi chakra – universality through sweetness, the sweetness of relationship. HAMSA The Hamsa chakra is a part of the Vishuddhi chakra. It is the abstract, PRANAVA the integrating power, the great power which has all the pouwers in it, the Aum, the sound of the All-pervading Power the inner current of all this universe that is created. It's pranava itself, which is so pure – complete purity within yourself, absolute purity, nothing but vibrations. That is only possible through developing your vibratory vibratory awareness and your discrimination. Nothing but vibrations – your MORE ABOUT THE HAMSA Hamsa Puja 1991 The Source of Discretion awareness is the only way you see, smell, feel – everything through vibratory New York USA awareness.... Hamsa Chakra Puja 1992 Abbotsford Canada 15

 Vibrations much. I know you all love Me very It is a tremendous love for Me. And when I get the vibrations from you, it's like the ripples that reach the shores and again they return back and lots of little, little sparkling drops are there on the shore also. In the same way, in My heart, I feel your love echoing the beauty of the sparkle - this divine love, which I cannot explain to you the experience, what it creates. The first thing that it creates – tears come into My eyes because it is the compassion... Every part of the Mother's body, everything is created out of divine love. Every bit of it emits nothing but divine love. Vibrations are nothing but divine love.

 A state must come when you don't have to see vibrations, just feel them. That should be the state, that sign – your pranava is full. I never feel anything, neither vibrations nor any chakra – nothing. I have to ask you because for Me Purification nothing catches. Imagine such a gross person, nothing catches. Nothing I can feel.. But the only thing that happens is that anybody who comes before of vibrations face Me just gets it, gets cured. Now I am nothing but vibrations. When you Me, it just works. When I speak, it works. I don't do anything. Rationally I is your job. don't understand. But these vibrations themselves, the energy goes, works it out. That works it out. That works it out. It works out all over, in the whole over, world. I do not consult it. I do not ask it. It's working on its own. If I want, I will I may not. If I don't want to feel you, I will not feel you. There ask. Otherwise might be a rakshasa sitting next to Me. He might be shivering, but nothing will happen to Me. I can stop his shivering if I want to. If I don't want, I will ask him to shiver. I am not bothered because on vibrations the responsibility is there. On vibrations – which are My light – I leave them alone. They are very well trained. They know everything. They are absolutely pure. As My name is, they are absolutely pure. I have no problem with them. I play here and there. That's a different point. I try to cover them up sometimes. I create a maya. It's different. That's another style. But as far as the vibrations are concerned, they are absolutely pure. That's why they are so effective. So keep your vibrations pure, without any intention.. Purification MORE ABOUT VIBRATIONS of vibrations is your jo... 26 November 1979 How to get the Spirit Within London United Kingdom 16

 This Agnya chakra is a gate. It is the door of Heaven and everyone has to pass through it. Christ said, "I am the light. I am the path" because He is Aumkara. He is the path. And He is the door. He is the gate. And everybody will have to pass through His gate. ALL WORDS BY SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI – PAGE 2 left: Birthday Felicitations 2002 and 9 March 1983 Melbourne Page 3 left: 7 March 1981 Cambridge and Diwali Puja 1991 Page 3 right: Shivaratri Puja 1995 Page 4 left (nirvichar samadhi): 24 July 1979 London Page 4 left (Swadisthan): Guru Puja 1989 Page 4 left (creativity): Saraswati Puja 1983 Page 5 right: 31 January 1983 Delhi Page 6 left: Diwali Puja 1992 Page 6 lower left: Sahasrara Puja 1987 Page 6 right: Mahalakshmi Puja 1996 Page 7 left and right: 30 December 1979 Mumbai Page 8 left: 26 November 1979 London Page 8 right: Shri Krishna Puja 1988 Page 9 far left and right: Shri Ganesha Puja 1984 (Brighton) Page 9 left: Guru Puja 1980 Page 10 left: Shri Ganesha Puja 1997, 12 July 1994 Paris and Shri Krishna Puja 1997 Page 10 right: 19 December 1987 Aurangabad India Page 11 left and right: Shri Krishna Puja 1997 Page 12 left: Navaratri Pujas 1994 and 1999 Page 13 left: Shri Virata Puja 1989 and Shri Krishna Puja 1999 Page 13 right: 2 May 1985 Vienna and 28 May 1990 San Diego Page 14 left: 31 March 1980 Brighton and 10 May 1985 London Page 14 right: Shri Krishna Puja 1984 Page 15 left: Hamsa Puja 1988 Page 16 left: Shri Adi Shakti Puja 1993 (Cabella) Page 17 left: 3 February 1983 Delhi Page 18 left: Sahasrara Puja 1997 Page 18 right: Mahamaya Puja 1994 Auckland

 AGNYA Then we come to the Agnya chakra, which is the light itself. That is the The one that enlightens your attention – the Agnya Chakra. That is the light by you see everything after Realization. And when you know you are the which whole light and when you know that you are the eternal light, that nothing can kill you ... you cannot be pierced by weapons, cannot be burnt by fire. Once world you know that in your Agnya, then all the fears and domination disappear just like that because it is the light of love that does not dominate nor is it within. afraid. Because it knows it is eternal, it is not afraid of death nor of crucifixion or of anything. So to allow the joy of the Agnya to penetrate within is to stabilize you your light. In that light, you will enjoy your sacrifice like the martyrs who kill themselves with joy. In the same way, whatever trouble you have to put in for Sahaja Yoga, you will do it with joy – anything that you have to face, any kind of sacrifice... You have to become the light – the light that never dies, which is above all the joys. The son who crucified Himself for the sake of His Mother's work, who carried the cross in the presence of a Mother who was so powerful, such children you have to be to carry the light – sacrifice, the enjoyment of PHOTOGRAPHS Page 2: Shri Mary Shri Mahalakshmi sacrifice. Sacrifice for your emancipation, for your light being kept alive... Puja Munich 8 September 1984 Page 5: Venice Italy circa 1985 What are you going to sacrifice? These stones and this dust? For what? Page 7: September 1984 Switzerland Page 8: Capri Italy May 1989 (all photos above by Herbert Reininger) For the eternal light... Page 17: near Calgary Canada (photo by Ian Butterworth) Page 18: Diwali Puja 1983 17

 You are completely filled with your Self, contented with yourself and then you want to share. This is the ideal way of dealing with the Sahasrara and I am sure the day will come when this whole world's Sahasrara has to be opened out.... That is what you are here for.

 It is out of proportion you are going to get. This is no sacrifice. This is not MAHAMAYA It's the basic of Sahaja Yoga.... When the Goddess even the slightest value of what you are going to get.. But that proportion comes in the Sahasrara, the Shakti, She is Mahamaya, "Sahasrare Mahamaya, already described. She has to be the Mahamaya. you can only see when you have light. When the light starts, it goes to eternity. In the same way, this eternal That means She should light encompasses the whole world and you know the whole world within camouflage Herself fully. Nobody should be able to yourself. know Her as the Goddess to begin with. And even if they get Realization, they should not reach to the end of it... The job of Mahamaya is to give Realization. Now if I had SAHASRARA The last chakra is of the Sahasrara, which is a very important centre come on a tiger with a sword in My hand, nobody because it is in the core of your heart, surrounding your heart and all the would have stood near Me. You all would have run away from Me. In any other form, if the Goddess had come, She could not seven chakras have got their seats there. These are the seats which receive the joy and communicate to the Heart. have done what She was supposed to do.... So the Mahamaya incarnation has In the Sahasrara, if you are there, already so many things you have got. to come so that people can You've got your vibrations. You've got your powers. But it's the most tricky come closer.... You have to be identified into My body, into My cells of My body... centre. It's a Mahamaya – Kalki in a Mahamaya shape. It is a complete illusion. You can't see how you are inside Me. You can't see In the Sahasrara, the joy of Sahasrara is the joy of the entirety because your reflection within Me. You can't see. This is all seven seats are there. If you can capture your Sahasrara, in complete Mahamaya. This is the secret part of it that you don't know.... Mahamaya is that which brings you recognition of this Mahamaya – complete recognition, which is a very difficult thing because always the maya is there – then there's nothing to talk back, brings you back to normal, brings you back to reality.... Just enjoy that about. Then see how your heart enlarges. See now. Just recognize. See the maya and you are enjoying it. It is the best way to enjoy this Mahamaya... I thought something unique must be done which encompasses you are in that expansion of your heart. It will cover all your entire being - just recognize. That's why we have puja here. I have allowed you to have My puja only everything of Sahaja Yoga. for one reason. It is not one Incarnation. It's not one nadi. It's not one Goddess. But all of it is there. 18

 That's the only way you can recognize Me, by seeing vibrations, by seeing chakras, by feeling them, by getting them more, by correcting yourself. This is why I've agreed to have this puja. But if you do not recognize and do puja, it is useless for you. It is very bad. Just recognize.



----------------------

2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breezes
2009 issue 4 – volume twenty-two n
umber four
It is said that God is love.
We have heard that
many times and many
people have explained
in their own way what
is love. But to feel that
love is the best way
of
understanding it. Even if
you explain or describe
in all details, although it
is described in all detail,
you cannot enjoy love
without experiencing it.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-1.txt 
 The ocean of love is your Sahasrara.
When your Sahasrara is filled with love, then life is changed.
You don't become a very intelligent man, a very dynamic personality,
but you are nothing but love and this love is so self-satisfying.
You are not bothered if others don't love you or they love you.
just
You don't see to that part.
What you see is the enjoyment from that love.
It's a tremendous ocean of love. You all have got it.
And once you have entered into Sahaja Yoga,
you know that you have entered into the Sahasrara.
And the Sahasrara is, I tell you, the source of all the truth.
recognize
Truth is there – the complete truth.
Truth is the knowledge. And also, truth is love.
God is the ocean of compassion, ocean of love.
He is the one who is so anxious that you
all
should enter into His kingdom
to occupy your great seats as His children.
He is the Father of the Fathers.
He is the most loving Father you could think of.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
This experience comes to us because God Himself has placed within us
This issue features
the mechanism to absorb this love and to manifest it. It is a very
delicate
one talk from
mechanism within us – extremely delicate.
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
This mechanism is placed in our heart and, by our ignorance, so many
CKP Hall, Mumbai
times we spoil this mechanism or disturb it or sometimes even completely
30 December 1979
destroy it.
Advice on All Chakras
The light of love is joy. Anything else cannot give you joy. It's only the
love that you feel in your heart that gives you joy.
Some words and sentences
on the yellow pages are
MULADHARA
translated from Marathi.
This mechanism acts in seven layers within us. In the periphery of these
These appear in italics.
seven layers, we have got ripples of this joy arising. They come to the shores
of our brain and create the bubbles of joy. But again, if the brain is a very
MORE ABOUT
rational rock, then these bubbles dissolve, giving no effect to the rock. So a
THE MULADHARA
13 January 1983
Left Muladhara and
the Supraconscious
Duhlia India
loving person is a thousand times better than a rational person.
But most of the people feel this love only on the periphery of the
5 February 1981
The Muladhara Chakra
outermost layer, which is the light of the Muladhara. As you know, the
New Delhi India
Muladhara has got excretory effects and how important or relieved we
MORE ABOUT LOVE
feel when our excretions are all right. It's a basic thing that that relief gives
Guru Puja 2001
Worship, Purity and Love in
Yourself and in Others
Cabella Italy
you a kind of a joy and happiness. It is really gross. It is a low type, as they
Diwali Puja 1987
The Light of Love
Lecco Italy
call it, but very important for us to get that joy. But to make this joy not so
dominating over all other joys of deeper sensitivity is to be innocent.
Sahasrara Puja 1989
Jump into the Ocean of Love
Sorrento Italy
I know one cannot be innocent. You have to be innocent yourself. But
26 October 1987
The Revolution of Love
Rome Italy
with Sahaja Yoga you can, by clearing your Muladhara.
2
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Innocence was created first of all
before the universe was created
and this exists within us.
сетсе
ren
We are here to give joy, happiness to everyone,
to make everyone happy... When you
make
them happy, then you feel that joy within
yourself, “Oh, they're so happy." See their
happiness. Then only this lotus opens out
much more like a ripple moves and moves to
the end of the shores and then, from the shore,
it returns back to you. In the same way, when
your joy reaches the joy of others, then the
ripples that come up make a beautiful pattern
of your life. Just think of such situations where
you did something good to others, have been
nice to others. And then you found the
very
joy in that person and how that joy came
back to you. Think of that pattern that you
felt so subtly in your life, how it is built in.
Whenever you think of that time or that
moment or that area, the whole picture comes
to you and you think, “What a time!" But that
time is eternally within you all the time...
You are My light and the light is there, which
is an eternal light.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 MORE ABOUT INNOCENCE
So that's very important, that our Muladharas must be clear. Our
23 June 1980
The Essence Within
innocence must be established, so that these gross joys do not cover the
London United Kingdom
31 December 1985
entire spectrum of our life and make us slaves of these gross joy-giving
The Innocence of a Child
Ganapatipule India
reliefs. But to clean your Muladhara does not mean, by any chance in Sahaja
Sahasrara Puja 1984
Mesnieres de Brayes France
Yoga, to get after any kind of obsession and obstruction, but to give a natural
Mahakali Puja 1990
Purity and Collectivity
Le Raincy France
release, like an innocent child, to these ripples, which need not go back to all
MORE ABOUT RIPPLES
the other layers of joy.
Diwali Puja 1994
The Lights of Pure Compassion
Istanbul Turkey
You must have seen when the ripples in a ocean touch the shores, they
7 June 1988
turn back. If the shores are made of very hard rocks, this turning can be very
Recognition of the Adi Shakti
Schwechat Austria
deep and the waves can go much deeper. If the brain is very ego-oriented,
9 March 1983
Puja Talk
Melbourne Australia
is covered with ego, then these joys have a much greater significance in life
In Sahaja Yoga
there's no question of
suppression. You just
become innocent.
than normal. Innocence is the only way one can neutralize those ripples
coming back on the other six very important layers.
That is the principle
of Shiva. This Sahaj
culture is in the
SWADISTHAN
centre, neither too
much of licentiousness
you go forward, you know in the second layer is the joy of creativity.
As
nor too much of
suppression, but it is
in the centre, which
is Shiva's greatest
When the joy of creativity comes within us, it again comes back to the
periphery. For some people it is so important, so maddening to create
principle. It is to be
innocent. And this
something – they are mad after it and they think it is something so important
innocence just shines
in you.... To be in the
centre, in the Sahaj,
is the best way to
to do – to create some thought, to create some book, to create some artistic
impressions or something. For some people it's very important, so they
understand that what
is so important for
life is morality. And
that comes from your
create. And this creativity, when it hits some rational mind, it gives him the
same kind of a deeper reaction, that a person starts thinking that he is the
innocence. And that
is the quality of Shri
Ganesha, who is the
greatest of all and whatever he does to the rest of the world is all right as
son of Shiva.
3
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 disthe
Swadisthan is the chakra which gives you, first and foremost thing, creativity.
A person who is a guru has to be creative by nature. If you
are not a creative person, yoи саппot becoте a guru. For
example, you are faced with disciples with whom you have to
converse, you have to create a word of divine magic to impress
on the disciples or the people who are attracted towards you
NIRVICHAR SAMADHI
After getting Realization, there is a
period of doubts because first you get
thoughtless awareness, which is called
as nirvichar samadhi. When we say
as gurus, to show that you have much more divine magic
than them. If you are a very mundane type of a person, very
ordinary, cannot create a beautiful couplet or a beautiful
sentence or a humour or a joke or a beautiful painting or
a beautiful tapestry or a beautiful house, if you lack in
creativity you will lack in your guru principle because a guru
has to create out of ordinary people something extraordinary.
He should be able to create a new personality out of an old
awareness in the normal terminology, it
means alertness to anything. But when
we say samadhi, it means enlightened
awareness. You get thoughtless
enlightened awareness. And then you get
doubtless enlightened awareness.
personality which is decayed. So the first principle you have to
understand within yourself, that you should be able to create
a new personality in a person.
The stage between the two in some
people is so little that they just are
there... But here are mediocre and there
are also absolutely bullock carts, I would
call them. They cannot move with the
time of the jet. In these modern times,
imagine a bullock cart being pulled by a
jet – big problem. But if you are of that
calibre and that quality, you get both the
stages just like that. There is no doubt
after that. But then there are some who
get into doubts. I don't know what they
doubt here. They had the experience.
They feel the vibrations coming.
They see cool breeze flowing through
them. They see it working on others.
They see the pusation of the Kundalini,
the rising of the Kundalini. They are
getting better in health and everything
is improving. Still they are doubting
and wasting their time.. Everything
is delayed because of that. All right, so
we have here jet planes, we have here
supersonics, we have missiles – and we
have also bullock carts.
Creativity
With love, all kinds of creative action takes
place ... and as love will increase, your
creativity will develop. So the basis of all
the creativity of Saraswati is love. If there
is no love, there's no creativity. It's even
there in the deeper sense. People who have
created all the scientific things are also
[acting] out of love for the masses, not for
themselves. Nobody has produced anything
for themselves. If they make something for
themselves, it has to become for universal
use, otherwise it has no meaning...
So all the activity on the right-hand side of
Saraswati, basically has to end up in love.
ир
It starts with love and ends up in love.
ир
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 long as he is a great creator of thought or ideas. Such a man can become
very, very dogmatic, dominating and could be tyrannical because he thinks
whatever he does is showing results, showing success according to him. He
rationalizes the whole thing and the whole thing goes back, much deeper
into him, covers all his chakras.
So the neutralizing of this second layer is thoughtless awareness -
nirvichar. When your awareness is enlightened – samadhi- and you are in
the nirvichar state, then whatever you create, you just see it. In thoughtless
awareness, you really enjoy whatever you see or whatever you create...
That is how it is kept to the periphery. It is important that it should be kept,
coming on the brain, because the brain is the one which records it. And if the
brain is such a solid stuff that it cannot record, it is not sensitive, most of it is
lost in giving it a reaction and the whole joy is finished.
For example, you create some painting. You just create it and just look
at it without any thought. The complete joy of your heart which you have
poured onto that canvas will be filling you completely and you will feel the
flow of joy going down. If the creation is done in thoughtless awareness,
then it is the most pure. Apart from that, it is the most beautiful, it is the
most perfect because such a painting or such an art or such a creation, such
a thought, such a book, such an idea will emit vibrations. The coefficience
MORE ABOUT CREATIVITY
to emit vibrations will be complete if it is done in thoughtless awareness.
Diwali Puja 2000
Lake Piru USA
That is why those who are realized souls, when they create something or
Saraswati Puja 1990
The Essence of Vishnumaya
they produce something, you find it easy to find out whether it is giving
Vancouver Canada
vibrations or not – very easy.
4
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 NABHI
When the Kundalini
In the same way, you go to the third very, very important centre of your
rises, then only these
Deities get awakened.
And when they
Nabhi – the Nabhi, or you can call it the navel chakra. The joy of feeling that
get awakened, this
Sushumna path,
this central path of
you have eaten the food cannot be described. In Marathi they will
say .. if
you are hungry, you won't even take to Sahaja Yoga, you won't take to God.
Mahalakshmi starts
acting as the balancing
power to begin with
at the Nabhi chakra.
So the Nabhi chakra
Even if God is standing before you, you will say, "First fill my stomach, oh
God, then I will talk to You." And when you eat the food, the joy you get out
of that also goes to the periphery, as usual. If it goes to a rational rock, as I
is surrounded by ten
gurus, the prophets
who give you
the
then again the effect is deeper. If you start thinking about it, you feel, "I
say,
balance, who come
on this Earth again
and again to give you
balance in life.
have had my food, others must have" and this and that and all those things.
And then
think that "I must have more of this and more of that. I must
you
They tell you, "Don't do
this, don't do that...
So the balancing comes
through the Nabhi and
the Nabhi looks after
you and teaches you
how to behave.
have something more to feed my stomach."
Now when you have a limited stomach, you can't eat mounds of food...
Normally people have very limited stomachs. Then when your stomach is
limited, you start thinking, "Oh, my stomach is limited. Still the joy of the
Nabhi chakra is not yet complete. Let me think of something else" So you
end up with maybe alcohol because alcohol you think takes no space in
the stomach. You think it has a different spacing in the stomach. I have seen
people drinking beer. I was surprised you cannot drink so much of water as
|
MORE ABOUT THE NABHI
28 March 1981
people can drink beer. Most surprising, pints and pints of beer they can go
The Nabhi Chakra
Sydney Australia
on drinking and they never feel satisfied. At such time, the movement starts
7 February 1981
Nabhi Chakra and Void
Delhi India
towards the left of the joy. This is the beginning of the left side, we start.
Guru Puja 1979
London United Kingdom
And at that time, you think that by getting drunk, you are getting into a very
romantic mood or some sort of a nonsense like that. Then you start spending
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 In Sahaj culture we have to be special people.
We cannot be like other people who are just running after
money and doing everything just to ruin themselves.
In Sahaja culture we have to meditate, get our satisfaction
about everything within ourselves. And also we have to be like
the Lakshmi children... Unless and until we meditate, unless
and until we reach that state of satisfaction, we cannot see the
work of this Divine Power.. Whatever you gain, whatever joy,
satisfaction, vibrations, knowledge, all that, you want to give it
to others. You want to spread it because now you've got the reality
and you don't want to keep it to yourself. You think it is very
important that everyone in the world should know about reality.
Have that satisfaction and glory of your own being and of your
own standard and of your own calibre. The others are not of your
calibre – all right, forget about it. That should not give you ego,
but should give you a personality that does not react.
We have something of our own. We do not react to things.
We are not reactionaries. And things will disappear which are harmful.
Everything will be perfectly all right because
we are standing in our own perfection, in our own glory.
What do we need? Nothing, just enjoying ourselves.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 This Principle of
Lakshmi gives us
all your time, wasting your life, taking to laziness, to inertia. You
take
may
to drugs. This can reach up to the heart of a person or to the liver of the
a great sense of
satisfaction. If you
don't have satisfaction,
person. The liver goes on becoming solid and solid. The more you drink, the
then any amount of
Lakshmi cannot help
worse you become.
you. One becoтes
very greedy. You have
something, but you
So man goes on wasting his time trying to get joy out of something which
is so dangerous for your being. Anybody who says that drinking is very bad,
want to have more
and more and more.
people immediately say that "Oh, he is absolutely Victorian." Or whatever it
is, they brand the person.
Now how to get rid of the Nabhi complication? Because these joys are so
temporary, you will see in every case. The Nabhi joy is also very temporary.
MORE ABOUT SATISFACTION
Shri Krishna-Kubera Puja 2002
Canajoharie USA
I mean you also do not enjoy it much. If you could, you would not go into it
Diwali Puja 2000
Lake Piru USA
again and again.
So the neutralizing point is satisfaction. You should feel satisfied. You
have eaten all right two morsels – feel satisfied. Even with two morsels
you
Bakasura
A demon killed by Bhima,
one of the Pandava brothers.
will be much happier than, like a bakasur, if you eat a mound of rice. To be
satisfied is the only way you can neutralize your Nabhi. In all your material
wants, there is no end to it. You go on supplying any number of things. You
will
go on asking for more, but you have not enjoyed anything. You have
bought one piece of cloth. You made a shirt for yourself. You want to have
another one because a person who is working in your office has got this
kind of a shirt. So run all over the world to find that shirt, but the one who is
wearing the shirt, he's running all over the world to find a shirt as you have
made.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 I could have been born a Japanese or a Chinese.
And supposing I was speaking in Chinese with three thousand words.
Then who'd have understood Me?
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 So this madness goes on increasing and the Nabhi chakra remains in a big
turmoil. So one of the neutralizing points, most important, is the satisfaction
Pick up what
of the Nabhi. At every point you should try to feel satisfied. "All right, if I
Mataji is
haven't got it, I am satisfied." At that moment you will get the joy. "I have got
saying
this thing. All right, I am satisfied." You will get the joy and others will be also
in a happy disposition..
Satisfaction is the only way one can enjoy. Even say, I am speaking in
It is the
English, if you just see, are you enjoying the satisfaction of it? Supposing I
essence.
was not a Maharashtrian. I could have been born a Japanese or a Chinese.
And supposing I was speaking in Chinese with three thousand words.. Then
Pick it up.
what, should you have understood Me?
So again, here we come to the same question: are we satisfied? Whatever
we get – those who are looking for amrut, for ambrosia, do not bother about
That's how
the words. They just want to pick up what Mataji is saying. It is the essence.
you are
Pick it
That's how you are going to feel satisfied...
•dn.
There's no end to the madness, if you start with dissatisfaction. But if you
going to
start with satisfaction, then that's the point. You don't have to go further
–
feel satisfied.
this
You just go deep. Such a person is such a headache, I tell
that
way,
way.
Such a
person, as soon as you see, you feel, "Oh God, what have I done
you.
today to deserve this?"
A person should live in this world like the flowers. You can't see them,
how they bloom, what time they bloom. But when they bloom, you can only
feel their fragrance, their love.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 It is like going in a boat. Just keep quiet.
Just be in the centre with the centre of gravity of the boat.
Just be there. That is dharma. In your sustenance, stay there.
I mean to remain there, you don't have to do anything.
To become that, you have to do something.
All these things will come to you automatically when there is light.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Satisfaction you cannot have without Realization. So before that, if I
"You should be satisfied," it's just brainwashing. You cannot be. After
say,
Realization, because you have found that which satisfies your spirit, that's
why your priorities change. You get satisfied for nothing at all..
A person who is satisfied is the most efficient person. Our country
suffers from the Nabhi chakra. That's why we are very inefficient people.
VOID
We have three
For everything we have excuses – like "this is not working because this was
identities within
ourselves. On the
not working." Our inefficiency comes out of the Nabhi chakra problem. If you
heart is Shiva, in the
brain is Shri Krishna,
are a satisfied person, your work is very satisfying also. If a lady has a good
the Virata, and in the
liver, Brahmadeva. So
we have three identities
and in the stomach, in
the Void, as you say, is
Nabhi, when she cooks her food, with very little food you feel very satisfied.
Whatever she will do will be excellent.
all the Guru Tattwa
So for all Nabhi problems, one mantra one must remember is of
where all the great
gurus, from Adi Nath,
Mohammed-sahib
satisfaction.
and others, up to
Shirdi Sai Nath,
all of them are the
Guru principle.
VOID
Now we go to the Void, although in the seven layers it is a little confused
with Nabhi. But we have to see to the Void also.
In dharma, in sustenance, we get happiness about it. When we try to
be nice to someone we get happiness out of it. But some people who are
supposed to be dharmic can be horrid, so boring that you would like to run
away from such people all your life. They are supposed to be very religious
people. They get up at four o'clock in the morning, torture everyone around,
then they do their aarti, rubbing of the sandalwood, then having a bath
MORE ABOUT SUSTENANCE
Mahashivaratri Puja 1981
with a big stotra going on. Everybody must wake up.. They must disturb
Mumbai India
8.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 in the same tradition,
My disciples
S
What is your power?
Where does your power lie?
It lies in the spirit...
illusive. So to improve your Void say, "Mother,
It is your chastity.
If a man is chaste, of chaste
This guru is very
You are our guru.
temperament he has and
he stands up in his chastity.
Because of this illusiveness, that fear or that awe which
which is necessary for the guru is not
is necessary, that
established. Unless and until you develop that awe, a complete
awe within you, your Guru Principle won't develop..
You must find out about your own guru. Establish Her in
your heart. I mean you have a wonderful guru otheruwise. I must
say, I wish I had one like that. And She is desireless and sinless...
You must know your guru and that She is on every chakra
working. Imagine what a tremendous guru you have. With that
you will feel the confidence...
To understand your own guru power, you must know who
is your guru – Sakshat Adi Shakti. “Oh God, it's too much.
Then establish your Void. A guru does not bend his head before
anybody else and especially My disciples. Except to mothers and
sisters ... they do not bow to anybody else.
And secondly, you must know that your guru has been the
mother of very great people. The thought of them itself should
establish your Guru Tattwa. What tremendous sons I have had,
what great personalities. No words can describe them – and
so many of them, one after another. And you are in the same
tradition, My disciples. Keep them as your ideals. Try to follow
them. Read about them, understand them, what they have said,
how they have achieved such heights. Recognize them. Respect
respect
It acts. It works....
The vehicle we have is our chastity...
You have everything within you.
You are the storehouse of chastity, which
is your power.
Everything is within you.
Nothing has gone out. It's all there.
All that fragrance is within you.
It is all preserved.
Don't condemn yourself.
And you are so fortunate I am here
to tell you all about it.
You are so fortunate I am with you....
You are nowhere if you have no chastity.
That's like a broken glass,
which is trying to reflect something.
It can never give the right picture.
It's so important.
And I have to tell you this now.
"
The time has come for Me to tell you:
this is the snake in our life....
Let what I say become the mantra
to awaken that within you so that,
them. You will establish your Guru Tattwa.
Imbibe all the statutes within you and be proud about it.
Don't be misguided by what people are saying. Multitudes
are talking. We are going to pull the whole multitude towards
as My children,
you enjoy the bliss of chastity,
as I have enjoyed all My human life
and all My Divine lives.
You enjoy the same quantity.
That's what I want.
ourselves.
First of all, let us establish our weight, the gravity. As the
Mother Earth keeps everybody pulled towards the Earth, we
will be pulling all of them to ourselves...
Promise that you will be a guru worthy of your Mother.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 everyone, saying that they are dharmis – very hot-tempered, angry people.
These dharmis can be neutralized in a very, very simple way. That dharma
is your own concentration inward. Like you want to donate something to
someone, it's just between you and God. There is no expression of it outside
at all...
Some of these so-called honest can be so blunt that you cannot go
near them. They think if they are honest then they have a right to cut
MORE ABOUT CHASTITY
everybody's throat. It is for you I have said it and not for anybody else. It
Shri Ganesha Puja 1989
Chastity & the Collective Nature
Les Diablerets Switzerland
should be concentrated on yourself. The dharma is for ourselves.. It's your
Shri Ganesha Puja 1985
The Importance of Chastity
Brighton United Kingdom
own clearing that is important in dharma and not anybody else's. There's a
relationship between you and your guru – direct.
Supposing you come and tell Me something, that "Mataji, this is between
Respecting your
chastity is really
You and me." That is between you and Me, although I'm not bound by it, not
respecting Me
because I reside
at all. If it is necessary I may speak it out, but ninety-nine percent l'll keep it
within you as
chastity.
that as a secret, so it is the secrecy of your own dharma. The beauty of it is
If Shri Ganesha is
the auspiciousness,
I reside within you
like that. You see the subtleties... If you are a dharmic man, it's so sweet.
Suddenly you'll find the shine appearing like a diamond suddenly, with
as chastity.
all the facets. Suddenly you will find a person who – what a beautiful man he
you are not looking after yourself, looking after everybody's dharmas.
is. But
Then the same thing will happen, that the joy of dharma will only be felt if
you limit it to yourself. That cannot be shared. Virtues cannot be shared.
Can I share My virtues with you? I cannot. You can support it. Somebody is a
MORE ABOUT THE VOID
7 February 1981
virtuous man, then you can support him. But the joy of that dharma, that raasa,
Introduction to the
Nabhi and the Void
Delhi India
falling into your heart, nobody else can enjoy it. You enjoy your own chastity.
6.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Doma
ea
I am the Primordial Mother
and I have to do the job of awakening the primordial nature,
the dharma within human beings and that's what I have to do and nothing else.
Dharma means our primordial taboos that are
RELIGION
Your inner religion is enlightened –
inner religion. These chakras are created
by great prophets. They have talked of
religion in the real sense of the word, but
be
built-in, in the human beings.... The primordial
taboos are only understood if people are trying
to understand oneself or else whatever has come
they do not follow religion. You may
Christian, Hindu, Muslim, anything,
to them through tradition. Now Sahaj Dharma
you can commit any kind of sin, but
become a saint, you
is little bit different in the sense that it's much
опce you do not.
Nothing can tempt you. For that,
you don't have to leave your houses,
families, nothing. It's inside yourself..
All the religions are the signboards to
enter into the Kingdom of God. But if
you are just standing at the signboard
and reading the signboard, will you
enter? You have to leave the signboard
пot.
higher than the Sahaj ideas that we talk of, but
it's much higher than even what Shri Krishna
said or Shri Rama said.... Sahaja Dharma is
that
you are just free – complete freedom from
lust, greed and all nonsense. You are above it.
You are above. This Sahaj Dharma is above the
and come up to this centre where resides
all the peace, joy and happines....
Once you are enlightened, you don't do
wrong things. You don't take to wrong
things. Then you start understanding
all these prophets, all these great
incarnations. You start understanding
what they were. Then you understand
that all these religions have come out of
one Tree of Life, which is spirituality.
And we have plucked these flowers and
we are fighting with the dead flowers.
There's no life in it.
dharma established by Shri Krishna or by Shri
It is
Rama because you have reached that
stage.
in complete freedom you have to be dharmic.
Whatever is not good for you, you should not
don't do this
do. I don't have to tell
that you
you
or you don't do that. Whatever I say may not be
acceptable, but immediately your vibrations will
tell you.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 It is, of course, written, "Thou shalt not do, thou shalt not do." These are
all commandments that have come, but they can come only from God, not
from you.
Once you start doing it to others, you are finished. You have lost
the joy of your dharma...
Religion is
You will never teach dharma to others. Preaching religion is against
religion. You cannot preach. How can you preach religion...? We can
respect.
only evolve our own, imbibe our own, except for the people who are
incarnations. They can tell what is religion, but they cannot put religion into
you. And when you start enjoying that religion within you, you start having
Dharma gives you the
that more and more within yourself. Then you start respecting yourself. Your
balance. It gives you
self-respect comes.
the establishment into
So we take it to this, that religion is respect. The neutralization of using
proper behavior, proper
understanding, proper
religion for wrong things is respect. Respect every other person. Respect his
living, but it doesn't
religion. Respect the principles of other religions – of religion I am saying.
give you the completion
of your journey.
Otherwise you start running behind bhoots.
It doesn't give you
the
Again discrimination should be there. I am saying respect the religion
satisfaction of reaching
that is within you and the religion in another person. Maybe secretly that
the destination.
And your personality
person is very religious. Outwardly he doesn't show...
is still incomplete.
So we come to religion, which is a part of the Nabhi. The satisfaction of
So one has to have the
experience of the spirit.
religion is only possible when you learn to respect other people and their
religion, their styles.
MORE ABOUT RELIGION
Without telling that person, without talking to him about it, you can
7 February 1985
The Culture of Universal Religion
Bordi India
correct his catches and your own. Why are you catching? Because you have
12 July 1994
The Inner Religion
some weakness. I never catch from anyone. So to denounce somebody or to
Paris France
10
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-19.txt 
 This is Sahaj Dharma:
In the Sahaj Dharma you get rid of all kinds of
kaama, krodha, mada, matsa, lobha, moha.
That means lust, anger, attractions, then greed...
With Sahaj Dharma, you take people into your heart. You love them.
Your love flows all the time. Your compassion flows all the time...
You should have a heart which is open...
You must try to see the beauty as Sahaja Yogis.
You should be sensitive to see how you have been helped,
how you have been guided, how you have been blessed.
This is Sahaj Dharma..
This is the new dharma we have established now in this world
a new race with a new dharma....
Sahaj Dharma is that you are your own. You are in your own.
You are in your own realm and in your happiness and joy.
Where is the time to criticize others?
So the best thing is to show your maximum love to everyone.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 put down somebody is not proper. That shows that you have less strength.
So you should say that "Mother, I have less strength and, because that person
has so much of this kind of a vibration, I feel a little bad."
If the whole world is all right and then you are going to feel all right, then
what's the use of having this light? Just think of this – that we will say that "All
right, I am the light and I have to give light. I am a realized soul. But when all
the lights are all right, then only I will be with them." So a light and a half –
what's the use of having such a light?
We should have such lights that can go in the darkness and finish the
darkness. That light is the light of dharma within us. It is not how many times
you meditate, how many times you sit in the water, put your feet in the water
or use My photograph or what you do and all these rituals. It is not that.
You are all Sahaj
Dharmis. You have
It is how much dharma is within your heart...
accepted Sahaj Dharma
and in Sahaj Dharma
Try to imbibe the dharma within yourself and then you will see
we have to have pure
eventually you will become a very generous-hearted person – very
love of the heart –
not hypocrisy – and
a sensible life.
generous-hearted because you are starting tolerating everyone – even
generous as far as money is concerned. That is something so gross...
Generosity just flows. It flows and emits by itself and you just start
enjoying it.
HEART
MORE ABOUT DHARMA
The most important chakra is that of Jagadamba. It is the Heart and this
Shri Rama Puja 1987
Les Avants Switzerland
gives you joy. At a point where you have relationships with
children
your
Sahasrara Puja 1997
At Sahasrara You Stand on
Truth and Go Beyond Dharma
Cabella Italy
the people who are generous, for them the whole world are their own
11
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Security
Kundalini is a part, or we can Mahakali is the person who guides you how to
say a reflection, of the Adi Shakti. avoid all the dangers. Now She protects your
And also Jagadamba is part of the Adi life. She protects your body. She protects
Shakti. She is placed in the centre of
two Hearts, which is a very important organs of your body. She is the one who gives you
point. Now all these powers are placed all the security of life. In Her realm, you feel com-
in that chakra, so you imagine how pletely secure. You are never afraid of anything...
all the
If you are under Her beautiful guidance and Her
many of these powers there must be.
And Her powers are expressed through blessings, you will never feel afraid to do anything.
the centre Heart in all the Ganas you You will never do anything wrong also. As soon as
have around your body. Now these
Ganas are the ones who do give you
the you will try to do wrong, She will hold your hand.
She is really the guiding person. She is the one who
protection, give you the sleep, give you
the energy, give you the blessings – all actually gives us our existence. Without Her, we
of them are at work all the time - and cannot exist because She is the one who is the power
these bodies are extremely dedicated and of Shri Shiva....
connected all the time to the Mother
So your worries are finished. She worries about you.
Amba. We can call Her Jagadamba.
Now She is the Mother of the universe,
You shouldn't worry about yourself. That's the point
so you can imagine it, how busy She has of it. Her security is so great. She's so secure Herself
to be to look after the whole universe... that She gives you all the security that
It is Mother's centre. It is impossible to
understand the love of the Mother. It's All this works out in such a manner, that it builds
absolutely impossible. When the girls
get married and they become mothers,
then they start understanding how you you are standing on the truth. Hold it with
much their mother must have done your hands. You will grow on it. You will enjoy
for them to come up. In the same way, yourself. Life will be so much better, much more
when Sahaja Yogis become good Sahaja beautiful. And it is only through you the whole world
Yogis, like Ganas, they realize how is going to be saved. So strengthen yourself, strengthen
much the Ganas had to have patience,
had to have love and intelligence to
fight the negativity. So all the forces
of Jagadamba act towards hitting the brainwaves that you have about it.... Develop that
you need.
up a tremendous sense of security within
know
that
you,
both
your arms and strengthen your feet.
The faith is the strength of Sahaja Yoga, not the
negativity of all kinds. faith that gives you the sense of security.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-22.txt 
 children. For everyone the love flows. Everybody's worry is the worry of
that person. This comes from the centre Heart, that you try to mother every
person. That feeling is there..
The protection is given by the Goddess to Her bhaktas, not to abhaktas,
not to rakshasas...
First and foremost, the essence of the Heart chakra is security. It is to feel
your own security yourself. Feel your own security within yourself. Only the
realized can feel that security because they know they have their Atma, their
Spirit. By small, small things, we destroy our security..
The complete security within yourself is that you are the Self and these
You
things are not important. If you are a secure man, your children will also find
that out that their security lies in finding their own security. They themselves
will say, "Now, don't try to help us to spoil us. Do not give us things by which
are
we feel more insecure!" And such children would be really brave children...
Feel your own security and then the joy of that security will take
to
you
your depth. Why are you insecure in life? Money...? The person who has
the
God, who has got now the blessings of the Divine, what more does he want?
Because your God is almighty, nobody's might is greater than that of your
Self.
Father. Nobody dare touch you on any point. But your faith is lacking and
that is why you start with your faith in your heart. Make the faith sit in
your
Heart chakra and that faith is going to give you the joy of security. Faith is the
answer for all the insecurities of the world. You have made the Parmeshwar
stand in front of you, what else do you want?
12
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Livata
where we have to seek ourselves in others
It is the totality – and the totality of everything.
If that is the Virat, then that is in your brain, but reality is in your heart.
So the totality you may see, you may witness.
The reality is the subtlety behind it.
The power of the Virata is that it can penetrate into the subtle side of human beings
in such a manner that in everything we are connected. We are not separated.
And
every drop is connected with the ocean. We are connected with the whole universe.
And when you become a citizen of the Virat, then all the things with which you are connected
also get your vibrations, your ideas, your ambitions. Everything passes through that and it works...
Once you are above your ego, you enter into the kingdom of the Virata.
There the king is the Virat and you are the subjects who are looked
after completely by the Virata Shakti, by the power of the Virata.
But at that stage, you become really a universal personality...
In the case of a person who rises above his ego
and he is a part and parcel of that Virata Shakt,
enters into the kingdom of Virata, he knows he is very small.
He is very small compared to that and he just dissolves into that shakti.
And this should happen to us, that we should humble down.
We should humble down and know that our powers, whatever we have,
if they give us ego, we should get rid of it. We should not have that ego.
We should get rid of it and we should actually achieve that state
where you can be called as citizens of the Virata's power...
When you are entering into the kingdom of the Virata,
have to be like children. You are children there.
you
As children you enter.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-24.txt 
 VISHUDDHI
Madhurya
So now we come to the chakra of Vishuddhi. The Vishuddhi chakra
Sweetness
Krishna is the one who
can be divided into two. It is the Vishuddhi and the Hamsa. There are two
represents the madhurya,
the sweetness, sweetness
chakras and the Vishuddhi Chakra is, as you know, the chakra of the Virat,
of your character...
It's a very beautiful feeling of
madhurya. You see, in little,
little things they express
madhurya, like in poetry,
in relating some events.
When you get a very sweet
where we have to seek ourselves in others. We have to seek our Atma in
another person. We have to feel his Atma. We have to feel everybody's
feeling about the whole
event. Krishna's leelas were
Atma. We have to feel everyone else. We have to feel it. And how to do it
all full of madhurya.
It's like a sport.
– Krishna has taught us – is madhurya. It is the sweetness. Madhurya is the
essence of sweet. Feel others with the sweetness of it, that you are going to
It is for you to use that
tremendous power –
the embodiment of
feel a flower. You are going to smell the fragrance of the other flower, which
madhurya, sweetness.
That madhurya you have to
imbibe and that madhurya
you have to spread.
That's very important.
So that relationship of
has a different fragrance from yours. Feel that person with that sweetness as
feel the flower. How you catch the flower, how you smell it, how carefully
you
sweetness between each
other, the relation of
enjoying each other,
the relation of knowing
each other has to be full of
you don't even break a little of that so that you get the complete fragrance,
that fragrance you can only feel if you have that sweetness, that madhurya.
sweetness, just like honey.
It is just there, but we have
to be the bee to reach there.
And that sweetness of yours is so joy-giving, how you say things sweetly, how
you express yourself sweetly...
am sure it will work out.
It should work out
for all of you.
I think the sharpness of the tongue, the cutting nature of the tongue,
sarcasm, the so-called brilliance of expression, sometimes it is better to be
MORE ABOUT MADHURYA
Shri Krishna Puja 1988
The State of Witnessing
Garlate Italy
with a buddhu (fool) than to be with such an intelligent man who is all the
time ... hitting you, morning until evening. Then you say harsh things.. Then
2 May 1985
Nirananda
Vienna Austria
you develop a guilt. Then you have to say more harsh things. It goes on.
Mother Earth Puja 1983
Surbiton United Kingdom
So this kind of a behavior is because, when we speak, we do not have a
MORE ABOUT THE VIRATA
sensitivity to feel another person. Put yourself in the same situation. How will
Shri Virata Puja 1989
We Must Talk of Sahaja Yoga
you feel?
Connecticut USA
13
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-25.txt 
 it Atma
we call
The seeking of God starts when a person starts realizing or seeing that there must be
something beyond, there must be something which is fulfilling, something that is really
satisfying and he starts finding that absolute point from where there is no need to return,
where there is no disgust, where there is no frustration, disappointment.
And such a point resides within us in our heart as the Spirit.
We call it Atma in the Sanskrit language.
This spirit in the heart is the witness, which witnesses us, which looks after us.
But we are not conscious of it. That means the Spirit is not flowing, is not radiating
in our central nervous system, that we are not conscious of it.
We know there is someone. We know someone inside is there.
We're aware of it in a way, but it is not flowing through our conscious mind,
through our central nervous system. And this is what the seeking is for.
We are seeking our Spirit.
As Krishna has said,
through Atma only the Atma will know.
That is, the Spirit will know Itself through the Spirit.
It is a simple thing to be understood, that we are not yet the Spirit
and we have to become the Spirit.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-26.txt 
 So at the Vishuddhi level – madhurya, such a simple thing it is. Develop –
We have
you have to develop a method...
The sweetness of your tongue, the sweetness of your talking, the
to seek
sweetness of meeting people, the whole thing – the sweetness itself gives
you such a joy to meet such a person who is so sweet and nice...
our atma
It is important that the language should be extremely sweet for a Sahaja
Yogi. On that point, they are going to judge you, I can tell you this much.
|
in another
Sharp-tongued people, nobody is going to accept.. For Sahaja Yoga and for
Sahaja Yogis, the centre is very easy, that when you speak to someone, say it
with your heart. Say it with the blessings of your Atma...
person.
you establish your love in another person, then say. This is the way
you can overcome this problem of Vishuddhi. And how do you learn? Just
by witnessing. Like two nice friends talking to each other, just witness how
GOPAS
Shri Krishna played
with the gopas by
holding their hands –
raasa. “Ra" is energy
they are enjoying. Just witness the drama. You will pick it up in no time,
just like that. The sweetness will be flowing into you. Become so soft in
behavior, in your countenance, in your faith.. People should say that "You
and sa" means with.
He used to play with
them.... On one side it's
are a realized soul. I can see that." It should be so evident. So give up your
a very beautiful, sweet
madhurya.... You have
to become those gopis
and gopas who gave joy
last practices and habits. Try to be friendly.
Shri Krishna's beauty was that He had friends – gopas. And what was the
to others
quality of the gopas compared to Shri Krishna? But how he got friendly with
MORE ABOUT THE ATMA
them – friendship... In friendship, you will find that enjoyment. But if you
7 September 1980
How to Know Where You Are
are not a witness, then what will you see...? In friendship it works both ways.
London United Kingdom
Shri Krishna Puja 1988
The State of Witnessing
Garlate Italy
You'd never trouble each other, but whenever there is difficulty, you can
smell it, you can feel it...
25 January 1982
Open Your Heart
Lonavala India
14
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-27.txt 
 sa
The discretion of the right side is hum
and the discretion of left side is sa.
CC
י>
It means “You are the one."
"Sa´ means
you.
“you."
CC
you know who is the
I
your case
But for every human being, You is the Divine.
You are the One. This comes from the left side. It is sa.
So the word “Hamsa" is made of two types of discretion,
where to see "I am" and where to see "You are."
On these two balances are the Moon and the Sun.
In the centre is the cross, which gives you the balance,
which gives you the dharma.
How all these things are connected,
one after another, in layers after layers.
You can see how dharma is connected with discretion....
So
you can see on the Hamsa how many things are judged.
I think the whole of Sahaja Yoga stands on the balance of Hamsa.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-28.txt 
 So this samuhik chetana, this universality, you can feel it on your
Vishuddhi chakra, so that you become a part and parcel of that Virat. Once
you are fully part and parcel, all of you can feel each other. But without
samuhik chetana:
sweetness you cannot. Imagine the nose fighting the eyes and the mouth
the new awareness of
fights, biting the ears. What will happen to a person? The same is the
collective consciousness
condition of Virat today. Sometimes the ears are blowing, sometimes the
head is blowing. The Virat doesn't know what to do because you all are
fighting with each other. Think of something sweet.
All brothers
But in that universality is the point. Because you are born of the same
and sisters of
Mother, you have the same Mother. Out of Her Sahasrara we are all born.
equal merit.
That's why we are all brothers and sisters of equal merit and credit. This is
what one has to feel.
So for the Vishuddhi chakra – universality through sweetness, the
sweetness of relationship.
HAMSA
The Hamsa chakra is a part of the Vishuddhi chakra. It is the abstract,
PRANAVA
the integrating power,
the great power which
has all the pouwers in it,
the Aum, the sound of
the All-pervading Power
the inner current of all this universe that is created. It's pranava itself, which
is so pure – complete purity within yourself, absolute purity, nothing
but vibrations. That is only possible through developing your vibratory
vibratory
awareness and your discrimination. Nothing but vibrations – your
MORE ABOUT THE HAMSA
Hamsa Puja 1991
The Source of Discretion
awareness is the only way you see, smell, feel – everything through vibratory
New York USA
awareness....
Hamsa Chakra Puja 1992
Abbotsford Canada
15
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-29.txt 
 Vibrations
much.
I know you all love Me
very
It is a tremendous love for Me.
And when I get the vibrations from you, it's like the ripples that reach the shores
and again they return back and lots of little, little sparkling drops are there on the shore also.
In the same way, in My heart, I feel your love echoing the beauty of the sparkle
- this divine love, which I cannot explain to you the experience, what it creates.
The first thing that it creates – tears come into My eyes because it is the compassion...
Every part of the Mother's body, everything is created out of divine love.
Every bit of it emits nothing but divine love.
Vibrations are nothing but divine love.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-30.txt 
 A state must come when you don't have to see vibrations, just feel them.
That should be the state, that sign – your pranava is full. I never feel anything,
neither vibrations nor any chakra – nothing. I have to ask you because for Me
Purification
nothing catches. Imagine such a gross person, nothing catches. Nothing I can
feel.. But the only thing that happens is that anybody who comes before
of vibrations
face
Me just gets it, gets cured. Now I am nothing but vibrations. When
you
Me, it just works. When I speak, it works. I don't do anything. Rationally I
is your job.
don't understand. But these vibrations themselves, the energy goes, works
it out. That works it out. That works it out. It works out all over, in the whole
over,
world. I do not consult it. I do not ask it. It's working on its own. If I want, I will
I may not. If I don't want to feel you, I will not feel you. There
ask. Otherwise
might be a rakshasa sitting next to Me. He might be shivering, but nothing
will happen to Me. I can stop his shivering if I want to. If I don't want, I will ask
him to shiver. I am not bothered because on vibrations the responsibility is
there. On vibrations – which are My light – I leave them alone. They are very
well trained. They know everything. They are absolutely pure. As My name
is, they are absolutely pure. I have no problem with them.
I play here and there. That's a different point. I try to cover them up
sometimes. I create a maya. It's different. That's another style. But as far as the
vibrations are concerned, they are absolutely pure. That's why they are so
effective. So keep your vibrations pure, without any intention.. Purification
MORE ABOUT VIBRATIONS
of vibrations is your jo...
26 November 1979
How to get the Spirit Within
London United Kingdom
16
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-31.txt 
 This Agnya chakra is a gate.
It is the door of Heaven
and everyone has to pass through it.
Christ said, "I am the light. I am the path"
because He is Aumkara.
He is the path.
And He is the door.
He is the gate.
And everybody will have to pass through His gate.
ALL WORDS BY SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI – PAGE 2 left: Birthday Felicitations 2002 and 9 March 1983 Melbourne
Page 3 left: 7 March 1981 Cambridge and Diwali Puja 1991 Page 3 right: Shivaratri Puja 1995 Page 4 left (nirvichar
samadhi): 24 July 1979 London Page 4 left (Swadisthan): Guru Puja 1989 Page 4 left (creativity): Saraswati Puja
1983 Page 5 right: 31 January 1983 Delhi Page 6 left: Diwali Puja 1992 Page 6 lower left: Sahasrara Puja 1987
Page 6 right: Mahalakshmi Puja 1996 Page 7 left and right: 30 December 1979 Mumbai Page 8 left: 26 November
1979 London Page 8 right: Shri Krishna Puja 1988 Page 9 far left and right: Shri Ganesha Puja 1984 (Brighton)
Page 9 left: Guru Puja 1980 Page 10 left: Shri Ganesha Puja 1997, 12 July 1994 Paris and Shri Krishna Puja 1997
Page 10 right: 19 December 1987 Aurangabad India Page 11 left and right: Shri Krishna Puja 1997 Page 12 left:
Navaratri Pujas 1994 and 1999 Page 13 left: Shri Virata Puja 1989 and Shri Krishna Puja 1999 Page 13 right:
2 May 1985 Vienna and 28 May 1990 San Diego Page 14 left: 31 March 1980 Brighton and 10 May 1985 London
Page 14 right: Shri Krishna Puja 1984 Page 15 left: Hamsa Puja 1988 Page 16 left: Shri Adi Shakti Puja 1993 (Cabella)
Page 17 left: 3 February 1983 Delhi Page 18 left: Sahasrara Puja 1997 Page 18 right: Mahamaya Puja 1994 Auckland
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-32.txt 
 AGNYA
Then we come to the Agnya chakra, which is the light itself. That is the
The
one that enlightens your attention – the Agnya Chakra. That is the light by
you see everything after Realization. And when you know you are the
which
whole
light and when you know that you are the eternal light, that nothing can kill
you ... you cannot be pierced by weapons, cannot be burnt by fire. Once
world
you know that in your Agnya, then all the fears and domination disappear
just like that because it is the light of love that does not dominate nor is it
within.
afraid. Because it knows it is eternal, it is not afraid of death nor of crucifixion
or of anything.
So to allow the joy of the Agnya to penetrate within
is to stabilize
you
your light. In that light, you will enjoy your sacrifice like the martyrs who kill
themselves with joy. In the same way, whatever trouble you have to put in for
Sahaja Yoga, you will do it with joy – anything that you have to face, any kind
of sacrifice...
You have to become the light – the light that never dies, which is above
all the joys.
The son who crucified Himself for the sake of His Mother's work, who
carried the cross in the presence of a Mother who was so powerful, such
children you have to be to carry the light – sacrifice, the enjoyment of
PHOTOGRAPHS
Page 2: Shri Mary Shri Mahalakshmi
sacrifice. Sacrifice for your emancipation, for your light being kept alive...
Puja Munich 8 September 1984
Page 5: Venice Italy circa 1985
What are you going to sacrifice? These stones and this dust? For what?
Page 7: September 1984 Switzerland
Page 8: Capri Italy May 1989
(all photos above by Herbert Reininger)
For the eternal light...
Page 17: near Calgary Canada
(photo by Ian Butterworth)
Page 18: Diwali Puja 1983
17
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-33.txt 
 You are completely filled with your Self,
contented with yourself and then you want to share.
This is the ideal way of dealing with the Sahasrara
and I am sure the day will come when this
whole world's Sahasrara has to be opened out....
That is what you are here for.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-34.txt 
 It is out of proportion you are going to get. This is no sacrifice. This is not
MAHAMAYA
It's the basic of Sahaja
Yoga.... When the Goddess
even the slightest value of what you are going to get.. But that proportion
comes in the Sahasrara, the
Shakti, She is Mahamaya,
"Sahasrare Mahamaya,
already described. She
has to be the Mahamaya.
you can only see when you have light.
When the light starts, it goes to eternity. In the same way, this eternal
That means She should
light encompasses the whole world and you know the whole world within
camouflage Herself fully.
Nobody should be able to
yourself.
know Her as the Goddess
to begin with. And even
if they get Realization,
they should not reach to
the end of it... The job
of Mahamaya is to give
Realization. Now if I had
SAHASRARA
The last chakra is of the Sahasrara, which is a very important centre
come on a tiger with a
sword in My hand, nobody
because it is in the core of your heart, surrounding your heart and all the
would have stood near Me.
You all would have run
away from Me. In any
other form, if the Goddess
had come, She could not
seven chakras have got their seats there. These are the seats which receive
the joy and communicate to the Heart.
have done what She was
supposed to do.... So the
Mahamaya incarnation has
In the Sahasrara, if you are there, already so many things you have got.
to come so that people can
You've got your vibrations. You've got your powers. But it's the most tricky
come closer.... You have to
be identified into My body,
into My cells of My body...
centre. It's a Mahamaya – Kalki in a Mahamaya shape. It is a complete illusion.
You can't see how you are
inside Me. You can't see
In the Sahasrara, the joy of Sahasrara is the joy of the entirety because
your reflection within Me.
You can't see. This is
all seven seats are there. If you can capture your Sahasrara, in complete
Mahamaya. This is the
secret part of it that you
don't know.... Mahamaya
is that which brings you
recognition of this Mahamaya – complete recognition, which is a very
difficult thing because always the maya is there – then there's nothing to talk
back, brings you back to
normal, brings you
back
to reality.... Just enjoy that
about. Then see how your heart enlarges. See now. Just recognize. See the
maya and
you are enjoying it. It is
the best way to enjoy this
Mahamaya... I thought
something unique must be
done which encompasses
you are in that
expansion of your heart. It will cover all your entire being - just recognize.
That's why we have puja here. I have allowed you to have My puja only
everything of Sahaja Yoga.
for one reason.
It is not one Incarnation.
It's not one nadi.
It's not one Goddess.
But all of it is there.
18
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-35.txt 
 That's the only way you can recognize Me,
by seeing vibrations, by seeing chakras, by feeling them,
by getting them more, by correcting yourself.
This is why I've agreed to have this puja.
But if you do not recognize and do puja,
it is useless for you. It is very bad.
Just recognize.
