The Divine Cood EBu Dreeze 2009 issue 5 – volume twenty-two number five

 Tomorrow, MW. you are no. going to show to the world WO what Sahaja Yoga is, not Me. no 2 One Thousand Petals • 10 Stillness Within • 12 Criticism & Introspection

 the one who gives blessings and removes all fear 16 Greatest Guru • 18 Known To Me All Along • 20 Water • 24 Prosperity • 28 To the Seekers • 30 Questions

 one thousand petats Sahasrara – the word Sahastr in the Sanskrit language means one thousand. And there are one thousand petals in our brain, which get enlightened... These petals are kept ready for our enlightenment and these are really the nerves – one thousand nerves – which are there for the enlightenment of the brain. So when the Kundalini rises, She enlightens those one thousand nerves which become like the shape of these flames – like a petal. And that's why it is called as the Sahasrara – the centre of Sahasrara.

 In human beings it is a very important centre because this is the only centre by which we think and we try to whatever we don't like. stop This is the centre which reacts – reacts in such a manner that, without any discretion, we start saying no to this and no to that.... cannot become your Self unless and until this Sahasrara, this But you brain, is opened out and the Kundalini becomes one with the Param- chaitanya. Before that, you are in complete ignorance about what is good and what is bad. Whatever you think, for this brain it is good and you do it. But whatever is really good, you do not know because you do not know the reality.

 The new awareness We have to understand the consciousness that we have – consciousness of being alive, consciousness of so many things we have and the so-called knowledge we have about everything. All that consciousness is stored near the liver.... But then this consciousness starts rising higher and higher. Then you become aware. reta one thousand perats In the evolutionary process you become aware of things without going through your brain. You just become aware. And how? Not by thinking, not by understanding or seeing, but you become aware because your brain has now started working in a manner that's very, very sensitive. So you just become aware of some sort of a fear or maybe some sort of a goodness or anything. But it goes even further ... where you start liking a person or disliking a person, but still it's nothing definite and sure. You dislike a person because he has a particular type of a face. It may be the eyes or maybe anything. Or maybe because you have known somebody who has been very nice, so you start transferring that image onto others. With these transferred images you can hate or love someone. Then you start saying, “I hate this, I hate that," which has no actual substantial mean- ing. You hate it because, perhaps, maybe such-and-such a person looks like somebody. Now you go further with it. Then you see that such-and-such a person - now I'm not talking about things, but about people – "such-and-such a person has done this harm to me...." So you start feeling that you should hate that person. Now new faculties of how to harm that person. Then you start thinking how to destroy that person, Always do the right. CC You have to person. With that hatred, you develop you start hating that how to make his life miserable. Then you may beat that person. You can do anything. So now the awareness is going towards another direction, which is dark- ness, which is not light because in the light you won't do such a thing. In the light you see everybody is sitting. You know how far you are, where you are sitting. If darkness shout at that person. You may try to kill that person. You may decide on you want to go out, you know how to walk out. But when in the you are there, you just don't understand and you go on behaving in that point. a manner which cannot be explained otherwise, except that it is because you are a human being... Human beings don't have any particular reason, as such, to hate someone. But why it works out is because they are involved in their ego. An egoistical person feels that he has a right to do what he wants to do. He can kill anybody. He can bomb anyone. He can do whatever he likes. But a person who is not doing that is the other way around. He is frightened. He is afraid of someone. Now the awareness moves on. This is a subtler awareness because, if you are afraid of somebody, you would not like to go to his house. You will avoid him in the street. All things you can do, so all this kind of knowledge about other human beings also accumulates in your mind. Then this thing starts working on a collective level because you think this group is very bad, they are good, these are bad, they are excellent In – like that. your own mind is better or that group is better. And collectively then, you start working out think that somebody has a and the other group group you 4 whole temperament, your awareness. your

 A connection to reality What is important is that you should know reality. You should know exactly what is right and what is wrong. For that, there is this great power of Kundalini within you. She is the one. She passes through all these centres – enlightens them first of all, so your awareness gets enlightened. And when She pierces through the Sahasrara, She joins you to this All- Pervading Power, which is knowledge, which is love, which is truth. So after that, you immediately know – some people don't know immediately, but some people do – that what we have been thinking so far, of separating ourselves from others by thinking that they are not all right, they are wrong, they are whatever it is. This disappears. This disappears completely. And then you realize that your awareness itself is dominated by so many other circumstances – for example, where you were born, what your parents taught you, what experiences you have had. And then realize that it was all wrong because it is not reality. Whatever feelings you have, whatever ideas have about another person or about another nation, all of them are not correct because now your Sahasrara is awakened. It is connected now to the All-Pervading Power. So this starts flowing into you. This enlight- ened awareness, it starts flowing down into your being, in your brain and then on your you you nerves you can feel that awareness. Now once you want to know about something, whether it is right or wrong - absolute right and wrong, it's not a question of relative – you just have to put your hands towards that person or towards that thing or whatever it is. Immediately on these vibrations you will know.... These vibrations are the Paramchaitanya. We call it Brahmachaitanya, which starts flowing through your fingertips. Now you start feeling what chakras they are catching, whether they are right or wrong and your discretion improves immensely... When your Sahasrara is enlightened, whatever you had gathered – knowledge, what- ever you thought was right, whatever was your dream and your aims of life – all these aspirations, they melt away. And then you take to reality and you start seeing the reality of everything. Unless and until you see that reality, you will be going with another crowd. "These people are saying so, so let's do that." "They are saying so, so let's do that." But you cannot see whether it is correct or not, whether it is good for you or not or whether it is going to help you. This kind of thing is so common in the whole world and that is why there is so much problem because they don't know the reality. Once you know the reality, most of the problems can be finished because this brain itself is creating problems. First of all, it commits all kinds of atrocities, violence, everything. Then it also justifies itself and then it does even worse things. All this they used to call it as sin, but now in Sahaja Yoga that's finished. Whatever your brain was contaminated with is now cleansed. It has got the knowledge and, through the knowledge, you can make out what is right and what is wrong. Up to this point it is all right, but then you must have full understanding that what- ever is right is right and whatever is wrong is wrong and we should not do anything that wrong. Always do right. You have to decide on that point. Now we have to do the right only, never the wrong. This is when it comes to your mind. Then what starts is your determination, what we call as devotion, dedication, sur- rendering. With that, you give up all your false ideas and all your false pride, all other things that you have been doing so far. And immediately you become a different person, a beautiful person. is

 Spreading the experience Now the third thing that happens to you, which never happened to you before is that you feel that "Unless and until I give the same state to other people, it won't be all right. It won't be all right for me to talk to them." So talking to your brothers, sisters. Then you start talking to other people. The whole nation you can talk to about Sahaja Yoga, that "I have gained so much. I have one thousand Perats you start got these things, so now why not you take it...?" By talking, by discussion, by arguments, by sermons, they will never take to it because their brain is just the same, still full of ignorance. So what you You have have to do is to raise their Kundalini. Once you raise their Kundalini and their brain opens, then they are on the same line as yourself. They don't have to worry about what is good and what is bad. They know themselves. Now that is what is very important. To correct this world is very impor- tant, that you all should know what is right and what is wrong and you have a vehicle of Paramchaitanya to know what is wrong and what is right. Now this strength starts moving and, as you see, there are so many people today with their open Sahasrara. Opening the Sahasrara was the most important part of the evolutionary process. All the evolutionary process brought human beings to what level? We had wars. We had all kinds of silly programs by which we really ruined so many countries, so many people. Now when you are one with that All-Pervading Power, it is a pure power, a vehicle of Paramchaitanya it's a nirmal power, an absolutely pure power that gives you complete sense and complete understanding as to how you should move, how you should live and what you should have. This is what is Self Realization, they say. But I would say that Self Realiza- tion is much further than that. Even if your brain is enriched by the knowl- edge, the real knowledge, still there are other things which should have and the most important thing is that you have to be completely aware – again I say the word “aware" – of where you stand in this big plan of world global to know what you is right and CC I transformation. What is your position? What are you supposed to do for this global trans- formation? What is your position? Where do you stand? What is the work for what is wrong. you to do? Now you have got this compulsion on you, that “I have to do something." When this compulsion starts working on you, which is not dreadful, which is not annoying, but very peaceful and joyful, which says that "I have to see that others also know themselves." So to know themselves is, first of all, that you must know your own chakras.... It is not only for others, but for yourself also. It is important that you should get your chakras corrected. That is the most important thing for and then you will have self-knowledge in the sense you will know what is the defect, where is the defect, "what am I doing wrong, what should I do?" And you CC then, when you correct it, when you correct those centres, then your aware- ness will be really fully enlightened about all the world. 6.

 You have to transform this mad world into something very sane. Global transformation It is a tremendous thing. It's very tremendous because, if you have to transform this mad world into something very sane and if we have to give them all Self Realization, imagine the task, how great it is, how many people we need to do it. But if your will-power is strong about it, you feel compelled to do it. But normally, we are compelled because we have to run our houses, we have to earn money, we have to do this, we have to do that. That you can do. But the main object of your life is to transform people and to work it out, this transformation, for the global peace. I don't know if it has been predicted or not, that a complete transformation will take place. But they have talked about transformation. I don't know that part and I just don't bother My head as to how many people are getting transformed. But after transformation you must settle down. First of all, you should see if you are a peaceful person, if there's peace in your heart. If you have no peace in your heart, then you are not a Sahaja Yogi. If you get excited and if you start shouting at people and all that, it means you are not Sahaja Yogis. You have to have a very, very peaceful temperament. That is very important. Now with that what should be there is pure compassion. What you are doing is not for your benefit, as such, but because you are compelled by this force to do good for others, to transform them. This is the greatest good you can do to others, that their brains are put right, they get rid of their diseases, they get rid of their problems. It's all there. But the first thing and the most important thing that happens is that they get power to transform others. When you have that power to transform others not waste it. You should not use it for yourself. That means the growth is not complete. You must talk about it, you must tell about it and you must work it out wherever it is sible. You have to work it out. This is the way we can spread to people on a global level, who can get complete transformation. All our problems, whether in India or anywhere, is because of human beings ... have not been enlightened. If you are enlightened, you will have no problem of any quarrel- ling or any fighting and all that. If you are enlightened, then you will think about others - others as if they are your own.... You will not think about yourself any more. If you are enlightened, then there is no question of any violence in your head. Nowadays, in the name of religion, in the name of everything, there is so much vio- lence. This violence can be easily corrected if they all become Sahaja Yogis. Think, if all the people become Sahaja Yogis, how will they quarrel? For what? peace, the should you pos-

 The divine play Religion is there, but above all these religions is the religion of Sahaja Yoga, where you become one and there all these quarrels of religions will disap- pear. This is not the only problem we have as human beings. We have some other problems also – very serious. We have a hankering. We are very greedy. We cannot adjust ourselves to any other circumstances. We want to live in complete comfort and this and that. But after this, you can sleep anywhere, you can eat anywhere, you need not eat. You become a person who is above all these needs, all these demands, absolutely. Then reta one thousand perats don't worry. There's you for what...? worry Now with this blessing of Sahasrara, you will be amazed there is help from the Paramchaitanya and that means a tremendous help because it acts globally, it acts individually, it acts on communities, it acts on nations because there is the Divine – what you call divine. There is a divine play going on. And this divine play plays tremendous, beautiful things by which people start correcting themselves. So Don't retaliate. Don't get angry. you should never be nervous. You should never be upset because you have the divine power within and it will correct. It can correct anyone.... you All this work is done by the Paramchaitanya. You don't have to do anything. Any problem that comes before you, before it really touches you, it is solved by the Paramchaitanya. But you must have full faith in yourself and in the Paramchaitanya and believe that you are a realized soul. Nobody can harm you. If they try to harm you, for the time being – all right, you may suffer – but you don't also feel the sufferings and you get out of it. Such a security, such a proper guidance is there. Don't get upset. You will enjoy you are saved from all kinds of attacks and all kinds of mistakes that you commit. It's all such a big computer of knowledge. He knows. It knows what you are doing and what you should not do, where you are going and what should not be your way. It knows everything – knows everything about Also you. the same life have to become aware of it. Now this is the stage where I that you have to be aware that you are realized souls. You are differ- ent, very unique. You are realized souls. You are not ordinary people and you are protected by this Paramchaitanya. Nothing can change you. Nothing can So then you would trouble you. Nothing can overpower you. which was Because you are not aware also of this Paramchaitanya, that's why you a little bit get worried.... Everything can be corrected by the Paramchaitanya if you know how to leave it to that, if you understand how you are one with that Paramchaitanya. You are a part and parcel of that and that Paramchaitanya is looking after you. You don't have a very conscious effort. There's no need to irritating you. have a very conscious effort. Accept life as it is. As it is, whatever life is there, accept it. Don't retaliate. Don't get angry. Don't get upset. Just accept and you will enjoy the same life which was irritating you. You will see the enjoying part of that and it will be your problems. You your enemies and a kind of a very fresh beautiful existence all so beautiful the way you will see that you will get over will get over all 8 you will have.

 You are the Paramchaitanya You are all Sahaja Yogis. It is a very great position. With that, if you humble down, then you will be amazed to see that you are absolutely in contact with this Paramchaitanya. Not only that, but you have become the Paramchait- anya. With this Paramchaitanya you can do anything. I need not tell you what you can do because some of you may not believe, but My own experience is that if you are the Paramchaitanya, if you know you are the Paramchaitanya, then it keeps your dignity, it keeps your position, it keeps your word and looks after you. And whatever is just said or desired, you just get it. Your desires also change. Your desires are not for stupid things, but for something that is very noble - like you want to transform people, you want to do Sahaja Yoga work. All these desires are fulfilled fully. When you want to do it, you like it and you think of it. It is something. Even seeing something, if you see something and you are stunned by that, immediately the Paramchaitanya will take over and you will have no problems because the way we react to all these difficulties and to so-called odds in life, it becomes a play – just a play. You are amazed. You look at it – and finished. Look at that – and finished. That is how it is the light. If it goes into the dark- ness and finishes the darkness, the darkness is finished and our problems are Paramchaitanya will give you all finished also. necessary help, So this is what our awareness has to become. Awareness has to become the Paramchaitanya. Then you get all the ideas, everything that is divine, but not only that, also the help of the Divine, all the solutions of the Divine. It is something amazing and everything quietens down, everything settles down and you are amazed watching all this, that you are the centre of doing all these things. You are not aware that you are doing and you are there. That ego part is missing, but you see it's all happening around you and then you are amazed how it is happening. The whole lifestyle changes, the whole understanding changes and you become a great source of happiness, joy and knowledge to others. You don't have to study anything. You don't have to know much, but you will know about everything, what is right and what is wrong. And then only you can tell the things with complete authority, that “this is not right..." I've seen people who are very rich think no end of themselves and then they become bankrupt. And those who are very bankrupt become rich. It's a kind of a turmoil in which they are jumping from one shore to another shore. all necessary prestige and also the personality. are not. You watch that drama. You see all that drama and, with your But you peace, you can see everything very calmly. It's not difficult for you to create more people like this. It's not difficult to transform this world. The time has come, just the right time. Like when the proper time comes, the blossom time comes, so many flowers become fruits. So like that, you all have become. Now it is for you to create seeds to spread Sahaja Yoga. You are now at that level of awareness where the Paramchaitanya is with parcel of you, absolutely with you to give you all necessary help, all necessary prestige and also the personality. May God bless you absolutely part and you, all.

 still This is what it is: simple. You are integrated. By integration, you get the power to do what you understand and you have you understand. the power to feel happy with what So you come to a stage where you develop this Nirananda. And this Nira- you develop when you are absolutely the spirit. In the Nirananda state there is no duality left. It is advaita. It is one personality. That is, you are nand completely integrated and the joy is not any more dented. It is complete. It hasn't got a happiness and a sorrow aspect, but is just joy. The joy is not that you laugh loud. The joy is not that you are always smiling. It is the stillness, the quietude within yourself, the peace of your being, of your spirit that asserts itself into vibrations which you feel. When you feel that feel like the light of the sun, the whole rays peace, you of that beauty spreading. But first of all, we are curbed down by our own personal, selfish, stupid ideas. Throw them away. We have them because we are insecure, because we have wrong ideas. Throw them away. Just stand alone, one with God and will find all these fears were useless. you Our cleansing is very important and that cleansing comes only when you really practise the cleansing as told in Sahaja Yoga. The Sahasrara is the blessing of the heavens. 10

 Keep yourself in a meditative mood. Try. Tell yourself, "Be peaceful. Be peaceful. My mind, be peaceful." Be still. Be still. Tell your mind to be still. You will be amazed. It's all within yourself. Try to merge your stillness within you... Now just ask, “Mother, take us deep into Your stillness." Just ask. ness also has another meaning - Yoga This happening is called as yoga. But yoga Kaushalyum, yukti. What the word yukti comes from is that yoga means "with deftness, how CC to handle this instrument. It is not sufficient for anyone to get an instrument. Supposing you are given a car and the machinery is opened up. Still if you don't know how to And if drive the car, you cannot drive it. It is useless for you try to do you. anything, you may spoil the car. Before starting the car, if you start turning the parts like the tires or some- thing like that or the wheels, the car won't move. In the same way, without having the yoga, if you try to do anything in the name of God, you are doing it artificially. So the yukti, the Kaushalyum to handle this instrument, is also to be learned. So the first part, this is the yoga. It is the sprouting of the Kundalini, the awakening of it and the breaking of the Sahasrara. I should say it is the job of a Sahaja Yogi or your Divine Mother. But afterwards, to learn the yukti, the Kaushalyum, the kushalta, the deftness, how to develop this awareness into that stillness and this awareness into that higher awareness – which you call it vibratory awareness – how to station it there is the job of an awakened soul.

 criticism intro What is the use of knowing what is wrong with others? It is like England trying to improve the conditions in India and India trying to improve the conditions in England. Guru Puja 1984 If we try to criticize others and not ourselves, then we are going to miss the bus. You must understand the importance of time. That is something people miss out. Sahaja Yoga is very good because you are blessed and you feel that you are secured. Things are very good. You get so many brothers and sisters and I see your faces just like roses shining. All that is good, but still there is a chance that you may fall back. The reason is you must purify yourself. Never get satisfied with yourself. Some people, when I talk to them, they never think I am talking to them. They think I am talking to somebody else. So please try to understand we have to introspect ourselves. We have to meditate. And when we are conscious about our own defects, we will start looking at them and they will drop out. Easter Puja 1991 12

 spection

 criticismrospection ст 1. in We are here to judge ourselves and not to judge others. When God's kingdom has to come on this Earth, we must understand the nature of Sahaja Yoga. When you come to Sahaja Yoga you are coming into the temple of God. All the dei- ties want to welcome you. They want to look after you. They want to give all the bless ings. And they want to give you those powers by which you can give Realization to others and improve their lives... Supposing you go to university and you have to learn something from and, as soon as you see the professor, you start criticizing his suit or his nose.... That is not a sign of intelligence, of pure intelligence. It is a sign of ego and stupid. We are here to judge ourselves and not to judge others... your professor makes ego a person and All the individuals now have to enter into My being. You have to all become parcel of the Virat. The microcosm has to become the macrocosm. For that, you have to give up your small, limited personalities. You have to become very large, big, but what have to surrender is your ego. That's the stupid thing which covers you up completely in the head and doesn't allow you to grow. So if you fight with it, it will exhaust you. For example, your ego is here and you are here, so light falls and you fight with your own image or your shadow. Then you are exhausted. Then you say, “Mother, I've been fighting with part Ego is even worse than you dirt and filth my ego, but the ego doesn't go." It is an illusion.... Stand under the light – under the light of enlightenment.... You don't fight yourself, so you don't fight your ego. You must only know that it exists. You stand before the mirror and because it attacks others. "Now, how do CC do, Mr. Ego?" Now a stupid idea comes, you say, “Oh, Mr. CC you say, Ego, now don't tell me anything. I know it's all right. It's all right.' you start detaching yourself, like you say, "All right, I forgive, I forgive, I forgive. I forgive you. You get out. You get out." The best thing is to shoebeat yourself. Then this ego business goes away. Now should not have happened" – it's all right. Forget it. Like supposing I see anything black on My sari, I won't have it there. I'll wash it off. Supposing I think this: “My sari is Me and this, whatever is dirt on that, is also Me." Then I won't leave it there. So >כ idea comes into your head that "this is very wrong, this But ego is even worse than dirt and filth because it attacks others. Also it attacks It comes from the over-activity of the brain.... So now, this is what happens to a person. Such a person gets old very soon. He is such a bore. Nobody likes such company. He may not like anyone, but such a bore no one likes.... you.

 Enjoy the taste of the bliss of God. To correct your ego, first thing, you should never criticize others, never get irritated with others.... You are a Sahaja Yogi. Be patient. Be patient. But for the ladies it is even worse. In My experience I've seen when women try to dominate. Actually, a woman is like this Mother Earth. And if the Mother Earth thinks that these trees are dominating Her, then what should we say? It is the same way if the women think that the husbands are dominating. I must say they are very wrong.... Try to pacify – that is her job – not to criticize others. On the whole, a lady should never be right-sided because there are so many problems she will jump into. I have seen these things happening in Sahaja Yoga... What I'm saying is you should not spoil your children. But you also shouldn't dominate the children and your husband and the family. It is not a good thing for women at all. It's also not very sweet.... Our attention should be on our spirit, onto higher things, not how you keep your how you keep your fork.... All the time attention should be on our spirit because spoon, we have to grow.... Don't judge others' vibrations and don't be harsh to others. It doesn't behoove a Sahaja Yogi to talk harshly to another. It doesn't behoove – let alone meanness, selfishness, miserliness. It should be a character which should show as if there's light in that person. as Christ ing others, that is a danger to you and to Sahaja Yoga. Meditate every day. Be in thoughtless awareness. Any thought comes in, say, "Forgive, forgive, forgive" and grow. Unless and until you are matured in Sahaja Yoga, you cannot really enjoy the taste of the bliss of God.O The meanness, talking at the back, “murmuring souls" criticiz- says, CO 15 17 August 1987

 the greatest guru 16

 The greatest guru that we have is love, Sahaj love. It is the guru within us which teaches us, which somehow or other leads us. We are led into that line of understanding, for which we don't have to If you want to have a guru, great go to any college, to any school for education. It is something so much within that it works and expresses itself, expresses like a light. Such people we can make out because they are fully enlightened. They have light, and through that light they see the whole world, which is very innocent and simple for them. We have love for our children naturally, we have love for our parents naturally, we have love for some people, but that love is different from God's love. That has some connections, some meaning. But this love, which cannot isn't she? But a mother is a very be described in words, has to be felt within. It is the same when you talk of your guru. You should have that love within you. Why do you feel it so much? The reason is the guru loves you and soft guru also. That's the trouble. you love the guru. That's the only reason why you Now there's no reason for that because love is love and that is how the you can call Me guru" because a mother is the greatest guru, should love your guru. Thať's why people don't guru becomes very important in life. We have people who love their guru and are very much in a chaste understanding of their love. In this great opportunity of love that we are here to enjoy each other fully from our heart, there is this ocean within us. We have to just get submerged in that ocean. If we are lost in that ocean, then we will have no problems, no questions. Everything will be our own and we can manage everything without any argument, without any questioning. That is what is being Sahaj. The Sahaj way – if you have this love, you enjoy. You enjoy yourself and enjoy everybody else because it is Sahaj. You don't have to make any efforts, don't have to try anything. Just it is there and ассері Mother as the But if you know, your first guru is your mother. it works. The feeling of love has no way of expressing itself. It is just there. It cannot express because it is without expression. It is just to be felt within yourself. Then you want to do so many things. You want to help everyone. You want to help yourself. You want to do good to others. So much has been done by great leaders of the world because they had that love. They had nothing else but this love which they could not contain within themselves, so they tried to spread it. And they are called now as our gurus, as our masters. But it is their love within which approached people in that unique manner. That's the thing that we cannot possess, you cannot claim. It is there and it works. It works automatically. This is what we have to know: we are that love. That love is within us. We have to have knowledge. We have to have a complete knowledge that we are that love. That will solve our problem because you can explain every- thing, all your behavior, all your failures. Everything you can explain when you know that you are endowed with that love. This is what is the guru. It is the love within which wants to share the love with others, which wants to give love to others. This is what is and joy. I can go on talking about love, but to feel it within yourself is the biggest thing. O you peace Guru Puja 2004

 Sahaja. Yoga, wa. to Me all along It was a unique knowledge with which I was born. It was not so easy to reveal it and I wanted to find out how to reveal it. First of all, I thought that the seventh chakra had to be opened, which I did on the fifth of May. It is a secret in a way. Formerly the Brahmachaitanya was avyakta. It was not manifested. It was not expressed by itself and so the people who managed to reach Brahmachaitanya – somehow, by attaining Realization – said, "It is nirakar ka solved in the ocean.' dis- You are like a drop that guna. gets No one could say, explain or tell people anything more about it. The great incarnations, who also came out of this Ocean of Brahmachait- tried their best to share it with the best available followers, who were great anya, few, and to introduce them to this Brahmachaitanya. But because the Brahmachaitanya was not in a manifested [vyakta] form, these incarnations got dissolved in it. Gyaneshwara took his samadhi. People said that he could not talk, it had to be experienced. So very few people got to understand it. Nobody could actualize the experience by feeling it on their fingertips or feeling it on their senses or in their minds or even understand it with their intellect, so it was a very big problem. They all tried and prepared a ground for it. Now I have come as the incarnation of the Brahmachaitanya as a whole. The Sea of Nirakar has now become a big cloud. It has taken a form Shivaratri Puja 1987 [saakar]. Those who came before were all a part and parcel of it. translated from Hindi Now the whole has come.

 This cloud has rainwater. The rainwater is nourishing the minds of the people. Gradually they are brought to a level where their Kundalinis have risen. They have got their Realization and now gradually they are feeling everything on their senses, on their fingertips. This is the reason why no one has talked about vibrations so clearly. They managed to talk about chaitanya lahiri. This was so because of its avyakta [unmanifested] form. It was only a state – a state to be enjoyed only in that time had to state, with no manifestation in the gross. In that state they became beyond sensations, beyond temper and so on. That is proof before us. How did they do it? What was this Brahmachaitanya? They could not show its pratyaksha [manifest] form. What they could show was only through | disclosed it. similes or through parables. The right come before This is what I have achieved – its pratyaksha form. The complete form of the Brahmachaitanya I have brought from the sea. So now, I do not allow you to get dissolved in it. I have put it in a form of a big ghat [matka or pot]. In that, you are smaller matkas. In other words, I have taken you all in My body as small cells, nourishing you, looking after you, cleansing you and working it out. But I am Mahamaya, so I have to work very slowly, gradually and at the right time and right point. When the seventh chakra was opened, all the chakras came to your Sahas- rara and I could manage all your chakras and all your Deities. Any Deity you ask and you get the vibrations. So that proves that I am Brahmachaitanya. The Brahmachaitanya is the Adi Shakti. And Sadashiva is also in My heart. But since I am so much humanized, it is not so easy to find it out. If you tell this to modern human beings, they will not understand. It can only be told to Sahaja Yogis because they will understand. To bear this truth is so difficult. These days it is difficult to bear money, let alone that. Even to bear one's own position, they become so shaky. So for them to bear the fact that I all the incarnations is too difficult to bear. encompass One day I went to Aurangabad, where a boy told Me that the Brahma- chaitanya is beyond feeling and non-feeling. He had read about it in some book. I told him it was true, but he should just forget about it and just feel it. It was then that I decided to tell a few people about it. You see, the right time also had to come before I disclosed it. All other religions have so far been segmented and not integrated. Now the whole integration has come. I can explain Christ, Muhammed-sahib and others because they are all a part and parcel of the whole, which is the Brah- machaitanya.O 19 30

 If you are thirsty, we can give you water, but we cannot drink. You have to drink water immersed in the water of collectivity and you have to feel the taste, feel the feeling, what it does and all that is together. Its not separate. purifies Purity is your Mother's name. You know that My name is purity. And this purity is such that it purifies everything. It just purifies. The purity should be such that it should purify, otherwise that purity has no meaning. For example, a soap purifies, but you don't purify the soap.... Water is the purifier. Water purifies us physically. And also our poisons are driven out of our liver by water. Water is a very great element in removing all problems. You use water for so many things. You know how it works it out. So this Lakshmi, which is purification, was born out of water. That's why She was called as Mary. And I'm also called as Nira, meaning "born out of cleans CC quenches water." So one has to understand ... that we inculcate purity. We should not cheat ourselves. It is easy to cheat, but we should inculcate purity within ourselves as a matter of our own maturity, as our own decoration, as our own beauty and not just because it's a labourious thing or it is a very hard thing. It is not nourishes like that. It should be achieved with great pleasure and happines... We like to have a bath or to be clean and to be presentable. In the same way, we should try to clean our thoughts. Just by paying attention to them, we can clean them. Thoughts must be made clean. First of all, why have thoughts at all? But even if you have, have clean and if you have to have, don't have thoughts full of arrogance, aggression or of permeates thoughts. Even pure fear.... Our purification of our mind comes through certain methods of under- flows standing ourselves. First of the understandings one has to have is that we are born in a family, born in a society, born in a so-called religious sect or what- ever. So all these fixations have put into us a certain amount of impurities, which may give us ego, superego. Anything it might give us. So to keep it pure and simple, take to the water element as much as you can. It helps both It helps the superego. Take to the water element. And ways. It helps the ego. that is what Lakshmi is... Diwali Puja 1981

 21

 You can quench the spiritual thirst of people – tremendous power – because when glistens you give Realization, then the seeking is over. Think of the water – nourishment. You nourish. You give spiritual nourishment to people through your power. Even if you are standing there, you are nourishing others. superego. All these Then dissolvement – and you dissolve their you dissolve their reflects ego powers you own after Realization. Just think of it.... It has another very great quality. Water permeates into the smallest particle. It goes to the roots, sucks into the roots.... personality has permeated into that person. He doesn't know. You have perme- buffers ated into that person and you are feeling the roots, where is the problem. The divine water is flowing into that being and the obstruction is felt through that you can say that this is catching, that is catching... The glistening of the water is so your skin becomes very radiant. divine water and And the last of all is the reflection. A person who sees you, sees his own reflection. gets frightened. This happens sometimes. I don't mean anything bad to anyone, but Не carries love people are unnecessarily frightened of Me because they see their reflection. So when they reach you, they see their reflection can be very aggressive because they see their reflection. They can be very hard on you because they see their reflection. And if it is clear-cut water, then you see the depth of that person. If you are a clear-cut Sahaja Yogi, you feel the depth clearly and they can see through the spirituality. These are the qualities of water... expresses emotion exerts pressure glorifies 22 20

 WATER In My body, the water I have as a buffer because it pro- Water finds it's own level. 1In the same way, tects the chakras. If I don't have water in the body, I may have problems. So it acts as a buffer also. It soothes your this compassion has to flow to all the places, epidermal cells. You can say it soothes your blindness. You see, if you don't have moisture, it is all blindness, a dryness in all. It soothes everyone. to all the ditches everywhere and should find its own level. And there are other types of powers of water which we know about. When it comes out of your eyes, it expresses In this lifetime, you can achieve that state. your compassion, your love, your emotions. That is the only thing, out of all the elements, which expresses emotions, In this lifetime, you can get to that state within yourself. water power. Water has other qualities also, which many people know - hydrostatic water, the pressure. It is the pressure and a person who exists like a Sahaja Yogi will definitely put a pressure on others. He will not aggress, but there will be a pressure.... You should really know that the water is a very holy thing and in our pujas also we use it specially. This dignifies the Kundalini. That means the Kundalini is the water jar, the carrier of Aquarius. And this is the age of the Aquarius. How important is this water? The water is the carrier of divine love. It is the best carrier. And this is the time of Aquarius. It means the Kundalini is made of divine water... Some of us, we do not know that we have those powers within us, that we can permeate into others. We can project our personalities to others. We can find out what's wrong with them. We can find out about ourselves. We can go into ourselves. Our permeation is like water. It is moving. It is flowing all the time. And this is a very important thing that we should be aware of, our powers that we have achieved.... We have our own self-esteem and we live with our own dignity and that's how we should be pure, transparent, honest. Within ourselves we should be absolutely honest. Water is so honest with itself. We put anything to the water, it will show. Put any colour into it, it will show. Put any mud, it will show. You have to be so honest, honest to yourself. And the whole thing should work out to be a personality and be congenial, beautiful, permeating... We have to dedicate ourselves to our purification, to our glorification because water glorifies. It gives you glory. & 30

 16

 Prosperity will come Shri Lakshmi Puja 21 September 1986 Belgium Lakshmi came out of the sea. That is the wealth that has come out of the sea. But the wealth has to be like a Lakshmi. The Lakshmi has a motherly nature. She is a mother. She is the Mother. She is standing on a lotus. That means She does not throw Her weight anywhere. People go and occupy other territories and use them for their own purpose. That will never give them the Lakshmi Principle. The only thing that may happen to them is to get some money for the time being. But they say that Lakshmi is chanchal. That means She is all the time shifting... Lakshmi has got one hand which is giving. Another hand She has got by which She protects you. In two hands She has pink lotuses. The pink lotus suggests the warmth. A person who has Lakshmi has to have warmth in his household. He must have in his heart warmth to receive people. 25

 The lotus and the elephant If a lotus flower receives even a horrible beetle, a black beetle which has got all kinds of thorns in it, it allows it to sleep overnight as a nice guest. The corona of the lotus that is beautiful spreads all the yellow colour on which this beetle rolls and enjoys the comfort. And the lotus watches the enjoyment of the beetle. It does not get disturbed. It does not get upset. And when the lotus opens out, the beetle just goes away. And the lotus still grows. It doesn't die out. In modern life, we don't want guests and if some guests come in the house, they dare not even spoil the carpet. We clean the house, we polish all our silver and all our brass, but we don't want even a little rat to come inside.... So the beauty of a lotus flower is that it is all-embracing. It is a very motherly principle. It tolerates any kind of nonsense from the beetle. So one of the aspects of Mahalakshmi is Gruha Lakshmi. It is the one who is the housewife. And if this is aspect spoiled, then we cannot have Lakshmi in our house, we cannot have wealth in our house. Lakshmi will disappear from all such houses where the housewife is not respected. Another of the Lakshmi Tattwa is that She gives protection to some people. That means aashraya. That means there are people who are supported by such a aspect person.... Then there is another aspect of Lakshmi where She is round like an elephant. She has a propensity. She is not like a mosquito... A Lakshmi has to have a grandeur.. A person who has dignified an elephant, in a swinging way... The Kundalini also doesn't agree very much with the hot movement because if you move the Kundalini up and down, up and down, She doesn't know where to go. But an got money doesn't jump like a monkey, but walks like an elephant, in a You have to manner ... gajagamini. That is one of the names of the Goddess. She walks like be a generous type and not elephant's walk is left-right, left-right, left-right. It goes on properly, through the central path. So it is not very good to walk in that fashion if you have to establish Sahaja Yoga miserly. properly. The four purposes The Mahalakshmi Principle comes out of the Lakshmi Principle.... When you have acted according to the image of the Lakshmi, then the Mahalakshmi Principle rises Now the Mahalakshmi Tattwa, the principle, is that you start thinking only within you. your spirit. When you are absolutely satisfied with the material wealth, then you start coming to the spirit. It was nice that people were seeking material wealth and had ... a revolution in a way, but as a result of that, you do not find that the greed has gone down. On the contrary, it has increased. And the lust has become so perverted. So we can find very clearly that we have failed the principle of Lakshmi in our society, in our family, in our government. The understanding of the spirit is only possible for people who have understood the meaning of the Lakshmi Principle first of all. So the purpose of Lakshmi is fourfold: Firstly, you have to give. It's not like in the Church where they will say, "All right, you have to give your money to me." It is not that because I don't want anything, but you have to be a generous type and not miserly. Supposing you have one door open, no air will come. Only the air that is sufficient for the room will be there and there won't be any entry of new air or more air or any draft inside. But if you open the door, another about will find there will be a circulation of air. So, by generosity, the circulation your material problems. one, then you one, 26 starts and you solve

 PROSPERITY Another principle which we should follow is of supporting others. Especially I want Sahaja Yogis – we should try to help each other. It may not be with money, but with moral sup- port. But if you have to support sometime someone with money, you should do it volun- tarily without even thinking that you are doing any obligation to that person – or else, you can think that “I'm doing this just for my own pleasure. The third real quality of the Lakshmi Tattwa is that it is respectful to the elderly. But we see it the other way around everywhere. A person, when he becomes rich, he becomes very arrogant. Thats a sign, as we say, of ... a person who has suddenly got the money and he doesn't know what to do.... We should others and we should understand that, if we have we haven't respect money, got everything. For example, in India a saint is respected higher than anybody, higher than all the artists, higher than all the painters, higher than all the kings, all the government. The highest is the saint. So if you are a rich person, you will be known by your respectful behavior towards everyone. By generosity, This respectful behavior you can also show to the things of others. Such a person would the circulation respect all auspicious things... So this quality, when it develops in a human being, then we can say the Mahalakshmi Principle has started. Now in all of you, the Mahalakshmi starts Principle has generated. The bridge over the Void Mahalakshmi resides in the Sushumna Nadi. And the Sushumna is developed only up to a point in human beings. It is later on like a bridge ciple. That means a person who is satisfied, who is in balance, who is dharmic, his ocean becomes desires of becoming the clouds of this Sushumna Nadi or a part of the Sushumna Nadi. This desire creates this path, this bridge of Sushumna within us. Unless and until the Mahalakshmi Principle is awakened within us, we cannot make the Kundalini pass properly because it will always get lost in the Void. So the dignity, the respect of a Sahaja Yogi will always help him to build this path of Sushumna over this Void. It is not some sort of an artificial respect or an artificial etiquette, but it is a feeling from inside, a kind of a state human beings reach where they feel that it is important that we have to be respectful to everybody. .. is created by the Mahalakshmi Prin- Balance, auspiciousness and prosperity I have told you what is the Mahalakshmi Principle. Now, if the Mahalakshmi Principle is awakened within us, then the Lakshmi just runs after us. In the Western culture, what have done is to bring Lakshmi to the level of only money, that also in paper. And it is so artificial that people don't know how suddenly they become bankrupt. So the innate Lakshmi Principle is to be understood, that you Sahaja Yogis have a spe- cial responsibility for all these Western countries, which are slowly losing all their wealth and the Third World will have all the money.... The discriminatory use of these kinds of policies have exhausted all your material wealth which was there from the Mother Earth. Now when that is exhausted, then that, on which you can depend, is your paper money. I've always said that a machine is for you and you are not for machine, so why go into the complete subjection to the machinery like this...? One should stop and back a little bit and see where we have gone wrong. Let us you go correct at that point. And once one realizes that it is important to keep a balance on the Nabhi Chakra, then the Mahalakshmi Tattwa is properly manifested. Also it is vice versa. If your Mahalakshmi Tattwa is awakened, as it is awakened in you, you can create balance, be auspicious in nature. Through use, it will happen that the prosperity will come. E

 to the seekers of truth: part one when will it happen? и I bow to all the seekers of truth. There are, in these modern times, many seekers of truth. It is a special category of people born in these modern times. In every country a lot of people are born with this seeking. They are a special category, which sees beyond, tries to find something beyond what they can perceive through their sense organs. The truth, as we see it, is through our sense organs. For example something we see as white, we call it "white," something we feel cool, we call it "cool"... That means whatever we perceive through our sense organs and whatever is communicated to us through our central nervous system, we accept as the truth. And we should accept that only as truth A lot of peopie and not something that is told to us, not something that we have read in books, not some- CC CC people thing that we can project in our mind. That doesn't mean that I deny any one of the scriptures. That doesn't mean that I deny anything. But to begin with, let us start from scratch, as they call it, or on a clean slate. Let us see what is the truth. are born with this seeking. To experience the truth every religion truth has been described. As I can see it, everybody does not see it. That is why there is blindness. That is why there are these blind alleys where you end up argu- ing things. So there must be something that is missing within us. We have not been able to really relate truth to our central nervous system. In Now, what is that missing within us? We should find out. In all humility, we should know that there must be something within us. We have been arguing about so many things. We have been talking about so many things, reading so many books, going into all kinds of funny experiences right from alcohol to other drugs and gurus and this and that, but still we have not felt anything on our central nervous system. Secondly, we have no control over that truth. So what is the reason? Is something missing in the human awareness? Is it that we are lacking something in our human aware- ness? All the books, all the scriptures which are true scriptures have said one thing: to know the truth, you are to be born again.... If you take Patanjali, who wrote a very ancient book, it is not that Patanjali asked you SC Patanjali: the compiler of to stand on your heads. That is wrong. That is just a wee bit of it. But what Patanjali has the Yoga Sutras (about two written is that have to achieve the truth on your central nervous system ... meaning you centuries before Christ). the experience of your spirit.

 Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi 22 June 1984 London To be born again The English language has an advantage and a disadvantage. The spirit could be the atma or the spirit could be an alcohol or the spirit could be a dead body. It could be stance, but it is not so. These are three separate things, absolutely opposite to each other. Pir: the spirit or atma So the atma, the spirit, has to be found out. It is said even by Mohammed-sahib. He said you are to become the pir. It is said by Zoroaster. It is said by Lao-Tse. It is also said by Zen. Buddha has said it. Mahavira has said it. Every one of them has said it .... that you have to be born again. To be born again does not mean that you certify yourself, "I am born again." A self- certificate, you can call it.... What is so special if you are born again? The human aware- ness at this level is just ready to be born again. In Sanskrit, the word for a bird is dwija. It means "born again" and also for a Brahmin who is born again. But those who call themselves Brahmins are not Brahmins. They just has to be call themselves Brahmins. Have they come to know the Brahma, the all-pervading power of God? Those who say that they are born again should feel the all-pervading power God around them. If they cannot feel it, they are not born again. So all these self-certifi- cates are a deception, a self-deception and a deception of others. It is just a money-making what it is. any circum- Awareness of higher than process. The living process The truth has to be achieved through your evolutionary process, which is a living process. Again we must understand the living process. Through just talking, mental projections, sitting down here, big talk about it or by giving you some courses or taking some money from you, you cannot get it. It is a state in a living growth. That proves that it is living. That means the state of our awareness has to be higher than what it is. If our state cannot rise, then it is not of any use. Like the seed that becomes the roots, then the bark, the leaves, the flowers and then the fruit ... in the same way, a living religion must give you a different state and that ... religion is within us. Every one of us has it. When we go against that living religion within us, we go into imbalances, but even today people can ask, “Why religion? Why should we have a balance? What is the need? into imbalances." I mean is that a logical question? Let's go What is religion? What is the religion? We come to that point. It is that a religion is a valency of human VALENCE: The number beings. Just like carbon has four valences, human beings have ten valences, which matter of possible bonds or does not have. Animals have nine, while the human beings have ten valences. And when qualities. For an atom, it these ten valences go out of balance, then they go out of the quality of a human being. But still, one can ask, why should we have these ten valences...? Because in the evolu- tionary process you have to ascend and you can never be satisfied with yourself unless and atom. For a human, it is until you have achieved it – especially the seekers. That is why I say they are the special category – because in this special category, men of or laws of dharma. God will have to become prophets and they will have powers to make others prophets... When is that going to happen? It has to happen today. O is the number of bonds it can make with another the number of qualities 29 30

 Q: uestions nswers How long every day should we meditate, not to make any mistake or going on ego or super-ego? That is one thing you should take out of your mind. You can never make mistakes. Your Kundalini doesn't make any mistakes. It is not what time. It is just if sit before the photograph and you are getting the cool breeze. Take the cool breeze for about two min- utes, say namaskar, finished. There is no ritual about Sahaja Yoga. Some "I've not washed my hands. I've not had my bath. How will I put my hands to Mother?" She is your Mother. You can put your hands to Me at any time. But you people say, have to respect. you If we didn't have respect for You before Realization what are the consequences? It doesn't matter. Mother is very forgiving, isn't She? She is the source of all forgiveness. Even after Realization, if you don't have respect for the time being, it's all right. Until have not known Me, ignorance is not to be punished. But after knowing Me, after seeing the photographs of lights and everything, after giving Realization to a few people, if you start misbehaving, then I can't help it.... If you are climbing a mountain slowly, slowly, when in the beginning, if you fall, it doesn't matter. You can again climb. But when you go higher and then you fall very fast. So your attention should be always on higher things. And doubting should be less about yourself and about Sahaja Yoga because you have to learn so many things. So many things people start doubting, like you say for the puja, “Why this puja? Why? What is the need? Why to worship this lady? She's like us." But why are these people so anxious to do the puja? Why do they come miles together to do the puja? What is in there? What do they get? you 30

 The West has received from India a lot of gurus and each with seemingly a different path. And it's believed in the West that all the paths lead to God. Many, many people believe that it doesn't seek the truth, you are going to get there. Is that what India has to contribute matter how you to the West and the seekers of America? India has to give the knowledge of the roots, while the West has the knowledge of the tree. But those who are exported from India, I wonder how many of them are really genuine or do they know anything about the roots? So I just can't say that those who are going there are the people who can deliver the knowledge which is not yet known to the West. Whatever is unknown is not divine. To understand logically the difference between India and the West is this: India has still retained the fundamentals as the goal of life. The fundamental is that one should get Self Realization, that one should try to lead a life of balance and of dharma. Because there is so much of the knowledge of the roots in this country, people can become very hypocritical. They can be very dishonest and can misuse that knowledge to exploit the western people who are naive about this knowledge. My idea of bringing some of the Sahaja Yogis from the West to India, in the villages of India, was to make them understand that comfort is not the goal of life because we have villagers who are realized souls, who do not have any comforts which are so important to the western people, but are very happy, satisfied and peaceful people and are extremely good yogis. But that does not mean that you give up your comforts and you become godly. It's all a mental behaviour if you think by negation. That is not the But when you come to India, you understand that this habit of seeking comfort must be given up. If you have any, it's all right, but let not the comfort sit on your head. Let your spirit rule and not the idea that you should be comfortable or affluent. That idea should not rule Realization. | can't think of real religion that has not way. talked of Self you. Many fake people have gone to America because they know you are all naive. And anything bombastic will impress you very much because American life has now become very money-oriented and ego-oriented. So they have developed all the methods of pering your ego and getting money out of you. So that you the pam- feel that you can purchase guru.... One must know whatever is vital in life, you cannot purchase it. In all humility, human beings also must realize that you have done nothing to become human beings. God has done everything. How much have you paid to Him...? The tradition of India has been throughout that a person must get his second birth, which is the tradition of the Christian religion, the tradition of Islam and the tradition of Buddhism, the tradition of Jainism, of Tao, of Zen. I can't think of any traditional, real religion that has not talked of Self Realization. We sing praise and it does really open our Vishuddhi. What is the right way to have devotion and use our Vishuddhi? You must know that it is the Virata. So once you become one with the Virat, then if you sing any praise to Him, it goes to Him directly. Any praise is sufficient. But not be one-sided. All the time singing praise also one gets tired. So what you have to do is to also meditate. And sometimes, when the heart is full, you must sing. But specializa- tion is not the way we have in Sahaja Yoga. I would suggest that some people really sing horridly, so they should not sing. They must try to improve their Vishuddhis, try to have better voice.... Please try to improve your Vishuddhis so that whatever you sing is melo- dious at least to the ear. That's the best way. you should

 According to Sahaja Yoga, what is the value of thoughts and of our whole culture? If you become thoughtless what about logic and books and our culture? Does it not have any value? апy One should understand in its right sense. When we are thoughtless, it is not that we cannot have thoughts. Thoughts do not invade us. We are free people. If we want to think, we can think. But if we don't want to think, we can stop thinking. That is thought- less awareness, first of all. Secondly, the inspiration comes to us only in thoughtless aware- ness. Then the third thing is the culture is of the spirit, which comes in us, which is a universal culture. Why do we have mass marriages? We don't have actually mass marriages. First of all, you see, marriages are to be done after Realization, when the people have lived at least two years with Self Realization. That's important because there are many great souls who want to take birth on this Earth. But we give full chance for these people to know each other and everybody cannot just get into it. They are nicely scrutinized and found out whether they are capable of a good marriage or not. As a result of that, ninety-nine percent marriages have proved extremely successful – very happy relations and also very beautiful children. You cannot force any- thing or anyone. They have to offer themselves and then we have to scrutinize the person because we don't want to have marriages which are of no use. When we are a realized person negativity can attack us more. How can we protect ourselves? Are those persons who are not realized not attacked as much or is it they just don't realize it? When you are a realized soul you can feel the negativity much more than others can. For example, if it is a clean cloth, then anything black on this shows clearly. And as soon as you see an attack, you know it and you know how to protect. Then there is no problem for But the normal people, even if they get cancer or they get mad, they don't know. you. When it happens to them, they are not at all aware. You become very sensitive about your centres and if anything goes wrong with your centres, immediately you discover. Is Sahaja Yoga the one way? Is it the fastest way or are there many other ways? тапy There is only one way.... It is a living process and it changes. When there is a problem, then it stops and sometimes it doesn't go ahead. There is a possibility. So one can't guar- antee everyone. If it works, well and good. You cannot pay for it. You cannot order it. It is like a living process. Supposing a seed is not sprouting, what is the use of paying money to the Mother Earth? She doesn't understand money. Nor if you stand on your heads also, the seed won't sprout. If it has to sprout, it will sprout. Does it mean now that other forms of yoga are not as good, not as fast? No, other forms of yoga, like Hatha Yoga, are used also in Sahaja Yoga later on, but in a scientific way. It is like taking the medicine wherever it is needed. Now, supposing your Kundalini has not started, how are we to know where it has stopped? Supposing it has stopped on your stomach and you are doing the exercises of your neck – what's the use? It is very practical. These days the people, the way they do their Hatha Yoga, they take all the medicines together from the medicine box without discrimination. any

 Credits and Notes Front cover: Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Contents pages words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 1 November 1981 Contents pages words: from the Shri Devi Atharva Shirsham Contents pages photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Mumbai 1979 (Malcolm Murdoch, photographer) Page 3 photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Guru Puja 2001 Page 10 words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 4 February 1983, Delhi Page 11 words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 13 and 28 January 1983 Pages 13 and 15 photos: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Easter Puja 2001 Page 16 photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Guru Puja 1983 Page 17 words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 16 October 1993 Pages 20 words (top right): Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Guru Puja 2004 Page 24 photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Rajalakshmi Puja 1983 Pages 28 and 29 photograph: Axinia Samoilova, photographer Page 30 words: Shri Mataji, 17 August 1987, Le Raincy France Page 31 words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 10 February 1982, Delhi Page 32 words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 12 October 1987, Vienna Photograph at left: detail at Shri Mataji's house in London circa 1982 Back cover words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Navaratri Puja 1984 Back cover photograph: a tulip (Axinia Samoilova, photographer) THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE SUBSCRIPTIONS: Contact@divinecoolbreeze.org CONTENT: editor@divinecoolbreeze.org The Divine Cool Breeze, 881 Frederick Road North Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada PRINTED BY King Printing Company Inc., 181 Industrial Avenue East Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA and Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. No.8, Chandragupta Housing Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411038, Maharashtra India THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE when it comes to giving www.divinecoolbreeze.org magazine onlined Give with your full heart. feel that love of giving Youjust and you feel so happy beciase you feel so big about yourselt Shri Mataji's words as news, lke an ocsan thafn giving so many douds and again it is recelving these rivers into it and again making it into douds carefully chosen and changing often A circle of beautiful conversion into bemuty after beauty starta. we should try to Is so beauth become a part of And that is what we should bry to become -a partof that circde that circle a mini-magazine and which is sojPHMing.

 How beautifully it opens. Slowly. Every petal so careful not to hit each other. Slowly it opens out. And then the fragrance starts pouring in the most dignified manner. Such a flower only can be offered at the Lotus Feet of the Adi Shakti.



----------------------

2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cood EBu
Dreeze
2009 issue 5 – volume twenty-two number five
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Tomorrow,
MW.
you are
no.
going
to show
to the world
WO
what Sahaja
Yoga is,
not Me.
no
2 One Thousand Petals • 10 Stillness Within • 12 Criticism & Introspection
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-2.txt 
 the one who gives blessings and removes all fear
16 Greatest Guru • 18 Known To Me All Along • 20 Water • 24 Prosperity • 28 To the Seekers • 30 Questions
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-3.txt 
 one thousand
petats
Sahasrara – the word Sahastr in the Sanskrit language means one thousand.
And there are one thousand petals in our brain, which get enlightened...
These petals are kept ready for our enlightenment and these are really
the nerves – one thousand nerves – which are there for the enlightenment
of the brain.
So when the Kundalini rises, She enlightens those one thousand nerves
which become like the shape of these flames – like a petal. And that's why it
is called as the Sahasrara – the centre of Sahasrara.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-4.txt 
 In human beings it is a very important centre because this is the only
centre by which we think and we try to
whatever we don't like.
stop
This is the centre which reacts – reacts in such a manner that, without
any discretion, we start saying no to this and no to that....
cannot become your Self unless and until this Sahasrara, this
But
you
brain, is opened out and the Kundalini becomes one with the Param-
chaitanya. Before that, you are in complete ignorance about what is
good and what is bad. Whatever you think, for this brain it is good and
you do it. But whatever is really good, you do not know because you do
not know the reality.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-5.txt 
 The new awareness
We have to understand the consciousness that we have – consciousness
of being alive, consciousness of so many things we have and the so-called
knowledge we have about everything. All that consciousness is stored near the
liver.... But then this consciousness starts rising higher and higher. Then
you
become aware.
reta
one thousand
perats
In the evolutionary process you become aware of things without going
through your brain. You just become aware. And how? Not by thinking, not
by understanding or seeing, but you become aware because your brain has
now started working in a manner that's very, very sensitive.
So you just become aware of some sort of a fear or maybe some sort of
a goodness or anything. But it goes even further ... where you start liking a
person or disliking a person, but still it's nothing definite and sure. You dislike
a person because he has a particular type of a face. It may be the eyes or maybe
anything. Or maybe because you have known somebody who has been very
nice, so you start transferring that image onto others.
With these transferred images you can hate or love someone. Then you
start saying, “I hate this, I hate that," which has no actual substantial mean-
ing. You hate it because, perhaps, maybe such-and-such a person looks like
somebody.
Now you go further with it. Then you see that such-and-such a person
- now I'm not talking about things, but about people – "such-and-such a
person has done this harm to me...." So you start feeling that you should hate
that person. Now
new faculties of how to harm that person. Then you start thinking how to
destroy that person,
Always do
the right.
CC
You have to
person. With that hatred, you develop
you start hating that
how to make his life miserable. Then you may beat that
person. You
can do anything.
So now the awareness is going towards another direction, which is dark-
ness, which is not light because in the light you won't do such a thing. In the
light you see everybody is sitting. You know how far you are, where you are
sitting. If
darkness
shout at that person. You may try to kill that person. You
may
decide on
you want to go out, you know how to walk out. But when in the
you are there, you just don't understand and you go on behaving in
that point.
a manner which cannot be explained otherwise, except that it is because you
are a human being...
Human beings don't have any particular reason, as such, to hate someone.
But why it works out is because they are involved in their ego. An egoistical
person feels that he has a right to do what he wants to do. He can kill anybody.
He can bomb anyone. He can do whatever he likes. But a person who is not
doing that is the other way around. He is frightened. He is afraid of someone.
Now the awareness moves on. This is a subtler awareness because, if you
are afraid of somebody, you would not like to go to his house. You will avoid
him in the street. All things you can do, so all this kind of knowledge about
other human beings also accumulates in your mind.
Then this thing starts working on a collective level because you think this
group is very bad, they are good, these are bad, they are excellent
In
– like that.
your own mind
is better or that group is better. And collectively then, you start working out
think that somebody has a
and the other
group
group
you
4
whole
temperament, your awareness.
your
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-6.txt 
 A connection to reality
What is important is that you should know reality. You should know exactly what is right
and what is wrong. For that, there is this great power of Kundalini within you. She is the
one. She passes through all these centres – enlightens them first of all, so your awareness
gets enlightened. And when She pierces through the Sahasrara, She joins you to this All-
Pervading Power, which is knowledge, which is love, which is truth.
So after that, you immediately know – some people don't know immediately, but
some people do – that what we have been thinking so far, of separating ourselves from
others by thinking that they are not all right, they are wrong, they are whatever it is. This
disappears. This disappears completely. And then you realize that your awareness itself is
dominated by so many other circumstances – for example, where you were born, what
your parents taught you, what experiences you have had. And then realize that it was
all wrong because it is not reality.
Whatever feelings you have, whatever ideas have about another person or about
another nation, all of them are not correct because now your Sahasrara is awakened. It is
connected now to the All-Pervading Power. So this starts flowing into you. This enlight-
ened awareness, it starts flowing down into your being, in your brain and then on your
you
you
nerves you can feel that awareness.
Now once you want to know about something, whether it is right or wrong - absolute
right and wrong, it's not a question of relative – you just have to put your hands towards
that person or towards that thing or whatever it is. Immediately on these vibrations you
will know....
These vibrations are the Paramchaitanya. We call it Brahmachaitanya, which starts
flowing through your fingertips. Now you start feeling what chakras they are catching,
whether they are right or wrong and your discretion improves immensely...
When
your Sahasrara is enlightened, whatever you had gathered – knowledge, what-
ever you thought was right, whatever was your dream and your aims of life – all these
aspirations, they melt away. And then you take to reality and you start seeing the reality
of everything.
Unless and until you see that reality, you will be going with another crowd. "These
people are saying so, so let's do that." "They are saying so, so let's do that." But you cannot
see whether it is correct or not, whether it is good for you or not or whether it is going
to help you.
This kind of thing is so common in the whole world and that is why there is so
much problem because they don't know the reality. Once you know the reality, most of
the problems can be finished because this brain itself is creating problems. First of all, it
commits all kinds of atrocities, violence, everything. Then it also justifies itself and then
it does even worse things.
All this they used to call it as sin, but now in Sahaja Yoga that's finished. Whatever
your brain was contaminated with is now cleansed. It has got the knowledge and, through
the knowledge, you can make out what is right and what is wrong.
Up to this point it is all right, but then you must have full understanding that what-
ever is right is right and whatever is wrong is wrong and we should not do anything that
wrong. Always do right. You have to decide on that point.
Now we have to do the right only, never the wrong. This is when it comes to your
mind. Then what starts is your determination, what we call as devotion, dedication, sur-
rendering. With that, you give up all your false ideas and all your false pride, all other
things that you have been doing so far. And immediately you become a different person,
a beautiful person.
is
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Spreading the experience
Now the third thing that happens to you, which never happened to you before
is that you feel that "Unless and until I give the same state to other people,
it won't be all right. It won't be all right for me to talk to them." So
talking to your brothers, sisters. Then you start talking to other people. The
whole nation you can talk to about Sahaja Yoga, that "I have gained so much.
I have
one thousand
Perats
you start
got these things, so now why not you take it...?"
By talking, by discussion, by arguments, by sermons, they will never take
to it because their brain is just the same, still full of ignorance. So what you
You have
have to do is to raise their Kundalini. Once you raise their Kundalini and
their brain opens, then they are on the same line as yourself. They don't have
to worry about what is good and what is bad. They know themselves.
Now that is what is very important. To correct this world is very impor-
tant, that you all should know what is right and what is wrong and you have a
vehicle of Paramchaitanya to know what is wrong and what is right. Now this
strength starts moving and, as you see, there are so many people today with
their open Sahasrara.
Opening the Sahasrara was the most important part of the evolutionary
process. All the evolutionary process brought human beings to what level?
We had wars. We had all kinds of silly programs by which we really ruined so
many countries, so many people.
Now when you are one with that All-Pervading Power, it is a pure power,
a vehicle of
Paramchaitanya
it's a nirmal power, an absolutely pure power that gives you complete sense
and complete understanding as to how you should move, how you should live
and what you should have.
This is what is Self Realization, they say. But I would say that Self Realiza-
tion is much further than that. Even if your brain is enriched by the knowl-
edge, the real knowledge, still there are other things which should have
and the most important thing is that you have to be completely aware – again
I say the word “aware" – of where you stand in this big plan of world global
to know what
you
is right and
CC
I
transformation.
What is your position? What are you supposed to do for this global trans-
formation? What is your position? Where do you stand? What is the work for
what is wrong.
you to do?
Now you have got this compulsion on you, that “I have to do something."
When this compulsion starts working on you, which is not dreadful, which is
not annoying, but very peaceful and joyful, which says that "I have to see that
others also know themselves." So to know themselves is, first of all, that
you
must know your own chakras....
It is not only for others, but for yourself also. It is important that you
should get your chakras corrected. That is the most important thing for
and then you will have self-knowledge in the sense you will know what is the
defect, where is the defect, "what am I doing wrong, what should I do?" And
you
CC
then, when you correct it, when you correct those centres, then your aware-
ness will be really fully enlightened about all the world.
6.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-8.txt 
 You have to transform
this mad world into something very sane.
Global transformation
It is a tremendous thing. It's very tremendous because, if you have to transform this mad
world into something very sane and if we have to give them all Self Realization, imagine
the task, how great it is, how many people we need to do it. But if your will-power is
strong about it, you feel compelled to do it. But normally, we are compelled because we
have to run our houses, we have to earn money, we have to do this, we have to do that.
That you can do. But the main object of your life is to transform people and to work it
out, this transformation, for the global peace.
I don't know if it has been predicted or not, that a complete transformation will take
place. But they have talked about transformation. I don't know that part and I just don't
bother My head as to how many people are getting transformed. But after transformation
you must settle down.
First of all, you should see if you are a peaceful person, if there's peace in your heart.
If you have no peace in your heart, then you are not a Sahaja Yogi. If you get excited and
if you start shouting at people and all that, it means you are not Sahaja Yogis. You have
to have a very, very peaceful temperament. That is very important. Now with that
what should be there is pure compassion. What you are doing is not for your benefit, as
such, but because you are compelled by this force to do good for others, to transform
them. This is the greatest good you can do to others, that their brains are put right, they
get rid of their diseases, they get rid of their problems. It's all there.
But the first thing and the most important thing that happens is that they get
power to transform others. When you have that power to transform others
not waste it. You should not use it for yourself. That means the growth is not complete.
You must talk about it, you must tell about it and you must work it out wherever it is
sible. You have to work it out. This is the way we can spread to people on a global level,
who can get complete transformation.
All our problems, whether in India or anywhere, is because of human beings ... have
not been enlightened. If you are enlightened, you will have no problem of any quarrel-
ling or any fighting and all that. If you are enlightened, then you will think about others
- others as if they are your own.... You will not think about yourself any more. If you are
enlightened, then there is no question of any violence in your head.
Nowadays, in the name of religion, in the name of everything, there is so much vio-
lence. This violence can be easily corrected if they all become Sahaja Yogis. Think, if all
the people become Sahaja Yogis, how will they quarrel? For what?
peace,
the
should
you
pos-
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-9.txt 
 The divine play
Religion is there, but above all these religions is the religion of Sahaja Yoga,
where you become one and there all these quarrels of religions will disap-
pear.
This is not the only problem we have as human beings. We have some
other problems also – very serious. We have a hankering. We are very greedy.
We cannot adjust ourselves to any other circumstances. We want to live in
complete comfort and this and that. But after this, you can sleep anywhere,
you can eat anywhere, you need not eat. You become a person who is above
all these needs, all these demands, absolutely. Then
reta
one thousand
perats
don't
worry. There's
you
for what...?
worry
Now with this blessing of Sahasrara, you will be amazed there is help
from the Paramchaitanya and that means a tremendous help because it acts
globally, it acts individually, it acts on communities, it acts on nations because
there is the Divine – what you call divine. There is a divine play going on.
And this divine play plays tremendous, beautiful things by which people start
correcting themselves.
So
Don't retaliate.
Don't get angry.
you should never be nervous. You should never be upset because you
have the divine power within and it will correct. It can correct anyone....
you
All this work is done by the Paramchaitanya. You don't have to do anything.
Any problem that comes before you, before it really touches you, it is solved
by the Paramchaitanya.
But you must have full faith in yourself and in the Paramchaitanya and
believe that you are a realized soul. Nobody can harm you. If they try to harm
you, for the time being – all right, you may suffer – but you don't also feel
the sufferings and you get out of it. Such a security, such a proper guidance
is there.
Don't get upset.
You will enjoy
you are saved from all kinds of attacks and all kinds of mistakes that
you commit. It's all such a big computer of knowledge. He knows. It knows
what you are doing and what you should not do, where you are going and
what should not be your way. It knows everything – knows everything about
Also
you.
the same life
have to become aware of it. Now this is the stage where I
that you have to be aware that you are realized souls. You are differ-
ent, very unique. You are realized souls. You are not ordinary people and you
are protected by this Paramchaitanya. Nothing can change you. Nothing can
So then
you
would
trouble you. Nothing can overpower you.
which was
Because you are not aware also of this Paramchaitanya, that's why you a
little bit get worried.... Everything can be corrected by the Paramchaitanya if
you know how to leave it to that, if you understand how you are one with that
Paramchaitanya. You are a part and parcel of that and that Paramchaitanya is
looking after you. You don't have a very conscious effort. There's no need to
irritating you.
have a very conscious effort.
Accept life as it is. As it is, whatever life is there, accept it. Don't retaliate.
Don't get angry. Don't get upset. Just accept and you will enjoy the same life
which was irritating you. You will see the enjoying part of that and it will be
your problems. You
your enemies and a kind of a very fresh beautiful existence
all
so beautiful the way you will see that
you will
get over
will
get over all
8
you will have.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-10.txt 
 You are the Paramchaitanya
You are all Sahaja Yogis. It is a very great position. With that, if you humble
down, then you will be amazed to see that you are absolutely in contact with
this Paramchaitanya. Not only that, but you have become the Paramchait-
anya. With this Paramchaitanya you can do anything.
I need not tell you what you can do because some of you may not believe,
but My own experience is that if you are the Paramchaitanya, if you know
you are the Paramchaitanya, then it keeps your dignity, it keeps your position,
it keeps your word and looks after you. And whatever is just said or desired,
you just get it.
Your desires also change. Your desires are not for stupid things, but for
something that is very noble - like you want to transform people, you want
to do Sahaja Yoga work. All these desires are fulfilled fully. When you want to
do it, you like it and you think of it. It is something.
Even seeing something, if you see something and you are stunned by that,
immediately the Paramchaitanya will take over and you will have no problems
because the way we react to all these difficulties and to so-called odds in life,
it becomes a play – just a play. You are amazed. You look at it – and finished.
Look at that – and finished. That is how it is the light. If it goes into the dark-
ness and finishes the darkness, the darkness is finished and our problems are
Paramchaitanya
will give you all
finished also.
necessary help,
So this is what our awareness has to become. Awareness has to become
the Paramchaitanya. Then you get all the ideas, everything that is divine, but
not only that, also the help of the Divine, all the solutions of the Divine. It is
something amazing and everything quietens down, everything settles down
and
you are amazed watching all this, that you are the centre of doing all these
things. You are not aware that you are doing and you are there. That ego part
is missing, but you see it's all happening around you and then you are amazed
how it is happening.
The whole lifestyle changes, the whole understanding changes and you
become a great source of happiness, joy and knowledge to others. You don't
have to study anything. You don't have to know much, but you will know
about everything, what is right and what is wrong. And then only you can tell
the things with complete authority, that “this is not right..."
I've seen people who are very rich think no end of themselves and then
they become bankrupt. And those who are very bankrupt become rich. It's a
kind of a turmoil in which they are jumping from one shore to another shore.
all necessary
prestige and also
the personality.
are not. You watch that drama. You see all that drama and, with your
But you
peace, you can see everything very calmly.
It's not difficult for you to create more people like this. It's not difficult to
transform this world. The time has come, just the right time. Like when the
proper time comes, the blossom time comes, so many flowers become fruits.
So like that, you all have become.
Now it is for you to create seeds to spread Sahaja Yoga. You are now at that
level of awareness where the Paramchaitanya is with
parcel of you, absolutely with you to give you all necessary help, all necessary
prestige and also the personality.
May God bless you
absolutely part and
you,
all.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-11.txt 
 still
This is what it is: simple. You are integrated.
By integration, you get the power to do what you understand and you have
you understand.
the power to feel happy with what
So you come to a stage where you develop this Nirananda. And this Nira-
you develop when you are absolutely the spirit. In the Nirananda state
there is no duality left. It is advaita. It is one personality. That is, you are
nand
completely integrated and the joy is not any more dented. It is complete. It
hasn't
got a happiness and a sorrow aspect, but is just joy.
The joy is not that you laugh loud. The joy is not that you are always
smiling. It is the stillness, the quietude within yourself, the peace of your
being, of your spirit that asserts itself into vibrations which
you feel.
When you feel that
feel like the light of the sun, the whole rays
peace, you
of that beauty spreading.
But first of all, we are curbed down by our own personal, selfish, stupid
ideas. Throw them away. We have them because we are insecure, because we
have wrong ideas. Throw them away. Just stand alone, one with God and
will find all these fears were useless.
you
Our cleansing is very important and that cleansing comes only when
you
really practise the cleansing as told in Sahaja Yoga.
The Sahasrara is the blessing of the heavens.
10
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Keep yourself in a meditative mood. Try.
Tell yourself, "Be peaceful. Be peaceful. My mind, be peaceful."
Be still. Be still. Tell your mind to be still.
You will be amazed. It's all within yourself. Try to merge your stillness within you...
Now just ask, “Mother, take us deep into Your stillness." Just ask.
ness
also has another meaning - Yoga
This happening is called as yoga. But
yoga
Kaushalyum, yukti.
What the word yukti comes from is that yoga means "with deftness, how
CC
to handle this instrument.
It is not sufficient for anyone to get an instrument. Supposing you are
given a car and the machinery is opened up. Still if you don't know how to
And if
drive the car, you cannot drive it. It is useless for
you try to do
you.
anything, you may spoil the car.
Before starting the car, if you start turning the parts like the tires or some-
thing like that or the wheels, the car won't move. In the same way, without
having the yoga, if you try to do anything in the name of God, you are doing
it artificially.
So the yukti, the Kaushalyum to handle this instrument, is also to be
learned. So the first part, this is the yoga. It is the sprouting of the Kundalini,
the awakening of it and the breaking of the Sahasrara.
I should say it is the job of a Sahaja Yogi or your Divine Mother. But
afterwards, to learn the yukti, the Kaushalyum, the kushalta, the deftness,
how to develop this awareness into that stillness and this awareness into that
higher awareness – which
you call it vibratory awareness – how to station it
there is the job of an awakened soul.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-13.txt 
 criticism
intro
What is the use of knowing what is wrong
with others?
It is like England trying to improve the conditions in India
and India trying to improve the conditions in England.
Guru Puja 1984
If we try to criticize others and not ourselves,
then we are going to miss the bus.
You must understand the importance of time. That is something people miss out.
Sahaja Yoga is very good because you are blessed and you feel that you are secured.
Things are very good. You get so many brothers and sisters and I see your faces just
like roses shining. All that is good, but still there is a chance that you may fall back.
The reason is you must purify yourself. Never get satisfied with yourself.
Some people, when I talk to them, they never think I am talking to them.
They think I am talking to somebody else.
So please try to understand we have to introspect ourselves. We have to meditate.
And when we are conscious about our own defects, we will start looking at them
and they will drop out.
Easter Puja 1991
12
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-14.txt 
 spection
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-15.txt 
 criticismrospection
ст
1.
in
We are here to judge ourselves and not to judge others.
When God's kingdom has to come on this Earth, we must understand the nature of
Sahaja Yoga.
When you come to Sahaja Yoga you are coming into the temple of God. All the dei-
ties want to welcome you. They want to look after you. They want to give all the bless
ings. And they want to give you those powers by which you can give Realization to others
and improve their lives...
Supposing you go to university and you have to learn something from
and, as soon as you see the professor, you start criticizing his suit or his nose.... That is
not a sign of intelligence, of pure intelligence. It is a sign of ego and
stupid.
We are here to judge ourselves and not to judge others...
your professor
makes
ego
a person
and
All the individuals now have to enter into My being. You have to all become
parcel of the Virat. The microcosm has to become the macrocosm. For that, you have to
give up your small, limited personalities. You have to become very large, big, but what
have to surrender is your ego. That's the stupid thing which covers you up completely
in the head and doesn't allow you to grow. So if you fight with it, it will exhaust you. For
example, your ego is here and you are here, so light falls and you fight with your own
image or your shadow. Then you are exhausted. Then you say, “Mother, I've been fighting
with
part
Ego is even
worse than you
dirt and filth
my ego, but the ego doesn't go." It is an illusion....
Stand under the light – under the light of enlightenment.... You don't fight yourself,
so you don't fight your ego. You must only know that it exists. You stand before the mirror
and
because it
attacks others.
"Now, how do
CC
do, Mr. Ego?" Now a stupid idea comes, you say, “Oh, Mr.
CC
you
say,
Ego, now don't tell me anything. I know it's all right. It's all right.'
you start detaching yourself, like you say, "All right, I forgive, I forgive, I forgive.
I forgive you. You get out. You get out." The best thing is to shoebeat yourself. Then this
ego business goes away. Now
should not have happened" – it's all right. Forget it. Like supposing I see anything black
on My sari, I won't have it there. I'll wash it off. Supposing I think this: “My sari is Me
and this, whatever is dirt on that, is also Me." Then I won't leave it there.
So
>כ
idea comes into your head that "this is
very wrong, this
But ego is even worse than dirt and filth because it attacks others. Also it attacks
It comes from the over-activity of the brain....
So now, this is what happens to a person. Such a person gets old very soon. He is
such a bore. Nobody likes such company. He may not like anyone, but such a bore no
one likes....
you.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Enjoy
the taste
of the
bliss of
God.
To correct your ego, first thing, you should never criticize others, never get irritated
with others.... You are a Sahaja Yogi. Be patient. Be patient.
But for the ladies it is even worse. In My experience I've seen when women try to
dominate. Actually, a woman is like this Mother Earth. And if the Mother Earth thinks
that these trees are dominating Her, then what should we say? It is the same way if the
women think that the husbands are dominating. I must say they are very wrong....
Try to pacify – that is her job – not to criticize others. On the whole, a lady should
never be right-sided because there are so many problems she will jump into. I have seen
these things happening in Sahaja Yoga... What I'm saying is you should not spoil your
children. But you also shouldn't dominate the children and your husband and the family.
It is not a good thing for women at all. It's also not very sweet....
Our attention should be on our spirit, onto higher things, not how you keep your
how
you keep your fork.... All the time attention should be on our spirit because
spoon,
we have to grow.... Don't judge others' vibrations and don't be harsh to others. It doesn't
behoove a Sahaja Yogi to talk harshly to another. It doesn't behoove – let alone meanness,
selfishness, miserliness. It should be a character which should show as if there's light in
that person. as Christ
ing others, that is a danger to you and to Sahaja Yoga.
Meditate every day. Be in thoughtless awareness. Any thought comes in, say, "Forgive,
forgive, forgive" and grow. Unless and until you are matured in Sahaja Yoga, you cannot
really enjoy the taste of the bliss of God.O
The meanness, talking at the back, “murmuring souls"
criticiz-
says,
CO
15
17 August 1987
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-17.txt 
 the greatest guru
16
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-18.txt 
 The greatest guru that we have is love, Sahaj love.
It is the guru within us which teaches us, which somehow or other leads us.
We are led into that line of understanding, for which we don't have to
If you want to have a guru,
great
go to any college, to any school for education. It is something so much within
that it works and expresses itself, expresses like a light.
Such people we can make out because they are fully enlightened. They
have light, and through that light they see the whole world, which is very
innocent and simple for them.
We have love for our children naturally, we have love for our parents
naturally, we have love for some people, but that love is different from God's
love. That has some connections, some meaning. But this love, which cannot isn't she? But a mother is a very
be described in words, has to be felt within.
It is the same when you talk of your guru. You should have that love
within you. Why do you feel it so much? The reason is the guru loves you and soft guru also. That's the trouble.
you love the guru. That's the only reason why you
Now there's no reason for that because love is love and that is how the
you can call Me guru" because
a mother is the greatest guru,
should love
your guru.
Thať's why people don't
guru becomes very important in life. We have people who love their guru and
are very much in a chaste understanding of their love.
In this great opportunity of love that we are here to enjoy each other fully
from our heart, there is this ocean within us. We have to just get submerged
in that ocean. If we are lost in that ocean, then we will have no problems, no
questions. Everything will be our own and we can manage everything without
any argument, without any questioning.
That is what is being Sahaj. The Sahaj way – if you have this love, you
enjoy. You enjoy yourself and enjoy everybody else because it is Sahaj. You
don't have to make any efforts, don't have to try anything. Just it is there and
ассері
Mother as the
But if you know, your first guru
is your mother.
it works.
The feeling of love has no way of expressing itself. It is just there. It cannot
express because it is without expression. It is just to be felt within yourself.
Then you want to do so many things. You want to help everyone. You want
to help yourself. You want to do good to others.
So much has been done by great leaders of the world because they had
that love. They had nothing else but this love which they could not contain
within themselves, so they tried to spread it. And they are called now as our
gurus, as our masters. But it is their love within which approached people
in that unique manner. That's the thing that we cannot possess, you cannot
claim. It is there and it works. It works automatically.
This is what we have to know: we are that love. That love is within us.
We have to have knowledge. We have to have a complete knowledge that
we are that love. That will solve our problem because you can explain every-
thing, all your behavior, all your failures. Everything you can explain when
you know that you are endowed with that love.
This is what is the guru. It is the love within which wants to share
the love with others, which wants to give love to others. This is what is
and joy.
I can go on talking about love, but to feel it within yourself is the biggest
thing. O
you
peace
Guru Puja 2004
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Sahaja.
Yoga, wa.
to Me all along
It was a unique knowledge with which I was born.
It was not so easy to reveal it and I wanted to find out how to reveal it.
First of all, I thought that the seventh chakra had to be opened, which I did
on the fifth of May. It is a secret in a way. Formerly the Brahmachaitanya
was avyakta. It was not manifested. It was not expressed by itself and so the
people who managed to reach Brahmachaitanya – somehow, by attaining
Realization – said, "It is nirakar ka
solved in the ocean.'
dis-
You are like
a drop that
guna.
gets
No one could say, explain or tell people anything more about it. The
great incarnations, who also came out of this Ocean of Brahmachait-
tried their best to share it with the best available followers, who were
great
anya,
few, and to introduce them to this Brahmachaitanya. But because the
Brahmachaitanya was not in a manifested [vyakta] form, these incarnations
got dissolved in it.
Gyaneshwara took his samadhi. People said that he could not talk, it had
to be experienced. So very few people got to understand it. Nobody could
actualize the experience by feeling it on their fingertips or feeling it on their
senses or in their minds or even understand it with their intellect, so it was a
very
big problem. They all tried and prepared a ground for it.
Now I have come as the incarnation of the Brahmachaitanya as a whole.
The Sea of Nirakar has now become a big cloud. It has taken a form
Shivaratri Puja 1987 [saakar]. Those who came before were all a part and parcel of it.
translated from Hindi
Now the whole has come.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-20.txt 
 This cloud has rainwater. The rainwater is nourishing the minds of the
people. Gradually they are brought to a level where their Kundalinis have
risen. They have got their Realization and now gradually they are feeling
everything on their senses, on their fingertips.
This is the reason why no one has talked about vibrations so clearly. They
managed to talk about chaitanya lahiri. This was so because of its avyakta
[unmanifested] form. It was only a state – a state to be enjoyed only in that time had to
state, with no manifestation in the gross. In that state they became beyond
sensations, beyond temper and so on. That is proof before us.
How did they do it? What was this Brahmachaitanya? They could not
show its pratyaksha [manifest] form. What they could show was only through | disclosed it.
similes or through parables.
The right
come before
This is what I have achieved – its pratyaksha form. The complete form of
the Brahmachaitanya I have brought from the sea.
So now, I do not allow you to get dissolved in it. I have put it in a form
of a big ghat [matka or pot]. In that, you are smaller matkas. In other words,
I have taken you all in My body as small cells, nourishing you, looking after
you, cleansing you and working it out. But I am Mahamaya, so I have to
work very slowly, gradually and at the right time and right point.
When the seventh chakra was opened, all the chakras came to your Sahas-
rara and I could manage all your chakras and all your Deities. Any Deity you
ask and you get the vibrations. So that proves that I am Brahmachaitanya.
The Brahmachaitanya is the Adi Shakti. And Sadashiva is also in My
heart. But since I am so much humanized, it is not so easy to find it out.
If you tell this to modern human beings, they will not understand. It can
only be told to Sahaja Yogis because they will understand. To bear this truth
is so difficult. These days it is difficult to bear money, let alone that. Even to
bear one's own position, they become so shaky. So for them to bear the fact
that I all the incarnations is too difficult to bear.
encompass
One day I went to Aurangabad, where a boy told Me that the Brahma-
chaitanya is beyond feeling and non-feeling. He had read about it in some
book. I told him it was true, but he should just forget about it and just feel it.
It was then that I decided to tell a few people about it. You see, the right
time also had to come before I disclosed it.
All other religions have so far been segmented and not integrated. Now
the whole integration has come. I can explain Christ, Muhammed-sahib and
others because they are all a part and parcel of the whole, which is the Brah-
machaitanya.O
19
30
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-21.txt 
 If you are thirsty,
we can give you water,
but we cannot drink.
You have to drink water
immersed in the water of collectivity and you have to feel the taste,
feel the feeling, what it does
and all that is together.
Its not separate.
purifies
Purity is your Mother's name. You know that My name is purity. And this
purity is such that it purifies everything. It just purifies. The purity should be
such that it should purify, otherwise that purity has no meaning.
For example, a soap purifies, but you don't purify the soap.... Water is the
purifier. Water purifies us physically. And also our poisons are driven out of
our liver by water. Water is a very great element in removing all problems.
You use water for so many things. You know how it works it out.
So this Lakshmi, which is purification, was born out of water. That's why
She was called as Mary. And I'm also called as Nira, meaning "born out of
cleans
CC
quenches
water."
So one has to understand ... that we inculcate purity. We should not cheat
ourselves. It is easy to cheat, but we should inculcate purity within ourselves
as a matter of our own maturity, as our own decoration, as our own beauty
and not just because it's a labourious thing or it is a very hard thing. It is not
nourishes like that. It should be achieved with great pleasure and happines...
We like to have a bath or to be clean and to be presentable. In the same
way, we should try to clean our thoughts. Just by paying attention to them,
we can clean them. Thoughts must be made clean. First of all, why have
thoughts at all? But even if you have, have clean and
if you have to have, don't have thoughts full of arrogance, aggression or of
permeates
thoughts. Even
pure
fear....
Our purification of our mind comes through certain methods of under-
flows standing ourselves. First of the understandings one has to have is that we are
born in a family, born in a society, born in a so-called religious sect or what-
ever. So all these fixations have put into us a certain amount of impurities,
which may give us ego, superego. Anything it might give us. So to keep it
pure and simple, take to the water element as much as you can. It helps both
It helps the
superego. Take to the water element. And
ways. It helps the
ego.
that is what Lakshmi is...
Diwali Puja 1981
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-22.txt 
 21
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-23.txt 
 You can quench the spiritual thirst of people – tremendous power – because when
glistens
you give Realization, then the seeking is over.
Think of the water – nourishment. You nourish. You give spiritual nourishment to
people through your power. Even if you are standing there, you are nourishing others.
superego. All these
Then dissolvement –
and
you dissolve their
you dissolve their
reflects
ego
powers you own after Realization. Just think of it....
It has another very great quality. Water permeates into the smallest particle. It goes to
the roots, sucks into the roots....
personality has permeated into that person. He doesn't know. You have perme-
buffers
ated into that person and you are feeling the roots, where is the problem.
The divine water is flowing into that being and the obstruction is felt through that
you can say that this is catching, that is catching...
The glistening of the water is so your skin becomes very radiant.
divine water and
And the last of all is the reflection. A person who sees you, sees his own reflection.
gets frightened. This happens sometimes. I don't mean anything bad to anyone, but
Не
carries love
people are unnecessarily frightened of Me because they see their reflection. So when they
reach you, they see their reflection can be very aggressive because they see their reflection.
They can be very hard on you because they see their reflection. And if it is clear-cut water,
then
you see the depth of that person. If you are a clear-cut Sahaja Yogi, you feel the depth
clearly and they can see through the spirituality. These are the qualities of water...
expresses emotion
exerts pressure
glorifies
22
20
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-24.txt 
 WATER
In My body, the water I have as a buffer because it pro-
Water finds it's own level. 1In the same way,
tects the chakras. If I don't have water in the body, I may
have problems. So it acts as a buffer also. It soothes your
this compassion has to flow to all the places,
epidermal cells. You can say it soothes your blindness. You
see, if you don't have moisture, it is all blindness, a dryness
in all. It soothes everyone.
to all the ditches everywhere and should find its own level.
And there are other types of powers of water which we
know about. When it comes out of your eyes, it expresses
In this lifetime, you can achieve that state.
your compassion, your love, your emotions. That is the only
thing, out of all the elements, which expresses emotions,
In this lifetime, you can get to that state within yourself.
water power.
Water has other qualities also, which many people know
- hydrostatic water, the pressure. It is the pressure and a
person who exists like a Sahaja Yogi will definitely put a
pressure on others. He will not aggress, but there will be a
pressure....
You should really know that the water is a very holy
thing and in our pujas also we use it specially. This dignifies
the Kundalini. That means the Kundalini is the water jar,
the carrier of Aquarius. And this is the age of the Aquarius.
How important is this water? The water is the carrier
of divine love. It is the best carrier. And this is the time of
Aquarius. It means the Kundalini is made of divine water...
Some of us, we do not know that we have those
powers
within us, that we can permeate into others. We can project
our personalities to others. We can find out what's wrong
with them. We can find out about ourselves. We can go
into ourselves. Our permeation is like water. It is moving.
It is flowing all the time. And this is a very important
thing that we should be aware of, our powers that we have
achieved....
We have our own self-esteem and we live with our own
dignity and that's how we should be pure, transparent,
honest. Within ourselves we should be absolutely honest.
Water is so honest with itself. We put anything to the
water, it will show. Put any colour into it, it will show. Put
any mud, it will show.
You have to be so honest, honest to yourself. And the
whole thing should work out to be a personality and be
congenial, beautiful, permeating...
We have to dedicate ourselves to our purification, to our
glorification because water glorifies. It gives you glory. &
30
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-25.txt 
 16
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Prosperity
will come
Shri Lakshmi Puja
21 September 1986
Belgium
Lakshmi came out of the sea. That is the wealth that has come out
of the sea. But the wealth has to be like a Lakshmi.
The Lakshmi has a motherly nature. She is a mother. She is the
Mother. She is standing on a lotus. That means She does not throw
Her weight anywhere. People go and occupy other territories and
use them for their own purpose. That will never give them the
Lakshmi Principle. The only thing that may happen to them is to
get some money for the time being. But they say that Lakshmi is
chanchal. That means She is all the time shifting...
Lakshmi has got one hand which is giving. Another hand She
has got by which She protects you. In two hands She has pink
lotuses. The pink lotus suggests the warmth. A person who has
Lakshmi has to have warmth in his household. He must have in his
heart warmth to receive people.
25
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-27.txt 
 The lotus and the elephant
If a lotus flower receives even a horrible beetle, a black beetle which has got all kinds of
thorns in it, it allows it to sleep overnight as a nice guest. The corona of the lotus that is
beautiful spreads all the yellow colour on which this beetle rolls and enjoys the comfort.
And the lotus watches the enjoyment of the beetle. It does not get disturbed. It does not
get upset. And when the lotus opens out, the beetle just goes away. And the lotus still
grows. It doesn't die out.
In modern life, we don't want guests and if some guests come in the house, they dare
not even spoil the carpet. We clean the house, we polish all our silver and all our brass,
but
we don't want even a little rat to come inside....
So the beauty of a lotus flower is that it is all-embracing. It is a very motherly
principle. It tolerates any kind of nonsense from the beetle. So one of the aspects of
Mahalakshmi is Gruha Lakshmi. It is the one who is the housewife. And if this
is
aspect
spoiled, then we cannot have Lakshmi in our house, we cannot have wealth in our house.
Lakshmi will disappear from all such houses where the housewife is not respected.
Another of the Lakshmi Tattwa is that She gives protection to some people.
That means aashraya. That means there are people who are supported by such a
aspect
person....
Then there is another aspect of Lakshmi where She is round like an elephant. She
has a propensity. She is not like a mosquito... A Lakshmi has to have a grandeur.. A
person who has
dignified
an elephant, in a swinging way...
The Kundalini also doesn't agree very much with the hot movement because if you
move the Kundalini up and down, up and down, She doesn't know where to go. But an
got money doesn't jump like a monkey, but walks like an elephant, in a
You have to
manner ... gajagamini. That is one of the names of the Goddess. She walks like
be a generous
type and not elephant's walk is left-right, left-right, left-right. It goes on properly, through the central
path. So it is not very good to walk in that fashion if you have to establish Sahaja Yoga
miserly. properly.
The four purposes
The Mahalakshmi Principle comes out of the Lakshmi Principle.... When you have
acted according to the image of the Lakshmi, then the Mahalakshmi Principle rises
Now the Mahalakshmi Tattwa, the principle, is that you start thinking only
within
you.
your spirit. When you are absolutely satisfied with the material wealth, then you
start coming to the spirit.
It was nice that people were seeking material wealth and had ... a revolution in a way,
but as a result of that, you do not find that the greed has gone down. On the contrary, it
has increased. And the lust has become so perverted. So we can find very clearly that we
have failed the principle of Lakshmi in our society, in our family, in our government.
The understanding of the spirit is only possible for people who have understood the
meaning of the Lakshmi Principle first of all.
So the purpose of Lakshmi is fourfold:
Firstly, you have to give. It's not like in the Church where they will say, "All right, you
have to give your money to me." It is not that because I don't want anything, but you
have to be a generous type and not miserly. Supposing you have one door open, no air
will come. Only the air that is sufficient for the room will be there and there won't be
any entry of new air or more air or any draft inside. But if you open the door, another
about
will find there will be a circulation of air. So, by generosity, the circulation
your material problems.
one, then
you
one,
26
starts and
you solve
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-28.txt 
 PROSPERITY
Another principle which we should follow is of supporting others. Especially I want Sahaja
Yogis – we should try to help each other. It may not be with money, but with moral sup-
port. But if you have to support sometime someone with money, you should do it volun-
tarily without even thinking that you are doing any obligation to that person – or else, you
can think that “I'm doing this just for my own pleasure.
The third real quality of the Lakshmi Tattwa is that it is respectful to the elderly. But we
see it the other way around everywhere. A person, when he becomes rich, he becomes very
arrogant. Thats a sign, as we say, of ... a person who has suddenly got the money and he
doesn't know what to do....
We should
others and we should understand that, if we have
we haven't
respect
money,
got everything. For example, in India a saint is respected higher than anybody, higher than
all the artists, higher than all the painters, higher than all the kings, all the government.
The highest is the saint. So if you are a rich person, you will be known by your respectful
behavior towards everyone.
By generosity,
This respectful behavior you can also show to the things of others. Such a person would the circulation
respect all auspicious things... So this quality, when it develops in a human being, then
we can say the Mahalakshmi Principle has started. Now in all of you, the Mahalakshmi starts
Principle has generated.
The bridge over the Void
Mahalakshmi resides in the Sushumna Nadi. And the Sushumna is developed only up to
a point in human beings. It is later on like a bridge
ciple. That means a person who is satisfied, who is in balance, who is dharmic, his ocean
becomes desires of becoming the clouds of this Sushumna Nadi or a part of the Sushumna
Nadi. This desire creates this path, this bridge of Sushumna within us.
Unless and until the Mahalakshmi Principle is awakened within us, we cannot make
the Kundalini pass properly because it will always get lost in the Void. So the dignity, the
respect of a Sahaja Yogi will always help him to build this path of Sushumna over this Void.
It is not some sort of an artificial respect or an artificial etiquette, but it is a feeling from
inside, a kind of a state human beings reach where they feel that it is important that we
have to be respectful to everybody.
.. is created by the Mahalakshmi Prin-
Balance, auspiciousness and prosperity
I have told you what is the Mahalakshmi Principle. Now, if the Mahalakshmi Principle is
awakened within us, then the Lakshmi just runs after us. In the Western culture, what
have done is to bring Lakshmi to the level of only money, that also in paper. And it is so
artificial that people don't know how suddenly they become bankrupt.
So the innate Lakshmi Principle is to be understood, that you Sahaja Yogis have a spe-
cial responsibility for all these Western countries, which are slowly losing all their wealth
and the Third World will have all the money.... The discriminatory use of these kinds of
policies have exhausted all your material wealth which was there from the Mother Earth.
Now when that is exhausted, then that, on which you can depend, is your paper money.
I've always said that a machine is for you and you are not for machine, so why go into the
complete subjection to the machinery like this...?
One should stop and back a little bit and see where we have gone wrong. Let us
you
go
correct at that point. And once one realizes that it is important to keep a balance on the
Nabhi Chakra, then the Mahalakshmi Tattwa is properly manifested. Also it is vice versa.
If your Mahalakshmi Tattwa is awakened, as it is awakened in you, you can create balance,
be auspicious in nature. Through use, it will happen that the prosperity will come. E
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-29.txt 
 to the seekers of truth: part one
when will it happen?
и
I bow to all the seekers of truth.
There are, in these modern times, many seekers of truth.
It is a special category of people born in these modern times.
In every country a lot of people are born with this seeking. They are a special category,
which sees beyond, tries to find something beyond what they can perceive through their
sense organs.
The truth, as we see it, is through our sense organs. For example something we see as
white, we call it "white," something we feel cool, we call it "cool"... That means whatever
we perceive through our sense organs and whatever is communicated to us through our
central nervous system, we accept as the truth. And we should accept that only as truth
A lot of peopie and not something that is told to us, not something that we have read in books, not some-
CC
CC
people
thing that we can project in our mind.
That doesn't mean that I deny any one of the scriptures. That doesn't mean that I
deny anything. But to begin with, let us start from scratch, as they call it, or on a clean
slate. Let us see what is the truth.
are born with
this seeking.
To experience the truth
every religion truth has been described. As I can see it, everybody does not see it. That
is why there is blindness. That is why there are these blind alleys where you end up argu-
ing things. So there must be something that is missing within us. We have not been able
to really relate truth to our central nervous system.
In
Now, what is that missing within us? We should find out. In all humility, we should
know that there must be something within us. We have been arguing about so many
things. We have been talking about so many things, reading so many books, going into
all kinds of funny experiences right from alcohol to other drugs and gurus and this and
that, but still we have not felt anything on our central nervous system.
Secondly, we have no control over that truth. So what is the reason? Is something
missing in the human awareness? Is it that we are lacking something in our human aware-
ness? All the books, all the scriptures which are true scriptures have said one thing: to
know the truth, you are to be born again....
If you take Patanjali, who wrote a very ancient book, it is not that Patanjali asked you
SC
Patanjali: the compiler of to stand on your heads. That is wrong. That is just a wee bit of it. But what Patanjali has
the Yoga Sutras (about two written is that have to achieve the truth on your central nervous system ...
meaning
you
centuries before Christ).
the experience of your spirit.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi 22 June 1984 London
To be born again
The English language has an advantage and a disadvantage. The spirit could be the atma
or the spirit could be an alcohol or the spirit could be a dead body. It could be
stance, but it is not so. These are three separate things, absolutely opposite to each other. Pir: the spirit or atma
So the atma, the spirit, has to be found out.
It is said even by Mohammed-sahib. He said you are to become the pir. It is said by
Zoroaster. It is said by Lao-Tse. It is also said by Zen. Buddha has said it. Mahavira has
said it. Every one of them has said it .... that you have to be born again.
To be born again does not mean that you certify yourself, "I am born again." A self-
certificate, you can call it.... What is so special if you are born again? The human aware-
ness at this level is just ready to be born again.
In Sanskrit, the word for a bird is dwija. It means "born again" and also for a Brahmin
who is born again. But those who call themselves Brahmins are not Brahmins. They just has to be
call themselves Brahmins. Have they come to know the Brahma, the all-pervading power
of God? Those who say that they are born again should feel the all-pervading power
God around them. If they cannot feel it, they are not born again. So all these self-certifi-
cates are a deception, a self-deception and a deception of others. It is just a money-making what it is.
any circum-
Awareness
of higher than
process.
The living process
The truth has to be achieved through your evolutionary process, which is a living process.
Again we must understand the living process. Through just talking, mental projections,
sitting down here, big talk about it or by giving you some courses or taking some money
from you, you
cannot get it. It is a state in a living growth. That proves that it is living.
That means the state of our awareness has to be higher than what it is. If our state
cannot rise, then it is not of any use. Like the seed that becomes the roots, then the bark,
the leaves, the flowers and then the fruit ... in the same way, a living religion must give you
a different state and that ... religion is within us. Every one of us has it.
When we go against that living religion within us, we go into imbalances, but even
today people can ask, “Why religion? Why should we have a balance? What is the need?
into imbalances." I mean is that a logical question?
Let's
go
What is religion?
What is the religion? We come to that point. It is that a religion is a valency of human VALENCE: The number
beings. Just like carbon has four valences, human beings have ten valences, which matter of possible bonds or
does not have. Animals have nine, while the human beings have ten valences. And when qualities. For an atom, it
these ten valences go out of balance, then they go out of the quality of a human being.
But still, one can ask, why should we have these ten valences...? Because in the evolu-
tionary process you have to ascend and you can never be satisfied with yourself unless and atom. For a human, it is
until you have achieved it – especially the seekers.
That is why I say they are the special category – because in this special category, men of or laws of dharma.
God will have to become prophets and they will have powers to make others prophets...
When is that going to happen? It has to happen today. O
is the number of bonds it
can make with another
the number of qualities
29
30
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Q:
uestions
nswers
How long every day should we meditate, not to make any mistake or going on ego or super-ego?
That is one thing you should take out of your mind. You can never make mistakes. Your
Kundalini doesn't make any mistakes. It is not what time. It is just if sit before the
photograph and you are getting the cool breeze. Take the cool breeze for about two min-
utes, say namaskar, finished. There is no ritual about Sahaja Yoga. Some "I've
not washed my hands. I've not had my bath. How will I put my hands to Mother?" She is
your Mother. You can put your hands to Me at any time. But
you
people say,
have to respect.
you
If we didn't have respect for You before Realization what are the consequences?
It doesn't matter. Mother is very forgiving, isn't She? She is the source of all forgiveness.
Even after Realization, if you don't have respect for the time being, it's all right. Until
have not known Me, ignorance is not to be punished. But after knowing Me, after seeing
the photographs of lights and everything, after giving Realization to a few people, if you
start misbehaving, then I can't help it.... If you are climbing a mountain slowly, slowly,
when in the beginning, if you fall, it doesn't matter. You can again climb. But when you
go higher and then you fall very fast.
So your attention should be always on higher things. And doubting should be less
about yourself and about Sahaja Yoga because you have to learn so many things. So many
things people start doubting, like you say for the puja, “Why this puja? Why? What is
the need? Why to worship this lady? She's like us." But why are these people so anxious
to do the puja? Why do they come miles together to do the puja? What is in there? What
do they get?
you
30
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-32.txt 
 The West has received from India a lot of gurus and each with seemingly a different path. And
it's believed in the West that all the paths lead to God. Many, many people believe that it doesn't
seek the truth, you are going to get there. Is that what India has to contribute
matter how you
to the West and the seekers of America?
India has to give the knowledge of the roots, while the West has the knowledge of the tree.
But those who are exported from India, I wonder how many of them are really genuine
or do they know anything about the roots? So I just can't say that those who are going
there are the people who can deliver the knowledge which is not yet known to the West.
Whatever is unknown is not divine. To understand logically the difference between India
and the West is this: India has still retained the fundamentals as the goal of life. The
fundamental is that one should get Self Realization, that one should try to lead a life of
balance and of dharma. Because there is so much of the knowledge of the roots in this
country, people can become very hypocritical. They can be very dishonest and can misuse
that knowledge to exploit the western people who are naive about this knowledge.
My idea of bringing some of the Sahaja Yogis from the West to India, in the villages of
India, was to make them understand that comfort is not the goal of life because we have
villagers who are realized souls, who do not have any comforts which are so important to
the western people, but are very happy, satisfied and peaceful people and are extremely
good yogis. But that does not mean that you give up your comforts and you become
godly. It's all a mental behaviour if you think by negation. That is not the But when
you come to India, you understand that this habit of seeking comfort must be given up.
If you have any, it's all right, but let not the comfort sit on your head. Let your spirit rule
and not the idea that you should be comfortable or affluent. That idea should not rule Realization.
| can't think of
real religion
that has not
way.
talked of Self
you.
Many fake people have gone to America because they know you are all naive. And
anything bombastic will impress you very much because American life has now become
very money-oriented and ego-oriented. So they have developed all the methods of
pering your ego and getting money out of you. So that you
the
pam-
feel that
you can purchase
guru....
One must know whatever is vital in life, you cannot purchase it. In all humility,
human beings also must realize that you have done nothing to become human beings.
God has done everything. How much have you paid to Him...?
The tradition of India has been throughout that a person must get his second birth,
which is the tradition of the Christian religion, the tradition of Islam and the tradition of
Buddhism, the tradition of Jainism, of Tao, of Zen. I can't think of any traditional, real
religion that has not talked of Self Realization.
We sing praise and it does really open our Vishuddhi. What is the right way to have devotion
and use our Vishuddhi?
You must know that it is the Virata. So once you become one with the Virat, then if you
sing any praise to Him, it goes to Him directly. Any praise is sufficient. But
not be one-sided. All the time singing praise also one gets tired. So what you have to do
is to also meditate. And sometimes, when the heart is full, you must sing. But specializa-
tion is not the way we have in Sahaja Yoga. I would suggest that some people really sing
horridly, so they should not sing. They must try to improve their Vishuddhis, try to have
better voice.... Please try to improve your Vishuddhis so that whatever you sing is melo-
dious at least to the ear. That's the best way.
you should
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-33.txt 
 According to Sahaja Yoga, what is the value of thoughts and of our whole culture? If you
become thoughtless what about logic and books and our culture? Does it not have any value?
апy
One should understand in its right sense. When we are thoughtless, it is not that we
cannot have thoughts. Thoughts do not invade us. We are free people. If we want to
think, we can think. But if we don't want to think, we can stop thinking. That is thought-
less awareness, first of all. Secondly, the inspiration comes to us only in thoughtless aware-
ness. Then the third thing is the culture is of the spirit, which comes in us, which is a
universal culture.
Why do we have mass marriages?
We don't have actually mass marriages. First of all, you see, marriages are to be done after
Realization, when the people have lived at least two years with Self Realization. That's
important because there are many great souls who want to take birth on this Earth. But
we give full chance for these people to know each other and everybody cannot just get
into it. They are nicely scrutinized and found out whether they are capable of a good
marriage or not. As a result of that, ninety-nine percent marriages have proved extremely
successful – very happy relations and also very beautiful children. You cannot force any-
thing or anyone. They have to offer themselves and then we have to scrutinize the person
because we don't want to have marriages which are of no use.
When we are a realized person negativity can attack us more. How can we protect ourselves?
Are those persons who are not realized not attacked as much or is it they just don't realize it?
When you are a realized soul you can feel the negativity much more than others can. For
example, if it is a clean cloth, then anything black on this shows clearly. And as soon as
you see an attack, you know it and you know how to protect. Then there is no problem
for
But the normal people, even if they get cancer or they get mad, they don't know.
you.
When it happens to them, they are not at all aware. You become very sensitive about your
centres and if anything goes wrong with your centres, immediately you discover.
Is Sahaja Yoga the one way? Is it the fastest way or are there many other ways?
тапy
There is only one way.... It is a living process and it changes. When there is a problem,
then it stops and sometimes it doesn't go ahead. There is a possibility. So one can't guar-
antee everyone. If it works, well and good. You cannot pay for it. You cannot order it. It
is like a living process. Supposing a seed is not sprouting, what is the use of paying money
to the Mother Earth? She doesn't understand money. Nor if you stand on your heads also,
the seed won't sprout. If it has to sprout, it will sprout.
Does it mean now that other forms of yoga are not as good, not as fast?
No, other forms of yoga, like Hatha Yoga, are used also in Sahaja Yoga later on, but in a
scientific way. It is like taking the medicine wherever it is needed. Now, supposing your
Kundalini has not started, how are we to know where it has stopped? Supposing it has
stopped on your stomach and you are doing the exercises of your neck – what's the use?
It is very practical. These days the people, the way they do their Hatha Yoga, they take all
the medicines together from the medicine box without
discrimination.
any
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Credits and Notes
Front cover: Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Contents pages words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 1 November 1981
Contents pages words: from the Shri Devi Atharva Shirsham
Contents pages photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Mumbai 1979
(Malcolm Murdoch, photographer)
Page 3 photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Guru Puja 2001
Page 10 words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 4 February 1983, Delhi
Page 11 words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 13 and 28 January 1983
Pages 13 and 15 photos: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Easter Puja 2001
Page 16 photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Guru Puja 1983
Page 17 words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 16 October 1993
Pages 20 words (top right): Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Guru Puja 2004
Page 24 photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Rajalakshmi Puja 1983
Pages 28 and 29 photograph: Axinia Samoilova, photographer
Page 30 words: Shri Mataji, 17 August 1987, Le Raincy France
Page 31 words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 10 February 1982, Delhi
Page 32 words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 12 October 1987, Vienna
Photograph at left: detail at Shri Mataji's house in London circa 1982
Back cover words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Navaratri Puja 1984
Back cover photograph: a tulip (Axinia Samoilova, photographer)
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
SUBSCRIPTIONS: Contact@divinecoolbreeze.org
CONTENT: editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
The Divine Cool Breeze, 881 Frederick Road
North Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
PRINTED BY
King Printing Company Inc., 181 Industrial Avenue East
Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA
and Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd.
No.8, Chandragupta Housing Society, Paud Road,
Kothrud, Pune 411038, Maharashtra India
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
when it comes to giving www.divinecoolbreeze.org
magazine onlined
Give with your full heart.
feel that love of giving
Youjust
and you feel so happy beciase
you feel so big about yourselt
Shri Mataji's words as news,
lke an ocsan thafn giving so many douds
and again it is recelving these rivers into it
and again making it into douds
carefully chosen and changing often
A circle of beautiful conversion
into bemuty after beauty starta.
we should try to
Is so beauth
become a part of
And that is what we should bry
to become -a
partof that circde
that circle
a mini-magazine
and which is sojPHMing.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-35.txt 
 How beautifully it opens.
Slowly. Every petal so careful
not to hit each other.
Slowly it opens out.
And then the fragrance starts pouring
in the most dignified manner.
Such a flower only
can be offered at the Lotus Feet of the Adi Shakti.
