Dec.-2009

 Let's feel proud.. To be a part of... Our glorious nation.. a And hoist the Tricolor high.. Sending you warm wishes.. On Indian Independence Day "SBefore independence in this country fIndiaf Irememberwe had to fight the British, and what patriotism people had at that timne. Iremember oncewe had goneto seeahockey that time it was not nationalitwas congress flagin thecar Sothesoldierss cam they said, "Take down this flag Somy driver gotdown hesaid," You cubmy throat first and then you take douon the flag". We all children joined him and they wereshoched, went back Suchenthusiasm, such patriotismcu these people match, andmyfather always hadanational flagonit, atthat timewhenwewerefighting ame (HH.Shri Matgji Nirmala Devi, 12lal94)

 INSIDE THIS ISSUE The Power of Photos - 2 माँ तुलजाभवानी शक्ति की देवता'- १४ AND MORE Meaning of Ai Giri Nandini - 4 A Cloud hides the Sun and. . -8 Key to treatments in Sahaja Yoga - 10 Two Cranes & a Tortoise - 12 Kidshakti Page - 17 Attractions - 20 यही ध्यान है - २१ Will of God - 20 Note : The yearly Subscription fees for Year - 2010 will be Rs. 200/- Kindly send D.D. or Cheque of the said amount to Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd; PUNE.

 The trouble is My photograph has vibarations.... The camera is much more sensitive than human beings are. There are so many things the camera has caught, which human beings cannot catch...... The camera is so sensitive and so honest and so deep.... It could be a person loves you very much that even a photograph of hers can love you so much. It could be. We cannot think of someone who is just love. And the photograph has that love within itself... None of the people before Me were photographed. Christ was never phorographed. photographed. Even Muhammed was nor photographed. This is the first time you have developed this wonderful thing called the camera. Buddha was not And there's my photograph. What to do?.. It is rather difficult to accept a photograph because it is said that you should not bow to any. It was said because there were no photographs before. Nothing was there. A photograph is such a truthful thing. And you'll see yourself later on. Then you won't give up. I know that. You will like it.. A photograph may also have symbolic value. Say we have the photograph, will you? She's not there. Will you spit on her photograph, any one of you? You will not. Because, after all, that photo, that thing represents something. It is a symbol, is'nt it? It may not give vibrations, but definitely it is a symbol of something. queen's It is the coefficient of the whole thing that works this out. Even when I am talking to you, you'll be amazed. Something will work out within your-self. The sound also carries the vibrations. 14th April 1982 [when taking photographs] you must take the right angle and at the right time. I find some people take exactly the wrong ver

 angle and at the wrong time. Yes, when you get the vibrations, that's the point you must click. And because you just take it at a wrong time, the photographs do not come out well for some people. The vibrations will tell you when to take. I took a photograph of some people and their vibrations started flowing. It's all relatiye. July 1985 3.

 Ai Giri Ai Giri Nandini Nandit. Medini Oh Beloved daughter of the mountains, The one who brings about great joy to the earth, Vishw. Vinodini Nandanute The One who brings joy to the whole universe, I prostrate Myselfbefore You, who is the form of complete bliss. Girivar. Vindhya Shirodhini Vasini Your Holy abode is in the king ofthe mountains, the Vindhyas. Vishnu Vilasini Jishnu Nute Shri Vishunu is filled with joy when he meditates on You having won You remain that complete self, I seek refuge at Your Lotus Feet. Bhagavati He Shiti Kanth. Kutumbini great creator of this Universe, the Great Goddess who is the wife of Lord Shiva, the blue throated one, and of the family of Oh Lord Shiva. Bhuri Kutumbini Bhuri Krute You belong to the universal family and for You, the whole Universe is Your family, You are the one who does the greatest Of great actions namely giving self-realization. Jay. Jay. He Mahishasur. Mar. Dini Victory to You, Oh Great Goddess who killed the terrible demon, Mahishasura. RamyakaPar.Dini ShailaSute You are the One with the beautiful luminous face, the wife of the one who has the matted locks, i.e. Lord Shiva, Daughter of the king of mountains, i.e. Shri Parvati Sur. Var. Varshini Dur.Dhar. Dhar.Shini On the gods You shower auspicious blessings. Enemies of Gods are so powerful, yet You are able to keep them away. Dur. Mukh. Marshini Har.Sharate You are the destroyer of the evil faced ones,i.e. demons. You are the giver ofuninterrupted happiness. Tribhuvan. Poshini Shankar. Toshini You are the one who looks after and sustains all the three worlds. The One who is the ultimate joy of Lord Shankara.

 Nandini Kilbisha Mojini GhoshaRate You alone can destroy all our sins which You do by giving us self-realization. Yet, for those who are the enemies of the gods and your children, You always wear a ferocious expression that says"BEWARE". Danuj. Niroshini KshitiSut. Roshini You show to the gods that You are pleased with them. Yet to the sons of Diti (different from Aditi= the Mother of the gods). Who are the demons, you always show your displeasure. Dur.Mud. Shoshini SindhuSute Even though there may be demons who have great strength, You can take their evil strength away. Jay. Jay. He Mahishasur. Mar. Dini RamyakaPar.Dini ShailaSute Dhanuranusanga Ranakshanasanga In the battle field You are so absorbed in the battle that Your arm moves continuously shooting arrows, Your entire body shakes as if You are dancing and Your bangles make musical sounds. Parisphut. Danga Natatkatake (All these denotes that even while She is continuously vanquishing the force of the gods, She does it with total concentration, with grace and beauty) Kanak. Pishanga Pushatka Nishanga They look like flashes of gold, yellow and light shining from Your bow (kanak Gold, Pishanga= yellow, Nishanga rasad bhata Shrunga-Making sounds that are pleasing ear). Rasad Bhata Shrunga Hata Batuke Oh Great Goddess, You destroyed the demon Vatuke, when You Shoot Your arrows in the battle field, krut. Chaturanga Bala Kshiti Ranga And Your very presence makes this army of gods filled with enthusiasm, joy and valor, and even their arrows which are in the quiver on their backs Ghatada Bahu Ranga Ratada Bhatuke Shine forth with new colours and seeing all these Lord Bhairava dances in front of You in great ecstasy, repeating Overand over again" Jai Mataji, Jai Mataji". Jay. Jay. He Mahishasur. Mar. Dini RamyakaPar.Dini ShailaSute Jay. Jay. Japya Jaye JayaShabda Oh Great Goddess who brings salvation to the world, our complete prostrations before You; constant inchantation of Your Holy Name is the most supreme prayer that a devotee can take for his own meditation, Parastuti tatpara Vishwanute And when he gets absorbed in saying Your Name, need for other sounds and language falls away. Oh Goddess, who brought salvation to this world, we constantly prostrate ourselves before You (Tatpar constantly) 5.

 Ai Giri Jhana Jhana Jhinjita Jhinkruta Nupura Lord Shiva who, though beyond sounds and language when he hears the sound of Your wondrous ornaments moving against one another, JhinJhita Mohita Bhutapate When You are in battle or in dance and make sounds like Jhana Jhana Jhinjita and Jhinkruta, he becomes totally filled with Joy and leaving his meditation desires to hear these heavenly sounds again and again. Natina Natartha Natina Nata Nayaka Oh Great Goddess, who took the form of Shri Ardha Narishwara, when You dance in the company of other great dancers, Naatita Natya Yugana Rate You put them all the shame and for Your divine cosmic dance You always have the greatest musicians and singers to accompany You. Jay. Jay. He Mahishasur. Mar. Dini RamyakaPar.Dini ShailaSute Ayi Sumanas Sumanas Sumanas (In this line the poet uses the word Sumanas four times and each time he uses it to denote a different aspect of the Devi) With the beautiful mind You are also like a soft flower. Though we are seeing you in the form of Shri Durga, your mind is as that of Lord Shiva and Shri Parvati; Sumanas Sumanohara kantiyute Your being is so beautiful, and seeing You in this beautiful form our minds become as pure as those of the gods, and we worship you even more because You are the one who is totally effulgent and all kinds of lights emanate from You. Shrita Rajini Rajini Rajini (Here the word Rajini, has four different meanings) The night takes Your protection, Beautiful, You are the One whose arti we do; Rajini Rajini Kara Vakravrute You are the One who has no birth, You are eternal, in Your hand You hold a lotus; Your noble face shines like a full moon. Sunayana Vibhrama Rabhrama Rabhrama And we see Your beautiful eyes under the lovely dark eye-brows, that look like a cluster of bees, Rabhrama Rabhrama Radhipate And Your name is also Shri Bhramahri Devi, that when you raise Your eyebrows, the three lines that are formed on Your forehead are the three worlds themselves and simply by

 Nandini ( Cont. ) the movement of Your eye-brows You create and dissolve the three worlds. Jay. Jay. He Mahishasur. Mar. Dini RamyakaPar.Dini ShailaSute Sahita Maharnava Malla Mattalika In the battle field when You are faced with great fighters, Vallika Rallika Mallarate You do battle with them in the way in which they fight. Vir. Chita Vallika Pallika Mallika When You are confronted with such powerful demons who use no weapons, You become totally absorbed in that battle. Jhillika Bhillika Vargavrute And make plans to destroy them after You have tired them and all this brings great joy to the Bhil tribals who were being harassed by these Mallas. SitaKrutha Phulli Samulla Sitaruna Your actions are so beautiful, like the rays of the rising sun, and becomes apparent to us as if Tallaja Pallava Sallalite Flowers are suddenly blossoming on creepers and seeing all these beautiful actions Lord Shiva becomes pleased. Jay. Jay. He Mahishasur. Mar. Dini RamyakaPar.Dini ShailaSute Kamala Dalamala Komala Kanti Those beautiful pure clusters of lotuses that emit very gently and sweetly beautiful light, Kala Kalitamala Bhala Late You have made these flowers blossom by Your own powers and have kept them in Your hair. Sakala Vilasa Kala Nilaya Krama Heavenly swans have the power to discriminate, and when they recognize all your great work. Keli Chalat Kala Haunsa Kule They are filled with complete joy and move around in an excited manner. Ali Kula Sankula kuvalaya Mandala Just as clusters of bees are attracted to groups of fragrant lotuses, Mauli Milad Bakulali Kule The stars come in clusters attracted to Your forehead. Jay. Jay. He Mahishasur. Mar. Dini RamyakaPar.Dini ShailaSute "JAI SHRI MATAJI" 7.

 A Cloud hides the Sun 1975 letter from Shri Mataji to sahaja yogis, written on May 5th, 5 years after the opening of Sahasrara Chakra at the universal level Attention, Maya and Walking on the Path... In 1975, Shri Mataji (the founder of Sahaja Yoga Meditation) celebrated Sahasrara Day in London with about twenty to twenty-five invited people. On that same day, she sent a letter in Marathi to the Sahaja Yogis in India. Excerpts are provided below. "I am explaining, in this letter," She wrote, "what is Unreal. It should be read out to all and assimilated by all." Your name, village, country, horoscope, forecasts, many such things get attached to you or others attach them to you. Once the Brahmarandhra (the top of the head -fontanel bone area, the core of Sahasrara chakra) is closed, many types of illusory ideas become part of your mind... Only that attention which progresses, renouncing all that is unreal, breaks all known and unknown bindings becomes verily the Self. Atma (the Spirit) is never disturbed or destroyed. Only human attention, in pursuit of desires, leaves its inner path. This is Maya (the Illusion). She has been intentionally created. Without her, the Attention would not have developed. You should not be afraid of Maya and should recognize her so that Shewill illuminate your path. A Cloud hides the Sun and also makes it seen. In the same way, once the Maya is identified, she moves aside and the Sun is seen. The Sun is

 and Also Makes it always there, but what is the purpose of the Cloud? Because of the Cloud, have an urge to see the Sun, which shines for a moment and again you hides somewhere. It gives strength and courage to your sight to see the sun. Man has been created with such great efforts. Only one step on his feet and all is successful. But still, it is not becoming possible. Hence, I have come as your Mother.... Attention should always be kept going deeper and deeper within. Forget the outside as much as possible. Have confidence that everything about it is taken care of. There are many instances to prove it. Then, in whatever you do, your attention remains in oneness with the Self. All bindings of sin and merit are snapped. Distinctions like worldly and nonwordly vanish because that wicked darkness, which has created all the discriminations, ends. Everything becomes auspicious in the light of true knowledge, whether it is the destruction done by Shri Krishna or the cross of Shri Jesus. All this will not be understood by explaining. Just showing the path will not help. The path will be known only after walking on it.... Many Blessings and Infinite Love to you all. Ever Yours, Your Mother, Nirmala Ref : Divine Cool Breeze Magazine. Volume 14, Number 4. July-August 2001. page 32 EGO

 to treatments in Sahaja Yoga Key Take vibrated white sugar. *Take biscuit between hotand cold. HEAD * Apply Coconut or Olive Oil am & pm. Take out anger by getting a pillow and hitting it hard. * Ice on liver. *Improve attention by meditation & listening to talks. * *Use sauces with food. Radha Krishna or Vitthala Sometimes can use almond oil, for nervous types...oriffeel exhausted. Avoid sitting in Sun...but if head becomes hot, not to take water till eaten something sweet. mantras. Protect the throat from cold conditions. * Ifwe speak, speak of Sahaja. NERVES * Cover in winter, so brain does not freeze. Look at green grass orthe ground. Apply Almond oil to head. STOMACH Vibrated water, and for L side, vibrated salt..and for R side, vibrated sugar. Vibrated lime under pillow. Oil head weekly, then wash the * Put L hand on center stomach and R hand to photo. head Maharashtrian clay to remove heat. Purify your eyes. For Vishuddhi, tilt head to R with attention on Sahastrara. * Eat vibrated food, avoid hotel food. HAIR Raise Kundalini, and apply Little vibrated coconut oil applied to hair at night and in *Avoid fungus type foods. morning. * Avoid oils with fragrances / essences which may lead to greying of hair. * Not to use butter or ghee on head or hair. bandhan. * Eat butter..gives fat cells for brain. Eat cooling foods in summer. Rub or massage the head or skull with oil. ASCENT * Yoga, Union, Meditation, Surrender, Joy, Recognition, Dedication, Bliss, Bhakti. ТЕЕТН Brush teeth quite a lot. Oil the hair before a head bath. Just sit, and listen to Shri Mataji orto Her talks..and imbibe. Get into collectivity collective. Rub Olive Oil and fine salt on Comb hair properly so that is not an forehead...make it nice. gums before sleeping. In India, use twig of Neem as toothbrush. be Can comb the hair (or dress) in a different way, to fool the spirits... beard also. *Shri Mataji Prasanna. Be large hearted. NECK Radha Krishna or Vitthala TONGUE GENERAL Raise Kundalini and put * mantras. Clean the tongue in the mornings. Reduce what you eat by half... not to think about food too much. * Not to move neck too much.. or hands too much... or to shrug shoulders whilst talking, so as not to spoil Vishuddhi. Protect from cold conditions. bandhan. * Use hands, not brains. * . •Be decent and decorous. THROAT Wash hands and use water as much as you can. * Gargle with salt water daily. LIVER * Footsoak. Ghee or butter on hot drinks. Chandrama mantra. 10

 to the Physical Body with reference * Shoebeat. Can take piece of garlic before sleeping. Carry & use photo. Sit on ground. Meditate. advantage of others. Not show off powers. Avoid over thinking. hands with candle. Keep eyes focused on ground. * Have awe for God. EARS Warm Olive Oil with piece of garlic, and put drop of this oil in NOSE * Introspection. Lead a clean life. With dropper, put warm Radha Krishna or Vitthala vibrated butter or ghee or oil into ears. Take correct mantra nose... one drop each side, mantras. Allah ho Akbar with index morning and evening. fingers in the ears. and say with respect. Use neti with inhalant for 3-4 days before sleeping. Radha Krishna or Vitthala BODY * Olive Oil massage on backbone. Oil hands and body before bath. mantras. SKIN Discipline or train the body. Can apply ghee/butter to body, *Use cotton fabrics for children. ifoveractive....not otherwise. Neem boiled in water and used as bath for skin troubles. Wear vest to avoid colds. Use Indian clay on skin....is good for soothing sunburn. Rub ghee or butter on fingers and hands, if dried up. * To get vibrations in hand, ask "Mother, are you the Holy Ghost? If hands feel hot, just 'throw it HANDS Put L (or minus) hand on a hot liver and R (or plus) hand outside, to suck heat with the L hand and give it out with the R hand. Work with hands, not brains. FOREHEAD * Keep free of hair. Give up wrong ideas and gurus. * Shoebeat. * If chakra catching, put hand there... do not feel condemned about it. away. Rub hands and throw it away. *IfL hand is hot or shaking, put Rhand on heart. * Accept Sahaja Yoga is the only * If R hand is hot, put L hand on Receive vibrations with L hand. give with R hand. * Wash hands... use as much water as you can, to get vibrations alright. Wash hands after toilet.. and before food. way. land, liver and R hand to photo. IFR hand is shaking, put L hand on stomach, R hand to photo. Surrender to Real Guru. * Do things for God. If feel nervous, put L hand on centre of stomach and R hand to photo. * Namaste is better than shaking EYES * Eat butter/ghee..which supplies fat for brain. Apply Netranjan at night. * Vibrated water helps. Use photo of Shri Mataji's Use water not paper after toilet. * Before bath rub oil on hands and body. hands.... is healthier. From :- Sabajvidya - 28th Aug 2002 Use clay to clean hands, in India. *Not harm others or take 11)

 Two o Cranes Once, two cranes and a tortoise lived as good friends in a lake. The cranes would share their daily adventures with the tortoise. The tortoise who had never seen anything beyond the lake would never tire of talking about ore thing or the other to the cranes. One year, the summer was unusually hot. The lake began to dry up and there was no food to eat. The cranes decided to leave their present home and move to the newfound lake. The cranes searched for and wide and found another lake that was full even in the scorching heat. 12 بامی

 Sa Tortoise They asked the tortoise to clamp its mouth tightly around a strong branch and the cranes lifted the branch with their strong beaks and started their flight. The tortoise had never seen these sights before and was so touched by the kindness of the cranes. It forgot all about the advice of the cranes and opened its mouth to thank its friends. As son as it opened its mouth, it lost its grip over the branch. It fell to the earth below and died. "Alas! If only our friend had been careful" Think be Act you The End

 माँ तुलजाभवानी ि म. हाराष्ट्र के उस्मानाबाद जिले में स्थित तुलजापूर, जो माँ तुलजाभवानी का स्थान है । ये छत्रपति शिवाजी महाराज की कुलदेवी हैं और महाराष्ट्र व अन्य राज्यों के कई निवासी इसकी कुलदेवी के रूप में पूजा करते हैं। तुलजाभवानी महाराष्ट्र के प्रमुख साढ़े तीन शक्तिपीठों में से एक है तथा भारत के प्रमुख पचास शक्तिपीठों में से भी एक मानी जाती है। मान्यता है कि छत्रपति शिवाजी महाराज को खुद देवी माँ ने तलवार प्रदान की थी, जिसे भवानी तलवार कहते हैं। यह मंदिर महाराष्ट्र के प्राचीन दंडकारण्य वनक्षेत्र में स्थित यमुनांचल पर्वत पर स्थित है । ऐसी जनश्रुति है कि इसमें स्थित तुलजाभवानी माता की मूर्ति स्वयंभू है। इस मूर्ति की एक और बात यह है कि यह मंदिर में स्थायी रूप से स्थापित न होकर 'चलायमान' है। साल में तीन बार इस प्रतिमा के साथ प्रभ महादेव, श्री यंत्र तथा खंडरदेव की भी प्रदक्षिणापथ पर परिक्रमा करवाई जाती है। तुलजाभवानी की स्वयंभू प्रतिमा शालीग्राम पत्थर से निर्मित यह मूर्ति वस्तुतः स्वयंभू मूर्ति मानी जाती हैं। इस मूर्ति के आठ हाथ हैं, जिनमें से एक हाथ से उन्होंने दैत्य के बाल पकड़े हैं तथा दूसरे हाथों से वे दैत्य पर त्रिशूल से वार कर रही हैं। ऐसा प्रतीत होता है कि माता महिषासुर राक्षस का वध कर रही हैं। माता की दाहिनी ओर उनका वाहन सिंह स्थापित है इस प्रतिमा के समीप ऋषि मार्कडेय की प्रतिमा स्थापित है, जो पुराण पढ़ने की मुद्रा में है। माता के आठों हाथों में चक्र, गदा, त्रिशूल, अंकुश, धनुष व पाश आदि शसत्र सुसज्जित हैं। 14 १

 'शक्ति की देवता' प्रतिमा का इतिहास इतिहास में इस प्रतिमा का वर्णन मार्कडेय पुराण के दुर्गा सप्तशती' नामक अध्याय में उल्लेखित है। इस ग्रंथ की रचना स्वयं संत मार्कडेय ने की थी। इस अध्याय में कर्म, भक्ति व ध्यान के संदर्भ में ज्ञान है। इस प्रतिमा की ऐतिहासिकता का दूसरा स्रोत भगवद् गीता भी है। तुलजाभवानी की कथा कृतयुग में करदम नामक एक ब्राह्मण साधु थे, जिनकी अनुभूति नामक अत्यंत सुन्दर व सुशील पत्नी थी। जब करदम की मृत्यु हुई तब अनुभूति ने सती होने का प्रण किया, पर एक बच्चे की माँ होने के कारण उन्हें यह विचार त्यागना पड़ा तथा मंदाकिनी नदी के किनारे तपस्या प्रारंभ कर दी। इस दौरान कूकर नामक राजा अनुभूति को ध्यान मग्न देखकर उनकी सुन्दरता पर आसक्त हो गया तथा अनुभूति के साथ दुष्कर्म करने का प्रयास किया। इस दौरान अनुभूति ने माता से याचना की और माँ अवतरित हुईं। माँ के साथ युद्ध के दौरान कूकर एक महिष रूपी राक्षस में परिवर्तित हो गया और महिषासुर कहलाया माँ ने महिषासुर का वध किया और यह पर्व 'विजयादशमी' कहलाया इसलिए माँ को 'त्वरितां' नाम से भी जाना जाता है, जिसे मराठी में तुलजा भी कहते हैं। तुलजाभवानी की पूजा इस मंदिर की ख्याति मराठा राज्य में फैली और यह देवी भोसले प्रशासकों की कुलदेवी के रूप में पूजी जाने लगीं। छत्रपति शिवाजी अपने प्रत्येक युद्ध के पहले माता से आशीर्वाद प्राप्त करने के लिए यहाँ आते थे । तुलजाभवानी का मंदिर इस मंदिर का स्थापत्य मूल रूप से हेमदपंथी शैली से प्रभावित है । इसमें प्रवेश करते ही दो विशालकाय महाद्वार नजर आते हैं। इनके बाद सबसे पहले कलोल तीर्थ स्थित है, जिसमें १०८ तीर्थों के पवित्र जल का सम्मिश्रण है इसमें उतरने के पश्चात् थोड़ी ही दूरी पर गोमुख तीर्थ स्थित है, जहाँ जल तीव्र प्रवाह के साथ बहता है। तत्पश्चात् सिद्धिविनायक भगवान का मंदिर स्थापित है। तत्पश्चात् एक सुसज्जित द्वार में प्रवेश करने के पश्चात् मुख्य कक्ष (गर्भगृह) में माता की स्वयंभू प्रतिमा स्थापित है। गर्भगृह के पास ही एक चाँदी का पलंग स्थित है, जो माता की निद्रा के लिए है। इस पलंग के उलटी तरफ शिवलिंग स्थापित है. जिसे दर से देखने पर ऐसा प्रतीत होता है कि माँ भवानी व शिव शंकर आमने-सामने बैठे हैं। यहाँ पर स्थित चाँदी के छल्ले वाले स्तंभों के विषय में माना जाता है कि यदि आपके शरीर के किसी भी भाग में दर्द है, तो सात दिन लगातार इस छल्ले को छूने से वह दर्द समाप्त हो जाता है। इस मंदिर से जुड़ी एक जनश्रुति यह भी है कि यहाँ पर एक ऐसा चमत्कारिक पत्थर विद्यमान है, जिसके विषय में यह माना जाता है कि यह आपके सभी प्रश्नों का उत्तर सांकेतिक रूप में 'हाँ' या 15

 माँ तुलजागवानी.... 'ना' में देता है। यदि आपके प्रश्न का उत्तर 'हाँ' है तो यह अपने आप दाहिनी ओर मुड जाता है और अगर 'ना' है तो यह बाईं दिशा में मुड़ जाता है। माना जाता है कि छत्रपति शिवाजी किसी भी युद्ध से पहले चिंतामणि नामक इस पत्थर के पास अपने प्रश्नों के समाधान के लिए आते थे। कैसे पहुँचे? तुलजापूर तक आने के लिए सभी प्रकार के यातायात के साधन उपलब्ध हैं। दक्षिण से आने वाले यात्री नालदुर्ग तक आसानी से सड़क मार्ग द्वारा आ सकते हैं। उत्तरी व पश्चिमी राज्यों से आने वाले तीर्थयात्री सोलापुर के रास्ते तुलजापुर तक आ सकते हैं। जबकि पूर्वी राज्यों से आने वाले यात्री नागपुर या लातूर के रास्ते यहाँ आ सकते हैं। रेलमार्ग - तीर्थयात्री सोलापुर तक रेल से आ सकते हैं जो कि तुलजापुर से केवल ४४ कि.मी.की दूरी पर स्थित है। वायुमार्ग - तुलजापुर तक आने के लिए यहाँ से सबसे करीबी हवाई अड्डा सोलापूर, पुणे हैं, जहाँ से बस या निजी वाहन द्वारा इस स्थान तक पहुँचा जा सकता है। में प्रतिप र्च বयेववर्धिणवि लवेवव वि धवदिताशाहस नी:शिवस्येषामुद्रा অट्रायराजना म सजता ि शा AEN

 KIDSHAKTrI PAGE S. Colour Maa Durga's sketch reastime 17

 का रं राम ब स हजयोगी से पूछते हैं कि ध्यान करने के लिए क्या करें? आप निर्विचार समाधि में रहिए, बस। उस वक्त कुछ भी मत कीजिए। आप केवल लक्ष की ओर ही नहीं बढ़ रहे, परम चैतन्य मात्र आपकी देखभाल का भार ही नहीं ले रहा, परन्तु इसके साथ पहली बार आप प्रकृति में, वातावरण में, तथा आपसे निरन्तर सम्बन्धित लोगों में दैवत्व का प्रसार कर रहे हैं। यही एक कार्य है जो हमें मुझ करना है ध्यान की विधि अति सहज है। इसके अतिरिक्त हम प्रार्थना तथा पूजाएं करते हैं। पूर्ण समर्पण से, हृदय से परम प्राप्ति की याचना के लिए की हुई प्रार्थना भी स्वीकार होती है। केवल याचना मात्र कीजिए, बाकी सब हो जाएगा। पिछले संस्कारों तथा भविष्य की आकांक्षाओं के कारण सहजयोगियों को समस्याओं का सामना करना पड़ता है। सहजयोग में आपने सीखा है कि जब भी कोई समस्या हो उसका समाधान कैसे करें। ध्यान करने के अतिरिक्त भी सी विधियाँ हैं। आप इन्हें भलि-भाँति जानते हैं। आपको चक्रों तथा कुण्डलिनी की स्थिति का ज्ञान होना आवश्यक है। किसी चक्र के दोष के कारण यदि कुण्डलिनी रुक गयी है तो हमें हतोत्साहित नहीं होना चाहिए। यदि आपकी कार रास्ते पर बिगड़ जाए तो परेशान होने से क्या लाभ होगा? आपको इसकी रचना (यन्त्र की बनावट) का ज्ञान प्राप्त करना होगा, एक कुशल कारीगर बनना होगा, तब आप इसे कुशलता बहुत 18

 यही ध्यान है.. ध्यान-धारणा पर श्री माताजी निर्मलादेवी का वार्तालाप, नई दिल्ली, १९७६ पूर्वक चला सकेंगे अत: सहजयोग की सभी विधियों का ज्ञान तथा उनमें निपुणता प्राप्त करना आवश्यक है। इस ज्ञान में निपुणता आप केवल इसे दूसरों को देकर, उनसे सीख कर अपने तथा दूसरों को दोष मुक्त करके पा सकते हैं। हतोत्साहित होने की कोई बात नहीं, यह बहुत बुरी बात है। स्वयं से निराश तथा अप्रसन्न होने पर समस्याएं खड़ी हो सकती हैं। आपको अपने पर हँसना चाहिए। अपनी बिगड़ी हुई यंत्र- रचना पर हँसना चाहिए। इस यन्त्र से भी यदि आप स्वयं को पहचानना शुरू कर दें तो भी आप विलीन हो जाते हैं। न आप चक्र रहते हैं न माध्यम (चैनल) आप ही चेतना बन जाते है। आप ही शक्ति हैं और आप ही कुण्डलिनी। अतः आपको किसी भी अव्यवस्थिति की चिन्ता नहीं करनी चाहिए। यदि कुछ अव्यवस्थित है भी तो आप उसे ठीक कर सकते हैं । अभी-अभी बिजली चली गयी थी। बत्ती यदि सोत से ही कट गई है तो यह गम्भीर बात है। परन्तु किसी फ्यूज आदि की खराबी से यह हुआ है तो आप इसे ठीक कर सके हैं। आपके चक्र यदि खराब भी हैं तो भी चिन्ता की कोई आवश्यकता नहीं। सहजयोग में चिन्ता करना तथा स्वयं को हतोत्साहित करना गलत दृष्टिकोण है। दूसरे शब्दों में सहज का अर्थ है 'सुगम- मार्ग' । सहज तथा सहज होने का अर्थ है 'जाहि विधि राखो ताहि विधि रहिए'। इस प्रकार का दृष्टिकोण आपके चित्त को अन्तर्मुखी करता है। बाह्य भाग को भूल जाइये, इसकी हमें कोई चिन्ता नहीं। जैसे आप मुझे रखेंगी, मैं वैसे ही रहँगा', और आप आश्चर्यचकित रह जाएंगे कि सब कुछ अच्छा हो गया है, ठीक हो गया है। कभी-कभी आप पाते हैं कि आप कहीं पहुँचना चाहते थे नहीं पहुंच पाएं, कोई भजन लिखना चाहते थे-नहीं लिख पाए, पाना चाहते थे-आपको नहीं मिली, यह सब आपको परमात्मा की इच्छा समझ कर स्वीकार करना चाहिए। कोई वस्तु ठीक है। परमात्मा की यही इच्छा थी। वे यही चाहते थे ऐसी अवस्था में आपकी एकाकारिता परमात्मा की इच्छा से हो जाती है। पूरे विश्व में परमात्मा की इच्छा का प्रसार करने के लिए ही आप पृथ्वी पर विद्यमान हैं। इस स्थिति में पहुंच कर भी यदि आप अपनी इच्छाएं तथा अपने विषय में विचार बनाने शुरू कर देंगे तो कब आप परमात्मा की इच्छा बन पाएंगे? इस में (अहं) भाव को जाना ही होगा। यही 'ध्यान-धारणा है। यहाँ अब आप 'मैं' नहीं रहे, 'आप' बन गये हैं। 19

 Attractionns I. feel attracted for any man... think that 'that' man has a bhoot, and I also have a bhoot.. you only the bhoots attract bhoots.. it's as simple as that..it's only the bhoots attract (810904); Why to make your body that attractive to every man, spoiling his attention, and your attention... what is the need... the whole idea is wrong (780000) Entities are being exchanged in flirtations, and result in wobbly eyes, and also are the cause of those 'attractions' that we cannot explain or understand (781218); In a very gross way, we see that people are attracted towards others through the body element. Any body attraction can enslave you and cannot give you freedom. It will give you habits for your body enslavement, and will enslave you to your Guru. The other attractions are for food, greed, and lust-materialism at it's worst. Once you start getting used to it, you become enslaved...and not a Guru (860706) Jai Shri Mataji! God .. Now in your freedom you must understand what is glorious for you.. you tell yourself that I have to become something more... and the only thing I have to do is to completely coordinate, cooperate and surrender to His will... so that I become. In that surrendering you do the greatest thing, because by that you do not interfere with His work..you do not obstruct the Will of God. He wants to give you the highest... which you cannot achieve for yourself... it is His gift to you (800517.1) then We should not determine ourselves, what we should do-the Spirit uses us, and if something does not work out, then we should not be upset about it. Everything is arranged and planned if you are to do something, it will work out (960505); When something that you want doesn't work out, then you should accept it as the Will of God-that it is what He desires, that it is the Desire of God; Now one with His Desires. You are here to communicate the desires of God, to the whole world. At this stage, if you start having your own desires and ideas about yourself, then when will you become the Desire of God (730330) åre you Jai Shri Mataji! 20

 In My childhood, I used to think, "My dreams are too atastic. 1000 Will they ever materialize ? Iused to collect small, little stones. , "Will there be people who are not the stones, And Iwould say but who are the hearts? " By God's grace, I've met you. Prbled & Pited No. 8, Chandrugupta Co-op Housing Society, Puud Road, Kothrud, Punr, Maharashtra, India - 411 038 0: 25286537, 25286032 email:saleanitl.co.in website: wwwRnitl.co.in (For querier a senuding articlen contact on abere addres

 You can spend all your life under a tree (in India) The nature haA been so kind and that is the reason people took to mediation and found out all these deeper things within



----------------------

2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Dec.-2009
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Let's feel proud..
To be a part of...
Our glorious nation..
a And hoist the
Tricolor high..
Sending you
warm wishes..
On
Indian Independence Day
"SBefore independence in this country fIndiaf Irememberwe had to fight
the British, and what patriotism people had at that timne. Iremember oncewe
had goneto seeahockey
that time it was not nationalitwas congress flagin thecar Sothesoldierss cam
they said, "Take down this flag Somy driver gotdown hesaid," You cubmy
throat first and then you take douon the flag". We all children joined him and
they wereshoched, went back
Suchenthusiasm, such patriotismcu
these people
match, andmyfather always hadanational flagonit,
atthat timewhenwewerefighting
ame
(HH.Shri Matgji Nirmala Devi, 12lal94)
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 INSIDE
THIS ISSUE
The Power
of Photos - 2
माँ तुलजाभवानी
शक्ति की देवता'- १४
AND MORE
Meaning of Ai Giri Nandini - 4
A Cloud hides the Sun and. . -8
Key to treatments in Sahaja Yoga - 10
Two Cranes & a Tortoise - 12
Kidshakti Page - 17
Attractions - 20
यही ध्यान है - २१
Will of God - 20
Note : The yearly Subscription fees for Year - 2010 will be Rs. 200/-
Kindly send D.D. or Cheque of the said amount to Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd; PUNE.
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 The trouble is My photograph has vibarations....
The camera is much more sensitive than human beings
are. There are so many things the camera has caught, which
human beings cannot catch......
The camera is so sensitive and so honest and so deep.... It
could be a person loves you very much that even a photograph
of hers can love you so much. It could be.
We cannot think of someone who is just love. And the
photograph has that love within itself...
None of the people before Me were photographed.
Christ was never phorographed.
photographed. Even Muhammed was nor photographed.
This is the first time you have developed this wonderful thing
called the camera.
Buddha was not
And there's my photograph. What to do?..
It is rather difficult to accept a photograph because it is
said that you should not bow to any. It was said because
there were no photographs before. Nothing was there. A photograph is
such a truthful thing. And you'll see yourself later on. Then you won't
give up. I know that. You will like it..
A photograph may also have symbolic value. Say we have the
photograph, will you? She's not there. Will you spit on her photograph, any
one of you? You will not. Because, after all, that photo, that thing represents
something. It is a symbol, is'nt it? It may not give vibrations, but definitely it
is a symbol of something.
queen's
It is the coefficient of
the whole thing that works
this out. Even when I am
talking to you, you'll be
amazed. Something will
work out within your-self.
The sound also carries the
vibrations.
14th April 1982
[when taking
photographs] you must
take the right angle and at
the right time.
I find some people
take exactly the wrong
ver
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 angle and at the wrong time.
Yes, when you get the vibrations, that's
the point you must click. And because you
just take it at a wrong time, the photographs
do not come out well for some people.
The vibrations will tell you when to take.
I took a photograph of some people and
their vibrations started flowing.
It's all relatiye.
July 1985
3.
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Ai Giri
Ai Giri Nandini Nandit. Medini
Oh Beloved daughter of the mountains, The one who brings
about great joy to the earth,
Vishw. Vinodini Nandanute
The One who brings joy to the whole universe, I prostrate
Myselfbefore You, who is the form of complete bliss.
Girivar. Vindhya Shirodhini Vasini
Your Holy abode is in the king ofthe mountains, the Vindhyas.
Vishnu Vilasini Jishnu Nute
Shri Vishunu is filled with joy when he meditates on You
having won You remain that complete self, I seek refuge at Your
Lotus Feet.
Bhagavati He Shiti Kanth. Kutumbini
great creator of this Universe, the Great Goddess who is
the wife of Lord Shiva, the blue throated one, and of the family of
Oh
Lord Shiva.
Bhuri Kutumbini Bhuri Krute
You belong to the universal family and for You, the whole
Universe is Your family, You are the one who does the greatest
Of great actions namely giving self-realization.
Jay. Jay. He Mahishasur. Mar. Dini
Victory to You, Oh Great Goddess who killed the terrible
demon, Mahishasura.
RamyakaPar.Dini ShailaSute
You are the One with the beautiful luminous face, the wife of
the one who has the matted locks, i.e. Lord Shiva, Daughter of the
king of mountains, i.e. Shri Parvati
Sur. Var. Varshini Dur.Dhar. Dhar.Shini
On the gods You shower auspicious blessings. Enemies of
Gods are so powerful, yet You are able to keep them away.
Dur. Mukh. Marshini Har.Sharate
You are the destroyer of the evil faced ones,i.e. demons. You
are the giver ofuninterrupted happiness.
Tribhuvan. Poshini Shankar. Toshini
You are the one who looks after and sustains all the three
worlds. The One who is the ultimate joy of Lord Shankara.
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Nandini
Kilbisha Mojini GhoshaRate
You alone can destroy all our sins which You do by giving us self-realization. Yet, for those who are the
enemies of the gods and your children, You always wear a ferocious expression that says"BEWARE".
Danuj. Niroshini KshitiSut. Roshini
You show to the gods that You are pleased with them. Yet to the sons of Diti (different from Aditi=
the Mother of the gods). Who are the demons, you always show your displeasure.
Dur.Mud. Shoshini SindhuSute
Even though there may be demons who have great strength, You can take their evil strength away.
Jay. Jay. He Mahishasur. Mar. Dini
RamyakaPar.Dini ShailaSute
Dhanuranusanga Ranakshanasanga
In the battle field You are so absorbed in the battle that Your arm moves continuously shooting
arrows, Your entire body shakes as if You are dancing and Your bangles make musical sounds.
Parisphut. Danga Natatkatake
(All these denotes that even while She is continuously vanquishing the force of the gods, She does it
with total concentration, with grace and beauty)
Kanak. Pishanga Pushatka Nishanga
They look like flashes of gold, yellow and light shining from Your bow (kanak Gold, Pishanga=
yellow, Nishanga rasad bhata Shrunga-Making sounds that are pleasing ear).
Rasad Bhata Shrunga Hata Batuke
Oh Great Goddess, You destroyed the demon Vatuke, when You Shoot Your arrows in the battle field,
krut. Chaturanga Bala Kshiti Ranga
And Your very presence makes this army of gods filled with enthusiasm, joy and valor, and even
their arrows which are in the quiver on their backs
Ghatada Bahu Ranga Ratada Bhatuke
Shine forth with new colours and seeing all these Lord Bhairava dances in front of You in great
ecstasy, repeating Overand over again" Jai Mataji, Jai Mataji".
Jay. Jay. He Mahishasur. Mar. Dini
RamyakaPar.Dini ShailaSute
Jay. Jay. Japya Jaye JayaShabda
Oh Great Goddess who brings salvation to the world, our complete prostrations before You; constant
inchantation of Your Holy Name is the most supreme prayer that a devotee can take for his own meditation,
Parastuti tatpara Vishwanute
And when he gets absorbed in saying Your Name, need for other sounds and language falls
away. Oh Goddess, who brought salvation to this world, we constantly prostrate ourselves before
You (Tatpar constantly)
5.
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Ai Giri
Jhana Jhana Jhinjita Jhinkruta Nupura
Lord Shiva who, though beyond sounds and language when he hears the sound of Your
wondrous ornaments moving against one another,
JhinJhita Mohita Bhutapate
When You are in battle or in dance and make sounds like Jhana Jhana Jhinjita and
Jhinkruta, he becomes totally filled with Joy and leaving his meditation desires to hear
these heavenly sounds again and again.
Natina Natartha Natina Nata Nayaka
Oh Great Goddess, who took the form of Shri Ardha Narishwara, when You dance in
the company of other great dancers,
Naatita Natya Yugana Rate
You put them all the shame and for Your divine cosmic dance You always have the
greatest musicians and singers to accompany You.
Jay. Jay. He Mahishasur. Mar. Dini
RamyakaPar.Dini ShailaSute
Ayi Sumanas Sumanas Sumanas
(In this line the poet uses the word Sumanas four times and each time he uses it to
denote a different aspect of the Devi) With the beautiful mind You are also like a soft
flower. Though we are seeing you in the form of Shri Durga, your mind is as that of Lord
Shiva and Shri Parvati;
Sumanas Sumanohara kantiyute
Your being is so beautiful, and seeing You in this beautiful form our minds become as
pure as those of the gods, and we worship you even more because You are the one who is
totally effulgent and all kinds of lights emanate from You.
Shrita Rajini Rajini Rajini
(Here the word Rajini, has four different meanings) The night takes Your protection,
Beautiful, You are the One whose arti we do;
Rajini Rajini Kara Vakravrute
You are the One who has no birth, You are eternal, in Your hand You hold a lotus; Your
noble face shines like a full moon.
Sunayana Vibhrama Rabhrama Rabhrama
And we see Your beautiful eyes under the lovely dark eye-brows, that look like a
cluster of bees,
Rabhrama Rabhrama Radhipate
And Your name is also Shri Bhramahri Devi, that when you raise Your eyebrows, the
three lines that are formed on Your forehead are the three worlds themselves and simply by
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Nandini
( Cont. )
the movement of Your eye-brows You create and dissolve the three worlds.
Jay. Jay. He Mahishasur. Mar. Dini
RamyakaPar.Dini ShailaSute
Sahita Maharnava Malla Mattalika
In the battle field when You are faced with great fighters,
Vallika Rallika Mallarate
You do battle with them in the way in which they fight.
Vir. Chita Vallika Pallika Mallika
When You are confronted with such powerful demons who use no weapons, You become totally
absorbed in that battle.
Jhillika Bhillika Vargavrute
And make plans to destroy them after You have tired them and all this brings great joy to the Bhil
tribals who were being harassed by these Mallas.
SitaKrutha Phulli Samulla Sitaruna
Your actions are so beautiful, like the rays of the rising sun, and becomes apparent to us as if
Tallaja Pallava Sallalite
Flowers are suddenly blossoming on creepers and seeing all these beautiful actions Lord Shiva
becomes pleased.
Jay. Jay. He Mahishasur. Mar. Dini
RamyakaPar.Dini ShailaSute
Kamala Dalamala Komala Kanti
Those beautiful pure clusters of lotuses that emit very gently and sweetly beautiful light,
Kala Kalitamala Bhala Late
You have made these flowers blossom by Your own powers and have kept them in Your hair.
Sakala Vilasa Kala Nilaya Krama
Heavenly swans have the power to discriminate, and when they recognize all your great work.
Keli Chalat Kala Haunsa Kule
They are filled with complete joy and move around in an excited manner.
Ali Kula Sankula kuvalaya Mandala
Just as clusters of bees are attracted to groups of fragrant lotuses,
Mauli Milad Bakulali Kule
The stars come in clusters attracted to Your forehead.
Jay. Jay. He Mahishasur. Mar. Dini
RamyakaPar.Dini ShailaSute
"JAI SHRI MATAJI"
7.
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 A Cloud hides the Sun
1975 letter from Shri Mataji to sahaja yogis, written on May 5th, 5 years after the opening of
Sahasrara Chakra at the universal level
Attention, Maya and Walking on the Path...
In 1975, Shri Mataji (the founder of Sahaja Yoga Meditation) celebrated Sahasrara Day in
London with about twenty to twenty-five invited people. On that same day, she sent a letter in
Marathi to the Sahaja Yogis in India. Excerpts are provided below.
"I am explaining, in this letter," She wrote, "what is Unreal. It should be read out to all and
assimilated by all."
Your name, village, country, horoscope, forecasts, many such things get attached to you or
others attach them to you.
Once the Brahmarandhra (the top of the head -fontanel bone area, the core of Sahasrara chakra)
is closed, many types of illusory ideas become part of your mind...
Only that attention which progresses, renouncing all that is unreal, breaks all known and
unknown bindings becomes verily the Self.
Atma (the Spirit) is never disturbed or destroyed. Only human attention, in pursuit of desires,
leaves its inner path.
This is Maya (the Illusion). She has been intentionally created. Without her, the Attention
would not have developed.
You should not be afraid of Maya and should recognize her so that Shewill illuminate your path.
A Cloud hides the Sun and also makes it seen.
In the same way, once the Maya is identified, she moves aside and the Sun is seen. The Sun is
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 and Also Makes it
always there, but what is the purpose of the Cloud? Because of the Cloud,
have an urge to see the Sun, which shines for a moment and
again
you
hides somewhere. It gives strength and courage to your sight to see the sun.
Man has been created with such great efforts. Only one step on his feet
and all is successful. But still, it is not becoming possible. Hence, I have
come as your Mother....
Attention should always be kept going deeper and deeper within.
Forget the outside as much as possible. Have confidence that everything
about it is taken care of. There are many instances to prove it. Then, in
whatever you do, your attention remains in oneness with the Self. All
bindings of sin and merit are snapped. Distinctions like
worldly and nonwordly vanish because that wicked darkness, which
has created all the discriminations, ends. Everything becomes auspicious
in the light of true knowledge, whether it is the destruction done by Shri
Krishna or the cross of Shri Jesus.
All this will not be understood by explaining. Just showing the path
will not help.
The path will be known only after walking on it....
Many Blessings and Infinite Love to you all.
Ever Yours,
Your Mother, Nirmala
Ref : Divine Cool Breeze Magazine. Volume 14, Number 4. July-August 2001. page 32
EGO
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 to treatments in Sahaja Yoga
Key
Take vibrated white sugar.
*Take biscuit between hotand cold.
HEAD
* Apply Coconut or Olive Oil am
& pm.
Take out anger by getting a
pillow and hitting it hard.
* Ice on liver.
*Improve attention by
meditation & listening to talks.
*
*Use sauces with food.
Radha Krishna or Vitthala
Sometimes can use almond oil, for
nervous types...oriffeel exhausted.
Avoid sitting in Sun...but if
head becomes hot, not to take
water till eaten something sweet.
mantras.
Protect the throat from cold
conditions.
* Ifwe speak, speak of Sahaja.
NERVES
* Cover in winter, so brain does
not freeze.
Look at green grass orthe ground.
Apply Almond oil to head.
STOMACH
Vibrated water, and for L side,
vibrated salt..and for R side,
vibrated sugar.
Vibrated lime under pillow.
Oil head weekly, then wash the
*
Put L hand on center stomach
and R hand to photo.
head
Maharashtrian clay to remove
heat.
Purify your eyes.
For Vishuddhi, tilt head to R
with attention on Sahastrara.
* Eat vibrated food, avoid hotel
food.
HAIR
Raise Kundalini, and apply
Little vibrated coconut oil
applied to hair at night and in *Avoid fungus type foods.
morning.
* Avoid oils with fragrances /
essences which may lead to
greying of hair.
* Not to use butter or ghee on
head or hair.
bandhan.
* Eat butter..gives fat cells for
brain.
Eat cooling foods in summer.
Rub or massage the head or
skull with oil.
ASCENT
* Yoga, Union, Meditation,
Surrender, Joy, Recognition,
Dedication, Bliss, Bhakti.
ТЕЕТН
Brush teeth quite a lot.
Oil the hair before a head bath.
Just sit, and listen to Shri Mataji
orto Her talks..and imbibe.
Get into collectivity
collective.
Rub Olive Oil and fine salt on
Comb hair properly so that is
not an forehead...make it nice.
gums before sleeping.
In India, use twig of Neem as
toothbrush.
be
Can comb the hair (or dress) in a
different way, to fool the
spirits... beard also.
*Shri Mataji Prasanna.
Be large hearted.
NECK
Radha Krishna or Vitthala TONGUE
GENERAL
Raise Kundalini and put
*
mantras.
Clean the tongue in the
mornings.
Reduce what you eat by half...
not to think about food too much.
* Not to move neck too much..
or hands too much... or to shrug
shoulders whilst talking, so as not
to spoil Vishuddhi.
Protect from cold conditions.
bandhan.
* Use hands, not brains.
*
.
•Be decent and
decorous.
THROAT
Wash hands and use water as
much as you can.
* Gargle with salt water daily.
LIVER
* Footsoak.
Ghee or butter on hot drinks.
Chandrama mantra.
10
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 to the Physical Body
with reference
* Shoebeat.
Can take piece of garlic before
sleeping.
Carry & use photo.
Sit on ground.
Meditate.
advantage of others.
Not show off powers.
Avoid over thinking.
hands with candle.
Keep eyes focused on ground.
* Have awe for God.
EARS
Warm Olive Oil with piece of
garlic, and put drop of this oil in
NOSE
* Introspection.
Lead a clean life.
With dropper, put warm
Radha Krishna or Vitthala vibrated butter or ghee or oil into
ears.
Take correct mantra
nose... one drop each side,
mantras.
Allah ho Akbar with index morning and evening.
fingers in the ears.
and say with respect.
Use neti with inhalant for 3-4
days before sleeping.
Radha Krishna or Vitthala
BODY
* Olive Oil massage on backbone.
Oil hands and body before bath.
mantras.
SKIN
Discipline or train the body.
Can apply ghee/butter to body, *Use cotton fabrics for children.
ifoveractive....not otherwise.
Neem boiled in water and used
as bath for skin troubles.
Wear vest to avoid colds.
Use Indian clay on skin....is
good for soothing sunburn.
Rub ghee or butter on fingers
and hands, if dried up.
* To get vibrations in hand, ask
"Mother, are you the Holy Ghost?
If hands feel hot, just 'throw it
HANDS
Put L (or minus) hand on a hot
liver and R (or plus) hand outside,
to suck heat with the L hand and
give it out with the R hand.
Work with hands, not brains.
FOREHEAD
* Keep free of hair.
Give up wrong ideas and gurus.
* Shoebeat.
* If chakra catching, put hand
there... do not feel condemned
about it.
away. Rub hands and throw it away.
*IfL hand is hot or shaking, put
Rhand on heart.
* Accept Sahaja Yoga is the only
* If R hand is hot, put L hand on
Receive vibrations with L hand.
give with R hand.
* Wash hands... use as much water
as you can, to get vibrations alright.
Wash hands after toilet.. and
before food.
way.
land,
liver and R hand to photo.
IFR hand is shaking, put L hand
on stomach, R hand to photo.
Surrender to Real Guru.
*
Do things for God.
If feel nervous, put L hand on
centre of stomach and R hand to
photo.
* Namaste is better than shaking
EYES
* Eat butter/ghee..which
supplies fat for brain.
Apply Netranjan at night.
* Vibrated water helps.
Use photo of Shri Mataji's
Use water not paper after toilet.
* Before bath rub oil on hands
and body.
hands.... is healthier.
From :- Sabajvidya -
28th Aug 2002
Use clay to clean hands, in India.
*Not harm others or take
11)
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Two
o Cranes
Once, two cranes and a tortoise lived as good friends in a
lake. The cranes would share their daily adventures with the
tortoise. The tortoise who had never seen anything beyond
the lake would never tire of talking about ore thing or the
other to the cranes.
One year, the summer
was unusually hot. The
lake began to dry up and
there was no food to eat.
The cranes decided to leave their present home and move
to the newfound lake.
The cranes searched for and wide and found another lake
that was full even in the scorching heat.
12
بامی
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Sa Tortoise
They asked the tortoise to clamp its mouth tightly around
a strong branch and the cranes lifted the branch with
their strong beaks and started their flight.
The tortoise had never seen
these sights before and was
so touched by the kindness
of the cranes.
It forgot all about the advice of
the cranes and opened its mouth
to thank its friends. As son as
it opened its mouth, it lost its
grip over the branch. It fell to
the earth below and died.
"Alas! If only our
friend had been
careful"
Think be
Act
you
The End
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 माँ तुलजाभवानी
ि
म.
हाराष्ट्र के उस्मानाबाद जिले में स्थित तुलजापूर, जो माँ तुलजाभवानी का स्थान है । ये छत्रपति शिवाजी महाराज की
कुलदेवी हैं और महाराष्ट्र व अन्य राज्यों के कई निवासी इसकी कुलदेवी के रूप में पूजा करते हैं।
तुलजाभवानी महाराष्ट्र के प्रमुख साढ़े तीन शक्तिपीठों में से एक है तथा भारत के प्रमुख पचास शक्तिपीठों में से भी एक मानी जाती
है। मान्यता है कि छत्रपति शिवाजी महाराज को खुद देवी माँ ने तलवार प्रदान की थी, जिसे भवानी तलवार कहते हैं।
यह मंदिर महाराष्ट्र के प्राचीन दंडकारण्य वनक्षेत्र में स्थित यमुनांचल पर्वत पर स्थित है । ऐसी जनश्रुति है कि इसमें स्थित
तुलजाभवानी माता की मूर्ति स्वयंभू है। इस मूर्ति की एक और बात यह है कि यह मंदिर में स्थायी रूप से स्थापित न होकर 'चलायमान'
है। साल में तीन बार इस प्रतिमा के साथ प्रभ महादेव, श्री यंत्र तथा खंडरदेव की भी प्रदक्षिणापथ पर परिक्रमा करवाई जाती है।
तुलजाभवानी की स्वयंभू प्रतिमा
शालीग्राम पत्थर से निर्मित यह मूर्ति वस्तुतः स्वयंभू मूर्ति मानी जाती हैं। इस मूर्ति के आठ हाथ हैं, जिनमें से एक हाथ से उन्होंने
दैत्य के बाल पकड़े हैं तथा दूसरे हाथों से वे दैत्य पर त्रिशूल से वार कर रही हैं। ऐसा प्रतीत होता है कि माता महिषासुर राक्षस का वध
कर रही हैं। माता की दाहिनी ओर उनका वाहन सिंह स्थापित है इस प्रतिमा के समीप ऋषि मार्कडेय की प्रतिमा स्थापित है, जो पुराण
पढ़ने की मुद्रा में है। माता के आठों हाथों में चक्र, गदा, त्रिशूल, अंकुश, धनुष व पाश आदि शसत्र सुसज्जित हैं।
14
१
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 'शक्ति
की देवता'
प्रतिमा का इतिहास
इतिहास में इस प्रतिमा का वर्णन मार्कडेय पुराण के दुर्गा सप्तशती' नामक अध्याय में
उल्लेखित है। इस ग्रंथ की रचना स्वयं संत मार्कडेय ने की थी। इस अध्याय में कर्म, भक्ति व ध्यान
के संदर्भ में ज्ञान है। इस प्रतिमा की ऐतिहासिकता का दूसरा स्रोत भगवद् गीता भी है।
तुलजाभवानी की कथा
कृतयुग में करदम नामक एक ब्राह्मण साधु थे, जिनकी अनुभूति नामक अत्यंत सुन्दर व सुशील
पत्नी थी। जब करदम की मृत्यु हुई तब अनुभूति ने सती होने का प्रण किया, पर एक बच्चे की माँ होने
के कारण उन्हें यह विचार त्यागना पड़ा तथा मंदाकिनी नदी के किनारे तपस्या प्रारंभ कर दी। इस
दौरान कूकर नामक राजा अनुभूति को ध्यान मग्न देखकर उनकी सुन्दरता पर आसक्त हो गया तथा
अनुभूति के साथ दुष्कर्म करने का प्रयास किया। इस दौरान अनुभूति ने माता से याचना की और माँ
अवतरित हुईं।
माँ के साथ युद्ध के दौरान कूकर एक महिष रूपी राक्षस में परिवर्तित हो गया और महिषासुर
कहलाया माँ ने महिषासुर का वध किया और यह पर्व 'विजयादशमी' कहलाया इसलिए माँ को
'त्वरितां' नाम से भी जाना जाता है, जिसे मराठी में तुलजा भी कहते हैं।
तुलजाभवानी की पूजा
इस मंदिर की ख्याति मराठा राज्य में फैली और यह देवी भोसले प्रशासकों की कुलदेवी के रूप
में पूजी जाने लगीं। छत्रपति शिवाजी अपने प्रत्येक युद्ध के पहले माता से आशीर्वाद प्राप्त करने के
लिए यहाँ आते थे ।
तुलजाभवानी का मंदिर
इस मंदिर का स्थापत्य मूल रूप से हेमदपंथी शैली से प्रभावित है । इसमें प्रवेश करते ही दो
विशालकाय महाद्वार नजर आते हैं। इनके बाद सबसे पहले कलोल तीर्थ स्थित है, जिसमें १०८
तीर्थों के पवित्र जल का सम्मिश्रण है इसमें उतरने के पश्चात् थोड़ी ही दूरी पर गोमुख तीर्थ स्थित है,
जहाँ जल तीव्र प्रवाह के साथ बहता है। तत्पश्चात् सिद्धिविनायक भगवान का मंदिर स्थापित है।
तत्पश्चात् एक सुसज्जित द्वार में प्रवेश करने के पश्चात् मुख्य कक्ष (गर्भगृह) में माता की
स्वयंभू प्रतिमा स्थापित है। गर्भगृह के पास ही एक चाँदी का पलंग स्थित है, जो माता की निद्रा के
लिए है। इस पलंग के उलटी तरफ शिवलिंग स्थापित है. जिसे दर से देखने पर ऐसा प्रतीत होता है कि
माँ भवानी व शिव शंकर आमने-सामने बैठे हैं।
यहाँ पर स्थित चाँदी के छल्ले वाले स्तंभों के विषय में माना जाता है कि यदि आपके शरीर के
किसी भी भाग में दर्द है, तो सात दिन लगातार इस छल्ले को छूने से वह दर्द समाप्त हो जाता है।
इस मंदिर से जुड़ी एक जनश्रुति यह भी है कि यहाँ पर एक ऐसा चमत्कारिक पत्थर विद्यमान है,
जिसके विषय में यह माना जाता है कि यह आपके सभी प्रश्नों का उत्तर सांकेतिक रूप में 'हाँ' या
15
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 माँ तुलजागवानी....
'ना' में देता है। यदि आपके प्रश्न का उत्तर 'हाँ' है तो यह अपने आप दाहिनी ओर मुड जाता है और अगर 'ना' है तो यह बाईं दिशा में
मुड़ जाता है।
माना जाता है कि छत्रपति शिवाजी किसी भी युद्ध से पहले चिंतामणि नामक इस पत्थर के पास अपने प्रश्नों के समाधान के लिए
आते थे।
कैसे पहुँचे?
तुलजापूर तक आने के लिए सभी प्रकार के यातायात के साधन उपलब्ध हैं। दक्षिण से आने वाले यात्री नालदुर्ग तक आसानी से
सड़क मार्ग द्वारा आ सकते हैं। उत्तरी व पश्चिमी राज्यों से आने वाले तीर्थयात्री सोलापुर के रास्ते तुलजापुर तक आ सकते हैं। जबकि
पूर्वी राज्यों से आने वाले यात्री नागपुर या लातूर के रास्ते यहाँ आ सकते हैं।
रेलमार्ग - तीर्थयात्री सोलापुर तक रेल से आ सकते हैं जो कि तुलजापुर से केवल ४४ कि.मी.की दूरी पर स्थित है।
वायुमार्ग - तुलजापुर तक आने के लिए यहाँ से सबसे करीबी हवाई अड्डा सोलापूर, पुणे हैं, जहाँ से बस या निजी वाहन द्वारा इस
स्थान तक पहुँचा जा सकता है।
में
प्रतिप र्च
বयेववर्धिणवि
लवेवव वि
धवदिताशाहस
नी:शिवस्येषामुद्रा
অट्रायराजना
म
सजता
ि
शा
AEN
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 KIDSHAKTrI
PAGE
S.
Colour Maa Durga's sketch
reastime
17
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-19.txt 
 का
रं
राम
ब
स
हजयोगी से पूछते हैं कि ध्यान करने के लिए क्या करें? आप निर्विचार समाधि में रहिए, बस। उस वक्त कुछ भी मत
कीजिए। आप केवल लक्ष की ओर ही नहीं बढ़ रहे, परम चैतन्य मात्र आपकी देखभाल का भार ही नहीं ले रहा, परन्तु इसके साथ
पहली बार आप प्रकृति में, वातावरण में, तथा आपसे निरन्तर सम्बन्धित लोगों में दैवत्व का प्रसार कर रहे हैं। यही एक कार्य है जो हमें
मुझ
करना है ध्यान की विधि अति सहज है।
इसके अतिरिक्त हम प्रार्थना तथा पूजाएं करते हैं। पूर्ण समर्पण से, हृदय से परम प्राप्ति की याचना के लिए की हुई प्रार्थना भी
स्वीकार होती है। केवल याचना मात्र कीजिए, बाकी सब हो जाएगा।
पिछले संस्कारों तथा भविष्य की आकांक्षाओं के कारण सहजयोगियों को समस्याओं का सामना करना पड़ता है। सहजयोग में
आपने सीखा है कि जब भी कोई समस्या हो उसका समाधान कैसे करें। ध्यान करने के अतिरिक्त भी सी विधियाँ हैं। आप इन्हें
भलि-भाँति जानते हैं। आपको चक्रों तथा कुण्डलिनी की स्थिति का ज्ञान होना आवश्यक है। किसी चक्र के दोष के कारण यदि
कुण्डलिनी रुक गयी है तो हमें हतोत्साहित नहीं होना चाहिए। यदि आपकी कार रास्ते पर बिगड़ जाए तो परेशान होने से क्या लाभ
होगा? आपको इसकी रचना (यन्त्र की बनावट) का ज्ञान प्राप्त करना होगा, एक कुशल कारीगर बनना होगा, तब आप इसे कुशलता
बहुत
18
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 यही ध्यान है..
ध्यान-धारणा पर श्री माताजी निर्मलादेवी का वार्तालाप, नई दिल्ली, १९७६
पूर्वक चला सकेंगे अत: सहजयोग की सभी विधियों का ज्ञान तथा उनमें निपुणता प्राप्त करना
आवश्यक है। इस ज्ञान में निपुणता आप केवल इसे दूसरों को देकर, उनसे सीख कर अपने तथा दूसरों
को दोष मुक्त करके पा सकते हैं।
हतोत्साहित होने की कोई बात नहीं, यह बहुत बुरी बात है। स्वयं से निराश तथा अप्रसन्न होने पर
समस्याएं खड़ी हो सकती हैं। आपको अपने पर हँसना चाहिए। अपनी बिगड़ी हुई यंत्र- रचना पर हँसना
चाहिए। इस यन्त्र से भी यदि आप स्वयं को पहचानना शुरू कर दें तो भी आप विलीन हो जाते हैं। न
आप चक्र रहते हैं न माध्यम (चैनल) आप ही चेतना बन जाते है।
आप ही शक्ति हैं और आप ही कुण्डलिनी। अतः आपको किसी भी अव्यवस्थिति की चिन्ता नहीं
करनी चाहिए। यदि कुछ अव्यवस्थित है भी तो आप उसे ठीक कर सकते हैं ।
अभी-अभी बिजली चली गयी थी। बत्ती यदि सोत से ही कट गई है तो यह गम्भीर बात है। परन्तु
किसी फ्यूज आदि की खराबी से यह हुआ है तो आप इसे ठीक कर सके हैं। आपके चक्र यदि खराब भी
हैं तो भी चिन्ता की कोई आवश्यकता नहीं।
सहजयोग में चिन्ता करना तथा स्वयं को हतोत्साहित करना गलत दृष्टिकोण है। दूसरे शब्दों में सहज का अर्थ है 'सुगम- मार्ग' ।
सहज तथा सहज होने का अर्थ है 'जाहि विधि राखो ताहि विधि रहिए'। इस प्रकार का दृष्टिकोण आपके चित्त को अन्तर्मुखी करता है।
बाह्य भाग को भूल जाइये, इसकी हमें कोई चिन्ता नहीं।
जैसे आप मुझे रखेंगी, मैं वैसे ही रहँगा', और आप आश्चर्यचकित रह जाएंगे कि सब कुछ अच्छा हो गया है, ठीक हो गया है।
कभी-कभी आप पाते हैं कि आप कहीं पहुँचना चाहते थे नहीं पहुंच पाएं, कोई भजन लिखना चाहते थे-नहीं लिख पाए,
पाना चाहते थे-आपको नहीं मिली, यह सब आपको परमात्मा की इच्छा समझ कर स्वीकार करना चाहिए।
कोई वस्तु
ठीक है। परमात्मा की यही इच्छा थी। वे यही चाहते थे ऐसी अवस्था में आपकी एकाकारिता परमात्मा की इच्छा से हो जाती है।
पूरे विश्व में परमात्मा की इच्छा का प्रसार करने के लिए ही आप पृथ्वी पर विद्यमान हैं। इस स्थिति में पहुंच कर भी यदि आप अपनी
इच्छाएं तथा अपने विषय में विचार बनाने शुरू कर देंगे तो कब आप परमात्मा की इच्छा बन पाएंगे?
इस में (अहं) भाव को जाना ही होगा। यही 'ध्यान-धारणा है। यहाँ अब आप 'मैं' नहीं रहे, 'आप' बन गये हैं।
19
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Attractionns
I.
feel attracted for any man... think that 'that' man has a bhoot, and I also have a bhoot..
you
only the bhoots attract bhoots.. it's as simple as that..it's only the bhoots attract (810904); Why to
make your body that attractive to every man, spoiling his attention, and your attention... what is the
need... the whole idea is wrong (780000)
Entities are being exchanged in flirtations, and result in wobbly eyes, and also are the cause of
those 'attractions' that we cannot explain or understand (781218); In a very gross way, we see that
people are attracted towards others through the body element. Any body attraction can enslave you
and cannot give you freedom. It will give you habits for your body enslavement, and will enslave you
to your Guru. The other attractions are for food, greed, and lust-materialism at it's worst. Once you
start getting used to it, you become enslaved...and not a Guru (860706)
Jai Shri Mataji!
God ..
Now in your freedom you must understand what is glorious for you..
you tell yourself that I have to become something more... and the only
thing I have to do is to completely coordinate, cooperate and surrender to His
will... so that I become. In that surrendering you do the greatest thing, because
by that you do not interfere with His work..you do not obstruct the Will of
God. He wants to give you the highest... which you cannot achieve for yourself...
it is His gift to you (800517.1)
then
We should not determine ourselves, what we should do-the Spirit uses us, and
if something does not work out, then we should not be upset about it. Everything
is arranged and planned if you are to do something, it will work out (960505);
When something that you want doesn't work out, then you should accept it as the
Will of God-that it is what He desires, that it is the Desire of God; Now
one with His Desires. You are here to communicate the desires of God, to the
whole world. At this stage, if you start having your own desires and ideas about
yourself, then when will you become the Desire of God (730330)
åre
you
Jai Shri Mataji!
20
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-22.txt 
 In My
childhood, I used to think, "My dreams are too
atastic.
1000
Will they
ever materialize ?
Iused to collect small, little stones.
, "Will there be people who are not the stones,
And Iwould say
but who are the hearts? "
By God's grace,
I've met you.
Prbled & Pited
No. 8, Chandrugupta Co-op Housing Society, Puud Road,
Kothrud, Punr, Maharashtra, India - 411 038
0: 25286537, 25286032 email:saleanitl.co.in
website: wwwRnitl.co.in (For querier a senuding articlen contact on abere addres
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_IV.pdf-page-23.txt 
 You can spend all your life under a tree (in India)
The nature haA been so kind and that is the reason
people took to mediation and found out
all these deeper things within
