The Divine Cool Breeze 2009 issue 3 – volume twenty-two number three

 You make us childlike, sweet and happy. You take care of all the children of the world. Blessing of Kalyan 2 Union with His Power 4 It was Decided 6 No Fear 12 Trust Each Other 16 Sahaja Yoga is a Staircase 18 A Portrait 26 Purity of Snow 28 Questions & Answers 30 THE DIVINE MOTHER WHO LOVES HER DEVOTEES LIKE HER CHILDREN VANDÂRU-JANA-VATSALE Only through Your kind love for Your children are we here now.

 blessing of Kalyan dr the refuge of the gurul translated from Hindi: Today we have gathered here to worship the guru. A guru is considered to be higher than all the Devas and Devis. In reality who is this guru? What is that greatest of powers within him that makes him a guru? This element of the guru (Guru Tattwa) is in fact Shiva. The qualities and powers of Shiva that we possess within should be understood as the powers of a guru because when we are blessed with the powers of the guru, that is the power which manifests and then you become your own guru. But the working of that power is what bestows benevolence (kalyan) upon you. Whoever receives this power should understand that now he is blessed with kalyan. It is very difficult to briefly explain the meaning of this word "kalyan." Kalyan means to have success in every sphere, blos- som in every aspect and be decorated with recognition everywhere. When someone blesses another and wishes, “May kalyan be with you," then what is that thing which should happen? What does this kalyan mean? It is that kalyan which we call Self Realization. There cannot be kalyan without Self Realization. It cannot be under- stood, neither can it be achieved within. All these things together come as benevolent Puja blessings (kalyanmay) to humans and, because of it, one experiences the state of tremen- dous joy within and becomes radiant. To achieve this path of benevolence (kalyan marg), you had to Shivaratri 15 February 2004 whatever was needed to be done by you, you have done it. Whatever labour Delhi put in, you have put in. Whatever faith you needed to have for it, you had it. But now, when you have attained the path of this kalyan and when the given you the mantra with the boons of kalyan to you, then what should happen? The guru has greatest thing that you attain is the power of complete settling (samadhan) within. There is nothing more to be sought. Now you also have become the guru. Now nothing more special is going to come your way, but you will be able to feel the bliss of that samadhan (complete settlement and resolving power). You will be able to recognize that bliss and also be completely dissolved in it. Now, you must observe that the first and foremost thing is the physical self – the physical problems, physical weakness, all these get cleansed by this path of this kalyan. All the physical problems will vanish. Now, if that doesn't happen, then immediately you This talk was played for the must understand that the blessings of this kalyan have yet to work out in you or have not taken place yet. Subsequently, all your emotional weaknesses also must vanish in that Shivaratri Puja in Pune. kalyan. Once you are able to achieve this power, you are blessed by this power of kalyan This is the first time it has which takes care of removing all the emotional weaknesses that you develop within. You Sahaja Yogis at the 2009 become realized. been published in English. Shri Mahadeva also assists you in achieving this. Shri Mahadeva sits at the Sahasrara when Kundalini pierces it. That is why He is called as Mahadeva. He is the Deva of your Devas. In this path of bliss (kalyan marg), one experiences several aspects. The greatest experi- ence one has in it is peace – mental peace, physical peace and, above all, the family peace. There are several problems in a family and also there are several troubles. All those vanish automatically by receiving it, by the blessings of this kalyan. They do not exist at all.

 Many such people are there in the world who, after receiving this power of bliss, have settled down in peace with enlightened attention as their destination. This is called as kalyan, in which a human is able to attain his state of balance. And for attaining that state of balance, one needs the refuge of a guru. As you go into the shelter of your guru, you will be able to attain that state of balance. You will have a feeling that you are completely satisfied and you do not require anything else. This type of balance gives considerable power within us. I call that power to be the power of love. When a person attains this power of love then he experiences a thrill in his entire body, as if some other power has embraced him. With this power he is also able to over- come all the turmoil, imbalances and ups and downs of life and settle in a complete state of balance. It is for this reason that people strive a lot to attain this particular power. And he attains this power from another person, another human being only who appears as God before him, who in turn has also attained it for himself. Shri Mataji speaks in English: This is a subject which you can only explain in the Hindi language, which this gurupad from somebody else. But that somebody else is endowed with the power, As you go into that says you get the of mind, to begin with, and also the power to overcome all kinds the shelter of power peace of earthly problems, mental problems, physical problems. All these problems you can solve through your mental balance and the mental blessings from your guru. When you of your guru, become the guru, you yourself have the power to bless others. With your blessing power, you can create a guru out of many. And once the guru is created and there is a guru who has this power, it is very satisfying.. The satisfaction is so much that you do not want anything. This is the You have seen Shiva. He doesn't have many clothes. He does not decorate Himself. He is able to attain just sitting in a meditative mood all the time. He doesn't want anything. He is so satis- fied with Himself that He doesn't want anything. And that is the power you get Realization, if you have a guru and a guru of that level and calibre. One should not try to become a guru. That is very impractical. If you try to become, you will never be that. It has to come to you automatically, without any effort. So the only way you can get to it is through dhyana. Dhyana is meditation. When meditate, just meditate and meditate. Do not ask for anything. Meditation itself gives you that instrument which can bear this great power of the guru. And then automati- cally you give this power to others. You do not have to work it out. Just in your presence, people can get you will be of Shiva. power after Self that state of balance. any asking, without you of complete satisfaction. And there is salvation – for and this power you for others. So all the problems which are faced in the journey of ascent are finished and you are drenched in the bliss of heavenly peace and joy. That is why it is called as kaivalya. It means only the blessings. See, that means there is no other word to translate it. There is no other way of explaining it. It is a state. It is a stithi. It's a state. In that state, you have to rise and you know that you are in that state. It is a very remarkable thing that, once you reach that state, you do not have to ask for anything. It is all there and you are so satisfied. I can go on talking about this special power, but I think whatever I have said, please meditate on that. And you are all capable of reaching that state, that state of complete peace and joy. May God bless you. I

 To know where you are as far as God is concerned – that is the main thing, isn't it? We are here for that, to be one with God, to be in union with His power, to be His instruments. And how our connections get loose and how we can correct them, we should try to understand that. in union

 with His power

 O long time back, before I incarnated it was They had a big meeting in the heavens, all the thirty-five crores of Gods. The Deities were there present to decide what was to be done: “This is the ultimate that we have to do to human beings. It is to open their Sahasrara, to open their awareness to the spirit, to the real knowledge of the Divine, to remove the darkness of ignorance." And it had to be spontaneous because it has to work the living force of God. Also it had to be very quick.

 decided So all the Gods requested that now I, the Adi Shakti, had to take birth. They all tried their best. They did whatever was possible. The saints were made by them, few. They incarnated and people made religions out of them, which were but very perverted, brought them a bad name. There was no reality in those religions. Those religions were money-oriented or power-oriented. There was no divine force working. Actually it was all anti-divine. Sahasrara Puja How to now turn human beings away from these superficial religions, these per- verted paths of destruction? How to tell them about all these established organizations? 199 8 For ages they have been ruling, making money, making power. It was a tremendous task. It had to be done with great patience and love. It was a very delicate work also because they believed in those religions – innocent people, simple people. To blast them, that “this is all nonsense, they are no religions, they are against the incarnation, against all the prophets, against all the saints, that is why all the real saints had to suffer. It was a powerful work that was to be done and that is why the Adi Shakti had to take birth on this Earth. It had to be before the sixth of May because the sixth of May was the doomsday in So it was done on the fifth of May in the nick of the time. It was all decided that year. beforehand and every Deity's job was allotted to all of them. Very efficient Deities, very obedient, they knew Me very well, completely dedicated and devoted. They knew Me well. Every end of My hair they knew. I didn't have to teach them protocol. very, very Love itself gives you protocol, but love that is divine, it is not selfish love. It is not I love the way child, husband, my country, my clothes. It is the love which is my my divine, which spreads from your heart, from your spirit, like the light of knowledge. What a tremendous task it was. So, as said, at the Sahasrara I had to be Mahamaya. I had to be Mahamaya. I had to be something that people could not recognize Me easily. But Deities? No, this Maha- had to come on this Earth, not the Adi Shakti in Her purest form. It's too much, maya so She was covered with this Mahamaya.

 Saints and yogis Now you see in nineteen years what we have achieved. So many yogis are sitting before Me. The difference between a saint and a yogi is that a saint himself is righteous, he him- self is holy, but he doesn't know much about the Kundalini. But the yogi knows about the Kundalini. The difference between a yogi and a Sahaja Yogi is that a Sahaja Yogi has powers and a Sahaja Yogini has powers to give Realization to others. A yogi can cleanse himself, but he cannot cleanse others, while a Sahaja Yogi can cleanse others and cleanse himself. So this is the superior-most state, which you achieved through your great punyas, I should say. So many of you have been searching for the truth in previous lives and now here Nothing is more you important than are to achieve what you have been searching. All that has happened now, so beautifully. You are not even aware what has happened to you. Automatically, spontaneously you have the powers within your central nervous system in a split of a second. Your attention got your ascent has been fixed now. Of course, even now some people do not have. Even now, I see the attention wobbles. But so many of you have achieved that state ... Shivaham, Shivaham, Shivaham. You have it. What Adi Shankaracharya has described about himself, you can say that about all of you, so many Adi Shankaracharyas sitting before Me. But still, I am a Mahamaya. I just behave like you. I too have a family. I too have children, who can be called as mine. And you are My children too. So when you are matured enough, the first sign is that you get discretion. That is divine discretion. It is love again... Nothing is more important than your ascent higher and higher because it has a very divine the ultimate, the climax where the whole humanity is to be saved great purpose, through your efforts. You have to work it out. And in this situation we see the thousand petals. These are the powers of the Virata within you. And this is where we falter, that the light of this Sahasrara is the Brahmarandra, which is your Heart chakra.... There is a saying in Sanskrit ... “The ones who are of a character of saints, the whole world is their family." Gold is to be tested In the breaking of the Sahasrara, I have never left anything undone. It is a perfect job. Your nerves are not hurt. Your brain is not hurt. Such a powerful Kundalini comes up. How sweetly, beautifully, delicately She pierces through. Only a thread comes out. And how then the connection is established and the relaxation starts coming in on the sympa- thetic, how all the beautiful chakras open and more of these threads are coming up. Now you are also told how to work it out. You know all the technical know-how. What not know is that you are not yet a perfect machine. You have to perfect yourself. Moreover there is a Mahamaya. She does not take you for granted. That's the trouble, you see. She puts you deliberately into temptations. Deliberately She gives you positions... To test you, may marry you to funny people also. This testing has to be done. That is the job of a Mahamaya. She has to test you. Gold has to be tested. The diamond has to be tested. All that is valuable has to be tested. Without that, how can you certify...? All these things are to be understood in the right perspective. They are for our ascent, you do She fix for our benevolence, for our higher state. But for that, you must know we have to our whole will to it. When people climb the Himalayas, what do they do? They take a big nail, nail it at a higher point, then tie up a rope and climb up to that. They don't look down. Then put another nail up there, climb up to that and that is how they climb the Himalayas. dn

 IT WAS DECIDED Now what do we do in Sahaja Yoga? We take a nail from the top, put it downward. First day when you get Realization the experience is tremendous, then one by one coming down, the other way around. But as soon as you get Realization, if you are intelligent enough, then you decide, "How should I up myself?" Decide like this: supposing you are very fond of milk, take it like that. Now We will be that powerful fix should say, "Until I achieve a certain state, I’ll not take people of love, you milk." But that should not be treated as a sacrifice, but as a joyous ascent. Do the people who nail upwards to go to the top of Himalayas, do they feel they are sacrificing something? If you start thinking that, "Oh God, of understanding, I have sacrificed milk," then you are finished. The downward movement starts. But if you like something, then you have to say, “All right, if I like of discretion CC of it, let me like my ascent more than this. Until I have ascended, I will not have." Such determination should be there. And without that, how do you think you can get over the horrible, monstrous mountain of ignorance that and of humility. you have got? Actually, in Realization I have put you on the top of the mountain, but you start slipping down. So you have to keep to that topmost point. I tell about everything. You go and ask any one of the saints or any one of you the incarnations. Did they know so much about the Kundalini? If they great had, they would have written about it. They have never written anything about the Kundalini. If they have, it is very little. To such an extent that it acts on your fingertips, that now we have brought science close to reality - the truth, the divine science, all is explained. It has become completely integrated now with us. Sahaja Yoga is the most scientific thing that you could think – exact. The biggest computer, that you are. But the computer has to be workable. Sahaj culture: rising in love You have to now understand your responsibility. We have to emancipate the human beings. We don't want to do anything that is a little out of the way.... The Deities, they are working twenty-four hours, all the months and all the around, continuously because they have a continuous supply of years which you can also have.... energy, We are Sahaja Yogis and we have our Sahaj culture. We live with our culture, proud of it, and this is our religion. We have our pure religion on which we thrive. We are not going to change ourselves. We are going to change the whole world. We have a culture of our own and we are going to behave in that manner which is going to change the whole world. This is our responsibility. You are chosen for this work. You are the real chosen ones. You are the real pure ones.... Be aware of it, of your responsibility. Be aware of your powers. The greatest power that you have is of divine love, not the stupid love that blinds you and that way we walk, the way we live, the way we behave, everything has to be Sahaj. And it is such a real, living culture of beautiful people in the world.... We will be that powerful people of love, of understanding, of discretion and of humility. I would like to see those days in My lifetime. I hope you will give Me full assistance. "fall in love," but you rise in love. The way we talk, the you 9.

 FOR A

 IT WAS DECIDED A razor's edge You have to know there is only one point that was fixed in this meeting The Deities of the Devas and that I cannot overcome. They said, "We will tolerate any nonsense because they are coming from ignorance, but anybody who doesn't love You, anybody who insults You, anybody who takes advantage of You, anybody who exploits You, anybody who shows lack are around, of protocol, anybody who does not recognize You, we will hit them hard. And that permission You must give us, otherwise we are not for sitting now here, this world." They formed a union against Me and I had to give in. I am very careful. I tell you, don't touch Me. Be careful. Some people just try to put My sari right. You are not to do. You don't have to do all of them that. Don't play with My money. Don't take My hospitality. Be careful. I tell you as much as I can and this is what it is. One side is Mahamaya, another side is Deities and the poor Sahaja Yogis are in between. I sym- pathize with think, of course, but otherwise it is wonderful... This is Mahamaya and the Deities are around sitting now here, all of them peering into you, all of them judging you, having a big meeting there – "Who is who? Where is the attention of this gentleman? Where is he looking? What is he doing?" – all sitting here. But at the same time, they have flowers, divine flowers, divine blessings and all the angels are just going around. I can see them. Your cameras can catch them. You got photographs which will show you all of them sitting. And it is already predicted that the whole world will come down at the Lotus Feet of your Mother and that you will decide the future of this world. It is written already fourteen thousand years back and there is another one who is prophesizing the same. So you have to be aware. Where is your I know, but you better be careful. It is a razor's edge I Peering into you, all of them judging you. have attention? What are we worried about? Where are we spending our time? Leave your children to Me. Leave your families to Me. You can only keep your purse, but the rest of it, you can leave all your headaches to Me. But don't play tricks with Me. Mahamaya knows all in and out. If I want to know, I can know each and everything about I don't want to know. Under these circumstances, we are supported, looked after, managed, taken to reality so easily, so much with care.... You are assisted. Here these prime ministers have only five, six body- guards. You have millions and millions, each one of Nobody can touch you except for you. You can harm yourself – that's all. Nobody can harm.... For us, our ascent is the only concern, is the only ideal, nothing else - and it will work out. your tricks, everything, you. with you. you, All the rest will be taken care of. We have all the mechanics to do that, but first give it to the mechanics to work out. All will work in a reflex action. "I have this, I have that." Just Clear out your chakras. Don't say, clear out. "How dare I have all these problems...?" Clear out, morning, evening – clear out. I am sure it will work out... May God bless you. 11

 THERE SH OULD BE NO FEAR. THERE WILL BE NO PROBLEM. Material problems are not difficult to solve. Somebody was taking My photograph, which was in a silver frame, and he was rather worried because the customs may stop him from taking it. Of course, the photograph they can't stop, but maybe the silver frame. And this gentleman told Me that he was taking it with him with a silver frame and he thought people would object. But as soon as they saw the photograph, they said namaskar to the photograph and forgot about the frame.

 13

 I always work through you if you are one with Me. Even when I am speaking, you are speaking. And when you are speaking, I am speaking. You know that. But with all this, that awe is very important. And that gives you the love that thinks – complete integration of your heart and your brain. The love that thinks is thoughtful – love that thinks. And then the third integration is the love that acts. But first this integration must be brought in – the love that thinks, which understands, which feels and then the love that acts. But the basic is the love. It starts from the heart. It is the love. 14

 12

 rust each other, love each other and give more trust and more love and understand- ing.... You will know that you are much better now. Keep it up. Put yourself into bandhan. Girdle up yourself and "onward Christian soldiers." This is what it is. We have to be in that way. We are the people who are loving. We love. We distribute love. We emit love and we have to be that picture and that image that, when people see, they will say, "Oh, these are the right type CC of people..." We have to promise our Mother that "Mother, this year we really promise You, we will work very hard. We will be very compassionate with kindnes.." Just try to see what is the person saying. Even if he is stupid, no use laughing at him. Just see what he's saying, what is his attitude. All this will bring forth a very, very beautiful image of all My children, whom I love very much. I will love and love and love. Whatever may happen, I will be your own. But still, in My love I request you that I cannot feel happy unless and until I make you like Myself. 16

 You are climbing ahead into the new path of righteousness, of goodness, of compassion and love. F1 Stand on the right path, say that "This is it and I am going to do this. If you know that, know that you are sattwikas. Then you are in the centre.

 18

 Sahaja Yoga is a staircase You are here to worship your guru in the realm of the heart of the universe. If we can do that in our domain of the heart, we do not have to do anything else... I feel I have to tell you about Sahaja Yoga and its value, which is related to other yogas, which was accepted in the olden days all over the world. They called it as the Yoga, not Sahaja Yoga. Yoga – it started with various types of practices of Ashtanga Yogas – eightfold yogas – with a guru. And one had to go through lots of hardships. Nobody who was married was allowed into that Ashtanga Yoga and they had to give up their families, give up their relation- ships. They had to become absolutely without any attachments to go to a Guru Puja 1987 Shudy Camps UK guru. All their as is done in modern times, but given away. And this was called as Yoga. Another style was called as sankhya. Sankhya is where all your life you have to gather things with detachment and then to distribute them completely and take to a guru, in a way completely surrendered, and then get Realization. Sankhya was the left-sided behavior and Yoga was the right-sided. Where the Gayatri mantra was used was the sankhya. Because they were left-sided, they used to use the Gayatri mantra. They went so much to the left side to gather things, to gather possessions, to gather properties, to gather all kinds of friends and relations and societies – that they were afraid that they may be all their possessions were given up, not to the guru, property, that is, completely lost into all those things. They would go to the mantra of Gayatri, which teaches you the essences of all our chakras, the centres. I have told about this before also – “bhu bhurv swaha." Bhu stands for the essence or the bija of the Muladhara, bhuv for the universe that is cre- ated – that is the Swadisthana's bija. Swaha is the bija of the Nabhi. Manah swaha: Nabhi is the essence of the Heart chakra. Then janah is the people, collectivity. It is manah: Heart bhuv: Muladhara bhuv: Swadisthan the essence or the bija of the Vishuddhi chakra. Then tapah is the one where you go into tapasya, into renunciation, into hardships. It is the essence of the janah: Vishuddhi Agnya chakra. And then the satya is the truth. It is the essence of the Sahasrara tapah: Agnya - not the truth that we think of as truth, but the truth that is expressed in our satya: Sahasrara central nervous system. %24

 Two sides, two paths This is discovered at the seventh stage of the Sahasrara. So the people who did sankhya were not so much respected as spiritual people because they thought these were all involved into worldly things and worldly possessions and worldly happen- ings. So they were regarded as something secondary. Or those who were yogis of the gurus were regarded higher because they had already given up everything and they had gone to a guru, giving up all the things that they had. But here, these had a problem within themselves because they found that those who came to them up everything, no doubt, but still there were lurking attachments. In their own ashrams, they found these people had their own attachments to things. Though outwardly they had given up, but inside they had not given up. they were still sticking onto these ideas that "Oh, it's all right. But still we can have gurus gave So CC What is it little things like that. It doesn't matter." Like that, there were little compromises going, as we have here – nunneries and all that. So both, in a way, were artificial. The one side is the sankhyas. They were trying to ascend with all the luggage they were carrying. And another was trying to descend with all the ambitions of ascent. So it was a very funny thing in every aspect, in both these styles of yoga. As you have to achieve? you can see that now, if you go to America will find, “Oh God, what is this America? It's not democracy, it's demonocracy." But if you go from that to the realm of another country like Russia, you complete pressures and fears." But as soon as a Russian comes out of that country, he can become worse than an American. So what is this? One theory works here, another theory works there. So which is the theory that is all right? You find the same about religion. A religion which believes in many Gods, like the Hindus, they are also believing now into the bhoots. And they are also following the path of possessions. If you go to a temple, every temple has got a nice arrange- ment for you to get possessed. Or even a church or a mosque where God has to reside, you find suddenly you get attacked and you come out absolutely puzzled about yourself, ending up into lunatic asylums. So what sort of worshipping places are these, where you go to find God and you get the horrible satanic forces acting on you? That is why, in the modern times, people have become so very confused. We do not find truth in anything – in any ideologies, any philosophies, anything that started. Confucius started human- ism. Socrates started another thing. Mohammed-sahib started another thing. Like Mohammed-sahib said, let us not worship God as an idol. Let us worship Him in the Nirakara, in the formless God. But you see the formless, how they are killing each other now? I mean, after seeing the Muslim countries, you can't believe there could be any formless or formful God existing anywhere. All must have run away, the way they are fighting. Then CC you find, "What is this? You are working here under you see the Christian countries. Wherever they have gone, they have tried to dominate other people who were not Christians, just as if they had a right to do it because they were Christians, the disciples of Christ who said, "Forgive them for they do not know what they are doing." And I have to say the same for all the Christians, "Forgive them for they do not know what they are doing." And when you are shocked at all these things. One must sit down and think what is to be done, what is the problem. So it is neither sankhya nor Yoga. Then what is it you have to achieve? That is Sahaja Yoga. 20

 A STAIRCASE become one Two yogas Sahaja Yoga is a system in which first you are not given a theory, but the light in your hand to see for yourself in which both things look the same. For example, now you have this beautiful house made for your Mother, while your Mother doesn't know how to got get attached to even a pin. It's a funny situation. Everybody has to remind Me, “Mother, it is Your house." "Oh, I see." CC And I have to be reminded I must thank you all, especially the English, especially the Nothing leaders of the English Sahaja Yogis, for making a full effort to get this house. But then, I think, "Why should I thank? It's not mine. It's theirs." And that is what it is. belongs to us, So a new type of confusion starts and that is what I felt, that this confusion is sweet and beautiful. It is a fact that nothing belongs to us, but everything belongs to us. When I think about how beautifully you have done this place, it belongs to Me all right. This house belongs to Me, England belongs to Me and, above all, the whole world belongs to us. belongs to Me. That is how we see sankhya and Yoga become one in Sahaja Yoga. And it is said that you see sankhya and Yoga as one, then only it is Sapashyati. That is the one who sees. That is the one who is the witness. So for normal people, it could be that "How is it your Mother is supposed to be a guru very but everything when and She wears all the ornaments?" But what to do? She is also a mother and She is also a Goddess – another confusion. How to make these two things be? You see a guru has to be a very angry person, wearing only a single dress either upwards or downwards – I don't know how – with a big thick rod in the hand, never smiling... The gurus have to be very long-faced, developing big, big beards – and no ladies allowed. In such a situation, where the women are not to be seen at all, I mean I shouldn't even see My face. It is like that. There is a big discussion ... whether a woman should be allowed to do the spiritual practices or not – imagine, not only among Christians, you will be surprised, even in Indian scriptures – whether a woman is allowed or not to do spiritual practices. Now when your Mother is a woman and She is your guru, what will you do? This is another confusion because it is wrong. The whole thing is a falsehood based on no basis at all. You may try anything to say that women are not meant for spiritual life. Try any argument, fails.... To put all these upside-down stories right, your Mother had to come on this Earth as a guru. I got to this point out of one little confusion I had about Myself. The other day, somebody was after My life, that I should buy a bracelet. I said, "I have it no money any more. I don't want to buy.' "All right, we will give it in puja." I said, “But now there is only Guru Puja. They said, "All right, we will give it in Guru Puja." I said, "To buy a bracelet for Guru Puja is something funny.." After all, in a Guru Puja you don't give a bracelet to your guru, do you? You can give a big rod or you might give him a sandalwood khada ... chappals or you may give him a shawl. But here it is. I have asked. All right, give it in Guru Puja. What was the reason? And I became aware of My own confusion and I thought of it. I said, “This is what it is, that it has to happen this way that, on a Guru Puja, you have to give a bracelet to your guru." Let us change it over. The whole thing has to be brought up this way that everything faces reality. All these false ideas have to be given up. Like if you have a carpet upside-down, the whole design is upside-down, but if you put the carpet right, everything falls in line. And that is why you needed a mother to give you Realization and a guru as a mother to teach that. For ascent to God, nobody can be prohibited. CC you

 A STAIRCASE Spontaneity That is how Sahaja Yoga today is working out in all directions, if you find, to put all upside-down things into the right direction, to expose it to reality, to bring all real values, to abolish all rotten value all political, economic systems, systems, all spiritual theologies, all psychological and all such nonsensical ideas into their proper direction. How in one incarnation it has worked out, you can imagine, how in one incarnation all these ideas have been put right.... Today, through Sahaja Yoga, we have been able to prove that sankhya and Yoga are the same. Whether you collect things, whether you have possessions or whether you give away, makes no difference to a person who is detached from within. If you collect them for others, even better. But if you collect for yourself and then give away, that is even much better. Because first you col- you think, "Oh, it's good for me, I will use this one for down, it is not myself, will be a good idea." So the self is there, but then, that you give away. If they settle lect for yourself, then CC כ That means your detachment is complete. Or the third personality could be liking that ... which just goes on collecting and just goes on giving. Without Sahaja. It is not thinking, it collects and, without thinking, it gives because thinking is not spontaneous. My job. That is one thing I have given up, is to think. I don't want to think. That's your work, not Me. And without thinking, how many things we have achieved through Sahaja Yoga. Yoga and sankhya both are products of think- ing, not products of spontaneit... On this point, I have to say a few words. It is important. A few points I have to say about the spontaneity part, which is quite interesting, the way people think spontaneity works. It is mostly the ego part spontaneous, with so many people. Especially the very old Sahaja Yogis think they are authorities on spontaneity. Like we had a land in Vaitarna (India), so one of the older ones went there and he said, "This land is vibrating and this is not vibrating." So everybody accepted, "All right, all right, all right." Then they said, "In this part of the land nobody should eat their food.' Now, from where does this knowledge come? Eating food is not a sin, is it? As if it is a sin that you are eating food in there. Then religiously they follow a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, z and again a, b, c, d of Sahaja Yoga to such an extent that I start thinking now they have become another fanatic Sahaja Yogi. Fanaticism is against Sahaja Yoga – absolutely. Now they will ask, “How many times we should say this mantra?" Then this is which says "Zero times." I say, I "A "How many drops we should put, the ghee in our nose?" Then I say, full jug." Then, "Oh, I should not have gone from the left side, I should have gone from the right side." Then, I would say, “You just jump up. CC You have to be like children, but the ideas are so settled down in Sahaja Yoga. Now it is so many years, of course, but they should not settle down. If they settle down, it is not Sahaja. It is not spontaneous. "If you do this way, it's wrong" – nothing of the kind. Nothing is you people. If you do anything wrong, your vibrations will be lost, then it is wrong. That way, wrong for finished. What is there to be so cautious about? Like somebody said, "I don't want to look at the cigarette." I said, “Why?" 22

 "Looking at it also is sinful." I said, “Looking at it, what happens?" “Then I feel like smoking." Sahaja Yoga is So I said, “Better smoke once and for all." not for sticking my hand." Or, “I cannot hold a wine bottle in "Why?" "No, holding the wine bottle is sinful." onto something. I mean, you can swim in the wine. So this kind of understanding should be there. Though I have always said that if I say one thing, you will clinch onto it. So I always say the other side of it, that don't stick on to something. Sahaja Yoga is not for sticking onto some- thing. Like somebody who had learnt certain lessons about Sahaja Yoga in the beginning of it, certain mantras they had learned and still they are sticking on to the same step. No, no, no –- you have to go ahead. This is just a staircase. stuck at a point. We have had so many such cases here. People get Don't get really outworn, as they say. They will go on telling you so many nonsensical ideas – "You see, if you do like this, then this happens." First of all, you don't give ideas to others. That is one thing. If you decide that we don't give ideas about what is wrong with another person, half of your job is done because you don't have to do any job, as I don't do.

 Understanding Sahaja Yoga We have to be not only humble, but very tact- ful and sweet to new people, if you want any more to come in. But if you have decided not to have any more because you will have to put another marquee, then I have nothing to say. But if you want others to come in, then it is important that you talk to them in a very sweet and beautiful language, the way they under- stand. Rudeness, arrogance, showing off is of no use. One should understand Sahaja Yoga is where you are in complete enjoyment about it. You are just lost into that enjoyment. Where is the time to remember how many times to give a bandhan to yourself? What is the need to give a bandhan to yourself? It is all a joke now you. It should be. A little child sucks the milk from the bottle because it has no teeth, for but what about you people having that kind of a thing? It's very childish and shows no growth at all. Sahaja Yoga must grow within. You should not be any more regarded as immature Sahaja Yogis. I would say a person who is a matured Sahaja Yogi is the one who can combine so many things together with all beautiful lines, thin lines, thin maryadas maintained.... This is the growth within you, which will show. So we have to have our growth and, for growth, let us be silent within. Let us not react to others.... Understanding Sahaja Yoga is very simple, extremely simple when you understand one thing, that intact. "Now, how to get to innocence?" people will say. How to get to innocence? It's a vicious circle how to get to innocence. It is a very vicious circle. We have to get to innocence through what? – your ego or superego? How you get to innocence...? How to manage is the problem? Very simple it is. In the beginning I said, “Let your guru reside in your heart.... Let Mother manage. me." Keep it at that. Your right side will clear. Your left side will clear when you say, "Nobody have to have your innocence you will You have to go ahead. This is just a stairwcase. “Mother is managing CC “Nobody - can manage me, but Mother can manage me" two things together. Things will work out. Don't get stuck at a point.

 A STAIRCASE The word of the guru Thank God you have somebody like Me, who is sitting here, who can say so. Think of those who never had anyone to tell them or to be in their presence to say that I can manage this or you can manage that, that now you can balance. Allow your Kundalini to grow. Everything works out.... When I tell you something, please do it. Please do it because I know quite a lot because I am a guru, your guru, because I am the Guru of all the gurus. And those who are a real guru know that "My Mother knows everything. She is knowledge Herself. If says something, it means something." And even I may test you sometimes. It doesn't matter. That is how you become the guru.... When you become absolutely one with the desires of your guru, you achieve the position of a guru... It is important that we should do one thing seriously. It is to take your Mother very seriously when it comes to some request.... It should be always accepted as the law of the Divine because the guru is the giver of the law of the Divine, not the worldly laws. The where vou are law of the Divine he gives you. The law of the Divine you understand, then you have to surrender to that law of the Divine and that is how you will become masters of that law.... in complete She Sahaja Yoga is God is your guru. Let Him guide you. "Thy will be done. Let us not guide ourselves." And also sometimes they try to guide the guru as well. Then the guru plays tricks and then you fall into the trap of tricks and then you find it's too much. It is better to listen to what the guru is telling you and better to do it. Whatever the guru says is all right. Gurus can ask you anything. I mean I am quite a nice guru.... Whatever has to happen, happens. In Sahaja Yoga, to think that one hundred percent will be rich, healthy, wealthy and on top of the world is a nonsense. If we become very wealthy, then there will be a recession because others willl be very poor. If we become very healthy, then nobody will come near us. If we all look like wrestlers, who will come near us? If we become very wise, then people will be frightened of such wise people. They cannot understand anything. It will go over their heads. So let us be in the centre. We should be wealthy, but not too much. We should be healthy, but not too much. We should be wise, but not too much. So far, so good – that is how we should move. enjoyment. So we keep to our maryadas and we become beautiful Sahaja Yogis, who will be con- genial to others, who will be able to get others to us, who will be able to project an image of magnetic personalities. And this is what we have to do. If we try to show off in any way – like I have seen people try to show off unnecessar- ily – there is no need. Just be in the background. If you are very much in the background, just be in the foreground. Try to balance yourself. Try to watch yourself and guide yourself and tell yourself, "Become your own guru. Judge yourself, how far you are in the centre, how far you are growing, how much growth have you achieved. Are you still attached to small things here and there? Are still bothered about small things...? you It is to be seen if you have to be gurus. If you can't see that, how can others see that? This is to be realized – not to be put in the mind, but to be realized in the heart. In the realm of your heart you have to realize it. You have to understand it in the realm of your heart. It is nice that we are in England, the heart of the universe, that we are talking about opening our hearts. If you have to put Me there, it is the ocean of love and to contain this ocean of love, you have to have a very, very large heart - bigger than your countries, bigger than this world, bigger than this universe. May God bless you. bigger than your personalities, 25

 rehi DISCHI tche DISCHI These pictures were taken during the time of Diwali Puja in Italy, in Montecatini near Florence, in October 1989. Shri Mataji, Sir CP and Debu Chaudhury, along with a few Sahaja Yogis, went to visit nearby Florence and ended up posing as models for street artists. While all the artists were of great talent, none of them managed to capture any one of the three very special models. The artists mentioned several times that they didn't understand why they were unable to capture the people in front of them accurately. Shri Mataji ended up correcting some of the sketches, much to the delight of the many yogis who had joined the group over the several hours Shri Mataji had spent sitting outside the main cathedral of Florence. Painting, far right, by Konstantin Sterkhov 26

 ARCHES NARSYAK

 The purity of the snow is a hundred percent. And that covers the Mother Earth. It gives the formation of innocence.

 White is the pure colour of silk. It is complete detachment. In white all the colours are mixed. Then only it becomes white. In such a balance and unity it is. It should be that you become white – and whiter than snoW.

 uestions nSwers Shri Mataji, would you say a few words about the forthcoming golden age? 8 July 1999 Aquarius, according to our astrology, is the Kundalini. The Kundalini is Aquarius London according to the Indian science of astrology... They say that this Age of Aquarius very important because this will change the lives of people. And that is what they have already described about this, that now there was Kali Yuga. That means the worst possible times. The whole Kali Yuga means the absolutely the worse and worst possible time for our destruction. That was over. Then comes Kruta Yuga – I mean overlapping. Now in Kruta Yuga, this All- Pervading Power – they call it Paramchaitanya – becomes active. It starts helping people to come along. That also has been going on for some days. After this is Satya Yuga. It is the age of truth, but it is a last judgement. If take is to truth, all right, well and good. But if you don't take to truth, you are you judged. It is like this.... It is a new mission where you have to do something. You are the ones who are going to completely revolutionize the whole world. You can do it. Absolutely everybody is capable of doing that. Which God is in the Kundalini? In the triangle? Kundalini itself. The Kundalini is your own Mother, individual Mother and She has tape-recorded all because She wants to give you your second birth, but She is your individual mother. You don't share Her with anybody else. Yours is different. Somebody else's is differ- ent because the tape-recording is different. And She knows everything about So when She rises, She goes very slowly without harming you, without troubling you and pierces through. your your aspirations, everything. And She rises your past and you. She is the reflection of the Adi Shakti who is called as the Holy Ghost We say in the Bible, but She rises without any difficulty. Hardly any time it takes. 30

 What is the reason for having dreams? The reason for dreams is that when you are sleeping your attention moves either to the supraconscious side or to the subconscious side. Your attention starts moving and then 3 February 1983 you start seeing things which are connected with your subconscious or your collective Delhi subconscious and all these things. And you may go on to the supraconscious side, where you see your future and all these things. But the reason why you get dreams actually is that the unconscious, which is within you - is trying to guide you to the right path. And how does it guide you to the right path? It is through dreams. But these are misunderstood. How do you understand these dreams because you are so confused? First you go deep into yourself and you touch the unconscious – sushupti stithi. But from there you come out and then, when you are coming out, you touch your subconscious or maybe the supraconscious. So whatever anubhuti you had or whatever experience you had of the depths of the sushupti gets confused and you don't know what you dreamt and understand and you forget it. - or you can say the Kundalini or your Atma don't you But those who are realized souls go to their sushupti and see exactly what they have to know. Like many people in Bombay, when I came they didn't know I was coming, but they were at the airport because they got the dream. So at this sushupti level, at the deep level, you get the communication with God if you know how to go in and come out fully aware. But if you get confused with supraconscious or subconscious areas or if you start, chitta is not so clear-cut. Then there can be a big confusion. your In spite of tremendous stress on the Kundalini by Your Holiness, it is hard for me to reconcile myself with the fact that there is not the slightest reference to Kundalini in the authoritative guides on yoga -I mean Patangali's Yoga Sutras or Gita. Why? that in Yoga Sutras of Patangali it is not written about Kundalini and in the Gita, Не says it is not written about the Kundalini. It is a fact because, you see, it was a secret science. It was kept a secret science. In My first lecture only, I said in the sixth century Adi Shankara- charya for the first time opened his mouth about it. It was a secret science with very great gurus like Janaka, who gave Realization to Nachiketa. And in the same way, Shri Krishna did not talk about it because, you see, even when Markandeya talked about it, people did not know what he was saying. They never thought him to be a sensible man. Then later on, as the people became into two compartments – one on the right, one on the left side – some started worshipping God in a devotion and in a bhakti way. Others started doing yagya havanadi things. So whatever was required for these two types things evolved and that is what developed. The central side of evolution was kept a secret. And even at the time of Shri Krishna it was not mentioned. Not a word about this thing was mentioned because this is an internal happening. It's antar yoga. It was not described, but Shri Krishna hinted at it, that you have to have your yoga. But how, He did not say because that was not the time. He was the one who laid the seeds. Thatť's why He is called of as Krishna. Krishna means krishi, the one who has done krishi. So this one was laid. The sprouting had to come. Today it was to be told.

 So I am telling you about it. Everything is not told at the same time. It is the same in Sahaja Yoga. We don't tell you everything at this state. About the Agnya Chakra I have told you something, but not all. Gradually, when It has to be seen how far it is to be said at you will be so aware, I will tell you. what time. And what was needed at that time was told by Krishna. So the Gita is the one which only tells you that this will happen. But Gyaneshwara, who was born after the sixth century, in Gyaneshwari he has written about the Kundalini clearly.... He said this is how it is done. Gya- There is neshwara has written ... because at that time, it was to be told. Before that, it was not to be told. Shankaracharya in the sixth century did it. Then Gya- neshwara did it. Then Nanaka did it. Then Kabira did it. All these people no ism did it. Not only that, but even Mohammed-sahib in a way has talked about it – about Sahaja Yoga and resurrection time. They all started talking about the resurrection time much later as they started seeing people getting it because with God. to talk too much about the future is dangerous. Shri Krishna was placed with Arjuna when they were at the war.... Не told him how to become one with God ... that when you become one with God, you become a stithapragya. He gave the idea as to what will happen to you. But how it will happen He did not say. That was left to Me to explain. They can't do everything. I have to do something, isn't it? Because if He had said how then, they would have said, "Give me Realization." But they were CC not prepared for Realization.

 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE www.divinecoolbreeze.org SUBSCRIPTIONS: Contact@divinecoolbreeze.org CONTENT: editor@divinecoolbreeze.org The Divine Cool Breeze, 881 Frederick Road North Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada PRINTED BY King Printing Company Inc., 181 Industrial Avenue East Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA and Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. No.8, Chandragupta Housing Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411038, Maharashtra India Credits and Notes I have tried to go into spiritualism in the real sense of the word, but my health is deteriorating day by day. Front cover: Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 1981 words: 92nd quality of Shri Hanuman, 107th Contents pages name of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, a prayer to Shri Bhumi Devi Some gentleman has done spiritualism in the real sense of the word and his health is deteriorating. Contents pages photograph: Shri Mataji and Sahaja Yoginis, Shri Mahalakshmi Puja 1987, Mechelen Belgium (Herbert Reininger) Page 4 words: Shri Mataji, London, 7 September 1980 I have told you already what is the reason for that Page 4 and 5 photo: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 1993 is that you take to spiritualism out of ignorance. Page 10 photo: Shri Mataji, Mahalakshmi Puja 1987 (H. Reininger) There is no spiritualism. There is no ism with God. Page 12 words: Shri Mataji, Lonavala India, 25 January 1982 Pages 12 and 13 photos: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, CC • The spirit cannot be "ismized." So take to you Ganapatipule India, circa January 1990 (Herbert Reininger) Sahaja Yoga. Page 14 words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Navaratri Puja 1984 Page 15 photo: Shri Mataji, Mahalakshmi Puja 1987 (H. Reininger) Page 16 words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Birthday Puja 1980 What will be the end of all the world and of human- Page 17 photo: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, probably at the Munich ashram at the time of the 1987 Mahakali Puja (Herbert Reininger) kind? Page 17 words: Shri Mataji, Guru Puja 2001 and 12 January 1985 Pages 18 & 23 photos: Shri Mataji, Guru Puja 1987 (H. Reininger) Which will be the end of the world? Again, futur- Page 24 photo: a staircase at Shudy Camps UK, Guru Puja 1987 istic – very futuristic. Let's not talk about the end. (Herbert Reininger) Page 26 words: Herbert Reininger Just now is the beginning. When the child is born, we just don't think about his death, do we? So better be worried about the beginning of this new Page 26 photos: Shri Mataji, Florence Italy, 1989 (H. Reininger) Page 27 painting: portrait of Shri Mataji by Konstantin Sterkhov Page 28 photo: a cedar forest, Vancouver Canada Page 28 words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Shri Ganesha Puja 1984 world that we have started and don't think of the Page 29 words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Guru Puja 1980 Photograph above: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in India death and all those things. Forget it for the time Back cover words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Diwali Puja 2000 being. Back cover photo: near Kings Canyon Australia (Gautama Payment)

 HOW DOES A TREE GROW? BY ITSELF. I ALLOW Y OU TO GROW BY YOURSELF, THROUGH INTROSPECTION AND MEDITATION.



----------------------

2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
2009 issue 3 – volume twenty-two number three
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-1.txt 
 You make us childlike,
sweet and happy.
You take care of all
the children of the world.
Blessing of Kalyan 2
Union with His Power 4
It was Decided 6
No Fear 12
Trust Each Other 16
Sahaja Yoga is a Staircase 18
A Portrait 26
Purity of Snow 28
Questions & Answers 30
THE DIVINE MOTHER
WHO LOVES HER DEVOTEES
LIKE HER CHILDREN
VANDÂRU-JANA-VATSALE
Only through Your kind love for Your children are we here now.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-3.txt 
 blessing of Kalyan
dr
the refuge of the gurul
translated from Hindi: Today we have gathered here to worship the guru. A guru is considered to be higher
than all the Devas and Devis. In reality who is this guru? What is that greatest of powers
within him that makes him a guru? This element of the guru (Guru Tattwa) is in fact
Shiva. The qualities and powers of Shiva that we possess within should be understood
as the powers of a guru because when we are blessed with the powers of the guru, that
is the power which manifests and then you become your own guru. But the working of
that power is what bestows benevolence (kalyan) upon you. Whoever receives this power
should understand that now he is blessed with kalyan. It is very difficult to briefly explain
the meaning of this word "kalyan." Kalyan means to have success in every sphere, blos-
som in every aspect and be decorated with recognition everywhere.
When someone blesses another and wishes, “May kalyan be with you," then what is
that thing which should happen? What does this kalyan mean? It is that kalyan which we
call Self Realization. There cannot be kalyan without Self Realization. It cannot be under-
stood, neither can it be achieved within. All these things together come as benevolent
Puja blessings (kalyanmay) to humans and, because of it, one experiences the state of tremen-
dous joy within and becomes radiant. To achieve this path of benevolence (kalyan marg),
you had to
Shivaratri
15 February 2004 whatever was needed to be done by you, you have done it. Whatever labour
Delhi
put in, you have put in. Whatever faith you needed to have for it, you had it.
But now, when you have attained the path of this kalyan and when the
given you the mantra with the boons of kalyan to you, then what should happen? The
guru has
greatest thing that you attain is the power of complete settling (samadhan) within. There
is nothing more to be sought. Now you also have become the guru. Now nothing more
special is going to come your way, but you will be able to feel the bliss of that samadhan
(complete settlement and resolving power). You will be able to recognize that bliss and
also be completely dissolved in it.
Now, you must observe that the first and foremost thing is the physical self – the
physical problems, physical weakness, all these get cleansed by this path of this kalyan.
All the physical problems will vanish. Now, if that doesn't happen, then immediately you
This talk was played for the must understand that the blessings of this kalyan have yet to work out in you or have
not taken place yet. Subsequently, all your emotional weaknesses also must vanish in that
Shivaratri Puja in Pune. kalyan. Once you are able to achieve this power, you are blessed by this power of kalyan
This is the first time it has which takes care of removing all the emotional weaknesses that you develop within. You
Sahaja Yogis at the 2009
become realized.
been published in English.
Shri Mahadeva also assists you in achieving this. Shri Mahadeva sits at the Sahasrara
when
Kundalini pierces it. That is why He is called as Mahadeva. He is the Deva of
your
Devas.
In this path of bliss (kalyan marg), one experiences several aspects. The greatest experi-
ence one has in it is peace – mental peace, physical peace and, above all, the family peace.
There are several problems in a family and also there are several troubles. All those vanish
automatically by receiving it, by the blessings of this kalyan. They do not exist at all.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Many such people are there in the world who, after receiving this power of bliss, have
settled down in peace with enlightened attention as their destination. This is called as
kalyan, in which a human is able to attain his state of balance. And for attaining that state
of balance, one needs the refuge of a guru. As you go into the shelter of your guru, you
will be able to attain that state of balance. You will have a feeling that you are completely
satisfied and you do not require anything else. This type of balance gives considerable
power within us. I call that power to be the power of love.
When a person attains this power of love then he experiences a thrill in his entire
body, as if some other power has embraced him. With this power he is also able to over-
come all the turmoil, imbalances and ups and downs of life and settle in a complete state
of balance. It is for this reason that people strive a lot to attain this particular power. And
he attains this power from another person, another human being only who appears as
God before him, who in turn has also attained it for himself.
Shri Mataji speaks in English:
This is a subject which you can only explain in the Hindi language, which
this gurupad from somebody else. But that somebody else is endowed with the power,
As you go into
that
says
you
get
the
of mind, to begin with, and also the power to overcome all kinds the shelter
of
power
peace
of earthly problems, mental problems, physical problems. All these problems you can
solve through your mental balance and the mental blessings from your guru. When you
of your guru,
become the guru, you yourself have the power to bless others. With your blessing power,
you can create a guru out of many. And once the guru is created and there is a guru who
has this power, it is very satisfying..
The satisfaction is so much that you do not want anything. This is the
You have seen Shiva. He doesn't have many clothes. He does not decorate Himself. He is able to attain
just sitting in a meditative mood all the time. He doesn't want anything. He is so satis-
fied with Himself that He doesn't want anything. And that is the power you get
Realization, if you have a guru and a guru of that level and calibre.
One should not try to become a guru. That is very impractical. If you try to become,
you will never be that. It has to come to you automatically, without
any effort.
So the only way you can get to it is through dhyana. Dhyana is meditation. When
meditate, just meditate and meditate. Do not ask for anything. Meditation itself gives
you that instrument which can bear this great power of the guru. And then automati-
cally you give this power to others. You do not have to work it out. Just in your presence,
people can get
you will be
of Shiva.
power
after Self
that state of
balance.
any asking, without
you
of complete satisfaction. And there is salvation – for
and
this
power
you
for others.
So all the problems which are faced in the journey of ascent are finished and you are
drenched in the bliss of heavenly peace and joy. That is why it is called as kaivalya. It
means only the blessings. See, that means there is no other word to translate it. There is
no other way of explaining it. It is a state. It is a stithi. It's a state. In that state, you have
to rise and you know that you are in that state. It is a very remarkable thing that, once
you reach that state, you do not have to ask for anything. It is all there and you are so
satisfied.
I can go on talking about this special power, but I think whatever I have said, please
meditate on that. And you are all capable of reaching that state, that state of complete
peace and joy.
May God bless you.
I
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-5.txt 
 To know where you are
as far as God is concerned –
that is the main thing, isn't it?
We are here for that,
to be one with God,
to be in union with His power,
to be His instruments.
And how our connections get loose
and how we can correct them,
we should try to understand that.
in union
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-6.txt 
 with His power
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-7.txt 
 O long time back, before I incarnated
it was
They had a big meeting in the heavens,
all the thirty-five crores of Gods.
The Deities were there present to decide what
was to be done: “This is the ultimate that we
have to do to human beings. It is to open
their Sahasrara, to open their awareness to the
spirit, to the real knowledge of the Divine,
to remove the darkness of ignorance." And it
had to be spontaneous because it has to work
the living force of God. Also it had to be very
quick.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-8.txt 
 decided
So all the Gods requested that now I, the Adi Shakti, had to take birth. They
all tried their best. They did whatever was possible. The saints were made by them,
few. They incarnated and people made religions out of them, which were
but
very
perverted, brought them a bad name. There was no reality in those religions. Those
religions were money-oriented or power-oriented. There was no divine force working.
Actually it was all anti-divine.
Sahasrara Puja
How to now turn human beings away from these superficial religions, these
per-
verted paths of destruction? How to tell them about all these established organizations?
199 8
For ages they have been ruling, making money, making power. It was a tremendous task.
It had to be done with great patience and love. It was a very delicate work also because
they believed in those religions – innocent people, simple people. To blast them, that
“this is all nonsense, they are no religions, they are against the incarnation, against all
the prophets, against all the saints, that is why all the real saints had to suffer.
It was a powerful work that was to be done and that is why the Adi Shakti had to
take birth on this Earth.
It had to be before the sixth of May because the sixth of May was the doomsday in
So it was done on the fifth of May in the nick of the time. It was all decided
that
year.
beforehand and every Deity's job was allotted to all of them. Very efficient Deities, very
obedient, they knew Me very well, completely dedicated and devoted. They knew Me
well. Every end of My hair they knew. I didn't have to teach them protocol.
very, very
Love itself gives you protocol, but love that is divine, it is not selfish love. It is not
I love
the way
child,
husband,
my country, my clothes. It is the love which is
my
my
divine, which spreads from your heart, from your spirit, like the light of knowledge.
What a tremendous task it was.
So, as said, at the Sahasrara I had to be Mahamaya. I had to be Mahamaya. I had to
be something that people could not recognize Me easily. But Deities? No, this Maha-
had to come on this Earth, not the Adi Shakti in Her purest form. It's too much,
maya
so She was covered with this Mahamaya.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Saints and yogis
Now you see in nineteen years what we have achieved. So many yogis are sitting before
Me. The difference between a saint and a yogi is that a saint himself is righteous, he him-
self is holy, but he doesn't know much about the Kundalini. But the yogi knows about
the Kundalini.
The difference between a yogi and a Sahaja Yogi is that a Sahaja Yogi has powers and a
Sahaja Yogini has powers to give Realization to others. A yogi can cleanse himself, but he
cannot cleanse others, while a Sahaja Yogi can cleanse others and cleanse himself. So this
is the superior-most state, which you achieved through your great punyas, I should say.
So many of you have been searching for the truth in previous lives and now here
Nothing
is more
you
important than are to achieve what you have been searching. All that has happened now, so beautifully.
You are not even aware what has happened to you. Automatically, spontaneously you have
the
powers within your central nervous system in a split of a second. Your attention
got
your ascent
has been fixed now.
Of course, even now some people do not have. Even now, I see the attention wobbles.
But so many of you have achieved that state ... Shivaham, Shivaham, Shivaham. You have
it. What Adi Shankaracharya has described about himself, you can say that about all of
you, so many Adi Shankaracharyas sitting before Me.
But still, I am a Mahamaya. I just behave like you. I too have a family. I too have
children, who can be called as mine. And you are My children too. So when you are
matured enough, the first sign is that you get discretion. That is divine discretion. It is
love again...
Nothing is more important than your ascent higher and higher because it has a very
divine
the ultimate, the climax where the whole humanity is to be saved
great
purpose,
through your efforts. You have to work it out. And in this situation we see the thousand
petals. These are the powers of the Virata within you. And this is where we falter, that the
light of this Sahasrara is the Brahmarandra, which is your Heart chakra....
There is a saying in Sanskrit ... “The ones who are of a character of saints, the whole
world is their family."
Gold is to be tested
In the breaking of the Sahasrara, I have never left anything undone. It is a perfect job.
Your nerves are not hurt. Your brain is not hurt. Such a powerful Kundalini comes up.
How sweetly, beautifully, delicately She pierces through. Only a thread comes out. And
how then the connection is established and the relaxation starts coming in on the sympa-
thetic, how all the beautiful chakras open and more of these threads are coming up. Now
you are also told how to work it out. You know all the technical know-how. What
not know is that you are not yet a perfect machine. You have to perfect yourself.
Moreover there is a Mahamaya. She does not take you for granted. That's the trouble,
you see. She puts you deliberately into temptations. Deliberately She gives you positions...
To test you, may marry you to funny people also. This testing has to be done. That is
the job of a Mahamaya. She has to test you. Gold has to be tested. The diamond has to be
tested. All that is valuable has to be tested. Without that, how can you certify...?
All these things are to be understood in the right perspective. They are for our ascent,
you do
She
fix
for our benevolence, for our higher state. But for that, you must know we have to
our whole will to it. When people climb the Himalayas, what do they do? They take a
big nail, nail it at a higher point, then tie up a rope and climb up to that. They don't look
down. Then put another nail up there, climb up to that and that is how they climb the
Himalayas.
dn
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-10.txt 
 IT WAS DECIDED
Now what do we do in Sahaja Yoga? We take a nail from the top, put it
downward. First day when you get Realization the experience is tremendous,
then one by one coming down, the other way around. But as soon as you get
Realization, if you are intelligent enough, then you decide, "How should I
up myself?" Decide like this: supposing you are very fond of milk, take it
like that. Now
We will be
that powerful
fix
should say,
"Until I achieve a certain state, I’ll not take
people of love,
you
milk." But that should not be treated as a sacrifice, but as a joyous ascent.
Do the people who nail upwards to go to the top of Himalayas, do they
feel they are sacrificing something? If you start thinking that, "Oh God, of understanding,
I have sacrificed milk," then you are finished. The downward movement
starts. But if you like something, then you have to say, “All right, if I like of discretion
CC
of
it, let me like my ascent more than this. Until I have ascended, I will not
have." Such determination should be there. And without that, how do
you
think you can get over the horrible, monstrous mountain of ignorance that and of humility.
you have got?
Actually, in Realization I have put you on the top of the mountain, but
you start slipping down. So you have to keep to that topmost point. I tell
about everything. You go and ask any one of the saints or any one of
you
the
incarnations. Did they know so much about the Kundalini? If they
great
had, they would have written about it. They have never written anything
about the Kundalini. If they have, it is very little. To such an extent that it
acts on your fingertips, that now we have brought science close to reality
- the truth, the divine science, all is explained. It has become completely
integrated now with us. Sahaja Yoga is the most scientific thing that you
could think – exact. The biggest computer, that you are. But the computer
has to be workable.
Sahaj culture: rising in love
You have to now understand your responsibility. We have to emancipate
the human beings. We don't want to do anything that is a little out of the
way....
The Deities, they are working twenty-four hours, all the months and all
the
around, continuously because they have a continuous supply of
years
which
you can also have....
energy,
We are Sahaja Yogis and we have our Sahaj culture. We live with our
culture, proud of it, and this is our religion. We have our pure religion on
which we thrive. We are not going to change ourselves. We are going to
change the whole world. We have a culture of our own and we are going to
behave in that manner which is going to change the whole world. This is our
responsibility. You are chosen for this work. You are the real chosen ones.
You are the real pure ones....
Be aware of it, of your responsibility. Be aware of your powers. The
greatest power that you have is of divine love, not the stupid love that blinds
you and that
way we walk, the way we live, the way we behave, everything has to be Sahaj.
And it is such a real, living culture of beautiful people in the world.... We
will be that powerful people of love, of understanding, of discretion and of
humility. I would like to see those days in My lifetime. I hope you will give
Me full assistance.
"fall in love," but you rise in love. The way we talk, the
you
9.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-11.txt 
 FOR A
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-12.txt 
 IT WAS DECIDED
A razor's edge
You have to know there is only one point that was fixed in this meeting
The
Deities
of the Devas and that I cannot overcome. They said, "We will tolerate
any nonsense because they are coming from ignorance, but anybody
who doesn't love You, anybody who insults You, anybody who takes
advantage of You, anybody who exploits You, anybody who shows lack are around,
of protocol, anybody who does not recognize You, we will hit them
hard. And that permission You must give us, otherwise we are not for
sitting now here,
this world."
They formed a union against Me and I had to give in.
I am very careful. I tell you, don't touch Me. Be careful. Some people
just try to put My sari right. You are not to do. You don't have to do all of them
that. Don't play with My money. Don't take My hospitality. Be careful.
I tell you as much as I can and this is what it is. One side is Mahamaya,
another side is Deities and the poor Sahaja Yogis are in between. I sym-
pathize with
think, of course, but otherwise it is wonderful...
This is Mahamaya and the Deities are around sitting now here, all
of them peering into you, all of them judging you, having a big meeting
there – "Who is who? Where is the attention of this gentleman? Where
is he looking? What is he doing?" – all sitting here. But at the same time,
they have flowers, divine flowers, divine blessings and all the angels are
just going around. I can see them. Your cameras can catch them. You
got photographs which will show you all of them sitting. And it
is already predicted that the whole world will come down at the Lotus
Feet of your Mother and that you will decide the future of this world. It
is written already fourteen thousand years back and there is another one
who is prophesizing the same. So you have to be aware. Where is your
I know, but you better be careful. It is a razor's edge I Peering into you,
all of them
judging you.
have
attention?
What are we worried about? Where are we spending our time? Leave
your children to Me. Leave your families to Me. You can only keep your
purse, but the rest of it, you can leave all your headaches to Me. But
don't play tricks with Me. Mahamaya knows all
in and out. If I want to know, I can know each and everything about
I don't want to know. Under these circumstances, we are supported,
looked after, managed, taken to reality so easily, so much with care....
You are assisted. Here these prime ministers have only five, six body-
guards. You have millions and millions, each one of
Nobody can touch you except for you. You can harm yourself – that's
all. Nobody can harm....
For us, our ascent is the only concern, is the only ideal, nothing else
- and it will work out.
your tricks, everything,
you.
with
you.
you,
All the rest will be taken care of. We have all the mechanics to do
that, but first give it to the mechanics to work out. All will work in a
reflex action.
"I have this, I have that." Just
Clear out your chakras. Don't say,
clear out. "How dare I have all these problems...?" Clear out, morning,
evening – clear out. I am sure it will work out...
May God bless you.
11
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-13.txt 
 THERE SH OULD
BE NO FEAR.
THERE WILL BE NO PROBLEM.
Material problems are not difficult to solve.
Somebody was taking My photograph,
which was in a silver frame,
and he was rather worried
because the customs may
stop him from taking it.
Of course, the photograph
they can't stop, but maybe
the silver frame. And this
gentleman told Me that he
was taking it with him with
a silver frame and he
thought people would object.
But as soon as they saw
the photograph, they said
namaskar to the photograph
and forgot about the frame.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-14.txt 
 13
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-15.txt 
 I always work through you if you are one with Me.
Even when I am speaking, you are speaking.
And when you are speaking, I am speaking.
You know that.
But with all this, that awe is very important.
And that gives you the love that thinks –
complete integration of your heart and your brain.
The love that thinks is thoughtful – love that thinks.
And then the third integration is the love that acts.
But first this integration must be brought in –
the love that thinks, which understands, which feels
and then the love that acts.
But the basic is the love.
It starts from the heart.
It is the love.
14
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-16.txt 
 12
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-17.txt 
 rust each other, love each other and give
more trust and more love and understand-
ing.... You will know that you are much
better now. Keep it up. Put yourself into
bandhan. Girdle up yourself and "onward Christian soldiers."
This is what it is. We have to be in that way.
We are the people who are loving.
We love. We distribute love.
We emit love and we have to be that picture and that image
that, when people see, they will say, "Oh, these are the right type
CC
of people..."
We have to promise our Mother that "Mother, this year we
really promise You, we will work very hard. We will be very
compassionate with kindnes.."
Just try to see what is the person saying. Even if he is stupid,
no use laughing at him. Just see what he's saying, what is his
attitude. All this will bring forth a very, very beautiful image of
all My children, whom I love very much.
I will love and love and love. Whatever may happen, I will be
your own.
But still, in My love I request you that I cannot feel happy
unless and until I make you like Myself.
16
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-18.txt 
 You are climbing ahead into the new path of righteousness, of goodness, of compassion and love.
F1
Stand on the right path, say that
"This is it and I am going to do this.
If you know that,
know that you are sattwikas.
Then you are in the centre.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-19.txt 
 18
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Sahaja Yoga
is a staircase
You are here to worship your guru in the realm of the heart of the universe.
If we can do that in our domain of the heart, we do not have to do anything
else...
I feel I have to tell you about Sahaja Yoga and its value, which is related
to other yogas, which was accepted in the olden days all over the world. They
called it as the Yoga, not Sahaja Yoga. Yoga – it started with various types of
practices of Ashtanga Yogas – eightfold yogas – with a guru. And one had to
go through lots of hardships. Nobody who was married was allowed into that
Ashtanga Yoga and they had to give up their families, give up their relation-
ships. They had to become absolutely without any attachments to go to a
Guru Puja 1987
Shudy Camps UK
guru. All their
as is done in modern times, but given away. And this was called as Yoga.
Another style was called as sankhya. Sankhya is where all your life you have
to gather things with detachment and then to distribute them completely and
take to a guru, in a way completely surrendered, and then get Realization.
Sankhya was the left-sided behavior and Yoga was the right-sided. Where the
Gayatri mantra was used was the sankhya. Because they were left-sided, they
used to use the Gayatri mantra. They went so much to the left side
to gather things, to gather possessions, to gather properties, to gather all kinds
of friends and relations and societies – that they were afraid that they may be
all their possessions were given up, not to the guru,
property,
that is,
completely lost into all those things. They would go to the mantra of Gayatri,
which teaches you the essences of all our chakras, the centres.
I have told about this before also – “bhu bhurv swaha." Bhu stands for
the essence or the bija of the Muladhara, bhuv for the universe that is cre-
ated – that is the Swadisthana's bija. Swaha is the bija of the Nabhi. Manah swaha: Nabhi
is the essence of the Heart chakra. Then janah is the people, collectivity. It is manah: Heart
bhuv: Muladhara
bhuv: Swadisthan
the essence or the bija of the Vishuddhi chakra. Then tapah is the one where
you go into tapasya, into renunciation, into hardships. It is the essence of the janah: Vishuddhi
Agnya chakra. And then the satya is the truth. It is the essence of the Sahasrara tapah: Agnya
- not the truth that we think of as truth, but the truth that is expressed in our
satya: Sahasrara
central nervous system.
%24
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Two sides, two paths
This is discovered at the seventh stage of the Sahasrara. So the people who did
sankhya were not so much respected as spiritual people because they thought these
were all involved into worldly things and worldly possessions and worldly happen-
ings. So they were regarded as something secondary. Or those who were yogis of the
gurus were regarded higher because they had already given up everything and they
had
gone to a guru, giving up all the things that they had. But here, these had
a problem within themselves because they found that those who came to them
up everything, no doubt, but still there were lurking attachments.
In their own ashrams, they found these people had their own attachments to
things. Though outwardly they had given up, but inside they had not given up.
they were still sticking onto these ideas that "Oh, it's all right. But still we can have
gurus
gave
So
CC
What is it little things like that. It doesn't matter." Like that, there were little compromises
going, as we have here – nunneries and all that.
So both, in a way, were artificial. The one side is the sankhyas. They were trying
to ascend with all the luggage they were carrying. And another was trying to descend
with all the ambitions of ascent.
So it was a very funny thing in every aspect, in both these styles of yoga. As
you have to
achieve?
you can see that now, if you go to America will find, “Oh God, what is this
America? It's not democracy, it's demonocracy." But if you go from that to the realm
of another country like Russia, you
complete pressures and fears." But as soon as a Russian comes out of that country,
he can become worse than an American. So what is this? One theory works here,
another theory works there. So which is the theory that is all right?
You find the same about religion. A religion which believes in many Gods, like
the Hindus, they are also believing now into the bhoots. And they are also following
the path of possessions. If you go to a temple, every temple has got a nice arrange-
ment for you to get possessed. Or even a church or a mosque where God has to
reside, you find suddenly you get attacked and you come out absolutely puzzled
about yourself, ending up into lunatic asylums.
So what sort of worshipping places are these, where you go to find God and
you get the horrible satanic forces acting on you? That is why, in the modern times,
people have become so very confused. We do not find truth in anything – in any
ideologies, any philosophies, anything that started. Confucius started human-
ism. Socrates started another thing. Mohammed-sahib started another thing. Like
Mohammed-sahib said, let us not worship God as an idol. Let us worship Him in
the Nirakara, in the formless God. But you see the formless, how they are killing
each other now? I mean, after seeing the Muslim countries, you can't believe there
could be any formless or formful God existing anywhere. All must have run away,
the way they are fighting.
Then
CC
you
find, "What is this? You are working here under
you see the Christian countries. Wherever they have gone, they have tried
to dominate other people who were not Christians, just as if they had a right to
do it because they were Christians, the disciples of Christ who said, "Forgive them
for they do not know what they are doing." And I have to say the same for all the
Christians, "Forgive them for they do not know what they are doing." And when
you are shocked at all these things. One must sit down and think what is to be done,
what is the problem.
So it is neither sankhya nor Yoga. Then what is it you have to achieve? That is
Sahaja Yoga.
20
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-22.txt 
 A STAIRCASE
become one
Two
yogas
Sahaja Yoga is a system in which first you are not given a theory, but the light in your
hand to see for yourself in which both things look the same. For example, now you have
this beautiful house made for your Mother, while your Mother doesn't know how to
got
get attached to even a pin. It's a funny situation.
Everybody has to remind Me, “Mother, it is Your house."
"Oh, I see."
CC
And I have to be reminded I must thank you all, especially the English, especially the Nothing
leaders of the English Sahaja Yogis, for making a full effort to get this house. But then, I
think, "Why should I thank? It's not mine. It's theirs." And that is what it is.
belongs to us,
So a new type of confusion starts and that is what I felt, that this confusion is
sweet and beautiful. It is a fact that nothing belongs to us, but everything belongs to
us. When I think about how beautifully you have done this place, it belongs to Me all
right. This house belongs to Me, England belongs to Me and, above all, the whole world belongs to us.
belongs to Me.
That is how we see sankhya and Yoga become one in Sahaja Yoga. And it is said that
you see sankhya and Yoga as one, then only it is Sapashyati. That is the one who
sees. That is the one who is the witness.
So for normal people, it could be that "How is it your Mother is supposed to be a guru
very
but everything
when
and She wears all the ornaments?" But what to do? She is also a mother and She is also a
Goddess – another confusion. How to make these two things be? You see a guru has to
be a very angry person, wearing only a single dress either upwards or downwards – I don't
know how – with a big thick rod in the hand, never smiling... The gurus have to be very
long-faced, developing big, big beards – and no ladies allowed. In such a situation, where
the women are not to be seen at all, I mean I shouldn't even see My face. It is like that.
There is a big discussion ... whether a woman should be allowed to do the spiritual
practices or not – imagine, not only among Christians, you will be surprised, even in
Indian scriptures – whether a woman is allowed or not to do spiritual practices. Now
when your Mother is a woman and She is your guru, what will you do? This is another
confusion because it is wrong. The whole thing is a falsehood based on no basis at all. You
may try anything to say that women are not meant for spiritual life. Try any argument,
fails.... To put all these upside-down stories right, your Mother had to come on this Earth
as a guru. I got to this point out of one little confusion I had about Myself.
The other day, somebody was after My life, that I should buy a bracelet. I said, "I have
it
no money any more. I don't want to buy.'
"All right, we will give it in puja."
I said, “But now there is only Guru Puja.
They said, "All right, we will give it in Guru Puja."
I said, "To buy a bracelet for Guru Puja is something funny.." After all, in a Guru
Puja you don't give a bracelet to your guru, do you? You can give a big rod or you might
give him a sandalwood khada ... chappals or you may give him a shawl. But here it is. I
have asked. All right, give it in Guru Puja. What was the reason? And I became aware of
My own confusion and I thought of it. I said, “This is what it is, that it has to happen this
way that, on a Guru Puja, you have to give a bracelet to your guru." Let us change it over.
The whole thing has to be brought up this way that everything faces reality.
All these false ideas have to be given up. Like if you have a carpet upside-down, the
whole design is upside-down, but if you put the carpet right, everything falls in line. And
that is why you needed a mother to give you Realization and a guru as a mother to teach
that. For ascent to God, nobody can be prohibited.
CC
you
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-23.txt 
 A STAIRCASE
Spontaneity
That is how Sahaja Yoga today is working out in all directions, if you find, to
put all upside-down things into the right direction, to expose it to reality, to
bring all real values, to abolish all rotten value all political, economic
systems,
systems, all spiritual theologies, all psychological and all such nonsensical ideas
into their proper direction. How in one incarnation it has worked out, you
can imagine, how in one incarnation all these ideas have been put right....
Today, through Sahaja Yoga, we have been able to prove that sankhya and
Yoga are the same. Whether you collect things, whether you have possessions
or whether you give away, makes no difference to a person who is detached
from within. If you collect them for others, even better. But if you collect for
yourself and then give away, that is even much better. Because first you col-
you think, "Oh, it's good for me, I will use this one for
down, it is not myself, will be a good idea." So the self is there, but then, that you give away.
If they settle
lect for yourself, then
CC
כ
That means your detachment is complete. Or the third personality could be
liking that ... which just goes on collecting and just goes on giving. Without
Sahaja.
It is not
thinking, it collects and, without thinking, it gives because thinking is not
spontaneous. My job.
That is one thing I have given up, is to think. I don't want to think.
That's your work, not Me. And without thinking, how many things we have
achieved through Sahaja Yoga. Yoga and sankhya both are products of think-
ing, not products of spontaneit...
On this point, I have to say a few words. It is important. A few points
I have to say about the spontaneity part, which is quite interesting, the way
people think spontaneity works. It is mostly the ego part
spontaneous, with so many people. Especially the very old Sahaja Yogis think
they are authorities on spontaneity. Like we had a land in Vaitarna (India), so
one of the older ones went there and he said, "This land is vibrating and this
is not vibrating." So everybody accepted, "All right, all right, all right." Then
they said, "In this part of the land nobody should eat their food.'
Now, from where does this knowledge come? Eating food is not a sin, is it?
As if it is a sin that you are eating food in there. Then religiously they follow a,
b, c, d, e, f, g, h, z and again a, b, c, d of Sahaja Yoga to such an extent that I
start thinking now they have become another fanatic Sahaja Yogi. Fanaticism
is against Sahaja Yoga – absolutely.
Now they will ask, “How many times we should say this mantra?" Then
this is
which
says
"Zero times."
I say,
I
"A
"How many drops we should put, the ghee in our nose?" Then I say,
full jug."
Then, "Oh, I should not have gone from the left side, I should have gone
from the right side." Then, I would say, “You just jump up.
CC
You have to be like children, but the ideas are so settled down in Sahaja
Yoga. Now it is so many years, of course, but they should not settle down. If
they settle down, it is not Sahaja. It is not spontaneous. "If you do this way,
it's wrong" – nothing of the kind. Nothing is
you people. If you do anything wrong, your vibrations will be lost,
then it is wrong. That
way,
wrong for
finished. What is there to be so cautious about?
Like somebody said, "I don't want to look at the cigarette."
I said, “Why?"
22
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-24.txt 
 "Looking at it also is sinful."
I said, “Looking at it, what happens?"
“Then I feel like smoking."
Sahaja Yoga is
So I said, “Better smoke once and for all."
not for sticking
my hand."
Or, “I cannot hold a wine bottle in
"Why?"
"No, holding the wine bottle is sinful."
onto something.
I mean, you can swim in the wine.
So this kind of understanding should be there. Though I have always said
that if I say one thing, you will clinch onto it. So I always say the other side of
it, that don't stick on to something. Sahaja Yoga is not for sticking onto some-
thing. Like somebody who had learnt certain lessons about Sahaja Yoga in the
beginning of it, certain mantras they had learned and still they are sticking on
to the same step. No, no, no –- you have to go ahead. This is just a staircase.
stuck at a point. We have had so many such cases here. People get
Don't
get
really outworn, as they say. They will go on telling you so many nonsensical
ideas – "You see, if you do like this, then this happens."
First of all, you don't give ideas to others. That is one thing. If you decide
that we don't give ideas about what is wrong with another person, half of your
job is done because you don't have to do any job, as I don't do.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Understanding Sahaja Yoga
We have to be not only humble, but very tact-
ful and sweet to new people, if you want any
more to come in. But if you have decided not
to have any more because you will have to put
another marquee, then I have nothing to say.
But if you want others to come in, then it is
important that you talk to them in a very sweet
and beautiful language, the way they under-
stand.
Rudeness, arrogance, showing off is of no
use. One should understand Sahaja Yoga is
where you are in complete enjoyment about it.
You are just lost into that enjoyment. Where
is the time to remember how many times to
give a bandhan to yourself? What is the need to
give a bandhan to yourself? It is all a joke now
you. It should be. A little child sucks the
milk from the bottle because it has no teeth,
for
but what about you people having that kind of
a thing? It's very childish and shows no growth
at all.
Sahaja Yoga must grow within. You should
not be any more regarded as immature Sahaja
Yogis. I would say a person who is a matured
Sahaja Yogi is the one who can combine so
many things together with all beautiful lines,
thin lines, thin maryadas maintained.... This is
the growth within you, which will show.
So we have to have our growth and, for
growth, let us be silent within. Let us not react
to others....
Understanding Sahaja Yoga is very simple,
extremely simple when you understand one
thing, that
intact. "Now, how to get to innocence?" people
will say. How to get to innocence? It's a vicious
circle how to get to innocence. It is a very
vicious circle. We have to get to innocence
through what? – your ego or superego? How
you get to innocence...?
How to manage is the problem? Very
simple it is. In the beginning I said, “Let your
guru reside in your heart....
Let Mother manage.
me." Keep it at that. Your right side will clear.
Your left side will clear when you say, "Nobody
have to have your innocence
you
will
You have to go ahead.
This is just a stairwcase.
“Mother is managing
CC
“Nobody
-
can manage me, but Mother can manage me"
two things together. Things will work out.
Don't get stuck at a point.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-26.txt 
 A STAIRCASE
The word of the guru
Thank God you have somebody like Me, who is sitting here, who can say so. Think
of those who never had anyone to tell them or to be in their presence to say that I can
manage this or you can manage that, that now you can balance.
Allow your Kundalini to grow. Everything works out....
When I tell you something, please do it. Please do it because I know quite a lot
because I am a guru, your guru, because I am the Guru of all the gurus. And those who
are a real guru know that "My Mother knows everything. She is knowledge Herself. If
says something, it means something." And even I may test you sometimes. It doesn't
matter. That is how you become the guru.... When you become absolutely one with the
desires of your guru, you achieve the position of a guru...
It is important that we should do one thing seriously. It is to take your Mother very
seriously when it comes to some request.... It should be always accepted as the law of the
Divine because the guru is the giver of the law of the Divine, not the worldly laws. The where vou are
law of the Divine he gives you. The law of the Divine you understand, then you have to
surrender to that law of the Divine and that is how you will become masters of that law.... in complete
She
Sahaja Yoga is
God is
your guru. Let Him guide you. "Thy will be done. Let us not guide ourselves."
And also sometimes they try to guide the guru as well. Then the guru plays tricks and
then you fall into the trap of tricks and then you find it's too much.
It is better to listen to what the guru is telling you and better to do it. Whatever the
guru says is all right. Gurus can ask you anything. I mean I am quite a nice guru....
Whatever has to happen, happens. In Sahaja Yoga, to think that one hundred percent
will be rich, healthy, wealthy and on top of the world is a nonsense. If we become very
wealthy, then there will be a recession because others willl be very poor. If we become very
healthy, then nobody will come near us. If we all look like wrestlers, who will come near
us? If we become very wise, then people will be frightened of such wise people. They
cannot understand anything. It will go over their heads.
So let us be in the centre. We should be wealthy, but not too much. We should be
healthy, but not too much. We should be wise, but not too much. So far, so good – that
is how we should move.
enjoyment.
So we keep to our maryadas and we become beautiful Sahaja Yogis, who will be con-
genial to others, who will be able to get others to us, who will be able to project an image
of magnetic personalities. And this is what we have to do.
If we try to show off in any way – like I have seen people try to show off unnecessar-
ily – there is no need. Just be in the background. If you are very much in the background,
just be in the foreground. Try to balance yourself. Try to watch yourself and guide yourself
and tell yourself, "Become your own guru.
Judge yourself, how far you are in the centre, how far you are growing, how much
growth have you achieved. Are you still attached to small things here and there? Are
still bothered about small things...?
you
It is to be seen if you have to be gurus. If you can't see that, how can others see that?
This is to be realized – not to be put in the mind, but to be realized in the heart. In the
realm of your heart you have to realize it. You have to understand it in the realm of your
heart.
It is nice that we are in England, the heart of the universe, that we are talking about
opening our hearts. If you have to put Me there, it is the ocean of love and to contain this
ocean of love, you have to have a very, very large heart -
bigger than your countries, bigger than this world, bigger than this universe.
May God bless you.
bigger than your personalities,
25
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-27.txt 
 rehi
DISCHI
tche
DISCHI
These pictures were taken during
the time of Diwali Puja in Italy, in
Montecatini near Florence, in October
1989. Shri Mataji, Sir CP and Debu
Chaudhury, along with a few Sahaja
Yogis, went to visit nearby Florence and
ended
up posing as models for street
artists. While all the artists were of great
talent, none of them managed to capture
any one of the three very special models.
The artists mentioned several times that
they didn't understand why they were
unable to capture the people in front of
them accurately. Shri Mataji ended up
correcting some of the sketches, much to
the delight of the many yogis who had
joined the group over the several hours
Shri Mataji had spent sitting outside the
main cathedral of Florence.
Painting, far right,
by Konstantin Sterkhov
26
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-28.txt 
 ARCHES
NARSYAK
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-29.txt 
 The purity of the snow
is a hundred percent.
And that covers the Mother Earth.
It gives the formation of innocence.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-30.txt 
 White is the pure colour of silk.
It is complete detachment.
In white all the colours are mixed.
Then only it becomes white.
In such a balance and unity it is.
It should be that you become white
– and whiter
than snoW.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-31.txt 
 uestions
nSwers
Shri Mataji, would you say a few words about the forthcoming golden age?
8 July 1999 Aquarius, according to our astrology, is the Kundalini. The Kundalini is Aquarius
London according to the Indian science of astrology... They say that this Age of Aquarius
very important because this will change the lives of people. And that is what
they have already described about this, that now there was Kali Yuga. That means
the worst possible times. The whole Kali Yuga means the absolutely the worse and
worst possible time for our destruction. That was over.
Then comes Kruta Yuga – I mean overlapping. Now in Kruta Yuga, this All-
Pervading Power – they call it Paramchaitanya – becomes active. It starts helping
people to come along. That also has been going on for some days.
After this is Satya Yuga. It is the age of truth, but it is a last judgement. If
take
is
to truth, all right, well and good. But if you don't take to truth, you are
you
judged. It is like this.... It is a new mission where you have to do something. You
are the ones who are going to completely revolutionize the whole world. You can
do it. Absolutely everybody is capable of doing that.
Which God is in the Kundalini? In the triangle?
Kundalini itself. The Kundalini is your own Mother, individual Mother and
She has tape-recorded all
because She wants to give you your second birth, but She is your individual mother.
You don't share Her with anybody else. Yours is different. Somebody else's is differ-
ent because the tape-recording is different. And She knows everything about
So when She rises, She goes very slowly without harming you, without troubling
you and pierces through.
your
your aspirations, everything. And She rises
your past and
you.
She is the reflection of the Adi Shakti who is called as the Holy Ghost
We
say
in the Bible, but She rises without any difficulty. Hardly any time it takes.
30
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-32.txt 
 What is the reason for having dreams?
The reason for dreams is that when you are sleeping your attention moves either to the
supraconscious side or to the subconscious side. Your attention starts moving and then 3 February 1983
you start seeing things which are connected with your subconscious or your collective Delhi
subconscious and all these things. And you may go on to the supraconscious side, where
you see your future and all these things. But the reason why you get dreams actually is
that the unconscious, which is within you
- is trying to guide you to the right path. And how does it guide you to the right path? It
is through dreams. But these are misunderstood.
How do you understand these dreams because you are so confused? First you go deep
into yourself and you touch the unconscious – sushupti stithi. But from there you come
out and then, when you are coming out, you touch your subconscious or maybe the
supraconscious. So whatever anubhuti you had or whatever experience you had of the
depths of the sushupti gets confused and you don't know what you dreamt and
understand and you forget it.
- or you can say the Kundalini or your Atma
don't
you
But those who are realized souls go to their sushupti and see exactly what they have
to know. Like many people in Bombay, when I came they didn't know I was coming, but
they were at the airport because they got the dream. So at this sushupti level, at the deep
level, you get the communication with God if you know how to go in and come out fully
aware. But if you get confused with supraconscious or subconscious areas or if you start,
chitta is not so clear-cut. Then there can be a big confusion.
your
In spite of tremendous stress on the Kundalini by Your Holiness, it is hard for me to reconcile
myself with the fact that there is not the slightest reference to Kundalini in the authoritative
guides on yoga -I mean Patangali's Yoga Sutras or Gita. Why?
that in Yoga Sutras of Patangali it is not written about Kundalini and in the Gita,
Не
says
it is not written about the Kundalini. It is a fact because, you see, it was a secret science. It
was kept a secret science. In My first lecture only, I said in the sixth century Adi Shankara-
charya for the first time opened his mouth about it. It was a secret science with very great
gurus like Janaka, who gave Realization to Nachiketa. And in the same way, Shri Krishna
did not talk about it because, you see, even when Markandeya talked about it, people did
not know what he was saying. They never thought him to be a sensible man.
Then later on, as the people became into two compartments – one on the right, one
on the left side – some started worshipping God in a devotion and in a bhakti way. Others
started doing yagya havanadi things. So whatever was required for these two types
things evolved and that is what developed. The central side of evolution was kept a secret.
And even at the time of Shri Krishna it was not mentioned. Not a word about this thing
was mentioned because this is an internal happening. It's antar yoga. It was not described,
but Shri Krishna hinted at it, that you have to have your yoga. But how, He did not say
because that was not the time. He was the one who laid the seeds. Thatť's why He is called
of
as Krishna. Krishna means krishi, the one who has done krishi. So this one was laid. The
sprouting had to come. Today it was to be told.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-33.txt 
 So I am telling you about it. Everything is not told at the same time. It
is the same in Sahaja Yoga. We don't tell you everything at this state. About
the Agnya Chakra I have told you something, but not all. Gradually, when
It has to be seen how far it is to be said at
you will be so aware, I will tell
you.
what time. And what was needed at that time was told by Krishna.
So the Gita is the one which only tells you that this will happen. But
Gyaneshwara, who was born after the sixth century, in Gyaneshwari he has
written about the Kundalini clearly.... He said this is how it is done. Gya-
There is neshwara has written ... because at that time, it was to be told. Before that,
it was not to be told. Shankaracharya in the sixth century did it. Then Gya-
neshwara did it. Then Nanaka did it. Then Kabira did it. All these people
no ism did it. Not only that, but even Mohammed-sahib in a way has talked about it
– about Sahaja Yoga and resurrection time. They all started talking about the
resurrection time much later as they started seeing people getting it because
with God.
to talk too much about the future is dangerous.
Shri Krishna was placed with Arjuna when they were at the war....
Не
told him how to become one with God ... that when you become one with
God, you become a stithapragya. He gave the idea as to what will happen to
you. But how it will happen He did not say. That was left to Me to explain.
They can't do everything. I have to do something, isn't it? Because if He had
said how then, they would have said, "Give me Realization." But they were
CC
not prepared for Realization.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-34.txt 
 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
www.divinecoolbreeze.org
SUBSCRIPTIONS: Contact@divinecoolbreeze.org
CONTENT: editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
The Divine Cool Breeze, 881 Frederick Road
North Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
PRINTED BY
King Printing Company Inc., 181 Industrial Avenue East
Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA
and Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd.
No.8, Chandragupta Housing Society, Paud Road,
Kothrud, Pune 411038, Maharashtra India
Credits and Notes
I have tried to go into spiritualism in the real sense of
the word, but my health is deteriorating day by day.
Front cover: Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 1981
words: 92nd quality of Shri Hanuman, 107th
Contents
pages
name of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, a prayer to Shri Bhumi Devi
Some gentleman has done spiritualism in the real
sense of the word and his health is deteriorating.
Contents pages photograph: Shri Mataji and Sahaja Yoginis, Shri
Mahalakshmi Puja 1987, Mechelen Belgium (Herbert Reininger)
Page 4 words: Shri Mataji, London, 7 September 1980
I have told you already what is the reason for that
Page 4 and 5 photo: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 1993
is that you take to spiritualism out of ignorance.
Page 10 photo: Shri Mataji, Mahalakshmi Puja 1987 (H. Reininger)
There is no spiritualism. There is no ism with God.
Page 12 words: Shri Mataji, Lonavala India, 25 January 1982
Pages 12 and 13 photos: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi,
CC •
The spirit cannot be "ismized." So
take to
you
Ganapatipule India, circa January 1990 (Herbert Reininger)
Sahaja Yoga.
Page 14 words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Navaratri Puja 1984
Page 15 photo: Shri Mataji, Mahalakshmi Puja 1987 (H. Reininger)
Page 16 words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Birthday Puja 1980
What will be the end of all the world and of human-
Page 17 photo: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, probably at the Munich
ashram at the time of the 1987 Mahakali Puja (Herbert Reininger)
kind?
Page 17 words: Shri Mataji, Guru Puja 2001 and 12 January 1985
Pages 18 & 23 photos: Shri Mataji, Guru Puja 1987 (H. Reininger)
Which will be the end of the world? Again, futur-
Page 24 photo: a staircase at Shudy Camps UK, Guru Puja 1987
istic – very futuristic. Let's not talk about the end.
(Herbert Reininger) Page 26 words: Herbert Reininger
Just now is the beginning. When the child is born,
we just don't think about his death, do we? So
better be worried about the beginning of this new
Page 26 photos: Shri Mataji, Florence Italy, 1989 (H. Reininger)
Page 27 painting: portrait of Shri Mataji by Konstantin Sterkhov
Page 28 photo: a cedar forest, Vancouver Canada
Page 28 words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Shri Ganesha Puja 1984
world that we have started and don't think of the
Page 29 words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Guru Puja 1980
Photograph above: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in India
death and all those things. Forget it for the time
Back cover words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Diwali Puja 2000
being.
Back cover photo: near Kings Canyon Australia (Gautama Payment)
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-35.txt 
 HOW DOES A TREE GROW?
BY ITSELF.
I ALLOW Y
OU TO GROW BY YOURSELF, THROUGH INTROSPECTION AND MEDITATION.
