The Divine Cool BreezeS 2009 issue 6- volume twenty-two number six alls

 Don't indulge too much in the past, but see the distance you have crossed in such a short time. 34

 You are the essence of time. You are beyond time. HC DIVIVE COUL DISEEZE VULUME TWENTY-TWONUMBER SIX: 2 Sahaja Yoga is Forever 4 Peace is Keynote 10 The Present Becomes Divine • 12 Rooted in Truth • 14 A Collective Happening 16 Sat-Chit-Anand 18 Three Things 20 Shri Ganesha Described · 22 Blossomtime 26 To the Seekers of Truth • 28 Questions & Answers 32 Time

 foreve Sahaja Yoga is what will last forever and everybody will remember it. The one who has a humble nature will be remembered for generations. Everything that you are doing is for God and that is why you are doing it för your Self. So introspection is very important. Criticizing others should be less and criticizing yourself and laughing at yourself is the best. I laugh at Myself many a times and say many things like that, if you have noticed. That makes life so interesting. That will kill your ego. "How I am trying to assert myself and where is the meekness that Christ has talked about?" It is a natural goodness within us. Once it shines and shows, you become so beautiful, so lovable. 50 Whether you are sitting here near Me or there, I know who is that kind. My heart just opens for such a personality. I know who they are. But even if I know, I will never tell you. It is better that you know yourself. 2.

 Peace is the In our new journey into the battlefield, we have to win people with love, compassion, affection and dignity. When we say it is a Vishwa Dharma, it is the universal religion we belong to. First and foremost thing, the essence of that is peace. The peace has to be within, to begin with. You have to be peaceful within yourself. If you are not peaceful, if you are playing tricks with your ego, if you are just satisfying yourself saying that you are peaceful, you are sadly mistaken. Peace is to be enjoyed within yourself. It is to be felt within yourself. So do not give wrong sat- isfactions to yourself. Do not give false notions to yourself. Don't cheat yourself. Peace has to be felt within yourself and if you are not feeling shouldn't come and ask Me, "Mother, why am I not feel- that, you ing it?" because I am not going to tell you that something is wrong with you. You have to work it out, that you should feel peaceful within yourself. feel It is not that if you have too much of silence outside, you peaceful. The peace has to be within yourself. You have it. Your spirit is absolutely peaceful, avyagra, without restlessness. There is no restlessness in your spirit- absolutely peaceful and steady. 7 February 1985 Bordi India It is for you to feel it. It is not for anybody else to certify you. 4

 Keynote for the universal growth of this religion What is right with you Because there is no peace, there is no registration. Whatever goes into your head, that is going to work out. But what I find is that people have concave personalities, then they receive it. Those who have convex personalities do not register anything. The registration is so poor that whatever I say doesn't have any effect on them. Otherwise, whatever I say is a mantra. It should have a direct effect on you and you should feel that effect, that penetration within you. But as if it is for somebody else, as if it is not for you, this shows there is no peace within you. Only the peace within can register whatever is auspicious, whatever is nourishing for your growth. So try to make peace with yourself. Do not fight with yourself.. It is not what is wrong with you that is the problem. What is right with you is the attitude. Whatever is right with you, put your foot on that. Establish yourself on that point and then develop yourself higher.

 Peace is the keynote for the universal growth of this religion. It is disturbed by many things. Firstly, as I said, by yourself. You shouldn't have funny ideas about yourself. People have very funny ideas. I see Sahaja Yogis, as soon as they get Realization, or something better happens to them, they start telling others how to do meditation, how to stand up, how to give bandhan, how to do this and that. It is very, very poor. It is very low level. Try to assimi- ate within yourself. First grow yourself. That growth itself will tell others how one should be. Your own character, your own tempera- ment, your own nature, your own behav- iour - all this will tell others that this is a great man and they will try to follow your example. Example is the best teaching. When the tree is small, even if it says, "I am great" nobody is going to come and sit under a dwarf tree. But when it is a big tree, you can see the shade and everybody knows it is a big tree and they can come and sit under that. You don't have to tell. In the same way, when you grow, you don't have to certify that "I am great." It just works. Respect for others The peace within expresses, with others. That is the first sign of the man- ifestation of peace. Such a person doesn't use harsh words, doesn't use cruel words. But he first of all, peace is also not a person who is ineffective. He is very effective, using very sweet and nice words. Maybe he begins by using harsh words, then he mellows down and comes down to a position where he is effective as well as he is very mild and sweet. Such a per- sonality has to be developed - outside. So, have peace with your friends, peace with Sahaja Yogis. If you cannot be peace ful with Sahaja Yogis, then you are no good, absolutely no good. When you meet another Sahaja Yogi, you can't bark like dogs at each other.... So the peace should be with your broth- ers and sisters. They are all born out of My Sahasrara and nobody has a right to insult,

 PEACE to be sarcastic. Saying things which are harmful. That is no friendship. It is a kind of a very enmity that you are carrying on in your hearts. That cannot be forgiveness. If you say sarcastic things to others, you are not in the culture of universal religion. You should be respectful. The more respectful you are to each other, the better it would be.. Suddenly you come out with remarks. Very nasty remarks they are. There is no sense in it. That is not our culture. We belong to a universal religion. How can it be that culture? So when you try to be peaceful with your brothers and sisters, try to be extremely You are in respectful. When you write letters to each other say, "My dear brother in Sahaj Yoga such and such." I have seen all communists do that. Anybody who belongs to any party does one body, that. It is a kind of a respect they have. You cannot talk like street people and ordinary people because you are really extraordinary. And all that is extraordinary has to be expressed through you. subtle active. Humility and neatness To keep this peace with others, be in an apologetic mood. "I hope I haven't done this mistake. I hope I haven't hurt you. I hope I haven't put your things in a wrong way." Like that. Be in an apologetic mood. You can find that among Indians. Indians have that kind of a problem. They are more on the apologetic footing. Sometimes it is impossible to convince them... In Indian culture we have something very great.... We are more on the apologetic style, never on the aggressive. Never trying to find faults with others, but we find faults in what way we have failed, how we have failed. This is something to be learned from Indians, if they have retained their culture at all. It is actually in their blood. That is how our culture is going to be such that we will express complete peace within ourselves. And you must know that you are in one body, active. You are active cells in one body. All the cells of the body are never active, but those who are active have to be at peace with each other, otherwise what will happen to that poor body? So try to make The second thing you can do to make peace is to talk less. Whenever there is a quarrel or anything, just keep quiet. You see, it will have a better effect. If two persons are quarrel- ling, never try to solve it, but just keep quiet. Quiet is very important. More to be silent. But it should not be another extreme, like the English culture, that they just don't talk, whatever it is. They just don't talk, but they think too much. You must keep quiet with the feeling that "May God bless these people with some sense." It should not be ice-frozen sea, but peace. peace which is effective the peace that is effective. So in this new culture, we have to be extremely peaceful people and that peace should be expressed on your In our culture neatness is very important – neatness of thought, neatness of mind, neatness of body, neatness of behavior. How you do things neatly is very important in our culture. That is very, very important, which may look very funny to some people because whether you hold the fork this way or that way makes no difference to Me. It doesn't matter how you hold your fork or knife on a table. That is not so important. But definitely it is important how you hold the aarti [tray], how you hold the puja things, how you hold My photographs, how you hold the things that belong to other Sahaja Yogis, how you respect the things that are auspicious. So that is what one has to have within yourself – the neatness of piousness, of auspi- ciousness, of holiness. That is to be done with very great care and understanding and with that weight of auspiciousness you should walk, with that weight of auspiciousness. You are auspiciousness walking on this Earth, yourself. You are peace on this Earth. But the peace is put into this vessel has to be clean, has to be neat and has to be placed in such a way that nothing spills out. faces. People should understand that you are peaceful.... IS way

 Think of Peace, bliss and gratitude So to have peace, the best way to put your mind right is to think of good things. Think of the flowers, not of the thorns, what good things others have done to you, what good things there are, what are the beautiful moments you have had and count your blessings. Count your blessings, otherwise you cannot create peace. You need not pay attention to everything like that. Keep your attention at peace. Keep the peace inside, with your atten- tion inside. Actually, if you really allow all My words to go inside your brain, I'm sure I'll achieve the results. But with the convex mind, it is very difficult. Just suck in. Another aspect of peace is never try to support anything that is boisterous or which is destructive.... Anybody who is being tortured or aggressed or dominated is to be pro- tected and supported. If you have the strength of peace you can do it just by standing there. You don't have to fight for your peace, but if it comes to that - a person like Hitler, when he came, people had to fight for their peace. Now the second part of our culture has to be bliss. People should see bliss working in us. People should feel there is bliss. If a person is blissful, he looks blissful, he emits bliss, he radiates it. He doesn't look a miserable, unhappy creature who is all the time grudging, grumbling or worried about little petty things here and there. And nobody has a right to disturb anybody's bliss. If somebody is in a blissful state, try to copy that person and become that. But people get jealous of such people who are blissful and try to disturb... We have to enjoy our bliss within. That is important. Perhaps you are not aware of the the flowers, not of the thorns. bliss that have, not at all aware. you Never, never before there were so many people who got Realization. Never before, in the history before that people of very ordinary effort, of very little seeking, of very little understand- ing have been given Realization like this. It's like sometimes, if you see, like a stone becoming a diamond suddenly. You can cut a diamond from a diamond. Such a blissful state you are in. Tremendous bliss has come. It is so effective. I Myself don't know, when I see that, I'm really surprised how it's working. Bliss can only come through gratitude, only through enlarging your heart with grati- tude. Bliss is the reward of gratitude the gratitude which is not just worldly or just spoken lip service, but is from the heart - the gratitude of the heart. And the blissful people are never jealous of others because what is greater than bliss? Bliss has so many dimensions that you go beyond the realm of cause and effects. All the angels, all the are there to help you. You know that it works out this way, it works out that way – but you take it for granted. You don't have that effect of the bliss in you, when you know this has happened, that has happened - what a bliss. You cross your hearts when you feel blissful. Cross your hearts. Now feel that. Just see. Feel the bliss like this.... Tremendous bliss is within us. How much it has happened to us, that Adi Shakti Herself came on this Earth to solve your problems. Never ganas that God has been so kind. 8. SO

 Bliss is everywhere This bliss then, you find everywhere. In a little thing also you find there is bliss. Zen taught that to people. They saw bliss in seeing only a moss, a little bit of moss. And see the moss and that moss has all the little, little tentacles and that bliss. But those who are vain people can never feel bliss. Vanity kills bliss. Ego kills bliss... It is so beautiful. How many have got this bliss? Have sympathy for them, have com- passion for them, those who do not have. But bliss comes to you through your confidence in yourself. If you have no confidence in yourself, bliss cannot be. And the worst thing against confidence is [saying], "Then what should I do? Then how can I get it? Then why not I have?" It is the worst, you fight- ing yourself all the time. You are that, sitting on that and still if you are saying, "Why shouldn't I have it?" Moss has all you you say, "Oh God, what a beautiful piece it is." God has created a little moss and that bliss. So what to answer? I mean you just want to ask because you have to ask. It is there. Why are you asking? Just feel it. If that works out, that you feel where you are sitting, then you will be surprised that you are at peace with yourself and there is bliss. Last of all in this culture, you have to behave like people who have authority. You have the authority of your spirit. You are authorized. You have the spirit. Those who are in authority never try to show off because they are in authority. Your authority is your Self, your own being. People should see in you what you are. You don't have to carry labels... You are authorized. Authority shows on your face. But now you are actualized on the authority... You might be something at the height. You might just go down. But a Sahaja Yogi will remain a Sahaja Yogi. You are authorized and actualized. This means whatever is your authority is part and parcel of your being. You are that. Like if you are a human being, you are a human being. Now you can't grow tails, even if you want to. So, now you are authorized, actualized, completely moulded Sahaja Yogis. Like the sandalwood, sandalwood is not to be told by taking a vow, "Oh, it is sandalwood." It is sandalwood because every part of it has the fragrance of sandalwood. Every part bit of you must have the fragrance of Sahaja Yoga... So you are not only actualized. of you, every You are perfected. You are perfected. you must have the dignity of that authority in you. And dignity is a very humble dignity. Dignity is never arrogant. The sign of dignity is humility.... Humility is a sign. How you talk to others, immediately people will know that have the authority from God. See the humbleness of the Divine, how It is trying to please you and amuse you and make you happy - in the nature, also in the lectures.... I hope you have understood the culture of your universal religion. Please try to adopt it. May God bless So you you.

 WE TRY TO DO OUR LEVEL BEST, but still sometimes you feel that there can be some mistakes we might have committed. But it is not for you to be upset about it because once you have reached the shores of joy, then you should not give it up for anything because it is your own choice whether you want joy or you want unhap- piness.. Whatever your past was, whatever mistakes you might have committed in the past in your ascent or whatever might have happened in the past because of others to you, it is all lost in the past, the ocean of the past.... When you reach a certain state, then you should not allow anything of the past to come back. I would even suggest to give a challenge to the past.... Even if you are afraid of the past .. or you get angry with yourself or you feel upset about it, then yet you have not reached the point. So now you have to see it, that you are at a distance. That's why you are secing it. Nothing can touch you. the present becomes DIVINE So the judgment will come from you to yourself. “Am I still involved in the An absolutely silent that was yesterday. Is it finished now? Am I even now bothered about it?" past And Mother will also sometimes test you on that. Sometimes I may remind you of some mistake of yours and then see what happens to you. And your confidence you drink then I will know where are My children. like the nectar of life. you have become the fruit which is ripe, so why should you worry Now about things which you are not any more? Now if you have become a full- fledged bird, why should you worry about the egg that used to smell so badly. This is the attitude one must have towards oneself, the confidence within yourself. 10

 So that's how you challenge your past and now you can even challenge your future. Now start thinking what can happen to us, supposing, which is very, very common nature of the western people. Yes, because if you tell somebody, "Now, will you please go and telephone to that person," immediately that person will tell you, "Perhaps he may not be there. Now let me see what's the time. This is the time he has to go out, so he must have gone out." But why don't you telephone? And you telephone and the fellow is there. This is the western style of futuristic explanations of everything... That kind of a mind always tries to find problem because it doesn't want to solve. So |f vou believe as soon as it starts, wants to say he wants to go somewhere to the station. Immediately he the word, "Problem is, there is no car." That means he starts quarrelling with himself in God, It acts says all the time. His body is quarrelling on one side, his heart is on another side, his mind on another side, liver is on another side. So as a result, at the end of the day you find all of In everything. them sitting, "Ha," doing nothing whatsoever, all exhausted, fighting with oneself. Now you are Sahaja Yogis. You have to remember that all God's powers are with you, but the only thing is you have to be with Him. The powers are with you, but they are not going to run after you. I mean if you want to wriggle out of it, what can the powers do? So you have the powers of God. So that's how with the future we start thinking like this, "Now, let me figure it out, if it works out or not...?" This is God's work.... It will fix. But still some people will linger on to think, "How can it be, Mother?" Now I'll tell you the secret. You are in the Brahma Shakti and this Brahma Shakti is the vibrations that you feel. It has all the creative power. It has all the destructive power. It has all the evolutionary power. It has all the powers, we can say. And it's like a big com- puter. It uses whatever it wants to use. Vibrations are Brahma Shakti and they exist in every matter, whether dead or alive. So when see that .. the order has come and the vibrations in the molecules act. you So this Brahma Shakti is everywhere. It penetrates into everything. And if you believe in God, It acts in everything. But it is not blind belief. First you have to be a perfect Sahaja Yogi. Then you are one with the Brahma Shakti. You can control everything and you do not waste your energy in controlling nonsensical things. You don't want to become like a juggler, creating a flower out of a thorn or that sort of a thing. But wherever necessary it works, it acts. So will have experiences in life, one by one, and you will be amazed how things you work out. And then you will realize that you are not an ordinary Sahaja Yogi. Whatever you have committed wrong in the past or whatever you used to think of the future, the present becomes divine. And that divine present is the ocean of joy, of which you are the part and particle. Just enjoy that... Don't think about who is the enjoyer and who is the creator. You just become the existence. Existence is the present. That is how it works out- where you lose all words, all thoughts, all feelings, which are of an emotional type. An absolutely silent confidence you drink like the nectar of life. May God bless you al

 A living thing develops slowly. Sahaja Yoga is a living process. rooted in truth It is important to know that Sahaja Yoga is truth and we are firmly rooted in it. We have to, therefore, discard the untrue, otherwise we cannot attain purity. As a matter of fact, untruth is an illusion and we should decide to get out of it. With pure desire for this, our awakened Kundalini puts us in a state where we can discern what is truth and what is untruth and we start longing to attain only the truth. Giving up all our misconceptions, we have to take to truth. Some people wish to attain material wealth, some desire to achieve power and there are some others who are in search of God Almighty. Those who want to know the abso- lute (Parama) will be the first to come to Sahaja Yoga. After getting established in Sahaja Yoga, one is, at times, pained to see the slow with which Sahaja Yoga is spreading, but we should understand that a living thing devel- ops slowly. Sahaja Yoga is a living process. We cannot force it on anyone. We cannot give false certificates and we cannot say for certain that everyone will get Realization. For a number of reasons, many people do not get realized. pace After Realization, when one is connected with the Paramchaitanya, one comes to know that the Paramchaitanya does everything for us. We get detached and become akarmi. Nothing worries us. On coming to Sahaja Yoga, due to short-sightedness, in the beginning one considers oneself the doer. Slowly, as one gets experienced, one understands that man does noth- ing. The Paramchaitanya does everything. Everything gets done smoothly. Sometimes, if something goes against our desires, even then we should not think that God has not helped us. In fact, we can neither think nor do more than God, so we have to accept that the Paramchaitanya has done the appropriate thing and what is coming up is very beautiful. There are two aspects about which a Sahaja Yogi has to be very careful. Firstly, through individual meditation, we should know our faults, the state of our instrument, whether we are right-sided or left-sided. By putting our attention on the photograph, we can know all this. Then in meditation, we should clear all the negativity. In Sahaja Yoga, the meditation system is very easy. After clearing ourselves, we should into the collectivity. The opening of the heart is essential for this. A narrow-minded get person can never be collective. We should not put our attention on the faults of others, for, by doing so, these shortcomings grab us. We should take note of the qualities and inherent beauty of others. We should correct their faults with the power of divine love. 12

 Love is truth and truth is love. One who uses the power of love ascends very high. Love is truth With hearts, you have to see people with love. This is how you develop individually open and collectively. We should beware of a person who is not collective. Listening to others and truth talk about the faults of others is wrong in Sahaja Yoga. We should observe how softly we can speak and how much power of forgiveness we possess. We should regard all Sahaja is love. Yogis as our relatives. The second aspect of Sahaja Yoga is the knowledge of Sahaja Yoga and its spreading. We should know which place on the hand or foot indicates the catches of which chakra and which catch could cause which disease and how it can be cured. Ladies, being shaktis, must attain this knowledge. With the help of this knowledge, ladies will be able to under- stand Sahaj children and their behavioural The spreading of Sahaja Yoga is another significant thing. As without cross-ventila- tion the room cannot be aired, in the same way, if you do not pass on the experience of Sahaja Yoga to others, do not help them, do not give them Self Realization, do not spread Sahaja Yoga, then you yourself cannot progress. There are some Sahaja Yogis who keep dreaming all the time that the heaven of Sahaja Yoga will dawn on the whole globe. Such Sahaja Yogis always remain in a state of bliss. Hyderabad Puja great responsibility has fallen on our shoulders - the responsibility of building up 25 February 1990 a pure-hearted society in which we can place our faith and remain established in that translated from Hindi faith. patterns.

 The solution of the whole thing is one which I have found out Myself. It was this: that it is a collective happening. his A person who is an individual can never get over ego. The greatest law of Sahaja Yoga: it's a collective You have to attend. You have to go for meditation with others, collectively. It is a collective happening. Supposing a nail is The chakra of the Virat taken out of your finger. It will never grow. In the same way, it is a collective happening.... is where we have to seek Thousands and thousands of people who are self-realized, they are all your part and parcel. ourselves in others. If one person gets into trouble in any place, all of them will jump at it and try to see that that Our banyan tree is saved. So you have so many brothers person 50 and sisters - real brothers and sisters I should is the collectivity. say. They are not only blood relations, but they are spirit relations. 14

 To be Sahaj is to be collective. If you do not meet collectively every day, then there will be a problem. In the collective only the maturity starts. It is a living process. Now supposing a tree is growing and you take out a leaf from there and the leaf will say, "I'm going to grow by myself." It cannot grow. It will be left out. So that is what one has to remember, that it is a collective happening. We all have to meet and grow together. Now those who are not collective will disappear one day into thin air, like a dead leaf. I think people do not understand the meaning of a collective happening. It is just like a tree growing and with the tree everything else that belongs to the tree also grows. happening So for the growth of this tree, one has to remember that you have to stick onto the tree. But the tree is not going to run after you, "Stick on, stick on to me, stick on to me." For that, whatever has to be done, has to be done. You know, when the winter comes, all the leaves fall off. What they do is to create a barrier between themselves and the tree by Modern Sahaja Yoga is a collective happening. It cannot work out some living process. They create a barrier in berween. There is a little bark that comes in between. Now when that happens the leaves fall off and the tree becomes barren. individually. So after Now the same thing happens in Sahaja Yoga. When you do not accepr the principle of getting your Realization, you must have self-estecm. Sahaja Yoga, you put a barrier in between the sap and the leaf. Now when that happens, respect your Realization and attain the highest. аcсepг the leaf falls off. You cannot sit at home and say that "I am doing Sahaja Yoga." So you have to open out yourself, your heart, everything to suck in the sap to nourish. You have to give up your ego and superego, your conditionings and ideas you have had from before. This is what is the surrender. It is the Islam. And that is to be achieved. But that is not going to help the tree. It is going to help you.

 chit sat The spirit is the most precious thing that we have within ourselves. The preciousness of your spirit is immeasurable and that is why it is called the thing of eternal value. Because it is infinite, we cannot measure it. Now, God the Almighty we say is sat-chit-anand. Sat means the truth. The truth we His light understand in human terminology is relative. But the truth I am telling you is the abso- His light lute, from where all the relations start. An example I will tell you, how to understand. comes into the This Earth has got oceans and rivers and all kinds of waters, but the Earth is enveloping 1S all of them. If the Mother Earth was not there, there could not have been any of this heart of man existing. So we can say that the Mother Earth is the support of all the things that exist on Earth. She is enveloping us. In the atoms She exists, in the big mountains She exists because the elements are part of that Earth. In the same way is God Almighty. The sat part of Him, the truth, is the support of all the things that are created or not created. Another example you try to understand is how the sat is the purush, is the God who does not take actual part in the creation itself, but is a catalyst. The example can be like this: I am doing all the work, I am creating everything, but I have a light in Without the light, I cannot do anything. The light is the support of My work, but the light does not in any way do anything about what I do. In the same way, God Almighty is just the witness like a light. But His other quality is the chit. It is attention. When ir is excited pulsated . then, through His attention, He starts creating. And He has a third quality which we call anand. Anand is the feeling of joy that He gets by His perception, by His creation, the joy that He gets. All these three things - sat, chit, anand- when they are at a zero point where they meet, then they become the prin- ciple of Brahma. When these three things are one, where there is complete silence, noth- ing is created and nothing is manifested, but the joy is one with the attention because the attention has reached to merge into joy and joy has become one with the truth. This combination of three qualities separate and create three types of phenomena. Anand, the joy, inwardly merged with His creation and with the truth. When joy starts moving with the creation, the creation starts moving down from, first, the sat or truth stage to asat – that is untruth – to maya, that is illusion. And at that time, the creation starts working out. And when it starts working out, the joy, which is on the left-hand side, the emotional side of God, also starts becoming grosser and grosser, until they reach a where there is a complete darkness of tamoguna, the complete cessation of the creativity and the complete sleeping of the joy. Is it clearer? You will understand now Mahalakshmi, Mahakali and Mahasaraswati. That is why Christ said, "I am the light"- because He represents the sat, the light of God. And when the light of God becomes absolutely gross, dormant or dead, then it reaches the second stage of creation. All these things go deeper and deeper and become grosser. That is one part of the parabola. Now another part of the parabola starts when you are attaining back to God Almighty. That process now gradually starts becoming higher and higher, subtler and subtler and finer and finer. In that refinement, ultimately the light works for the evolutionary process. Gradually the grosser parts start becoming enlightened. You find the lower animal is not as much enlightened as the higher animal. Gradually, even the joy starts becoming subtler and subtler. We can call it beautiful. Human joys are much more beautiful than that of as spirit. IS hand. my or when it is IS stage 16 animals.

 anand You see a keybox. You open it out. You see the patterns. It is like the ocean before you, where I am there. So the joy also start changing its manifestation in the sense you start more and a wider range of joy comes into your hands. For example, to a dog, beauty has no meaning, decency has no meaning. So at a stage when you reach, when you are a human being, to that extent you develop your sat, which is awareness. To that extent, you also develop your joy and, to that extent, you also develop creative action. Now you see how the creativity of God passes into the hands of man, when he turns out, how the joy of God passes into the hands of man and how His light comes into the heart of man as spirit. It is beautiful. I have just touched upon when you have become a human being. People say ing in a human being only. Because of that light, we talk of religion, we talk of God and we talk of eternal things. But it is really a precarious stage, that is to be a human being, because, at this stage, you have to jump only a little bit that side, while you start jumping this side and that side. Because this jumping is not possible unless and until the awareness reaches that and more human beings have a soul - not that others do not have - but light starts burn- Three things become independent and, in that independence, you find have to be where stage you your own course. This is the position because your Self cannot be yours until and unless you are independent. As long as you are a slave or under bondage or something that is gross, how can you enjoy that eternal joy that is within you? So it is for you to expose yourself more to that joy by opening out your Self more and more and getting subtler and cleaner, so that feel that Divine. Once you know this point, that after getting Self Realization, unless and until these three things start merging together, you cannot feel that you have established yourself. The joy within you must be felt through your awareness, otherwise you cannot see it. Suppose you have no eyes, then how can you see? If you were not aware to see Me, how will Combined. you you see Me? If you are not aware to hear Me, how will you understand Me? And once that awareness comes to you, then only the joy awakens within you because only through these subtle feeling of the awareness are you going to absorb the joy. Just now you felt, you said, "What a beautiful thing it is." You felt very happy. You are feeling the joy of creation at this stage and man is the summit of creation. But only the crown part is such a little thing. Very little it is. Very little distance it crosses in no time, but the only thing is that three things have to be combined. And that is why you find, even if you get Self Realization, you do not feel the silence because you have not become the light. You do not feel the joy because you have not become the anand. That is the left side of you. In everything there is joy as a human being. You start seeing joy in patterns. You see a keybox. You open it out. You see the patterns. You call it the veneer. You call the rough- ness and things, the smoothness and the harmony of it. You start feeling the matter, the joy of His creation. But after Realization, you start feeling the joy of creation.... It is like the ocean before where I am there and I want you all to come into it reprinted from and enjoy. It is all for you. The whole thing was created for your enjoyment. You have to Nirmala Yoga become subtler and subtler. You are wasting a lot of time here on very gross things. "Spirit" circa 1983 *** you, volume 3 number 16

 Dhammam sharanam gachami three things Do your puja just for the joy– not for any results - just for the joy. I mean we are doing so many things like that. For example, we enjoy each other's company. Just think of that. You all Sahaja Yogis are enjoying each other's company. What is this for? Nothing at all. There is nothing. You are enjoying it without any desire, just for enjoyment's sake enjoyment. When that purity comes in our temperament, that we do everything without desire, we have got rid of our ego, so Buddha is awakened within us. And that is what is the importance of Buddha. He has settled Himself down in the place which is the most difficult place. That is on the left side of your For that, we have to say, "Buddham sharanam gachami." This means we surrender ourselves to Buddha. any IS head.... LL the second one is going to be? “Sangham sharanam gachami. Then what does He say I surrender myself to collectivity" - sangam. "Sang" means the collectivity. "I surrender myself to collectivity." The ego goes down. First of all, Buddha, who is sitting, who is the deity, which is the enlightenment - you say, "I surrender myself to Buddha." Secondly, you say, "I surrender myself to collectivity." Egoistical people cannot sur render. So "I surrender myself to collectivity" - so we say, "Sangham sharanam gacham.' It is to the Virat we are doing... "Dhammam sharanam gachami." "Dhammam" means the religion, the balance. "I surrender myself to religion," which is essential. Or you can put it the other way around: "Buddham sharanam gachami, Dhammam sharanam gachami, Sangham sharanam gachami." That's all. If you have achieved it, then we can talk about it, not before that. 13 So these three things are to be achieved. We would put it in a Sahaja Yoga way like this: First of all, "Dhammam sharanam gachami, I surrender myself to my virtues." All desires can be surrendered to your virtue. "Is it virtuous to do like this?" You can. If you are brought up that way, you will not just do it. You will not have any desires to do any- thing that is not virtuous and righteous. You will just not do it. So, Dhammam sharanam gachami. So then you should say, "Buddham sharanam gachami." It means "I surrender myself to my enlightenment." This is the second state when you have ascended. "I surrender myself to enlightenment, enlightenment that I have got to my spirit." It is the spirit who is going to rise - "no more my physical, mental, emotional, nonsensical temptations." But what is the spirit? And thirdly, "Sangham sharanam gachami" - to the collectivity, to the whole, to the Virat. This is the Buddha Puja 1983 we have to work it out. way

 Buddham sharanam gachami to be achieved So ultimately, you reach the same point, that "Let me start it for myself- from myself to others, not from others to myself. It is like treating the tree from outside, not from the roots. But Sahaja Sangham sharanam gachami ге Yoga treats you from the roots. First you get your Realization, all right. Then you learn how to surrender yourself to your dharma. Then you become collectively conscious. Collectivity is a temperament. It is a sense of enjoyment that you get in the collective living. Unless and until you have that, you have not achieved. So Buddha has played a very great role in our lives and He is a very great, powerful force within us.... Ego is the only problem I always face, [otherwise] everything will be all right. So for us, the great mantra is "Buddham sharanam gachami." These three mantras you must say every day to get rid of this horrible ego... That is why I wore a Buddha shawl today because it is sug- gestive of a detached mind which has no problem. And there could be a personality which is colourless, but you can have it covered with colours, many colours I think. So when you are a realized soul, whatever you do is natu- ral – whatever do. If I am wearing this [shawl], now I Buddha. When I take it off, I am the Adi Shakti. It is not a drama. It is a fact. But if you are not a realized soul, before that, whatever you do is just a drama... If somebody is a real person, whatever he does is not a drama. It is reality. That is how they say that She can take this form, She can take that form. People don't understand how can a person lam the you Adi Shakti. take so many forms. She can. If it is reality, it can. Like the Mother Earth, She is a reality and the sap which is coming from the Mother Earth takes so many forms. See Her power. Flow- It is not a drama. ers – it's good - different colours, fragrance, so many things. Just one Mother Earth... because She is reality. The reality in Her can produce. But unreal things- whatever you make out of unreal It is a fact. things – they may look real... but they are not. ге 19

 He is just in connection with His Mother. To Him, She is everything. Не You are beyond the gross, subtle and causal bodies. You are beyond the three times. You always reside at the Muladhara chakra. The three Shakti Powers are within You. Yogis constantly meditate upon You. 20

 Shri Ganesha тes I have described There are so many qualities of Shri Ganesha which I have described. One of them is that He is a child. And He is very humble. He is very playful. He is very interesting. And He is extremely humble. And despite His weight, He is very lightweight because He can sit on a small, little mouse. He doesn't try to show off. He doesn't have His vahana [vehicle] as great as Vishnu's or anything. His vahana is very simple, the sim- plest – or we can say the smallest creature which can really crawl is a mouse and He uses this mouse. With this mouse, He expresses His own power that He doesn't need any other vehicle. It is His vehicle. It is His simplicity. He moves. He penetrates. And He affects the lives of people through very, very simple, sweet methods.... He always tries to please His Mother. He doesn't want to do anything that will make Her unhappy. He doesn't say no. And that is what is the quality of Shri Ganesha, that He knows what His Mother will like, each and every thing. And He does everything that is good for Him because, by that, He is pleasing His Mother. His complete dedication is to the Mother. It is not other thing, not to any other Deity. He fought with all of them. He to any is not bothered about who others are. He goes to all of them through the understanding of the Mother and respects them through the understanding of the Mother... That is what He is, just in connection with His Mother. To Him, She is everything. She is the source of knowledge. She is the source of joy. She is the source of truth. He doesn't have to look to anybody else.... If you have to achieve any knowledge within, if you have to ascend higher, then you have to learn from Shri Ganesha. What He does and what is His relationship with His Mother - which is purifying, nourishing and result- oriented - the result is that you ascend gradually. Shri Ganesha doesn't require even to know anything. He already knows. He is a very matured person – or we can say the most matured Deity is Shri Ganesha.

 **** bloss OSS 22

 I have come on this Earth to give you the complete knowledge of your spirit and of your being and to give you that enlightened dimension to your awareness by which will be able to make out who is real and who is unreal. you After your enlightenment, you will know how to use this power which is radiating through you. You will know how to cure yourself and cure others, mentally and physically. You will know sitting down here what is wrong with a person about whom you are thinking. You will jump into the realm of Brahma, that is the Divine Power, which is all-pervading. This power organizes the whole universe. This changes these flowers into fruits and seeds. This power sprouts the seeds. The Kundalini is the representative of the same power. That is your individual Mother. Everybody has their own Mother sitting down there. She loves and She is you waiting for an opportunity to give you this Realization. This has to be performed now - and now because the blossomtime has come. Many beautiful flowers have to find heir fruitful meaning. It will happen to all the nations. omtime It will happen to all the nations.

 blossom OSSom When we are dealing with reality, we have to know that we cannot just go on with things which are artificial, which are befooling others, but we have to really become that real- ity. Once you become that, when you are really like that, then only you have done the job for which you are born at this juncture of blossomtimes. Otherwise, you could have been born earlier and could have been something different. But you are specially born, so you Once you doing start value, realize yourself what you are and try to understand, have self-respect realize your God's work, and try to do things which are very important as Sahaja Yogis. Of course, you are doing a job, you are doing other things, but do the work of Sahaja Yoga, you will find more time for everything. Once you start will be amazed. If you God does you doing God's work, God does your work. And that is how you will be amazed how you get so much time to do the right thing. your work. Now it is for you to go back and introspect. See for yourself. Now the Adi Shakti Herself has come. But I am very simple. I am very simple to look at. In My behaviour, I am very, very humble and people take Me for granted. I don't do anything. I don't want to punish you. I don't want to do anything like that, But you yourself get punished. You yourself become useless if you do not look after yourself and grow yourself. This finding is so great. A man had never known Me before. He was very learned, but he was very humble and what he told Me was "Just imagine, I'm sitting before the very normal. So I said, "What should happen to you? What do you think?" He said, "Mother, it's a big thing to realize that I am sitting before You and that You Creator of this world and still I'm are here." I said, "It's good that you don't feel My presence so oppressive or so dominating. I'm very happy. "No," he said, "I just feel the love, just feel the compassion. That's what it is. We have to know that we should have just love and compassion- compassion and love for ourselves in the way that we should not harm anybody's heart... What is going to help you the most is to make yourself a perfect channel for Sahaja Yoga, to be a perfect channel. In that, you will be amazed how you will be helped... for There are so many things you can do very easily, if you see you are the instrument of the Divine. And then your temperament will change. The nature will change. You will become a very, very sweet person, a likable person, and everybody will think that this is a saint walking around. So that is all I have to say about this. Whatever is the discovery is not a discovery for Me, but a discovery for the whole world. And I'm sure once it is established and is exposed to the whole world, things will change for you – and for Me also. May God bless you. yourself that Shri Adi Shakti Puja 1998 24

 time to transform this world This change of attitude towards life, this change of complete peace and joy has come to all because your attention is now on your spirit. Its not difficult to transform this world. The time has you don't think of money. Money walks your way. You don't think of power. Now you Power walks your way. And the power of the spirit is the highest, the most powerful and the most righteous thing. It is not necessary that you things- no necessity of these rituals. The spirit is residing within you already, all you have done in last lives. come, just the right time. When the proper time comes, the blossomtime comes, so should become a sanyasi, sadhu-baba, do all kinds of many flowers become fruits. So, like that, you all have become. Now it is for you to create seeds to spread Sahaja Yoga. You are now at that level of awareness where the Paramchaitanya is with you, absolutely part and parcel of persons to understand that one can become the spirit, but this is in the evolutionary you, absolutely with you to Now in this life the only thing you have to do is to put attention to your spirit. And that is only possible through the awakening of this Kundalini - the Primordial Mother.... This of divine love is not only the love, if you want to say, it is also peace and joy power and also it is the superior wisdom. It is rather subtle for normal man to understand -I know that, I've gone through that - for IS give you all necessary help, all necessary prestige and also the personality. Sahasrara Puja 1999 process. Today is the time for people to become the spirit. This is the blessing of this blos- somtime, as I call it, and people have to become the spirit, otherwise what is left of them is like all other human beings... So this is an essential step today to become the spirit. All the saints, all the prophets, all the religions have talked about it.... It is only one simple thing. It is that you are a spirit and that spirit, unless and until you become, you cannot achieve any peace, any joy and no love.... Like a flower when it becomes the fruit, all its petals and everything drop out and then it becomes the fruit. So you have now become the fruit- the fruit of knowledge, the fruit of wisdom and of love. For knowledge, you don't have to read books. There is no need to. People who have read too many are difficult to get Sahaja Yoga. But what you have to see yourself is what is the reality. But that is only possible if you are a realized soul, otherwise you get lost in May God bless you. the illusions of the world. You live with the illusions all your life, struggling, fighting and Blossom into the beauty of I don't want to say what the end is. So a simple thing has happened with Sahaja Yoga. In your evolutionary process, your glorify your Father and this attention now has gone more to the spirit than to anything else. As soon as the power of is glorified with His gracious the spirit comes, you find yourself successful in everything. You don't want, you don't ask love towards you. for it and ... your spirit so that you will you don't mind. 20 March 1998 7 October 1981

 Koltheseekers of truth: part two a question of becoming сотm There are barriers within us, built in, not because of anything else, but only because we have misled ourselves. You have to be We have been going to various roads of seeking, whatever suited us. Wherever we went to, we have tried to find something and we have injured ourselves. Within ourselves sometimes, we have built up certain barriers. Now when you become the prophet, actually you become your own master. You become a free person. You have to be a free person. So far you are not. You cannot over- come your own weaknesses, your own temptations, infatuations, emotional problems, a free person. So far vou are not. mental worries. Why? Because you are still standing in the waves of this turmoil, this troubled area where you just see the waves all the time and you are frightened of breaking down. But if you somehow or other get out of it and get into the boat of your own being, then you enjoy. You become a witness, a sakshi. Even to understand the scriptures, you have to be a free person, which you are not. You have to be your own master. For that, you cannot pay me... To get your freedom of the spirit, you can't pay because money is money. Money has no value in the divine field. Nothing can bring this forth but your own ascent. And how do we ascend? Is there anything built within us? 10 The knowledge of the roots Whatever I am telling you is the knowledge of the roots. What we see is the knowledge of We see it from outside. We see a leaf from outside. If we have to treat the leaf, we the tree. have to go to the roots. But from outside, when we see the tree, we are still outside also. When have to treat the leaf, you have to go to the roots. If you block out the leaf, it you is dead. Then you put it under the microscope. You can go on seeing cells. After that, you can see the nucleus. You can go on analyzing it and analyzing it, making it dead, dead and dead and dead. But to treat it, you have to go to the roots. And this knowledge of the roots we have here.... Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi 22 June 1984 London These are not new ideas. These are very ancient ideas. In the Bible it is described as the Holy Ghost....

 Paths not layers I had never read Carl Jung, although I knew he was a realized soul – at least he got his Realization at a later time. So I said, "All right, let me have a look. Let me see his theory. And as I opened the book, I saw a diagram, what he had drawn of the human being. And I said that's the mistake because he saw human beings from outside and he described them in layers. First he said the unconscious that cannot be expressed manifested. And then the unconscious that can be manifested. Then he said about the subconscious and then he is said above that is the conscious mind, then above that is the ego - like layers, IS This Earth one after another. Now when you are sitting here, though you are in layers, the path is laid down. In the same way within us, God being the greatest organizer, He has not made us into layers, Is a special but what he has made us in a parallel way - left side and right side and the central path. Three paths He has made within us for our evolutionary process. The central path works present out our evolution. The left side gives us the desire and the right side gives us of action. These are just the principles I am telling you, but you can understand slowly, from God. when you grow, all the details of it. The central path of evolution has brought you today to this level of human aware- ness. Now beyond that is a very short ascent which you have to achieve, by which you become the spirit. But there has to be some living process for this to happen. And what is that living process built within us? It is the reflection of the Holy Ghost within us in the triangular bone, which is called as Kundalini in the Sanskrit language. This exists within us.... At the top of the head, it pulsates and then it breaks. When this breaks, the pulsa- tion stops and you start fontanel bone area. This is the happening... that takes place so the power from feeling the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost coming out of your that you get connected with the truth. With the connection become you So the connection takes place and you start feeling on your fingertips the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost which surrounds you. Actually you start feeling... One should know that when we have eyes we start seeing, when we have ears we start hearing, so now you have got a new awareness. What is this awareness? This is the awareness of collective con- sciousness, that you become. Again I say, "you become." You are not just certified, but become. It's a question of becoming, that you become collectively conscious, that on you your central nervous system you can feel another person. You can feel yourself. You can feel your centres. You can feel the centres of others on your fingertips.... But who talks about the resurrection? Nowhere people talk about it. They talk about the doomsday because they can frighten people with the doomsday first and take advan- tage of it and make money out of it. God who has created this universe. He feels love. Do you think He will destroy this great creation of His without giving us the fruit, without letting us know the fruit of His creation? He is the wisest of wise, the greatest, compassionate source of love. How could He allow this universe to be destroyed, especially this Earth, which is a special present from Him. So don't believe in all these stupid ideas of destruction and the last complete devastation. There is still lots of time. Let's first enjoy the blessings of the Divine for which He has created you. e IS 27

 Q2 uestions nswers SHRI MATAJI: One more question I will ask – very simple, not so difficult. What is the difference between a baddha and a bhoot How will you make it out, a hindrance and a bhoot? SAHAJA YOGI: Bhoots will move around. And a baddha? It stays still. Its a block. Old Arlesford He is correct. What you said is correct, but it is not absolutely precise. A United Kingdom baddha will also move. I will tell you how. A baddha is always on the cen- 17 May 1980 tres or on your organs. If it is ... in the liver, this baddha may come in the centre and then it will start moving from here to here as the Kundalini will be moving. But a baddha doesn't have its arbitrary movement. As you move the Kundalini, the baddha moves. Baddha means the hindrance. But a bhoot is arbitrary. It moves. It will be one moment here. It will be one moment there. It will move this side. It will move that side. It will go to the right Heart, then it will come to the left Heart if it is an arbitrary behavior. That means it is not controlled by your movement of your fingers. Through the Kundalini awakening then, you must know it is a bhoot... One thing is arbitrary. It works on its own and another is in your control. You are taking it out yourself. Like you can say that if there is some lump in the body, it may start moving with the bloodstream or something, some force acting upon it. But by itself, it does not move. But if there is a worm, a living worm, it will move by itself. 28

 So the last question is then, how do you manage the baddha and the bhoot? How will you take out the bhoot of other people without getting yourself into it? Otherwise the whose bhoot has to be taken out will put three bhoots in you and five in the others.... person The Sahaja Yogis give several answers. One says to use a candle. Another says to use a bandhan. Another says to use a mantra to Mukti Devi. Another says to say the Lord's Prayer. There is no general thing about it. All answers are correct, but they are not complete. There are ways and methods. They are trying to solve the prob- lems, but it is rather difficult. Now first of all, you see a person who is pos- There are ways sessed. I mean you are sure he is possessed, so you do like this: take a form. You have to take a form because you have to fight it. You take an aggressive and methods. form. Karate? Karate, yes something like that.... Inside you become higher than that person.... So you go with a great force on that person. Put a bandhan and say, "Now sit down...." You have to say it as if you are not compromising on this - no compromise. Then you ask the person various questions. After giving yourself a bandhan... verify what sort of a bhoot it will be. That's the best. First of all, you ask that person has he been to any guru. So now you know at least sixteen of them. And you know how to take them out also. So you find out which bhoot he has been to. If it is a guru, you just ask the person does he still believe in that guru. If so, you have nothing to do with that person. You have no business. You say, "I'm sorry, sir.." Not sorry - you say, "Please go away." If you say "sorry" it will come inside. Any inviting word say, "All right, finished, you get out from there.' But in the case he says, "I'm possessed. I know I'm in trouble. I've should not use. Just you got this thing" and all that, then you ask that person, "What is the name of your guru? What is the mantra you got? How many years you have been?" Like that, you ask the questions. If he is truthful and if he tells you that, then you exactly know where the mantra is, what has happened to him. If it is a guru, then it has to be in the Void. Ifit is in the Void, you tell him, "You say the mantra of Adi Guru or ask the question 'Mother, are You the real...' on the photograph." Keep the photograph in front of your face like a mask if possible. Don't allow you yourself to be exposed, but give the photo- graph to the man. You say, "Now ask this question to this photograph." Now asks the question, the Kundalini will start coming here... if the person

 Then you should say, "After asking the question, now you say that you are the " If the person is possessed by a guru, then if you know the name of guru. the guru, then you will know the mantra. When he is doing all these things, you go on saying, "Narakasura Mardini" or "Mahishasura Mardini" or any- thing like that, whatever you have to do - or "Sarvasurya Mardini." For a guru the best thing is vibrated salt. You give some vibrated salt with water to that person to drink. It is not easy to get rid of the guru, so you tell him very firmly that he is one of the most horrible ones we have ever known, "so you have to work very hard to get rid of it." Give him salt. Give him all that. Let him do it. And do not hurry up. Tell him it is going to take time, it will be all right and what troubles people had with this and he will have to work it 33 out. This is one type of bhoot you will find. Then you find these are guru bhoots and which takes time, which are very difficult and they can take you up. It can be very dangerous. But say somebody becomes blind with a bhoot. His eyes are open and he is blind. That is a sure shot he is blind because of a bhoot. Two types of blindness are possible. Their left Swadishthana will be catching and you will think it is due to a bhoot. But it can be also left Swadishthana is catching and he is becoming blind could be with diabetes. It could be the combination of both. So you ask him if he has diabetes or not. If the person has no diabetes, then definitely it is the bhoot. Now what do you do to take out that kind of a bhoot? Use a candle. In Sahaj Yoga Not only a candle – it won't work. You take My hand photograph, only the hand. You have photographs of My hand and put a candle before that pho- one has also tograph. All these photographs that you have separately have meanings. Put the candle and behind that is the hand and ask the person to see the light. If he can see the light, gradually you will be amazed he will start seeing. is to be used. In Sahaj Yoga one has also to be precise, just like the English.. If you are precise, it comes out. If you are not precise, then you try this, you try that, it won't work out. But if you have a photograph of My hands you should ask the person to see the photograph of the hand. By seeing the person will start seeing the hand. And then gradually the person will become all right. I've seen one person getting the eyes within ten minutes time. But in that, if the left Swadishthana is catching, if the person has no diabetes and the eyes are open, then it is definitely a bhoot, nothing else. Even if some people might say, "She lost her eyes because... there was a fire in the house." But she got frightened and the bhoots sat in here and she became blind. They to be precise. This the light, gradually 30

 are connected, both things. Actually the eyes cannot remain open if the eyes burned out. So if the eyes are open and absolutely normal to look at and the are person cannot see, the light is out. That means there is a bhoot. So these things can be very easily done.. It will improve your eyesight also. My hands My Hands should be used – very good for the eyes. My Hands are extremely good for are extremely your eyes. If you can see My Hands with the light, very good for your eyes. Now what are My Feet good for? They are very good for ego and also good for superego. It is very good for people who suffer from ego or superego because, such people are very gross and the Feet solve the problem. So just use My your eyes. Feet. If they see My face, the ego will start working, "This face is like that, it should be like that - this, that." Superego might give problems. Even the supraconscious will give you problems. But Feet, even if you are supracon- scious, they will correct your problems. The Feet are not only powerful, but they go up to the use My Feet, he will be all right. The face won't work for him. The face is for the seekers. But for all such grossest point where you are. Any type of person ... you just people who are absolutely an incorrigible type, the Feet are the best. Those who have extreme ego, those who have extreme superego- extreme- the Feet are very important. You also sometimes watch My Feet. That is a very good exercise. Just watch My Feet to get rid of your grossness. Just watch way - with your eyes. How are you going to watch Me with the Sahasrara? But also with Sahasrara you can see. O

 AAAAAA AAA AAAAAAA Time is our slave We are not slaves of the time. There are a thousand and one stories I can tell you how, by delaying in a place, by getting late in a place, by not caring for the time, I have seen such beautiful manifestations, such beautiful dramas, the art of the Divine Power, that I was amazed how people worry so much about the time. If time is really necessary, if we are all watching our time every year as our birthday and if you think that time is very important – it is in a way. In these modern times, we really need the time for meditation, for collective meetings and for Sahaja Yoga.

 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE www.divinecoolbreeze.org SUBSCRIPTIONS: contact@divinecoolbreeze.org CONTENT editor@divinecoolbreeze.org PRINTED BY King Printing Company Inc. 181 Industrial Avenue East Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. No.8, Chandragupta Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411038 Maharashtra, India Eredits and Notere Votes Front cover: Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Buddha Purnima, 26 May 1983, Brighton UK • Contents pages words, left: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Shri Krishna Puja 1982• Contents pages words, right: from the To the Divine Essence of Prayer (an adaptation of the Shri Ganesh Atharva Shirsha) Contents pages photographs: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi • Page 2 words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Christmas Pujas 2000 and 1992 Page 3 photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Page 6 photograph: a tree, Vancouver Canada Page 8 photograph: "Carefree," a yellow flower (Axinia Samoilova, photographer) • Page 9 photograph: moss, Vancouver Canada Page 10 photograph: lotus flowers (Axinia Samoilova, photographer) • Page 13 photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi • Page 14 words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Shri Buddha Puja 1991, 30 December 1979, 3 January 1988 and 27 March 1994• Page 15 words: Shri Mahalaksmi Puja 1987 • Page 15 side quotes: 21 July 1992 and 17 October 1990 Page 18 photograph: "Meditating," Buddha statue (Axinia Samoilova, photographer) Page 19 photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Page 20 photograph: a statue of Shri Ganesha made by Brigitte Saugstad (photo montage by Edward Saugstad) • Page 20 words: from the Shri Ganesha Atharva Shirsha • Page 22 photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi • Page 25 photograph: red flower (Axinia Samoilova, photographer) Page 26 and 27 photograph: clouds (Axinia Samoilova, photographer) Page 31 photograph: the hands of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi • Page 32 photograph: Shri Mataji and sundial, near Cheltenham United Kingdom, 1982 Page 32 words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Birthday Puja 1994 • Photograph above: the offering of flower petals, Shri Ganesha Puja, Togliatti Russia, 12 September 2009 (Calin Chirou, photographer) Back cover words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Devi Puja 1985, Sydney Australia Back cover photograph: "Life," a dandelion (Axinia Samoilova, photographer) THIS IS YOUR LAST ISSUE OF THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE FOR 2009 renew your subscription for 2010 www.divinecoolbreeze.org

 You are in that great circle of nature where you have to play your own part in a full way.



----------------------

2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool BreezeS
2009 issue 6- volume twenty-two number six
alls
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Don't indulge too much in the past, but see the distance you have crossed in such a short time.
34
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-2.txt 
 You are the essence of time.
You are
beyond time.
HC DIVIVE COUL DISEEZE VULUME TWENTY-TWONUMBER SIX: 2 Sahaja Yoga is Forever
4 Peace is Keynote
10 The Present Becomes Divine • 12 Rooted in Truth • 14 A Collective Happening
16 Sat-Chit-Anand
18 Three Things
20 Shri Ganesha Described · 22 Blossomtime
26 To the Seekers of Truth • 28 Questions & Answers
32 Time
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-3.txt 
 foreve
Sahaja Yoga
is what will last forever
and everybody will remember it.
The one who has a humble nature
will be remembered for generations.
Everything that you are doing is for God
and that is why you are doing it för your Self.
So introspection is very important.
Criticizing others should be less and
criticizing yourself and laughing at yourself is the best.
I laugh at Myself many a times
and say many things like that, if you have noticed.
That makes life so interesting. That will kill your ego.
"How I am trying to assert myself
and where is the meekness that Christ has talked about?"
It is a natural goodness within us. Once it shines and shows,
you become so beautiful, so lovable.
50
Whether you are sitting here near Me or there, I know who is that kind.
My heart just opens for such a personality. I know who they are.
But even if I know, I will never tell you.
It is better that you know yourself.
2.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Peace is the
In our new journey into the battlefield, we have to win people with love, compassion, affection and dignity.
When we say it is a Vishwa Dharma, it is the universal religion we
belong to. First and foremost thing, the essence of that is peace.
The peace has to be within, to begin with. You have to be peaceful
within yourself. If you are not peaceful, if you are playing tricks
with your ego, if you are just satisfying yourself saying that you
are peaceful, you are sadly mistaken. Peace is to be enjoyed within
yourself. It is to be felt within yourself. So do not give wrong sat-
isfactions to yourself. Do not give false notions to yourself. Don't
cheat yourself.
Peace has to be felt within yourself and if you are not feeling
shouldn't come and ask Me, "Mother, why am I not feel-
that, you
ing it?" because I am not going to tell you that something is wrong
with you. You have to work it out, that you should feel peaceful
within yourself.
feel
It is not that if you have too much of silence outside, you
peaceful. The peace has to be within yourself. You have it. Your
spirit is absolutely peaceful, avyagra, without restlessness. There is
no restlessness in your spirit- absolutely peaceful and steady.
7 February 1985
Bordi India
It is for you to feel it. It is not for anybody else to certify you.
4
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Keynote
for the universal growth of this religion
What is right with you
Because there is no peace, there is no registration. Whatever goes into your
head, that is going to work out. But what I find is that people have concave
personalities, then they receive it. Those who have convex personalities do
not register anything. The registration is so poor that whatever I say doesn't
have any effect on them. Otherwise, whatever I say is a mantra. It should
have a direct effect on you and you should feel that effect, that penetration
within you. But as if it is for somebody else, as if it is not for you, this shows
there is no peace within you.
Only the peace within can register whatever is auspicious, whatever is
nourishing for your growth. So try to make peace with yourself. Do not fight
with yourself.. It is not what is wrong
with you that is the problem. What
is right with you is the attitude. Whatever is right with you, put your foot on
that. Establish yourself on that point and then develop yourself higher.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Peace is the keynote for the universal
growth of this religion.
It is disturbed by many things. Firstly, as
I said, by yourself. You shouldn't have funny
ideas about yourself. People have very funny
ideas. I see Sahaja Yogis, as soon as they get
Realization, or something better happens
to them, they start telling others how to do
meditation, how to stand up, how to give
bandhan, how to do this and that. It is very,
very poor. It is very low level. Try to assimi-
ate within yourself. First grow yourself. That
growth itself will tell others how one should
be. Your own character, your own tempera-
ment, your own nature, your own behav-
iour - all this will tell others that this is a
great man and they will try to follow your
example.
Example is the best teaching. When
the tree is small, even if it says, "I am great"
nobody is going to come and sit under a
dwarf tree. But when it is a big tree, you can
see the shade and everybody knows it is a big
tree and they can come and sit under that.
You don't have to tell. In the same way,
when
you grow, you don't have to certify that "I
am great." It just works.
Respect for others
The peace within expresses,
with others. That is the first sign of the man-
ifestation of peace. Such a person doesn't use
harsh words, doesn't use cruel words. But he
first of all, peace
is also not a person who is ineffective. He
is very effective, using very sweet and nice
words. Maybe he begins by using harsh
words, then he mellows down and comes
down to a position where he is effective as
well as he is very mild and sweet. Such a per-
sonality has to be developed - outside.
So, have peace with your friends, peace
with Sahaja Yogis. If you cannot be peace
ful with Sahaja Yogis, then you are no good,
absolutely no good. When you meet another
Sahaja Yogi, you can't bark like dogs at each
other....
So the peace should be with your broth-
ers and sisters. They are all born out of My
Sahasrara and nobody has a right to insult,
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-8.txt 
 PEACE
to be sarcastic. Saying things which are harmful. That is no friendship. It is a kind of a very
enmity that you are carrying on in your hearts. That cannot be forgiveness. If you
say sarcastic things to others, you are not in the culture of universal religion. You should be
respectful. The more respectful you are to each other, the better it would be..
Suddenly you come out with remarks. Very nasty remarks they are. There is no sense in
it. That is not our culture. We belong to a universal religion. How can it be that culture?
So when you try to be peaceful with your brothers and sisters, try to be extremely You are in
respectful. When you write letters to each other say, "My dear brother in Sahaj Yoga such
and such." I have seen all communists do that. Anybody who belongs to any party does one body,
that. It is a kind of a respect they have. You cannot talk like street people and ordinary
people because you are really extraordinary. And all that is extraordinary has to be expressed
through you.
subtle
active.
Humility and neatness
To keep this peace with others, be in an apologetic mood. "I hope I haven't done this mistake.
I hope I haven't hurt you. I hope I haven't put your things in a wrong way." Like that. Be in
an apologetic mood. You can find that among Indians. Indians have that kind of a problem.
They are more on the apologetic footing. Sometimes it is impossible to convince them...
In Indian culture we have something very great.... We are more on the apologetic style,
never on the aggressive. Never trying to find faults with others, but we find faults in what
way we have failed, how we have failed. This is something to be learned from Indians, if
they have retained their culture at all. It is actually in their blood.
That is how our culture is going to be such that we will express complete peace within
ourselves. And you must know that you are in one body, active. You are active cells in one
body. All the cells of the body are never active, but those who are active have to be at peace
with each other, otherwise what will happen to that poor body? So try to make
The second thing you can do to make peace is to talk less. Whenever there is a quarrel
or anything, just keep quiet. You see, it will have a better effect. If two persons are quarrel-
ling, never try to solve it, but just keep quiet. Quiet is very important. More to be silent.
But it should not be another extreme, like the English culture, that they just don't talk,
whatever it is. They just don't talk, but they think too much. You must keep quiet with the
feeling that "May God bless these people with some sense." It should not be ice-frozen sea,
but
peace.
peace which is effective the peace that is effective.
So in this new culture, we have to be extremely peaceful people and that peace should
be expressed on your
In our culture neatness is very important – neatness of thought, neatness of mind,
neatness of body, neatness of behavior. How you do things neatly is very important in our
culture. That is very, very important, which may look very funny to some people because
whether you hold the fork this way or that way makes no difference to Me. It doesn't
matter how you hold your fork or knife on a table. That is not so important. But definitely
it is important how you hold the aarti [tray], how you hold the puja things, how you hold
My photographs, how you hold the things that belong to other Sahaja Yogis, how you
respect the things that are auspicious.
So that is what one has to have within yourself – the neatness of piousness, of auspi-
ciousness, of holiness. That is to be done with very great care and understanding and with
that weight of auspiciousness you should walk, with that weight of auspiciousness. You are
auspiciousness walking on this Earth, yourself. You are peace on this Earth. But the
peace is put into this vessel has to be clean, has to be neat and has to be placed in such a
way that nothing spills out.
faces. People should understand that you are peaceful....
IS
way
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Think of Peace, bliss and gratitude
So to have peace, the best way to put your mind right is to think of good things. Think
of the flowers, not of the thorns, what good things others have done to you, what good
things there are, what are the beautiful moments you have had and count your blessings.
Count your blessings, otherwise you cannot create peace. You need not pay attention to
everything like that. Keep your attention at peace. Keep the peace inside, with your atten-
tion inside. Actually, if you really allow all My words to go inside your brain, I'm sure I'll
achieve the results. But with the convex mind, it is very difficult. Just suck in.
Another aspect of peace is never try to support anything that is boisterous or which
is destructive.... Anybody who is being tortured or aggressed or dominated is to be pro-
tected and supported. If you have the strength of peace you can do it just by standing
there. You don't have to fight for your peace, but if it comes to that - a person like Hitler,
when he came, people had to fight for their peace.
Now the second part of our culture has to be bliss. People should see bliss working in
us. People should feel there is bliss. If a person is blissful, he looks blissful, he emits bliss,
he radiates it. He doesn't look a miserable, unhappy creature who is all the time grudging,
grumbling or worried about little petty things here and there. And nobody has a right
to disturb anybody's bliss. If somebody is in a blissful state, try to copy that person and
become that. But people get jealous of such people who are blissful and try to disturb...
We have to enjoy our bliss within. That is important. Perhaps you are not aware of the
the flowers,
not of the
thorns.
bliss that
have, not at all aware.
you
Never, never before there were so many people who got Realization. Never before,
in the history
before that people of very ordinary effort, of very little seeking, of very little understand-
ing have been given Realization like this. It's like sometimes, if you see, like a stone
becoming a diamond suddenly. You can cut a diamond from a diamond. Such a blissful
state you are in. Tremendous bliss has come. It is so effective. I Myself don't know, when
I see that, I'm really surprised how it's working.
Bliss can only come through gratitude, only through enlarging your heart with grati-
tude. Bliss is the reward of gratitude the gratitude which is not just worldly or just
spoken lip service, but is from the heart - the gratitude of the heart. And the blissful
people are never jealous of others because what is greater than bliss? Bliss has so many
dimensions that you go beyond the realm of cause and effects. All the angels, all the
are there to help you. You know that it works out this way, it works out that way – but
you take it for granted. You don't have that effect of the bliss in you, when you know this
has happened, that has happened - what a bliss.
You cross your hearts when you feel blissful. Cross your hearts. Now feel that. Just see.
Feel the bliss like this.... Tremendous bliss is within us. How much it has happened to us,
that Adi Shakti Herself came on this Earth to solve your problems. Never
ganas
that God has been so kind.
8.
SO
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Bliss is everywhere
This bliss then, you find everywhere. In a little thing also you find there is bliss. Zen
taught that to people. They saw bliss in seeing only a moss, a little bit of moss. And
see the
moss and that moss has all the little, little tentacles and that bliss. But those who are vain
people can never feel bliss. Vanity kills bliss. Ego kills bliss...
It is so beautiful. How many have got this bliss? Have sympathy for them, have com-
passion for them, those who do not have.
But bliss comes to you through your confidence in yourself. If you have no confidence
in yourself, bliss cannot be. And the worst thing against confidence is [saying], "Then
what should I do? Then how can I get it? Then why not I have?" It is the worst, you fight-
ing yourself all the time. You are that, sitting on that and still if you are saying, "Why
shouldn't I have it?"
Moss has all
you
you say, "Oh God, what a beautiful piece it is." God has created a little
moss and
that bliss.
So what to answer? I mean you just want to ask because you have to ask. It is there.
Why are you asking? Just feel it. If that works out, that you feel where you are sitting, then
you will be surprised that you are at peace with yourself and there is bliss.
Last of all in this culture, you have to behave like people who have authority. You
have the authority of your spirit. You are authorized. You have the spirit. Those who are
in authority never try to show off because they are in authority.
Your authority is your Self, your own being. People should see in you what you are.
You don't have to carry labels... You are authorized. Authority shows on your face. But
now you are actualized on the authority...
You might be something at the height. You might just go down. But a Sahaja Yogi
will remain a Sahaja Yogi. You are authorized and actualized. This means whatever is your
authority is part and parcel of your being. You are that. Like if you are a human being,
you are a human being. Now you can't grow tails, even if you want to.
So, now you are authorized, actualized, completely moulded Sahaja Yogis. Like the
sandalwood, sandalwood is not to be told by taking a vow, "Oh, it is sandalwood." It is
sandalwood because every part of it has the fragrance of sandalwood. Every part
bit of you must have the fragrance of Sahaja Yoga... So you are not only actualized.
of you,
every
You are perfected. You are perfected.
you must have the dignity of that authority in you. And dignity is a very humble
dignity. Dignity is never arrogant. The sign of dignity is humility....
Humility is a sign. How you talk to others, immediately people will know that
have the authority from God. See the humbleness of the Divine, how It is trying to please
you and amuse you and make you happy - in the nature, also in the lectures....
I hope you have understood the culture of your universal religion. Please try to adopt
it. May God bless
So
you
you.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-11.txt 
 WE TRY TO DO OUR LEVEL BEST,
but still sometimes you feel that there can be some
mistakes we might have committed. But it is not
for you to be upset about it because once you
have reached the shores of joy, then you should
not give it up for anything because it is your own
choice whether you want joy or you want unhap-
piness..
Whatever your past was, whatever mistakes
you might have committed in the past in your
ascent or whatever might have happened in the
past because of others to you, it is all lost in the
past, the ocean of the past....
When you reach a certain state, then you
should not allow anything of the past to come
back. I would even suggest to give a challenge to
the past....
Even if you are afraid of the past .. or you get
angry with yourself or you feel upset about it, then
yet you have not reached the point. So now you
have to see it, that you are at a distance. That's why
you are secing it. Nothing can touch you.
the present becomes
DIVINE
So the judgment will come from you to yourself. “Am I still involved in the
An absolutely silent
that was yesterday. Is it finished now? Am I even now bothered about it?"
past
And
Mother will also sometimes test you on that. Sometimes I may
remind you of some mistake of yours and then see what happens to you. And
your
confidence you drink
then I will know where are My children.
like the nectar of life.
you have become the fruit which is ripe, so why should you worry
Now
about things which you are not any more? Now if you have become a full-
fledged bird, why should you worry about the egg that used to smell so badly.
This is the attitude one must have towards oneself, the confidence within
yourself.
10
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-12.txt 
 So that's how you challenge your past and now you can even challenge your future.
Now start thinking what can happen to us, supposing, which is very, very common nature
of the western people. Yes, because if you tell somebody, "Now, will you please go and
telephone to that person," immediately that
person will tell you, "Perhaps he
may not be
there. Now let me see what's the time. This is the time he has to go out, so he must have
gone out." But why don't you telephone? And you telephone and the fellow is there. This
is the western style of futuristic explanations of everything...
That kind of a mind always tries to find problem because it doesn't want to solve. So
|f vou believe
as soon as it starts, wants to say he wants to go somewhere to the station. Immediately he
the word, "Problem is, there is no car." That means he starts quarrelling with himself in God, It acts
says
all the time. His body is quarrelling on one side, his heart is on another side, his mind on
another side, liver is on another side. So as a result, at the end of the day you find all of In everything.
them sitting, "Ha," doing nothing whatsoever, all exhausted, fighting with oneself.
Now
you are Sahaja Yogis. You have to remember that all God's
powers are with
you,
but the only thing is you have to be with Him. The powers are with you, but they are not
going to run after you. I mean if you want to wriggle out of it, what can the powers do?
So you have the powers of God.
So that's how with the future we start thinking like this, "Now, let me figure it out, if
it works out or not...?"
This is God's work.... It will fix. But still some people will linger on to think, "How
can it be, Mother?"
Now I'll tell you the secret. You are in the Brahma Shakti and this Brahma Shakti is
the vibrations that you feel. It has all the creative power. It has all the destructive
power.
It has all the evolutionary power. It has all the powers, we can say. And it's like a big com-
puter. It uses whatever it wants to use.
Vibrations are Brahma Shakti and they exist in every matter, whether dead or alive. So
when
see that .. the order has come and the vibrations in the molecules act.
you
So this Brahma Shakti is everywhere. It penetrates into everything. And if you believe
in God, It acts in everything. But it is not blind belief. First you have to be a perfect Sahaja
Yogi. Then you are one with the Brahma Shakti. You can control everything and you
do
not waste your energy in controlling nonsensical things. You don't want to become like a
juggler, creating a flower out of a thorn or that sort of a thing. But wherever necessary it
works, it acts.
So
will have experiences in life, one by one, and you will be amazed how things
you
work out. And then you will realize that you are not an ordinary Sahaja Yogi.
Whatever you have committed wrong in the past or whatever you used to think of the
future, the
present becomes divine. And that divine present is the ocean of joy, of which
you are the part and particle. Just enjoy that... Don't think about who is the enjoyer and
who is the creator. You just become the existence. Existence is the present.
That is how it works out- where you lose all words, all thoughts, all feelings, which
are of an emotional type. An absolutely silent confidence you drink like the nectar of life.
May God bless you al
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-13.txt 
 A living thing develops slowly.
Sahaja Yoga is a living process.
rooted in truth
It is important to know that Sahaja Yoga is truth and we are firmly rooted in it. We have
to, therefore, discard the untrue, otherwise we cannot attain purity. As a matter of fact,
untruth is an illusion and we should decide to get out of it.
With pure desire for this, our awakened Kundalini puts us in a state where we can
discern what is truth and what is untruth and we start longing to attain only the truth.
Giving up all our misconceptions, we have to take to truth.
Some
people wish to attain material wealth, some desire to achieve power and there
are some others who are in search of God Almighty. Those who want to know the abso-
lute (Parama) will be the first to come to Sahaja Yoga.
After getting established in Sahaja Yoga, one is, at times, pained to see the slow
with which Sahaja Yoga is spreading, but we should understand that a living thing devel-
ops slowly. Sahaja Yoga is a living process. We cannot force it on anyone. We cannot give
false certificates and we cannot say for certain that everyone will get Realization. For a
number of reasons, many people do not get realized.
pace
After Realization, when one is connected with the Paramchaitanya, one comes to
know that the Paramchaitanya does everything for us. We get detached and become
akarmi. Nothing worries us.
On coming to Sahaja Yoga, due to short-sightedness, in the beginning one considers
oneself the doer. Slowly, as one gets experienced, one understands that man does noth-
ing. The Paramchaitanya does everything. Everything gets done smoothly. Sometimes, if
something goes against our desires, even then we should not think that God has not helped
us. In fact, we can neither think nor do more than God, so we have to accept
that the
Paramchaitanya has done the appropriate thing and what is coming up is very beautiful.
There are two aspects about which a Sahaja Yogi has to be very careful. Firstly,
through individual meditation, we should know our faults, the state of our instrument,
whether we are right-sided or left-sided. By putting our attention on the photograph,
we can know all this. Then in meditation, we should clear all the negativity.
In Sahaja Yoga, the meditation system is very easy. After clearing ourselves, we should
into the collectivity. The opening of the heart is essential for this. A narrow-minded
get
person can never be collective. We should not put our attention on the faults of others,
for, by doing so, these shortcomings grab us. We should take note of the qualities and
inherent beauty of others. We should correct their faults with the power of divine love.
12
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Love is truth and truth is love. One who uses the power of love ascends very high. Love is truth
With
hearts, you have to see people with love. This is how you develop individually
open
and collectively. We should beware of a person who is not collective. Listening to others and truth
talk about the faults of others is wrong in Sahaja Yoga. We should observe how softly we
can speak and how much power of forgiveness we possess. We should regard all Sahaja is love.
Yogis as our relatives.
The second aspect of Sahaja Yoga is the knowledge of Sahaja Yoga and its spreading.
We should know which place on the hand or foot indicates the catches of which chakra
and which catch could cause which disease and how it can be cured. Ladies, being shaktis,
must attain this knowledge. With the help of this knowledge, ladies will be able to under-
stand Sahaj children and their behavioural
The spreading of Sahaja Yoga is another significant thing. As without cross-ventila-
tion the room cannot be aired, in the same way, if you do not pass on the experience of
Sahaja Yoga to others, do not help them, do not give them Self Realization, do not spread
Sahaja Yoga, then you yourself cannot progress.
There are some Sahaja Yogis who keep dreaming all the time that the heaven of Sahaja
Yoga will dawn on the whole globe. Such Sahaja Yogis always remain in a state of bliss. Hyderabad Puja
great responsibility has fallen on our shoulders - the responsibility of building up 25 February 1990
a pure-hearted society in which we can place our faith and remain established in that translated from Hindi
faith.
patterns.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-15.txt 
 The solution of the whole thing is one which I have found out Myself.
It was this: that it is a collective happening.
his
A person who is an individual can never get over
ego.
The greatest law of Sahaja Yoga:
it's a collective
You have to attend. You have to go for
meditation with others, collectively. It is a
collective happening. Supposing a nail is
The chakra of the Virat
taken out of your finger. It will never grow. In
the same way, it is a collective happening....
is where we have to seek
Thousands and thousands of people who are
self-realized, they are all your part and parcel.
ourselves in others.
If one person gets into trouble in any place, all
of them will jump at it and try to see that that
Our banyan tree
is saved. So
you have so many brothers
person
50
and sisters - real brothers and sisters I should
is the collectivity.
say. They are not only blood relations, but
they are spirit relations.
14
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-16.txt 
 To be Sahaj is to be collective. If you do not meet collectively every day, then
there will be a problem. In the collective only the maturity starts. It is a living process.
Now supposing a tree is growing and you take out a leaf from there and the leaf will
say, "I'm going to grow by myself." It cannot grow. It will be left out. So that is what one
has to remember, that it is a collective happening. We all have to meet and grow together.
Now those who are not collective will disappear one day into thin air, like a dead leaf.
I think people do not understand the meaning of a collective happening. It is just like
a tree growing and with the tree everything else that belongs to the tree also grows.
happening
So for the growth of this tree, one has to remember that you have to stick onto the
tree. But the tree is not going to run after you, "Stick on, stick on to me, stick on to me."
For that, whatever has to be done, has to be done. You know, when the winter comes, all
the leaves fall off. What they do is to create a barrier between themselves and the tree by
Modern Sahaja Yoga is
a collective happening.
It cannot work out
some living process. They create a barrier in berween. There is a little bark that comes in
between. Now when that happens the leaves fall off and the tree becomes barren.
individually. So after
Now the same thing happens in Sahaja Yoga. When you do not accepr the principle of getting your Realization,
you must have self-estecm.
Sahaja Yoga, you put a barrier in between the sap and the leaf. Now when that happens, respect your Realization
and attain the highest.
аcсepг
the leaf falls off.
You cannot sit at home
and say that "I am doing
Sahaja Yoga."
So you have to open out yourself, your heart, everything to suck in the sap to nourish.
You have to give up your ego and superego, your conditionings and ideas you have had
from before.
This is what is the surrender. It is the Islam. And that is to be achieved. But that is not
going to help the tree. It is going to help you.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-17.txt 
 chit
sat
The spirit is the most precious thing that we have within ourselves. The preciousness of
your spirit is immeasurable and that is why it is called the thing of eternal value. Because
it is infinite, we cannot measure it.
Now, God the Almighty we say is sat-chit-anand. Sat means the truth. The truth we
His light understand in human terminology is relative. But the truth I am telling you is the abso-
His light
lute, from where all the relations start. An example I will tell you, how to understand.
comes into the This Earth has got oceans and rivers and all kinds of waters, but the Earth is enveloping
1S
all of them. If the Mother Earth was not there, there could not have been any of this
heart of man existing. So we can say that the Mother Earth is the support of all the things that exist
on Earth. She is enveloping us. In the atoms She exists, in the big mountains She exists
because the elements are part of that Earth. In the same way is God Almighty. The sat part
of Him, the truth, is the support of all the things that are created or not created.
Another example you try to understand is how the sat is the purush, is the God who
does not take actual part in the creation itself, but is a catalyst. The example can be like
this: I am doing all the work, I am creating everything, but I have a light in
Without the light, I cannot do anything. The light is the support of My work, but the
light does not in any way do anything about what I do. In the same way, God Almighty
is just the witness like a light.
But His other quality is the chit. It is attention. When ir is excited
pulsated . then, through His attention, He starts creating.
And He has a third quality which we call anand. Anand is the feeling of joy that He
gets by His perception, by His creation, the joy that He gets. All these three things - sat,
chit, anand- when they are at a zero point where they meet, then they become the prin-
ciple of Brahma. When these three things are one, where there is complete silence, noth-
ing is created and nothing is manifested, but the joy is one with the attention because the
attention has reached to merge into joy and joy has become one with the truth.
This combination of three qualities separate and create three types of phenomena.
Anand, the joy, inwardly merged with His creation and with the truth. When joy starts
moving with the creation, the creation starts moving down from, first, the sat or truth
stage to asat – that is untruth – to maya, that is illusion. And at that time, the creation
starts working out. And when it starts working out, the joy, which is on the left-hand
side, the emotional side of God, also starts becoming grosser and grosser, until they reach
a where there is a complete darkness of tamoguna, the complete cessation of the
creativity and the complete sleeping of the joy.
Is it clearer? You will understand now Mahalakshmi, Mahakali and Mahasaraswati.
That is why Christ said, "I am the light"- because He represents the sat, the light of God.
And when the light of God becomes absolutely gross, dormant or dead, then it reaches
the second stage of creation. All these things go deeper and deeper and become grosser.
That is one part of the parabola.
Now another part of the parabola starts when you are attaining back to God Almighty.
That process now gradually starts becoming higher and higher, subtler and subtler and
finer and finer. In that refinement, ultimately the light works for the evolutionary process.
Gradually the grosser parts start becoming enlightened. You find the lower animal is not
as much enlightened as the higher animal. Gradually, even the joy starts becoming subtler
and subtler. We can call it beautiful. Human joys are much more beautiful than that of
as spirit.
IS
hand.
my
or when it is
IS
stage
16
animals.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-18.txt 
 anand
You see a keybox. You open it out. You see the patterns.
It is like the ocean before you, where I am there.
So the joy also start changing its manifestation in the sense you start more
and a wider range of joy comes into your hands. For example, to a dog, beauty has no
meaning, decency has no meaning.
So at a stage when you reach, when you are a human being, to that extent you develop
your sat, which is awareness. To that extent, you also develop your joy and, to that extent,
you also develop creative action. Now you see how the creativity of God passes into the
hands of man, when he turns out, how the joy of God passes into the hands of man and
how His light comes into the heart of man as spirit.
It is beautiful. I have just touched upon when you have become a human being.
People say
ing in a human being only. Because of that light, we talk of religion, we talk of God and
we talk of eternal things. But it is really a precarious stage, that is to be a human being,
because, at this stage, you have to jump only a little bit that side, while you start jumping
this side and that side. Because this jumping is not possible unless and until the awareness
reaches that
and
more
human beings have a soul - not that others do not have - but light starts burn-
Three things
become independent and, in that independence, you find have to be
where
stage
you
your own course. This is the position because your Self cannot be yours until and unless
you are independent. As long as you are a slave or under bondage or something that is
gross, how can you enjoy that eternal joy that is within you?
So it is for you to expose yourself more to that joy by opening out your Self more and
more and getting subtler and cleaner, so that feel that Divine.
Once you know this point, that after getting Self Realization, unless and until these
three things start merging together, you cannot feel that you have established yourself.
The joy within you must be felt through your awareness, otherwise you cannot see it.
Suppose you have no eyes, then how can you see? If you were not aware to see Me, how
will
Combined.
you
you see Me? If you are not aware to hear Me, how will you understand Me? And once
that awareness comes to you, then only the joy awakens within you because only through
these subtle feeling of the awareness are you going to absorb the joy.
Just now you felt, you said, "What a beautiful thing it is." You felt very happy. You are
feeling the joy of creation at this stage and man is the summit of creation. But only the
crown part is such a little thing. Very little it is. Very little distance it crosses in no time,
but the only thing is that three things have to be combined. And that is why you find,
even if you get Self Realization, you do not feel the silence because you have not become
the light. You do not feel the joy because you have not become the anand. That is the left
side of you.
In everything there is joy as a human being. You start seeing joy in patterns. You see
a keybox. You open it out. You see the patterns. You call it the veneer. You call the rough-
ness and things, the smoothness and the harmony of it. You start feeling the matter, the
joy of His creation. But after Realization, you start feeling the joy of creation....
It is like the ocean before where I am there and I want you all to come into it reprinted from
and enjoy. It is all for you. The whole thing was created for your enjoyment. You have to Nirmala Yoga
become subtler and subtler. You are wasting a lot of time here on very gross things.
"Spirit" circa 1983
***
you,
volume 3 number 16
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Dhammam sharanam gachami
three things
Do your puja just for the joy– not for any results - just for the joy. I mean we are doing
so many things like that. For example, we enjoy each other's company. Just think of that.
You all Sahaja Yogis are enjoying each other's company. What is this for? Nothing at
all. There is nothing. You are enjoying it without any desire, just for enjoyment's sake
enjoyment.
When that purity comes in our temperament, that we do everything without
desire, we have got rid of our ego, so Buddha is awakened within us. And that is what is
the importance of Buddha. He has settled Himself down in the place which is the most
difficult place. That is on the left side of your
For that, we have to say, "Buddham sharanam gachami." This means we surrender
ourselves to Buddha.
any
IS
head....
LL
the second one is going to be? “Sangham sharanam gachami.
Then what does He say
I surrender myself to collectivity" - sangam. "Sang" means the collectivity. "I surrender
myself to collectivity." The ego goes down.
First of all, Buddha, who is sitting, who is the deity, which is the enlightenment - you
say, "I surrender myself to Buddha."
Secondly, you say, "I surrender myself to collectivity." Egoistical people cannot sur
render. So "I surrender myself to collectivity" - so we say, "Sangham sharanam gacham.'
It is to the Virat we are doing...
"Dhammam sharanam gachami." "Dhammam" means the religion, the balance. "I
surrender myself to religion," which is essential. Or you can put it the other way around:
"Buddham sharanam gachami, Dhammam sharanam gachami, Sangham sharanam
gachami." That's all. If you have achieved it, then we can talk about it, not before that.
13
So these three things are to be achieved. We would put it in a Sahaja Yoga way like
this:
First of all, "Dhammam sharanam gachami, I surrender myself to my virtues." All
desires can be surrendered to your virtue. "Is it virtuous to do like this?" You can. If you
are brought up that way, you will not just do it. You will not have any desires to do any-
thing that is not virtuous and righteous. You will just not do it. So, Dhammam sharanam
gachami.
So then you should say, "Buddham sharanam gachami." It means "I surrender myself
to my enlightenment." This is the second state when you have ascended. "I surrender
myself to enlightenment, enlightenment that I have got to my spirit." It is the spirit who
is going to rise - "no more my physical, mental, emotional, nonsensical temptations." But
what is the spirit?
And thirdly, "Sangham sharanam gachami" - to the collectivity, to the whole, to the
Virat. This is the
Buddha Puja 1983
we have to work it out.
way
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Buddham sharanam gachami
to be achieved
So ultimately, you reach the same point, that "Let me start it
for myself- from myself to others, not from others to myself. It is
like treating the tree from outside, not from the roots. But Sahaja
Sangham sharanam gachami
ге
Yoga treats you from the roots. First you get your Realization, all
right. Then you learn how to surrender yourself to your dharma.
Then you become collectively conscious.
Collectivity is a temperament. It is a sense of enjoyment that
you get in the collective living. Unless and until you have that,
you have not achieved.
So Buddha has played a very great role in our lives and He is
a very great, powerful force within us....
Ego is the only problem I always face, [otherwise] everything
will be all right.
So for us, the great mantra is "Buddham sharanam gachami."
These three mantras you must say every day to get rid of this
horrible ego...
That is why I wore a Buddha shawl today because it is sug-
gestive of a detached mind which has no problem. And there
could be a personality which is colourless, but you can have it
covered with colours, many colours I think.
So when you are a realized soul, whatever you do is natu-
ral – whatever do. If I am wearing this [shawl], now I
Buddha. When I take it off, I am the Adi Shakti. It is not a
drama. It is a fact.
But if you are not a realized soul, before that, whatever you
do is just a drama...
If somebody is a real person, whatever he does is not a drama.
It is reality. That is how they say that She can take this form, She
can take that form. People don't understand how can a person lam the
you
Adi Shakti.
take so many forms. She can. If it is reality, it can. Like the
Mother Earth, She is a reality and the sap which is coming from
the Mother Earth takes so many forms. See Her power. Flow- It is not a drama.
ers – it's good - different colours, fragrance, so many things. Just
one Mother Earth... because She is reality. The reality in Her can
produce. But unreal things- whatever you make out of unreal It is a fact.
things – they may look real... but they are not.
ге
19
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-21.txt 
 He is just in connection with His Mother.
To Him, She is everything.
Не
You are beyond the gross, subtle and causal bodies.
You are beyond the three times.
You always reside at the Muladhara chakra.
The three Shakti Powers are within You.
Yogis constantly meditate upon You.
20
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Shri Ganesha
тes
I have described
There are so many qualities of Shri Ganesha which I have described.
One of them is that He is a child.
And He is very humble.
He is very playful.
He is very interesting.
And He is extremely humble.
And despite His weight, He is very lightweight because He can sit on a
small, little mouse. He doesn't try to show off. He doesn't have His vahana
[vehicle] as great as Vishnu's or anything. His vahana is very simple, the sim-
plest – or we can say the smallest creature which can really crawl is a mouse
and He uses this mouse. With this mouse, He expresses His own power that
He doesn't need any other vehicle. It is His vehicle. It is His simplicity. He
moves. He penetrates. And He affects the lives of people through very, very
simple, sweet methods....
He always tries to please His Mother. He doesn't want to do anything that
will make Her unhappy. He doesn't say no. And that is what is the quality
of Shri Ganesha, that He knows what His Mother will like, each and
every
thing. And He does everything that is good for Him because, by that, He
is pleasing His Mother. His complete dedication is to the Mother. It is not
other thing, not to any other Deity. He fought with all of them. He
to any
is not bothered about who others are. He goes to all of them through the
understanding of the Mother and respects them through the understanding
of the Mother... That is what He is, just in connection with His Mother. To
Him, She is everything. She is the source of knowledge. She is the source of
joy. She is the source of truth. He doesn't have to look to anybody else....
If you have to achieve any knowledge within, if you have to ascend higher,
then you have to learn from Shri Ganesha. What He does and what is His
relationship with His Mother - which is purifying, nourishing and result-
oriented - the result is that you ascend gradually.
Shri Ganesha doesn't require even to know anything. He already knows.
He is a very matured person – or we can say the most matured Deity is
Shri Ganesha.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-23.txt 
 ****
bloss
OSS
22
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-24.txt 
 I have come on this Earth to give you the complete
knowledge of your spirit and of your being and to give you
that enlightened dimension to your awareness by which
will be able to make out who is real and who is unreal.
you
After your enlightenment, you will know how to use this
power which is radiating through you. You will know how
to cure yourself and cure others, mentally and physically.
You will know sitting down here what is wrong with a
person about whom you are thinking. You will jump into
the realm of Brahma, that is the Divine Power, which is
all-pervading.
This power organizes the whole universe. This changes
these flowers into fruits and seeds. This power sprouts
the seeds. The Kundalini is the representative of the same
power.
That is your individual Mother. Everybody has their
own Mother sitting down there. She loves
and She is
you
waiting for an opportunity to give you this Realization.
This has to be performed now - and now because the
blossomtime has come. Many beautiful flowers have to find
heir fruitful meaning. It will happen to all the nations.
omtime
It will happen to all the nations.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-25.txt 
 blossom
OSSom
When we are dealing with reality, we have to know that we cannot just go on with things
which are artificial, which are befooling others, but we have to really become that real-
ity.
Once you become that, when you are really like that, then only you have done the job
for which you are born at this juncture of blossomtimes. Otherwise, you could have been
born earlier and could have been something different. But you are specially born, so you
Once you
doing
start
value, realize yourself what you are and try to understand, have self-respect
realize
your
God's work,
and try to do things which are very important as Sahaja Yogis.
Of course, you are doing a job, you are doing other things, but
do the work of Sahaja Yoga, you will find more time for everything. Once you start
will be amazed. If
you
God does
you
doing God's work, God does your work. And that is how you will be amazed how you get
so much time to do the right thing.
your work.
Now it is for you to go back and introspect. See for yourself. Now the Adi Shakti
Herself has come. But I am very simple. I am very simple to look at. In My behaviour, I
am very, very humble and people take Me for granted. I don't do anything. I don't want
to punish you. I don't want to do anything like that, But you yourself get punished. You
yourself become useless if you do not look after yourself and grow yourself.
This finding is so great.
A man had never known Me before. He was very learned, but he was very
humble and what he told Me was "Just imagine, I'm sitting before the
very normal.
So I said, "What should happen to you? What do you think?"
He said, "Mother, it's a big thing to realize that I am sitting before You and that You
Creator of this world and still I'm
are here."
I said, "It's good that you don't feel My presence so oppressive or so dominating. I'm
very happy.
"No," he said, "I just feel the love, just feel the compassion. That's what it is.
We have to know that we should have just love and compassion- compassion and
love for ourselves in the way that we should not harm anybody's heart... What is going
to help you the most is to make yourself a perfect channel for Sahaja Yoga, to be a perfect
channel. In that, you will be amazed how you will be helped...
for
There are so many things you can do very easily, if you see you are
the instrument of the Divine. And then your temperament will change. The nature will
change. You will become a very, very sweet person, a likable person, and everybody will
think that this is a saint walking around.
So that is all I have to say about this. Whatever is the discovery is not a discovery
for Me, but a discovery for the whole world. And I'm sure once it is established and is
exposed to the whole world, things will change for you – and for Me also.
May God bless you.
yourself that
Shri Adi Shakti Puja 1998
24
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-26.txt 
 time
to transform this world
This change of attitude towards life, this change of complete peace and joy has come to
all because your attention is now on your spirit.
Its not difficult to transform
this world. The time has
you
don't think of money. Money walks your way. You don't think of power.
Now you
Power walks your way. And the power of the spirit is the highest, the most powerful and
the most righteous thing.
It is not necessary that you
things- no necessity of these rituals. The spirit is residing within you already, all you have
done in last lives.
come, just the right time.
When the proper time comes,
the blossomtime comes, so
should become a sanyasi, sadhu-baba, do all kinds of many flowers become fruits.
So, like that, you all have
become. Now it is for you to
create seeds to spread Sahaja
Yoga. You are now at that
level of awareness where the
Paramchaitanya is with you,
absolutely part and parcel of
persons to understand that one can become the spirit, but this is in the evolutionary you, absolutely with you to
Now in this life the only thing you have to do is to put attention to your spirit. And
that is only possible through the awakening of this Kundalini - the Primordial Mother....
This of divine love is not only the love, if you want to say, it is also peace
and joy
power
and also it is the superior wisdom.
It is rather subtle for normal man to understand -I know that, I've gone through that
- for
IS
give you all necessary help,
all necessary prestige and also
the personality.
Sahasrara Puja 1999
process.
Today is the time for people to become the spirit. This is the blessing of this blos-
somtime, as I call it, and people have to become the spirit, otherwise what is left of them
is like all other human beings...
So this is an essential step today to become the spirit. All the saints, all the prophets,
all the religions have talked about it.... It is only one simple thing. It is that you are a spirit
and that spirit, unless and until you become, you cannot achieve any peace, any joy and
no love....
Like a flower when it becomes the fruit, all its petals and everything drop out and
then it becomes the fruit. So you have now become the fruit- the fruit of knowledge, the
fruit of wisdom and of love.
For knowledge, you don't have to read books. There is no need to. People who have
read too many are difficult to get Sahaja Yoga. But what you have to see yourself is what
is the reality. But that is only possible if you are a realized soul, otherwise you get lost in May God bless you.
the illusions of the world. You live with the illusions all your life, struggling, fighting and Blossom into the beauty of
I don't want to say what the end is.
So a simple thing has happened with Sahaja Yoga. In your evolutionary process, your glorify your Father and this
attention now has gone more to the spirit than to anything else. As soon as the power of is glorified with His gracious
the spirit comes, you find yourself successful in everything. You don't want, you don't ask love towards you.
for it and ...
your spirit so that you will
you don't mind.
20 March 1998
7 October 1981
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Koltheseekers of truth: part two
a question of becoming
сотm
There are barriers within us,
built in, not because of anything else,
but only because we have misled ourselves.
You have to be We have been going to various roads of seeking, whatever suited us. Wherever we
went to, we have tried to find something and we have injured ourselves. Within ourselves
sometimes, we have built up certain barriers.
Now when you become the prophet, actually you become your own master. You
become a free person. You have to be a free person. So far you are not. You cannot over-
come your own weaknesses, your own temptations, infatuations, emotional problems,
a free person.
So far vou
are not. mental worries. Why? Because you are still standing in the waves of this turmoil, this
troubled area where you just see the waves all the time and you are frightened of breaking
down. But if you somehow or other get out of it and get into the boat of your own being,
then you enjoy. You become a witness, a sakshi.
Even to understand the scriptures, you have to be a free person, which you are not.
You have to be your own master. For that, you cannot pay me...
To get your freedom of the spirit, you can't pay because money is money. Money has
no value in the divine field. Nothing can bring this forth but your own ascent. And how
do we ascend? Is there anything built within us?
10
The knowledge of the roots
Whatever I am telling you is the knowledge of the roots. What we see is the knowledge of
We see it from outside. We see a leaf from outside. If we have to treat the leaf, we
the
tree.
have to go to the roots. But from outside, when we see the tree, we are still outside also.
When
have to treat the leaf, you have to go to the roots. If you block out the leaf, it
you
is dead. Then you put it under the microscope. You can go on seeing cells. After that, you
can see the nucleus. You can go on analyzing it and analyzing it, making it dead, dead
and dead and dead. But to treat it, you have to go to the roots. And this knowledge of the
roots we have here....
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
22 June 1984 London
These are not new ideas. These are very ancient ideas. In the Bible it is described as
the Holy Ghost....
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Paths not layers
I had never read Carl Jung, although I knew he was a realized soul – at least he got his
Realization at a later time. So I said, "All right, let me have a look. Let me see his theory.
And as I opened the book, I saw a diagram, what he had drawn of the human being. And
I said that's the mistake because he saw human beings from outside and he described
them in layers. First he said the unconscious that cannot be expressed manifested. And
then the unconscious that can be manifested. Then he said about the subconscious and
then he is said above that is the conscious mind, then above that is the ego - like layers,
IS
This Earth
one after another.
Now when you are sitting here, though you are in layers, the path is laid down. In the
same way within us, God being the greatest organizer, He has not made us into layers, Is a special
but what he has made us in a parallel way - left side and right side and the central path.
Three paths He has made within us for our evolutionary process. The central path works present
out our evolution. The left side gives us the desire and the right side gives us
of action. These are just the principles I am telling you, but you can understand slowly, from God.
when you grow, all the details of it.
The central path of evolution has brought you today to this level of human aware-
ness. Now beyond that is a very short ascent which you have to achieve, by which you
become the spirit. But there has to be some living process for this to happen. And what is
that living process built within us? It is the reflection of the Holy Ghost within us in the
triangular bone, which is called as Kundalini in the Sanskrit language. This exists within
us.... At the top of the head, it pulsates and then it breaks. When this breaks, the pulsa-
tion stops and you start
fontanel bone area. This is the happening... that takes place so
the
power
from
feeling the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost coming out of your
that you get connected
with the truth.
With the connection
become
you
So the connection takes place and you start feeling on your fingertips the cool breeze of
the Holy Ghost which surrounds you. Actually you start feeling... One should know
that when we have eyes we start seeing, when we have ears we start hearing, so now you
have
got a new awareness. What is this awareness? This is the awareness of collective con-
sciousness, that you become. Again I say, "you become." You are not just certified, but
become. It's a question of becoming, that
you become collectively conscious, that on
you
your central nervous system you can feel another person. You can feel yourself. You can
feel
your centres. You can feel the centres of others on your fingertips....
But who talks about the resurrection? Nowhere people talk about it. They talk about
the doomsday because they can frighten people with the doomsday first and take advan-
tage of it and make money out of it.
God who has created this universe. He feels love. Do you think He will destroy this
great creation of His without giving us the fruit, without letting us know the fruit of His
creation? He is the wisest of wise, the greatest, compassionate source of love. How could
He allow this universe to be destroyed, especially this Earth, which is a special present
from Him. So don't believe in all these stupid ideas of destruction and the last complete
devastation. There is still lots of time. Let's first enjoy the blessings of the Divine for
which He has created you. e
IS
27
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-29.txt 
 Q2
uestions
nswers
SHRI MATAJI: One more question I will ask – very simple, not so difficult.
What is the difference between a baddha and a bhoot How will you make it
out, a hindrance and a bhoot?
SAHAJA YOGI: Bhoots will move around.
And a baddha?
It stays still. Its a block.
Old Arlesford He is correct. What you said is correct, but it is not absolutely precise. A
United Kingdom baddha will also move. I will tell you how. A baddha is always on the cen-
17 May 1980 tres or on your organs. If it is ... in the liver, this baddha may come in the
centre and then it will start moving from here to here as the Kundalini will
be moving. But a baddha doesn't have its arbitrary movement. As you
move
the Kundalini, the baddha moves. Baddha means the hindrance.
But a bhoot is arbitrary. It moves. It will be one moment here. It will
be one moment there. It will move this side. It will move that side. It will
go to the right Heart, then it will come to the left Heart if it is an arbitrary
behavior. That means it is not controlled by your movement of your fingers.
Through the Kundalini awakening then, you must know it is a bhoot...
One thing is arbitrary. It works on its own and another is in your control.
You are taking it out yourself. Like you can say that if there is some lump
in the body, it may start moving with the bloodstream or something, some
force acting upon it. But by itself, it does not move. But if there is a worm, a
living worm, it will move by itself.
28
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-30.txt 
 So the last question is then, how do you manage the baddha and the
bhoot? How will you take out the bhoot of other people without getting
yourself into it? Otherwise the whose bhoot has to be taken out will
put three bhoots in you and five in the others....
person
The Sahaja Yogis give several answers. One says to use a candle. Another says to
use a bandhan. Another says to use a mantra to Mukti Devi. Another says to say
the Lord's Prayer.
There is no general thing about it. All answers are correct, but they are not
complete. There are ways and methods. They are trying to solve the prob-
lems, but it is rather difficult. Now first of all, you see a person who is pos- There are ways
sessed. I mean you are sure he is possessed, so you do like this: take a form.
You have to take a form because you have to fight it. You take an aggressive and methods.
form.
Karate?
Karate, yes something like that.... Inside you become higher than that
person.... So you go with a great force on that person. Put a bandhan and
say,
"Now sit down...." You have to say it as if you are not compromising on this
- no compromise. Then you ask the person various questions. After giving
yourself a bandhan... verify what sort of a bhoot it will be. That's the best.
First of all, you ask that person has he been to any guru. So now you know
at least sixteen of them. And you know how to take them out also. So you
find out which bhoot he has been to. If it is a guru, you just ask the person
does he still believe in that guru. If so, you have nothing to do with that
person. You have no business. You say, "I'm sorry, sir.." Not sorry - you say,
"Please go away." If you say "sorry" it will come inside. Any inviting word
say, "All right, finished, you get out from there.'
But in the case he says, "I'm possessed. I know I'm in trouble. I've
should not use. Just
you
got
this thing" and all that, then you ask that person, "What is the name of your
guru? What is the mantra you got? How many years you have been?" Like
that, you ask the questions. If he is truthful and if he tells you that, then you
exactly know where the mantra is, what has happened to him.
If it is a guru, then it has to be in the Void. Ifit is in the Void, you tell him,
"You say the mantra of Adi Guru or ask the question 'Mother, are You the
real...' on the photograph." Keep the photograph in front of your face like a
mask if possible. Don't allow you yourself to be exposed, but give the photo-
graph to the man. You say, "Now ask this question to this photograph." Now
asks the question, the Kundalini will start coming here...
if the
person
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Then you should say, "After asking the question, now you say that you are
the
" If the person is possessed by a guru, then if you know the name of
guru.
the guru, then you will know the mantra. When he is doing all these things,
you go on saying, "Narakasura Mardini" or "Mahishasura Mardini" or any-
thing like that, whatever you have to do - or "Sarvasurya Mardini." For a
guru the best thing is vibrated salt. You give some vibrated salt with water to
that
person to drink. It is not easy to get rid of the guru, so you tell him very
firmly that he is one of the most horrible ones we have ever known, "so you
have to work very hard to get rid of it." Give him salt. Give him all that. Let
him do it. And do not hurry up. Tell him it is going to take time, it will be
all right and what troubles people had with this and he will have to work it
33
out.
This is one type of bhoot you will find. Then you find these are guru
bhoots and which takes time, which are very difficult and they can take you
up. It can be very dangerous. But say somebody becomes blind with a bhoot.
His eyes are open and he is blind. That is a sure shot he is blind because of
a bhoot. Two types of blindness are possible. Their left Swadishthana will
be catching and you will think it is due to a bhoot. But it can be also left
Swadishthana is catching and he is becoming blind could be with diabetes. It
could be the combination of both. So you ask him if he has diabetes or not.
If the person has no diabetes, then definitely it is the bhoot.
Now what do you do to take out that kind of a bhoot?
Use a candle.
In Sahaj Yoga Not only a candle – it won't work. You take My hand photograph, only the
hand. You have photographs of My hand and put a candle before that pho-
one has also tograph. All these photographs that you have separately have meanings. Put
the candle and behind that is the hand and ask the person to see the light. If
he can see the light, gradually you will be amazed he will start seeing.
is to be used.
In Sahaj Yoga one has also to be precise, just like the English.. If you are
precise, it comes out. If you are not precise, then you try this, you try that, it
won't work out. But if you have a photograph of My hands you should ask
the person to see the photograph of the hand. By seeing
the person will start seeing the hand. And then gradually the person will
become all right.
I've seen one person getting the eyes within ten minutes time. But in that,
if the left Swadishthana is catching, if the person has no diabetes and the
eyes are open, then it is definitely a bhoot, nothing else. Even if some people
might say, "She lost her eyes because... there was a fire in the house." But
she got frightened and the bhoots sat in here and she became blind. They
to be precise.
This
the light, gradually
30
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-32.txt 
 are connected, both things. Actually the eyes cannot remain open if the eyes
burned out. So if the eyes are open and absolutely normal to look at and
the
are
person cannot see, the light is out. That means there is a bhoot. So these
things can be very easily done.. It will improve your eyesight also. My hands My Hands
should be used – very good for the eyes. My Hands are extremely good for are extremely
your eyes. If you can see My Hands with the light, very good for your eyes.
Now what are My Feet good for? They are very good for ego and also good for
superego. It is very good for people who suffer from ego or superego because,
such people are very gross and the Feet solve the problem. So just use My your eyes.
Feet.
If they see My face, the ego will start working, "This face is like that, it
should be like that - this, that." Superego might give problems. Even the
supraconscious will give you problems. But Feet, even if you are supracon-
scious, they will correct your problems. The Feet are not only powerful, but
they go up to the
use My Feet, he will be all right.
The face won't work for him. The face is for the seekers. But for all such
grossest point where you are. Any type of person ... you just
people who are absolutely an incorrigible type, the Feet are the best. Those
who have extreme ego, those who have extreme superego- extreme- the Feet
are very important. You also sometimes watch My Feet. That is a very good
exercise. Just watch My Feet to get rid of your grossness. Just watch
way -
with
your eyes. How are you going to watch Me with the Sahasrara? But also
with Sahasrara you can see. O
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-33.txt 
 AAAAAA
AAA
AAAAAAA
Time is our slave
We are not slaves of the time. There are a thousand and one stories I can tell you how, by delaying in a
place, by getting late in a place, by not caring for the time, I have seen such beautiful manifestations,
such beautiful dramas, the art of the Divine Power, that I was amazed how people worry so much
about the time. If time is really necessary, if we are all watching our time every year as our birthday
and if you think that time is very important – it is in a way. In these modern times, we really need
the time for meditation, for collective meetings and for Sahaja Yoga.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-34.txt 
 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
www.divinecoolbreeze.org
SUBSCRIPTIONS:
contact@divinecoolbreeze.org
CONTENT
editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
PRINTED BY
King Printing Company Inc.
181 Industrial Avenue East
Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA
Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd.
No.8, Chandragupta Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411038
Maharashtra, India
Eredits and Notere
Votes
Front cover: Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Buddha Purnima, 26 May 1983, Brighton UK • Contents pages words, left:
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Shri Krishna Puja 1982• Contents pages words, right: from the To the Divine Essence of Prayer (an adaptation
of the Shri Ganesh Atharva Shirsha)
Contents pages photographs: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi • Page 2 words: Shri Mataji Nirmala
Devi, Christmas Pujas 2000 and 1992
Page 3 photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Page 6 photograph: a tree, Vancouver Canada
Page 8 photograph: "Carefree," a yellow flower (Axinia Samoilova, photographer) • Page 9 photograph: moss, Vancouver Canada
Page 10 photograph: lotus flowers (Axinia Samoilova, photographer) • Page 13 photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi • Page 14 words:
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Shri Buddha Puja 1991, 30 December 1979, 3 January 1988 and 27 March 1994• Page 15 words: Shri
Mahalaksmi Puja 1987 • Page 15 side quotes: 21 July 1992 and 17 October 1990 Page 18 photograph: "Meditating," Buddha statue
(Axinia Samoilova, photographer) Page 19 photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Page 20 photograph: a statue of Shri Ganesha made
by Brigitte Saugstad (photo montage by Edward Saugstad) • Page 20 words: from the Shri Ganesha Atharva Shirsha • Page 22 photograph:
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi • Page 25 photograph: red flower (Axinia Samoilova, photographer) Page 26 and 27 photograph: clouds
(Axinia Samoilova, photographer) Page 31 photograph: the hands of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi • Page 32 photograph: Shri Mataji and
sundial, near Cheltenham United Kingdom, 1982
Page 32 words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Birthday Puja 1994 • Photograph above:
the offering of flower petals, Shri Ganesha Puja, Togliatti Russia, 12 September 2009 (Calin Chirou, photographer)
Back cover words:
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Devi Puja 1985, Sydney Australia Back cover photograph: "Life," a dandelion (Axinia Samoilova,
photographer)
THIS IS YOUR LAST ISSUE OF THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE FOR 2009
renew your subscription for 2010
www.divinecoolbreeze.org
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_(Scan)_VI.pdf-page-35.txt 
 You are in that great circle of nature where you have to play your own part in a full way.
