The Divine Cool Breezes 2009 issue 1 – volume twenty-two number one

 2 Maryadas 14 Talking about God 16 The Magnetic 20 Peace 22 Ask Me 28 Seven Moments 30 Giving SIDDHI-YOGA NISEVITE THE ONE WHOM DEVOTEES APPROACH

 32 Shri Hanuman and the Necklace

 purity of relationships 2onsi Raksha Bandhan 11 August 1984 London

 maryadas you must have I will solve, your problems but you solve your ascent I have to tell you something about Raksha Bandhan. Before that, we have to talk about the maryadas that are to be observed by Sahaja Yogis.

 Maryadas of marriage One of the things I discovered here in the West, that though we have understood the importance of the Muladhara, which is very important, and that unless and until we re- establish our Muladhara fully, we are not going to have the speediest ascent. Despite all that, still there are lingering things you see around – like people start choosing their life partners in Sahaja Yoga. That is not allowed. That is not allowed. You are not to spoil your ashrams, your centres, using them for a marriage-searching society. not You must respect. This point you must respect. If you have to marry, then you can find partner outside Sahaja Yoga – to begin with. But if you want to marry in Sahaja spoil the name Yoga, then you should not go on searching people in Sahaja Yoga. It is a very dangerous thing for Sahaja Yoga itself and for you people. That is one thing one should never try to You should life your of Sahaja Yoga. do with Sahaja Yogis. For all practical purposes, you are brothers and sisters and that's why I always encour- age marriages between people who belong to another country or another centre.... Most of the marriages which were done like that are very [much more] successful than the marriages that were selected and were done. It's very wrong to do such a thing as to arrange your marriage with a Sahaja Yogi by yourself. It will be dangerous. I don't want to Brahmacharya: say anything, but it won't turn out to be good because it is an anti-God activity, absolutely a traditional code of anti-God. You are supposed to develop your brahmacharya. You are supposed to develop conduct of a yogi that your Muladhara. Instead of that, if you start using a Sahaja Yogini or a Sahaja Yogi for the includes celibacy. selection of your married life, it's going to be very, very troublesome. Your Muladhara will not settle down. I mean that's a very bad stroke for your development. Because of the background and the kind of conditioning you have had, you people don't understand that it is important to maintain the purity of the centres and of every place. So any such relationship in one city is a very wrong thing. It spoils everyone. To add up to the trouble, it's a habit of people, I have heard, that they try to tease that "you look better together, you are nice together." They tease and enjoy. It's a kind of a very perverted enjoyment of the Muladhara, to tease others, “You are looking very nice with him and better marry." It's a kind of a romantic nonsense. CC you Of course, for all this, yogis – they have to have a brahmacharya. But even if you can't have a brahmacharya, you must have maryadas – not to tease each other and enjoy that kind of a nonsense when the marriage is not settled. If the marriage is settled, it is all right. And this kills completely the joy of marriage because there is no curiosity left. And many times I find that absurd relations are established. Some of them are really no good. And they will really be detrimental and some of them never are established. So if they are established, they are wrong. And if they are not established, they are heartbreaking. So all this kind of thing you should not do. You have got experiences of people who married outside and brought wonderful people to Sahaja Yoga. If you can do it, you should do it. But if you have to marry Sahaja Yogis, you should not marry them at the cost of destroying the purity and the idealism it has. For your own sake, for your own pleasures, you should not spoil the name of Sahaja Yoga. That is one thing I have seen, so I would say that today, as it is the day of purity in relationships, let us know that you have to treat each other as brothers and sisters. No such play should be followed. Don't allow your mind to drift into this. Because you allow, then there's no end to it. As it is, you know how hard it is to bring you back to normal. if 4

 MARYADAS When Christ had said, "Thou shalt not have adulterous eyes," He didn't say it because it was not practical. It is quite practical for Sahaja Yogis. And there is nothing to worry about marriages so much. What is so important? So many are married and what has happened to them? Even with Sahaja Yoga marriage, some of them have failed because of these bad habits. So you better get rid of these bad habits before marriage because after marriage also they go on like this and search for boys and girls. Because if these habits are not curbed before mar- riage, then they go on lingering on. So one should not try to do all these things before marriage. And I have seen such marriages are never, never successful so far. And even if they are, it is a sort of make-believe thing. It doesn't give real joy. It's a joyless pursuit. Maybe in one case, it be successful. That doesn't mean that should take any help from may you such difficult things, but have normal marriages which are enjoyable, which have created permanent bonds between people. Maryadas between men and women Maryadas We have to understand the maryadas.... Relationships between men and women are only if a certain amount of boundaries are kept.... We have to understand how to keep pure are to be our relationships in proper respect to each other's modesty and chastity. Now for example, there is a girl who is younger to you. You must keep all the distance from such If she is much older than you, then it is all right. You can talk, laugh, joke. She's much older than you. But normally with a girl who is younger to you, even much younger, you should try person. a established first with Me. to keep away.... You must learn these things, how to maintain a distance. Now there is a man who is younger to you, then you must not have any funny ideas about such a person. It is absolutely absurd. If some gentleman is younger to you, it is only in perversion you do such things. See, you should not have any funny ideas about that person. It's only done when there are emergencies, when there is no possibility of a marriage, when there are so many women or so many men or under perverted conditions. We don't have of these conditions here, so we have to behave like normal people. And any when the proper atmosphere is given to us, why not make use of it? Why should we create absurd things...? do like that, then anybody starts doing it. It's a kind of an aggressiveness, Once you that you arrange something, come to Me, saying, “Mother, we want to marry." Now what am I to say? “All right, marry." But it creates a problem for Me, for the rest of the people. They will marry a girl who is thirty years younger?" You must understand My problems. If you ask Me for something – “Mother, should I do it?" – you really force Me into it. I have to say yes because I cannot be very strict with “All right, if he has married a girl who is twenty years younger, why not I CC say, CC you because I am your Mother. But you should be sensible what to ask Me, how far to go. This is the biggest maryada you have to learn... Try to see that you don't try to take advantage of Me and, secondly, don't try to bring people to Me who do not deserve it. There is no need to waste My time with them.... It is aggressiveness only. Please don't try to do that. This is a wrong thing to do. So the maryadas are to be established first with Me, that understand that you should not try to trouble Me at all like this...

 Keep that understanding that if you have to grow, we must have a proper relationship with Mother and we must understand what will displease Her the most.... So many things are there that people just try to force on Me and I say yes. But I am very cunning and clever in that because I tell in a way that you should realize that it is not joy-giving... The maryadas of relationships between you is a relationship of pure love, of purity. Unless and until you develop pure relationships, you are going to be ruined. See, this finger It would be has to have a pure relationship with this hand. Supposing if this finger has some dirty feelings about this hand, it may dirty it, it may spoil it. In the same way, we should have extremely pure relationships with each other. It means we should try to give our heart to another person without any lust or greed in it. That we should try to do. Try to help each other. I find when they feel in a lusty way or a greedy way attached to others, this is not for killing Sahaja the Sahaja Yogis, but non-Sahaja Yogis. They get so much interested in that person. It's a absolutely of attachment. baser very way Yoga if you do But in Sahaja Yoga, your attachment is with your spirit, with your atma. And atma is purest form of our being. We have to keep it absolutely pure and then the enjoyment the not keep your is higher than any romance, any marriage, any worldly thing. It's the highest and the top- most. First achieve that. First of all, you should arise and achieve that. Achieve that purity. That is very important. Now the relationship between the men and women – I have told you not try to enter into any bedrooms where the ladies are. It's not proper. Nor should the women enter into men's thing. But it is very common. Women should not behave in the way other women behave... So the sense of shame must be developed among men and women. It looks nice. It looks beautiful. It gives you an additional charm if you have the sense of shame, a little bashfulness.... Even with Me, they will talk with a hand like that. "Mother, You see this thing is happening." But there's no need to do all that. Talk in a way that is gentle and beautiful.... How you talk, how you speak, everything should be saintly. You are saints do maryadas. that should you realize? You are all saints, so how behave with dignity towards each other, you should try to now, you you you respect their dignity, how you live is very important. And that maintain in a that looks like a saintly behaviour. You have to be a saint.... It would be absolutely killing Sahaja Yoga if you do not keep your maryadas. That is one of the most essential things one has to know. I have told you again and again how you dress up, how way bear yourself up, how you you talk, how listen to others more than you you talk yourself, how you become non-aggressive. It is the best way to impress people and to express Sahaja Yoga. I tell you, as it is, people have started saying, "They are very beautiful people, you can see they are very beautiful. You can see they are a very different type. It's something different. They are something great." People have started saying that. But still we lack in certain things.... We are all prophets, and prophets have to behave like proph- ets. They can not behave like cheap-type people. So, in that, we have to understand the maryadas... You must teach your children to call elders by the name of brother or uncle or some- one. Give some respect to the elders.... I have seen little boys calling big, married people with three, four children by name. That's not our style. You should never do it.... We must respect each other, must call them by higher names. Especially when in a meeting, there are people, you should call them – each other, even your friends – by “Mister...." At least call them “mister" and say something in a way which is beautiful. The English language has many words as "please, thank you." All these must be used profusely. We are going back a little bit. We are now becoming much more modern. That we should give up and become less modern and more elevating. CC

 MARYADAS Maryadas of brothers and sisters Now the whole idea of this maryada is such that when you have called somebody as a sister or a brother, then it is not only lip service, “You are my sister." It is something innate and very deep. You have to develop that feeling of a sister because that's how your sublim- ity will go up, your left Vishuddhi will improve, your Vishnumaya will be satisfied. If you call somebody a sister, the sisterly and daughterly relationships and motherly relationships always bring down the so-called ego, which is hiding in the left Vishuddhi. So try to be kind and gentle with the person whom you call the sister. Stand by her, look after her. If you call somebody your brother, you have to pray for his protection. Then you must know that you have a right to ask him for his protection also. But you must also give something to him and you must try to look after him, welcome him to house and treat him as a part and parcel of your being because he is very much near to you because he is your brother and he's very much closer to you. But such a brother should not try to dominate the wife. This is the maryada again. Like a brother or somebody is very friendly with the brother or a lady is friendly as a sister, then she should not try to put a wedge between the husband and wife. That is the worst thing to do, to put a wedge between husband and wife. Anybody who tries that must know that he is a mean person. One should never try to put a wedge between a husband and wife. your I know there are problems between a husband and wife. I will put them right, but you don't try to put any wedge between them and don't try to create a problem. If it is prob- lematic, it is for Me to solve, not you people. You don't have to solve and don't interfere with their married life. Let them be as they are. I will find out how they are. I will try to help them. But it's very wrong to play with their married life or with their marriage prob- lems and suddenly jump on somebody. It is a very wrong thing which is very common here.... This kind of a cheap heart-giving business and taking business is not for Sahaja Yoga. In our heart resides the spirit. We are dignified people and in that dignity we have to rise and live with that dignity, not to cheaply allow the spirit to be insulted or dominated or subjugated to anyone.

 Maryadas and children The relationship with children also one should understand. I have seen some people have a habit of getting a child very much closer and pampering them.... Let the parents handle the child. You just don't interfere with other's children.... Inform Me. I will cure the child. But if a child is being spoiled by you, the worst thing to do to harm that child is to spoil. Children here are very clever and intelligent, you must know. They are very good at manipulating. They will because they are extremely precocious. They are realized souls. They are born in this country – what a combination. At that time must be care- ful as to their training. From the first five years, all the parents must be extremely strict with children, extremely strict. Don't allow them to overpower you or manipulate you. tant. If you allow them to overpower you or to dominate you, they will sit on your head. Tell them not to do like that... They are not deities to be worshipped. They are only realized souls, so keep them at that point. And you are My trustees of those children and if you spoil them, it is you who will be held responsible. You have no business to spoil the lives of these children as Sahaja Yogis and their chances of ascent. So if they are born- realized, they are not deities. This you must understand. They are not beyond corruption. They are not beyond all kinds of things.... With you very It's very impor- have to be really strict. They must know how to meditate, children your you they must know how to pray, they must know how to respect and all the good things you must teach your children. And don't allow them to sit on your head. Many people have ruined the lives of their children like this. Now will you please see that such a child is brought to proper level? If the child is trying to take liberties with you and is cheeky and does not listen, please give that child to some other Sahaja Yogi to look after, whom you think can look after and see that the child is put right. Nip in the bud is the best way because we don't want to have children who are spoiled, who are spoiling other children, nor do we want children who are subjected to such children. So you can have proper children, well-behaved children, sensible, wise children because they can really be a drag on you, on Me, on everyone if you do not properly bring them up. And they are our liabilities. We have to look after them. So the relationship between the father and children, mother and children is impor- tant. Actually the mother should look after the child much more. And the child must respect. The father should never scold the mother in the presence of the child. That's one thing one must understand, that if the father starts scolding the mother in the presence of the child, the child will have no respect for the mother. But the respect must be main- tained because, if the wife respects the husband, then the child will know how to respect her and the husband too. So the whole thing is built up like that. It is a kind of a pattern for children to follow. One should not try to dominate the husband, at least in the presence of children. That's very wrong because then the children learn that trick and they start dominating you. So it flows from you to children, so try to see that if you have to do anything, then you do it yourself. And respect the husband and in a way that is very obvious to the child that the father is respected by mother. And they are just like monkeys. The way you behave, they behave. So you allow them to behave in a particular manner. They will behave that But if you put a good pattern of behaviour, they will imbibe it. The other day I was thinking how Indian children are so obedient, so sensible. They will never ask for it, "I want this, I want that." They never manipulate. What happens? How do they do it? The reason is, I think, the good pattern in the house. Everybody knows whom to respect, how to respect, how to behave. way.

 MARYADAS The relationship in Sahaja Yoga has to be even more than this, much more subtle. For example, if we are in a room, try to give to another person always, try to do for them. If you have to pay, better pay yourself, not to wait for another person. Try to do it yourself. Run forward to do it. If someone is carrying the luggage, you run, you do it. That is the way a Sahaja Yogi should be. Mostly children are like that. They will say, "I'll get it, I'll do it, I'll receive it." It may be ego, you might call it, but whatever it is, that is the sign you have to achieve by organizing a proper type of an image for the whole society, that if somebody needs something, you run.... First let others have, not that you should first have anything. How you eat your food is very important. Everything is very important for the children to see and to behave like that. all Maryadas and money money matters also, I have seen that people should be very, very sensible and should have proper maryadas. Now with Me, whatever maryadas you want to keep, you must understand.... Whenever it is possible, should try to do whatever is possible for Sahaja Yoga. It's very important. Try to surren- der. Not that I will take any money from you, you know that. I don't want any money or anything, but surrender yourself absolutely to Sahaja Yoga. That is the best way people have risen and have done so well. In you

 Maryadas and Sahaja Yoga Now the relationship among yourselves, among different nations – we should try to help people.... We must not forget that we have to help. We have to help as many as possible. And we must try to do whatever is possible for others. This is important. If we cannot do for a group like Sahaja Yogis, whom are we going to help? So we have to give that help. Now in Sahaja Yoga itself, on the subtle basis, we should not try to judge anybody's vibrations... It's an absolutely wrong idea. Everybody, individually, should sit before the photograph, get the vibrations every morning. There should be a discipline. You must know that the system of Sahaja Yoga today has worked out this way, that I have given you Realiza- tion just to say that let your light be enlightened. Now you have to see your lamp if it is clean or not. It is only possible when the light is enlightened. See your lamp, if it is enlightened or not.... You better judge yourself, cleanse yourself, look after yourself. And also try to see how your lamp is. Is it clean? "Mother has given us the light to see and why not see?" So if you work it out on these lines, you will go very fast. And have to, now, perfect yourself. We have so many Sahaja Yogis, but how many are perfect? This is the point. Now your relationship to Sahaja Yoga is also very important. There is a maryada about it very much. Sahaja Yoga should not be taken for granted. Anybody who thinks he has got Realization and now he is sit- different groups, among you ting on top of the world is not so. You must work it out. You have to have discipline.. First build the dome and then the foundation – Sahaja Yoga is like that – so that with the dome you understand, you are protected, you are looked after. But people take it for granted, like “Mother will do it, leave it to Mother." No, it is not so. You are My hands. Supposing My hands have to lift this, I should say that Nirmala will do it? Now which is Nir- mala? These hands are the Nirmala at this point. So many people drift like that. So to Sahaja Yoga also, your attitude should be of respect. You should not try to put yourself into bandhan before others. You should not try to do these things, but in a dignified way you must respect Sahaja Yoga. And foremost of all, to Sahaja Yoga your relationship should be that you should know Sahaja Yoga, what it is.... All of you, one and all, should become a big pandit. But you get lost in your marriage problems, then your children's problems, then “my mother," then “my sister." I mean it will take too much time for you. First of all, you should see, "I am a Sahaja Yogi. Let me get to work..." You should say, "I have nothing to do, I am going to study Sahaja Yoga.." There are so many books you can read. I have told you. Try to make your own library. Try to improve in it. Everybody must try to get perfec- tion – perfectionism. You should never be a liability on Sahaja Yoga, but a great asset of Sahaja Yoga. That's what everybody should try to be, that your problems I will solve, but you solve your ascent. That is very impor- tant. You must ascend, otherwise whatever problems I solve, you get into another problem, then you get into another problem... CC CC CC 10

 MARYADAS I have seen people, they go into an ashram and then they think this is their house. They live there. They manipulate all the money that they save and this and that and develop this, want to make everything comfortable. They never think, “This is not my is the ashram of Mother. I have to do it." But that detachment is not there, not at all a detachment. And it is something surprising, that if you have to go to the Himalayas and make an insurance policy, then what's the use of coming to Sahaja Yoga? It is as absurd as that. We are writing two insurance policies, that “I have gone to the Himalayas. When I die, give my property to this one. If I don't die, I will come back after that." And nicely packing up in a nice plastic bag so that ice doesn't spoil it. It's as absurd as that. So you should not have anything. Now some people have a habit, "Oh, I'll get a house for myself. Get my wife there, children there." Finished - all such people should, for a change, leave their houses, come to an ashram, put some other people in their house because they are getting attached. How will you get detached? Is there any way out? Because that is very impor- tant in Sahaja Yoga. Unless and until you are detached, you cannot ascend. Sup- posing you have all the tentacles down here on the Mother Earth and you say, "Let this plane fly," how will it go? ashram. I am doing it because I am a Sahaja Yogi. This CC Maryadas and detachment The relationship of purity must be understood in everything. Is it a pure relation- ship? “Am I living in this ashram in pure relationship? Because this is the house that is giving me comfort, that's why I am living in this house. Or am I just living here just because it's an abode? I am here today and I will be there tomorrow?" You will be amazed. You will enjoy every part of life. As soon as you are attached, you are doomed. It's a headache to be attached to someone. Then "My wife has not arrived. Oh God, what to do now? I must telephone to her, get her here." But if you are detached about it, she will come in time. Not only that, but you will enjoy her company. Otherwise you will shout at her, "Why didn't you come in time? I was waiting for you." Then why were you waiting to scold her and shout at her and spoil all the relationship? Just see the absurdity of the whole thing is the attachment. You should get completely detached about everything and you will enjoy, just enjoy. But in that also, one has to judge. Are you really enjoying or are you just making a drama out of it? Try to be sincere. Purity is brought forth by sincerity. If you are not sincere to yourself and to others, you cannot be pure. And purity is the main thing you have to achieve in Sahaja Yoga, apart from the unity, which I have given you. But if you do not use this unity for purity – no use. So this light should give you complete wisdom that you enjoy a pure, good life. You are married. All right, you have a life of enjoyment with That I have already described to you and with your wife how to behave also. I have described to you many a times – or with your husband. But when it comes to others, you should have an absolutely pure relationship of no exploitation. Even there are flirting exploitations the same as money exploitations. Here, if you exploit somebody by money, it's called a “thug," but flirting is not called anything. I think that is a much worse crime according to Christ. So you have to be care- ful on this point and understand that the relationship with each other has to be Until you are detached, hanker, you you cannot ascend. wife. your CC pure.

 MARYADAS Now there are people who have horrible wives or horrible husbands. I don't mind. They can give them up. If they are absolutely impossible, if they are spoiling their purity, if they are torturing their lives, then the best is to get rid of them. I don't mind because if they are so bad that you cannot use them – just like this body, if it is so bad – it's better to give up and die. So let that relationship die out. But that death should come to You are all born you as a very forceful help, otherwise, after that, if you become a nervous of one Mother. personality, what is the use? So what you have to do after such a thing has happened – that you have given up such a relationship – then, if you have to go to the courts and all that, you should give up Sahaja Yoga for the time being. Solve your problems. Solve your court problems, everything, then come to Sahaja Yoga. We do not want to get involved into this kind of a thing at all, that we have broken any family or anything.... I have to make a humble request to you, that if you have any a such problem, do not allow any child who is younger than a proper age – six- to be kept in the ashram without taking a full permission, teen years written permission from the parents. Or a wife who has made problems with the husband should not be allowed to come and stay in the ashram with the children unless and until it is resolved. We are not responsible for all kinds of problems. Then people who are sick or mentally deranged should not be kept in the ashram. That is also quite a sympathetic attitude of so many Sahaja Yogis. An ashram is for the best people, not for the luna- tics. So please do not get such people who are no good. We do not want such people to come in the ashram who are going to ruin the reputation of the ashram. The greatest relationship So coming to the relationship of Vishnumaya, is that Vishnumaya is the one who is the sister of Shri Krishna. She is the one who announced the coming of Shri Krishna. She is the one who sacrificed Her life to save Shri Krishna's life. Vishnumaya is the one who surrounds Shri Krishna and She was born as Draupadi, who was later on humiliated by Duryodhana and it was Shri Krishna who came and helped Her. So it is a very sweet relation- ship of purity, of help. A very delicate relationship is to be maintained of a brother and a sister. And that is a special relationship today... It is a greater relationship than any other relationship because here somebody is your own sister, is all right. But if she is not your own sister, you should know that you all are born of one Mother, so the brother and sister relationship should be all right. In that, also one should not have preferences because some would like to have a rich sister or some sort of a nonsense like that – or somebody would like to have the most miserable one. This is all the maya. But a relationship with a person with whom you would like to be happy, you should tie the rakhi. And if there is anybody left out, you should not try to do that. May God bless 12 you.

 14

 I'm talking about God, who is the ocean of love, who is the ocean of compassion, who is the ocean of forgiveness. But we do not even understand that ocean, how great it is, how beautifully it cleanses us, gives us a nice bath, beautifully wraps us into nice warmth and takes us to the realm of His kingdom. This is happening en masse now. It is happening in other countries. Especially in India, thousands of people have got Realization in the villages. And it should happen to all of you here. But if you are not seeking, I cannot force. You can take the horse to the river, up put his mouth in the river, but the horse has to drink the water and enjoy the satisfaction. 26 September 1982

 The Magnetic The first centre is very important. It is of the innocence, which gives you the magnetic powers in the sense not only that you are attracted, but you attract people. But magnetic means that you know whether you are moving to the north or to the south. Birds have this power in them. The birds have it. That's how they fly from one place to another because they can feel the magnet within. And the person who is pure at that point, he never gets lost because he knows which side is moving. I have never had a problem like that. I move either to the left or to the right or for- ward and My husband, who is dealing with shipping, he says, "I have never met a better navigator than my wife and it's so spontaneous." I don't have to think. I know for definite that you are moving in the wrong CC direction or in the right direction... So the magnet is placed within you there, but it's to be awakened. When it is awak- ened, these deities – when they are awakened – you become the truth, like the light that comes in you starts seeing everything as far as your feelings are concerned, your experienc- ing is concerned, so you become the truth. 7 October 1981 Shri Ganesha within Me is a powerful identity. While worshipping Him, you have to know that such a powerful thing you have to establish within yourself and, by that estab- lishment, you have to manifest the powers of Shri Ganesha. And the power of Shri Gane- sha's greatness is auspiciousness. It's a coefficient. It's a formula, we can say in scientific language, that emits auspiciousness. It's a magnet in the Mother Earth. The same magnet is within you, which is Shri Ganesha. You leave Me alone and I can tell you which is the north, south, east, west. Close My eyes, still I'll tell you. You know there are so many birds who fly out all the way to Australia, to Siberia because they have that magnet with them. They have that innocence with them. There are so many fish, which have got an actual magnet placed in them. Scientists should find out. In the same way, Shri Ganesha within us is magnetic, so a person who has Shri Gane sha awakened within himself becomes magnetic and the magnet attracts the steel, not the dried leaves.... And steel is like the Guru Tattwa. A man with the steel says, “man of steel." A person who has character, conviction and who cannot be dominated by temptations is says, a man of steel, So this magnet attracts the steel. Steel has only one badness. The bad thing about it is that it is not pliable. It is rather dry, but the magnet attracts. This means it creates that special quality in the steel that it moves towards the magnet. In the same way, when this magnet is awakened within you, you'll be amazed. Instead of people running away from your ashrams, they will be running towards you. I find it impossible. I go to any house, if they come to know I am there, God save Me – anywhere, any place. So what is this magnet? It is pure love. It is pure love and the concept of pure love is that it doesn't depend on anything whatsoever, but on itself. It is the support of itself. It's like light that spreads just by its own nature. It doesn't want anything, doesn't expect anything. It just spreads all over and enlightens other peoples' hearts. That's why they get attracted. 7 September 1986 16

 The guru word means gravity. Gravity means a person who is grave, who is deep, who is magnetic. Guru Puja 1984 1100 wOOBURRY The Divine is not interested in useless people. It is interested in that special calibre... They're extremely enjoyable and magnetic and dynamic. They're complete in themselves because they feel their subtlety. They live on that. Still, their seeking is there and the meaning they try to find in their own being. 9 June 1980 And they want to identify their subtlety with something that is universal.

 The magnetism is a magic. It is a magic of a person. A person is magnetic because he has certain magic. Now this magic comes from your own personality. So the basis of mag- netism on the left-hand side starts and that basis is Shri Ganesha. Shri Ganesha is the basis of that magnetism. So your innocence is the best way to have that magnetism. Magnetism you cannot express in a material way. It is not material stuff, but it is some- thing abstract. It comes from your quality of Shri Ganesha. Such a person is magnetic. Magnetic means that such a person attracts another person because of the weight of the person, because of the quality of the person. Such a person attracts, but does not attract for lust, greed and nonsensical things, but attracts another person because of the fragrance of love in the subjects. Now it is always confused – confused because it's such an abstract thing. So one must understand it in a very subtle way. What is this magnetism that one should understand? You see, there are some gestures people use artificially, which normally they have been using just to attract other people – the way they walk, the way they dress, the way they live. All these things are of no use. It is something so inner. That fragrance is so inner which must be developed. Mahalakshmi Puja 1983 18

 Feel the peace of the place... Feel the peace within.... They are the most peaceful places where you have been. 20

 URL=http://www.file- osting.org/filelderails!7537/ Areua9%20(No%2QTriggers). Wɔx/map| RL

 Me If you have any questions, апy ask When we get angry, is our anger just our tendency to react? If you get angry within yourself and if you are sure that you are not doing anything wrong, for a Sahaja Yogi there is no need to say, "outside you are angry." There's no need. That anger itself is a power and you should do your bandhan and anything that you want to do, CC 6 August 1982 but should not show that you are angry. You should be absolutely silent because you you can be. You are in the axis. You are not on the periphery. Actually, the anger is just to see your anger and use that anger for that purpose. And once you start doing that, that anger will itself work out. That will itself work out the person. you must learn to see your anger that is working. All these things are important. You have seen that sometimes only shouting at the bhoots, they go away and many mad people have been cured like that. But you don't do all that. That's for Me. You must be always decent, with decorum and all that. But if the anger is because of your nature or a tendency or out of control, then it's a bad thing... I can get very angry, but I am completely under control. I know why I am angry, where the bhoot is, how he's running away. I can see that. But you can't see the bhoot. You can't see anything, so there is no need for you to get angry and show temper. But if you have an anger, say for example which makes you uncontrollable, then there is a mantra for that – shanti. “Ya Devi sarva bhuteshu, shanti rupena samsthita." You must ask for that bliss, for that peace. This is a mantra for you. For controlling your temper, you have to tell yourself, "Ya Devi sarva bhuteshu, shanti rupena samsthita." So shanti is the point. The axis point is that from which you witness everything. You are in shanti. You are in complete peace. You are not in a turmoil. Even if you are angry, you are not in a turmoil. Whatever is angry is the power and the power is taking charge. But unless and until that is achieved, what you have to do is to put yourself in a position that you are peaceful.... The shanti is your fort. But peacefulness never means cowardice. Never call cowardice as peace. A person who is peaceful is never a coward because nothing can transgress it, nothing can overpower it. It is never, never possible that cowardice and peace can go together. But your power is inside, not outside, so you don't show your power of your anger outside. But just a little anger with anybody, you will see it will work out. But first estab- lish that position within you where you are the axis, where you do not allow anger to sit on your head. That is the growth. That's the growth, that you are at peace.... London And you'll be amazed. But anger On a rare occasion in the summer of 1982, Shri Mataji invited questions from the Sahaja Yogis gathered at a London ashram. 22

 What are Your plans? What are My plans? I don't plan. You see, I don't plan because I don't know how far My instruments are ready. First now, My only plans, if I have any, are to really prepare My weapons all right. Once they are done, then we’ll fix them up. You see, unless and until you know how far your bomb can fall, how can you plan it? So first of all, I must measure up the power of My children, how powerful they are. Thatť's what I'm trying to do now, to make them aware of their powers to use. Like you see Hanumana, when He was born and when He grew up, He forgot that I must measure I must time. He forgot His powers. So He was to be reminded that "You are such-and-such powerful person. You don't know what Your powers are. You ate off the whole of Surya. This You did in your childhood. You are born with this power, but now, after growing, up the power You have rather sort of forgotten it and also You were afraid of using them and it sort of looks like in a dominant position. But it is there. If You just try to remember them, it will of My children. come." They have tremendous power, these people have, tremendous powers. But they have to assume and stand on that.... Some Sahaja Yogis use their devotion to You to oppress others. You all have a direct access to Me. You all can grow your spirits. Nobody can dominate you. Everyone has complete freedom to know their spirit. And the spirit is something that cannot be dominated by anyone. Now supposing somebody tries to oppress you, what will they oppress which way? They will say, Now have it. Somebody will say, "T'll jump in the sea." Jump – just now you jump. What will they oppress you in? You see, just see that. Not in your spiritual growth, can they? And that's how the problem starts, in material things. In an ashram now, somebody says, “All right, we would like to have a photograph of Mother put there." The other will say, “No, we're going to have it there." Whether you put it here or there makes no differ- ence. My photograph is going to work it out. Even in puja matters, I've seen people will say that “No, Mother is sitting there, don't in in you, "All right, we'll not have this carpet, we'll have that carpet." CC feet towards the Mother." It's a common thing. Everybody knows one should put your not put them, but still they'll say, "No, we want to put them." All right, let them put. Next time they will not because they will know it is wrong. They'll find out. So you see, nobody can oppress anyone. I am here to correct. Once you understand that you are not perfect, the other is not perfect, we are all perfecting ourselves, we are all coming up, Now I have also seen people will say that there are two Sahaja Yogis talking to other Sahaja Yogis. Now one is a very oppressive one. The other one is upset to see that this one is oppressive. Now for that purpose, if you are quiet, silent, you will always dominate him. People will listen to you, not to him. But even if you start saying, “Oh, you don't say like that and this," they will think these are fighting cocks. Then, at that time, you are wiser. This thing will even give him a chance to understand. But what happens, one Mother is there to look after us, then we will never think like that. CC dominates. Another tries to dominate him by outward things and the whole show person is over. There is no need to dominate another person by outward things. He will settle down by himself if you show your dignity of your silence and of your understanding of Sahaja Yoga. There is no need just now to say, "You shut up, you sit down, you don't do!" It is absolutely wrong... In Sahaja Yoga, it will never help. The other person can only win over by his dignity, by his quiet methods, by approaching a person properly...

 QUESTIONS So many times you have seen I just keep quiet. It works out. It is not necessary that you should at that moment shout. There's no need and it cre- ates a very bad impression and very bad leadership. First of all, you cannot be dominated. This is one fact. It is a truth. You can grow in your spirituality, whatever people may try to dominate in worldly things. Thank God we don't have any organization. Thank God we don't have secretaries, assistant secretaries, under-secretaries, vice-secretaries, upper sec- retaries, lower secretaries. We don't have any nonsense. Otherwise, even that would have been dominating to people. Then they would have fought that. Everybody has position. So we don't have that problem. We don't have any money problem because we don't have all these nonsensical ideas. I have solved these problems by But the greatest having no institutions, no positions. Everybody has position. But the greatest position is of your spirit, which you establish. The atten- position iIs of tion is not there. It is more ego-oriented. The whole stuff is ego-oriented. You can't fight ego with You cannot. You can only fight ego or super-ego ego. your spirit. with the spirit. How much do I dominate you? I absorb all your aggression also and how much do I dominate you? If I have to correct you, I go forward and do it and tell you that I am correcting you, whether you like it or not - and see the result. It is all right. But if you have that capacity, do it. Then there is lacking in you that you cannot do that way, so be prepared not to at least spoil the show of Sahaja Yoga... You have seen all these saints, those who have talked about Me. What you do they say? Everybody says the same thing about Me. There cannot be any fight between saints, can there be? If the truth is one, how can there be a fight? But because one is inadequate, another is dominating, both must achieve that state. But the best is to behave more dignified, more grown-up, more patronizing. People will definitely take to you because you will become the leader. Arguments are not going to lead you anywhere. I can tell you this much. No use arguing among yourselves. If you have to argue, you have to argue with others, not among yourselves.... How do we fight the ego? You should never fight ego. If you try to fight it, it will sit more on your head. That's not the way to fight it. That there is - "Oh, I am going to box you" – then it will grow more. The more you box and you fight your ego ego it, the more it will grow. Never fight your ego. The only way is to see it. Your attention is very important. Your attention is now enlightened. Whatever you see, it comes to its right size. Ego, if it is overgrown, you just watch your ego. Best is to watch yourself in the mirror and you say, "Oh, Mr. Ego, how do you do?" Then it will come down. But don't fight it. It is just to be seen. All kinds of could be there. If you are over-educated, you are egois- tical. If you are uneducated, you are egoistical because you must try to show that CC egos you are something. All sorts of egos are there. So the best thing is to see for yourself. That's why I say, "Face yourself." Your Self means your spirit. CC 24

 CE Mother, is it the same for super-ego? also, Yes, very much so. For "Get out. I can see you very clearly. You are there. You get out from here. How dare you frighten me. I am the spirit. I am the spirit. How dare you can do that" – that's how. You see, ego makes you idiotic, absolutely. Ego makes you idiotic, makes an idiot out of you – absolutely. And the super-ego makes you a coward. It makes you a coward. Now how to fight it – "I'm not going to be an idiot." If go away. If you want to be an idiot, then he will be there to help you. If you want to be an idiot, all right, call Mr. Ego. You'll become an idiot straightforward. It is the easiest you are not to be frightened. You should just say, super-ego CC you say that, the ego will way.... And super-ego – if to be. Ham Ksham," as I told you, the mantra on the Agnya. Either you have to say, "I am." The other I say is "I forgive you...." That relationship with yourself should be tyrannical. You should lash it up. You should absolutely make it clear to yourself that "I have to perfect myself. If I have to give my being to God, it has to be perfect." Secondly, if you have to have a relationship with others, it has to be an ideal relation- ship. Sahaja Yogi with Sahaja Yogi means something great. The greatest relationship is that. With your sister, with your brother, it should be ideal. And in collectivity, we have to be pragmatic. In collectivity, we can change our course. We'll take the way we like. The way it moves, we will manage it.... If you understand this very simple thing about relations and attitudes, you will never have problem. Your relationship with the Sahaja Yogi has to be an absolutely ideal relationship, oth- erwise some screw is loose. Try to in this thing. You know everything, that it has to be Now see, the relationship between that [flame] and Me has to be proper so that it does not burn Me. It's absolutely in the lifetime also. We have to do the same thing. That rela- tionship with each other has to be ideal to create the best results. It is so practical. I don't know what is there to tell in this. And you have to be perfect because you are the unit. And the whole thing can be pragmatic. Then only it can be. But here, it is just the other around. The screws are pragmatic, the relationship is imperfect and the collectivity is you are a coward, then it sits on your head. Say, "I am not going make it ideal.... I don't understand what have I to tell proper. way absolutely static. It doesn't move. The collectivity – after all, we are collective, bound to each other. "How can we move, Mother? We are static now. We are bound to each other. We can't move, you see." It is just like the rock of Gibraltar...

 QUESTIONS Shri Mataji, could You say something about maintaining our attention so that it stays where it should? The best way is to learn how to watch yourself. Just now, sitting here, just put yourself into a position from where you watch yourself. "Now what am I doing?" This is the abbhyas. This is the study. Apart from mantras, apart from anything, the abbhyas is the practice, the practice of becoming a witness. And the witness is the spirit state. There attention will not go. I mean you will see everything. It is there, but the attention will be inside. Try to practise this. "Am I a witness?" It comes to Me just like a picture Now, say some people say, "Oh God, I had a horrible time, Mother. This hap- pened, that happened." See – you are not a witness. How can you have a horrible CC - absolutely not time if you are the spirit? You only have a horrible time when you are not the spirit. If you can watch the whole thing as a drama that is played, then you are not having a horrible time, but this outside of you is having a horrible time, which you are of this life, but of lives. watching. That's how the attention can be fixed very well if you practise abbhyas, practise all the time to be witness. Say you go out, you see something, you just try to see it, not to think about it. Be a witness of the whole thing. The joy will be complete and also you will become absolutely peaceful. Your attention will be completely enlightened. And then the inspiration you To Me, it is just like a film in My mind. If I have seen this room, now I know what is in this design. Everything I know, how you are sitting, what pose you have taken, how you were, what it was. Everything is like a design. You see, it comes to Me just like a picture – absolutely not of this life, but of lives – because that's a recording system that records best. If there are thoughts, it's like something in between. You see, now he is trying to record Me on the film and if there is something in between moving, nothing will come in it. But when there is nothing in between and you are just seeing through, you are recording everything that is important. Moreover, you will be amazed. You don't record unimportant things. Like for people now, they go to a village or any place. They will be recording, "Oh God, it was very dirty and this happened and we went there and there was cement to sleep on" for example. "And then we went inside and there was no proper chair to sit down. And the chair was so hard and my back started aching." All these things they will remember. And then what happened? "Oh God, I couldn't tion." Everything was that bad, you see, just like a newspaper – all bad news. But to a person who is a realized soul in a real way, he doesn't see. I mean you don't smell anything dirty. You always smell something good. You never smell. You do not think of anything dirty. Everywhere you go, it's beautiful. Even if you see just the sand, you see the pattern. Even if you see a barren hill... I said, “Look at the beauty of these hills in Maharashtra." They said, "Mother, what is the beauty? It's not covered with trees." I said, "That's the beauty. Just see the They couldn't see the patterns that I was seeing. But if you this hill?" I also know that because I know the patterns of all the hills, how it has moved, how it has made patterns and things like that. Because they don't see that, they cannot see the beauty because they are looking out for defects. Or relatively, will be tremendous.... will get CC CC get Realiza- patterns. ask Me, "What is you see English trees are better than say X-Y-Z trees, so then this is not better. The relative, they start. But you are at an absolute point. You are getting the absolute of everything. Everything is your own. What is there to judge?

 What does it take to be kind, to be gentle, to say pleasant things? Mother, perhaps You can see the beauty because You are the artist. I am the artist and I am the art. But what about you? Who are you? You are the one who is created and you can create and you can become the artist. That's what I am saying, that you are not only the light, but the light that will give light to others. And also you will sustain that light, which you have given. This is the dif- ference now between you and other people, not that only you will be the artist, but you will enjoy the art of the artist. This is what you have You don't know. You are not aware of your powers. It's a dynamic thing which has happened to you, which you should take to. But our attention is on from where the dirt is coming, where the filth is coming, where the ugliness is there.... The same thing can look ugly to a person who is of that kind of an attitude who wants to see everything ugly. Try your attitudes. Try to see good in others. Try to see. I am not saying for other people, but I am saying at least for Sahaja Yogis you can do it. Try to see good in them, what good they have done to Sahaja Yoga, what you owe to them, how to get along with them. Why not see the good in them? By giving them encouragement, by being good to them, you are helping Sahaja Yoga. But you want to help your ego because you are very wise. So then only, by appreciating another person only, you have a better relationship. This is a very simple fact.... What does it take to be kind, to be gentle, to say pleasant things...? Somebody is very tidy, then that person is bad. Somebody is very untidy, that is bad – every sort of thing. But why not you do something about yourself that there is something inside I don't waste My energy. I have no energy for wasting. In the same way, why do waste your energy? Why not see to the better side of man? By seeing the bad side, if you can cure it, well and good. But if you cannot cure it, you are going to get yourself bad. If you can cure it, there is nothing like it. But can't.... When judging others, one has to know one should judge oneself first of all because with what are you judging – with your ego or super-ego? I have seen it's a very common failing, which should not be there any more. Now you are realized souls. You are saints. Although olden saints might be doing whatever they did, forget them – but you people are not going to see the faults of each other, but to the good points of everyone... It's so enjoyable, how beautiful we are that everything is so beautiful around us, to see such beauty exists and we do not see it, such a tremendous joy. Every bliss is there, flowing within us and we don't know, we don't notice it. It's such a happy thing. It's such a beautiful thing. "Oh God! Such a source of joy was just standing next to me, I never knew. And I just got. person you which is not tidy? And it is inside you that is very upsetting... you you CC turned around and saw that force. I turned around." back – all the conditionings of yours, the ideas that you have. Do not pass Turn your judgement, first thing. Great art critics and all that, please, I beg of you that do not pass remarks at anything all the time. It's ego playing the trick. Just watch it, how it is making feel that you are something very great. Be careful. 27 you

 sevEN moтеnts WITH SHRI MATAJI ONE If you can record the joy of raising the kundalini of others, you will feel a new wealth of these beautiful moments will be accumulated. And all those moments which were giving you confusion or fear or so-called unhappiness and happiness will drop out and pure joy will remain because now most of the experiences you have had are more of joy. Joy has no thoughts. It's just an experience – pratyaksha. That's why I said you keep your eyes open. hope you'll understand what I mean by that. I 26 May 1980 TWO Once you are absolutely thoughtlessly aware, you are one with the Divine, so much so that the Divine takes over every activity, every moment of your life and looks after you and you feel completely secured, one with the Divine and you enjoy the blessings of the Divine. Sahasrara Puja 1998 THREE Look at the tree with love and you will find that the tree itself is giving you the joy of its creation because you will become thoughtless. And the creator who has made that beautiful tree will be pouring all that joy which is stored in it. Every human being is a store of joy, unlimited, I assure you. Believe me and don't waste them because somebody is not properly dressed or he's not according to the way you want him to be, which you learned in your public school. Every doorstep everywhere there is beauty lying. Do not miss it. But if you have a possessiveness about it ... then you can never enjoy them. You can never enjoy all that beauty, all that store, all that wealth that is in human being. Every moment it is bubbling. every Christmas Puja 1979 28

 FOUR What is important is to enjoy the time. This moment, every moment has a dynamism in it. But you are thinking, "Now to go, now Mother is speak- get my train or not, I should look at my watch, as soon as the time is I will run." But I tell you, for a Sahaja Yogi, the trains will ing, whether I'll י stop, the airplanes will stop. Everything stops for them because, after all, it's all God's work you are entering into. Who is greater than God? Who is more Every moment has powerful than Him? Once you enter into His kingdom, everything works out. You know it works out.... So the joy of those happenings, the joy of that blissfulness, that security of God fills you up. And when it fills you up, you feel absolutely relaxed. You feel it's all done for a dynamism. 10 July 1984 you. FIVE Supposing a child is born to a mother and the child has not seen the mother, then that child cannot have that feeling for a mother as you people can have. So this is the greatest thing that you have got... Then the joy starts pouring in because you start seeing how your Mother looks after you at every moment, how She creates play and how She creates magic. Guru Puja 1979 SIX The idea that we are sacrificing, itself is an ego-oriented idea. What do you sacrifice? What do we have to sacrifice? Supposing I say I am sacrificing. It's nonsense because that's My nature. I have to jolly well do it. I can't help it. I can't run away. If I run away from you, My vibrations will make Me.... I have to give. In the same way, you have to give Realization. If you think that house I do lots of meditation, Mother. I give exclusively. I am exclu- "In my sive" – finished. You cannot go further. You may have your own conception you are going further with it. You are absolutely wrong. I allow you to continue with your myths. That doesn't mean that it is true. People ask Me, "How many times should we attend the program? How many times should we meditate?" Every moment. that 25 January 1982 SEVEN You must know how to smile. You must know how to win over people. Still there are some Sahaja Yogis and some Sahaja Yoginis who are still rather stiff. I find them a little stiff in type and they can't give up their stiffness. Maybe they think no end of themselves or whatever it is. Then they will not enjoy Sahaja Yoga. Of course, mentally they understand Sahaja Yoga and all that, but they cannot enjoy fully Sahaja Yoga and its mirth, its joyous moments. 10 September 1995

 When it comes to giving, give it with your full heart. You just feel that love of giving and you feel so happy because you feel so big about yourself, like an ocean that's giving so many clouds and again it is receiving these rivers into it and again making it into clouds. A sort of a circle of beautiful conversion into beauty after beauty starts. It's so beautiful. 215204 And that's what we should try to become, a part of that circle, which is so beautiful and which is so joy-giving to yourself also. 27 March 1981 30

 ON

 Shri l Hanun man land the necklace a story about dynamism and humility Tun I MUST SAY YOU HAVE TO VENTURE. You have to venture without any fear, collectively and individually, forgetting as to what will happen. I mean you won't go to jail. You will not be crucified. Be sure on that.... You are not aware that you are angels and this is your work. You have to do this and nothing else is important. I hope .. that enthusiasm, that venture- some nature will vibrate your Pingala and, without feeling any ego about it, in the most humble manner, as Hanumana was, you will do the jobs. Hanumana – imagine, He was given a beautiful necklace of gold with big, big balls for Him to wear, by Sita. And He opened all of them one by one. He said, "There is no Rama in this. What will I do with this gold?" So She said, "Where is Rama?" He opened His heart and showed it. "See, Rama is here." CC If Rama is there, you cannot have ego. So much of dynamism and so much of humility – what a combination it was. And that's what have to just manifest. The more will work, the will assert yourself, you will find that humility is the only thing that helps. Obedience is the only thing that helps to carry out your work will become humbler and humbler. But if you think, “Oh, I am you you more you and CC you doing this," then finished. ככ But if you know that it's done by the Divine – “Paramchaitanya is doing everything, I am just an instrument" – the humility will be there and you will be an effective instrument.... CC I hope today you have understood the subtle side of your being, which is there, which is exhibiting, which I can see clearly and that you will, all of you will in your meditation, become aware of what you have within yourself. That's the greatest thing that will please the Divine. And the Divine will look after you fully. With the same confidence as the angels like Hanumana, you have to go further and work it out. Shri Hanumana all. Puja 1989 | May God bless you

 Credits and Notes2 I hope you will understand My vision Front cover: Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Krishna River near Brahmapuri India, 1989 (Herbert Reininger) Contents pages pho- tograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in India Contents pages name: the 82nd name of Shri Ganga Mata Page 2: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Page 7: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Christmas 1981, London Page 9: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi and a child Pages 10 and 13: Shri Mataji Nir- mala Devi Pages 14 and 15: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi and Sahaja Yo- ginis in India Page 17 and 19: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Pages 20 and 21: near Brahmapuri India, 1988 (Herbert Reininger) Pages 20 quote: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 4 January 1983, Sholapur India Pages 25, 30 and 31: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Above photo: rakhi tray, August 2008, Toronto Canada (Omar Davis) Left quote: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Navarati Puja 1990 Back cover photo: a cedar tree, Vancouver Canada Back cover quote: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Guru Puja 1980 and you will stand by Me, you will come up to that. I depend on you entirely for My vision. We have to change this whole world into a beautiful place. THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE www.divinecoolbreeze.org For that, not much sacrifice is needed. SUBSCRIPTIONS: contact@divinecoolbreeze.org You are already blessed. CONTENT: editor@divinecoolbreeze.org The Divine Cool Breeze, 881 Frederick Road North Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada You don't have to do much, PRINTED BY King Printing Company Inc., 181 Industrial Avenue East Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA and Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. only thing is keep your attention No.8, Chandragupta Housing Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411038, Maharashtra India on the source of Power.

 The trees are not attached to anything They will die tomorrow. It doesn't matter. But anybody who comes to them, they give shadow, they give fruits.



----------------------

2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breezes
2009 issue 1 – volume twenty-two number one
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-1.txt 
 2 Maryadas 14 Talking about God 16 The Magnetic 20 Peace 22 Ask Me 28 Seven Moments 30 Giving
SIDDHI-YOGA NISEVITE
THE ONE WHOM DEVOTEES APPROACH
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-2.txt 
 32 Shri Hanuman and the Necklace
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-3.txt 
 purity of relationships
2onsi
Raksha Bandhan
11 August 1984
London
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-4.txt 
 maryadas
you must have
I will solve,
your problems
but you solve your ascent
I have to tell you something about Raksha Bandhan.
Before that, we have to talk about the maryadas
that are to be observed by Sahaja Yogis.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Maryadas of marriage
One of the things I discovered here in the West, that though we have understood the
importance of the Muladhara, which is very important, and that unless and until we re-
establish our Muladhara fully, we are not going to have the speediest ascent.
Despite all that, still there are lingering things you see around – like people start
choosing their life partners in Sahaja Yoga. That is not allowed. That is not allowed. You
are not to spoil your ashrams, your centres, using them for a marriage-searching society.
not You must respect. This point you must respect. If you have to marry, then you can find
partner outside Sahaja Yoga – to begin with. But if you want to marry in Sahaja
spoil the name Yoga, then you should not go on searching people in Sahaja Yoga. It is a very dangerous
thing for Sahaja Yoga itself and for you people. That is one thing one should never try to
You should
life
your
of Sahaja Yoga. do with Sahaja Yogis.
For all practical purposes, you are brothers and sisters and that's why I always encour-
age marriages between people who belong to another country or another centre....
Most of the marriages which were done like that are very [much more] successful than
the marriages that were selected and were done. It's very wrong to do such a thing as to
arrange your marriage with a Sahaja Yogi by yourself. It will be dangerous. I don't want to
Brahmacharya: say anything, but it won't turn out to be good because it is an anti-God activity, absolutely
a traditional code of anti-God. You are supposed to develop your brahmacharya. You are supposed to develop
conduct of a yogi that your Muladhara. Instead of that, if you start using a Sahaja Yogini or a Sahaja Yogi for the
includes celibacy. selection of your married life, it's going to be very, very troublesome. Your Muladhara will
not settle down. I mean that's a very bad stroke for your development.
Because of the background and the kind of conditioning you have had, you people
don't understand that it is important to maintain the purity of the centres and of every
place. So any such relationship in one city is a very wrong thing. It spoils everyone. To add
up to the trouble, it's a habit of people, I have heard, that they try to tease that "you look
better together, you are nice together." They tease and enjoy. It's a kind of a very perverted
enjoyment of the Muladhara, to tease others, “You are looking very nice with him and
better marry." It's a kind of a romantic nonsense.
CC
you
Of course, for all this, yogis – they have to have a brahmacharya. But even if you
can't have a brahmacharya, you must have maryadas – not to tease each other and enjoy
that kind of a nonsense when the marriage is not settled. If the marriage is settled, it is all
right. And this kills completely the joy of marriage because there is no curiosity left. And
many times I find that absurd relations are established. Some of them are really no good.
And they will really be detrimental and some of them never are established. So if they are
established, they are wrong. And if they are not established, they are heartbreaking.
So all this kind of thing you should not do. You have got experiences of people who
married outside and brought wonderful people to Sahaja Yoga. If you can do it, you
should do it. But if you have to marry Sahaja Yogis, you should not marry them at the
cost of destroying the purity and the idealism it has.
For your own sake, for your own pleasures, you should not spoil the name of Sahaja
Yoga. That is one thing I have seen, so I would say that today, as it is the day of purity in
relationships, let us know that you have to treat each other as brothers and sisters. No such
play should be followed. Don't allow your mind to drift into this. Because
you allow,
then there's no end to it. As it is, you know how hard it is to bring you back to normal.
if
4
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-6.txt 
 MARYADAS
When Christ had said, "Thou shalt not have adulterous eyes," He didn't say it because
it was not practical. It is quite practical for Sahaja Yogis. And there is nothing to worry
about marriages so much.
What is so important? So many are married and what has happened to them? Even
with Sahaja Yoga marriage, some of them have failed because of these bad habits. So you
better get rid of these bad habits before marriage because after marriage also they go on
like this and search for boys and girls. Because if these habits are not curbed before mar-
riage, then they go on lingering on. So one should not try to do all these things before
marriage.
And I have seen such marriages are never, never successful so far. And even if they
are, it is a sort of make-believe thing. It doesn't give real joy. It's a joyless pursuit. Maybe
in one case, it be successful. That doesn't mean that should take any help from
may
you
such difficult things, but have normal marriages which are enjoyable, which have created
permanent bonds between people.
Maryadas between men and women
Maryadas
We have to understand the maryadas.... Relationships between men and women are only
if a certain amount of boundaries are kept.... We have to understand how to keep
pure
are to be
our relationships in proper respect to each other's modesty and chastity. Now for example,
there is a girl who is younger to you. You must keep all the distance from such
If she is much older than you, then it is all right. You can talk, laugh, joke. She's much
older than you. But normally with a girl who is younger to you, even much younger, you
should try
person.
a
established
first with Me.
to keep away.... You must learn these things, how to maintain a distance.
Now there is a man who is younger to you, then you must not have any funny ideas
about such a person. It is absolutely absurd. If some gentleman is younger to you, it is
only in perversion you do such things. See, you should not have any funny ideas about
that person. It's only done when there are emergencies, when there is no possibility of a
marriage, when there are so many women or so many men or under perverted conditions.
We don't have of these conditions here, so we have to behave like normal people. And
any
when the proper atmosphere is given to us, why not make use of it? Why should we create
absurd things...?
do like that, then anybody starts doing it. It's a kind of an aggressiveness,
Once
you
that
you arrange something, come to Me, saying, “Mother, we want to marry." Now what
am I to say? “All right, marry." But it creates a problem for Me, for the rest of the people.
They will
marry a girl who is thirty years younger?"
You must understand My problems. If you ask Me for something – “Mother, should I
do it?" – you really force Me into it. I have to say yes because I cannot be very strict with
“All right, if he has married a girl who is twenty years younger, why not I
CC
say,
CC
you because I am your Mother. But you should be sensible what to ask Me, how far to go.
This is the biggest maryada you have to learn...
Try to see that you don't try to take advantage of Me and, secondly, don't try to bring
people to Me who do not deserve it. There is no need to waste My time with them....
It is aggressiveness only. Please don't try to do that. This is a wrong thing to do. So the
maryadas are to be established first with Me, that understand that you should not try to
trouble Me at all like this...
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Keep that understanding that if you have to grow, we must have a proper relationship
with Mother and we must understand what will displease Her the most.... So many things
are there that people just try to force on Me and I say yes. But I am very cunning and clever
in that because I tell in a way that you should realize that it is not joy-giving...
The maryadas of relationships between you is a relationship of pure love, of purity.
Unless and until you develop pure relationships, you are going to be ruined. See, this finger
It would be has to have a pure relationship with this hand. Supposing if this finger has some dirty
feelings about this hand, it may dirty it, it may spoil it. In the same way, we should have
extremely pure relationships with each other. It means we should try to give our heart to
another person without any lust or greed in it. That we should try to do. Try to help each
other. I find when they feel in a lusty way or a greedy way attached to others, this is not for
killing Sahaja the Sahaja Yogis, but non-Sahaja Yogis. They get so much interested in that person. It's a
absolutely
of attachment.
baser
very
way
Yoga if you do
But in Sahaja Yoga, your attachment is with your spirit, with your atma. And atma is
purest form of our being. We have to keep it absolutely pure and then the enjoyment
the
not keep your
is higher than any romance, any marriage, any worldly thing. It's the highest and the top-
most. First achieve that. First of all, you should arise and achieve that. Achieve that purity.
That is very important.
Now the relationship between the men and women – I have told you
not try to enter into any bedrooms where the ladies are. It's not proper. Nor should the
women enter into men's thing. But it is very common. Women should not behave in the
way other women behave...
So the sense of shame must be developed among men and women. It looks nice. It
looks beautiful. It gives you an additional charm if you have the sense of shame, a little
bashfulness.... Even with Me, they will talk with a hand like that. "Mother, You see this
thing is happening." But there's no need to do all that. Talk in a way that is gentle and
beautiful.... How you talk, how you speak, everything should be saintly. You are saints
do
maryadas.
that
should
you
realize? You are all saints, so how
behave with dignity towards each other,
you should try to
now,
you
you
you respect their dignity, how you live is very important. And that
maintain in a that looks like a saintly behaviour. You have to be a saint....
It would be absolutely killing Sahaja Yoga if you do not keep your maryadas. That is
one of the most essential things one has to know. I have told you again and again how you
dress up,
how
way
bear yourself up,
how you
you talk, how
listen to others more than you
you
talk yourself, how you become non-aggressive. It is the best way to impress people and to
express Sahaja Yoga. I tell you, as it is, people have started saying, "They are very beautiful
people, you can see they are very beautiful. You can see they are a very different type. It's
something different. They are something great." People have started saying that. But still
we lack in certain things.... We are all prophets, and prophets have to behave like proph-
ets. They can not behave like cheap-type people. So, in that, we have to understand the
maryadas...
You must teach your children to call elders by the name of brother or uncle or some-
one. Give some respect to the elders.... I have seen little boys calling big, married people
with three, four children by name. That's not our style. You should never do it.... We must
respect each other, must call them by higher names. Especially when in a meeting, there
are people, you should call them – each other, even your friends – by “Mister...." At least
call them “mister" and say something in a way which is beautiful. The English language has
many words as "please, thank you." All these must be used profusely. We are going back a
little bit. We are now becoming much more modern. That we should give up and become
less modern and more elevating.
CC
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-8.txt 
 MARYADAS
Maryadas of brothers and sisters
Now the whole idea of this maryada is such that when you have called somebody as a
sister or a brother, then it is not only lip service, “You are my sister." It is something innate
and very deep. You have to develop that feeling of a sister because that's how your sublim-
ity will go up, your left Vishuddhi will improve, your Vishnumaya will be satisfied. If you
call somebody a sister, the sisterly and daughterly relationships and motherly relationships
always bring down the so-called ego, which is hiding in the left Vishuddhi.
So try to be kind and gentle with the person whom you call the sister. Stand by her,
look after her. If you call somebody your brother, you have to pray for his protection.
Then you must know that you have a right to ask him for his protection also. But you
must also give something to him and you must try to look after him, welcome him to
house and treat him as a part and parcel of your being because he is very much near
to you because he is your brother and he's very much closer to you.
But such a brother should not try to dominate the wife. This is the maryada again.
Like a brother or somebody is very friendly with the brother or a lady is friendly as a sister,
then she should not try to put a wedge between the husband and wife. That is the worst
thing to do, to put a wedge between husband and wife. Anybody who tries that must
know that he is a mean person. One should never try to put a wedge between a husband
and wife.
your
I know there are problems between a husband and wife. I will put them right, but you
don't try to put any wedge between them and don't try to create a problem. If it is prob-
lematic, it is for Me to solve, not you people. You don't have to solve and don't interfere
with their married life. Let them be as they are. I will find out how they are. I will try to
help them. But it's very wrong to play with their married life or with their marriage prob-
lems and suddenly jump on somebody. It is a very wrong thing which is very common
here....
This kind of a cheap heart-giving business and taking business is not for Sahaja Yoga.
In our heart resides the spirit. We are dignified people and in that dignity we have to rise
and live with that dignity, not to cheaply allow the spirit to be insulted or dominated or
subjugated to anyone.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Maryadas and children
The relationship with children also one should understand. I have seen some people have
a habit of getting a child very much closer and pampering them.... Let the parents handle
the child. You just don't interfere with other's children.... Inform Me. I will cure the
child. But if a child is being spoiled by you, the worst thing to do to harm that child is to
spoil. Children here are very clever and intelligent, you must know. They are very good
at manipulating. They will because they are extremely precocious. They are realized souls.
They are born in this country – what a combination. At that time must be care-
ful as to their training.
From the first five years, all the parents must be extremely strict with children,
extremely strict. Don't allow them to overpower you or manipulate you.
tant. If you allow them to overpower you or to dominate you, they will sit on your head.
Tell them not to do like that... They are not deities to be worshipped. They are only
realized souls, so keep them at that point. And you are My trustees of those children and
if you spoil them, it is you who will be held responsible. You have no business to spoil
the lives of these children as Sahaja Yogis and their chances of ascent. So if they are born-
realized, they are not deities. This you must understand. They are not beyond corruption.
They are not beyond all kinds of things....
With
you
very
It's
very impor-
have to be really strict. They must know how to meditate,
children
your
you
they must know how to pray, they must know how to respect and all the good things
you must teach your children. And don't allow them to sit on your head. Many people
have ruined the lives of their children like this. Now will you please see that such a child
is brought to proper level? If the child is trying to take liberties with you and is cheeky
and does not listen, please give that child to some other Sahaja Yogi to look after, whom
you think can look after and see that the child is put right. Nip in the bud is the best way
because we don't want to have children who are spoiled, who are spoiling other children,
nor do we want children who are subjected to such children.
So you can have proper children, well-behaved children, sensible, wise children
because they can really be a drag on you, on Me, on everyone if you do not properly bring
them up. And they are our liabilities. We have to look after them.
So the relationship between the father and children, mother and children is impor-
tant. Actually the mother should look after the child much more. And the child must
respect. The father should never scold the mother in the presence of the child. That's one
thing one must understand, that if the father starts scolding the mother in the presence
of the child, the child will have no respect for the mother. But the respect must be main-
tained because, if the wife respects the husband, then the child will know how to respect
her and the husband too.
So the whole thing is built up like that. It is a kind of a pattern for children to follow.
One should not try to dominate the husband, at least in the presence of children. That's
very wrong because then the children learn that trick and they start dominating you.
So it flows from you to children, so try to see that if you have to do anything, then you
do it yourself. And respect the husband and in a way that is very obvious to the child that
the father is respected by mother. And they are just like monkeys. The way you behave,
they behave. So you allow them to behave in a particular manner. They will behave that
But if you put a good pattern of behaviour, they will imbibe it.
The other day I was thinking how Indian children are so obedient, so sensible. They
will never ask for it, "I want this, I want that." They never manipulate. What happens?
How do they do it? The reason is, I think, the good pattern in the house. Everybody
knows whom to respect, how to respect, how to behave.
way.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-10.txt 
 MARYADAS
The relationship in Sahaja Yoga has to be even more than this, much
more subtle. For example, if we are in a room, try to give to another person
always, try to do for them. If you have to pay, better pay yourself, not to wait
for another person. Try to do it yourself. Run forward to do it. If someone is
carrying the luggage, you run, you do it. That is the way a Sahaja Yogi should
be. Mostly children are like that. They will say, "I'll get it, I'll do it, I'll receive
it." It may be ego, you might call it, but whatever it is, that is the sign you
have to achieve by organizing a proper type of an image for the whole society,
that if somebody needs something, you run.... First let others have, not that
you should first have anything. How you eat your food is very important.
Everything is very important for the children to see and to behave like that.
all
Maryadas and money
money matters also, I have seen that people should be very, very sensible
and should have proper maryadas. Now with Me, whatever maryadas you
want to keep, you must understand.... Whenever it is possible, should try
to do whatever is possible for Sahaja Yoga. It's very important. Try to surren-
der. Not that I will take any money from you, you know that. I don't want any
money or anything, but surrender yourself absolutely to Sahaja Yoga. That is
the best way people have risen and have done so well.
In
you
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Maryadas and Sahaja Yoga
Now the relationship among yourselves, among
different nations – we should try to help people.... We must not forget
that we have to help. We have to help as many as possible. And we must
try to do whatever is possible for others. This is important. If we cannot
do for a group like Sahaja Yogis, whom are we going to help? So we have
to give that help.
Now in Sahaja Yoga itself, on the subtle basis, we should not try to
judge anybody's vibrations... It's an absolutely wrong idea. Everybody,
individually, should sit before the photograph, get the vibrations every
morning. There should be a discipline. You must know that the system of
Sahaja Yoga today has worked out this way, that I have given you Realiza-
tion just to say that let your light be enlightened. Now you have to see your
lamp if it is clean or not. It is only possible when the light is enlightened.
See your lamp, if it is enlightened or not.... You better judge yourself,
cleanse yourself, look after yourself. And also try to see how your lamp is.
Is it clean? "Mother has given us the light to see and why not see?"
So if you work it out on these lines, you will go very fast. And
have to, now, perfect yourself. We have so many Sahaja Yogis, but how
many are perfect? This is the point.
Now your relationship to Sahaja Yoga is also very important. There
is a maryada about it very much. Sahaja Yoga should not be taken for
granted. Anybody who thinks he has got Realization and now he is sit-
different
groups, among
you
ting on top of the world is not so. You must work it out. You have to have
discipline..
First build the dome and then the foundation – Sahaja Yoga is like
that – so that with the dome you understand, you are protected, you are
looked after. But people take it for granted, like “Mother will do it, leave
it to Mother." No, it is not so. You are My hands. Supposing My hands
have to lift this, I should say that Nirmala will do it? Now which is Nir-
mala? These hands are the Nirmala at this point. So many people drift like
that.
So to Sahaja Yoga also, your attitude should be of respect. You should
not try to put yourself into bandhan before others. You should not try
to do these things, but in a dignified way you must respect Sahaja Yoga.
And foremost of all, to Sahaja Yoga your relationship should be that you
should know Sahaja Yoga, what it is.... All of you, one and all, should
become a big pandit. But you get lost in your marriage problems, then
your children's problems, then “my mother," then “my sister." I mean it
will take too much time for you. First of all, you should see, "I am a Sahaja
Yogi. Let me get to work..." You should say, "I have nothing to do, I am
going to study Sahaja Yoga.."
There are so many books you can read. I have told you. Try to make
your own library. Try to improve in it. Everybody must try to get perfec-
tion – perfectionism. You should never be a liability on Sahaja Yoga, but
a great asset of Sahaja Yoga. That's what everybody should try to be, that
your problems I will solve, but you solve your ascent. That is very impor-
tant. You must ascend, otherwise whatever problems I solve, you get into
another problem, then you get into another problem...
CC
CC
CC
10
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-12.txt 
 MARYADAS
I have seen people, they go into an ashram and then they think this is their
house. They live there. They manipulate all the money that they save and this
and that and develop this, want to make everything comfortable. They never
think, “This is not my
is the ashram of Mother. I have to do it." But that detachment is not there, not
at all a detachment. And it is something surprising, that if you have to go to the
Himalayas and make an insurance policy, then what's the use of coming to Sahaja
Yoga? It is as absurd as that. We are writing two insurance policies, that “I have
gone to the Himalayas. When I die, give my property to this one. If I don't die, I
will come back after that." And nicely packing up in a nice plastic bag so that ice
doesn't spoil it. It's as absurd as that. So you should not have anything.
Now some people have a habit, "Oh, I'll get a house for myself. Get my wife
there, children there." Finished - all such people should, for a change, leave their
houses, come to an ashram, put some other people in their house because they
are getting attached.
How will you get detached? Is there any way out? Because that is very impor-
tant in Sahaja Yoga. Unless and until you are detached, you cannot ascend. Sup-
posing you have all the tentacles down here on the Mother Earth and you say,
"Let this plane fly," how will it go?
ashram. I am doing it because I am a Sahaja Yogi. This
CC
Maryadas and detachment
The relationship of purity must be understood in everything. Is it a pure relation-
ship? “Am I living in this ashram in pure relationship? Because this is the house
that is giving me comfort, that's why I am living in this house. Or am I just living
here just because it's an abode? I am here today and I will be there tomorrow?"
You will be amazed. You will enjoy every part of life. As soon as you are attached,
you are doomed. It's a headache to be attached to someone. Then
"My wife has not arrived. Oh God, what to do now? I must telephone to her, get
her here." But if you are detached about it, she will come in time. Not only that,
but you will enjoy her company. Otherwise you will shout at her, "Why didn't
you come in time? I was waiting for you." Then why were you waiting to scold her
and shout at her and spoil all the relationship? Just see the absurdity of the whole
thing is the attachment.
You should get completely detached about everything and you will enjoy, just
enjoy. But in that also, one has to judge. Are you really enjoying or are you just
making a drama out of it? Try to be sincere. Purity is brought forth by sincerity.
If you are not sincere to yourself and to others, you cannot be pure. And purity is
the main thing you have to achieve in Sahaja Yoga, apart from the unity, which I
have given you. But if you do not use this unity for purity – no use.
So this light should give you complete wisdom that you enjoy a pure, good
life. You are married. All right, you have a life of enjoyment with
That I have already described to you and with your wife how to behave also. I
have described to you many a times – or with your husband. But when it comes
to others, you should have an absolutely pure relationship of no exploitation.
Even there are flirting exploitations the same as money exploitations. Here, if you
exploit somebody by money, it's called a “thug," but flirting is not called anything.
I think that is a much worse crime according to Christ. So you have to be care-
ful on this point and understand that the relationship with each other has to be
Until you
are detached,
hanker,
you
you cannot
ascend.
wife.
your
CC
pure.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-13.txt 
 MARYADAS
Now there are people who have horrible wives or horrible husbands.
I don't mind. They can give them up. If they are absolutely impossible,
if they are spoiling their purity, if they are torturing their lives, then the
best is to get rid of them. I don't mind because if they are so bad that you
cannot use them – just like this body, if it is so bad – it's better to give up
and die. So let that relationship die out. But that death should come to
You are all born
you as a very forceful help, otherwise, after that, if you become a nervous
of one Mother. personality, what is the use?
So what you have to do after such a thing has happened – that you
have given up such a relationship – then, if you have to go to the courts
and all that, you should give up Sahaja Yoga for the time being. Solve your
problems. Solve your court problems, everything, then come to Sahaja
Yoga. We do not want to get involved into this kind of a thing at all, that
we have broken any family or anything....
I have to make a humble request to you, that if you have any a such
problem, do not allow any child who is younger than a proper age – six-
to be kept in the ashram without taking a full permission,
teen years
written permission from the parents. Or a wife who has made problems
with the husband should not be allowed to come and stay in the ashram
with the children unless and until it is resolved. We are not responsible
for all kinds of problems. Then people who are sick or mentally deranged
should not be kept in the ashram. That is also quite a sympathetic attitude
of so many Sahaja Yogis. An ashram is for the best people, not for the luna-
tics. So please do not get such people who are no good. We do not want
such people to come in the ashram who are going to ruin the reputation
of the ashram.
The greatest relationship
So coming to the relationship of Vishnumaya, is that Vishnumaya is the
one who is the sister of Shri Krishna. She is the one who announced the
coming of Shri Krishna. She is the one who sacrificed Her life to save Shri
Krishna's life. Vishnumaya is the one who surrounds Shri Krishna and She
was born as Draupadi, who was later on humiliated by Duryodhana and it
was Shri Krishna who came and helped Her. So it is a very sweet relation-
ship of purity, of help. A very delicate relationship is to be maintained of a
brother and a sister. And that is a special relationship today...
It is a greater relationship than any other relationship because here
somebody is your own sister, is all right. But if she is not your own sister,
you should know that you all are born of one Mother, so the brother and
sister relationship should be all right.
In that, also one should not have preferences because some would like
to have a rich sister or some sort of a nonsense like that – or somebody
would like to have the most miserable one. This is all the maya. But a
relationship with a person with whom you would like to be happy, you
should tie the rakhi. And if there is anybody left out, you should not try
to do that.
May God bless
12
you.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-15.txt 
 14
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-16.txt 
 I'm talking about God,
who is the ocean of love,
who is the ocean of compassion,
who is the ocean of forgiveness.
But we do not even understand
that ocean, how great it is,
how beautifully it cleanses us,
gives us a nice bath,
beautifully wraps us into nice warmth
and takes us to the realm of His kingdom.
This is happening en masse now.
It is happening in other countries.
Especially in India, thousands of people
have got Realization in the villages.
And it should happen to all of you here.
But if you are not seeking, I cannot force.
You can take the horse
to the river,
up
put his mouth in the river,
but the horse has to drink the water
and enjoy the satisfaction.
26 September 1982
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-17.txt 
 The Magnetic
The first centre is very important. It is of the innocence, which gives you the magnetic
powers in the sense not only that you are attracted, but you attract people.
But magnetic means that you know whether you are moving to the north or to the
south. Birds have this power in them. The birds have it. That's how they fly from one place
to another because they can feel the magnet within. And the person who is pure at that
point, he never gets lost because he knows which side is moving.
I have never had a problem like that. I move either to the left or to the right or for-
ward and My husband, who is dealing with shipping, he says, "I have never met a better
navigator than my wife and it's so spontaneous."
I don't have to think. I know for definite that you are moving in the wrong
CC
direction
or in the right direction...
So the magnet is placed within you there, but it's to be awakened. When it is awak-
ened, these deities – when they are awakened – you become the truth, like the light that
comes in you starts seeing everything as far as your feelings are concerned, your experienc-
ing is concerned, so you become the truth.
7 October 1981
Shri Ganesha within Me is a powerful identity. While worshipping Him, you have to
know that such a powerful thing you have to establish within yourself and, by that estab-
lishment, you have to manifest the powers of Shri Ganesha. And the power of Shri Gane-
sha's greatness is auspiciousness. It's a coefficient. It's a formula, we can say in scientific
language, that emits auspiciousness. It's a magnet in the Mother Earth.
The same magnet is within you, which is Shri Ganesha.
You leave Me alone and I can tell you which is the north, south, east, west. Close My
eyes, still I'll tell you.
You know there are so many birds who fly out all the way to Australia, to Siberia
because they have that magnet with them. They have that innocence with them. There
are so many fish, which have got an actual magnet placed in them. Scientists should find
out.
In the same way, Shri Ganesha within us is magnetic, so a person who has Shri Gane
sha awakened within himself becomes magnetic and the magnet attracts the steel, not the
dried leaves.... And steel is like the Guru Tattwa. A man with the steel says, “man of steel."
A person who has character, conviction and who cannot be dominated by temptations is
says,
a man of steel,
So this magnet attracts the steel. Steel has only one badness. The bad thing about it
is that it is not pliable. It is rather dry, but the magnet attracts. This means it creates that
special quality in the steel that it moves towards the magnet.
In the same way, when this magnet is awakened within you, you'll be amazed. Instead
of people running away from your ashrams, they will be running towards you. I find it
impossible. I go to any house, if they come to know I am there, God save Me – anywhere,
any place.
So what is this magnet? It is pure love. It is pure love and the concept of pure love
is that it doesn't depend on anything whatsoever, but on itself. It is the support of itself.
It's like light that spreads just by its own nature. It doesn't want anything, doesn't expect
anything. It just spreads all over and enlightens other peoples' hearts. That's why they get
attracted.
7 September 1986
16
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-18.txt 
 The guru word means gravity. Gravity means a person who is grave, who is deep, who is magnetic. Guru Puja 1984
1100
wOOBURRY
The Divine is not interested in useless people. It is interested in that special calibre...
They're extremely enjoyable and magnetic and dynamic.
They're complete in themselves because they feel their subtlety. They live on that.
Still, their seeking is there and the meaning they try to find in their own being.
9 June 1980
And they want to identify their subtlety with something that is universal.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-19.txt 
 The magnetism is a magic. It is a magic of a person.
A person is magnetic because he has certain
magic.
Now this magic comes from your own personality. So the basis of
mag-
netism on the left-hand side starts and that basis is Shri Ganesha. Shri
Ganesha is the basis of that magnetism.
So your innocence is the best way to have that magnetism. Magnetism
you cannot express in a material way. It is not material stuff, but it is some-
thing abstract. It comes from your quality of Shri Ganesha. Such a person
is magnetic.
Magnetic means that such a person attracts another person because of
the weight of the person, because of the quality of the
person. Such a person
attracts, but does not attract for lust, greed and nonsensical things, but
attracts another person because of the fragrance of love in the subjects.
Now it is always confused – confused because it's such an abstract thing.
So one must understand it in a very subtle
way.
What is this magnetism that one should understand? You see, there are
some gestures people use artificially, which normally they have been using
just to attract other people – the way they walk, the way they dress, the
way they live. All these things are of no use. It is something so inner. That
fragrance is so inner which must be developed.
Mahalakshmi Puja 1983
18
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Feel the peace of the place...
Feel the peace within....
They are the most peaceful places
where you have been.
20
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-22.txt 
 URL=http://www.file-
osting.org/filelderails!7537/
Areua9%20(No%2QTriggers).
Wɔx/map| RL
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Me
If you have any questions,
апy
ask
When we get angry, is our anger just our tendency to react?
If you get angry within yourself and if you are sure that you are not doing anything wrong,
for a Sahaja Yogi there is no need to say, "outside you are angry." There's no need. That
anger itself is a power and you should do your bandhan and anything that you want to do,
CC
6 August 1982
but
should not show that you are angry. You should be absolutely silent because you
you
can be. You are in the axis. You are not on the periphery. Actually, the anger is just to see
your anger and use that anger for that purpose. And once you start doing that, that anger
will itself work out. That will itself work out the person.
you must learn to see your anger that is working. All these things are important.
You have seen that sometimes only shouting at the bhoots, they go away and many
mad people have been cured like that. But you don't do all that. That's for Me. You must
be always decent, with decorum and all that. But if the anger is because of your nature or
a tendency or out of control, then it's a bad thing...
I can get very angry, but I am completely under control. I know why I am angry,
where the bhoot is, how he's running away. I can see that. But you can't see the bhoot. You
can't see anything, so there is no need for you to get angry and show temper.
But if you have an anger, say for example which makes you uncontrollable, then there
is a mantra for that – shanti. “Ya Devi sarva bhuteshu, shanti rupena samsthita." You must
ask for that bliss, for that peace. This is a mantra for you. For controlling your temper,
you have to tell yourself, "Ya Devi sarva bhuteshu, shanti rupena samsthita."
So shanti is the point. The axis point is that from which you witness everything. You
are in shanti. You are in complete peace. You are not in a turmoil. Even if you are angry,
you are not in a turmoil. Whatever is angry is the power and the power is taking charge.
But unless and until that is achieved, what you have to do is to put yourself in a
position that you are peaceful.... The shanti is your fort. But peacefulness never means
cowardice. Never call cowardice as peace. A person who is peaceful is never a coward
because nothing can transgress it, nothing can overpower it. It is never, never possible that
cowardice and peace can go together.
But your power is inside, not outside, so you don't show your power of your anger
outside. But just a little anger with anybody, you will see it will work out. But first estab-
lish that position within you where you are the axis, where you do not allow anger to sit
on your head. That is the growth. That's the growth, that you are at peace....
London
And you'll be amazed. But
anger
On a rare occasion in the
summer of 1982, Shri Mataji
invited questions from the
Sahaja Yogis gathered at a
London ashram.
22
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-24.txt 
 What are Your plans?
What are My plans? I don't plan. You see, I don't plan because I don't know how far My
instruments are ready. First now, My only plans, if I have any, are to really prepare My
weapons all right. Once they are done, then we’ll fix them up.
You see, unless and until you know how far your bomb can fall, how can you plan it?
So first of all, I must measure up the power of My children, how powerful they are. Thatť's
what I'm trying to do now, to make them aware of their powers to use.
Like
you see Hanumana, when He was born and when He grew up, He forgot that
I must measure
I must
time. He forgot His powers. So He was to be reminded that "You are such-and-such
powerful person. You don't know what Your powers are. You ate off the whole of Surya.
This You did in your childhood. You are born with this power, but now, after growing, up the power
You have rather sort of forgotten it and also You were afraid of using them and it sort of
looks like in a dominant position. But it is there. If You just try to remember them, it will of My children.
come."
They have tremendous power, these people have, tremendous powers. But they have
to assume and stand on that....
Some Sahaja Yogis use their devotion to You to oppress others.
You all have a direct access to Me. You all can grow your spirits. Nobody can dominate
you. Everyone has complete freedom to know their spirit. And the spirit is something that
cannot be dominated by anyone.
Now supposing somebody tries to oppress you, what will they oppress
which way? They will say,
Now have it. Somebody will say, "T'll jump in the sea." Jump – just now you jump. What
will they oppress you in? You see, just see that. Not in your spiritual growth, can they?
And that's how the problem starts, in material things. In an ashram now, somebody
says, “All right, we would like to have a photograph of Mother put there." The other will
say, “No, we're going to have it there." Whether you put it here or there makes no differ-
ence. My photograph is going to work it out.
Even in puja matters, I've seen people will say that “No, Mother is sitting there, don't
in
in
you,
"All right, we'll not have this carpet, we'll have that carpet."
CC
feet towards the Mother." It's a common thing. Everybody knows one should
put your
not put them, but still they'll say, "No, we want to put them." All right, let them put.
Next time they will not because they will know it is wrong. They'll find out.
So
you see, nobody can oppress anyone. I am here to correct. Once you understand
that you are not perfect, the other is not perfect, we are all perfecting ourselves, we are all
coming up,
Now I have also seen people will say that there are two Sahaja Yogis talking to other
Sahaja Yogis. Now one is a very oppressive one. The other one is upset to see that this
one is oppressive. Now for that purpose, if you are quiet, silent, you will always dominate
him. People will listen to you, not to him. But even if you start saying, “Oh, you don't
say like that and this," they will think these are fighting cocks. Then, at that time, you
are wiser. This thing will even give him a chance to understand. But what happens, one
Mother is there to look after us, then we will never think like that.
CC
dominates. Another tries to dominate him by outward things and the whole show
person
is over. There is no need to dominate another person by outward things. He will settle
down by himself if you show your dignity of your silence and of your understanding of
Sahaja Yoga. There is no need just now to say, "You shut up, you sit down, you don't do!"
It is absolutely wrong...
In Sahaja Yoga, it will never help. The other person can only win over by his dignity,
by his quiet methods, by approaching a person properly...
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-25.txt 
 QUESTIONS
So many times you have seen I just keep quiet. It works out. It is not
necessary that you should at that moment shout. There's no need and it cre-
ates a very bad impression and very bad leadership.
First of all, you cannot be dominated. This is one fact. It is a truth.
You can grow in your spirituality, whatever people may try to dominate in
worldly things.
Thank God we don't have any organization. Thank God we don't have
secretaries, assistant secretaries, under-secretaries, vice-secretaries, upper sec-
retaries, lower secretaries. We don't have any nonsense. Otherwise, even that
would have been dominating to people. Then they would have fought that.
Everybody
has position. So we don't have that problem. We don't have any money problem because
we don't have all these nonsensical ideas. I have solved these problems by
But the greatest having no institutions, no positions. Everybody has position.
But the greatest position is of your spirit, which you establish. The atten-
position iIs of tion is not there. It is more ego-oriented. The whole stuff is ego-oriented.
You can't fight ego with
You cannot. You can only fight ego or super-ego
ego.
your spirit. with the spirit.
How much do I dominate you? I absorb all your aggression also and how
much do I dominate you? If I have to correct you, I go forward and do it
and tell you that I am correcting you, whether you like it or not - and
see the result. It is all right. But if you have that capacity, do it. Then there
is lacking in you that you cannot do that way, so be prepared not to at least
spoil the show of Sahaja Yoga...
You have seen all these saints, those who have talked about Me. What
you
do they say? Everybody says the same thing about Me. There cannot be
any fight between saints, can there be? If the truth is one, how can there be
a fight? But because one is inadequate, another is dominating, both must
achieve that state. But the best is to behave more dignified, more grown-up,
more patronizing. People will definitely take to you because you will become
the leader.
Arguments are not going to lead you anywhere. I can tell you this much.
No use arguing among yourselves. If you have to argue, you have to argue
with others, not among yourselves....
How do we fight the ego?
You should never fight ego. If you try to fight it, it will sit more on your
head. That's not the way to fight it. That there is
- "Oh, I am going to box you" – then it will grow more. The more you box
and
you fight your ego
ego
it, the more it will grow. Never fight your ego. The only way is to see it.
Your attention is very important. Your attention is now enlightened.
Whatever you see, it comes to its right size. Ego, if it is overgrown, you just
watch your ego. Best is to watch yourself in the mirror and you say, "Oh,
Mr. Ego, how do you do?" Then it will come down. But don't fight it. It is
just to be seen.
All kinds of could be there. If you are over-educated, you are egois-
tical. If you are uneducated, you are egoistical because you must try to show
that
CC
egos
you are something. All sorts of egos are there.
So the best thing is to see for yourself. That's why I say, "Face yourself."
Your Self means your spirit.
CC
24
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-26.txt 
 CE
Mother, is it the same for super-ego?
also,
Yes, very much so. For
"Get out. I can see you very clearly. You are there. You get out from here. How dare you
frighten me. I am the spirit. I am the spirit. How dare you can do that" – that's how.
You see, ego makes you idiotic, absolutely. Ego makes you idiotic, makes an idiot out
of you – absolutely. And the super-ego makes you a coward. It makes you a coward.
Now how to fight it – "I'm not going to be an idiot." If
go away. If you want to be an idiot, then he will be there to help you. If you want to be
an idiot, all right, call Mr. Ego. You'll become an idiot straightforward. It is the easiest
you are not to be frightened. You should just say,
super-ego
CC
you say that, the ego will
way....
And super-ego – if
to be. Ham Ksham," as I told you, the mantra on the Agnya. Either you have to say, "I
am." The other I say is "I forgive you...."
That relationship with yourself should be tyrannical. You should lash it up. You
should absolutely make it clear to yourself that "I have to perfect myself. If I have to give
my being to God, it has to be perfect."
Secondly, if you have to have a relationship with others, it has to be an ideal relation-
ship. Sahaja Yogi with Sahaja Yogi means something great. The greatest relationship is
that. With your sister, with your brother, it should be ideal. And in collectivity, we have
to be pragmatic. In collectivity, we can change our course. We'll take the way we like. The
way it moves, we will manage it....
If you understand this very simple thing about relations and attitudes, you will never
have problem.
Your relationship with the Sahaja Yogi has to be an absolutely ideal relationship, oth-
erwise some screw is loose. Try to
in this thing. You know everything, that it has to be
Now see, the relationship between that [flame] and Me has to be proper so that it does
not burn Me. It's absolutely in the lifetime also. We have to do the same thing. That rela-
tionship with each other has to be ideal to create the best results. It is so practical. I don't
know what is there to tell in this. And you have to be perfect because you are the unit.
And the whole thing can be pragmatic. Then only it can be. But here, it is just the other
around. The screws are pragmatic, the relationship is imperfect and the collectivity is
you are a coward, then it sits on your head. Say, "I am not going
make it ideal.... I don't understand what have I to tell
proper.
way
absolutely static. It doesn't move. The collectivity – after all, we are collective, bound to
each other. "How can we move, Mother? We are static now. We are bound to each other.
We can't move, you see." It is just like the rock of Gibraltar...
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-27.txt 
 QUESTIONS
Shri Mataji, could You say something about maintaining our attention so that
it stays where it should?
The best way is to learn how to watch yourself. Just now, sitting here, just put
yourself into a position from where you watch yourself. "Now what am I doing?"
This is the abbhyas. This is the study. Apart from mantras, apart from anything, the
abbhyas is the practice, the practice of becoming a witness. And the witness is the
spirit state. There attention will not go. I mean you will see everything. It is there,
but the attention will be inside. Try to practise this. "Am I a witness?"
It comes to Me
just like a picture
Now, say some people say, "Oh God, I had a horrible time, Mother. This hap-
pened, that happened." See – you are not a witness. How can you have a horrible
CC
- absolutely not
time if you are the spirit? You only have a horrible time when you are not the spirit.
If you can watch the whole thing as a drama that is played, then you are not having
a horrible time, but this outside of you is having a horrible time, which you are
of this life,
but of lives. watching.
That's how the attention can be fixed very well if you practise abbhyas, practise
all the time to be witness. Say you go out, you see something, you just try to see
it, not to think about it. Be a witness of the whole thing. The joy will be complete
and also you will become absolutely peaceful. Your attention will be completely
enlightened. And then the inspiration you
To Me, it is just like a film in My mind. If I have seen this room, now I know
what is in this design. Everything I know, how you are sitting, what pose you have
taken, how you were, what it was. Everything is like a design. You see, it comes
to Me just like a picture – absolutely not of this life, but of lives – because that's a
recording system that records best.
If there are thoughts, it's like something in between. You see, now he is trying
to record Me on the film and if there is something in between moving, nothing will
come in it. But when there is nothing in between and you are just seeing through,
you are recording everything that is important.
Moreover, you will be amazed. You don't record unimportant things. Like for
people now, they go to a village or any place. They will be recording, "Oh God,
it was very dirty and this happened and we went there and there was cement to
sleep on" for example. "And then we went inside and there was no proper chair to
sit down. And the chair was so hard and my back started aching." All these things
they will remember. And then what happened? "Oh God, I couldn't
tion." Everything was that bad, you see, just like a newspaper – all bad news.
But to a person who is a realized soul in a real way, he doesn't see. I mean you
don't smell anything dirty. You always smell something good. You never smell. You
do not think of anything dirty. Everywhere you go, it's beautiful. Even if you see
just the sand, you see the pattern. Even if you see a barren hill...
I said, “Look at the beauty of these hills in Maharashtra."
They said, "Mother, what is the beauty? It's not covered with trees."
I said, "That's the beauty. Just see the
They couldn't see the patterns that I was seeing. But if you
this hill?" I also know that because I know the patterns of all the hills, how it has
moved, how it has made patterns and things like that. Because they don't see that,
they cannot see the beauty because they are looking out for defects. Or relatively,
will be tremendous....
will
get
CC
CC
get Realiza-
patterns.
ask Me, "What is
you see English trees are better than say X-Y-Z trees, so then this is not better. The
relative, they start. But you are at an absolute point. You are getting the absolute of
everything. Everything is your own. What is there to judge?
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-28.txt 
 What does it take to be kind,
to be gentle, to say pleasant things?
Mother, perhaps You can see the beauty because You are the artist.
I am the artist and I am the art. But what about you? Who are you? You are the one who
is created and you can create and you can become the artist.
That's what I am saying, that you are not only the light, but the light that will give
light to others. And also you will sustain that light, which you have given. This is the dif-
ference now between you and other people, not that only you will be the artist, but you
will enjoy the art of the artist. This is what you have You don't know. You are not
aware of your powers. It's a dynamic thing which has happened to you, which you should
take to. But our attention is on from where the dirt is coming, where the filth is coming,
where the ugliness is there....
The same thing can look ugly to a person who is of that kind of an attitude who wants
to see everything ugly.
Try your attitudes. Try to see good in others. Try to see. I am not saying for other
people, but I am saying at least for Sahaja Yogis you can do it. Try to see good in them,
what good they have done to Sahaja Yoga, what you owe to them, how to get along with
them. Why not see the good in them? By giving them encouragement, by being good to
them, you are helping Sahaja Yoga. But you want to help your ego because you are very
wise. So then only, by appreciating another person only, you have a better relationship.
This is a very simple fact....
What does it take to be kind, to be gentle, to say pleasant things...?
Somebody is very tidy, then that person is bad. Somebody is very untidy, that
is bad – every sort of thing. But why not you do something about yourself that there is
something inside
I don't waste My energy. I have no energy for wasting. In the same way, why do
waste your energy? Why not see to the better side of man? By seeing the bad side, if you
can cure it, well and good. But if you cannot cure it, you are going to get yourself bad. If
you can cure it, there is nothing like it. But can't....
When judging others, one has to know one should judge oneself first of all because
with what are you judging – with your ego or super-ego? I have seen it's a very common
failing, which should not be there any more. Now you are realized souls. You are saints.
Although olden saints might be doing whatever they did, forget them – but you people
are not going to see the faults of each other, but to the good points of everyone...
It's so enjoyable, how beautiful we are that everything is so beautiful around us, to
see such beauty exists and we do not see it, such a tremendous joy. Every bliss is there,
flowing within us and we don't know, we don't notice it. It's such a happy thing. It's such
a beautiful thing.
"Oh God! Such a source of joy was just standing next to me, I never knew. And I just
got.
person
you which is not tidy? And it is inside you that is very upsetting...
you
you
CC
turned around and saw that force. I turned around."
back – all the conditionings of yours, the ideas that you have. Do not pass
Turn
your
judgement, first thing. Great art critics and all that, please, I beg of you that do not pass
remarks at anything all the time. It's ego playing the trick. Just watch it, how it is making
feel that you are something very great. Be careful.
27
you
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-29.txt 
 sevEN moтеnts
WITH SHRI MATAJI
ONE
If you can record the joy of raising the kundalini of others, you will feel a
new wealth of these beautiful moments will be accumulated. And all those
moments which were giving you confusion or fear or so-called unhappiness
and happiness will drop out and pure joy will remain because now most of
the experiences you have had are more of joy. Joy has no thoughts. It's just
an experience – pratyaksha. That's why I said you keep your eyes open.
hope you'll understand what I mean by that.
I
26 May 1980
TWO
Once you are absolutely thoughtlessly aware, you are one with the Divine,
so much so that the Divine takes over every activity, every moment of your
life and looks after you and you feel completely secured, one with the Divine
and
you enjoy the blessings of the Divine.
Sahasrara Puja 1998
THREE
Look at the tree with love and you will find that the tree itself is giving you
the joy of its creation because you will become thoughtless. And the creator
who has made that beautiful tree will be pouring all that joy which is stored
in it. Every human being is a store of joy, unlimited, I assure you. Believe me
and don't waste them because somebody is not properly dressed or he's not
according to the way you want him to be, which you learned in your public
school. Every doorstep everywhere there is beauty lying. Do not miss it. But
if you have a possessiveness about it ... then you can never enjoy them. You
can never enjoy all that beauty, all that store, all that wealth that is in
human being. Every moment it is bubbling.
every
Christmas Puja 1979
28
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-30.txt 
 FOUR
What is important is to enjoy the time. This moment, every moment has a
dynamism in it. But you are thinking, "Now to go, now Mother is speak-
get my train or not, I should look at my watch, as soon as
the time is I will run." But I tell you, for a Sahaja Yogi, the trains will
ing, whether I'll
י
stop,
the airplanes will stop. Everything stops for them because, after all, it's all
God's work you are entering into. Who is greater than God? Who is more
Every
moment has
powerful than Him? Once you enter into His kingdom, everything works
out. You know it works out.... So the joy of those happenings, the joy of that
blissfulness, that security of God fills you up. And when it fills you up, you
feel absolutely relaxed. You feel it's all done for
a dynamism.
10 July 1984
you.
FIVE
Supposing a child is born to a mother and the child has not seen the mother,
then that child cannot have that feeling for a mother as you people can have.
So this is the greatest thing that you have got... Then the joy starts pouring in
because you start seeing how your Mother looks after you at every moment,
how She creates play and how She creates magic.
Guru Puja 1979
SIX
The idea that we are sacrificing, itself is an ego-oriented idea. What do
you
sacrifice? What do we have to sacrifice? Supposing I say I am sacrificing. It's
nonsense because that's My nature. I have to jolly well do it. I can't help it.
I can't run away. If I run away from you, My vibrations will make Me.... I
have to give. In the same way, you have to give Realization. If you think that
house I do lots of meditation, Mother. I give exclusively. I am exclu-
"In
my
sive" – finished. You cannot go further. You may have your own conception
you are going further with it. You are absolutely wrong. I allow you to
continue with your myths. That doesn't mean that it is true. People ask Me,
"How many times should we attend the program? How many times should
we meditate?" Every moment.
that
25 January 1982
SEVEN
You must know how to smile. You must know how to win over people. Still
there are some Sahaja Yogis and some Sahaja Yoginis who are still rather stiff.
I find them a little stiff in type and they can't give up their stiffness. Maybe
they think no end of themselves or whatever it is. Then they will not enjoy
Sahaja Yoga. Of course, mentally they understand Sahaja Yoga and all that,
but they cannot enjoy fully Sahaja Yoga and its mirth, its joyous moments.
10 September 1995
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-31.txt 
 When it comes to giving,
give it with your full heart.
You just feel that love of giving
and you feel so happy because
you feel so big about yourself,
like an ocean that's giving so many clouds
and again it is receiving these rivers into it
and again making it into clouds.
A sort of a circle of beautiful conversion into
beauty after beauty starts.
It's so beautiful.
215204
And that's what we should try to become,
a part of that circle,
which is so beautiful
and which is so joy-giving to yourself also.
27 March 1981
30
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-32.txt 
 ON
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Shri l
Hanun man
land the necklace
a story about dynamism and humility
Tun
I MUST SAY YOU HAVE TO VENTURE. You have to venture without any fear,
collectively and individually, forgetting as to what will happen. I mean you
won't go to jail. You will not be crucified. Be sure on that....
You are not aware that you are angels and this is your work. You have to do
this and nothing else is important. I hope .. that enthusiasm, that venture-
some nature will vibrate your Pingala and, without feeling any ego about it,
in the most humble manner, as Hanumana was, you will do the jobs.
Hanumana – imagine, He was given a beautiful necklace of gold with big,
big balls for Him to wear, by Sita. And He opened all of them one by one.
He said, "There is no Rama in this. What will I do with this gold?"
So She said, "Where is Rama?"
He opened His heart and showed it. "See, Rama is here."
CC
If Rama is there, you cannot have ego.
So much of dynamism and so much of humility – what a combination it
was. And that's what have to just manifest. The more will work, the
will assert yourself, you will find that humility is the only thing
that helps. Obedience is the only thing that helps to carry out your work
will become humbler and humbler. But if you think, “Oh, I am
you
you
more you
and
CC
you
doing this," then finished.
ככ
But if you know that it's done by the Divine – “Paramchaitanya is doing
everything, I am just an instrument" – the humility will be there and you
will be an effective instrument....
CC
I hope today you have understood the subtle side of your being, which is
there, which is exhibiting, which I can see clearly and that you will, all of you
will in your meditation, become aware of what you have within yourself.
That's the greatest thing that will please the Divine. And the Divine will look
after
you fully. With the same confidence as the angels like Hanumana, you
have to go further and work it out.
Shri Hanumana
all.
Puja 1989 | May God bless you
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Credits and Notes2
I hope you will understand My vision
Front cover: Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Krishna River
near Brahmapuri India, 1989 (Herbert Reininger) Contents pages pho-
tograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in India Contents pages name:
the 82nd name of Shri Ganga Mata Page 2: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Page 7: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Christmas 1981, London Page 9:
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi and a child Pages 10 and 13: Shri Mataji Nir-
mala Devi Pages 14 and 15: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi and Sahaja Yo-
ginis in India Page 17 and 19: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Pages 20 and
21: near Brahmapuri India, 1988 (Herbert Reininger) Pages 20 quote:
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 4 January 1983, Sholapur India Pages 25,
30 and 31: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Above photo: rakhi tray, August
2008, Toronto Canada (Omar Davis) Left quote: Shri Mataji Nirmala
Devi, Navarati Puja 1990 Back cover photo: a cedar tree, Vancouver
Canada Back cover quote: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Guru Puja 1980
and you will stand by Me,
you will come up to that.
I depend on you entirely for My vision.
We have to change this whole world
into a beautiful place.
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
www.divinecoolbreeze.org
For that, not much sacrifice is needed.
SUBSCRIPTIONS: contact@divinecoolbreeze.org
You are already blessed.
CONTENT: editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
The Divine Cool Breeze, 881 Frederick Road
North Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
You don't have to do much,
PRINTED BY
King Printing Company Inc., 181 Industrial Avenue East
Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA
and Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd.
only thing is keep your attention
No.8, Chandragupta Housing Society, Paud Road,
Kothrud, Pune 411038, Maharashtra India
on the source of Power.
 2009_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-35.txt 
 The trees are not attached to anything
They will die tomorrow.
It doesn't matter.
But anybody who comes to them,
they give shadow,
they give fruits.
