dune-2009

 So Many Things One Has To earn fom a dog Dogs have a capacity to learn I have taught this doghow to do puja. He used to touch My Feet and he Would never lick My Feet. He would lick My sari, but never My Feet. And he knew how to use a w.c., can you believe it? All sorts of things he knew. You can teach him so many things. It used to discriminate even the footsteps of every person in the house. And he never liked nudity of kind. One Yugoslav lady came with her short - not very short. but any with a frock, you see. And the legs were showing. And he started barking at her. She wasn't mannerly like that. So Ihad to give her a towel to cover her legs while she was talking to Me. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, during an informal talk in France.

 INSIDE THIS ISSUE Meaning & Importance of Puja - 2 Filling the Cup - 6 Shri Mataji On Shri Kartikeya - 8 AND MORE Shri Kartikeya's Colouring Page - 12 The Tale of the Two Parrots- 13 Athena - 14 पुर्नजन्म - 16

 MEANING ANd IMPORTANCE of PELA 00 6412 4E9 9 #4 When performing puja, Shri Ganesha is to be praised first so as to awaken and establish Shri Ganesha within you .. noh 1986-05-24

 oday I will tell you the importance of puja. Even puja of the adoration to the statues, maybe, or, maybe, the photographs, or, you can say, the stained glass copies of the Mother and Christ. But later on, people started becoming more rational and they did not understand what is the importance of puja. And when they could not explain it, they gave up doing pujas in that regular manner. Even before Christ, they used to have a particular type of a PUJA among the carly Christians they used to do the туре tabernacle which was measured and was specially made and a puja place was created to worship what they called Yahovah. Now this Yahovah in our Sahaja Yoga is Sadashiva, and Mother Mary is Mahalakshmi. She incarnated before also. She incarnated as Sita, and then She incarnated as Radha, and then She incarnated as Mother Mary. Now it is clearly written about the birth of Christ in a book called Devi Mahatmayam. He was the son of Radha. Radha is the Mahalakshmi, so He was born in another state as an egg and half of the egg remained as Shri Ganesha and half of it became Mahavishnu which is our Lord Jesus Christ. All the description about Jesus Christ is given in that Mahavishnu's description, exactly the same. Now this Mahalakshmi came on this earth and She brought forth Her child with immaculate conception which She had done before also, as Radha. So, Christ is the son of the great being of the Virat. Actually Vishnu, Mahavishnu, Vishnu becomes the Virata. Now this Vishnu Tattwa becomes Virata and also He becomes Rama and Krishna and then the Virat, means the Akbar. So Christ is a, is the Omkara itself, is the vibrations itself. All other incarnations had to take the principle or the essence of the Mother Earth to create their body, except for Christ's body which is absolutely Omkara. And the earth element of that being is Shri Ganesha. So we can say that Christ is the power of Shri Ganesha. So that's the reason He could walk on the water. So He's the purest form of divinity, because He's just vibrations. So when you do puja to Me, because I'm in person, there is nothing unreal. If they had done puja to Christ, they must, they have done puja to Christ also when He lived. And to His Mother. It is said that in the Ten Commandments whatever is created by the heavens and by the earth should not be re-created and re-produced and worshipped. So the incarnations are created by the heavens. But in the former days there was no possibility. Now whatever is created by the Mother Earth is what has come 3)

 as Now, I give these statues nou vibrations, give you vibrations, but not so much as I give you. out of the Mother Earth, which is the swayambhu, it's created by the Mother Earth. Now we have everywhere, we find the swayambhu things. Another thing is, some realised souls also have made beautiful statues. I went to Portugal and they had a festival of the Lady of the Rocks. So I went to see that place and there was a very small little statue of this height of the Mary, about say, five inches, at the most, and the face was just like Mine, exactly like Mine; and they said that this was found suddenly by two children who were following a rabbit which hid inside a niche. So these children saw some light inside the niche and they started following under a rock. And they reached the source of the light, was this statue; they brought it out, and in that light they walked, and when the people outside, where lots of people were gathered, they were amazed to see that they brought out the statue from somewhere inside. So they worshipped that, that statue in that place. And all the Now, these statues give you vibrations, as I give you vibrations, but not so much as I give you. other statues also, there may be many, who might be giving you vibrations.Also in India, as you know, you went some of you, to Ganapatipule where it is the Ganesha which has come - Mahaganesha, that is Christ - has come out of the Mother Earth, Mahaganesha. So the lower portion of the body you see there and the head is the whole of the mountain. And there the water of the sea is also sweet, and there are many sweet water wells there. If remember, a photograph of Mine was taken there, many people took photographs, and in some you photographs, in My heart there's a light coming out, and some told Me that some photographs which did not have the light, but when they re-took, I mean the negatives were again taken as a photograph, and again they took a photograph with that, then the light came in there. So, one must know that in the realm of divine there are all kinds of miraculous things. Shri Same is the puja. Now when we do the puja, first of all you will praise Shri Ganesha. By that, in you, Ganesha will be awakened and established. By worshiping Me as Shri Ganesha your innocence will be established and you will see, that vibration-wise also, your vibrations will increase and you will feel very stable within yourself. Now when you will take Shri Ganesha's names you will know what qualities He has, what 4.

 powers He gives you. When you praise those qualitics, those powers of those qualities will start emitting through you. This is how the Divine works, as if you get charged with those qualities. Then you praise the Goddess, the Adi Shakti. Now the Adi Shakti has all the seven chakras within Her awakened, and She has to work with all these seven chakras. For the first time such an incarnation has come. Ir's like you make first one room, then second room, then third room, seven rooms, and then the whole house is done, you get the keys and you open the house is yours. That is how I could achieve self-realisation, en masse. It could not happen carlier, but now possible because of this combination ofall the seven chakras. So now when you are praising the Adi Shakti, I'm also a Mahamaya, that I look like you, I behavelike you, I have made myselfexactly like you, very difficult to make, but I have. And this body has to bear lots of things to make understand Sahaja Yoga and your own powers. For example, if you're rude to Me, if you're not gets very angry because He has said that anything against Holy Ghost, He won't tolerate. So you respectful, Christ the white chakra, the Agnya starts, you see, starts throwing anger, and moving very fast. Now Ihave to bear it, I cannot tell you the way Christ wants Me to tell you because He's very direct, and I have to little bit be careful so that you don't get upset. Moreover while doing the puja, supposingyou are a doubting type, or you are opposing it, then you don't absorb the vibrations and I have problems, because the vibrations are flowing and you are not receiving it. So I don't know how to contain within myself, you don't suck in the vibrations, so I take time to take them out. very So all these things are very symbolic, whatever we are doing is very symbolic, and that symbol actually acts. For example if you give somebody a flower, that fellow feels, that person feels extremely joyous and happy and gratitude comes in. So when you offer Me say, flowers or anything like water or anything, then the elements are happy and the deities are happy in the chakras. And then they emit their vibrations of their quality and of their blessings on you. They give you their quality and their blessings. That is how the Divineacts and gradually after puja you will feelit that the whole thing is working out. Now we are doing puja at this time and all over the world people know that there's a puja going on here, so they're also sitting in meditation and they also get the blessings. They're also waiting for this moment when the puja starts, so we give them a time like eleven o'clock or so, up till eleven o'clock we should sit down and they start at eleven o'clock. Now they are getting the same blessings, though you are doing the puja but they also get the blessings in their meditation. If you are notr yet so clever and if you don't know all the few things which are important in the puja, does nor matter, because if you are ignorant about it, innocent about it, God knows, He forgives, He doesn't mind. We should not mind if you commit any mistakes or anything, just with a humble heart, do the way you like. Gradually, you will learn, but if you know and then you deliberately make mistakes, then it's not good. As we forgive our children, God also forgives innocent children, so you should be relaxed about it. Just do it for the joy of your heart. very May God you all. bless 51

 Filling the Cup By Sia Reddy (UK) I t must have been the fifth time during the morning meditation that Shanti's mother told her to just sit still! But, no use. She was fidgeting around, playing with the song book, and if there was nothing to grab near by, she played with her toes, her trousers, her fingers... "Shanti!" Mummy scolded again. "Please! I told you! Sit properly! Hands on your lap". Shanti follows mummy's instructions for just about a second, until she finds the pattern of the carpet really interesting again and started following the lines with her fingers. "Ok" says mummy. "Listen. Why do you meditate? Hmm? Tell me." Almost six years old, Shanti has heard a lot about vibrations and known a lot of mantras, but she had not yet really thought about "WHY" she should be meditating.. "To make Shri Mataji happy!" she replies. "That is also true" says Mummy. "Of course, but you really meditate for yourself and nobody else, not even Mummy". "But why?" Shanti asks. "Why do I need to meditate?" Mummy took a deep breath and looked at Shri Mataji's picture. After about a minute she turned to Shanti and said, "Look. When we meditate, all the bad things in and around us run away. We can feel happy and light again. But meditation is so much more than just sitting here. If S01 you imagine meditation being a huge beautiful mountain, we have properly not even reached the first But you know what the first step is?" step. "No. What is it mummy?" The first step is the "Getting ready part". Imagine a cup, and you would like to fill it with water." "Yes, mummy, I can imagine. A cup. Mine is pink!" "Good. In your mind, turn this cup on its side. Now try to pour water in it". "I don't think I can, Mummy" Shanti replies. 60

 "Exactly! Now imagine holding it and moving it right and left, and again right, move it all along the table. Now pour the water!" Shanti laughed. "But Mummy, the water will spill all over the placel Maybe just a few drops will be in my pink cup!", "Exactly" said mummy. "You cannot turn the cup on its head either, nor can you hide it under the table, you want to fill it with water. It is exactly the same with your meditation. If you don't sit still, if you are not if ready, like the cup, to receive the vibrations, why should they even try to fill you with love and joy?" "I see what you mean mummy" Shanti replies. Mummy continued, "Your 'getting ready' is so important to show all the deities that you are now ready and willing to meditate. But remember, it is only the first step! What counts is what happens after. This is where your journey really begins. Shanti's eyes shimmered with joy. She closed her eyes and thought of this empty pink cup again. She wanted to be still and ready to be filled like the cup. And before she could even wonder what would happen next, she felt a soothing cool breeze on her hands. Just like that. "I felt it, it is cool mummy!" she shouted with excitement. "That is good! Now stay still like the animals in the forest, when they are trying to listen to the sounds of like the stars that are looking down on us and don't rush around across the firmament, like a lake that lets all the ducks and fish frolic in its water whilst he himself is still and patient. Then, when you are still, you will be joyful. Full-filled" nature, Shanti still sat with her eyes closed, only this time she felt no urge to play with her fingers, nor did her eyes open by themselves again all the time, as they usually want to! She just sat there, and it was so easy. The lake...the stars..the universe, it all made sense. At least for a few minutes. get the drum and sing Ganesha Ganesha, mummy?" Mummy smiled and replied. "Go on then". "Can I

 SHRI MATAJI ON SHRI KARTIKEYA K artikeya represents the great, we can say, the captain or leader of all the ganas, - of all them like a commander in chief. Ganesha is a king but He is the commnander in chief. And because German characteris to be in command of everything we are going to have this Puja where the men will be in command of their spirits and their manly qualities, and women will be in command of their womanly qualities. To be in command is different from to be a master. Master owns it; a commander does not own it. He does not own it, that is also lost. Possession is also lost, we just command it. And that is the state we have to come to now, from Ganesha state to the state of Kartikeya, - the other way round. Ganesha is nice. He's the king, very nicely sitting down with all the powers, alright? In a sense He's there but Kartikeya is the one who commands innocence, gives you a power of that commandment. He commands. After the Guru Puja it's better that we should have the power to command others and that commanding spirit comes in the men through their talking, through their dynamism, through their personal achievements; for the women through their loving power, through their forbearance, through their gracious behavior, forgiveness, compassion. So let us develop that today, that we can command it means it's not that what we have but in a position we are to command. I hope you understand what is Kartikeya... (1) The spirit of Kartikeya- that pure, absolute dynamism which doesn't indulge into nonsensical things and useless things, which show results... (3) Now in front, in the center here is who? Kartikeya is in the center; Christ is in the center. In the center itself, where the chiasma optic is, here outside, is Kartikeya. What is Kartikeya? Kartikeya is the protector of

 Christ. Around Kartikeya, they're all the protectors of Christ...(4) Shri You know Narakasura has taken birth, and he's to be killed, the sahaja yogis are going to kill him. You have to come up to a point and definitely he can be killed. When Kartikeya is awakened within you, he can be killed. But for that you have to be just like gold, untarnishable. You need strong people to do that. A sword that can kill him has to come out from your mettles. Then Narakasura can be killed. He is one of the worst possible asura. That is the fourteenth day. When he was killed, the gate of hell was opened and all those who where his disciples or his followers or satanic people were put. That's the only day you can sleep late and a good news for you...(2) E Kartikeya, very powerful, eleven About Right Mooladhara Rudras, When it comes to clearing Mooladhara we usually miss our right Mooladhara. Right Mooladhara is the chakra which is abode of Shri Kartikeya. He is the one who protects us from the demonic forces. and this, has given Right Mooladhara is the chakra who manifests wisdom and surrendering of Shri Ganesha. Right Mooladhara is also important as out of eleven Ekadesha Rudras two are Shri Ganesha and Shri Kartikeya. The Rudras protect us from satanic attacks and give us strength to fight negativities. Therefore, right Mooladhara becomes equally important for clearing and strengthening our left side. Him the highest It is observed that when our right Mooladhara improves our catching of left Swadhisthana reduces. position. Shri Kartikeya also keeps supervision over hell. Shri Bhairavnath, while fighting against spirit possessions in us, touches Right Mooladhara and therefore works in coordination with Shri Kartikeya to thwart the negativities from our subtle system back to hell from where they came. The power of Shri Kartikeya is also very essential in preserving our innocence. When the Kundalini ascends from the sacred bone to Sahasrara, right Mooladhara plays an important role in clearing out the blockages in the path of Kundalini. It is observed that when our right Mooladhara improves our Right side also becomes better: for two reasons: 1. Since Mooladhara is directly associated with our Agnya chakra, so right Mooladhara directly cures right Agnya, and it also repairs the weakened ego-controlling Rudra on our forehead. (Out of 11 Rudras present on our forehead, two are present to control our ego and superego) ()-13th July' 1986- Shri kartikeya Puja Holzkirchen, Germany 2. As an effect of reduced ego we develop Shraddha and enlightened mind (which has Divine discretion and knowledge). (2) - 06th Nov' 1983- Diwali Puja, Hampstead, U. K. One cannot describe how He looked after His Mother, it's impossible. No words can describe the understanding of Christ for His Mother, His love, His gentleness, His care, His devotion, dedication, His Shraddha cannot be described. And you know that He came as an evolved Shri Ganesha, and at the back He is Shri Ganesha, front He is Shri Kartikeya, very powerful, eleven Rudras, and this, has given Him the highest position. (2) (3)-21st Dec'1996 Shri Kartikeya Puja, Mumbai, India tour (4)-04th Sep' 1981- Advice on Ekadesha Rudra, London 9.

 18 182 MA

 I don't know why you people don't put any oil whatsoever. Why not put oil in the head? Poor head needs the oil always. At least on Saturday put so much oil, rub it nicely and have a bath. Now people just don't put any oil in their head. I mean you must oil, gear up your brain, don't you think so .... 13th Jan' 1986

 KIDSHAKTI PAGE Colour Shri Kartikeya's sketch 12

 The Tale of the Trwo Parrots .. e his is a story of two parrots, who loved to travel far and wide in search of food and visit new places. These two beautiful birds were brothers named Radha and Potthapada. Once, they entered the palace gardens and were caught in a trap laid for birds. Both Radha and Potthapada were brought before the king, who just could not keep his eyes off the stunning birds. The king ordered his men that the birds be kept in a special cage made of gold. They were fed the choicest foods everyday. Radha and Potthapada were the toast of the king's palace. Royal guests would stand by the golden cage and admire the birds. Life was very comfortable for them until the day a huge ape was brought to the palace. The ugly ape was named Kalabahu. Soon, all attention that was reserved for the parrots was now Kalabahu's. People had not seen such a huge ape before. Kalabahu became the center of attraction of all the royal guests and palace officials. They would pour in to have a good look at the ape and his antics that made everyone roar with laughter. As a result, both the parrots started feeling neglected. Nobody cared whether they were fed on time or not. Potthapada, the younger of the two parrots, was deeply hurt. He confided in his elder brother, "Let us leave from here and go elsewhere. Nobody cares for us anymore." Radha, wiser of the two, replied, "Potthapada, my brother, do not feel so sad. Attention, praise and blame, and honor and dishonor are temporary facets of life. Soon, people will get tired of the ape's antics and know your true worth." And, sure enough, people started disliking the ape, as he began misbehaving and fooling around a bit too much. The king also found his acts offensive, and ordered Kalabahu to be sent back to the forest. People started paying all their attention to the well-behaved and beautiful parrots once again. Moral : True worth and ability are always given their due ultimately. 13

 "Ih t is very, very fortunate and auspicious that we are celebrating the Diwali in Greece, specially in Delphi. It has a very ancient history, and as you know Athena resided here. She was the Primordial Mother. Atha in Sanskrit means "primordial." So this place has been described, has been described even in the Puranas as Manipur dweep. Manipur is the Nabhi. Also in Sanskrit Manipur means the Nabhi Chakra. So it's described as the Manipur dweep, is written Manipur e dweepe. Just imagine these Puranas, these ancient-time books – God knows how old they are, must be at least eight thousand or maybe more - and they have described Greece as the Manipur dweep, is the place of Nabhi and where resides the Adi Shakti, that's the Athena. So I mean, how it was known to them - maybe through torsion area, I would say; but it is written very clearly, and same we find here is the place of Athena which is in the Nabhi... Now this Primordial Mother that we have as Athena also has in her hand a Kundalini, also She has one trident. All this is sign that when she was born she knew that she has to fight the evil forces in the Nabhi Chakra. All this history is really shown very clearly in the Greek mythology." (Dimali Puja, Delphi, Greete, 7/11/99) this Athena has been described, and when I went to Her temple I found that "..and so, there was a little temple for the child God. That was Shri Ganesha. And then, when I went to Delphi, also, when I went there I was surprised to see, they showed me a mound and said, "This is the Nabhi, navel of the whole universe." I said, "That's correct." But when I turned round there were lots of vibrations and what I find is a Ganesha statue there." (Shri Pallas Atbena Puja, Athens, Greece, 26/4/93) "I was amazed at the Temple of Athena when we went there. It's so much so near to the thing that the Mooladhara is shown there where the Kundalini exists. Now she's the one who has snakes around her, see? And she has little little snakes as her children. Can you imagine? And she's one, and she has a daughter, which is the Kundalini in you and a God who is a child God. And when she stands she has a Kundalini in her hand, the snake coming out of her hand. With all the charkas she is made. It's so beautifully shown. The best was her Sanctum Sanctorum where nobody is allowed to go inside where she resides. Is the Adi Kundalini. But they say that she came out of the head of Zeus, the Primordial Kundalini. And her place nobody can go inside, nobody can reach. Except for her son, the child. But her steps are very large also are roundish. She is curved. Can you imagine? They're curved as if part of the Kundalas they are. And they are three and a half in height, you can see that, in height and in width also. Like every place are made of big stones and the last one is made of the small, three and a half, and they go in a curve. And that is Sanctum Sanctorum nobody can go inside." (Talk, Mill Farm seminar, Dorset, England, 2/8/81) 14

 619 Athena Advice given by H.H.Shri Mataji Nimala Devi 15

 पुर्नजन्म RỆ -02- ee8

 भी सत्य साधकों को मेरा प्रणाम। सर्वप्रथम में यह कहना चाहुँगी कि सत्य जो है वही है। आप न तो उसे परिवर्तित कर सकते हैं, न इसकी परिकल्पना कर सकते हैं और न ही इसका बर्णन कर सकते हैं। आपको स्वयं सत्य बनना पड़ता है, इसके बिना तो यह मात्र बातें ही है। आज जो भी कुछ में आपको बताऊँंगी उस पर आप आँखे बन्द करके विश्वास न कर लें। अन्धविश्वास के कारण हमने बहुत कष्ट उठाये हैं। वैज्ञानिक की तरह अपने मस्तिष्क को खुला रखें। यदि यह कार्य करें और आपको लगे कि यह सत्य है, यदि सत्यानुभव का वास्तवीकरण आप में हो जाए, यदि पूर्ण सत्य को आप अपने मध्य स्नायु तन्त्र पर समझ पाएं केवल तब आपको स्थाई रूप से इस पर विश्वास करना है। तब आपको विश्वास करना हैं क्योंकि आप ईमानदार हैं, और जान जाएंगे कि यह व्यक्तिगत रूप से आपके लिए, आपके देश के लिए और सारे विश्व के लिए हितकारी है । तो सत्य यह है कि आप यह शरीर, मस्तिष्क, भावनाएं, बन्धन और यह अहं आदि नहीं है। आप पवित्र आत्मा हैं। इसी कारण इस मानवीय चेतना पर, दुर्भाग्यवश, आप सत्य को नहीं जान सकते। अपनी विकास प्रक्रिया में मानव के रूप में हम इस अवस्था तक पहुँच गये हैं। कोई भी भेदन, जिसका वास्तवीकरण होना है बाकी नहीं रहा। यह बड़ी-बड़ी शेखियाँ मात्र नहीं, परन्तु इसका वास्तवीकरण होना है। वास्तवीकरण होने पर आप दसरे सत्य को जान जाएंगे कि परमात्मा के प्रेम की एक अत्यन्त सूक्ष्म शक्ति है। इन वृक्षों को आप देखते हैं और इन्हें स्वीकार कर लेते हैं। 'एक नारियल में से इतने सारे वृक्ष कैसे निकल आये' जीवन्त क्रिया होने के कारण हमने यह जानने का कभी कष्ट नहीं उठाया। हमारे हृदय को कौन चलाता है?डाक्टर कहेंगे कि यह स्वत: चालित (ऑटोनोमस) नाड़ी प्रणाली है। परन्तु यह स्वत: (ऑटो) कौन है? किसी भी जीवन्त चीज़ के बारे में हम कभी प्रश्न नहीं करते क्योंकि हमारे पास इसका कोई उत्तर नहीं है। हमारे विकास की यह जीवन्त प्रक्रिया भी स्वत: ही घटित होती है। आत्म - साक्षात्कारी के रूप में... सर्वप्रथम मेरा यह बताना आवश्यक है कि आप इसका व्यापार नहीं कर सकते। इसका व्यापार करना पापमय है। इसका क्रय-विक्रय पाखण्ड है और उसके लिए लोगों को व्यक्तिगत और सामूहिक रूप से दंड भुगतना होगा। तो यह पहली चीज़ है कि आप इसका व्यापार नहीं कर सकते। क्योंकि यह आपकी अपनी शक्ति है जो आपके अपने अन्दर निहित है, कुण्डलाकार होने के कारण जिसे हम कुण्डलिनी कहते हैं। यह आपके अन्दर स्थित है और बिना किसी प्रयत्न के इसे जागृत किया जा सकता है, सहज। 'सह' अर्थात् आपके साथ जन्मी, 'ज' अर्थात् स्वत:। आधुनिक युग में बहुत सी ऐसी चीजें हैं, कि मुझे हैरानी होती है कि कितने लोगों के पास सत्य को पहचान लेने का विवेक होगा। तो पहली चीज़ आप यह देखें कि शिष्य कैसे हैं? वे क्या कर रहें हैं। उनका ज्ञान कितना है? उनमें कितनी शक्तियाँ हैं। आप जब आध्यात्मिक हो जाते हैं तो यह आपका पूर्ण पुर्नजन्म है। आपकी सारी शक्तियाँ जागृत हो गई हैं। नि:सन्देह आत्मसाक्षात्कार के पश्चात् या कहें कि प्रथम अंकुरण के पश्चात् आपको थोड़ी सी गहनता से अभ्यास करके सर्वव्यापक शक्ति से अपने सम्बन्ध को स्थापित करना होगा। ये सम्बन्ध ही योग है, जहाँ आपकी एकाकारिता सर्वव्यापक शक्ति से हो जाती है। सदा के लिए आप जुड़ जाते हैं। इसे नया जन्म कहते हैं। संस्कृत भाषा में इस नये जन्म को द्विज बनना कहते हैं। अर्थात् दो बार जन्मा, द्विज का अर्थ पक्षी भी होता है। पक्षी पहले अंडा होता है, फिर वह पक्षी बनता है और स्वतन्त्र हो कर उड़ना सीखता है। इसी प्रकार आत्मसाक्षात्कारी व्यक्ति का पुर्नजन्म होता है। पहले सामान्य व्यक्ति की तरह और फिर आत्मसाक्षात्कारी के रूप में। आपको न तो 17) र

 सरा भ० ० ा सत्यापित करना होता है, न कोई संस्था बनानी होती है और न ही इसके लिए कुछ खर्च करना होता है। सर्वव्यापक शक्ति का यह अनुभव ही बाइबल की भाषा में परम चैतन्य की शीतल लहरियाँ (Cool breeze of the Holy Ghost) कहलाता है। आदि शंकराचार्य ने अपनी पुस्तक में इसे 'सलीलं-सलीलं' कहा है, अर्थात् जो अत्यन्त शीतल एवं आनन्ददायिनी है। तब यह शीतल लहरियाँ आपके सिर के तालू भाग में महसूस होती हैं। सिर के तालू भाग को ब्रह्मरन्ध्र कहते हैं क्योंकि सर्वव्यापक शक्ति ब्रह्मचैतन्य कहलाती है। 'रन्ध्र' अर्थात् सुराख। तो जब यह रन्ध्र खुलता है तो आपको अपने सिर पर यह शीतल लहरियाँ अनुभव होने लगती हैं। तब आप शान्त हो जाते हैं। आपकी चिन्ताऐं, झूरियाँ समाप्त होने लगती हैं। आपके तनाव स्थायी रूप से समाप्त हो जाते हैं। आप एक शान्त व्यक्ति बन जाते हैं। क आइए अब युवा-अध्यक्षों की समस्याओं को समझें। इनकी एक सबसे बड़ी समस्या यह है कि जब यह कार्य करते हैं तो इन्हें मानसिक तनाव हो जाता है। यह आम बात है क्योंकि आप सोचते हैं कि आप कार्य कर रहे हैं। पहली स्थिति में हम कहते हैं कि हम कर्म कर रहे हैं। इससे हमारा अहं बनता है और हम बहुत प्रसन्न होते हैं। अहं को जब बढ़ावा मिलता है तो हम अधिक प्रसन्न होते हैं, परन्तु जब यह पंक्चर (हवा निकलना) होता है तो हम खिन्न होते हैं। अहं दत्त प्रसन्नता आनन्द नहीं होती क्योंकि आनन्द कोई द्वैत स्थिति नहीं है, यह अद्वितीय है, अद्वैत है। तो जब इसका सम्बन्ध सर्वव्यापक शक्ति जो कि अत्यन्त गतिशील, विवेकशील एवं अत्यन्त अभिव्यक्तिशील है, से होता है तो आप आनन्द की स्थिति का अनुभव करते हैं। क्योंकि जो भी कुछ आप करना चाहते हैं, वह 18

 आपके सम्मुख होता है और आपको हैरानी होती है कि किस प्रकार आपने इसको विकसित कर लिया। व्यापार में भी किसी व्यक्ति को आप मिलना चाहते हैं तो तुरन्त जान जाएंगे कि वह कैसा व्यक्ति है आप यह भी जान जाएंगे उससे कैसा व्यवहार करना है, किस प्रकार की चुनौती लेनी है और क्या चर्चा करनी है आत्मा का प्रकाश आपके चित्त को प्रकाशित करता है । हम सबको। सभी लोगों ने यदि इसी एक चीज़ को जान लिया होता तो न तो कोई झगड़ा होता न लड़ाई; न कोई सिद्धान्त होते न हठधर्मी और न भिन्न धर्म होते। जैसे मैं आपके सम्मुख बैठी हूँ और आप मुझे स्पष्ट देख रहे हैं। पूर्ण सत्य को यदि आप अपनी अंगुलियों के सिरों पर जान लें तो क्यों आप परस्पर झगड़ा करें, क्यों परस्पर युद्ध करें और क्यों एक दूसरे की हत्या करें? आप समझें कि सर्वप्रथम उपलब्धि जो आप प्राप्त करते हैं वह यह है कि पूर्णत्व का स्पष्ट ज्ञान आपको हो जाता है। पूरी वास्तविकता को आप जान जाते हैं। अभी तक हम अंधेरे में हैं क्योंकि वह भेदन अभी घटित नहीं हुआ है। दूसरे हम सदा धर्म की बात करते हैं। लोग मुझसे प्रश्न श्री माताजी ये धर्म इतने कष्टदायक क्यों हैं? वे युद्ध क्यों कर रहे हैं?' क्योंकि वे अंधेरे में है। आप चाहे ईसाई, मुसलमान या हिन्दु कोई भी हों, आप कोई भी पाप कर सकते हैं। कोई विवशता नहीं है। धर्म आपके अन्दर उदय होना आवश्यक है। यह आपको अन्दर से धर्मपरायण बना देता है, बाहर से नहीं। तब समस्याओं का अन्त हो जाता है। विस्तृत होने के अवसर बहुत हैं। आपका अस्तित्व ही अन्त:शक्ति है। सम्भवत: आप नहीं जानते कि आप कितने गरिमामय हैं। आप ये भी नहीं जानते कि आप क्या कर सकते हैं और आपमें कितनी शक्तियाँ हैं। हमें इसका ज्ञान नहीं है। हमें स्वयं का ज्ञान नहीं है। आज आप इसी समस्या का सामना कर रहे हैं। एक बार जब हम स्वयं को जान लंगे, इस मशीन की कार्यप्रणाली को जान लेंगे, दैवी प्रेम के विज्ञान को जान लेंगे तो पूरा जीवन इसी प्रकार परिवर्तित हो जाएगा। श० ट यहाँ कुछ लोग बैठे हैं जो आज बहुत बड़े लोग हैं । एक समय उनके सम्मुख भी समस्याओं का अम्बार था। परन्तु सहजयोग में आने के पश्चात् वे पूर्णतया प्रगल्भ हो गए साथ ही साथ वे करुणामय भी हैं और सामूहिक रूप से सोचते हैं। भारत में लक्ष्मी धन की देवी है। जब यह आपके अन्दर जागृत हो जाती है तो यह आपके लिए धनार्जन करती है। आपको धन, वैभव प्राप्त होता है। परन्तु अभी तक यह लक्ष्मी नहीं है। आपके पास एक बड़ी कार है फिर भी आप दुष्कृत्य कर सकते हैं। पर सहजयोगी बनकर आप यह सब नहीं करते, आप वास्तव में धर्मपरायण हो जाते हैं और दैवी शक्ति आपकी हर इच्छा पूर्ण करने में सहायक होती है। इसके लिए आपको कोई चालाकी करने की आवश्यकता नहीं रहती। परमात्मा की शक्ति ही सारा कार्य कर देती है। यह आपकी देखभाल करती हैं पर आपको स्वयं पर विश्वास होना चाहिए। हैं। लक्ष्मी जी को यदि आप देखें तो उनके हाथ में दो कमल होते हैं। इसका अर्थ है कि इस प्रकार के व्यक्ति को अत्यन्त स्नेही होना होगा। गर्म जोशी होनी चाहिए, अपने बच्चों, पत्नी, पड़ोसियों और सभी के प्रति। यह हार्दिक हो, दिखावे मात्र ही नहीं। २५ वर्ष का कोई लड़का किसी प्रतिस्पर्धा में टैनिस खेल रहा है। आजकल सभी कुछ धनचलित होने के कारण खेल भी उसे सदमा पहुँचाता है। परिणामतः वह बहुत सोचता है, शराब पीता है। ऐसे व्यक्ति को भयकर हृदय-घात हो सकता है। यही अन्त अधिक सोचने तथा योजना बनाने वाले वृद्धों का भी हो सकता है। एक दिन पता चलता है कि उन्हें हृदय शूल हो गया। कभी-कभी चेतावनी देने के लिए भी उन्हें हृदय घात हो जाता है। दुसरी बार दूसरी चेतावनी और तीसरी बार समाप्त। इन दिनों हृदय बहुत बड़ी समस्या है। ऐसा नहीं है कि उनके हृदय पत्थर के हैं जो टूट जाते हैं। परन्तु मूल्यहीन दिशा में अपनी शक्ति का दुरुपयोग ही मुख्य समस्या है।... 19

 পা सा श्रीकृष्ण, जो कि विराट स्वरूप है, मास्टरों के मास्टर; हम ये कह सकते द्ौपदी जो श्रीकृष्ण हैं। जब ट्रौपदी पर समस्या आई - की बहन - साक्षात विष्णुमाया थीं। उसने श्रीकृष्ण को याद किया। उसकी साड़ी को दुःशासन खींच रहा था। उसने सिर्फ 'क्रि' कहा। ट्रौपदी को 'कृष्णा' कहना था, पर उसने चलि सोचा, 'मैंने अगर कृष्णा कहा तो ये गिर जाएगा।" उसने जैसे ही श्ना का, साड़ी निचे गिर गई । तब उसने श्रीकृष्ण का र्णन करते हुए उसे पुकारा.... वो आवाज द्वारका तक पहुँची। कहाँ द्वारका और कहाँ रुस्तिनापूर? कम से कम दो हजार मील का अन्तर था। पर वो आवाज चैतन्य द्वारा पहुँच गयी और बहाँ एक बड़े ध्वनी का निर्माण हुआ। श्रीकृष्ण उनकी बहन की लज्जा की रक्षा के लिए वहाँ पहुँचे। तुरन्त। उसी क्षण। वे कह सकते थे कि 'चलो जाने दो। एक साड़ी निकलने दो, दूसरी और फिए उसके बाद मैं जाऊँगा। ' ा 'मुझे विश्वास है कि उसने मेरी ही साड़ियों को चुराया होगा - जो तुमने मेरी पूजा के लिए दी है - जो बहुत है। ऐसा मुझे लगता है बरना ट्रौपदी को देने के लिए उसने इतनी सारी साड़ियाँ कहाँ से लाई होगी? जरूर ये मेरी स्टोरेज की रही होंगी। मुझे विश्वास है और इसलिए आपने मुझे इतनी सारी साड़ियाँ दी है, जिससे कि वो सभी ख्त्रियों की लज्जा की रक्षा कर सकें। का श्रीकृष्ण पूजा, १९९१ तो ये साड़ी कई सारी विशेषताओं से जुड़ी हुई है। आप केवल इन साड़ियों को पहनती ही नहीं बल्कि आप अपने में बसी हुई सारी खुबियों को दर्शाते हो । श्रीकृष्ण पूजा, १९९० प

 Publisbed & Printed by Nirmal Transformation Pot. Ltd. No. 8. Chandragipta Co-op Housing Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune, Maharashtra. India - 41 2 w For qurier di arnding arniclg cotart e ahove adldre $286537.25286032 email sale@niti.co.in bsite www.nitl.co.in o atne ade

 A Saint kas to be gentle in the way the moonlight falls upon this Earthu. 16th Nou 1985



----------------------

2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 dune-2009
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 So Many Things One Has To
earn fom a dog
Dogs have a
capacity to learn
I have taught this doghow to do puja. He used to touch My Feet and he
Would never lick My Feet. He would lick My sari, but never My Feet.
And he knew how to use a w.c., can you believe it? All sorts of things he
knew. You can teach him so many things. It used to discriminate even
the footsteps of every person in the house. And he never liked nudity of
kind. One Yugoslav lady came with her short - not very short. but
any
with a frock, you see. And the legs were showing. And he started
barking at her. She wasn't mannerly like that. So Ihad to give her a towel
to cover her legs while she was talking to Me.
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, during an informal talk in France.
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 INSIDE
THIS ISSUE
Meaning & Importance of Puja - 2
Filling the Cup - 6
Shri Mataji On Shri Kartikeya - 8
AND MORE
Shri Kartikeya's Colouring Page - 12
The Tale of the Two Parrots- 13
Athena - 14
पुर्नजन्म - 16
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 MEANING ANd IMPORTANCE of
PELA
00
6412 4E9 9
#4
When performing puja, Shri Ganesha is
to be praised first so as to awaken and establish
Shri Ganesha within you ..
noh
1986-05-24
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 oday I will tell you the importance of puja. Even
puja of the
adoration to the statues, maybe, or, maybe, the
photographs, or, you can say, the stained glass copies of the
Mother and Christ. But later on, people started becoming
more rational and they did not understand what is the
importance of puja. And when they could not explain it,
they gave up doing pujas in that regular manner. Even
before Christ, they used to have a particular type of a
PUJA
among the carly Christians they used to do the
туре
tabernacle which was measured and was specially made and
a puja place was created to worship what they called Yahovah.
Now this Yahovah in our Sahaja Yoga is Sadashiva, and
Mother Mary is Mahalakshmi. She incarnated before also.
She incarnated as Sita, and then She incarnated as Radha,
and then She incarnated as Mother Mary.
Now it is clearly written about the birth of Christ in a
book called Devi Mahatmayam. He was the son of Radha.
Radha is the Mahalakshmi, so He was born in another state
as an egg and half of the egg remained as Shri Ganesha and
half of it became Mahavishnu which is our Lord Jesus
Christ. All the description about Jesus Christ is given in
that Mahavishnu's description, exactly the same.
Now this Mahalakshmi came on this earth and She
brought forth Her child with immaculate conception
which She had done before also, as Radha. So, Christ is the
son of the great being of the Virat. Actually Vishnu,
Mahavishnu, Vishnu becomes the Virata. Now this Vishnu
Tattwa becomes Virata and also He becomes Rama and
Krishna and then the Virat, means the Akbar. So Christ is a,
is the Omkara itself, is the vibrations itself. All other
incarnations had to take the principle or the essence of the
Mother Earth to create their body, except for Christ's body
which is absolutely Omkara. And the earth element of that
being is Shri Ganesha. So we can say that Christ is the power
of Shri Ganesha. So that's the reason He could walk on the
water. So He's the purest form of divinity, because He's just
vibrations. So when you do puja to Me, because I'm in
person, there is nothing unreal. If they had done puja to
Christ, they must, they have done puja to Christ also when
He lived. And to His Mother. It is said that in the Ten
Commandments whatever is created by the heavens and by
the earth should not be re-created and re-produced and
worshipped. So the incarnations are created by the heavens.
But in the former days there was no possibility. Now
whatever is created by the Mother Earth is what has come
3)
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 as
Now,
I give
these statues
nou
vibrations,
give you
vibrations,
but not so much as I give you.
out of the Mother Earth, which is the swayambhu, it's created by the Mother Earth. Now we have everywhere,
we find the swayambhu things. Another thing is, some realised souls also have made beautiful statues.
I went to Portugal and they had a festival of the Lady of the Rocks. So I went to see that place and there was
a very small little statue of this height of the Mary, about say, five inches, at the most, and the face was just like
Mine, exactly like Mine; and they said that this was found suddenly by two children who were following a
rabbit which hid inside a niche. So these children saw some light inside the niche and they started following
under a rock. And they reached the source of the light, was this statue; they brought it out, and in that light they
walked, and when the people outside, where lots of people were gathered, they were amazed to see that they
brought out the statue from somewhere inside. So they worshipped that, that statue in that place.
And all the
Now, these statues give you vibrations, as I give you vibrations, but not so much as I give you.
other statues also, there may be many, who might be giving you vibrations.Also in India, as you know, you went
some of you, to Ganapatipule where it is the Ganesha which has come - Mahaganesha, that is Christ - has come
out of the Mother Earth, Mahaganesha. So the lower portion of the body you see there and the head is the
whole of the mountain. And there the water of the sea is also sweet, and there are many sweet water wells there.
If
remember, a photograph of Mine was taken there, many people took photographs, and in some
you
photographs, in My heart there's a light coming out, and some told Me that some photographs which did not
have the light, but when they re-took, I mean the negatives were again taken as a photograph, and again they
took a photograph with that, then the light came in there. So, one must know that in the realm of divine there
are all kinds of miraculous things.
Shri
Same is the puja. Now when we do the puja, first of all you will praise Shri Ganesha. By that, in you,
Ganesha will be awakened and established. By worshiping Me as Shri Ganesha your innocence will be
established and you will see, that vibration-wise also, your vibrations will increase and you will feel very stable
within
yourself. Now when you will take Shri Ganesha's names you will know what qualities He has, what
4.
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 powers He gives you. When you praise those qualitics, those powers of those qualities will start emitting
through you. This is how the Divine works, as if you get charged with those qualities. Then you praise the
Goddess, the Adi Shakti. Now the Adi Shakti has all the seven chakras within Her awakened, and She has to
work with all these seven chakras. For the first time such an incarnation has come. Ir's like you make first one
room, then second room, then third room, seven rooms, and then the whole house is done, you get the keys and
you open the house is yours. That is how I could achieve self-realisation, en masse. It could not happen carlier,
but now possible because of this combination ofall the seven chakras.
So now when you are praising the Adi Shakti, I'm also a Mahamaya, that I look like you, I behavelike you, I
have made myselfexactly like you, very difficult to make, but I have. And this body has to bear lots of things to
make
understand Sahaja Yoga and your own powers. For example, if you're rude to Me, if you're not
gets very angry because He has said that anything against Holy Ghost, He won't tolerate. So
you
respectful, Christ
the white chakra, the Agnya starts, you see, starts throwing anger, and moving very fast. Now Ihave to bear it, I
cannot tell you the way Christ wants Me to tell you because He's very direct, and I have to little bit be careful so
that you don't get upset. Moreover while doing the puja, supposingyou are a doubting type, or you are opposing
it, then you don't absorb the vibrations and I have problems, because the vibrations are flowing and you are not
receiving it. So I don't know how to contain within myself, you don't suck in the vibrations, so I take time to take
them out.
very
So all these things are very symbolic, whatever we are doing is very symbolic, and that symbol actually acts.
For example if you give somebody a flower, that fellow feels, that person feels extremely joyous and happy and
gratitude comes in. So when you offer Me say, flowers or anything like water or anything, then the elements are
happy and the deities are happy in the chakras. And then they emit their vibrations of their quality and of their
blessings on you. They give you their quality and their blessings. That is how the Divineacts and gradually after
puja you will feelit that the whole thing is working out.
Now we are doing puja at this time and all over the world people know that there's a puja going on here, so
they're also sitting in meditation and they also get the blessings. They're also waiting for this moment when the
puja starts, so we give them a time like eleven o'clock or so, up till eleven o'clock we should sit down and they
start at eleven o'clock. Now they are getting the same blessings, though you are doing the puja but they also get
the blessings in their meditation. If you are notr yet so clever and if you don't know all the few things which are
important in the puja, does nor matter, because if you are ignorant about it, innocent about it, God knows, He
forgives, He doesn't mind. We should not mind if you commit any mistakes or anything, just with a humble
heart, do the way you like. Gradually, you will learn, but if you know and then you deliberately make mistakes,
then it's not good. As we forgive our children, God also forgives innocent children, so you should be
relaxed about it. Just do it for the joy of your heart.
very
May
God
you
all.
bless
51
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Filling the Cup
By Sia Reddy (UK)
I
t must have been the fifth time during the morning meditation that Shanti's mother told her to just sit
still! But, no use. She was fidgeting around, playing with the song book, and if there was nothing to grab near
by, she played with her toes, her trousers, her fingers...
"Shanti!" Mummy scolded again. "Please! I told you! Sit properly! Hands on your lap".
Shanti follows mummy's instructions for just about a second, until she finds the pattern of the carpet
really interesting again and started following the lines with her fingers.
"Ok" says mummy. "Listen. Why do you meditate? Hmm? Tell me."
Almost six years old, Shanti has heard a lot about vibrations and known a lot of mantras, but she had
not yet really thought about "WHY" she should be meditating..
"To make Shri Mataji happy!" she replies.
"That is also true" says Mummy. "Of course, but you really meditate for yourself and nobody else, not
even Mummy".
"But why?" Shanti asks. "Why do I need to meditate?"
Mummy took a deep breath and looked at Shri Mataji's picture.
After about a minute she turned to Shanti and said, "Look. When we meditate, all the bad things in and
around us run away. We can feel happy and light again. But meditation is so much more than just sitting here.
If
S01
you imagine meditation being a huge beautiful mountain, we have properly not even reached the first
But you know what the first step is?"
step.
"No. What is it mummy?"
The first step is the "Getting ready part". Imagine a cup, and you would like to fill it with water." "Yes,
mummy, I can imagine. A cup. Mine is pink!"
"Good. In your mind, turn this cup on its side. Now try to pour water in it".
"I don't think I can, Mummy" Shanti replies.
60
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 "Exactly! Now imagine holding it and moving it right and left, and again right, move it all along the
table. Now pour the water!"
Shanti laughed. "But Mummy, the water will spill all over the placel Maybe just a few drops will be in my
pink cup!",
"Exactly" said mummy. "You cannot turn the cup on its head either, nor can you hide it under the table,
you want to fill it with water. It is exactly the same with your meditation. If you don't sit still, if you are not
if
ready, like the cup, to receive the vibrations, why should they even try to fill you with love and joy?"
"I see what you mean mummy" Shanti replies.
Mummy continued, "Your 'getting ready' is so important to show all the deities that you are now ready
and willing to meditate. But remember, it is only the first step! What counts is what happens after. This is
where your journey really begins.
Shanti's eyes shimmered with joy. She closed her eyes and thought of this empty pink cup again. She
wanted to be still and ready to be filled like the cup. And before she could even wonder what would happen
next, she felt a soothing cool breeze on her hands. Just like that.
"I felt it, it is cool mummy!" she shouted with excitement.
"That is good! Now stay still like the animals in the forest, when they are trying to listen to the sounds of
like the stars that are looking down on us and don't rush around across the firmament, like a lake that
lets all the ducks and fish frolic in its water whilst he himself is still and patient. Then, when you are still, you
will be joyful. Full-filled"
nature,
Shanti still sat with her eyes closed, only this time she felt no urge to play with her fingers, nor did her
eyes open by themselves again all the time, as they usually want to! She just sat there, and it was so easy. The
lake...the stars..the universe, it all made sense. At least for a few minutes.
get the drum and sing Ganesha Ganesha, mummy?" Mummy smiled and replied. "Go on then".
"Can I
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 SHRI MATAJI ON
SHRI KARTIKEYA
K
artikeya represents the great, we can say, the captain or leader of all the ganas, - of all them like a
commander in chief. Ganesha is a king but He is the commnander in chief.
And because German characteris to be in command of everything we are going to have this Puja where
the men will be in command of their spirits and their manly qualities, and women will be in command of
their womanly qualities. To be in command is different from to be a master. Master owns it; a commander
does not own it. He does not own it, that is also lost. Possession is also lost, we just command it. And that is
the state we have to come to now, from Ganesha state to the state of Kartikeya, - the other way round.
Ganesha is nice. He's the king, very nicely sitting down with all the powers, alright? In a sense He's there
but Kartikeya is the one who commands innocence, gives you a power of that commandment. He
commands. After the Guru Puja it's better that we should have the power to command others and that
commanding spirit comes in the men through their talking, through their dynamism, through their personal
achievements; for the women through their loving power, through their forbearance, through their gracious
behavior, forgiveness, compassion. So let us develop that today, that we can command it means it's not that
what we have but in a position we are to command. I hope you understand what is Kartikeya... (1)
The spirit of Kartikeya- that pure, absolute dynamism which doesn't indulge into nonsensical things
and useless things, which show results... (3)
Now in front, in the center here is who? Kartikeya is in the center; Christ is in the center. In the center
itself, where the chiasma optic is, here outside, is Kartikeya. What is Kartikeya? Kartikeya is the protector of
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Christ. Around Kartikeya, they're all the protectors of Christ...(4)
Shri
You know Narakasura has taken birth, and he's to be killed, the sahaja
yogis are going to kill him. You have to come up to a point and definitely he
can be killed. When Kartikeya is awakened within you, he can be killed. But
for that you have to be just like gold, untarnishable. You need strong people to
do that. A sword that can kill him has to come out from your mettles. Then
Narakasura can be killed. He is one of the worst possible asura. That is the
fourteenth day. When he was killed, the gate of hell was opened and all those
who where his disciples or his followers or satanic people were put. That's the
only day you can sleep late and a good news for you...(2)
E Kartikeya,
very
powerful,
eleven
About Right Mooladhara
Rudras,
When it comes to clearing Mooladhara we usually miss our right
Mooladhara. Right Mooladhara is the chakra which is abode of Shri
Kartikeya. He is the one who protects us from the demonic forces.
and this,
has given
Right Mooladhara is the chakra who manifests wisdom and surrendering
of Shri Ganesha. Right Mooladhara is also important as out of eleven
Ekadesha Rudras two are Shri Ganesha and Shri Kartikeya. The Rudras
protect us from satanic attacks and give us strength to fight negativities. Therefore,
right Mooladhara becomes equally important for clearing and strengthening our
left side.
Him the
highest
It is observed that when our right Mooladhara improves our catching of
left Swadhisthana reduces.
position.
Shri Kartikeya also keeps supervision over hell. Shri Bhairavnath, while
fighting against spirit possessions in us, touches Right Mooladhara and
therefore works in coordination with Shri Kartikeya to thwart the negativities
from our subtle system back to hell from where they came.
The power of Shri Kartikeya is also very essential in preserving our
innocence. When the Kundalini ascends from the sacred bone to Sahasrara,
right Mooladhara plays an important role in clearing out the blockages in the
path of Kundalini.
It is observed that when our right Mooladhara improves our Right side
also becomes better: for two reasons:
1. Since Mooladhara is directly associated with our Agnya chakra, so
right Mooladhara directly cures right Agnya, and it also repairs the weakened
ego-controlling Rudra on our forehead. (Out of 11 Rudras present on our
forehead, two are present to control our ego and superego)
()-13th July' 1986-
Shri kartikeya Puja Holzkirchen,
Germany
2. As an effect of reduced ego we develop Shraddha and enlightened
mind (which has Divine discretion and knowledge).
(2) - 06th Nov' 1983-
Diwali Puja, Hampstead, U. K.
One cannot describe how He looked after His Mother, it's impossible.
No words can describe the understanding of Christ for His Mother, His love,
His gentleness, His care, His devotion, dedication, His Shraddha cannot be
described. And you know that He came as an evolved Shri Ganesha, and at the
back He is Shri Ganesha, front He is Shri Kartikeya, very powerful, eleven
Rudras, and this, has given Him the highest position. (2)
(3)-21st Dec'1996
Shri Kartikeya Puja, Mumbai,
India tour
(4)-04th Sep' 1981-
Advice on Ekadesha Rudra,
London
9.
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 18
182
MA
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 I don't know why you
people don't put any oil
whatsoever. Why not put oil
in the head? Poor head needs
the oil always. At least on
Saturday put so much oil, rub
it nicely and have a bath.
Now people just don't put any
oil in their head. I mean you
must oil, gear up your brain,
don't you think so ....
13th Jan' 1986
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 KIDSHAKTI
PAGE
Colour Shri Kartikeya's sketch
12
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 The Tale of the
Trwo Parrots ..
e his is a story of two parrots, who loved to travel far and wide in search of food and visit new
places. These two beautiful birds were brothers named Radha and Potthapada. Once, they entered the
palace gardens and were caught in a trap laid for birds. Both Radha and Potthapada were brought before the
king, who just could not keep his eyes off the stunning birds. The king ordered his men that the birds be
kept in a special cage made of gold. They were fed the choicest foods everyday.
Radha and Potthapada were the toast of the king's palace. Royal guests would stand by the golden cage
and admire the birds. Life was very comfortable for them until the day a huge ape was brought to the palace.
The ugly ape was named Kalabahu. Soon, all attention that was reserved for the parrots was now
Kalabahu's. People had not seen such a huge ape before. Kalabahu became the center of attraction of all the
royal guests and palace officials. They would pour in to have a good look at the ape and his antics that made
everyone roar with laughter. As a result, both the parrots started feeling neglected. Nobody cared whether
they were fed on time or not.
Potthapada, the younger of the two parrots, was deeply hurt. He confided in his elder brother, "Let us
leave from here and go elsewhere. Nobody cares for us anymore." Radha, wiser of the two, replied,
"Potthapada, my brother, do not feel so sad. Attention, praise and blame, and honor and dishonor are
temporary facets of life. Soon, people will get tired of the ape's antics and know your true worth."
And, sure enough, people started disliking the ape, as he began misbehaving and fooling around a bit
too much. The king also found his acts offensive, and ordered Kalabahu to be sent back to the forest. People
started paying all their attention to the well-behaved and beautiful parrots once again.
Moral : True worth and ability are always given their due ultimately.
13
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 "Ih
t is very, very fortunate and auspicious that we are celebrating the Diwali in
Greece, specially in Delphi. It has a very ancient history, and as you know Athena resided
here. She was the Primordial Mother. Atha in Sanskrit means "primordial." So this place has
been described, has been described even in the Puranas as Manipur dweep. Manipur is the
Nabhi. Also in Sanskrit Manipur means the Nabhi Chakra. So it's described as the Manipur
dweep, is written Manipur e dweepe. Just imagine these Puranas, these ancient-time books –
God knows how old they are, must be at least eight thousand or maybe more - and they have
described Greece as the Manipur dweep, is the place of Nabhi and where resides the Adi
Shakti, that's the Athena. So I mean, how it was known to them - maybe through torsion
area, I would say; but it is written very clearly, and same we find here is the place of Athena
which is in the Nabhi...
Now this Primordial Mother that we have as Athena also has in her hand a Kundalini,
also She has one trident. All this is sign that when she was born she knew that she has to fight
the evil forces in the Nabhi Chakra. All this history is really shown very clearly in the Greek
mythology."
(Dimali Puja, Delphi, Greete, 7/11/99)
this Athena has been described, and when I went to Her temple I found that
"..and
so,
there was a little temple for the child God. That was Shri Ganesha. And then, when
I went to
Delphi, also, when I went there I was surprised to see, they showed me a mound and said,
"This is the Nabhi, navel of the whole universe." I said, "That's correct." But when I turned
round there were lots of vibrations and what I find is a Ganesha statue there."
(Shri Pallas Atbena Puja, Athens, Greece, 26/4/93)
"I was amazed at the Temple of Athena when we went there. It's so much so near to the
thing that the Mooladhara is shown there where the Kundalini exists. Now she's the one who
has snakes around her, see? And she has little little snakes as her children. Can you imagine?
And she's one, and she has a daughter, which is the Kundalini in you and a God who is a child
God. And when she stands she has a Kundalini in her hand, the snake coming out of her
hand. With all the charkas she is made. It's so beautifully shown. The best was her Sanctum
Sanctorum where nobody is allowed to go inside where she resides. Is the Adi Kundalini. But
they say that she came out of the head of Zeus, the Primordial Kundalini. And her place
nobody can go inside, nobody can reach. Except for her son, the child. But her steps are very
large also are roundish. She is curved. Can you imagine? They're curved as if part of the
Kundalas they are. And they are three and a half in height, you can see that, in height and in
width also. Like every place are made of big stones and the last one is made of the small, three
and a half, and they go in a curve. And that is Sanctum Sanctorum nobody can go inside."
(Talk, Mill Farm seminar, Dorset, England, 2/8/81)
14
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 619
Athena
Advice given by
H.H.Shri Mataji Nimala Devi
15
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 पुर्नजन्म
RỆ -02- ee8
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 भी सत्य साधकों को मेरा प्रणाम।
सर्वप्रथम में यह कहना चाहुँगी कि सत्य जो है वही है। आप न तो उसे परिवर्तित कर सकते
हैं, न इसकी परिकल्पना कर सकते हैं और न ही इसका बर्णन कर सकते हैं। आपको स्वयं सत्य
बनना पड़ता है, इसके बिना तो यह मात्र बातें ही है। आज जो भी कुछ में आपको बताऊँंगी उस पर
आप आँखे बन्द करके विश्वास न कर लें। अन्धविश्वास के कारण हमने बहुत कष्ट उठाये हैं।
वैज्ञानिक की तरह अपने मस्तिष्क को खुला रखें। यदि यह कार्य करें और आपको लगे कि यह
सत्य है, यदि सत्यानुभव का वास्तवीकरण आप में हो जाए, यदि पूर्ण सत्य को आप अपने मध्य
स्नायु तन्त्र पर समझ पाएं केवल तब आपको स्थाई रूप से इस पर विश्वास करना है। तब आपको
विश्वास करना हैं क्योंकि आप ईमानदार हैं, और जान जाएंगे कि यह व्यक्तिगत रूप से आपके
लिए, आपके देश के लिए और सारे विश्व के लिए हितकारी है ।
तो सत्य यह है कि आप यह शरीर, मस्तिष्क, भावनाएं, बन्धन और यह अहं आदि नहीं है।
आप पवित्र आत्मा हैं। इसी कारण इस मानवीय चेतना पर, दुर्भाग्यवश, आप सत्य को नहीं जान
सकते। अपनी विकास प्रक्रिया में मानव के रूप में हम इस अवस्था तक पहुँच गये हैं। कोई भी
भेदन, जिसका वास्तवीकरण होना है बाकी नहीं रहा। यह बड़ी-बड़ी शेखियाँ मात्र नहीं, परन्तु
इसका वास्तवीकरण होना है। वास्तवीकरण होने पर आप दसरे सत्य को जान जाएंगे कि परमात्मा
के प्रेम की एक अत्यन्त सूक्ष्म शक्ति है। इन वृक्षों को आप देखते हैं और इन्हें स्वीकार कर लेते हैं।
'एक नारियल में से इतने सारे वृक्ष कैसे निकल आये' जीवन्त क्रिया होने के कारण हमने यह
जानने का कभी कष्ट नहीं उठाया। हमारे हृदय को कौन चलाता है?डाक्टर कहेंगे कि यह स्वत:
चालित (ऑटोनोमस) नाड़ी प्रणाली है। परन्तु यह स्वत: (ऑटो) कौन है? किसी भी जीवन्त
चीज़ के बारे में हम कभी प्रश्न नहीं करते क्योंकि हमारे पास इसका कोई उत्तर नहीं है। हमारे
विकास की यह जीवन्त प्रक्रिया भी स्वत: ही घटित होती है।
आत्म -
साक्षात्कारी
के रूप में...
सर्वप्रथम मेरा यह बताना आवश्यक है कि आप इसका व्यापार नहीं कर सकते। इसका
व्यापार करना पापमय है। इसका क्रय-विक्रय पाखण्ड है और उसके लिए लोगों को व्यक्तिगत
और सामूहिक रूप से दंड भुगतना होगा। तो यह पहली चीज़ है कि आप इसका व्यापार नहीं कर
सकते। क्योंकि यह आपकी अपनी शक्ति है जो आपके अपने अन्दर निहित है, कुण्डलाकार होने
के कारण जिसे हम कुण्डलिनी कहते हैं। यह आपके अन्दर स्थित है और बिना किसी प्रयत्न के
इसे जागृत किया जा सकता है, सहज। 'सह' अर्थात् आपके साथ जन्मी, 'ज' अर्थात् स्वत:।
आधुनिक युग में बहुत सी ऐसी चीजें हैं, कि मुझे हैरानी होती है कि कितने लोगों के पास सत्य को
पहचान लेने का विवेक होगा। तो पहली चीज़ आप यह देखें कि शिष्य कैसे हैं? वे क्या कर रहें हैं।
उनका ज्ञान कितना है? उनमें कितनी शक्तियाँ हैं। आप जब आध्यात्मिक हो जाते हैं तो यह
आपका पूर्ण पुर्नजन्म है। आपकी सारी शक्तियाँ जागृत हो गई हैं।
नि:सन्देह आत्मसाक्षात्कार के पश्चात् या कहें कि प्रथम अंकुरण के पश्चात् आपको थोड़ी
सी गहनता से अभ्यास करके सर्वव्यापक शक्ति से अपने सम्बन्ध को स्थापित करना होगा। ये
सम्बन्ध ही योग है, जहाँ आपकी एकाकारिता सर्वव्यापक शक्ति से हो जाती है। सदा के लिए
आप जुड़ जाते हैं। इसे नया जन्म कहते हैं। संस्कृत भाषा में इस नये जन्म को द्विज बनना कहते हैं।
अर्थात् दो बार जन्मा, द्विज का अर्थ पक्षी भी होता है। पक्षी पहले अंडा होता है, फिर वह पक्षी
बनता है और स्वतन्त्र हो कर उड़ना सीखता है। इसी प्रकार आत्मसाक्षात्कारी व्यक्ति का पुर्नजन्म
होता है। पहले सामान्य व्यक्ति की तरह और फिर आत्मसाक्षात्कारी के रूप में। आपको न तो
17)
र
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 सरा
भ०
०
ा
सत्यापित करना होता है, न कोई संस्था बनानी होती है और न ही इसके लिए कुछ खर्च करना होता है। सर्वव्यापक शक्ति का यह
अनुभव ही बाइबल की भाषा में परम चैतन्य की शीतल लहरियाँ (Cool breeze of the Holy Ghost) कहलाता है। आदि
शंकराचार्य ने अपनी पुस्तक में इसे 'सलीलं-सलीलं' कहा है, अर्थात् जो अत्यन्त शीतल एवं आनन्ददायिनी है। तब यह शीतल
लहरियाँ आपके सिर के तालू भाग में महसूस होती हैं। सिर के तालू भाग को ब्रह्मरन्ध्र कहते हैं क्योंकि सर्वव्यापक शक्ति ब्रह्मचैतन्य
कहलाती है। 'रन्ध्र' अर्थात् सुराख। तो जब यह रन्ध्र खुलता है तो आपको अपने सिर पर यह शीतल लहरियाँ अनुभव होने लगती हैं। तब
आप शान्त हो जाते हैं। आपकी चिन्ताऐं, झूरियाँ समाप्त होने लगती हैं। आपके तनाव स्थायी रूप से समाप्त हो जाते हैं। आप एक शान्त
व्यक्ति बन जाते हैं।
क
आइए अब युवा-अध्यक्षों की समस्याओं को समझें। इनकी एक सबसे बड़ी समस्या यह है कि जब यह कार्य करते हैं तो इन्हें
मानसिक तनाव हो जाता है। यह आम बात है क्योंकि आप सोचते हैं कि आप कार्य कर रहे हैं। पहली स्थिति में हम कहते हैं कि हम
कर्म कर रहे हैं। इससे हमारा अहं बनता है और हम बहुत प्रसन्न होते हैं। अहं को जब बढ़ावा मिलता है तो हम अधिक प्रसन्न होते हैं,
परन्तु जब यह पंक्चर (हवा निकलना) होता है तो हम खिन्न होते हैं। अहं दत्त प्रसन्नता आनन्द नहीं होती क्योंकि आनन्द कोई द्वैत
स्थिति नहीं है, यह अद्वितीय है, अद्वैत है। तो जब इसका सम्बन्ध सर्वव्यापक शक्ति जो कि अत्यन्त गतिशील, विवेकशील एवं
अत्यन्त अभिव्यक्तिशील है, से होता है तो आप आनन्द की स्थिति का अनुभव करते हैं। क्योंकि जो भी कुछ आप करना चाहते हैं, वह
18
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 आपके सम्मुख होता है और आपको हैरानी होती है कि किस प्रकार आपने इसको विकसित कर लिया।
व्यापार में भी किसी व्यक्ति को आप मिलना चाहते हैं तो तुरन्त जान जाएंगे कि वह कैसा व्यक्ति है आप यह
भी जान जाएंगे उससे कैसा व्यवहार करना है, किस प्रकार की चुनौती लेनी है और क्या चर्चा करनी है
आत्मा का प्रकाश आपके चित्त को प्रकाशित करता है । हम सबको। सभी लोगों ने यदि इसी एक
चीज़ को जान लिया होता तो न तो कोई झगड़ा होता न लड़ाई; न कोई सिद्धान्त होते न हठधर्मी और न
भिन्न धर्म होते। जैसे मैं आपके सम्मुख बैठी हूँ और आप मुझे स्पष्ट देख रहे हैं। पूर्ण सत्य को यदि आप
अपनी अंगुलियों के सिरों पर जान लें तो क्यों आप परस्पर झगड़ा करें, क्यों परस्पर युद्ध करें और क्यों
एक दूसरे की हत्या करें? आप समझें कि सर्वप्रथम उपलब्धि जो आप प्राप्त करते हैं वह यह है कि
पूर्णत्व का स्पष्ट ज्ञान आपको हो जाता है। पूरी वास्तविकता को आप जान जाते हैं। अभी तक हम
अंधेरे में हैं क्योंकि वह भेदन अभी घटित नहीं हुआ है।
दूसरे हम सदा धर्म की बात करते हैं। लोग मुझसे प्रश्न श्री माताजी ये धर्म इतने कष्टदायक क्यों
हैं? वे युद्ध क्यों कर रहे हैं?' क्योंकि वे अंधेरे में है। आप चाहे ईसाई, मुसलमान या हिन्दु कोई भी हों,
आप कोई भी पाप कर सकते हैं। कोई विवशता नहीं है। धर्म आपके अन्दर उदय होना आवश्यक है।
यह आपको अन्दर से धर्मपरायण बना देता है, बाहर से नहीं। तब समस्याओं का अन्त हो जाता है।
विस्तृत होने के अवसर बहुत हैं। आपका अस्तित्व ही अन्त:शक्ति है। सम्भवत: आप नहीं जानते कि
आप कितने गरिमामय हैं। आप ये भी नहीं जानते कि आप क्या कर सकते हैं और आपमें कितनी
शक्तियाँ हैं। हमें इसका ज्ञान नहीं है। हमें स्वयं का ज्ञान नहीं है। आज आप इसी समस्या का सामना कर
रहे हैं। एक बार जब हम स्वयं को जान लंगे, इस मशीन की कार्यप्रणाली को जान लेंगे, दैवी प्रेम के
विज्ञान को जान लेंगे तो पूरा जीवन इसी प्रकार परिवर्तित हो जाएगा।
श०
ट
यहाँ कुछ लोग बैठे हैं जो आज बहुत बड़े लोग हैं । एक समय उनके सम्मुख भी समस्याओं का
अम्बार था। परन्तु सहजयोग में आने के पश्चात् वे पूर्णतया प्रगल्भ हो गए साथ ही साथ वे
करुणामय भी हैं और सामूहिक रूप से सोचते हैं। भारत में लक्ष्मी धन की देवी है। जब यह आपके
अन्दर जागृत हो जाती है तो यह आपके लिए धनार्जन करती है। आपको धन, वैभव प्राप्त होता है।
परन्तु अभी तक यह लक्ष्मी नहीं है। आपके पास एक बड़ी कार है फिर भी आप दुष्कृत्य कर सकते हैं।
पर सहजयोगी बनकर आप यह सब नहीं करते, आप वास्तव में धर्मपरायण हो जाते हैं और दैवी शक्ति
आपकी हर इच्छा पूर्ण करने में सहायक होती है। इसके लिए आपको कोई चालाकी करने की आवश्यकता
नहीं रहती। परमात्मा की शक्ति ही सारा कार्य कर देती है। यह आपकी देखभाल करती हैं पर आपको स्वयं पर
विश्वास होना चाहिए।
हैं।
लक्ष्मी जी को यदि आप देखें तो उनके हाथ में दो कमल होते हैं। इसका अर्थ है कि इस प्रकार के
व्यक्ति को अत्यन्त स्नेही होना होगा। गर्म जोशी होनी चाहिए, अपने बच्चों, पत्नी, पड़ोसियों और सभी
के प्रति। यह हार्दिक हो, दिखावे मात्र ही नहीं।
२५ वर्ष का कोई लड़का किसी प्रतिस्पर्धा में टैनिस खेल रहा है। आजकल सभी कुछ धनचलित
होने के कारण खेल भी उसे सदमा पहुँचाता है। परिणामतः वह बहुत सोचता है, शराब पीता है। ऐसे
व्यक्ति को भयकर हृदय-घात हो सकता है। यही अन्त अधिक सोचने तथा योजना बनाने वाले वृद्धों का
भी हो सकता है। एक दिन पता चलता है कि उन्हें हृदय शूल हो गया। कभी-कभी चेतावनी देने के लिए
भी उन्हें हृदय घात हो जाता है। दुसरी बार दूसरी चेतावनी और तीसरी बार समाप्त। इन दिनों हृदय बहुत
बड़ी समस्या है। ऐसा नहीं है कि उनके हृदय पत्थर के हैं जो टूट जाते हैं। परन्तु मूल्यहीन दिशा में अपनी
शक्ति का दुरुपयोग ही मुख्य समस्या है।...
19
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 পা
सा
श्रीकृष्ण, जो कि विराट स्वरूप है, मास्टरों के मास्टर; हम ये कह सकते
द्ौपदी जो श्रीकृष्ण
हैं। जब ट्रौपदी पर समस्या आई - की बहन - साक्षात
विष्णुमाया थीं। उसने श्रीकृष्ण को याद किया। उसकी साड़ी को दुःशासन खींच
रहा था। उसने सिर्फ 'क्रि' कहा। ट्रौपदी को 'कृष्णा' कहना था, पर उसने
चलि
सोचा, 'मैंने अगर कृष्णा कहा तो ये गिर जाएगा।" उसने जैसे ही श्ना
का, साड़ी निचे गिर गई । तब उसने श्रीकृष्ण का र्णन करते हुए उसे
पुकारा.... वो आवाज द्वारका तक पहुँची। कहाँ द्वारका और कहाँ रुस्तिनापूर?
कम से कम दो हजार मील का अन्तर था। पर वो आवाज चैतन्य द्वारा पहुँच
गयी और बहाँ एक बड़े ध्वनी का निर्माण हुआ। श्रीकृष्ण उनकी बहन की लज्जा
की रक्षा के लिए वहाँ पहुँचे। तुरन्त। उसी क्षण। वे कह सकते थे कि 'चलो जाने
दो। एक साड़ी निकलने दो, दूसरी और फिए उसके बाद मैं जाऊँगा। '
ा
'मुझे विश्वास है कि उसने मेरी ही साड़ियों को चुराया होगा - जो तुमने
मेरी पूजा के लिए दी है - जो बहुत है। ऐसा मुझे लगता है बरना ट्रौपदी को देने के
लिए उसने इतनी सारी साड़ियाँ कहाँ से लाई होगी? जरूर ये मेरी स्टोरेज की
रही होंगी। मुझे विश्वास है और इसलिए आपने मुझे इतनी सारी साड़ियाँ दी है,
जिससे कि वो सभी ख्त्रियों की लज्जा की रक्षा कर सकें।
का
श्रीकृष्ण पूजा, १९९१
तो ये साड़ी कई सारी विशेषताओं से जुड़ी हुई है। आप केवल इन साड़ियों
को पहनती ही नहीं बल्कि आप अपने में बसी हुई सारी खुबियों को दर्शाते हो ।
श्रीकृष्ण पूजा, १९९०
प
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Publisbed & Printed by
Nirmal Transformation Pot. Ltd.
No. 8. Chandragipta Co-op Housing Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune, Maharashtra. India - 41
2 w For qurier di arnding arniclg cotart e ahove adldre
$286537.25286032 email sale@niti.co.in
bsite www.nitl.co.in o
atne ade
 2009_Yuvadrishti_Mx_(Scan)_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 A Saint kas to be gentle
in the way the moonlight
falls upon this Earthu.
16th Nou 1985
