The Divine Cool Breeze 2010 issue 1 – volume twenty-three number one

 You might find Me nis walking with you In the first era of Sahaja Yoga, you needed to see Me in person. As we say in Sanskrit, a dhyeya is the target. You wanted the target in front of you, whatever is to be achieved... You felt happy, secure, joyous when you had that in person before you. In the second era, now will not desire so much that Mother should be there. You will take it over from Me. you This is the divine desire I am telling you about and you have to work on that from today onwards. I am with you. You know that, but I need not be in this body because I don't know if I exist in this body or not. But once this desire starts working, you will see tremendous miracles happening... You may find Me anywhere. You are walking on the street, suddenly you might find Mataji walking with you. So this is the second era we have started and you should not be shocked head. if you see Me sitting on your bed and putting My hand on your Or you may see Me in the form of Christ walking into your room. Or as Shri Rama. That has to happen, so you should be prepared. IN THIS ISSUE page 2: the sahasrara • page 20: the ether page 26: to the seekers • page 28: the whole thing melts page 30: questions • page 32: sahaj means spontaneous

 at the sahasrara SAHASRARA PUJA 1980 In 1970, the fifth of May, was first time the collective spirit of God opened out. So far the blessings of God had come to human beings individually as grace and they received their Self Realization individually, one by one. And the method for individual Realization was just the opposite of the collective. First they had to estab- lish their dharma, cleanse themselves fully, desir- ing all the time for their salvation, putting their attention to their salvation, as you call itishwara pranidhan, thinking of God, asking for His grace and acting in a scrupulous, dharmic way to keep themselves pure. They had to control their mind, control their desires, control their action in such a manner that they absolutely kept to the centre path. And when they could get through all that testing and immunity, and when they deserved, then only the grace of Mother gave them Realiza- tion. This pattern was on for some time. These few people who got Realization did lots of wonderful things to prepare for Sahaj Yoga. They were in every field of life, but were very few and unique....

 3

 THE SCAFFOLDING OF SAHAJA YOGA They have really done a great job of first building the scaffoldings of the huge, great building of Sahaja Yoga which is going to come now. They are just like nuts and bolts in our whole working. Their desire to establish dharma was so great that the complete divine force of Mahakali was working through them. Then they put it to action with such understanding and such wisdom. Great scriptures were written by them. And for many years, thousands of years, they were the guiding lights for people. Only in the modern times ... people started doubting them. Before that people used to doubt themselves. They used to doubt that “We are not yet capable, we are not good enough, we cannot do it better. But they are perfect. Whatever they have said is all right." There was no doubting about the incarnations or about these saints, what they said, but the doubting was about themselves, that “how is it that this is the good path we know, this is the real path we know, still we are going in the wrong direction." If you read the poems of those days, it is all the time “Why – despite the desire to be good, to be upright, to be righteous – why am I roaming into wrong paths and wilderness?" The writers in those days always showed that a good righteous man was rewarded by God's blessings. But all this started toppling down with the developing and the super-ego challenging. Confusion started coming into the minds of people and they started doubting those great realized souls instead of doubting themselves. Because they could not reach anywhere near these great saints, some of them were influenced by many satanic forces around and played into their hands and started doubting those realized people and all these CC ego great scriptures. So on the one side we have the doubting people, the other side the fanatics. Those who tried to adhere more and more to the teachings had to become fanat- ics. So they became fanatics. And those who started doubting also could not show any benefits of doubting, could not convince the fanatics that they were wrong. So on one side we had fanatics and another side the doubting people. It is like standing between their tombstones. The real religion in man collapsed. There cannot be a new religion. Religion is a continuous living process within us which is our sustenance. It is like a ladder on which we climb ... step by step – but not leaving the ladder. All others are required. So the ultimate had to be established because of these two types of emer- gence – one doubting, another fanatics. Both had not known God. Both had not achieved reality and they criticized each other because both of them did not know what truth was. There cannot be a new religion. Religion is a continuous living process within us which is our sustenance. It is like a ladder on which we climb.

 at the s ahasrar a OF CONFUSION, I TOOK MY BIRTH AT A TIME I took My birth at a point where these confusions had started showing their results even on the physical plane. All imbalances of life react physically, mentally, emotionally, also spiritually. When I started looking around I was amazed how ignorance had made people naive like a cloud of ignorance which came on them. Formerly people had this much under- standing, this much sensitivity to know what is right and what is wrong. Even if they were wrong, they knew that wrong was wrong and right was right. But into this confused state, I was born and I knew I was to open the Sahasrara. So I started My work after My first shocks. I decided not to talk about it to anyone and very, very normal life of a very ordinary person. Not to be very striking because, like lead a Christ when He was born, a star came up. That is how King Herod came to know about Him and his forces worked and you know the story of what happened. If you are born with any striking signs, the negativity immediately finds you out. As it is, it found Me out and just after the fifteenth day of My birth, there was a very big accident, as you know. I had to really work very, very, very hard to enter into your being to find out the differ- ent permutations and combination. First of all, I had to find out your basic problems.... After finding the basic problems, I started finding out your permutations and combina- tions and I was amazed how human beings were placed to their outside world and how they reacted to their outside world. I identified that these permutations and combina- tions, which formed within themselves, were also capped by their other identifications - like the society in which they were born, like the nation in which they were born, like the ideas that were there. All these things became much more important than the original being which is universal within you. And every individual had taken a very odd, funny, awkward type of a shape, which I didn't know how to reduce and how to bring it to a proper growth level by which they could start their growth. It was a very, very hard work and night after night I used to work, while leading a very, very ordinary life of a very normal person. I used to deliberately behave like a very simple, ordinary student and show all My ignorance about things, but sometimes, you know, truth has an awkward habit of slipping out and it used to show itself. Then this working started and one of the biggest major problems of human beings I found was the family life and that is why I married. I wanted to study what are the prob- lems of family life. And then I started facing these problems as if they were My own and started understanding why people behave in this manner and that manner because these connections are to be done, of course, by you, but much more by the Divine Force. And if I could know what are your problems, I would be able to act.

 at the s ahasrara

 UNTYING THE KNOTS Other problems – like political, economic and all these problems – also I tried to study because they became so important for human beings, but they are of absolutely artificial value.... So I had to see to that, what makes them do this and what makes them do that – sort of a human behavior science I had to study for years. And then, as you start unfolding or you can say unentangling or disentangling or taking out the knots of a bundle, you reach a point where all the knots are opened out and one knot is still left for you, which is to be opened out. And that was done on the fifth of May 1970. And once that was done, the collective phenomena started working. And the greatest collective phenomena was that the Shri Chakra, being on this Earth, could be felt through your fingers. This was never before so. Nobody felt the fingers enlightened. Nobody felt the vibrations on the fin- gers as such, but they felt it within themselves because of the rising of the Kundalini and everything. And the way they developed themselves inside, they were more concerned about one individual. They developed their inner being much more than their collective being. But now, because the Sahas- rara of the universe was opened out, everybody started feeling the vibrations around them with their own hands. That means the chakras themselves were feeling before, but now the fingers, which are manifested from the power of a particular chakra or chakras, could feel the vibrations. That means the sensitivity of the Divine, which was in the chakras, spread out to peripheries to such an extent that the human being could feel it on the fingers. This was fantastic. So My job was to move from the centre to the periphery. While moving there, whatever are the obstacles I met, I had to clear them out one after another and then, once all the obstacles were cleared out and all the network was properly done, then it was to generate the energy through this happen- ing of Sahasrara Day. So you can imagine how important is this day.

 at the s ahasrar a

 THE TOOLS OF SAHAJA YOGA Now this much is for Myself. I don't know how many of you really know how much the Divine had to work and how many of you are really thankful to the Divine for this tremendous work, which was done through ages and now specially for these forty-seven years of My life. Relentlessly it worked keeping up the facade of a very normal, ordinary person – because it had to reach to the ordinary – not to the extraordinary, but to the ordinary. And one had to take out the extraordinary qualities in the ordinary by making them deeper. This was the tremendous task. But then I must say that the Sahaja Yoga, when it started working out, I also was given very great workers, the tools of Sahaja Yoga, who took it upon themselves as their own responsibility. And you all should be thankful to them because they really worked very hard with Me, taking it up upon up themselves as their own responsibility. There were very few, but they did it... So today we have to understand one thing, that we really need those brave people and those people who feel responsible, which is a very impor- tant virtue of Sahaj Yogis, while personal things – your own chakras and own problems and all that – is not important because if the whole improves, you are going to improve too. If the whole of the body improves, you are going to improve. But if one finger improves, the rest of the body is suffer- ing. You are not going to be happy either. your So the main thing is what are you doing for Sahaja Yoga. What can you walk do? How far can you go? How are you going to work it out? In every of life and field of life, those who really work it out, as a great responsibility upon themselves, are the ones who will be given more and more powers and chances. Then in Sahaja Yoga, you will find it is so simple and clean.... I know everything about you, which I have taken into My ocean of love and have tried to help you in every way – outside, inside, solving your problems. It is so transparent to see how Sahaj Yoga is so much a mother to whilst taking all the advantage with it, still you are more identified with your own enjoyments and your own idea of enjoyment. You people still do not But you. enjoy that collective spirit which was opened on the fifth of May 1970. You still lack in companionship, in company with each other. You enjoy it more like people who are not Sahaj Yogis. 11

 at the s ahasrara

 EVERYTHING FOR THE COLLECTIVITY Now today is the day to make a big determination that you will start enjoying your collective spirit. Everything for the collectivity, then the enjoyment will be maximum. You will never feel that you have sacrificed anything. But unless and until we have more of such people, the other dishwashers are of no use. Just dishwashers or very low grade Sahaja Yogis are absolutely useless, who just want to take advantage and have a nice time. All that of people, they are not going to make much mark for us. type We do not need much intelligence for that. You do not need much money for that. You do not need anything but a complete desire and one should know that here we are the going to gain our own flowering – the flowering of the whole of which we are part and parcel. you must make a determination not to bring Sahaja Yoga to your personal level So or to your limited problems or to your own relationships. It is the relationship of the creation with God. Is not your relationship or anybody else's relationship. As in any machine, all the wires must be connected to the mains through one main wire. In the same way, you all must be connected to God individually so that all are you connected among yourselves. I have been saying this again and again and again because at the Sahasrara you are being blessed with this collective spirit. 01 13

 The second very important point is of complete integration within and without. Within, unless and until there is integration, we cannot bring forth the outside integration. The complete integration within comes by dedicating yourself to your own improvement. First and foremost is that time must be given for your development – not to show Me or not to show anyone. It is between you and yourself. You have to work hard to cleanse yourself. It easy to live comfortably with all the horrible chakras within us, but it is easier also and the best, most enjoyable, to have very clean chakras. And it comes first of all in sincerity. First of all is complete sincerity. Are we sincere to ourselves? Sometimes it is misun- derstood. People think if you have to be sincere to yourself we should deny Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja Yoga is the union between you and God. And the sincerity must be full. It must be complete. Any kind of insincerity which comes into you is extremely detrimental. you must know that, as your Mother has sincerity about you, you must also have sincerity about yourself. Then you will start enjoying Sahaja Yoga. That is very important to create integration within you because, if it is sincerity, it comes from your heart. If it is coming from your heart, then your body, your mind, your intelligence, everything will work hard to fulfill it. But if it is not coming from your heart, it is going to be a superfi- is So cial thing, so you try to feel it from your heart. That is what it means – sincerity. Do not depend on anyone.... It is your own. So you have to work in such a way that you get complete integration and the driv- ing force towards integration is a very simple one. It is sincerity. Thus you will know that automatically you are getting integrated. The other factor that is important is patience. You must have patience with others because, if you do not have patience, your sincerity will start doubting itself. So you must have patience and to get patience you must know what you have been so far and where are you. When you will know what you were, you will have patience with others, tremendous patience. And by having patience with others, your sincerity will be all the time complete. By your sincerity, you will be completely integrated. at the s ahasrara 15 SINCERITY ABOUT YOURSELF

 DEEPER INTO SINCERITY So we come to the point of sincerity. Now let us go deeper into it, to how the sincerity is to be maintained. First of all, we have to make some determinations, sankalpas, of being sincere. Then we have to act by finding out how do we get insincere, on what points. You are good at analyzing. You can find it out... What are the connecting points? Keep a control on your mind to see how does it become insincere? You will be amazed that it is simpler to be sincere than to be insincere. Is the easiest thing is to be sincere than to be deceiving because don't have to think. To be sincere you don't have to think. If you have to be insincere, you you have to think, plan out and to find out methods, all the loopholes and escapes by which you have to run away. If you have to be captive of your sincerity, you don't have to worry about anything and then sincerity itself is rewarding. This principle must be written down in your hearts, that sincerity itself is rewarding. You don't have to go to anybody else to ask for the reward of sincerity. Sincerity itself rewards and that is why you start enjoying your own sincerity. If you start seeing all these things as a witness, how your sincerity has made you so beautiful, so dignified and how you have started rising in your self-esteem, you will be amazed how sincerity itself is a big force which will manifest its living dynamism in you and you will be a transformed This transformation within you is going to change the whole world. People are going to see that you are no more a confused person, you are not a person who is doubting and neither are you a person who is a fanatic. You are not a blind person and you are a person who is alert and aware and who can see things better than others. So the Divine is only interested in such people. As I have told you before, the Divine is more interested in a little worm which is alert and aware than in a palace of a king which is dead. The more alert you become, the more the Divine takes interest. But this alertness is nothing but the enlightenment of your sincerity. You will be amazed how sincerity is the thing. That means you are loyal to yourself. You have to be loyal and not disloyal. The loy- alty to yourself is sincerity and that is how I have managed Sahaja Yoga. But sincerity is My nature. I don't have to strive for it. I cannot get out of it. If I am your ideal, you should try to imbibe My nature within yourself and then you will be amazed how you are connected with Me. Then we all move like one wave, one being, one personality. That is the achievement of the Sahasrara Day – sincerity of purpose wrought in action, not theory and philosophy, but in action. Active sincerity in every way – and patience. All these things will bring forth the complete integration within. Once your tomorrow you will be placed at the helm of affairs everywhere in the society. Try to contact other people at your own level. Whatever may be the category of life you are leading, please try to contact them. By doing so, you create an atmosphere which starts another circle of evolution which is the outside integration, where the societies get integrated. All the people who profess different religions come to this Sahaja Yoga, which is today the fruit of all the religions. The integration between political and economic situations, complete ideologies will integrate because the source of all these is the same. It has gone into disintegration because of its artificial identifications. That is how we will integrate the whole world into a beautiful integrated creation, with the purpose of blissful existence for all of us to enjoy. you person. transformation starts working out, if human beings start getting transformed, SO

 at the s ahasrara 17

 at the s ahasrar a

 I AM GIVING YOU THE KEY Good times are ahead now.... Try to become sincere and sincere and sin- cere and enjoy your sincerity. I bless all with your sincerity... you You are expressing yourself as Sahaj Yogis who have recognized Me and are requesting to bless the rest of the people so that they also recognize Me have recognized. By this puja, I hope recognition will be much more as you clear. By My recognition, only you will recognize yourself and the whole thing will work out in a very, very beautiful manner.... It is just your privilege to be here and you must understand that privileges Sincerity is are given to people who are deserving. I am telling you these things because you are deserving and, in that condition, you must understand that this is a the key to great privilege that I am telling you all these things and that you should feel your success. enamoured that I am telling you that sincerity is the key to your success. It is a privilege. I am giving you the key.... Take it as a privilege. It is a V.I.P. treatment for you. You are all V.I.P.s. I cannot talk like this to the multitudes, but I can tell you this because I want to give you the complete keys. If you can look at yourself as how privi- leged you are and, understanding it, understanding what all Sahaj Yoga is, will understand that what a privilege it is for you to be here – what then you fortune, what reward for what have done. How many lives have been you completely rewarded by being here? This will help you to do puja in a more sincere manner. May God bless you. 19

 Like your ether, through which they are seeing the television now, in the same way, God's Power is everywhere. You can feel it. This capacity in [Shri Krishna] to witness has to be seen in every yogi. The element He controls is the ether. We call it as akasha in Sanskrit. This ether we are using now for our television, for our radio, for every sort of a collec- tive work, so we have to be in charge of the ether element, as yogis. And that is the subtlest of all, in the sense that you permeate into everything with that.... Plastic also permeates into everything- into matter, into everything up to the air, but it cannot enter into ether. The negativity cannot enter into ether, so when you enter into your ethereal zone, you actually enter into the area which is thoughtless awareness. So to achieve your ethereal state, you have to expand your thoughtless awareness. And the sustenance of that is done by Christ, by the spirit. So you can realize now, as a yogi, your state of mind should be ethereal. Shri Krishna Puja 1983 To achieve [Shri Hanuman] can fly in the air and, by flying in the air, He can carry the messages from one to another through the ether. Now the subtle of the ether that we have is under the your ethereal command of Shri Hanumana. He is the one who controls or He is the lord of this ether, the subtle of the ether or the causal of the ether and, through it, it communicates. All the state, you have communications that you find ... are through Hanumana's movement because He can go into a nirakar. He can go into a formless state. to expand your we use it for this communication that we have.... We Also the communications - have television, we have radios and all those things. Where we catch on to the ether, anything, it is all the blessings of Hanumana.... So without any connection through the ether, He can manage. So all the ethereal connections have been done by this great engineer, Shri Hanumana. And it is so perfect. It is so perfect that you cannot challenge it and you cannot find faults with it. Maybe your instruments may not be all right, but as far as His ethereal work is concerned, He is perfectly there. Now the scientists discover it and think that it is in the nature, but they never think, "How can it be? We say something in the ether and how is it received on the other end?" They just take it for granted that it is so, that we say something here or we relay something on the television and it is seen the other side. But they never even think or search out how it is done, what is the way. And this is what is the work of Shri Hanumana, who has done such a beautiful network and, through that network, all these things work out. got thoughtless anything, it is all the blessings of Hanumana.. awareness. Shri Hanuman Puja 1990 The Vishuddhi chakra has a specialty. When the human beings raised their head upward from the Mother Earth towards the sky – the sky is the ether, it is Shri Krishna's nature when it raised the head towards the ether, towards the sky, then this Vishuddhi chakra developed into a different dimension. Shri Krishna Puja 1986 If we put anything into the etheric, you can receive it anywhere. So the raga is the energy which into the ether and touches your spirit. That is the raga and these ragas are goes something like a housewife. Supposing if you stand with a military band, you will be fed up – left, right, left, right, left, right. But a beautiful melody, that is a melodious thing, melody, and this melody itself is suggestive of a beauty. Shri Fatima Puja 1988 20

 ETHER it is everywhere you can feel it

 ETHER The subtler side tanmatra – a Sanskrit Ether is the which is managed by another tanmatra, we call it akash.... It is Christ word meaning the causal who has sacrificed His life to open our Agnya chakra, that we have reached that state of essence of an element. akash. Without Him, it would not have been possible. We can have general communica- tion – like we can talk to people, we can say things, we can also use our fingers to express ourselves, our hands to communicate – but to communicate vibrations, you have to have vibrations, otherwise you cannot feel another person.... It has to rise from your own Self, energy then from others to the higher level of humanity, where you are in communication with the sky, which we can call as the tanmatra or the essential or the essence of ether.... With this tanmatra, sitting down here you can do the job. It works – just the atten- tion works. I know that. You also know very well. You don't have to ask Me to put the attention. You just put the attention and it will work out. It is a very important thing that you have got. Christmas Puja 1998 We have to be There are some people who told Me that they saw Me in dreams and then they a program. Now how can it happen? It can if it is something like the ether. We have it from the ether. You can see on a television. Something in the same way you can see in your deeper sleep something that exists in the ether. It is the subtle of the ether. It is the subtle of all the elements. It is called the causal of everything. If you become subtle, you touch that circle. As soon as you become a subtler being, more than a human being, you start seeing colours, hues, aesthetics, everything. In the same way, once you become the spirit, you see the aesthetics of righteous living. You enjoy the aesthetics of virtuous living. Because you become a subtler personality, you see things in a subtler way – in a very sub- tler way. came to deep people. 15 March 1985 What I am trying to tell you is that, with these vibrations, you enter into the divine ether. This ether exists in everything ... but it is nothing that you have to do because you are one with the divine ether. And when you start just paying attention to someone, that ether just goes and acts. So your attention becomes collectively conscious and collectively active. Thus you become great friends. There is no quarrel. There is no jealousy because you know you are part and parcel of one personality. The second thing that happens to is that know the truth. The fundamental truth is that you are the spirit. You are neither this body, nor this mind, nor intellect, nor ego. It is like a diamond lost in the mud. And as the diamond is cleared out and brought to the light, you are no more the you you 9 July 1986 mud, so you reach the absolute. much To work out many things of that kind we have to be deep people. We have to deeper within ourselves to touch our essences. That is, you know very well that all our chakras are made out of these essences and, when we go deep into ourselves, what we find is that we can touch the elements very well. But while doing so, actually we move horizontally. When we start moving horizontally, at the core of it we find that there are these essences placed and these essences then start exciting the essences across. Like in the radio, you have seen there is ether. Now when you speak on one side of the radio, it gets completely manifested in the essence of the ether and then everybody can hear it. When you people just give a bandhan sometimes, you find that you have communicated with another person. But that is only the essence of the ether – we can say, the subtler of the subtlest. People have only gone onto the subtler side, we can say, by science, but you go to the subtler side. And that sub- tler side gives you all these effects. go 6 May 1987 22

 With ether, it transcends A photograph has got so many elements in it. For example, it has got the light element, it A photograph has the water element, it has got the earth element, it has got also the air element. If got the air is not all right, you cannot get a photograph. And also it has got the ether element. With all these five elements, you cannot produce a statue. The ether element it has got because, if you have a photograph here, you can transcend it to any other place... A photograph can be transmitted, but you cannot transmit the statue, as it is, any- where. Only the photo of a statue you can. It has also got the ether element. So a photo- graph is much more powerful than any other statue. Moreover, it is a reproduction, no doubt, but a reproduction of reality with five elements. So I shouldn't call it just a repre- sentative. It is quite Me because My attention is there. is quite Me because My attention is there. 18 May 1980 If you can receive on the television something from the ether, you can always receive at that level also and you can manifest it. But in the television, what we receive doesn't manifest. Supposing we see some photograph of someone, it doesn't get up and cure us, does it? It does not. But here attention, when you put to it, the attention manifests. See how fantastic it is. It is very hard to believe, but it happens. It happens that the attention itself manifests. So this attention that becomes enlightened becomes one with the Divine. It manifests and it acts and it helps. 10 July 1984 Ether we use for broadcasting. We think it is only electromagnetic. It is a wrong Now when I speak and in broadcasting it goes in the ether, it is the Adi Shakti. So it idea. gov- erns it. Then it manages things. It can work on your Sahasrara. It can work on so many 20 April 1985 Kundalinis. It can work on the nature.

 ETHER What is a firmament in English? Your attention can go to any limit. You can find out about anyone dead or The firmament is ether.... alive, in any country. When we see television, we know about the ether. But This is the akash. It is the sky. I am talking about the subtle of the ether, which is so efficient, which is so fast, which is so active and which is so loving. 24 April 1980 18 July 1994 In the centre is the ether, the firmament. 2 June 1982 God is everywhere. Now see, it is very simple. I will tell you. It is like this: there is ether everywhere, but how is it that only the radio receives the pro- grams? Why do you have a radio? You can receive it yourself. After all, ether 3 August 1984 is everywhere. It is very simple. Ether is spread out everywhere and, if I am releasing a lecture here, you may hear it even in London. This ether itself has a principle which can be enlightened. Every element has a principle or the causal which can be enlightened. And when that is enlightened, the collectivity within us, if it is enlightened also, it reacts and it helps and condones, nourishes whatever a collective personality wants to do. Through Sahaja Yoga what happens to is that you become a collective personality. 9 October 1986 You can help a person because you enter that ether of God, which is within everyone. So once you are there, just like a radio receives messages through the ether, the messages you can receive about others, what is happening to other people when you are sitting down here. It is much more than this, but in a short thing, I would just say that you become collectively conscious. 23 March 1983 What is Me is you. is It is the subtle of that ether which communicates us to other worlds. That is 10 October 1993 one power of Virata, that He is the subtle of that. Love This all-pervading power is the power of divine love. It thinks. It organizes. It plans. It loves. It is the one which is the subtle of the ether, you can call it. It is the subtle of the matter. It is the subtle of emotions. It is the subtle of your mental power. It is the subtle of your evolutionary all integrated and coordinated in complete synchronization. your but power, 11 June 1985 What you can do is the communication of the Sahaja system through this all-pervading ether that is there, so that you can work out so many things that it cannot be explained on the ordinary human level. 28 January 1983 If there is love, you know the whole communication works through love, this subtle love. The whole ether has got this subtler love. Every matter has got this subtler love – everything has – and the whole thing goes into waves and you just get the message. But if you are not on that reception point or if you are not there, nothing works – neither you nor Me. It's a mutual thing. I help you, but you help Me too. What is Me is you. 5 October 1984 The whole subtle of the ether is at your feet. If you want to do something, 24 Guru Puja 1995 you can just do it, just with the vibrations.

 Sahaja Yoga is a very different style of spiritual fulfillment. So far, human beings have evolved either by a physical process or by an emotional pro- cess or by a mental process. Now these are the work of the elements which are like the physical process. When it takes place, it uses the oxygen or the air element. And in the emotional you use more of the water element for that. And for process, also your mental process you use the ether. So the human beings have grown on these three, four elements. And the light also, we have used quite a lot to see through our eyes and all that. Light we have used, like from the sun. All these elements we have used and actually even when we have not used they have manifested their blessings on us.... Now we must understand that before this Kundalini yoga that started, all the con- cept of God was created mentally on the ethereal level by all the great prophets to do the job of preparing an image first of all. And now the Kundalini itself, by its manifestation, introduces you to the reality of them. She actualizes them, all of them, all these principles of God and the spirit. So actually now you are introduced. First like you will tell your friends, “Now Mataji is going to come. She is such and such. She is like this, that." Still it is a mental tion now, but when I come here it is a different thing altogether. Now it is an actual thing. I am before you. So the Kundalini introduces you to actuality, to reality. All those mental pictures that we had, get completely actualized by Kundalini awakening. So all these projections were created for us to be prepared for this last bit of jump by which we would be able to tell you. If they had not told you, “Mataji is such and such," you would not recognize Me and My work. concep- 3 September 1983 Your attention becomes active. That means when you put your attention to something, then it acts there because it touches the universal cosmic power like the ether. And you are amazed about the miracles that you can create. You are amazed at your own glory. And you cannot believe it. You cannot believe it that you are performing all these beautiful acts. The best of all is that you jump into the Ocean of Joy. Joy has no duality like unhappiness and happiness. It is absolute. 26 July 1992

 JNa keekers of truth: part three Uto the to experience the truth псе The experience of truth has to be felt on the central nervous system. You bec ome The experience is very slow in the western countries. I am sorry. It is not that you are any way less seekers. You are very great seekers. I would say you are greater seekers than in trees, giant the Indians – much greater seekers. Indians have still to cross a lot of steps to come up to your level, no doubt. But while coming up to this level, you have developed a lot of problems and that is why the seeking sometimes takes time to express itself as a fruitful gain of Self Realization. trees, like will get your Realization, but again the Kundalini goes down. I must tell So moving trees. you you very frankly because I cannot be dishonest. It can be brought up by you by understanding how to work it out, by co-operating with your Self, by understanding yourself, that are the temple of God and that you have to work it out with respect to your Self and have to give some time.... What I find is people get their Realization and then they are lost ... but if you know how to handle your roots, how to nourish it, how to look after it, then bear fruits and, by your fruits, people know what you are. Then you become trees, giant trees, like moving trees. And many who come under such trees get realized.... Once you are settled, you will be circulating the divine interpretation and the divine experience of truth all over the world. You are the hard core and this is what you have to you you flower out, you you do. We cannot be mediocres.... There is no compromise with yourself. You become so powerful that you also do not compromise. You can just get out of everything in no time. But you must accept yourself first of all. Have faith in yourself... Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi 22 June 1984 London

 You become the knowledge I have to make a humble request. I know the experience of Sahaja Yoga is slow, but steady, and I am sure that today I have got people who are of a rare quality of courage... All this knowledge is available to you now because this time is for you to know all these secrets. Some newspaper people asked me, “Mother, have you got ... very big schol- very ars?" I said, “No, they are very ordinary people. Some may be who are more difficult, but mostly they are very normal, ordinary people – simple people. But what makes that?" think you They said, "They are so scholarly. They know so much." It is because you become the knowledge. So truth is the knowledge. The rest of it is all mythical. It is mythical. What we know about things is all mythical because whatever we see from outside is outside. Like I would say we appreciate the Mona Lisa. We appreciate the miracles, as we say, the great miracles that human beings have created. Why do we call them miracles? Sometimes we think that we have observed a very miraculous task. They are. Mentally we think that. But actually This time is for you to know all it is not so. Because they have divine vibrations, they emit vibrations and they appeal to you because in your heart lies that spirit, which is the universal being and which gives that feeling of bewilderment when you see these great miracles human beings have created... But unless and until you become a realized soul, how will you know? Now this is the only condition and to become the realized soul you have to have the ascent of the Kundalini and the proper state of that Kundalini to remain there. And that's the point where I found we lack in efforts, lack in courage and in patience. So again and again, I request you, do not be superficial... Be solid people, serious. Take it up seriously.... You must decide that if we get our Realization, we will establish ourselves into Sahaja Yoga, for which you do not have to pay. There is no membership. There is no organization, nothing. I have nothing to take from You cannot give to me. these secrets. you. By God's grace, you all should have come here to give you what you have and you need not be also docile about it or slavish. I have come here to give you or tell you what is free. May God bless get your Realization.... You need not be aggressive. I 27 you.

 it melts What you will feel once the Kundalini is awakened? In Sahaja Yoga, if the instrument is perfect, it happens just like that – like a very smooth landing. So the Kundalini lands up very smoothly. For people who are simple, they just do not feel anything except that they feel absolutely relaxed and from their hands they feel this chaitanya flowing. These vibrations start flowing. Simple things happen. First you get thoughtless awareness, which is called as "nirvichar samadhi." You are listening to Me, but you become absolutely thoughtless. There is no thought. You become blank. When the Kundalini crosses the Agnya, you start getting this in the hands and the whole thing becomes absolutely relaxed. Now, after Realization, you have to steady yourself. That is the most important thing where we fail because, though you are brought to the boat, still you are just going like that because you have come from the wobbling system. So after that, you have to settle down. And that settling takes some time. And if you could devote your time to that settling, then you can be a very good Sahaja Yogi. You can give Realization to people just like that, moving your hands just like this. These are very soothing vibrations, absolutely soothing. They soothe you completely. And if you put your hand on somebody after Realization, that person also feels that soothingness and the whole thing starts melting away. You find the whole thing melts. 28

 Foco

 uestions wers n There must have been a state in our lives where we were connected with this . How did power. we lose it? We lost it a long time back. That's it – you were connected. That's true, but this Adam and Eve, that is the point when we lost God. We had to take to this course of evolution. They wouldn't accept, so we had to go through this long process. Tell me a little bit more about the left side of the body, the feminine side. You want to know everything today only, is it? You will know everything all right. But there is, for God, there is nothing like feminine and masculine. That is our quarrel. The power of God is the feminine. Without the feminine, God is just a witness. So it is like the moon and the moonlight. Do we differentiate between the two? It is only because of human error that we differentiate like that. Between God and His power there is no differentiation. So this problem of feminine and masculine is our mental problem. It comes from both sides. But after Sahaja Yoga, you know what it is. It's nothing. It's just a myth. How do you make the Kundalini stronger? That is a good question. First you will get your Realization, then you go to the collective and the Kundalini will rise by itself and there are people [there who will help you become] a master of Sahaja Yoga. What is the difference between Sahaja Yoga and the other meditations such as Buddhism? The Buddhist meditation is the meditation that was followed at the time of Buddha. At that time, you had to renounce everything and go to His stupas, into places to meditate. Now the time has come that you have to get your Realization. That is how He prepared the Buddhists to get their Self Realization. So that was the beginning. Every religion said you must pray, you must balance yourself. Every religion wanted to do that. That is at that stage, all right? But now, you have to get your Self Realization for which worked. Because He has talked of the future, Buddha was known as Maitreya and also Bodhisattva. So this state is there. That meditation is just the ladder to reach the state have you where you can get your Self Realization. So nothing wrong with that, but you have to go further with it. 30

 What is bhakti yoga? Bhakti also has no meaning without connection. Supposing you have no connection on the telephone and you are telephoning. What's the use? Bhakti is only possible when you are connected. How do you communicate with people who are bound by their dogma and belief? Love can melt anything, isn't it? And there is a way. First you have to logically talk to them. Divine logic is very convincing, but if somebody is a stone, there is no need to break head with the stone. But logically you can explain and, if they have dogmas, your they will melt because you can ask them a simple question: "What did you get out of it? What powers did the dogmas will fall. But mostly it happens like this. I've seen, if there are many or family, everybody gets to Sahaja Yoga and they see the way they are, then automati- cally they come. Mostly dogmas are fashions. So it is a fashion and these people who have dogmas are people who do not seek truth. But once they see, also sometimes they come. you get out of it?" A simple question should be asked and that is how friends The spirit is Just a vwitness But we cannot guarantee that everybody will be there. According to John, he just said a hundred and forty-four thousand. We have already crossed that limit, so I don't know how many will be there. It's a question of one's own seeking and also they have to deserve it. They should be worthy of it. in the heart watching you. How do you control the flow of thoughts as they keep flowing? That is what you don't have to do. Your Kundalini will do it. Your Kundalini will create that situation for you. You don't have to do it. What do you mean by the spiriť" and how is that related to our consciousness and how are the two things linked by Self Realization? It's a good question. The spirit is the reflection of God Almighty within us. It is said that He has made human beings in His own image. Now we should not get confused with the word "image." Image means the reflection. So we reflect God Almighty. We are not God, but we reflect. Image is different from the actual thing. So now, when you are as a human being, then the spirit is just a witness in the heart watching you. And the seat of the God Almighty is there and He is reflecting in human heart. He is just watching. He is a witness. He doesn't come into your attention. He is watching you. But when Realization takes place, when the Kundalini pierces through this, then it starts flowing into our attention, the light of the spirit. Attention that we have is the con- sciousness. We have general consciousness – a human consciousness, you can say - is expressed through our central nervous system. The conscious mind is enlightened. It becomes a dynamic force. And gradually your beauty, your glory starts opening and Sydney 1992 recording what you are on your conscious mind, which is an enlightened one. - which

 SAHA Omeans pontaneous While I live, I'll work very hard to convince you about your own personality, your own Self. That's what I am living for – until you are completely convinced. You will be amazed that people who come to Sahaja Yoga also do all kinds of nonsensical things. I know they do. But they are not Sahaja Yogis in a way. Because unless and until you go deep into yourself, unless and until you find out what is your personality in the real sense of the word, whatever you may try, whatever you may do, it is not Sahaja. Sahaj means spontaneous.

 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE www.divinecoolbreeze.org SUBSCRIPTIONS: contact@divinecoolbreeze.org CONTENT: editor@divinecoolbreeze.org PRINTED BY King Printing Company Inc. 181 Industrial Avenue East Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA PRINTED BY Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. No.8, Chandragupta Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411038 Maharashtra, India Front cover: Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi (Gregoire de Kalbermatten, photographer) Contents pages photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Prater Park, Vienna, August 1983 (Gregoire de Kalbermatten) Contents pages words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Sahasrara Puja 1984 Page 2, 3 and 5 photographs: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Page 6 and 7 photographs: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Prague 1994 Page 8 and 9 photographs: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Pages 10 to 18 photographs: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi (Gregoire de Kalbermatten) Page 21 photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Matterhorn Switzerland (Gregoire de Kalbermatten) Page 23 photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Page 26 and 27 photographs: clouds (Axinia Samoilova) Page 28 text: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 8 March 1979, Delhi Page 28 and 29 photographs: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi (Gregoire de Kalbermatten) Photograph above: Incense sticks, Christmas Puja 2009 (Axinia Samoilova) Back cover photograph: flowers, Christmas Puja 2009 (Axinia Samoilova,) Back cover text: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi “As you enjoy a balance of colours in a beautiful photograph, in the same way, you enjoy the balance within yourself. You enjoy your personality, you enjoy your being and you enjoy to be the Self. And those who are on the same level, you just enjoy each other. This is the first time you enjoy other human beings as if you are enjoying a flower. The fragrance of that personality is a spiritual fragrance. It is so beautiful and attractive. Without any lust and greed in it, but just enjoying the company is real perfect bliss." (8 July 1984)

 As you enjoy a balance of colours in a beautiful photograph in the same way, you enjoy the balance within yourself BUN



----------------------

2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
2010 issue 1 – volume twenty-three number one
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-2.txt 
 You might find Me
nis
walking with you
In the first era of Sahaja Yoga, you needed to see Me in person.
As we say in Sanskrit, a dhyeya is the target. You wanted the target in front of you, whatever is to be achieved...
You felt happy, secure, joyous when you had that in
person before
you.
In the second era, now
will not desire so much that Mother should be there. You will take it over from Me.
you
This is the divine desire I am telling you about and you have to work on that from today onwards.
I am with you.
You know that, but I need not be in this body because I don't know if I exist in this body or not.
But once this desire starts working, you will see tremendous miracles happening...
You may find Me anywhere.
You are walking on the street, suddenly you might find Mataji walking with you.
So this is the second era we have started and you should not be shocked
head.
if you see Me sitting on your bed and putting My hand on your
Or you may see Me in the form of Christ walking into your room. Or as Shri Rama.
That has to happen, so you should be prepared.
IN THIS ISSUE
page 2: the sahasrara • page 20: the ether
page 26: to the seekers • page 28: the whole thing melts
page 30: questions • page 32: sahaj means spontaneous
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-3.txt 
 at the sahasrara
SAHASRARA PUJA 1980
In 1970, the fifth of May, was first time
the collective spirit of God opened out.
So far the blessings of God had come to human
beings individually as grace and they received their
Self Realization individually, one by one. And the
method for individual Realization was just the
opposite of the collective. First they had to estab-
lish their dharma, cleanse themselves fully, desir-
ing all the time for their salvation, putting their
attention to their salvation, as you call itishwara
pranidhan, thinking of God, asking for His grace
and acting in a scrupulous, dharmic way to keep
themselves pure. They had to control their mind,
control their desires, control their action in such
a manner that they absolutely kept to the centre
path. And when they could get through all that
testing and immunity, and when they deserved,
then only the grace of Mother gave them Realiza-
tion.
This pattern was on for some time. These few
people who got Realization did lots of wonderful
things to prepare for Sahaj Yoga. They were in every
field of life, but were very few and unique....
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-4.txt 
 3
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-5.txt 
 THE SCAFFOLDING OF SAHAJA YOGA
They have really done a great job of first building the scaffoldings of the huge,
great building of Sahaja Yoga which is going to come now. They are just like nuts
and bolts in our whole working. Their desire to establish dharma was so great
that the complete divine force of Mahakali was working through them. Then
they put it to action with such understanding and such wisdom. Great scriptures
were written by them. And for many years, thousands of years, they were the
guiding lights for people.
Only in the modern times ... people started doubting them. Before that people
used to doubt themselves. They used to doubt that “We are not yet capable, we
are not good enough, we cannot do it better. But they are perfect. Whatever they
have said is all right." There was no doubting about the incarnations or about
these saints, what they said, but the doubting was about themselves, that “how
is it that this is the good path we know, this is the real path we know, still we are
going in the wrong direction."
If you read the poems of those days, it is all the time “Why – despite the desire
to be good, to be upright, to be righteous – why am I roaming into wrong paths
and wilderness?" The writers in those days always showed that a good righteous
man was rewarded by God's blessings. But all this started toppling down with the
developing and the super-ego challenging. Confusion started coming into
the minds of people and they started doubting those great realized souls instead
of doubting themselves. Because they could not reach anywhere near these great
saints, some of them were influenced by many satanic forces around and played
into their hands and started doubting those realized people and all these
CC
ego
great
scriptures.
So on the one side we have the doubting people, the other side the fanatics.
Those who tried to adhere more and more to the teachings had to become fanat-
ics. So they became fanatics. And those who started doubting also could not show
any benefits of doubting, could not convince the fanatics that they were wrong.
So on one side we had fanatics and another side the doubting people. It is like
standing between their tombstones. The real religion in man collapsed.
There cannot be a new religion. Religion is a continuous living process within
us which is our sustenance. It is like a ladder on which we climb ... step by step –
but not leaving the ladder. All others are required.
So the ultimate had to be established because of these two types
of emer-
gence – one doubting, another fanatics. Both had not known God. Both had not
achieved reality and they criticized each other because both of them did not know
what truth was.
There cannot be a new religion. Religion is a continuous living process within us
which is our sustenance. It is like a ladder on which we climb.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-7.txt 
 at the s ahasrar a
OF CONFUSION, I TOOK MY BIRTH
AT A TIME
I took My birth at a point where these confusions had started showing their results
even on the physical plane. All imbalances of life react physically, mentally, emotionally,
also spiritually.
When I started looking around I was amazed how ignorance had made people naive
like a cloud of ignorance which came on them. Formerly people had this much under-
standing, this much sensitivity to know what is right and what is wrong. Even if they were
wrong, they knew that wrong was wrong and right was right. But into this confused state,
I was born and I knew I was to open the Sahasrara.
So I started My work after My first shocks. I decided not to talk about it to anyone
and
very, very normal life of a very ordinary person. Not to be very striking because, like
lead a
Christ when He was born, a star came up. That is how King Herod came to know about
Him and his forces worked and you know the story of what happened. If you are born
with any striking signs, the negativity immediately finds you out. As it is, it found Me out
and just after the fifteenth day of My birth, there was a very big accident, as you know.
I had to really work very, very, very hard to enter into your being to find out the differ-
ent permutations and combination. First of all, I had to find out your basic problems....
After finding the basic problems, I started finding out your permutations and combina-
tions and I was amazed how human beings were placed to their outside world and how
they reacted to their outside world. I identified that these permutations and combina-
tions, which formed within themselves, were also capped by their other identifications
- like the society in which they were born, like the nation in which they were born, like
the ideas that were there. All these things became much more important than the original
being which is universal within you. And every individual had taken a very odd, funny,
awkward type
of a shape, which I didn't know how to reduce and how to bring it to a
proper growth level by which they could start their growth.
It was a very, very hard work and night after night I used to work, while leading a
very, very ordinary life of a very normal person. I used to deliberately behave like a very
simple, ordinary student and show all My ignorance about things, but sometimes, you
know, truth has an awkward habit of slipping out and it used to show itself.
Then this working started and one of the biggest major problems of human beings I
found was the family life and that is why I married. I wanted to study what are the prob-
lems of family life. And then I started facing these problems as if they were My own and
started understanding why people behave in this manner and that manner because these
connections are to be done, of course, by you, but much more by the Divine Force. And
if I could know what are your problems, I would be able to act.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-9.txt 
 at the s ahasrara
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-10.txt 
 UNTYING THE KNOTS
Other problems – like political, economic and all these problems
– also I
tried to study because they became so important for human beings, but they
are of absolutely artificial value....
So I had to see to that, what makes them do this and what makes them do
that – sort of a human behavior science I had to study for years. And then, as
you start unfolding or you can say unentangling or disentangling or taking
out the knots of a bundle, you reach a point where all the knots are opened
out and one knot is still left for you, which is to be opened out. And that
was done on the fifth of May 1970. And once that was done, the collective
phenomena started working.
And the greatest collective phenomena was that the Shri Chakra, being
on this Earth, could be felt through your fingers. This was never before so.
Nobody felt the fingers enlightened. Nobody felt the vibrations on the fin-
gers as such, but they felt it within themselves because of the rising of the
Kundalini and everything. And the way they developed themselves inside,
they were more concerned about one individual. They developed their inner
being much more than their collective being. But now, because the Sahas-
rara of the universe was opened out, everybody started feeling the vibrations
around them with their own hands. That means the chakras themselves were
feeling before, but now the fingers, which are manifested from the power
of a particular chakra or chakras, could feel the vibrations. That means the
sensitivity of the Divine, which was in the chakras, spread out to peripheries
to such an extent that the human being could feel it on the fingers. This was
fantastic.
So My job was to move from the centre to the periphery. While moving
there, whatever are the obstacles I met, I had to clear them out one after
another and then, once all the obstacles were cleared out and all the network
was properly done, then it was to generate the energy through this happen-
ing of Sahasrara Day. So you can imagine how important is this day.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-11.txt 
 at the s ahasrar a
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-12.txt 
 THE TOOLS OF SAHAJA YOGA
Now this much is for Myself. I don't know how many of you really know
how much the Divine had to work and how many of you are really thankful
to the Divine for this tremendous work, which was done through ages
and
now specially for these forty-seven years of My life. Relentlessly it worked
keeping up the facade of a very normal, ordinary person – because it had to
reach to the ordinary – not to the extraordinary, but to the ordinary. And one
had to take out the extraordinary qualities in the ordinary by making them
deeper. This was the tremendous task.
But then I must say that the Sahaja Yoga, when it started working out, I
also was given very great workers, the tools of Sahaja Yoga, who took it
upon themselves as their own responsibility. And you all should be thankful
to them because they really worked very hard with Me, taking it up upon
up
themselves as their own responsibility. There were very few, but they did
it...
So today we have to understand one thing, that we really need those
brave people and those people who feel responsible, which is a very impor-
tant virtue of Sahaj Yogis, while personal things – your own chakras and
own problems and all that – is not important because if the whole improves,
you are going to improve too. If the whole of the body improves, you are
going to improve. But if one finger improves, the rest of the body is suffer-
ing. You are not going to be happy either.
your
So the main thing is what are you doing for Sahaja Yoga. What can you
walk
do? How far can you go? How are you going to work it out? In
every
of life and field of life, those who really work it out, as a great responsibility
upon themselves, are the ones who will be given more and more powers and
chances. Then in Sahaja Yoga, you will find it is so simple and clean.... I know
everything about you, which I have taken into My ocean of love and have
tried to help you in every way – outside, inside, solving your problems.
It is so transparent to see how Sahaj Yoga is so much a mother to
whilst taking all the advantage with it, still you are more identified with your
own enjoyments and your own idea of enjoyment. You people still do not
But
you.
enjoy that collective spirit which was opened on the fifth of May 1970. You
still lack in companionship, in company with each other. You enjoy it more
like people who are not Sahaj Yogis.
11
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-13.txt 
 at the s ahasrara
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-14.txt 
 EVERYTHING FOR THE COLLECTIVITY
Now today is the day to make a big determination that you will start enjoying your
collective spirit. Everything for the collectivity, then the enjoyment will be maximum.
You will never feel that you have sacrificed anything. But unless and until we have more
of such people, the other dishwashers are of no use. Just dishwashers or very low grade
Sahaja Yogis are absolutely useless, who just want to take advantage and have a nice time.
All that
of people, they are not going to make much mark for us.
type
We do not need much intelligence for that. You do not need much money for that.
You do not need anything but a complete desire and one should know that here we are
the
going to gain our own flowering – the flowering of the whole of which we are
part
and parcel.
you must make a determination not to bring Sahaja Yoga to your personal level
So
or to your limited problems or to your own relationships. It is the relationship of the
creation with God. Is not your relationship or anybody else's relationship.
As in any machine, all the wires must be connected to the mains through one main
wire. In the same way, you all must be connected to God individually so that
all are
you
connected among yourselves. I have been saying this again
and again and again because
at the Sahasrara you are being blessed with this collective spirit.
01
13
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-16.txt 
 The second very important point is of complete integration within and without. Within,
unless and until there is integration, we cannot bring forth the outside integration. The
complete integration within comes by dedicating yourself to your own improvement. First
and foremost is that time must be given for your development – not to show Me or not to
show anyone.
It is between you and yourself. You have to work hard to cleanse yourself. It
easy to live comfortably with all the horrible chakras within us, but it is easier also and
the best, most enjoyable, to have very clean chakras. And it comes first of all in sincerity.
First of all is complete sincerity. Are we sincere to ourselves? Sometimes it is misun-
derstood. People think if you have to be sincere to yourself we should deny Sahaja Yoga.
Sahaja Yoga is the union between you and God. And the sincerity must be full. It must be
complete. Any kind of insincerity which comes into you is extremely detrimental.
you must know that, as your Mother has sincerity about you, you must also have
sincerity about yourself. Then you will start enjoying Sahaja Yoga. That is very important
to create integration within you because, if it is sincerity, it comes from your heart. If it
is coming from your heart, then your body, your mind, your intelligence, everything will
work hard to fulfill it. But if it is not coming from your heart, it is going to be a superfi-
is
So
cial thing, so you try to feel it from your heart. That is what it means – sincerity. Do not
depend on anyone.... It is your own.
So you have to work in such a way that you get complete integration and the driv-
ing force towards integration is a very simple one. It is sincerity. Thus you will know that
automatically you are getting integrated.
The other factor that is important is patience. You must have patience with others
because, if you do not have patience, your sincerity will start doubting itself. So you must
have patience and to get patience you must know what you have been so far and where are
you. When you will know what you were, you will have patience with others, tremendous
patience. And by having patience with others, your sincerity will be all the time complete.
By your sincerity, you will be completely integrated.
at the s ahasrara
15
SINCERITY ABOUT YOURSELF
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-17.txt 
 DEEPER INTO SINCERITY
So we come to the point of sincerity. Now let us go deeper into it, to how the sincerity
is to be maintained. First of all, we have to make some determinations, sankalpas, of being
sincere. Then we have to act by finding out how do we get insincere, on what points. You are
good at analyzing. You can find it out... What are the connecting points? Keep a control on
your mind to see how does it become insincere? You will be amazed that it is simpler to be
sincere than to be insincere. Is the easiest thing is to be sincere than to be deceiving because
don't have to think. To be sincere you don't have to think. If you have to be insincere,
you
you have to think, plan out and to find out methods, all the loopholes and escapes by which
you have to run away. If you have to be captive of your sincerity, you don't have to worry
about anything and then sincerity itself is rewarding.
This principle must be written down in your hearts, that sincerity itself is rewarding. You
don't have to go to anybody else to ask for the reward of sincerity. Sincerity itself rewards
and that is why you start enjoying your own sincerity. If you start seeing all these things
as a witness, how your sincerity has made you so beautiful, so dignified and how you have
started rising in your self-esteem, you will be amazed how sincerity itself is a big force which
will manifest its living dynamism in you and you will be a transformed
This transformation within you is going to change the whole world. People are going
to see that you are no more a confused person, you are not a person who is doubting and
neither are you a person who is a fanatic. You are not a blind person and you are a person
who is alert and aware and who can see things better than others.
So the Divine is only interested in such people. As I have told you before, the Divine is
more interested in a little worm which is alert and aware than in a palace of a king which
is dead. The more alert you become, the more the Divine takes interest. But this alertness
is nothing but the enlightenment of your sincerity. You will be amazed how sincerity is the
thing. That means you are loyal to yourself. You have to be loyal and not disloyal. The loy-
alty to yourself is sincerity and that is how I have managed Sahaja Yoga. But sincerity is My
nature. I don't have to strive for it. I cannot get out of it.
If I am your ideal, you should try to imbibe My nature within yourself and then you
will be amazed how you are connected with Me. Then we all move like one wave, one being,
one personality.
That is the achievement of the Sahasrara Day – sincerity of purpose wrought in action,
not theory and philosophy, but in action. Active sincerity in every way – and patience. All
these things will bring forth the complete integration within.
Once your
tomorrow you will be placed at the helm of affairs everywhere in the society.
Try to contact other people at your own level. Whatever may be the category of life
you are leading, please try to contact them. By doing so, you create an atmosphere which
starts another circle of evolution which is the outside integration, where the societies get
integrated.
All the people who profess different religions come to this Sahaja Yoga, which is today
the fruit of all the religions. The integration between political and economic situations,
complete ideologies will integrate because the source of all these is the same. It has gone into
disintegration because of its artificial identifications. That is how we will integrate the whole
world into a beautiful integrated creation, with the purpose of blissful existence for all of us
to enjoy.
you
person.
transformation starts working out, if human beings start getting transformed,
SO
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-18.txt 
 at the s ahasrara
17
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-19.txt 
 at the s ahasrar a
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-20.txt 
 I AM GIVING YOU THE KEY
Good times are ahead now.... Try to become sincere and sincere and sin-
cere and enjoy your sincerity.
I bless
all with your sincerity...
you
You are expressing yourself as Sahaj Yogis who have recognized Me and
are requesting to bless the rest of the people so that they also recognize Me
have recognized. By this puja, I hope recognition will be much more
as you
clear. By My recognition, only you will recognize yourself and the whole
thing will work out in a very, very beautiful manner....
It is just your privilege to be here and you must understand that privileges
Sincerity is
are given to people who are deserving. I am telling you these things because
you are deserving and, in that condition, you must understand that this is a
the key to
great privilege that I am telling you all these things and that you should feel
your success.
enamoured that I am telling you that sincerity is the key to your success. It
is a privilege.
I am giving you the key.... Take it as a privilege. It is a V.I.P. treatment for
you. You are all V.I.P.s.
I cannot talk like this to the multitudes, but I can tell
you
this because I
want to give you the complete keys. If you can look at yourself as how privi-
leged you are and, understanding it, understanding what all Sahaj Yoga is,
will understand that what a privilege it is for you to be here – what
then
you
fortune, what reward for what
have done. How many lives have been
you
completely rewarded by being here? This will help you to do puja in a more
sincere manner.
May God bless you.
19
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Like your ether, through which they are seeing the television now,
in the same way, God's Power is everywhere. You can feel it.
This capacity in [Shri Krishna] to witness has to be seen in every yogi. The element He
controls is the ether. We call it as akasha in Sanskrit.
This ether we are using now for our television, for our radio, for every sort of a collec-
tive work, so we have to be in charge of the ether element, as yogis. And that is the subtlest
of all, in the sense that you permeate into everything with that.... Plastic also permeates
into everything- into matter, into everything up to the air, but it cannot enter into ether.
The negativity cannot enter into ether, so when you enter into your ethereal zone, you
actually enter into the area which is thoughtless awareness.
So to achieve your ethereal state, you have to expand your thoughtless awareness. And
the sustenance of that is done by Christ, by the spirit. So you can realize now, as a yogi,
your state of mind should be ethereal.
Shri Krishna Puja 1983
To achieve [Shri Hanuman] can fly in the air and, by flying in the air, He can carry the messages from
one to another through the ether. Now the subtle of the ether that we have is under the
your ethereal command of Shri Hanumana. He is the one who controls or He is the lord of this ether,
the subtle of the ether or the causal of the ether and, through it, it communicates. All the
state,
you have communications that you find ... are through Hanumana's movement because He can go
into a nirakar. He can go into a formless state.
to expand your
we use it for this communication that we have.... We
Also the communications -
have television, we have radios and all those things. Where we catch on to the ether,
anything, it is all the blessings of Hanumana....
So without any connection through the ether, He can manage. So all the ethereal
connections have been done by this great engineer, Shri Hanumana. And it is so perfect.
It is so perfect that you cannot challenge it and you cannot find faults with it. Maybe
your instruments may not be all right, but as far as His ethereal work is concerned, He is
perfectly there.
Now the scientists discover it and think that it is in the nature, but they never think,
"How can it be? We say something in the ether and how is it received on the other end?"
They just take it for granted that it is so, that we say something here or we relay something
on the television and it is seen the other side. But they never even think or search out how
it is done, what is the way. And this is what is the work of Shri Hanumana, who has done
such a beautiful network and, through that network, all these things work out.
got
thoughtless anything, it is all the blessings of Hanumana..
awareness.
Shri Hanuman Puja 1990
The Vishuddhi chakra has a specialty. When the human beings raised their head upward
from the Mother Earth towards the sky – the sky is the ether, it is Shri Krishna's nature
when it raised the head towards the ether, towards the sky, then this Vishuddhi chakra
developed into a different dimension.
Shri Krishna Puja 1986
If we put anything into the etheric, you can receive it anywhere. So the raga is the energy
which
into the ether and touches your spirit. That is the raga and these ragas are
goes
something like a housewife. Supposing if you stand with a military band, you will be fed
up – left, right, left, right, left, right. But a beautiful melody, that is a melodious thing,
melody, and this melody itself is suggestive of a beauty.
Shri Fatima Puja 1988
20
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-22.txt 
 ETHER
it is everywhere
you can feel it
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-23.txt 
 ETHER
The subtler side
tanmatra – a Sanskrit Ether is the which is managed by another tanmatra, we call it akash.... It is Christ
word meaning the causal who has sacrificed His life to open our Agnya chakra, that we have reached that state of
essence of an element. akash. Without Him, it would not have been possible. We can have general communica-
tion – like we can talk to people, we can say things, we can also use our fingers to express
ourselves, our hands to communicate – but to communicate vibrations, you have to have
vibrations, otherwise you cannot feel another person.... It has to rise from your own Self,
energy
then from others to the higher level of humanity, where you are in communication with
the sky, which we can call as the tanmatra or the essential or the essence of ether....
With this tanmatra, sitting down here you can do the job. It works – just the atten-
tion works. I know that. You also know very well. You don't have to ask Me to put the
attention. You just put the attention and it will work out. It is a very important thing that
you have got.
Christmas Puja 1998
We have to be
There are some people who told Me that they saw Me in dreams and then they
a program. Now how can it happen? It can if it is something like the ether. We have it
from the ether. You can see on a television. Something in the same way you can see in
your deeper sleep something that exists in the ether. It is the subtle of the ether. It is the
subtle of all the elements. It is called the causal of everything. If you become subtle, you
touch that circle. As soon as you become a subtler being, more than a human being, you
start seeing colours, hues, aesthetics, everything. In the same way, once you become the
spirit, you see the aesthetics of righteous living. You enjoy the aesthetics of virtuous living.
Because you become a subtler personality, you see things in a subtler way – in a very sub-
tler way.
came to
deep people.
15 March 1985
What I am trying to tell you is that, with these vibrations, you enter into the divine ether.
This ether exists in everything ... but it is nothing that you have to do because you are
one with the divine ether. And when you start just paying attention to someone, that
ether just goes and acts. So your attention becomes collectively conscious and collectively
active. Thus you become great friends. There is no quarrel. There is no jealousy because
you know you are part and parcel of one personality. The second thing that happens to
is that know the truth. The fundamental truth is that you are the spirit. You are
neither this body, nor this mind, nor intellect, nor ego. It is like a diamond lost in the
mud. And as the diamond is cleared out and brought to the light, you are no more the
you
you
9 July 1986
mud, so you reach the absolute.
much
To work out many things of that kind we have to be deep people. We have to
deeper within ourselves to touch our essences. That is, you know very well that all our
chakras are made out of these essences and, when we go deep into ourselves, what we
find is that we can touch the elements very well. But while doing so, actually we move
horizontally. When we start moving horizontally, at the core of it we find that there are
these essences placed and these essences then start exciting the essences across. Like in the
radio, you have seen there is ether.
Now when you speak on one side of the radio, it gets completely manifested in the
essence of the ether and then everybody can hear it. When you people just give a bandhan
sometimes, you find that you have communicated with another person. But that is only
the essence of the ether – we can say, the subtler of the subtlest. People have only gone
onto the subtler side, we can say, by science, but you go to the subtler side. And that sub-
tler side gives you all these effects.
go
6 May 1987
22
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-24.txt 
 With ether, it transcends
A photograph has got so many elements in it. For example, it has got the light element, it
A photograph
has
the water element, it has got the earth element, it has got also the air element. If
got
the air is not all right, you cannot get a photograph. And also it has got the ether element.
With all these five elements, you cannot produce a statue. The ether element it has got
because, if you have a photograph here, you can transcend it to any other place...
A photograph can be transmitted, but you cannot transmit the statue, as it is, any-
where. Only the photo of a statue you can. It has also got the ether element. So a photo-
graph is much more powerful than any other statue. Moreover, it is a reproduction, no
doubt, but a reproduction of reality with five elements. So I shouldn't call it just a repre-
sentative. It is quite Me because My attention is there.
is quite Me
because My
attention is
there.
18 May 1980
If
you can receive on the television something from the ether, you can always receive
at that level also and you can manifest it. But in the television, what we receive doesn't
manifest. Supposing we see some photograph of someone, it doesn't get up and cure us,
does it? It does not. But here attention, when you put to it, the attention manifests. See
how fantastic it is. It is very hard to believe, but it happens. It happens that the attention
itself manifests. So this attention that becomes enlightened becomes one with the Divine.
It manifests and it acts and it helps.
10 July 1984
Ether we use for broadcasting. We think it is only electromagnetic. It is a wrong
Now when I speak and in broadcasting it goes in the ether, it is the Adi Shakti. So it
idea.
gov-
erns it. Then it manages things. It can work on your Sahasrara. It can work on so many
20 April 1985
Kundalinis. It can work on the nature.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-25.txt 
 ETHER
What is a firmament in English? Your attention can go to any limit. You can find out about anyone dead or
The firmament is ether.... alive, in any country. When we see television, we know about the ether. But
This is the akash. It is the sky. I am talking about the subtle of the ether, which is so efficient, which is so
fast, which is so active and which is so loving.
24 April 1980
18 July 1994
In the centre is the ether,
the firmament.
2 June 1982
God is everywhere. Now see, it is very simple. I will tell you. It is like this:
there is ether everywhere, but how is it that only the radio receives the
pro-
grams? Why do you have a radio? You can receive it yourself. After all, ether
3 August 1984
is everywhere. It is very simple.
Ether is spread out everywhere and, if I am releasing a lecture here, you
may hear it even in London. This ether itself has a principle which can
be enlightened. Every element has a principle or the causal which can be
enlightened. And when that is enlightened, the collectivity within us, if it
is enlightened also, it reacts and it helps and condones, nourishes whatever
a collective personality wants to do. Through Sahaja Yoga what happens to
is that you become a collective personality.
9 October 1986
You can help a person because you enter that ether of God, which is within
everyone. So once you are there, just like a radio receives messages through
the ether, the messages you can receive about others, what is happening to
other people when you are sitting down here. It is much more than this, but
in a short thing, I would just say that you become collectively conscious.
23 March 1983
What is Me
is you.
is
It is the subtle of that ether which communicates us to other worlds. That is
10 October 1993
one power of Virata, that He is the subtle of that.
Love
This all-pervading power is the power of divine love. It thinks. It organizes.
It plans. It loves. It is the one which is the subtle of the ether, you can call
it. It is the subtle of the matter. It is the subtle of emotions. It is the
subtle of your mental power. It is the subtle of your evolutionary
all integrated and coordinated in complete synchronization.
your
but
power,
11 June 1985
What you can do is the communication of the Sahaja system through this
all-pervading ether that is there, so that you can work out so many things
that it cannot be explained on the ordinary human level. 28 January 1983
If there is love, you know the whole communication works through love,
this subtle love. The whole ether has got this subtler love. Every matter has
got this subtler love – everything has – and the whole thing goes into waves
and you just get the message. But if you are not on that reception point or if
you are not there, nothing works – neither you nor Me. It's a mutual thing.
I help you, but you help Me too. What is Me is you.
5 October 1984
The whole subtle of the ether is at your feet. If you want to do something,
24
Guru Puja 1995
you can just do it, just with the vibrations.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Sahaja Yoga is a very different style of spiritual fulfillment.
So far, human beings have evolved either by a physical process or by an emotional pro-
cess or by a mental process. Now these are the work of the elements which are like the
physical process. When it takes place, it uses the oxygen or the air element. And in the
emotional
you use more of the water element for that. And for
process, also
your mental
process you use the ether.
So the human beings have grown on these three, four elements. And the light also,
we have used quite a lot to see through our eyes and all that. Light we have used, like
from the sun. All these elements we have used and actually even when we have not used
they have manifested their blessings on us....
Now we must understand that before this Kundalini yoga that started, all the con-
cept of God was created mentally on the ethereal level by all the great prophets to do the
job of preparing an image first of all. And now the Kundalini itself, by its manifestation,
introduces you to the reality of them. She actualizes them, all of them, all these principles
of God and the spirit.
So actually now you are introduced. First like you will tell your friends, “Now Mataji
is going to come. She is such and such. She is like this, that." Still it is a mental
tion now, but when I come here it is a different thing altogether. Now it is an actual
thing. I am before you.
So the Kundalini introduces you to actuality, to reality. All those mental pictures that
we had, get completely actualized by Kundalini awakening. So all these projections were
created for us to be prepared for this last bit of jump by which we would be able to tell
you. If they had not told you, “Mataji is such and such," you would not recognize Me
and My work.
concep-
3 September 1983
Your attention becomes active. That means when you put your attention to
something, then it acts there because it touches the universal cosmic power
like the ether. And you are amazed about the miracles that you can create.
You are amazed at your own glory. And you cannot believe it. You cannot believe
it that you are performing all these beautiful acts. The best of all is that you jump
into the Ocean of Joy. Joy has no duality like unhappiness and happiness.
It is absolute.
26 July 1992
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-27.txt 
 JNa
keekers of truth: part three
Uto the
to experience the truth
псе
The experience of truth
has to be felt
on the central nervous system.
You bec ome
The experience is very slow in the western countries. I am sorry. It is not that you are
any way less seekers. You are very great seekers. I would say you are greater seekers than
in
trees, giant the Indians
– much greater seekers. Indians have still to cross a lot of steps to come up
to your level, no doubt. But while coming up to this level, you have developed a lot of
problems and that is why the seeking sometimes takes time to express itself as a fruitful
gain of Self Realization.
trees, like
will
get your Realization, but again the Kundalini goes down. I must tell
So
moving trees.
you
you
very frankly because I cannot be dishonest. It can be brought up by you by understanding
how to work it out, by co-operating with your Self, by understanding yourself, that
are the temple of God and that you have to work it out with respect to your Self and
have to give some time....
What I find is people get their Realization and then they are lost ... but if you know
how to handle your roots, how to nourish it, how to look after it, then
bear fruits and, by your fruits, people know what you are. Then you become trees, giant
trees, like moving trees. And many who come under such trees get realized....
Once you are settled, you will be circulating the divine interpretation and the divine
experience of truth all over the world. You are the hard core and this is what you have to
you
you
flower out, you
you
do.
We cannot be mediocres.... There is no compromise with yourself. You become so
powerful that you also do not compromise. You can just get out of everything in no time.
But you must accept yourself first of all. Have faith in yourself...
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
22 June 1984 London
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-28.txt 
 You become the knowledge
I have to make a humble request. I know the experience of Sahaja Yoga is slow, but
steady, and I am sure that today I have got people who are of a rare quality of courage...
All this knowledge is available to you now because this time is for you to know all
these secrets. Some newspaper people asked me, “Mother, have you got ... very big schol-
very
ars?"
I said, “No, they are very ordinary people. Some may be who are more difficult, but
mostly they are very normal, ordinary people – simple people. But what makes
that?"
think
you
They said, "They are so scholarly. They know so much."
It is because you become the knowledge.
So truth is the knowledge. The rest of it is all mythical. It is mythical. What we know
about things is all mythical because whatever we see from outside is outside. Like I would
say we appreciate the Mona Lisa. We appreciate the miracles, as we say, the great miracles
that human beings have created. Why do we call them miracles? Sometimes we think that
we have observed a very miraculous task. They are. Mentally we think that. But actually
This time
is for you
to know all
it is not so.
Because they have divine vibrations, they emit vibrations and they appeal to you
because in your heart lies that spirit, which is the universal being and which gives that
feeling of bewilderment when you see these great miracles human beings have created...
But unless and until you become a realized soul, how will you know?
Now this is the only condition and to become the realized soul you have to have the
ascent of the Kundalini and the proper state of that Kundalini to remain there. And that's
the point where I found we lack in efforts, lack in courage and in patience.
So again and again, I request you, do not be superficial... Be solid people, serious.
Take it up seriously.... You must decide that if we get our Realization, we will establish
ourselves into Sahaja Yoga, for which you do not have to pay. There is no membership.
There is no organization, nothing. I have nothing to take from You cannot give to me.
these secrets.
you.
By God's grace, you all should
have come here to give you what you have and you need not be also docile about it or
slavish. I have come here to give you or tell you what is free.
May God bless
get your Realization.... You need not be aggressive. I
27
you.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-29.txt 
 it melts
What you will feel once the Kundalini is awakened?
In Sahaja Yoga, if the instrument is perfect,
it happens just like that – like a very smooth landing.
So the Kundalini lands up very smoothly.
For people who are simple, they just do not feel anything
except that they feel absolutely relaxed and from their hands they feel
this chaitanya flowing. These vibrations start flowing.
Simple things happen.
First you get thoughtless awareness,
which is called as "nirvichar samadhi."
You are listening to Me, but you become absolutely thoughtless.
There is no thought. You become blank.
When the Kundalini crosses the Agnya, you start getting this
in the hands and the whole thing becomes absolutely relaxed.
Now, after Realization, you have to steady yourself.
That is the most important thing where we fail
because, though you are brought to the boat, still you are just
going like that because you have come from the wobbling system.
So after that, you have to settle down.
And that settling takes some time.
And if you could devote your time to that settling,
then you can be a very good Sahaja Yogi.
You can give Realization to people just like that,
moving your hands just like this.
These are very soothing vibrations, absolutely soothing.
They soothe you completely.
And if you put your hand on somebody after Realization,
that person also feels that soothingness
and the whole thing starts melting away.
You find the whole thing melts.
28
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Foco
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-31.txt 
 uestions
wers
n
There must have been a state in our lives where we were connected with this
. How did
power.
we lose it?
We lost it a long time back. That's it – you were connected. That's true, but this Adam and
Eve, that is the point when we lost God. We had to take to this course of evolution. They
wouldn't accept, so we had to go through this long process.
Tell me a little bit more about the left side of the body, the feminine side.
You want to know everything today only, is it? You will know everything all right. But
there is, for God, there is nothing like feminine and masculine. That is our quarrel. The
power of God is the feminine. Without the feminine, God is just a witness. So it is like
the moon and the moonlight. Do we differentiate between the two? It is only because
of human error that we differentiate like that. Between God and His power there is no
differentiation. So this problem of feminine and masculine is our mental problem. It
comes from both sides. But after Sahaja Yoga, you know what it is. It's nothing. It's just
a myth.
How do you make the Kundalini stronger?
That is a good question. First you will get your Realization, then you go to the collective
and the Kundalini will rise by itself and there are people [there who will help you become]
a master of Sahaja Yoga.
What is the difference between Sahaja Yoga and the other meditations such as Buddhism?
The Buddhist meditation is the meditation that was followed at the time of Buddha. At
that time, you had to renounce everything and go to His stupas, into places to meditate.
Now the time has come that you have to get your Realization. That is how He prepared
the Buddhists to get their Self Realization. So that was the beginning. Every religion said
you must pray, you must balance yourself. Every religion wanted to do that. That is at
that stage, all right? But now, you have to get your Self Realization for which
worked. Because He has talked of the future, Buddha was known as Maitreya and also
Bodhisattva. So this state is there. That meditation is just the ladder to reach the state
have
you
where you can get your Self Realization. So nothing wrong with that, but you have to go
further with it.
30
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-32.txt 
 What is bhakti yoga?
Bhakti also has no meaning without connection. Supposing you have no connection on
the telephone and you are telephoning. What's the use? Bhakti is only possible when you
are connected.
How do you communicate with people who are bound by their dogma and belief?
Love can melt anything, isn't it? And there is a way. First you have to logically talk to
them. Divine logic is very convincing, but if somebody is a stone, there is no need to
break
head with the stone. But logically you can explain and, if they have dogmas,
your
they will melt because you can ask them a simple question: "What did you get out of it?
What powers did
the dogmas will fall. But mostly it happens like this. I've seen, if there are many
or family, everybody gets to Sahaja Yoga and they see the way they are, then automati-
cally they come. Mostly dogmas are fashions. So it is a fashion and these people who have
dogmas are people who do not seek truth. But once they see, also sometimes they come.
you get out of it?" A simple question should be asked and that is how
friends
The spirit is
Just a vwitness
But we cannot guarantee that everybody will be there. According to John, he just said
a hundred and forty-four thousand. We have already crossed that limit, so I don't know
how many will be there. It's a question of one's own seeking and also they have to deserve
it. They should be worthy of it.
in the heart
watching
you.
How do you control the flow of thoughts as they keep flowing?
That is what you don't have to do. Your Kundalini will do it. Your Kundalini will create
that situation for you. You don't have to do it.
What do you mean by the spiriť" and how is that related to our consciousness and how are the
two things linked by Self Realization?
It's a good question. The spirit is the reflection of God Almighty within us. It is said that
He has made human beings in His own image. Now we should not get confused with
the word "image." Image means the reflection. So we reflect God Almighty. We are not
God, but we reflect. Image is different from the actual thing. So now, when you are as a
human being, then the spirit is just a witness in the heart watching you. And the seat of
the God Almighty is there and He is reflecting in human heart. He is just watching. He
is a witness. He doesn't come into your attention. He is watching you.
But when Realization takes place, when the Kundalini pierces through this, then it
starts flowing into our attention, the light of the spirit. Attention that we have is the con-
sciousness. We have general consciousness – a human consciousness, you can say -
is expressed through our central nervous system. The conscious mind is enlightened.
It becomes a dynamic force. And gradually your beauty, your glory starts opening and Sydney 1992
recording what you are on your conscious mind, which is an enlightened one.
- which
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-33.txt 
 SAHA
Omeans pontaneous
While I live, I'll work very hard to convince
you about your own personality, your own Self.
That's what I am living for – until you are completely convinced.
You will be amazed that people who come to Sahaja Yoga
also do all kinds of nonsensical things. I know they do.
But they are not Sahaja Yogis in a way.
Because unless and until you go deep into yourself,
unless and until you find out what is your personality in the real sense of the word,
whatever you may try, whatever you may do, it is not Sahaja.
Sahaj means spontaneous.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-34.txt 
 THE DIVINE
COOL BREEZE
www.divinecoolbreeze.org
SUBSCRIPTIONS:
contact@divinecoolbreeze.org
CONTENT:
editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
PRINTED BY
King Printing Company Inc.
181 Industrial Avenue East
Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA
PRINTED BY
Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd.
No.8, Chandragupta Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411038
Maharashtra, India
Front cover: Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi (Gregoire de Kalbermatten, photographer) Contents pages photograph: Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi, Prater Park, Vienna, August 1983 (Gregoire de Kalbermatten) Contents pages words: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Sahasrara Puja
1984 Page 2, 3 and 5 photographs: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Page 6 and 7 photographs: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Prague 1994 Page 8
and 9 photographs: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Pages 10 to 18 photographs: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi (Gregoire de Kalbermatten) Page 21
photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Matterhorn Switzerland (Gregoire de Kalbermatten) Page 23 photograph: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Page 26 and 27 photographs: clouds (Axinia Samoilova) Page 28 text: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 8 March 1979, Delhi Page 28 and 29
photographs: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi (Gregoire de Kalbermatten) Photograph above: Incense sticks, Christmas Puja 2009 (Axinia Samoilova)
Back cover photograph: flowers, Christmas Puja 2009 (Axinia Samoilova,) Back cover text: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi “As you enjoy a balance
of colours in a beautiful photograph, in the same way, you enjoy the balance within yourself. You enjoy your personality, you enjoy your being
and you enjoy to be the Self. And those who are on the same level, you just enjoy each other. This is the first time you enjoy other human beings
as if you are enjoying a flower. The fragrance of that personality is a spiritual fragrance. It is so beautiful and attractive. Without any lust and
greed in it, but just enjoying the company is real perfect bliss." (8 July 1984)
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-35.txt 
 As you enjoy a balance of colours in a beautiful photograph
in the same way, you enjoy the balance within yourself
BUN
