Yuva June 2010

 56

 INSIDE THIS ISSUE Mother's Words 4 Balance 8 आप अकेले नहीं हैं... 16 AND MORE Horseshoe 7 Breathing 11 More Amazing Facts 12 Sahaja yogis & the problems of the Easter Puzzle 13 world 21 Sea Shore Story 14 आज मैं स्वयं श्री गणेश की करुंगी 19 पूजा

 Whatever Mother has to be just listened to... that' says all. Mother says to you things which should not hurt you in any way, and you should not take it that seriously... but understand that... next time... we should not

 Mother's Words Ws hen Mother is talking, we should think 'Mother is talking to ME' or 'about ME' (860305); It's not V V for anyone else I am saying... I am saying it for each one of you (871224); Now my talks should not be a waste... again, please listen to me... I'm addressing to you... all of you... remember that. Do not think that I'm addressing to somebody else... it is to you all (850629); We should listen to the Mother, in the form of whom, the whole of the Brahmachaitanya has come, to shower us with the Chaitanya, to enrich us, to nurture us, to develop us. She is the Master of Sahastrara, the Master of all the chakras. But she is beyond the Sahastrara-much beyond. Such is the situation that we must listen to whatever she says, and we should obey Her (870503.1); Anything that Mother tells us, we should not take, or do to extreme (830204); There are certain problems that arise sometimes when we don't listen to Mother (880101) In general Mother has to tell us things which we should understand is for our good, for our enjoyment. Everything is to increase our enjoyment... even our ascent is to increase our enjoyment... our sensitivity to joy (881211); Whatever Mother says has to be just listened to... that' all. Mother says to you things which should not hurt you in any way, and you should not take it that seriously... but understand that... next time... we should not (881211) You must all individually also work it out that you study Sahaja Yoga in a way. In most of the tapes whatever I have said can be seen... found out... what is said about health... what is said about children... because I spontaneously say things.... and if you can sort it out you will know so many things... I mean if you sit down and do a study of these tapes it will help you to find out so many little little things that are so important for life. You can clarify it... can note it down... that this Mother said about these things... it will be very good for us to sort it out this way... what point is to be noted down in different headings... can put different different headings, and jot it down. Mother has said 'so'... Mother has said 'so'... whatever is not on the tape you should not listen to... whatever is on tape is authentic... whatever is recorded already should be accepted (890725); We must have one tape each-sit down and listen again and again-with pencil and paper, and see what I am saying. Every tape should be with

 OT AE R's WORD S you (890611) After listening to my lectures, you just go into meditation... actually my lectures are not to be understood by your brains, but by your Kundalini... and through your heart. So it doesn't matter it you don't remember something... It's alright... but it will come handy whenever you want to use it... some words or sentences.... you will not know from where it is coming... it's all recorded (880921); We record Mother's Vibrations and superimpose Mother's Lecture on that, so that it has double effect (791009.1) Whatever I have said, say, in the beginning of Sahaja Yoga is... not different, but... it's all... rudimentary-what I have said in this Guru Puja... I would not have said in the beginning... would I have. So the 'awareness' also, has to rise... to understand it, you see... this is very important (860707.2); When I say the truth, you get the vibrations.... so you can find out the truth... so, if Iam telling the truth or not, you can find out. But, is it possible that when I am speaking here, you don't feel the vibrations... if you are not getting the vibrations... always it is wrong with you, not with me. So how to find out whether I am telling the truth or not... that is Mahamaya... it's just a play you see... just fun (860707.2) Now you people don't misunderstand me so much as you used to... but still you do things which should not be done. To understand that whatever I tell you is for your ascent , you need a kind of a state of mind which is a detached mind. The detached mind is visible... very clear-cut in a person that he's neither very emotionally attached... and he's not very physically attached... but he sees that the progress of himself and of the society is the point... like the cell knows it has to progress for the betterment of the tree... but it has innate wisdom to do it in such a way that it never harms itself... and does not harm the tree. So the progress of a mind which one should develop, has to be such that you should move with a balance... with a witness state... and see for yourself how far you should go... and how far you should not go. Going to extremes is not Sahaja Yoga style... ascent is (850310) Recently they found out the books written by Thomas, the disciple of Christ who was coming to India. On his way he went to Egypt... and there he wrote the treatise... and he put in a big earthen vessel.... or perhaps it was a metallic thing... and it was discovered 42 years back. The people whom he considered to be authorised Christians he calls as Gnostics... Gna means to know. He has written... to know and to have the personal experience is the only way to follow Christ clearly. Not only that but he said that God Almighty who is so kind... why will he ask you to suffer... so he challenges all the Christian principles of suffering. In the same way in all the Religions people have diverted from the right path... and have come to the wrong path... and are indulging into self created Religions which have no relationship with Reality... of with the incarnations... those who started the Religions.... or who gave the ideas of Religions-l hope you won't do that to me... because you are Gnostic people.... you are the ones who know... who have had Self Realisation (871219)

 Horseshoe Horseshoe is auspicious...do you know that in modern times the symbol of Sahaja Yoga is a horseshoe shape...it has many meanings....but why that shape is auspicious people did not know. People do not know why one thing is auspicious ...and another thing is not auspicious. Now this has been in England for years....people were using horseshoe as an auspicious thing ..and it is ...100%...the shape of a horseshoe emits vibrations ...you can see for yourself...the shape ....is the shape how the Shakti moves....how the power moves....always ...elliptical...like if I love this person, the vibrations will go like this.....elliptical....like If I love this person, the vibrations will go like this....and embrace her and then will come back...but it can be 360 degrees it moves. The whole creation took place by the movement ofthe Shakti like this. like this Shri Mataji, 21/7/1980

 Balance

 Bi alance is needed for our ascent (830512); First put the left hand towards the Mother, or towards the Photo, and the right hand out, then put the left hand up, and the right hand towards the Mother (791118); If you don't have a balance, you'll just get vibrations in one hand (830512); If you feel vibrations equally in both hands, this means that you are in balance, that you are balanced (830202); If there is a disparity, then adjust it by giving a bandhan (811103) You are not only a physical being... you are also an emotional being. If you pay too much attention to your physical side, you can become a dry personality.... absolutely. Such a person gets heart troubles.... because the spirit resides in the heart, and if you are too much physical, then the heart goes out-you must pay attention to your spirit. So you are not onlya physical being... you are also mental being... you are an emotional being... and, a spiritual being... all these must be integrated... and there should be a complete balance (821008) You can find out in a second whether you are on a conditioning side or not.... if the left side is catching, then you are conditioned, and may suffer from pains etc. If the right side is catching, then you are on an ego trip, and may have health problems. Or you may be wobbly (800517.1); If you use any one of these powers, superego and ego, too much... then the other one gets frozen (811006) If we are feeling sleepy, or lazy... then put Right to Left 7 times, with the Right hand, whilst watching Mother, or it can be done also with the Photo (821101); Those who have left hand problems... means who have left side problems... should raise their right... all of you (800721); If the right hand is burning but not the left hand.... that is when a person is right sided, being an intellectual or futuristic person (830512), the left side subtle system is raised and taken over to the right side by movement.. of the right hand, to bring the system into balance (830121); If we have ego, we should raise the left side, and put it to the right side... there's no other way out... you have to work it out with your hands (830121) To get into the centre, to achieve balance first we move out of the left side to the right side, and from there to the centre. If you are feeling lethargic, are unable to get up, or are feeling sleepy or not alert, plan what you will do and get into action. Even doing Puja is a good idea. Then when you are into action, in order to get into the centre, just watch everything, just witness... say to yourself that you are not doing it (800517.2) The right side is like an accelerator, whilst the left side is like the brake. So if the Mooladhara is not in control, if the brake is not alright, then the accelerator cannot be controlled. So we should work very hard so that our Mooladhara is brought round and is put right, and our brake is established. Then whatever work you do for Sahaja Yoga, you will not get into ego practices. It is especially important in the West, where the idea of auspiciousness and holiness is being destroyed (890423)

 Some people are negative in the sense that they are on the left hand side, and some people are negative because they are on the right hand side. Some times these combinations work very well. When a dominating man tries to dominate a left hand person, they are great friends... because one dominates and the other takes domination. As soon as the left hand person comes on the centre or tries to come to the right, the dominating one starts clashing... then they are the worst of enemies. It happens like that... so be on the alert (800927). Now a person who is on the left should try to come in the centre... and in the same way a person who is on the right side should come to the centre. Now how do you do it... a person who is on the right side should try to become friendly with the left sided person, and the left hand side person should try to be friendly with the right sided person. So what is the give and take in this. The right sided person will be a better organiser may be.... may be not at least will be a better orator, or may be a better sort of a leader... may not be... you can't say... he may be the one who will suggest things and who will bring out things... who will say 'l'll do this sort of thing maybe.' The left hand person will be frightened, but will be humble, loving, more affectionate... he'll be much more at the command of others. This one will be commanding and the other will be receiving the commands (800927) Now how do we solve the problem of this mixture. The one who is very much on the ego side should try to obey the person who is on the left side, and the left sided should try to command more on the right hand person... and it should be accepted.... it should be mutually understood.... there should be a contract.... alright I am the ego oriented person, and you are the superego oriented, now let us do one thing... you try to dominate me, and l'll try to obey you... it will work out (800927) But it is rather difficult to get a left sided person here (UK).... there are very few... some were left sided, but when it came to ego... they were worse than anybody else. But, you can have a left sided person.... and let him dominate... till he develops his ego he's alright... if he develops, then he should stop it... but with complete understanding, watching yourself... how you develop, how far you go... a play should go on. But if you are identifying with yourself that I am always right, or nobody's right, then nothing can work out. So the best way to do this sort of thing is.... 'alright you order, and l'll do'... 'let you organise and we'll do it... you tell us how to do it.' Let us decide to improve ourselves, and not to feel bad about it... we have to improve a lot (800927) The job of a guru is to give balance to others... if you have the Guru Principle within you, you get into balance automatically (920719); A guru is not ascetic by nature... but he's so detached, that he's ascetic.... he may be a king... or a beggar.... or maybe a big personality... or just an ordinary person... nothing can disturb him... and he can never go into imbalance (920719) 10

 BREATHING Now what you do is to watch your breathing. See now, try to reduce your breathing; reduce it, in the sense that you have to breath out, wait for a while, then breathe in. For a long time. Then you breathe out. So during one minute your breathing will be less than normal. Alright? Try that, keep the attention on the emotions, you see? So that the connection is established. Better? See, the Kundalini rises. Now, when you are breathing, you find that there is a space in-between which you just leave vacant. Breathe in. Keep it there. Now breathe out and keep breathing out. Now breathe in. Now start breathing out and keep breathing out. Now breathe in. Now start breathing in such a way, that you really reduce your breathing. Your attention should be on your heart or it could be your emotion, it's better to keep the breathe inside a while. Hold it. Bring it out. Hold out. Then keep it outside for a while. Then again. Then you'll find that for a while you will not breathe. Good. See, you are settled now. The Laya takes place between your Prana and your Mana. Both the Shaktis become one. Now raise your Kundalini up - up on top and tie It up. Again, raise your Kundalini and tie it up thrice. Now at the Sahasrara you should say the mantra of Sahasrara - thrice. Om Twameva Sakshat Shri Kalki Sakshat Shri Sahasrara Swamini Moksha Pradayini Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah. Now it's opened now, if you see, now you can open again your Sahasrara like this. And see that you are stationed there ... Once this has been done then you go into meditation... Reduce your breathing, will be better. You reduce your breathing as if to stop it, but no exertion about it." H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi

 More Amazing facts If you yelled for 8 years, 7 months and 6 days, you would have produced enough sound energy to heat one cup of coffee. The human heart creates enough pressure while pumping to squirt blood 30 feet. On average people fear spiders more than they do death. Saster The strongest muscle in the body is the TONGUE. Liy It's impossible to sneeze with your eyes open. Americans on the average eat 18 acres of pizza every day. Did you know that you are more likely to be killed by a champagne cork than by a poisonous spider? EASTER MNING Right-handed people live, on average, nine years longer than left-handed people do. The dot on top of the letter 'i' is called a tittle. A"hairbreadth away" is 1/48 of an inch. -- The word four has four letters. In the English language there is no other number whose number of letters is equal to its value. Happy Easter The king of hearts is the only king without a moustache. No piece of square dry paper can be folded more than 7 times in half. The ant can lift 50 times its own weight, can pull 30 times its own weight and always falls over on its right side when intoxicated. Polar bears are left handed. The catfish has over 27,000 taste buds, that makes the catfish rank #1 for animal having the most taste buds. The flea can jump 350 times its body length, that is like a human jumping the length of a football field. Butterflies taste with their feet. Elephants are the only animals that can't jump. ( thankfully !!) Mosquitoes do not bite. They stab. A mosquito has no jaws, hence when attacking a victim, it pierces it with its long proboscis and sucks the blood up through it's nasal tube. Starfishes haven't got brains. Encher Gliter Brthers it

 GASTER PUZZLE |X AHAAM VDSN O OYOLDT WSNE ERGB C UJCDD A| |G S VACELEBRATETAL OCOHC GYB MALTTVFY| ID W N Z QINELY R N F C G IOTTIB BARHKYDUGUS| |W P X Z SKRKKT UUBKATMLLILYFCOLORFULMI |S CTRX YZ B W FEPBN P J STTT M CZKUP J Z HRRUI |O Z X Y XS P M U V W X F WIAHP QYIIVG B J HQAKTQ| JE S SOD Y Z WAXLRF W S GK VRAB Y XS N V ILLUNA| |N L ROBINSAC P ALMSUNDAYUCHICKUN NAG UJ |X F Q Y Y W MC VUN W C ME ESZROTSLTTFP W M B X VỊ |W Z C PU X N A T J DE O PRTURUZTUAL JTRF QO P W| |Z IYYMQ JTULIPSODEJJ P JE IGD JYINKN PI| |MLXLC SDRIB S FCAND Y M Z NRTOCLYZQYNK VI |S URPRISESZURK XR Q C B S G F S OF B V E O Q E C F| |G HEIFRLFTW NIVTKG PNUGLQDTPPS J JTG H| |Q R G S F S W J V X DLAM WUKESDYT EV W SR E WOLF| |KCN M D SRW NTALSUNRISETXERTJG WHUNTVI |J W HD M ASSYLYSTRV P S V C C NKIS BRQNG X Q P| JA S VAIRR W KU DFKF SUN HIDE S DUDIU VFUNS| |V TRFX G MDIN N ERAZZECVYRA ACTGALQ R W BỊ |S A UFU P FDILP VEMIAKRR N D BYOMLNL Q S D VI |V H BOIQ KN S J YB ZIEZ CUE WLEIRISE SIVVA |T PJ D V C P N F S VALLB W IHSYIW LC XY NNUBLQ| JU F SIO X L K K T U ZJY F T H C M S H USTQY KLTKR QI |H W TLRVRJB J FKUKGX CYOLCUFAHOETKNL N| Easten Gredings Exiter Groetigs Enster Zlessings Find these words in puzzle BASKET BIRDS BONNET BUNNY CANDY CELEBRATE CHICK BUTTERFLY CHICKENS CHILDREN CHOCOLATE НATS CHURCH COLORFUL CROCUS LENT DAFFODIL DRESS DINNER FAMILY GOODFRIDAY GRASS FLOWERS FRILLS GREEN HUNT IRISES LAMB MASS PALMSUNDAY PRIZES LILY ROBINS SERVICES SUITS RABBIT SUNDAY SUNRISE TULIPS SURPRISES

 AESIC er feet had set tiny patterns into the wet sand, which were soon washed away by the inevitable I Irhythm of the waves. She made her way to the sand castle she had built a day earlier only to find it in ruins. It didn't matter to her. With her plump little hands and plenty of sand, she got to work again. An hour or two passed before she finished her fifth sand castle of the week. She rubbed her hands together sending chunks of dirt into the air and finally stood up to admire her work. 'Mommy,' she yelled, her sounds somewhat muffled by the intermittent breaking of waves. She waved and then ran closer and yelled again. This time her mother heard. 'Look at my castle, Mommy. Isn't it pretty?" Her mother, Lisa, had plenty of praises. The little girl danced around her castle, adding little bits of sand here and there to shape the walls or adjust the size. Lisa knowing that in a couple of hours the castle would go under water. Her daughter seemed to read her mind, 'The big sea is going to take you. So goodbye pretty castle.' She patted the sand down while her mother wondered how her daughter could remain so detached. After so much effort, she was ready to leave it for the sea to destroy. Lisa couldn't imagine the other children in the city being without their toys. when she was not on holiday, Lisa managed a daycare and the children were not an easy lot. They wanted new toys and new games becoming sick of their old ones. She could understand because she did similar things. Lisa booked the family on a beach 14

 Sea shore story holiday because she was sick of work and home. She was even tired of her not-so-old laptop and had been looking out for the next thing. 'The new is only new for day,'she thought introspectively. Here was her daughter who played the same old game everyday, and the mighty waves would devour her tiny creation. But she built the castles again and again, enjoying each second. On the other hand, here was Lisa dissatisfied with her work and with her home routine. She craved for new experiences but soon grew weary of them. If fancy places, flashy gadgets and exotic foods do not satisfy, then the answer can't be in material wealth Lisa thought to herself. Her little girl never cared for any of these. She remained happy with herself wherever she was. The answer is her self. The inner self. For the spirit, nothing is old and boring. Each day is a fresh beginning, and every moment is one of joy. Lisa closed her eyes. Alight ocean-bound breeze enveloped her being and drifted away. When she opened her eyes, she couldn't tell whether her heart expanded into the ocean or the ocean became her heart. She felt one with the nature and in tune with her spirit. Her daughter tugged at her and slipped a coiled shell into her mother's hand. 'The water gave us a gift,' she said pointing ahead. For her daughter it was a game, but Lisa knew she had found a special peace that day. She hugged her daughter tight and thanked the sea, for she couldn't contain her gratitude. The two prepared to return home. She walked away from the ocean leaving behind her worries and attachments. The waves receded towards the setting sun, and then splashed on the shore washing their footprints away. By a Sahajayogini 15

 (१ काम म रा ाम म ु ा ना आप अकेले नहीं हैं... केलकत्ता, १४/४/१९९६ आम् जपको यह सहमझना चाहिए कि आप लोगों का जो उत्थान हुआ है वह आपकी पूर्व जन्म की मेहनत, श्रद्धा के फलस्वरूप हुआ है। इस जन्म में आपको यह बहुत बड़ा आशीर्वाद मिला हुआ है। लोग तो समझते थे कि यह हो ही नहीं सकता। यह आशीर्वाद जो आपने प्राप्त किया है ! आपको ध्यान रखना चाहिए कि आप कोई भी गलत काम न करें। क्योंकि गलत कार्य करने से आपकी जो निर्मलता है, पकड़ में आ जाएगी। मैं आपको ड्रा नहीं रही हूैँ बल्कि यह वास्तविकता बता रही हूँ। आप जो भी करें, अत्यन्त प्रेम से, उसका आनन्द उठाते हुए। हो सकता है आपको कोई परेशान करे । कोई बात नहीं। कितनी देर परेशान करेगा, जो परेशान करेगा, उसका ठिकाना हो जाता है। किसी भी स्तर पर भूलना नहीं कि आप एक सहजयोगी हैं। पहले जमाने में कितने सहजयोगी थे । एक थे सूफी निजामुद्दीन, तो उनकी गर्दन काटने को शाह निकल आए। उन्होंने कहा कि अगर तुम मेरे आगे सिर नहीं झुकाओगे तो तुम्हारी गर्दन काट लेंगे। और दूसरे दिन उसकी गर्दन काट ली। सो अगर कभी ऐसा हो भी तो डरना नहीं क्योंकि आप लोग अब परमात्मा के साम्राज्य में हैं। और इस बात को मद्देनजर रखते हुए आपको समझना चाहिए कि अब आप लोग अकेले नहीं हैं। आप पूर्णतया सुरक्षित हैं और इस सुरक्षा में आप क्यों परेशान होते हैं। 16

 से लोग आते हैं, 'माँ मुझे ये प्राब्लम है, मुझे वो प्राब्लम है।' इसका अर्थ यह है कि आप बहुत सहजयोगी नहीं हैं। जो सहजयोगी होगा उसको कोई समस्या (प्राब्लम) होगी नहीं । क्योंकि आप एक ऊँची जगह पर बैठे हैं। और प्राब्लम नीचे खींचते रहते हैं। यदि आप हर समय प्राब्लम प्राब्लम करते रहें तो सोच लेना चाहिए कि कुछ कमी है आप में। इसके लिए ध्यान करें, धारणा करें। अपने अन्दर धारणा करें कि आप सहजयोगी हैं। इससे आपके अन्दर एक आत्मविश्वास पूर्णतया प्रतीत होता है, लोग भी समझते हैं। आप केवल शांत हो जाएं। आपने चुप्पी लगा ली तो परम चैतन्य पूर्णतया सम्भाल लेगा । एक से एक धुरंधर बैठे हैं। परन्तु यदि आपमें ही दोष होंगे तो कहेंगे, 'इसको डुबकियाँ लगाओ दो-चार।' इस प्रकार ईसामसीह का एक छोटा सा जीवन था केवल ३५ वर्ष का। उसमें भी वे भटकते रहे। और भटकते हुए भारत भी आए। जितना जीवन में उन्होंने कार्य किया उनका नाम लेकर के न जाने लोगों ने कितनी तरह-तरह की संस्थाएं बनाई। ये करना है, वो करना है। झूठ है सब, गड़बड़ है। पर कितना उन्होंने काम किया। उनके मुँह में भी न जाने कैसी -कैसी गलत वस्तुएं डाली गईं। एक झूठी संस्था भी बना ली। जिस हीरे को इन्होंने ढक लिया वो आपके अन्दर में है। आपकी आज्ञा में कार्यान्वित है। आपकी क्षमा शक्ति जितनी बढ़ जाएगी आप उतने ही सहस्रार पर रहेंगे। ईसाई लोगों का तो यह है कि वे पैदा ही हुए ईसाई। उन्हें बस इतना ही मालूम है इसलिए हम उन्हें ईसाई स्वीकार करते हैं । हिन्दुओं को बस कृष्ण ही मालूम है, शिव मालूम है। इसी में खुश रहते हैं। और भाई, आप इससे परे उठ गए, पार हो गए, अब आप स्वयं सूफी हो गए। इन सब चीज़ों में जो सार है उसको आप ग्रहण कीजिए और प्रत्येक चीज़ में सत्य को खोजिए। बहत सी चीज़ों में असत्य है। इन सब धर्मों में जैसे ईसाई धर्म में आप देखिए, वही बात ईसाईयों में भी है और वही बात मुसलमानों में भी है कि जब आप मर जाएंगे तो आप अपने को गाड़ लीजिए। अपना शरीर गाड़ लीजिए। जलाईए मत, और जब आपका पुर्नउत्थान होगा तो आपका यही शरीर पुन: बाहर आ जाएगा, यदि आप परमात्मा के नाम पर मरे हैं और आपने अपना जीवन उसके लिए त्यागा है। अब सोचो ५०० साल बाद क्या चीज़ बाहर सी बातें असत्य भी हैं। बहुत आएगी, यदि आपको गाढ़ दिया जाए? उनसे पूछना चाहिए कि जो हड्डियाँ बच कर आएंगी उनकी क्या स्थिति होगी। यह विश्वास बहुत लोग करते हैं। यह विश्वास इतना गहरा है कि मेरे पास कुछ लोग आए थे। मैंने कहा, 'क्यों मरे जा रहे हो । तुम्हारा तो निराकार में विश्वास है, तुम क्यों जमीन के लिए लड़ रहे हो?' तो उन्होंने मुझे कहा कि हमारे तो शासत्त्र में यह लिखा है कि यदि तुम भगवान के नाम के लिए मरे तो ऐसा-ऐसा होगा। मैंने कहा पहले तो मुझे बताओ कि इसमें भगवान का नाम कहाँ लिखा है । दूसरी बात यह बताओ कि तुम यदि मर गए और तुम्हारा पुर्नउत्थान ५०० वर्ष बाद हुआ, तो अन्दर से क्या निकलेगा? तुम तो कब्रों में जाकर के सारी जमीन ले लेते हो और भूत बनते रहते हो । इस सम्बन्ध में में यह कहती हूँ कि अपने शास्त्र ठीक हैं, कि मरने के बाद आत्मा जो है वो निकल जाता है। और जो जीवात्मा है वह फिर से जन्म लेता है। क्योंकि जीवात्मा मरता नहीं। शरीर का ५०० | 17

 वर्ष बाद पुर्नउत्थान होगा ऐसी बात का विश्वास करना महामूर्खता है । कभी- कभी मैं सोचती हूँ कि ऐसी महामूर्खता को लेकर ये लोग जगह-जगह आपस में लड़ रहे हैं। आज इज़राईल में मारा-मारी हो रही है तो कल दूसरे स्थान पर होगी। यह मारा-मारी हो रही है मात्र धर्म को लेकर। मैंने कल भी बताया था कि सभी धर्म आपस में गुंथे हुए हैं। कोई भी धर्म अलग नहीं है। सभी ने यह वर्णन किया है, फिर यह लड़ाई क्यों, झगड़ा क्यों? यह सब कुछ उन लोगों का किया हुआ है जो अपने को धर्म मार्तण्ड कहते हैं। अब सोचिए कि ईसा मसीह ने एक बहुत बड़ी बात कही कि, 'तुम्हारी दृष्टि स्वच्छ होनी चाहिए। (Thou shall not have adultrous eyes) यानि चित्त में भी (adultery) अस्वच्छता नहीं होनी चाहिए। पर हमने तो विदेश में देखा कि हरेक की आँखे इधर से उधर चलती रहती है। किसी को देखा ही नहीं कि जिसकी आँखें न चल रही हों । केवल सहजयोगियों को छोड़कर। इस प्रकार उनकी (ईसा की) जो विशेष वाणी थी उसका कौन पालन कर रहा है, कौन मान रहा है? कोई नहीं। क्यों? क्योंकि उन्हें आत्मबोध नहीं है। यदि उनको आत्मबोध हो जाता तो आँखें स्थिर हो जाती। उनसे प्यार झलकता है। शान्ति और आनन्द झरता है। यह कैसे हुआ? कि उनकी आँख शुद्ध हो गई। उन्होंने जो कहा था, वह मात्र कहने से थोड़े ही हो सकता है। विदेश में तो यह बीमारी आवश्यकता से अधिक है। तो हमें समझ में आता है कि जो कुछ ईसा मसीह ने कहा हम कर नहीं पाते। कोई सा भी ऐसा धर्म नहीं है जिसमें लोग जो कहते हैं वही करते हैं। कारण वे समर्थ हैं। यानि जो हैं उसका अर्थ नहीं है। कोई कहेगा मैं ईसाई हूँ परन्तु उसकी आँखों में गन्दगी भरी रहेगी । कोई कहेगा मैं जैन हूँ और वह कपड़े की दुकान करेगा। अर्थात जो नहीं करना वही करेंगे। इसका कारण है कि हमारे अन्दर वह धर्म जागृत नहीं हुआ। और सहजयोग में यह जागृत हो जाता है । आत्मसाक्षात्कार होने के बाद, जागृत होने के बाद यदि आप उसका मान नहीं करेंगे तो न जाने आपको क्या-क्या कष्ट झेलने पड़ सकते हैं। इससे पहले आपको जो कष्ट थे, तकलीफें थीं वह महसूस नहीं होंगी। परन्तु अब आप संवेदनशील हो गए हैं। इसलिए समझ लेना चाहिए कि हमने जो इतनी बड़ी चीज़ पाई है उससे हम अलंकृत हो गएं, उससे हम सज गए। अब हमें अपने वैभव में और गौरव में होना चाहिए। जैसे ईसा-मसीह का पुर्नउत्थान हुआ था। वे कब्र से उठे थे, उनका चेहरा बहुत ही खिल गया था, उनकी बातें और भी सुन्दर हो गईं थीं; इसी प्रकार ईसा मसीह सहजयोगी थे। लेकिन उन्होंने उसे प्राप्त किया था आरै आपके लिए उन्होंने प्राण त्यागे कि आपका आज्ञा चक्र खुले। सो अहंकार आदि जो व्याधियाँ हैं उनसे दूर रहना चाहिए। अहंकार जब चढ़ जाता है तो आप कुछ भी हो सकते हैं, हिटलर भी हो सकते हैं। न जाने आप अपने आपको क्या समझ रहे हैं। जिसने हमें इस आज्ञा चक्र से ऊपर उठाया है, उस ईसा मसीह के जीवन को यदि आप देखेंगे कि वे बिल्कुल निर्मल है । इसी प्रकार हमारा जीवन भी पूर्णतया निर्मल होना चाहिए। सहजयोग में विवाह की पूर्ण रूप से व्यवस्था है । हालांकि ईसा मसीह ने विवाह नहीं किया था। उनको कोई जरूरत ही नहीं थी। आपके लिए सभी प्रकार की व्यवस्था है। इस व्यवस्था से आप पूर्ण रूप से सर्व सामान्य लोगों की तरह रह परन्तु सकते हैं और अपनी विशेषता को समझते हुए रहें। ईसा मसीह और सूफी लोग अपनी विशेषता समझते थे । अकेले ही उन्होंने सारे विश्व में कार्य किया। आपके तो सारे विश्व में इतने सारे भाई बहन हैं। कितना आपमें आत्मविश्वास होना चाहिए। आप अकेले नहीं हैं। सभी लेग एक ही बात कहते हैं सबको एक ही चीज़ प्राप्त है। और जब आप इस चीज़ को पाते | हैं तो इसका महत्व समझना चाहिए। इससे अमूल्य और कुछ भी नहीं है। यद्यपि मैं बहुत प्रसन्न हूँ कि कलकत्ते में इतना कार्य हो गया। इतने सहजयोगी हो गए, आपस में बहुत प्रेम है, कोई फूट नहीं, कोई झगड़ा नहीं। यह बहुत बड़ी बात है। मैं सोचती हूँ कि यह देवी की कृपा है कि लेग सहज में उतरते हैं। जैसे पुरुष कार्य कर रहे हैं वैसे स्त्रियों को भी करना चाहिए । जब सब ओर सहजयोग फैल जाएगा तो बंगाल देश बहुत सुन्दर स्वरूप में उतरेगा। आप सबको मेरा अनन्त आशीर्वाद ! 18

 आज मैं स्वयं श्री गणेश की करुंगी पूजा मि ० १४ भार स ४ ১ सुर अीा न की त ४ ९ दूसरी भारत यात्रा के बाद हाल ही में नवीकरण किए गए मैलबोर्न के kew आश्रम में श्रीमाताजी का स्वागत करने का सौभाग्य हमें प्राप्त हुआ। हम श्रीमाताजी के द्वार के सामने ध्यान कर रहे थे और अचानक वे बाहर आईं। 'आज हम समुद्र पर क्यों न चलें? वहाँ हम पूजा कर सकते हैं,' श्रीमाताजी ने कहा। हम सबकी यही इच्छा थी और श्रीमाताजी की बात सुनकर हम बहुत आनन्दित हुए कि हमारी प्रार्थना स्वीकार हो गई है। अत: व्यस्त मधुमक्खियाँ की तरह से हम पूजा के लिए आवश्यक तैयारियाँ करने लगे और कारों में भरकर श्रीमाताजी के पीछे-पीछे समुद्र की ओर चल पड़े। कुल मिलाकर हम १५ सहजयोगी थे तथा मौसम अत्यन्त शानदार था। श्रीमाताजी शॉल बिछी एक चिकनी चट्टान पर बैठ गईं जहाँ उनके चरण कमल समुद्र जल के एक छोटे से तालाब में थें। श्रद्धामिश्रित भयपूर्वक हम उन्हें देखते रहे, हमारी परम पावनी माँ के साथ प्रकृति की गोद में होने का आश्चर्यजनक एहसास! 'आज तुम मेरी पूजा नहीं करोगे, मैं स्वयं श्री गणेश की पूजा करुंगी,' जब हम वहाँ बैठे हुए थे तो श्रीमाताजी ने कहा। मैलबोर्न में मौसम अत्यन्त खुष्क था और पूरे ऑस्ट्रेलिया में चार महीनों से सूखे जैसी स्थिति थी-हम बारिश के लिए तड़प रहे थे। इसी क्षेत्र की झाड़ियों में कई बार आग लग चुकी थी जिसमें बहुत से घर जल गए थे। श्रीमाताजी ने ये करने का निर्णय किया था ताकि ऑस्ट्रेलिया को वर्षा का वरदान प्राप्त हो सके। पूजा उन्होंने रेत पर श्री गणेश की आकृति बनानी आरम्भ की। हम सब निर्विचारिता में श्री आदिशक्ति को श्री गणेश की 19

 यह आकृति बनाते देख रहे थे। हर चीज़ इतनी शान्त थी कि हमें लगा कि हम समय के अन्तराल से ऊपर उठ गए हैं-लहरों के तट पर हुए पहुँचने पर हमें केवल समुद्र की आवाज़ सुनाई दे रही थी। श्रीमाताजी की उपस्थिति से समुद्र मचलने लगा था तथा लहरें ऊँची होकर तेज़ी से आने लगी थीं ! श्रीमाताजी ने ऊपर को देखा । "मेरा जन्म समुद्र से हुआ था, इसी वजह से ये इतना मचल रहा है",' अपना हाथ लहराते हुए उन्होंने कहा। 'कृपा करके शान्त हो जाओ, शान्त हो जाओ,' और तुरन्त एक बार फिर सागर शान्त हो गया। रेत पर श्री गणेश की आकृति बनाते श्रीमाताजी पूर्णतः मौन थीं । चैतन्य लहरियों का प्रवाह अविश्वसनीय था और यह हुए अनुभूति अत्यन्त सुखद थी। उन्होंने अपने श्री गणेश को कुमकुम, हल्दी, अक्षत (चावल) और फूल अर्पण किए। अब ऑस्ट्रेलिया को सूखे की समस्या नहीं रहेगी,' अन्त में श्रीमाताजी ने कहा। हम सब आनन्दविभोर थे और पानी के बीच सभी तो को श्रीमाताजी के चरणकमलों में नतमस्तक होने की आज्ञा प्राप्त हुई। बारी-बारी जब हम उनके चरणकमलों में नतमस्तक हुए उन्होंने पीठ थपथपा के हमें आशीर्वाद दिया। 'अद्भुत, शानदार, बढ़िया,' अपने बच्चों पर करुणा से परिपूर्ण होकर उन्होंने कहा । बाद में हमने मैलबोर्न नगर को देखा जहाँ सायंकाल सार्वजनिक कार्यक्रम होना था । बहुत अधिक नकारात्मकता है!' श्रीमाताजी ने कहा। 'वहाँ पर बहुत काला प्रतीत हो रहा है।' उन्होंने अपना हाथ उठाया। 'आओ आज शाम के कार्यक्रम से पूर्व कुछ नकारात्मकता से मुक्ति पाने का प्रयत्न करें,' उन्होंने कहा। उन्होंने नगर पर अपना हाथ घुमाया और शुद्धिकरण वाली किरणों को आकाश में देखा जा सकता था, शुद्धि किरणें नगर से आकाश की ओर जा रही थीं , उस स्थान पर जहाँ आकाश में लटकी हुई नकारात्मकता को श्रीमाताजी ने शुद्ध किया था। उस रात कार्यक्रम में ४०० से भी अधिक लोग आए। यह मैलबोर्न की सबसे बड़ी संख्या है। सम्पादक की टिप्पणी : एक बार श्रीमाताजी को दक्षिण अफ्रीका के केप शहर के उत्तर स्थित तट पर उगने वाले जंगली फूलों का एक फोटो दिखाया गया था। वे हैरान थीं कि समुद्र तट पर इतने सुन्दर फूल भी उग सकते हैं। 'यहीं पर समुद्र से मेरा अवतरण हुआ था, उन्होंने कहा। परम पावनी माँ की शाश्वत प्रेरक अनुस्मृतियाँ, भाग ४ निर्मला अब 'निर्मला' नाम के अन्तिम अक्षर 'ला' के विषय में विचार करें। मेरा दुसरा नाम है 'ललिता'। यह देवी का आशीर्वाद है। यह उसका आयुध (शस्त्र) है। जब 'ला' अर्थात् 'देवी' ललिता रूप धारण करती है अथवा जब शक्ति ललित अर्थात् क्रियाशील रूप में परिणत होती है अर्थात् जब उस में चैतन्य लहरियाँ प्रवाहित होती हैं, जो आप अपनी हथेलियों पर अनुभव कर रहे हैं, वह शक्ति 'ललिता शक्ति'है। यह सौंदर्य एवं प्रेम से परिपूर्ण है। जब प्रेम की शक्ति जागृत होती है तब वह 'ला' शक्ति बन जाती है। यह आपको चारों ओर से घेर लेती है। जब वह क्रियाशील होती है तब चिन्ता कैसी ? १८ जनवरी १९८० 20

 Sahaja yogis & the problems of the world N: ow as Sahaja Yogis, you are powerful entities. You are very powerful people. IVWE have got problems in the whole world. You know that very well. It's not necessary (that) you have to be great intellectuals, or you have to be people who are some sort of politicians, or something. But you must be on the lookout for the problems, which are troubling this world. You have to. You cannot live in your own world, that you are a saint, "Now I am in Niranand," that's not possible. You can't just be in Nirananda. You have to know that you have to live in this world. And you have to know all the problems of this world. And you have to think about them, not only your problems that, "Mother how will I be able to do this and how will I be able to do that?" But you have to worry about the whole world. You have to think, what's happening in the world. What are the problems of the world? You are responsible for that. Not only that, but you have to pray. In your prayers you have to say, "Mother solve this problem." Collectively, individually, you have to take your attention from yourself, from your smaller life, to a much wider thing. Then you are a saint. And you have to think that it your duty to ask for Divine help, that all these problems should be solved. This is your job for which you are selected. Your asking is your going to work out because as you know, I am desireless. You have to desire for it. Whatever you desire will work out. The protection, the affection, the compassion of Mother is with you. But you have to look after is 21

 this world and show the concern that you have, not to live with very limited areas, and with very limited ways. ... Your problems extend to all the places wherever there is Sahaja Yoga. And you have to worry about all of them.... You have to stretch your attention outside, not inside, just worried about yourself, about your family, about your house, about your children. As soon as you spread your attention outside, your problems are solved in the house, in the smallest circumstance. You have to pay attention outside. ... There are important things that are happening which you can see for yourself. You can scan it out, what are the world problems, and you can see for yourself where you have to put your attention. You should become aware of your personality, it's not a personality that can be completely involved into a very small area. Your personality such should get involved into all the problems of the universe, all the problems there are. And you'll be amazed that everything can work out in a very collective way. .. So stretch out your vibrations. Stretch out your attentions. And you'll be amazed that all other stupid problems that you have will be finished. H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, extract from Introspection and Meditation, Shudy Camps, UK, 18/6/88 But, you people have to look after the side of machines, all right? I mean, handmade things, what can you make? Some ceramics, I think - apologies, some apologies for that. You better do what you know better and let them do what they can do better and share it. If this balance is established, there's no aggression. Unemployment can be solved. All the problems can be solved, if you take to handmade things. You should take to handmade things as far as possible. Sahaja yogis should use handmade things. I mean, not the cars, but for their personal use. Even I would say, soaps that you use are horrid. The soaps that you get in England are not meant for your skins at all, for sahaja yogis' skin. I can't bear them. What you have to use is natural soaps that you get from any country you feel like, but natural soaps, which come from natural oils. Foods also, natural food you must eat, more natural food, than artificial. All that will give you a better living and that is called as alternative, all right. That's alternative is important, but that doesn't mean you go on a bullock cart. You can export your trains to India, or your cars to India and get khadi from there. All right? Mutual understanding, because we are part and parcel of one whole and we just cannot exist by our only growth because then we become malignant, you see. One cells eats another. You have to. If you have a machinery, you have to eat other, because you produce so much. You must find markets for them, you must supply them, you must send over and then you must have other countries to exploit them. H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, extract from Talk, London, 7/6/82

 The discretion of the Ida Nadi is intuition. If you develop that discretion within you, through your meditative powers, you develop intuition. And intuition is nothing but the help of the Ganas, which are surrounding you. If you learn to take help from the Ganas you can become very intuitive and without much intelligence of yours you can say the right thing. The whole of Sahaja Yoga, I would say fifty percent at least out of that, is based on intuition. ... For that you have to develop a proper sense of Shri Ganesh. Shri Ganesh in it's right sense you have to understand. From there it starts because he's Ganapati, he's the one who is the master, is the chief of all the Ganas. So the Ganas give you the intuition. - 10th July 1988 Published & Printed by Nirmal Transformation Put. Ltd. No. 8, Chandragupta Co-op Housing Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune, Maharashtra, India - 411 038 © : 25286537, 25286032 email:sale@nitl.co.in website: www.nitl.co.in (For queries & sending articles contact on above address)

 I wonder how many Christians know the significance of an egg. Now egg signifies a stage where you are, before Realisation. When you are in your egg shell - that you are Mr X, you are Mrs Y. But, when you mature fully inside, the bird is ready and that is the time you are hatched. This is the time you get twice-born. So, the Resurrection of Christ signifies that, and that's why we give that egg to people, saying you are that, an egg, a reminder of that. And this egg can become a Spirit. (from Shri Mataji's Puja address, Easter Puja, 1982)



----------------------

2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Yuva
June
2010
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 56
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 INSIDE
THIS ISSUE
Mother's Words 4
Balance 8
आप अकेले नहीं हैं... 16
AND MORE
Horseshoe 7
Breathing 11
More Amazing Facts 12
Sahaja yogis &
the problems of the
Easter Puzzle 13
world 21
Sea Shore Story 14
आज मैं स्वयं श्री गणेश की
करुंगी 19
पूजा
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Whatever Mother
has to be just listened to... that'
says
all. Mother says to you things which should not hurt
you in any way, and you should not take it that
seriously... but understand that... next time... we
should not
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Mother's
Words
Ws
hen Mother is talking, we should think 'Mother is talking to ME' or 'about ME' (860305); It's not
V V for anyone else I am saying... I am saying it for each one of you (871224); Now my talks should
not be a waste... again, please listen to me... I'm addressing to you... all of you... remember that. Do
not think that I'm addressing to somebody else... it is to you all (850629); We should listen to the
Mother, in the form of whom, the whole of the Brahmachaitanya has come, to shower us with the
Chaitanya, to enrich us, to nurture us, to develop us. She is the Master of Sahastrara, the Master of all
the chakras. But she is beyond the Sahastrara-much beyond. Such is the situation that we must listen
to whatever she says, and we should obey Her (870503.1); Anything that Mother tells us, we should
not take, or do to extreme (830204); There are certain problems that arise sometimes when we don't
listen to Mother (880101)
In general Mother has to tell us things which we should understand is for our good, for our enjoyment.
Everything is to increase our enjoyment... even our ascent is to increase our enjoyment... our
sensitivity to joy (881211); Whatever Mother says has to be just listened to... that' all. Mother says to
you things which should not hurt you in any way, and you should not take it that seriously... but
understand that... next time... we should not (881211)
You must all individually also work it out that you study Sahaja Yoga in a way. In most of the tapes
whatever I have said can be seen... found out... what is said about health... what is said about
children... because I spontaneously say things.... and if you can sort it out you will know so many
things... I mean if you sit down and do a study of these tapes it will help you to find out so many little
little things that are so important for life. You can clarify it... can note it down... that this Mother said
about these things... it will be very good for us to sort it out this way... what point is to be noted down in
different headings... can put different different headings, and jot it down. Mother has said 'so'... Mother
has said 'so'... whatever is not on the tape you should not listen to... whatever is on tape is authentic...
whatever is recorded already should be accepted (890725); We must have one tape each-sit down
and listen again and again-with pencil and paper, and see what I am saying. Every tape should be with
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 OT AE
R's
WORD S
you (890611)
After listening to my lectures, you just go into meditation... actually my lectures are not to be
understood by your brains, but by your Kundalini... and through your heart. So it doesn't matter it you
don't remember something... It's alright... but it will come handy whenever you want to use it... some
words or sentences.... you will not know from where it is coming... it's all recorded (880921); We
record Mother's Vibrations and superimpose Mother's Lecture on that, so that it has double effect
(791009.1)
Whatever I have said, say, in the beginning of Sahaja Yoga is... not different, but... it's all...
rudimentary-what I have said in this Guru Puja... I would not have said in the beginning... would I
have. So the 'awareness' also, has to rise... to understand it, you see... this is very important
(860707.2); When I say the truth, you get the vibrations.... so you can find out the truth... so, if Iam
telling the truth or not, you can find out. But, is it possible that when I am speaking here, you don't feel
the vibrations... if you are not getting the vibrations... always it is wrong with you, not with me. So how
to find out whether I am telling the truth or not... that is Mahamaya... it's just a play you see... just fun
(860707.2)
Now you people don't misunderstand me so much as you used to... but still you do things which should
not be done. To understand that whatever I tell you is for your ascent , you need a kind of a state of
mind which is a detached mind. The detached mind is visible... very clear-cut in a person that he's
neither very emotionally attached... and he's not very physically attached... but he sees that the
progress of himself and of the society is the point... like the cell knows it has to progress for the
betterment of the tree... but it has innate wisdom to do it in such a way that it never harms itself... and
does not harm the tree. So the progress of a mind which one should develop, has to be such that you
should move with a balance... with a witness state... and see for yourself how far you should go... and
how far you should not go. Going to extremes is not Sahaja Yoga style... ascent is (850310)
Recently they found out the books written by Thomas, the disciple of Christ who was coming to India.
On his way he went to Egypt... and there he wrote the treatise... and he put in a big earthen vessel....
or perhaps it was a metallic thing... and it was discovered 42 years back. The people whom he
considered to be authorised Christians he calls as Gnostics... Gna means to know. He has written... to
know and to have the personal experience is the only way to follow Christ clearly. Not only that but he
said that God Almighty who is so kind... why will he ask you to suffer... so he challenges all the
Christian principles of suffering. In the same way in all the Religions people have diverted from the
right path... and have come to the wrong path... and are indulging into self created Religions which
have no relationship with Reality... of with the incarnations... those who started the Religions.... or
who gave the ideas of Religions-l hope you won't do that to me... because you are Gnostic people....
you are the ones who know... who have had Self Realisation (871219)
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Horseshoe
Horseshoe is auspicious...do you know that in modern times the
symbol of Sahaja Yoga is a horseshoe shape...it has many
meanings....but why that shape is auspicious people did not
know. People do not know why one thing is auspicious ...and
another thing is not auspicious. Now this has been in England for
years....people were using horseshoe as an auspicious thing
..and it is ...100%...the shape of a horseshoe emits vibrations
...you can see for yourself...the shape ....is the shape how the
Shakti moves....how the power moves....always
...elliptical...like if I love this person, the vibrations will go
like this.....elliptical....like If I love this person, the vibrations
will go like this....and embrace her and then will come back...but
it can be 360 degrees it moves. The whole creation took place by
the movement ofthe Shakti like this.
like this
Shri Mataji, 21/7/1980
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Balance
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Bi
alance is needed for our ascent (830512); First put the left hand towards the
Mother, or towards the Photo, and the right hand out, then put the left hand
up, and the right hand towards the Mother (791118); If you don't have a balance,
you'll just get vibrations in one hand (830512); If you feel vibrations equally in
both hands, this means that you are in balance, that you are balanced (830202);
If there is a disparity, then adjust it by giving a bandhan (811103)
You are not only a physical being... you are also an emotional being. If you pay
too much attention to your physical side, you can become a dry personality....
absolutely. Such a person gets heart troubles.... because the spirit resides in the
heart, and if you are too much physical, then the heart goes out-you must pay
attention to your spirit. So you are not onlya physical being... you are also mental
being... you are an emotional being... and, a spiritual being... all these must be
integrated... and there should be a complete balance (821008)
You can find out in a second whether you are on a conditioning side or not.... if the
left side is catching, then you are conditioned, and may suffer from pains etc. If
the right side is catching, then you are on an ego trip, and may have health
problems. Or you may be wobbly (800517.1); If you use any one of these
powers, superego and ego, too much... then the other one gets frozen (811006)
If we are feeling sleepy, or lazy... then put Right to Left 7 times, with the Right
hand, whilst watching Mother, or it can be done also with the Photo (821101);
Those who have left hand problems... means who have left side problems...
should raise their right... all of you (800721); If the right hand is burning but not
the left hand.... that is when a person is right sided, being an intellectual or
futuristic person (830512), the left side subtle system is raised and taken over to
the right side by movement.. of the right hand, to bring the system into balance
(830121); If we have ego, we should raise the left side, and put it to the right
side... there's no other way out... you have to work it out with your hands
(830121)
To get into the centre, to achieve balance first we move out of the left side to the
right side, and from there to the centre. If you are feeling lethargic, are unable to
get up, or are feeling sleepy or not alert, plan what you will do and get into action.
Even doing Puja is a good idea. Then when you are into action, in order to get into
the centre, just watch everything, just witness... say to yourself that you are not
doing it (800517.2)
The right side is like an accelerator, whilst the left side is like the brake. So if the
Mooladhara is not in control, if the brake is not alright, then the accelerator
cannot be controlled. So we should work very hard so that our Mooladhara is
brought round and is put right, and our brake is established. Then whatever work
you do for Sahaja Yoga, you will not get into ego practices. It is especially
important in the West, where the idea of auspiciousness and holiness is being
destroyed (890423)
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Some people are negative in the sense that they are on the left hand side, and
some people are negative because they are on the right hand side. Some times
these combinations work very well. When a dominating man tries to dominate a
left hand person, they are great friends... because one dominates and the other
takes domination. As soon as the left hand person comes on the centre or tries to
come to the right, the dominating one starts clashing... then they are the worst of
enemies. It happens like that... so be on the alert (800927).
Now a person who is on the left should try to come in the centre... and in the same
way a person who is on the right side should come to the centre. Now how do you
do it... a person who is on the right side should try to become friendly with the left
sided person, and the left hand side person should try to be friendly with the right
sided person. So what is the give and take in this. The right sided person will be a
better organiser may be.... may be not at least will be a better orator, or may be a
better sort of a leader... may not be... you can't say... he may be the one who will
suggest things and who will bring out things... who will say 'l'll do this sort of thing
maybe.' The left hand person will be frightened, but will be humble, loving, more
affectionate... he'll be much more at the command of others. This one will be
commanding and the other will be receiving the commands (800927)
Now how do we solve the problem of this mixture. The one who is very much on
the ego side should try to obey the person who is on the left side, and the left
sided should try to command more on the right hand person... and it should be
accepted.... it should be mutually understood.... there should be a contract....
alright I am the ego oriented person, and you are the superego oriented, now let
us do one thing... you try to dominate me, and l'll try to obey you... it will work out
(800927)
But it is rather difficult to get a left sided person here (UK).... there are very few...
some were left sided, but when it came to ego... they were worse than anybody
else. But, you can have a left sided person.... and let him dominate... till he
develops his ego he's alright... if he develops, then he should stop it... but with
complete understanding, watching yourself... how you develop, how far you
go... a play should go on. But if you are identifying with yourself that I am always
right, or nobody's right, then nothing can work out. So the best way to do this sort
of thing is.... 'alright you order, and l'll do'... 'let you organise and we'll do it... you
tell us how to do it.' Let us decide to improve ourselves, and not to feel bad about
it... we have to improve a lot (800927)
The job of a guru is to give balance to others... if you have the Guru Principle
within you, you get into balance automatically (920719); A guru is not ascetic by
nature... but he's so detached, that he's ascetic.... he may be a king... or a
beggar.... or maybe a big personality... or just an ordinary person... nothing can
disturb him... and he can never go into imbalance (920719)
10
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 BREATHING
Now what you do is to watch your breathing. See now, try to reduce your breathing; reduce it, in the
sense that you have to breath out, wait for a while, then breathe in. For a long time. Then you breathe
out. So during one minute your breathing will be less than normal. Alright?
Try that, keep the attention on the emotions, you see? So that the connection is established.
Better? See, the Kundalini rises.
Now, when you are breathing, you find that there is a space in-between which you just leave vacant.
Breathe in. Keep it there.
Now breathe out and keep breathing out.
Now breathe in.
Now start breathing out and keep breathing out.
Now breathe in.
Now start breathing in such a way, that you really reduce your breathing.
Your attention should be on your heart or it could be your emotion, it's better to keep the breathe inside
a while.
Hold it.
Bring it out.
Hold out.
Then keep it outside for a while.
Then again.
Then you'll find that for a while you will not breathe.
Good. See, you are settled now.
The Laya takes place between your Prana and your Mana. Both the Shaktis become one.
Now raise your Kundalini up - up on top and tie It up. Again, raise your Kundalini and tie it up thrice.
Now at the Sahasrara you should say the mantra of Sahasrara - thrice.
Om Twameva Sakshat Shri Kalki Sakshat
Shri Sahasrara Swamini Moksha Pradayini Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah.
Now it's opened now, if you see, now you can open again your Sahasrara like this. And see that you are
stationed there ... Once this has been done then you go into meditation...
Reduce your breathing, will be better. You reduce your breathing as if to stop it, but no exertion about
it."
H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 More
Amazing facts
If you yelled for 8 years, 7 months and 6 days, you would have produced enough sound energy to
heat one cup of coffee.
The human heart creates enough pressure while pumping to squirt blood 30 feet.
On average people fear spiders more than they do death.
Saster
The strongest muscle in the body is the TONGUE.
Liy
It's impossible to sneeze with your eyes open.
Americans on the average eat 18 acres of pizza every day.
Did you know that you are more likely to be killed by a champagne cork than by a poisonous spider?
EASTER MNING
Right-handed people live, on average, nine years longer than left-handed people do.
The dot on top of the letter 'i' is called a tittle.
A"hairbreadth away" is 1/48 of an inch.
--
The word four has four letters. In the English language there is no other number whose number of
letters is equal to its value.
Happy
Easter
The king of hearts is the only king without a moustache.
No piece of square dry paper can be folded more than 7 times in half.
The ant can lift 50 times its own weight, can pull 30 times its own weight and always falls over on its
right side when intoxicated.
Polar bears are left handed.
The catfish has over 27,000 taste buds, that makes the catfish rank #1 for animal having the most
taste buds.
The flea can jump 350 times its body length, that is like a human jumping the length of a football
field.
Butterflies taste with their feet.
Elephants are the only animals that can't jump. ( thankfully !!)
Mosquitoes do not bite. They stab. A mosquito has no jaws, hence when attacking a victim, it
pierces it with its long proboscis and sucks the blood up through it's nasal tube.
Starfishes haven't got brains.
Encher
Gliter
Brthers it
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 GASTER PUZZLE
|X AHAAM VDSN O OYOLDT WSNE ERGB C UJCDD A|
|G S VACELEBRATETAL OCOHC GYB MALTTVFY|
ID W N Z QINELY R N F C G IOTTIB BARHKYDUGUS|
|W P X Z SKRKKT UUBKATMLLILYFCOLORFULMI
|S CTRX YZ B W FEPBN P J STTT M CZKUP J Z HRRUI
|O Z X Y XS P M U V W X F WIAHP QYIIVG B J HQAKTQ|
JE S SOD Y Z WAXLRF W S GK VRAB Y XS N V ILLUNA|
|N L ROBINSAC P ALMSUNDAYUCHICKUN NAG UJ
|X F Q Y Y W MC VUN W C ME ESZROTSLTTFP W M B X VỊ
|W Z C PU X N A T J DE O PRTURUZTUAL JTRF QO P W|
|Z IYYMQ JTULIPSODEJJ P JE IGD JYINKN PI|
|MLXLC SDRIB S FCAND Y M Z NRTOCLYZQYNK VI
|S URPRISESZURK XR Q C B S G F S OF B V E O Q E C F|
|G HEIFRLFTW NIVTKG PNUGLQDTPPS J JTG H|
|Q R G S F S W J V X DLAM WUKESDYT EV W SR E WOLF|
|KCN M D SRW NTALSUNRISETXERTJG WHUNTVI
|J W HD M ASSYLYSTRV P S V C C NKIS BRQNG X Q P|
JA S VAIRR W KU DFKF SUN HIDE S DUDIU VFUNS|
|V TRFX G MDIN N ERAZZECVYRA ACTGALQ R W BỊ
|S A UFU P FDILP VEMIAKRR N D BYOMLNL Q S D VI
|V H BOIQ KN S J YB ZIEZ CUE WLEIRISE SIVVA
|T PJ D V C P N F S VALLB W IHSYIW LC XY NNUBLQ|
JU F SIO X L K K T U ZJY F T H C M S H USTQY KLTKR QI
|H W TLRVRJB J FKUKGX CYOLCUFAHOETKNL N|
Easten
Gredings
Exiter
Groetigs
Enster
Zlessings
Find these words in puzzle
BASKET
BIRDS
BONNET
BUNNY
CANDY
CELEBRATE
CHICK
BUTTERFLY
CHICKENS
CHILDREN
CHOCOLATE
НATS
CHURCH
COLORFUL
CROCUS
LENT
DAFFODIL
DRESS
DINNER
FAMILY
GOODFRIDAY GRASS
FLOWERS
FRILLS
GREEN
HUNT
IRISES
LAMB
MASS
PALMSUNDAY
PRIZES
LILY
ROBINS
SERVICES
SUITS
RABBIT
SUNDAY
SUNRISE
TULIPS
SURPRISES
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 AESIC
er feet had set tiny patterns into the wet sand, which were soon washed away by the inevitable
I Irhythm of the waves. She made her way to the sand castle she had built a day earlier only to find
it in ruins. It didn't matter to her. With her plump little hands and plenty of sand, she got to work again.
An hour or two passed before she finished her fifth sand castle of the week. She rubbed her hands
together sending chunks of dirt into the air and finally stood up to admire her work.
'Mommy,' she yelled, her sounds somewhat muffled by the intermittent breaking of waves.
She waved and then ran closer and yelled again. This time her mother heard.
'Look at my castle, Mommy. Isn't it pretty?"
Her mother, Lisa, had plenty of praises. The little girl danced around her castle, adding little bits of
sand here and there to shape the walls or adjust the size. Lisa knowing that in a couple of hours the
castle would go under water.
Her daughter seemed to read her mind, 'The big sea is going to take you. So goodbye pretty castle.'
She patted the sand down while her mother wondered how her daughter could remain so detached.
After so much effort, she was ready to leave it for the sea to destroy. Lisa couldn't imagine the other
children in the city being without their toys. when she was not on holiday, Lisa managed a daycare
and the children were not an easy lot. They wanted new toys and new games becoming sick of their
old ones. She could understand because she did similar things. Lisa booked the family on a beach
14
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Sea shore story
holiday because she was sick of work and home. She was even tired of her not-so-old laptop and
had been looking out for the next thing.
'The new is only new for day,'she thought introspectively.
Here was her daughter who played the same old game everyday, and the mighty waves would
devour her tiny creation. But she built the castles again and again, enjoying each second. On the
other hand, here was Lisa dissatisfied with her work and with her home routine. She craved for new
experiences but soon grew weary of them.
If fancy places, flashy gadgets and exotic foods do not satisfy, then the answer can't be in material
wealth Lisa thought to herself. Her little girl never cared for any of these. She remained happy with
herself wherever she was. The answer is her self. The inner self. For the spirit, nothing is old and
boring. Each day is a fresh beginning, and every moment is one of joy.
Lisa closed her eyes. Alight ocean-bound breeze enveloped her being and drifted away.
When she opened her eyes, she couldn't tell whether her heart expanded into the ocean or the
ocean became her heart. She felt one with the nature and in tune with her spirit. Her daughter tugged
at her and slipped a coiled shell into her mother's hand.
'The water gave us a gift,' she said pointing ahead.
For her daughter it was a game, but Lisa knew she had found a special peace that day. She hugged
her daughter tight and thanked the sea, for she couldn't contain her gratitude. The two prepared to
return home. She walked away from the ocean leaving behind her worries and attachments. The
waves receded towards the setting sun, and then splashed on the shore washing their footprints
away.
By a Sahajayogini
15
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 (१
काम
म
रा
ाम
म
ु
ा
ना
आप अकेले नहीं हैं...
केलकत्ता, १४/४/१९९६
आम्
जपको यह सहमझना चाहिए कि आप लोगों का जो उत्थान हुआ है वह आपकी पूर्व जन्म की मेहनत, श्रद्धा के फलस्वरूप
हुआ है। इस जन्म में आपको यह बहुत बड़ा आशीर्वाद मिला हुआ है। लोग तो समझते थे कि यह हो ही नहीं सकता। यह आशीर्वाद जो
आपने प्राप्त किया है ! आपको ध्यान रखना चाहिए कि आप कोई भी गलत काम न करें। क्योंकि गलत कार्य करने से आपकी जो निर्मलता
है, पकड़ में आ जाएगी। मैं आपको ड्रा नहीं रही हूैँ बल्कि यह वास्तविकता बता रही हूँ। आप जो भी करें, अत्यन्त प्रेम से, उसका आनन्द
उठाते हुए। हो सकता है आपको कोई परेशान करे । कोई बात नहीं। कितनी देर परेशान करेगा, जो परेशान करेगा, उसका ठिकाना हो जाता है।
किसी भी स्तर पर भूलना नहीं कि आप एक सहजयोगी हैं। पहले जमाने में कितने सहजयोगी थे । एक थे सूफी निजामुद्दीन, तो उनकी गर्दन
काटने को शाह निकल आए। उन्होंने कहा कि अगर तुम मेरे आगे सिर नहीं झुकाओगे तो तुम्हारी गर्दन काट लेंगे। और दूसरे दिन उसकी
गर्दन काट ली। सो अगर कभी ऐसा हो भी तो डरना नहीं क्योंकि आप लोग अब परमात्मा के साम्राज्य में हैं। और इस बात को मद्देनजर रखते
हुए आपको समझना चाहिए कि अब आप लोग अकेले नहीं हैं। आप पूर्णतया सुरक्षित हैं और इस सुरक्षा में आप क्यों परेशान होते हैं।
16
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 से लोग आते हैं, 'माँ मुझे ये प्राब्लम है, मुझे वो प्राब्लम है।' इसका अर्थ यह है कि आप
बहुत
सहजयोगी नहीं हैं। जो सहजयोगी होगा उसको कोई समस्या (प्राब्लम) होगी नहीं । क्योंकि आप एक
ऊँची जगह पर बैठे हैं। और प्राब्लम नीचे खींचते रहते हैं। यदि आप हर समय प्राब्लम प्राब्लम करते रहें
तो सोच लेना चाहिए कि कुछ कमी है आप में। इसके लिए ध्यान करें, धारणा करें। अपने अन्दर धारणा
करें कि आप सहजयोगी हैं। इससे आपके अन्दर एक आत्मविश्वास पूर्णतया प्रतीत होता है, लोग भी
समझते हैं। आप केवल शांत हो जाएं। आपने चुप्पी लगा ली तो परम चैतन्य पूर्णतया सम्भाल लेगा । एक
से एक धुरंधर बैठे हैं। परन्तु यदि आपमें ही दोष होंगे तो कहेंगे, 'इसको डुबकियाँ लगाओ दो-चार।'
इस प्रकार ईसामसीह का एक छोटा सा जीवन था केवल ३५ वर्ष का। उसमें भी वे भटकते रहे। और
भटकते
हुए भारत भी आए। जितना जीवन में उन्होंने कार्य किया उनका नाम लेकर के न जाने लोगों ने
कितनी तरह-तरह की संस्थाएं बनाई। ये करना है, वो करना है। झूठ है सब, गड़बड़ है। पर कितना
उन्होंने काम किया। उनके मुँह में भी न जाने कैसी -कैसी गलत वस्तुएं डाली गईं। एक झूठी संस्था भी
बना ली। जिस हीरे को इन्होंने ढक लिया वो आपके अन्दर में है। आपकी आज्ञा में कार्यान्वित है।
आपकी क्षमा शक्ति जितनी बढ़ जाएगी आप उतने ही सहस्रार पर रहेंगे। ईसाई लोगों का तो यह है कि वे
पैदा ही हुए ईसाई। उन्हें बस इतना ही मालूम है इसलिए हम उन्हें ईसाई स्वीकार करते हैं । हिन्दुओं को
बस कृष्ण ही मालूम है, शिव मालूम है। इसी में खुश रहते हैं। और भाई, आप इससे परे उठ गए, पार हो
गए, अब आप स्वयं सूफी हो गए। इन सब चीज़ों में जो सार है उसको आप ग्रहण कीजिए और प्रत्येक
चीज़ में सत्य को खोजिए। बहत सी चीज़ों में असत्य है। इन सब धर्मों में
जैसे ईसाई धर्म में आप देखिए, वही बात ईसाईयों में भी है और वही बात मुसलमानों में भी है कि जब
आप मर जाएंगे तो आप अपने को गाड़ लीजिए। अपना शरीर गाड़ लीजिए। जलाईए मत, और जब
आपका पुर्नउत्थान होगा तो आपका यही शरीर पुन: बाहर आ जाएगा, यदि आप परमात्मा के नाम पर
मरे हैं और आपने अपना जीवन उसके लिए त्यागा है। अब सोचो ५०० साल बाद क्या चीज़ बाहर
सी बातें असत्य भी हैं।
बहुत
आएगी, यदि आपको गाढ़ दिया जाए? उनसे पूछना चाहिए कि जो हड्डियाँ बच कर आएंगी उनकी क्या
स्थिति होगी। यह विश्वास बहुत लोग करते हैं। यह विश्वास इतना गहरा है कि मेरे पास कुछ लोग आए
थे। मैंने कहा, 'क्यों मरे जा रहे हो । तुम्हारा तो निराकार में विश्वास है, तुम क्यों जमीन के लिए लड़ रहे
हो?' तो उन्होंने मुझे कहा कि हमारे तो शासत्त्र में यह लिखा है कि यदि तुम भगवान के नाम के लिए मरे तो
ऐसा-ऐसा होगा। मैंने कहा पहले तो मुझे बताओ कि इसमें भगवान का नाम कहाँ लिखा है । दूसरी बात
यह बताओ कि तुम यदि मर गए और तुम्हारा पुर्नउत्थान ५०० वर्ष बाद हुआ, तो अन्दर से क्या
निकलेगा? तुम तो कब्रों में जाकर के सारी जमीन ले लेते हो और भूत बनते रहते हो ।
इस सम्बन्ध में में यह कहती हूँ कि अपने शास्त्र ठीक हैं, कि मरने के बाद आत्मा जो है वो निकल
जाता है। और जो जीवात्मा है वह फिर से जन्म लेता है। क्योंकि जीवात्मा मरता नहीं। शरीर का ५००
|
17
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 वर्ष बाद पुर्नउत्थान होगा ऐसी बात का विश्वास करना महामूर्खता है । कभी- कभी मैं सोचती हूँ कि ऐसी महामूर्खता को
लेकर ये लोग जगह-जगह आपस में लड़ रहे हैं। आज इज़राईल में मारा-मारी हो रही है तो कल दूसरे स्थान पर होगी। यह
मारा-मारी हो रही है मात्र धर्म को लेकर। मैंने कल भी बताया था कि सभी धर्म आपस में गुंथे हुए हैं। कोई भी धर्म अलग
नहीं है। सभी ने यह वर्णन किया है, फिर यह लड़ाई क्यों, झगड़ा क्यों? यह सब कुछ उन लोगों का किया हुआ है जो अपने
को धर्म मार्तण्ड कहते हैं। अब सोचिए कि ईसा मसीह ने एक बहुत बड़ी बात कही कि, 'तुम्हारी दृष्टि स्वच्छ होनी चाहिए।
(Thou shall not have adultrous eyes) यानि चित्त में भी (adultery) अस्वच्छता नहीं होनी चाहिए। पर हमने तो विदेश
में देखा कि हरेक की आँखे इधर से उधर चलती रहती है। किसी को देखा ही नहीं कि जिसकी आँखें न चल रही हों । केवल
सहजयोगियों को छोड़कर। इस प्रकार उनकी (ईसा की) जो विशेष वाणी थी उसका कौन पालन कर रहा है, कौन मान रहा
है? कोई नहीं। क्यों? क्योंकि उन्हें आत्मबोध नहीं है। यदि उनको आत्मबोध हो जाता तो आँखें स्थिर हो जाती। उनसे प्यार
झलकता है। शान्ति और आनन्द झरता है। यह कैसे हुआ? कि उनकी आँख शुद्ध हो गई। उन्होंने जो कहा था, वह मात्र
कहने से थोड़े ही हो सकता है। विदेश में तो यह बीमारी आवश्यकता से अधिक है। तो हमें समझ में आता है कि जो
कुछ
ईसा मसीह ने कहा हम कर नहीं पाते। कोई सा भी ऐसा धर्म नहीं है जिसमें लोग जो कहते हैं वही करते हैं। कारण वे समर्थ हैं।
यानि जो हैं उसका अर्थ नहीं है। कोई कहेगा मैं ईसाई हूँ परन्तु उसकी आँखों में गन्दगी भरी रहेगी । कोई कहेगा मैं जैन हूँ और
वह कपड़े की दुकान करेगा। अर्थात जो नहीं करना वही करेंगे। इसका कारण है कि हमारे अन्दर वह धर्म जागृत नहीं हुआ।
और सहजयोग में यह जागृत हो जाता है । आत्मसाक्षात्कार होने के बाद, जागृत होने के बाद यदि आप उसका
मान नहीं करेंगे तो न जाने आपको क्या-क्या कष्ट झेलने पड़ सकते हैं। इससे पहले आपको जो कष्ट थे,
तकलीफें थीं वह महसूस नहीं होंगी। परन्तु अब आप संवेदनशील हो गए हैं। इसलिए समझ लेना चाहिए कि हमने जो इतनी
बड़ी चीज़ पाई है उससे हम अलंकृत हो गएं, उससे हम सज गए। अब हमें अपने वैभव में और गौरव में होना चाहिए। जैसे
ईसा-मसीह का पुर्नउत्थान हुआ था। वे कब्र से उठे थे, उनका चेहरा बहुत ही खिल गया था, उनकी बातें और भी सुन्दर हो
गईं थीं; इसी प्रकार ईसा मसीह सहजयोगी थे। लेकिन उन्होंने उसे प्राप्त किया था आरै आपके लिए उन्होंने प्राण त्यागे कि
आपका आज्ञा चक्र खुले। सो अहंकार आदि जो व्याधियाँ हैं उनसे दूर रहना चाहिए। अहंकार जब चढ़ जाता है तो आप कुछ
भी हो सकते हैं, हिटलर भी हो सकते हैं। न जाने आप अपने आपको क्या समझ रहे हैं। जिसने हमें इस आज्ञा चक्र से ऊपर
उठाया है, उस ईसा मसीह के जीवन को यदि आप देखेंगे कि वे बिल्कुल निर्मल है । इसी प्रकार हमारा जीवन भी पूर्णतया
निर्मल होना चाहिए।
सहजयोग में विवाह की पूर्ण रूप से व्यवस्था है । हालांकि ईसा मसीह ने विवाह नहीं किया था। उनको कोई जरूरत ही
नहीं थी।
आपके लिए सभी प्रकार की व्यवस्था है। इस व्यवस्था से आप पूर्ण रूप से सर्व सामान्य लोगों की तरह रह
परन्तु
सकते हैं और अपनी विशेषता को समझते हुए रहें। ईसा मसीह और सूफी लोग अपनी विशेषता समझते थे । अकेले ही
उन्होंने सारे विश्व में कार्य किया। आपके तो सारे विश्व में इतने सारे भाई बहन हैं। कितना आपमें आत्मविश्वास होना
चाहिए। आप अकेले नहीं हैं। सभी लेग एक ही बात कहते हैं सबको एक ही चीज़ प्राप्त है। और जब आप इस चीज़ को पाते
|
हैं तो इसका महत्व समझना चाहिए। इससे अमूल्य और कुछ भी नहीं है।
यद्यपि मैं बहुत प्रसन्न हूँ कि कलकत्ते में इतना कार्य हो गया। इतने सहजयोगी हो गए, आपस में बहुत प्रेम है, कोई फूट
नहीं, कोई झगड़ा नहीं। यह बहुत बड़ी बात है। मैं सोचती हूँ कि यह देवी की कृपा है कि लेग सहज में उतरते हैं। जैसे पुरुष
कार्य कर रहे हैं वैसे स्त्रियों को भी करना चाहिए । जब सब ओर सहजयोग फैल जाएगा तो बंगाल देश बहुत सुन्दर स्वरूप में
उतरेगा।
आप सबको मेरा अनन्त आशीर्वाद !
18
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 आज मैं स्वयं श्री गणेश की
करुंगी
पूजा
मि
०
१४
भार
स
४
১
सुर
अीा
न
की
त
४
९
दूसरी भारत यात्रा के बाद हाल ही में नवीकरण किए गए मैलबोर्न के kew आश्रम में श्रीमाताजी का स्वागत करने
का सौभाग्य हमें प्राप्त हुआ। हम श्रीमाताजी के द्वार के सामने ध्यान कर रहे थे और अचानक वे बाहर आईं।
'आज हम समुद्र पर क्यों न चलें? वहाँ हम पूजा कर सकते हैं,' श्रीमाताजी ने कहा। हम सबकी यही इच्छा थी और
श्रीमाताजी की बात सुनकर हम बहुत आनन्दित हुए कि हमारी प्रार्थना स्वीकार हो गई है। अत: व्यस्त मधुमक्खियाँ की
तरह से हम पूजा के लिए आवश्यक तैयारियाँ करने लगे और कारों में भरकर श्रीमाताजी के पीछे-पीछे समुद्र की ओर चल
पड़े। कुल मिलाकर हम १५ सहजयोगी थे तथा मौसम अत्यन्त शानदार था। श्रीमाताजी शॉल बिछी एक चिकनी चट्टान पर
बैठ गईं जहाँ उनके चरण कमल समुद्र जल के एक छोटे से तालाब में थें। श्रद्धामिश्रित भयपूर्वक हम उन्हें देखते रहे, हमारी
परम पावनी माँ के साथ प्रकृति की गोद में होने का आश्चर्यजनक एहसास!
'आज तुम मेरी पूजा नहीं करोगे, मैं स्वयं श्री गणेश की पूजा करुंगी,' जब हम वहाँ बैठे हुए थे तो श्रीमाताजी ने कहा।
मैलबोर्न में मौसम अत्यन्त खुष्क था और पूरे ऑस्ट्रेलिया में चार महीनों से सूखे जैसी स्थिति थी-हम बारिश के लिए
तड़प रहे थे। इसी क्षेत्र की झाड़ियों में कई बार आग लग चुकी थी जिसमें बहुत से घर जल गए थे। श्रीमाताजी ने ये
करने का निर्णय किया था ताकि ऑस्ट्रेलिया को वर्षा का वरदान प्राप्त हो सके।
पूजा
उन्होंने रेत पर श्री गणेश की आकृति बनानी आरम्भ की। हम सब निर्विचारिता में श्री आदिशक्ति को श्री गणेश की
19
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 यह आकृति बनाते
देख रहे थे। हर चीज़ इतनी शान्त थी कि हमें लगा कि हम समय के अन्तराल से ऊपर उठ गए हैं-लहरों के तट पर
हुए
पहुँचने पर हमें केवल समुद्र की आवाज़ सुनाई दे रही थी। श्रीमाताजी की उपस्थिति से समुद्र मचलने लगा था तथा लहरें ऊँची होकर
तेज़ी से आने लगी थीं ! श्रीमाताजी ने ऊपर को देखा ।
"मेरा जन्म समुद्र से हुआ था, इसी वजह से ये इतना मचल रहा है",' अपना हाथ लहराते हुए उन्होंने कहा। 'कृपा करके शान्त हो
जाओ, शान्त हो जाओ,' और तुरन्त एक बार फिर सागर शान्त हो गया।
रेत पर श्री गणेश की आकृति बनाते
श्रीमाताजी पूर्णतः मौन थीं । चैतन्य लहरियों का प्रवाह अविश्वसनीय था और यह
हुए
अनुभूति अत्यन्त सुखद थी। उन्होंने अपने श्री गणेश को कुमकुम, हल्दी, अक्षत (चावल) और फूल अर्पण किए।
अब ऑस्ट्रेलिया को सूखे की समस्या नहीं रहेगी,' अन्त में श्रीमाताजी ने कहा। हम सब आनन्दविभोर थे और पानी के बीच सभी
तो
को श्रीमाताजी के चरणकमलों में नतमस्तक होने की आज्ञा प्राप्त हुई। बारी-बारी जब हम उनके चरणकमलों में नतमस्तक हुए
उन्होंने पीठ थपथपा के हमें आशीर्वाद दिया।
'अद्भुत, शानदार, बढ़िया,' अपने बच्चों पर करुणा से परिपूर्ण होकर उन्होंने कहा ।
बाद में हमने मैलबोर्न नगर को देखा जहाँ सायंकाल सार्वजनिक कार्यक्रम होना था ।
बहुत अधिक नकारात्मकता है!' श्रीमाताजी ने कहा। 'वहाँ पर बहुत काला प्रतीत हो रहा है।' उन्होंने अपना हाथ उठाया। 'आओ
आज शाम के कार्यक्रम से पूर्व कुछ नकारात्मकता से मुक्ति पाने का प्रयत्न करें,' उन्होंने कहा। उन्होंने नगर पर अपना हाथ घुमाया और
शुद्धिकरण वाली किरणों को आकाश में देखा जा सकता था, शुद्धि किरणें नगर से आकाश की ओर जा रही थीं , उस स्थान पर जहाँ
आकाश में लटकी हुई नकारात्मकता को श्रीमाताजी ने शुद्ध किया था। उस रात कार्यक्रम में ४०० से भी अधिक लोग आए। यह
मैलबोर्न की सबसे बड़ी संख्या है।
सम्पादक की टिप्पणी : एक बार श्रीमाताजी को दक्षिण अफ्रीका के केप शहर के उत्तर स्थित तट पर उगने वाले जंगली फूलों का
एक फोटो दिखाया गया था। वे हैरान थीं कि समुद्र तट पर इतने सुन्दर फूल भी उग सकते हैं। 'यहीं पर समुद्र से मेरा अवतरण हुआ था,
उन्होंने कहा।
परम पावनी माँ की शाश्वत प्रेरक अनुस्मृतियाँ, भाग ४
निर्मला
अब 'निर्मला' नाम के अन्तिम अक्षर 'ला' के विषय में विचार करें। मेरा दुसरा नाम है 'ललिता'। यह
देवी का आशीर्वाद है। यह उसका आयुध (शस्त्र) है। जब 'ला' अर्थात् 'देवी' ललिता रूप धारण
करती है अथवा जब शक्ति ललित अर्थात् क्रियाशील रूप में परिणत होती है अर्थात् जब उस में चैतन्य
लहरियाँ प्रवाहित होती हैं, जो आप अपनी हथेलियों पर अनुभव कर रहे हैं, वह शक्ति 'ललिता
शक्ति'है। यह सौंदर्य एवं प्रेम से परिपूर्ण है। जब प्रेम की शक्ति जागृत होती है तब वह 'ला' शक्ति बन
जाती है। यह आपको चारों ओर से घेर लेती है। जब वह क्रियाशील होती है तब चिन्ता कैसी ?
१८ जनवरी १९८०
20
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Sahaja yogis &
the problems
of the world
N:
ow as Sahaja Yogis, you are powerful entities. You are very powerful people.
IVWE have got problems in the whole world. You know that very well. It's not
necessary (that) you have to be great intellectuals, or you have to be people who are
some sort of politicians, or something. But you must be on the lookout for the problems,
which are troubling this world. You have to. You cannot live in your own world, that you are
a saint, "Now I am in Niranand," that's not possible. You can't just be in Nirananda. You
have to know that you have to live in this world. And you have to know all the problems of
this world. And you have to think about them, not only your problems that, "Mother how
will I be able to do this and how will I be able to do that?" But you have to worry about the
whole world. You have to think, what's happening in the world. What are the problems of
the world? You are responsible for that.
Not only that, but you have to pray. In your prayers you have to say, "Mother solve this
problem." Collectively, individually, you have to take your attention from yourself, from
your smaller life, to a much wider thing. Then you are a saint. And you have to think that it
your duty to ask for Divine help, that all these problems should be solved. This is your
job for which you are selected. Your asking is your going to work out because as you
know, I am desireless. You have to desire for it. Whatever you desire will work out. The
protection, the affection, the compassion of Mother is with you. But you have to look after
is
21
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 this world and show the concern that you have, not to live with very limited areas, and
with very limited ways. ... Your problems extend to all the places wherever there is
Sahaja Yoga. And you have to worry about all of them....
You have to stretch your attention outside, not inside, just worried about
yourself, about your family, about your house, about your children. As soon as you
spread your attention outside, your problems are solved in the house, in the smallest
circumstance. You have to pay attention outside. ...
There are important things that are happening which you can see for yourself.
You can scan it out, what are the world problems, and you can see for yourself where
you have to put your attention. You should become aware of your personality, it's not
a personality that can be completely involved into a very small area. Your personality
such should get involved into all the problems of the universe, all the problems there
are. And you'll be amazed that everything can work out in a very collective way. ..
So stretch out your vibrations. Stretch out your attentions. And you'll be amazed
that all other stupid problems that you have will be finished.
H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, extract from Introspection and Meditation,
Shudy Camps, UK, 18/6/88
But, you people have to look after the side of machines, all right? I mean,
handmade things, what can you make? Some ceramics, I think - apologies, some
apologies for that. You better do what you know better and let them do what they can
do better and share it. If this balance is established, there's no aggression.
Unemployment can be solved. All the problems can be solved, if you take to
handmade things. You should take to handmade things as far as possible. Sahaja
yogis should use handmade things. I mean, not the cars, but for their personal use.
Even I would say, soaps that you use are horrid. The soaps that you get in England
are not meant for your skins at all, for sahaja yogis' skin. I can't bear them. What you
have to use is natural soaps that you get from any country you feel like, but natural
soaps, which come from natural oils.
Foods also, natural food you must eat, more natural food, than artificial. All that
will give you a better living and that is called as alternative, all right. That's alternative
is important, but that doesn't mean you go on a bullock cart. You can export your
trains to India, or your cars to India and get khadi from there. All right? Mutual
understanding, because we are part and parcel of one whole and we just cannot
exist by our only growth because then we become malignant, you see. One cells
eats another. You have to. If you have a machinery, you have to eat other, because
you produce so much. You must find markets for them, you must supply them, you
must send over and then you must have other countries to exploit them.
H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, extract from Talk, London, 7/6/82
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 The discretion of the Ida Nadi is intuition. If you develop that discretion within you, through your meditative
powers, you develop intuition. And intuition is nothing but the help of the Ganas, which are surrounding you.
If you learn to take help from the Ganas you can become very intuitive and without much intelligence of yours
you can say the right thing. The whole of Sahaja Yoga, I would say fifty percent at least out of that, is based on
intuition. ...
For that you have to develop a proper sense of Shri Ganesh. Shri Ganesh in it's right sense you have to
understand. From there it starts because he's Ganapati, he's the one who is the master, is the chief of all the
Ganas. So the Ganas give you the intuition.
- 10th July 1988
Published & Printed by
Nirmal Transformation Put. Ltd.
No. 8, Chandragupta Co-op Housing Society, Paud Road,
Kothrud, Pune, Maharashtra, India - 411 038
© : 25286537, 25286032 email:sale@nitl.co.in
website: www.nitl.co.in (For queries & sending articles contact on above address)
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 I wonder how many Christians know the significance of an egg. Now egg signifies a stage where
you are, before Realisation. When you are in your egg shell - that you are Mr X, you are Mrs Y. But,
when you mature fully inside, the bird is ready and that is the time you are hatched. This is the time
you get twice-born. So, the Resurrection of Christ signifies that, and that's why we give that egg to
people, saying you are that, an egg, a reminder of that. And this egg can become a Spirit.
(from Shri Mataji's Puja address, Easter Puja, 1982)
