The Dvine Cool ODneeTOZ Ihe Dwime Tool VMreez The 2010 issue 2 – volume twenty-three number two ESAHAJA YOGA • FORTY YEARSS

 like a cool breeze DIWALI PUJA • 29 OCTOBER 1995 • NARGOL INDIA • TRANSLATED FROM HINDI I used to think, "Why are men doing such a drama and what has happened to them? Why are they doing all this nonsense?" But to whom was I to say all these things? I was all alone then. At the time when I arrived here, the only confusion was what must be done. After coming here, when I saw this rakshasa was mesmerizing people, I realized then if at that time somehow the Sahasrara was not opened, then God knows where these people would ultimately be lead. Moreover, the spell of his influence could not be ignored and also what would have been the fate of his disciples, those who were trying to seek God and the truth? Then I decided to stay the night at the seashore. I was all alone and felt very good. There was no one around to say a word. And then in meditation, I felt that the time had arrived when the Sahasrara must be opened. The moment I desired for the opening of the Sahasrara, what I noticed was that the Kundalini rose like a telescope within Me, opening one stage after the other, travelling khat, khat, khat. The colour of it was like the mixture of all the upward colours of these lamps put together, with which you have decorated. It was like the colour of molten red-hot iron. Then I saw the external structure of the Kundalini that kept on rising up, Through the words creating sounds at each chakra. The Kundalini rose up to pierce the Brahma- of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, randhra. Piercing Mine was not a big deal, but then I thought it would now we celebrate these forty years become easier in the world. of Sahaja Yoga. From the opening I felt at that moment whatever energy was there above suddenly entered within Me like a cool breeze from every direction. It was then I realized that of the Sahasrara in 1970 to the now there was no harm in starting the work. moment that is now in 2010, each year has been a stepping stone SHRI MATAJI TALKS ABOUT HER EARLY LIFE • 8 JULY 1986 • VIENNA in our collective story. Each of us is The last chakra was opened. I saw the Kundalini, which is the primordial force within us, which is the Holy Ghost within us, rising like a telescope opening a thread in the fabric that is Sahaja Yoga, all these years in the making. out. I saw the whole thing open and a big torrential rain of breeze started flow- Of Sahaja Yoga, She is the author. ing through My head all over. I felt, "I am lost now. I am no more there. It is that is there." I saw it completely happening to Me... Of our ascent, She is the artist. only the grace In 1970 this happened, on the fifth of May.

 I came for this purpose DIWALI PUJA • 29 OCTOBER 1995 • NARGOL • TRANSLATED FROM HINDI The confusion was all over. Yet not being completely certain about the deci- sion, I thought with all calmness that at last the time had come now. “At most what will happen? People will protest or beat Me up. At maximum, they will laugh or make fun or, beyond that, they are going to kill Me." But then there was nothing to fear. This ultimately had to be done. I had come on Earth for this purpose only, to awaken the collective consciousness in human beings. I thought, until people received their Self Realization or understood their own Self, this task would be impossible. Whatever else one would have tried to do in this world would be of no use at all. That was the reason to begin with that I worked it out on an old lady who knew Me well. When she received her Realization, then I was then satisfied. I said to Myself, "Well, at least one has received her Realization." By any means was it an easy task to give Realization in this Kali Yuga? But then when one of them received Realization, I felt many others could also their get Realization. And especially at the level of collective consciousness, it would be easier to give awareness. It was easy to give Realization to one person. It was in fact very easy to make a person aware. But to work it out on a collective level on the masses, it demanded more work. So I had to work a bit more with My acquired experiences with the humans. As a matter of fact, I felt that when I had to stop, what would be the factors that would be required to consider for taking out the bad habits or individual problems or conditionings from human beings. Because one individual had one type of problem, another had a second type, while the third had yet another type. I thought if it had to be worked out on a collective level, then everyone should the benefit with a single en-masse Realization. Everyone should be get able to gain out of it. Now I cannot explain it to you here, but it is true that these types of workings had never been done before on a collective level. I had achieved all these through meditation. SSAHAJA YOGA FORTY YEARSS

 1971 =1972 Twelve Sahaja Yogis Talk in Dhulia India Guru Purnima in Bombay Shri Mataji travels from India to USA via Malaysia, Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan 7 JANUARY 1990 • GANAPATIPULE GURU PURNIMA • BOMBAY • 1 JUNE 1972 • TRANSLATED FROM HINDI I had to become guru in this life, as this was not done in For the first four years I did not other lives. For any the first time, the work of a guru had to be done. Perhaps it is also a mother even allow them to have any puja whatsoever. Even when they said, who had to become the guru. This is supposed to be the Kali Yuga and prob- ably for that very reason especially, all the shaktis of the Divine "You are our guru, so You should put together allow us to have Guru Puja," had to flow from the Mother's heart... It is all in our destiny and that is why I said, “Nothing doing. I will not." in this life the position of guru had to be accepted. If a mother has to become כ Then first, after four years, on the a guru, it becomes rather a very difficult situation, as a mother is supposed to Navaratri day, they wanted to have be of a very soft nature. A guru may hit or strike or at times can also be very one puja. I said, “All right, you harsh. But to a mother, even if she has to speak harshly, it hurts in her heart and is very painful for her. And when she finds how her children have struggled to can have it, but very few people." And then they found that that puja rise after attaining all sadhana [penances and spiritual seeking], she is worried them so much of vibrations, how to nourish them with all love and care in order to salvage them... gave so much of elated spirituality and Ramdas Swami, once speaking on the qualities of a guru, said that one it touched so many dimensions should accept a guru who indeed is as precious as a paras in his qualities [like suddenly that then they started Midas who changes stone into gold]. His Midas touch does not turn others into gold but transforms them into another Midas like himself. And that is requesting Me, “Mother, You must why it is like the form of a mother. A mother is within her children. She feels give us a puja." Even in India, proud in the pride of her children. Perhaps that is why God Almighty had the where we have this system of puja, a mother.... Try to give desire for you to get this love and knowledge through people have no idea how to do it. to others. Try to make them understand.... They are all My children. It was very embarrassing, but I had to tell them each and every thing... DIWALI PUJA • 29 OCTOBER 1995 • NARGOL INDIA • TRANSLATED FROM HINDI When the Kundalini was awakened in that lady, I felt that some kind of a The complete attention, dedication entered within her and she started recognizing Me with the help and the complete importance that power of that subtle power. Then twelve more got their Realization.... I worked on do is you give to anything that you very important. If you do not give each and every chakra of these first twelve people, as the foundation had to be it the highest priority, it does not strengthened in them. The foundation can become strong only when materials work. If it is just “by the way," it are piled on it. But to make it strong, one has to also put in a lot of labour... doesn't work. So it is important to By working on them, I then realized one thing that was needed at that time understand that if you have to gain to make these twelve people understand. Each of them had an entirely different mentality. To integrate them as one with the help of the light of their spirits was anything in this puja, you have to give it the highest priority. | like the needle threading the flowers into a single garland.

 273 3 clickike a spark C SHRI KRISHNA PUJA • 28 AUGUST • BOMBAY Oh, we tried and tried and tried in different lives. Nothing worked. And now it is going to click like a spark. The chain reaction will start. But we have to have strong machines to carry that, otherwise the fuse will be off. Only the strength that is in you is to be felt by your attention. That is the only thing you have to do. It is to feel your attention and give up all that is falsehood.... Accept only the truth and the truth will give you that power to be the real instrument, to carry this channel, that force of love.... Every moment you are in meditation, just think of the moment and the dynamism of that moment, the complete power that is feeding every moment just to go inside you. It will flow through your Sahasrara inside your being and completely revolve around your whole being and transform the inside into a complete Chaitanya Shakti, a complete Divine Power. Allow it to come in. Accept it. Accept it without fear. Let it get in. Every moment keep awake. It any is a very precarious time that we are up to. I have only two hands. You can see that very clearly.... I can do everything, but not to make you do something. First western Sahaja Yogis meet Shri Mataji in London Your will will be respected throughout. Every other thing should be a First Sahaja Yoga public program: Dhulia India can be looked after for one, that you except The talk Seven Chakras and Their Deities perfect machine, a perfect channel, a perfect flute for My Talks in Delhi, Pune and Bordi Lord to play that tune of love. It is for you to clear out all Shri Krishna Puja in Bombay your seven holes. It is for you to clear out your hollowness Pubic programs in Bombay and to be complete within yourself and He knows His Public program in Nagpur job. He is the artist. But you are the instruments. And the Shri Mataji moves to UK harmonious music from so many souls can fill the ears of Seminar in Bombay these evil people and can penetrate into their heart and put love into them and it may be that they themselves will give their evil ways and fall at the feet of love. up

 1974 9/something important working startea woking SHRIMATAJI TALKS ABOUT HER EARLY LIFE • 8 JULY 1986 • VIENNA got elected to his post [in 1974] ... so when I came to London My husband we had one program in Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan. They arranged it. The Indians abroad are not so much interested in God. They are more interested in money, so none of the Indians stayed there. They all ran away and it was only the for- eigners who were there. There were about seven hippies. So I had to work on them, seven hippies. For four years I was working on them to give them Real- ization. In between I used to go to India and in India also the work was done for three months. Always I would be in India. So we started working in the villages, especially surprisingly where My forefathers were ruling in that area. The work started moving in a very big way. And then we started taking some people to India. Some people came from Public programs in Bombay Australia to India like that and the work started moving in those directions. Vibrations that are Love Then gradually the work improved and people found that this is the way we can transform ourselves. Many people who were taking drugs or alcoholic or mad people or cancer people, they felt better. Then they got cured and it was established that Sahaja Yoga is something very important.... That is how we started our work.... It was a difficult task in the West. Of course, in India it spread very fast in the villages, but city people in India also are westernized and they start ana- lyzing. They don't know much about our past. They do not know anything about our heritage, that we have our Kundalini and all that. But some people do know about Self Realization. But these gurus could not stick on in India because nobody would accept them. So they all ran away abroad. And that was something of a blessing for Me also because I did not have to fight and it started working out. And then people found that it helps in every way and they found so many miracles about it. And that is how Sahaja Yoga got settled.... The this industrial revolution has come in the West, people have lost way their moorings. Perhaps they are so confused. With all these gurus coming CO. down here confusing them and all kinds of new things coming, they don't know where to look. But unless and until you get your evolution completed, unless and until you reach that absolute state of understanding, the chaos will remain.

 joy in the heart975 one in love 2 SEPTEMBER • INDIA CC You must pray to God and ask what you want. Ask for “complete satisfac- tion in my heart, joy in my heart, bliss in my heart, so that the whole world becomes blissful. Give me love, love that I could love the whole world and that the whole world becomes one in love. Give salvation to this humanity, which is suffering. Take me to Your Feet. Cleanse me with Thy love." Now see if there is God or not? You can feel within yourself. He hears you. He is the glory of all the glory. He loves you. He protects He understands you. you. He guides you. He created you to reveal His love, but accept it. LETTER TO BOMBAY SAHAJA YOGIS TRANSLATED FROM MARATHI This is the miracle of Sahaja Yoga working through you, My beautiful, dear- est children. You are not like other people who have gone away from the field of battle (Kurukshtra). Some are not even yet born to take the load of the future building of Sahaja Yoga. Your task is tremndous and worthy of great glory. All such adventures are to be treated like sports. Your mettle will be judged and your power of love will be tested. Do not get entangled in the webs of maya. Public programs in Dadar India Public programs in Bombay LETTER TRANSLATED FROM MARATHI The Necessity of Meditation The unreal starts soon after birth in this world. Your name, village, country, horoscope, forecasts, many such things get attached to you or others attach Dharma and Adharma them to you. Once the Brahmarandhra is closed, many types of illusory ideas On Prayer become a part of your mind.... The atma is never disturbed or destroyed. Only human attention, in pursuit of desires, leaves its inner path. This is maya. She has been intentionally created. Without her, the attention would not have developed. You should not be afraid of maya and should recognize her so that she will illuminate your path. A cloud hides the sun and also makes it seen. In the same way, once the maya is identified, she moves aside and the sun is seen. The sun is always there, but what is the purpose of the cloud? Because of the cloud, you have an urge to see the sun, which shines for a moment and again hides somewhere. It gives strength and courage to your sight to see the sun.... I have come as your Mother.... All this will not be understood by explaining. Just showing the path will not help. The path will be known only after walking on it.

 197e state of infiniYody a state of infinity creates à a'melody те GUDI PADWA • BEING IN THOUGHTLESS AWARENESS • 30 MARCH • DELHI We have prayers and we have also puja. Prayers ... if said in your heart with the feeling of complete surrendering and asking for the eternal, it will be granted. Just ask for that and the rest will take care of itself step-by-step... If you get frustrated and unhappy with yourself, then there is going to be a problem. You have to laugh at yourself and laugh at your mechanism that is out of gear. When start identifying yourself, even with the instrument, then you you are not there. You are not the chakra. You are not the different channels. You are the awareness. You are the power. You are the Kundalini.... The other method we employ is of puja. I have found that puja works very well with human beings because it satisfies lots of demands of habits, that past you feel that you are doing something about it. Then you start giving what- think God has given you, the blessings... When you praise someone ever you from the heart that means you are accepting it. And that is the time when the chakras start creating a force by which you are thrown, you are triggered, into that realm of God. So these puja methods and prayer methods and the mantra methods have been devised and found out by great thinkers of Sahaja Yoga, the great masters of Sahaja Yoga, and it is the effort – or you can say the effortless effort – of the Sahaja Yogis that makes My body vibrate. It extracts the essence from My body. It makes the infinite release itself through this finite being and it works. It clicks. Puja is the time something is oozing out – the nectar – and you just receive it at that time with full devotion. It is oozing out. If you feel My vibrations of My chakras at that time, you will realize that even the minute, small, little wheels in My body are moving in a different space, at a different speed, in a Seminar in Bombay different dimension. And I really don't know how to explain, but you see it cre- Gudi Padwa in Delhi ates a melody. You have to receive it and it is a melody individually – suitable Description of the Kundalini for every individual. And when you receive it, it triggers in you that state of Patience and Other Advice infinity. So at the time of puja, you must know that all your attention should be in reception.

 path C.Dat last point of ignition 97atkamiddle. BIRTHDAY CELEBRATION • 21 MARCH • BOMBAY Think of love all the time. Love is all knowledge. Knowledge is all love. There is nothing beyond. If you have knowledge, it has to pass the test of love. If you know a person, it makes no record on you because you know him from outside. But if you love a person, then you know the person out and out. You know him so well, – everything, the way it is.... That is the knowledge we have to you know him seek.... Come to the stage of understanding the Divine within you, the love of and enjoy the God that is within you, which is trying to overflow from you sense of emitting and giving. Giving has the greatest joy and pleasure.... Get this eternal truth within yourself. Let your being be that subjective instrument, to understand what is what. Do not be driven away by a few read- ings here and a few readings there. Do not be driven away by the small-hearted ideas and the egoistical tomfoolery that is going on. It is to make fun of every- one. Oh Man, please awaken yourself to this great occasion of understanding. Birthday Puja in Delhi This dynamic force is dying to bubble out of you. We have to change this Mahashivaratri Puja in Delhi world and transform it into a beautiful creation because the Creator will not Guru and Navaratri Pujas in London allow His creation to be destroyed. If you do not accept the truth, you will be First public program in the West Attention Collectivity Responsibility destroyed.. As a Mother, I ask you to accept the divine truth, the divine love and to be Beyond Human Consciousness one. I wish all of you – all the Sahaja Yogis and all the people who are seeking Shri Krishna's Sahaja Yoga the Love and Dharma of greatest, highest of highest achievement in the awareness of God greatest and with love – that is what it is.... Sat Chit Ananda You are simple people, ordinary people and that is why you are the best Creation people, because you do not suffer from any extremes. You have a very simple heart. You are leading a very religious life and a sanctified married life. This place is for the people who are in the middle path of Lord Buddha. Sahaja Yoga is the integration of all the truths of life... I am not doing it. It is just happening. I have come on this Earth just for this ignition. This is the last point of ignition. This has to happen and this will happen.

 1978 high aspirationsves LETTER TRANSLATED FROM MARATHI • 17 AUGUST Many, many blessings to all. I have received the beautiful rakhis lovingly sent by you. A rakhi denotes a protective power. This protective bandhan is very powerful and, at the same time, delicate as it represents pure love between a brother and a sister. Whenever a sister ties this rakhi on a brother's hand, it establishes a relation of enduring protec- tion by the brother for the sister. Unfortunately, the sensitivity of human beings to the feelings of love has become so weak that tying a rakhi has become a mechanical ritual. In the absence of a deep, living faith, all human actions and rituals become dry and lifeless. We are born in this life with a purposeful responsi- bility towards all Sahaja Yogis and are all the time aware of their love and devotion. Myself, being desireless, I depend entirely on their desires. It is customary for a brother to ask for something from Easter Puja in London the sister on this day. All Sahaja Yogis should therefore col- Sahasrara and Guru Pujas in London lectively let Me know whatever they desire from My side. Navaratri and Christmas Pujas in London I am keeping very good health, as this is the desire of pure Public program in London and Birmingham all of you... Raksha Bandhan is a very important day and one Public program in Northampton UK Public in Delhi should desire on this occasion to become a whole. You programs First seminar in the West should always have high aspirations and your attention The Brahma Principle should be to larger perspectives. Sahaja Yogis are not The Bija Mantras expected to waste their attention in petty, small things. The Three Gunas We have to work very hard. Those of who have you Becoming Subtle achieved good progress should still work out much more. Satya Yuga We should open more centres. We must help the sick to Dharma cure their ailments and, above all, strive to bring people on the path of truth.

 to give meaning теanin I declare I am the one Easter and Diwali Pujas in London Guru Pujas in London and Delhi Shri Ganesha Puja in Bombay Sankranti Puja in Bombay Sahasrara Puja in London Birthday Puja in Bombay Puja in Bordi India Shri Mataji's Advent declaration Marriages in Bombay and London Seminars in Rahuri, London and Bombay Public programs at Delhi University GURU PUJA • 2 DECEMBER • DOLLIS HILL ASHRAM LONDON I never said about Myself because it was felt that human beings have now Chakra series of programs in Delhi achieved another dimension of ego even worse than at the time of Christ. If Anant Jeevan magazine published The Meaning of Love you blame anything, you can call it the Industrial Revolution because you were The Meaning of Yoga away from nature.... Today is the day I declare that I am the one who has to save the humanity. The Advent is published I declare I am the one who is Adi Shakti, who is the Mother of all the Mothers, who is the Primordial Mother, the Shakti, the desire of God, who has incar- nated on this Earth to give its meaning to itself, to this creation, to human beings. And I am sure, through My love and patience and My powers, I am going to achieve it. I was the one who was born again and again, but now in My complete I form and complete powers, I have come on this Earth, not only for the salva- tion of human beings, not only for their emancipation, but for granting them the Kingdom of Heaven, the joy, the bliss that your Father wants to bestow upon you. These words are to be kept within the bounds of Sahaja Yogis only, for the time being. The Advent And today is the day of Guru Puja, not My Puja, but your puja as gurus. I anoint all of you as gurus and today I will tell you what I have bestowed upon you and what great powers you already have within you.

 198 understand sahaja yoga á great privilege 27 JANUARY • BORDI INDIA Try to preserve all your powers. Respect yourself. You are a lamp that is burn- MAHA AVATAR ing a light, which enlightens others in their mind. It is a very great thing. Even महा अवतार millions and billions of people and now one person like that was born among here we have so many of you. But quality-wise if you do not rise, it is going to be a hopeless case. So you must improve your quality. All of you must improve your quality individually. Not criticizing others, not looking at others, but individually you should understand your capacities and how much you have given to others and how much you have really manifested out of what have got. you IATAJI DIVI You have control over the sun, over the moon, over the tides and over the sea and all those things you have. But for that, you have to do a little more, First issue Maha Avatar published which I will tell you some other time. Now I don't want you to control all these Shri Mataji in India, France, Spain things and sit down on top of a hillock and start showing off. Better thing is Switzerland and the United Kingdom you work it out first on human beings. Sankranti Puja in Pune Pujas in Paris and Brighton SAHASRARA PUJA • 5 MAY • LONDON Eight major pujas in London I am telling you these things because you are deserving. And in that condi- Pujas in Bombay and Lausanne tion, you must understand that this is a great privilege that I am telling you all Marriages in London and Bordi these things. You should feel enamoured that I am telling you that sincerity is Inauguration of The Advent the key of your success. It is a privilege. I am giving you the key... Take it as a privilege. It is a V.I.P. treatment for you. You are all V.I.P.s. I Programs in Paris, Pune and Bombay Programs Rahuri, Nice and Lausanne cannot talk like this to the multitudes, but I can tell this because I want to you Programs in Bern, Zurich and Geneva give you the complete keys. If you can look at yourself as to how privileged you Programs in Edinburgh and Glasgow are and understand it – understanding what all Sahaj Yoga is then you will Chelsham Road ashram established understand that what a privilege it is for you to be here – what fortune, what Old Alresford seminar in England reward for what you have done. How many lives have been completely rewarded The Meaning of Sahaja Yoga by being here? This will help you to do puja in a more sincere manner... The Meaning of Reality This is for your own nourishment, for your own growth, for your own The Meaning of Puja enjoyment.

 981 adoh Hol I am the one Spirit Hob Shri Mataji in Australia, Canada France, India, Italy, Japan, Malaysia Switzerland, UK and the United States Sankranti Puja in Pune Mahashivaratri Puja in Bombay Sahasrara and Guru Pujas in London Diwali and Christmas Pujas in London Shri Krishna Puja in United Kingdom Navaratri Puja in New York Mahalakshmi Puja in Rome Four pujas in Australia Ten public programs in Sydney Nineteen public programs in Delhi PUBLIC PROGRAM • 30 SEPTEMBER • NEW YORK The greatest thing that is needed for Sahaja Yoga is wisdom. And logically Twenty-two programs in North America you will reach a conclusion and understand that Sahaja Yoga is the end of all Marriages in Sydney, London and Rahuri the problems of the world. For example, take capitalism and communism. Shri Mataji moves to Brompton Square Now, I am a capitalist because I have all the powers and I am a communist Seminars in Paris and Dorset UK because I cannot enjoy it without giving it to you. But it is spontaneous.... Programs throughout United Kingdom You get completely integrated. Whatever you do, your heart supports it, Shri Mataji announces Satya Yuga your mind supports it and your body supports it. You are completely inte- First issue of Nirmala Yoga grated in one being. That is your spirit.... Normally I don't tell about Myself, but today he exposed Me. As soon as I came I had to tell – because it is not tactful, it is not tactful to say anything. NIRMALA YOGA It is better that discover Me than I tell because Christ was crucified, you you नि र्म ला योग everybody was tortured. I do not want to hamper My work because it makes no difference by telling you anything before Realization. It is better to tell you after Realization that I am the Holy Ghost – no doubt. I am the one about which Christ has talked. I have told them. I had never said this from a platform and I told. They have been telling Me, "Mother, You must say that once." I said, "In America I'll declare it." So today I declare that I am the Holy Ghost. I am the Holy Spirit, who has incarnated on this Earth for your Realization. May God bless you. Now, any questions?

 you are the spirit 982 dedication Shri Mataji in Austria, Belgium, France India, Italy, Spain, Switzerland, USA United Kingdom and West Germany Sankranti and Durga Pujas in Rahuri Easter and Shri Rama Pujas in London Navaratri and Diwali Pujas in London Birthday Pujas in London and Delhi Mahashivaratri Puja in Delhi Guru Puja in London Shri Krishna Puja in London COWLEY MANOR SEMINAR • DEDICATION THROUGH MEDITATION • 31 JULY • UNITED KINGDOM You have to recognize Me. And that recognition is fixed. That condition is Mahakali Puja in Lonavala India Shri Ganesha Puja in Satara India fixed. I cannot change it.... You have to dedicate yourself completely to Me – not to Sahaja Yoga – but to Me. Sahaja Yoga is just one of My aspects. Leaving Sahasrara Puja in Le Raincy France everything, you have to dedicate. Complete dedication, otherwise you cannot Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cheltenham UK Shri Ganesha Puja in Switzerland ascend any further.... You will create your own visions and complete them, fulfill them. You Shri Durga Puja in Vienna look so simple, as ordinary people, but you are not. In dedication, in complete Christmas Puja in Pune devotion, you have to do it now, not for your own gain, for your own achieve- First puja in Belgium ment. That is over now. It is for completely getting out of the mire and stand- Marriages in Delhi ing on the land, singing aloud the praise of your Father... Seminar in Lonavala India You are the ones who are capable of manifesting God's joy on this Earth. Cowley Manor seminar in the UK You are the flutes which are going to play the melody of God.... You become Nightingale Lane ashram established the ocean, you become the moon, you become the sun, you become the earth, Twenty public programs in India you become the ether, the firmament and you become the spirit. You work for Four public programs in Rome all of them. All the stars and universes you become and take up their work. Three public programs in France That is what it is because you have jumped onto your principle, onto your Three public programs in Madrid tattwa. That is how you jump onto everybody's tattwa. But be dedicated on Programs throughout England that tattwa because I am the principle of all these things. I am the tattwa - tat- Sahaja Yoga in South Africa tvamasi. I am the principle. Keep to your principle. I am the Kundalini. I am Understand Your Own Importance the essence.... With complete freedom and wisdom, you have to sail now, not Understanding the Love of God afraid of any storms or any hails or any typhoons because from now on you You are Bound by One Thread All is so Beautifully Made know your job is to cross through.

 for lave greatness of heart 198 Shri Mataji in Australia, Austria, Canada France, India, Italy, Spain, Switzerland United Kingdom and the United States Shri Ganesha Puja in Tivoli Italy Shri Ganesha Pujas in Rahuri and Nasik Shri Ganesha Pujas in Perth and Bombay Shri Ganesha Puja in Vancouver Sahasrara Puja in Bombay Mahashivaratri Puja in Delhi Shri Devi Pujas in Sydney and Paris Shri Mahalakshmi Puja in Kolhapur Birthday Pujas in Sydney and Bombay Mother Earth & Diwali Pujas in London Shri Buddha Puja in Brighton UK MOTHER EARTH MAHALAKSHMI PUJA • 21 AUGUST • SURBITON ASHRAM LONDON This is what today's Sahaja Yoga is: now the Mother Earth is the one who is Guru Puja in United Kingdom symbolized within you as the Muladhara, as symbolized as the Adi Shakti here Shri Krishna Puja in Santa Cruz who is sitting down before you to nourish you, to make you grow into new Shri Krishna Puja in Switzerland Shri Krishna Puja in Los Angeles personalities, into mature personalities. This concept we must understand.... For the first time after Realization, you can give Her back what you have Shri Krishna Puja in Vienna from Her. You can give vibrations to Her trees that are created. You can Ekadesha Rudra Puja in New York got make them beautiful. You can transform a flower into a more beautiful flower. Guru and Shri Ganesha Pujas in Houston from the Mother Earth, you can give because your Puja for beginners in Toronto Whatever have got you Mother Earth is awakened within you now. Navaratri Puja in Boston you return Her back everything that you got from Her and give it to Shri Bhoomi Devi Puja in Delhi So others – generosity, the greatness of heart, nobility, forgiveness, love, affection, Shri Mahakali Puja in Lonavala India bearing everything for love. For the mother to save her child, she will starve Shri Ganesha Puja in Vancouver herself. She will do everything to save her child. Complete dedication she has Pujas in Houston and Melbourne for her child. That is a real mother.... That is the real image of a mother. And Havan for America in London you have an image before you. Raksha Bandhan in Switzerland So this is what one has to develop now. Whether you are men or women, Twenty-one programs in North America as Sahaja Yogis you must develop a new consciousness of affection, love and Fourteen public programs in Australia More than twelve programs in Delhi compassion.

 love that thinks beacon of Mother 1984 Shri Mataji in Austria, France, India Italy, Switzerland, United Kingdom the USA and West Germany New Year and Holi Pujas in Delhi Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Bombay Sankranti Puja in Bombay NAVARATRI PUJA • 23 SEPTEMBER • LONDON Shri Ganesha Puja in Bombay I play with you. I always try to say things that will please you. And it should Shri Ganesha Puja in Switzerland please you much more that I have said how to reach your depths, reach that Shri Devi Pujas in Rahuri and Bordi gravity that will make you the gurus... The time has come for all of you to Birthday Pujas in Delhi and Bombay become gurus of the right type, not with egos or talking big and creating a Shri Mahalakshmi Puja in Kolhapur big show out of you, but a definite depth within that people see that here you Shri Chandra Ma Puja in Vaitarna is a beacon of Mother.... I always work through you if you are one with Me. Mahashivaratri Puja in Pandharpur Even when I am speaking, you are speaking. And when you are speaking, I am Sahasrara Puja in France speaking. You know that. But with all this, that awe is very important. That Guru Puja in Leysin Switzerland gives you the love that thinks, a complete integration of your heart and your Shri Krishna Puja in New Jersey USA brain. The love that thinks is thoughtful. Shri Mary-Mahalakshmi Puja in Munich Then the third integration is the love that acts. But first this integration must be brought in – the love that thinks, which understands, which feels and Christmas and Easter Pujas in London Navaratri Pujas in London and France then the love that acts. But the basic is the love. It starts from the heart... Ekadesha Rudra Puja in Como Italy Develop the depth in language, in speech, in feelings, in expressions, in the Raksha Bandhan in London personality. It is only the awe that will make it, but awe which is not frighten- Seminars in Leysin and Bordi ing, but awe that is joy-giving. This is the integration of it.... Open your Marriages in Delhi, Bordi & Switzerland hearts. It does not mean you should be frivolous. With all the Twenty-one public programs in India care, have you seen a lotus opening, how beautifully it opens? Slowly every Public programs throughout the UK petal so careful not to hit another, slowly it opens out. And then the fragrance Four public program series in London starts pouring in the most dignified manner. Such a flower only can be offered at the Lotus Feet of the Adi Shakti.

 1985éteater cause now forward on A NEW ERA - SACRIFICE FREEDOM ASCENT • 6 FEBRUARY • BORDI INDIA It is My life, My mission, My existence. My everything is for You have seen so many wars. You have seen so many war pictures. You the purpose of the emancipation of humanity. Even the last have seen how people have fought, how they have sacrificed themselves. dif- drop of My blood is for that. So My satisfactions are very Let us see what we are doing in this ferent. Please remember you are born of a very brave Mother. war... Get out of the slavery of your body, of your conditionings and Please try to rise. Be proud that we are doing such a tremen- your nonsensical ego. I am sure as a mother I am not dous task. Have that feeling of great valour. Then only we can so bad, but as a father I think I lack some things. Please try to come up achieve results. so that I should feel that I did not Shri Mataji in Australia, Austria, Belgium, France, India, Italy, Mexico lack in My fatherly attitude towards Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, USA and West Germany you – that awe, that understanding of a father's expectations. This I am not saying to Trigunatmika Puja in Netherlands Easter Puja in London Sankranti Puja in Bombay Shri Vishnumaya Puja in London you because it is some present Shri Devi Pujas in Pune and Sydney Gruha Lakshmi Puja in London situation.... It is My announcement Mahalakshmi Puja in London Shri Devi Puja in Dharamshala of this new dimension into which we Diwali Puja in Tivoli Italy Shri Devi Puja in San Diego have to rise. And as in the war, we Mahashivaratri Puja in Delhi Christmas Puja in Pune have to declare, “Now forward on!" Birthday Puja in Melbourne Puja at Brahmapuri River India In the same way, this is a declaration Birthday Pujas in Bombay and Delhi Eleven more pujas in India in no way to degrade you, in no Mother's Day Puja in Birmingham way to insult you or to say anything Marriages in Bordi and Melbourne Navaratri Puja in Switzerland Ten talks at seminar in Bordi about any one of you, but to just Navaratri Puja in Delhi National seminar in the UK infuse that inspiration which led First seminar at Ganapatipule Sahasrara Puja in Austria thousands and thousands and Shri Ganesha Puja in Brighton millions and billions of people to Four public programs in Munich Shri Ganesha Pujas in Rome & London Four public programs in New York sacrifice for a greater cause.... You are Shri Krishna Puja in the USA Vishwa Nirmala Dharma established the ones who are going to fight. You та A New Era talk in Bordi India are the ones who are responsible. Guru Puja in France

 you are the spirit become the existence bесoте SHRI BHOOMI DEVI PUJA • 3 AUGUST • SHUDY CAMPS UNITED KINGDOM For a Sahaja Yogi, it is important to understand that we are not going to 1986 take anything from here. It is all nothing but clay. And clay is going to remain here and is going to vanish for ever and ever. What are we going to carry with us? What are we going to have with us? All the time it is our evolution. It is now our spirit. So we are the spirit. We are neither this, nor that, nor that. We are the spirit Shri Mataji in Australia, Austria and we are absolutely not in any way contaminated by anything that is called Belgium, France, India, Italy matter. So we should see to the essence of the Mother Earth, that the Mother Earth Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland the UK, USA and West Germany uses Her matter to give joy to others. In the same way, if we use Her to give Guru Puja in Gmunden Austria joy to others, then you have followed Her path. On the contrary, if you try to exploit Her, it is like making holes or digging at Her, who is your Mother. If Shivaratri Puja in Pune Sahasrara Puja in Italy you try to separate Her into parts that means you are cutting Her body into Diwali Puja in Delhi different parts. All these human concepts are anti-Mother... It is very important to understand that unless and until we respect Shri Christmas Puja in India Shri Krishna Puja in USA Ganesha within us – our innocence, our chastity – we cannot allow ourselves Navaratri Puja in Calcutta to be called Sahaja Yogis. That is the first beginning, the first step towards our Shri Ganesha Puja in USA ascent. We cannot talk of anything else unless and until this foundation is laid Shri Krishna Puja in Switzerland in the Mother Earth. Shri Devi Puja in Dourdan France Shri Mahalakshmi Puja in Belgium CHALLENGE THE PAST AND THE FUTURE • 7 JULY • VIENNA Shri Bhoomi Puja at Pratishthan site You will have experiences in life, one by one, and you will be amazed how Birthday Pujas in Bombay and Delhi things work out. And then you will realize that you are not an ordinary Sahaja Shri Kartikeya Puja in West Germany Yogi. Whatever you have committed wrong in the past or whatever you used to Fourteen more pujas in India think of the future, the present becomes divine. And that divine present is the Marriages in Ganapatipule ocean of joy of which you are the part and particle. Just enjoy that. Then you Raksha Bandhan in London do not think about who is the enjoyer and who is the creator. You just become the existence. Existence is the present. Five public programs in Italy That is how it works out, where you lose all words, all thoughts, all feel- Three public programs in Madrid Shudy Camps established in the UK ings, which are an emotional type. An absolutely silent confidence you drink More than twenty-five programs in India like the nectar of life.

 1987fowE2fkone 2ue way. epitome of evolution oflove Shri Mataji in Australia, Austria Belgium, France, India, Italy Netherlands, New Zealand, Spain Switzerland, United Kingdom USA, USSR and West Germany Easter Puja in Rome Guru Puja at Shudy Camps UK Birthday and Shivaratri Pujas in India Sahasrara Puja in Thredbo Australia Shri Vishnumaya Puja in the USA Shri Krishna Puja in France Shri Rama Puja in Switzerland Shri Mahalakshmi Puja in Belgium Shri Mahakali Puja in Munich Shri Ganesha Puja in Madrid Navaratri Puja in Calcutta THE REVOLUTION OF LOVE PUBLIC PROGRAM • 26 OCTOBER • CINEMA CAPRANICA ROME I am here to give you a message that you have got this energy within you. Diwali Puja in Lecco Italy You are at the epitome of evolution. And it will hardly take a split of a second Christmas Puja in Pune for you to get your Realization, to enter into the Kingdom of God. There is THE WIND a beautiful instrument within you, which works it out. You are not to blame Vishwa Nirmala Dharma yourself for little, little things. You are not to feel guilty at all. You have to have North American Newsletter all the confidence. It is very important to understand that you are the high- Volume 1, No. 7 April 1987 I| Oa twamewa sakshat, Shri Adi Shakti Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi, est in the evolutionary process. It's only the human beings who are going to achieve Realization, not the mosquitoes or the chickens or the pigs. So we must respect our personality as human beings and do not believe all these stories where it is all just a money-making proposition... It is all being process of your evolution. It is your energy. organized within you during the Within yourself is your own Mother who is going to give you your Realization. heart resides the spirit and this spirit has its seat here on top of your In your head. And when the Kundalini touches that, you get on your central nervous The Wind, a Sahaja Yoga newsletter, is renamed by Shri Mataji. She calls system the sensation of the All-Pervading Power.. This is a very big revolution it The Divine Cool Breeze. that is coming today.... That is the way of love.

 face life and othèrs 1988 198ror vourself WHAT CAN WE DO NOW • 30 DECEMBER • ALIBAG INDIA Shri Mataji in Andorra, Austria The attention of Sahaj has gone beyond the realm of only few collective Belgium, Colombia, Finland, France Sahaja Yogis. When you open your gates to this new dimension, then suddenly India, Italy, Netherlands, Spain you start thinking about all the problematic things you have to face. So far you Switzerland, United Kingdom have been like Brahmins keeping away from non-Brahmins, in the sense keep- the USA and West Germany ing away from people who are not realized, keeping your society away from Guru Puja in Andorra them, keeping your vibrations all right and trying not to expose yourself to Navaratri Puja in Pune these people who are, according to you, maybe half-baked or maybe they are Shri Krishna Puja near Milan not yet in Sahaja Yoga. Easter Puja at Shudy Camps UK But I think now you are quite capable. Now we have reached a stage where Hamsa Swamini Puja in Germany nothing can harm you, nothing can catch you. Now you have to catch them.... Sahasrara Pujas in Italy and Bogota Now you know how to face life... Work it out for yourself and for others – Shri Buddha Puja in San Diego USA with love. Shivaratri and Birthday Pujas in Bombay So I, for a Mother to see all of Her children going away, I have said quite Ekadesha Rudra Puja in Austria a lot. It is not easy to say much on such an occasion, but I have to gather up Shri Fatima Puja in Switzerland courage and time and decide that I have to tell them all about it – because now Shri Gauri-Ganesha Puja in Bombay it is your responsibility to work it out. It is your responsibility. Shri Vishnumaya Puja at Shudy Camps In your own way, think about it. "What can we do for Sahaja Yoga?" In Diwali Pujas in Bombay & Shudy Camps everything you can see Sahaj. You will get ideas. Pass them on. Write them Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule down. Write your poetry. So many things can be done by all of you and there is First puja in South America no time to be wasted any more. It has to be a very fast job because this universe Eleven more pujas in India is standing on the brink of its destruction and we are the only people who have Puja in Barcelona Spain to save it. Seminar in Ganapatipule So it is an emergency for us. In that emergency one has to know that the Four public programs in Spain nature of Sahaj itself is working out everything. But if this does not work in Navaratri series of talks in Pune the right time, then we will have to have another world – which is another Marriages in Ganapatipule and Italy problem.

 enjoy theře is no problem 989 Shri Mataji in Austria, Brazil, Canada Colombia, Finland, France, Greece India, Italy, Nepal, Spain, Switzerland Turkey, United Kingdom, USA USSR, Ukraine and West Germany Guru Puja in Lago Di Braie Italy Diwali Puja in Montecatini Italy Sahasrara Puja in Sorrento Italy Easter Puja in Calcutta Christmas Puja in Pune Virata Puja in the USA Devi Puja in Istanbul Shivaratri Puja in Delhi Shri Hanumana Puja in Margate UK Shri Buddha Puja in Barcelona Shri Krishna Puja in the UK Shri Bhairavanath Puja in Milan Shri Pallas Athena Puja in Athens ENJOYING THE DISADVANTAGE • 5 MAY • BOAT TO CAPRI ITALY In Sahaja Yoga you must always think, if there is a disadvantage, it is an advan- Shri Ganesha Puja in Switzerland tage for us. You should see to the essence of the disadvantage and you will Navaratri Puja in United Kingdom overcome it with an advantage.... Birthday Pujas in Delhi and Bombay So in every way, if we can learn how to enjoy the disadvantage, the so- Pujas in Bogota and Rio de Janeiro called problem, then you will see that the solving of that is the solution in a Pujas in San Diego and Vancouver that there is no problem. It should not be taken as a challenge, but like a Pujas in Helsinki and Kathmandu way, big wave which comes onto a swimmer, how he enjoys to jump over it. That is Pujas in France and West Germany we are not joy-killers and we are not also spoilsports – spoilsports spoiling Nine more pujas in India why Six public programs in Italy the sport. "I don't like it, I don't enjoy it," but you should say, Twenty-five public programs in India should not say, So you "Why not?" Because if you decide not to like it, you will spoil the joy. But if Eight programs in North America CC you keep yourself open all the time and think, “Oh, I'm going to enjoy it," Ten public programs in the USSR then you start enjoying. For example, cappuccino was difficult for Me in the Program at the United Nations beginning. But now I enjoy. Sahaja Yoga Mantra Book published

 complete imaluement етеnt a commitment Shri Mataji in Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bulgaria, Canada, Czechoslovakia, France, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong Hungary, India, Italy, Malaysia, New Zealand, Poland, Romania, Singapore, Spain, Switzerland, Taiwan, Thailand Turkey, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, the United Sates of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 19901 Mahavira Puja in Barcelona Mahashivaratri Puja in Pune Sahasrara Puja in Fiuggi Italy Diwali Puja in Chioggia Italy Sankranti Puja in Kalwe India Shri Buddha Puja in Leningrad SAHASRARA PUJA • 6 MAY • FIUGGI ITALY Easter Puja in United Kingdom All these years, I have been waiting for this day. We have now the twenty- Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Calcutta first Sahasrara Day, so is a very important turning point. As you know, every twenty-first day we change our calendars as far as the Shri Adi Kundalini Puja in Austria Birthday Pujas in Sydney and Bombay horoscope is concerned. And so now a new change has to come and you can Mahalakshmi Puja in Hydra Greece see the announcement – a new understanding, an awareness of a very new Shri Krishna Pujas in UK and India dimension. We have been so far dealing with collective consciousness. We are collec- Pujas in San Diego and Vancouver Guru Puja in Avignon France tively conscious. We have the idea that we are collectively conscious. Also we Shri Ganesha Puja in Austria know we are a part and parcel of the whole and that we all are Sahaja Yogis. Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule We know about our chakras and our nadis very clearly. But perhaps we do not Shri Hanumana Puja in Germany know about our powers. How many powers have developed in those twenty- Navaratri Puja in Arzia Switzerland one years within yourself...? Shri Mahakali Puja in Le Raincy France Sahaja Yoga is a commitment. It is a commitment and a complete involve- More than nineteen other pujas in India ment, otherwise you are really useless for Sahaja Yoga – absolutely useless. It is Seminars and marriages Ganapatipule better to have few people who are committed than to have thousands who are just useless. So let us see what you have decided for yourself and what Raksha Bandhan in Los Angeles you have Eighteen public programs in India decided for Sahaja Yoga. If you have decided to opt for Sahaja Yoga, then just in eastern Europe know that this is the main thing which you have to do. The whole attention Seven public programs in the USA should be on that.

 not vour brain enlarge your heart 199t GURU PUJA • 28 JULY • CABELLA LIGURE ITALY When our knowledge is in the brain, it is just like a film. It is away from us. Shri Mataji in Austria, Australia It is not in our heart. But when it is in the heart, it acts, it works. It does not Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Germany work through brain. In the brain it just stays, but in the heart it works. And in Hungary, India, Italy, Netherlands the heart resides the spirit. New Zealand, Singapore, Taiwan It is very simple that we are people who are more living with our brains, not UK, United States and the USSR with our heart. But know that if in reality you see King Kong is standing before Shivaratri Pujas in Delhi and Italy you, you are not seeing a film – it is in reality. And in reality, the heart has to Holi celebration and puja in Delhi work, not the brain, because reality is only through the heart, not through the Birthday Pujas in Delhi and Bombay Shri Mahavira Pujas in Perth & Bombay brain. Once you understand this, then open your heart, enlarge it. "Now Easter Puja in Sydney Australia you will this is in my heart." So the whole thing will be so clear-cut. In your head you Sahasrara Puja in Ischia Italy will know everything clearly, what is to be done, how to react, how to work it Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule Pujas in Auckland and Canberra out. If you put all this knowledge of Sahaja Yoga into your heart, first of all you Pujas in Melbourne and Brisbane will have to enlarge your heart, otherwise you cannot put this ocean. Then you Kundalini Puja in Weilburg Germany will see this is Sahaja Yoga. Shri Hamsa Swamini Puja in New York To Me everything seems to be Sahaja Yoga... I can see clearly. Anything Guru and Shri Krishna Pujas in Cabella that I see, I connect it to Sahaja Yoga immediately. “This is Sahaja Yoga. Why Shri Ganesha Pujas in Cabella & Prague is this so? This is because of Sahaj Yoga. This is Sahaj Yoga." Navaratri and Diwali Pujas in Cabella So everywhere you start seeing Sahaja Yoga, when your heart knows what Shri Buddha Puja in Deinze Belgium your brain knows. I have known people who know all the mantras very well, Eleven more pujas in India Marriages in Ganapatipule everything very well and all that, but in the heart – So put it in the heart. In Sahaja Yoga the guru is not through his brain, but Seventeen public programs in India through his heart. Programs at the UN and in Honolulu

 1992arávitvik manifest it.W1 gravity is within GURU PUJA • 19 JULY • CABELLA LIGURE Easter Puja in Italy The word "guru" means gravity, that the Mother Earth has gravity. In the Birthday Puja in Delhi same way, a person who is a guru has to have the gravity. But how do you Sahasrara Puja in Cabella develop this gravity? Some people just artificially become very grave and some- Shri Krishna Puja in Cabella times show that they are very serious or something like that. Gravity is within yourself. In the second state of gurupada your gravity Adi Kundalini Puja in Cabella Mahasaraswati Puja in Auckland must manifest. As you become the witness, your gravity starts expressing itself. Shri Vishnumaya Puja in Belgium It will not show as temper or seriousness or anything like that. But it will Guru and Navaratri Pujas in Cabella manifest in a way that the whole thing will become extremely dignified and Mahalaskshmi Puja in St. Petersburg majestic. It will just manifest by itself. Shivaratri Puja in Glenrock Australia So the state in which you rise now becomes effective. Before this it was not. silence Shri Ganesha Pujas in Cabella and Perth You had to all the time manipulate, say this, say that. But in your you Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Togliatti Russia can manifest your gravity and this gravity acts like a magnet.... Shri Buddha Puja in Shudy Camps So with our what we do is to touch that depth within us, which can gravity, Diwali Puja in Timisoara Romania carry the divine power and manifest... Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule Your faith in God has to be absolutely untarnishable. Nothing can disturb Mahalakshmi Puja in Barcelona that. That is very important. You have seen all the miracles of God. You have Hamsa Chakra Puja in Canada seen how you are working out His powers. You have known all these things, Shri Vishnumaya Puja in USA but still the faith in God is missing. The person who has complete faith in Shri Durga Kali Puja in Paris God is God Himself, they say. It is called as Paramachaitanya. The guru is Puja in Bogota Colombia called as the one who is himself Brahmachaitanya. So when this faith in God Mahakali Puja in Brazil is absolutely established in you, that "There is God Almighty, He's Almighty and I am the messenger of that God," just this understanding, when it becomes Four more pujas in India Two more pujas in Australia absolutely firm in you, then you are in the gurupada. I bless you today that all of you achieve that state, that you reside in that Nine programs in eastern Europe Eight programs in North America gurupada state. And wherever you are, whatever may be your position, what- Fourteen public programs in India ever you may do, the faith in God Almighty that is so truly within will you express itself not only, but that it will manifest. It will act just like God. First Royal Albert Hall public program Shri Mataji in Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Czechoslavakia Finland, France, Hong Kong, Hungary, India, Italy, Malaysia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Romania Russia, Spain, Switzerland, Taiwan, Thailand, Ukraine, the United Kingdom and the United States of America

 let others enion the blossomtime 993 enjou Shri Mataji in Austria, Belgium Bulgaria, Canada, Czech Republic France, Germany, Greece, India, Italy Netherlands, Poland, Romania, Russia Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine United Kingdom and the USA Easter Puja in Magliano Sabina Italy Shri Pallas Athena Puja in Athens Sahasrara and Guru Pujas in Cabella Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Togliatti SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA • 3 AUGUST • TOGLIATTI RUSSIA These are the special times. I call them the blossomtime when so many flow- Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cabella ers are there who are seeking the truth. And their fragrance is their love. They Shri Fatima Puja in Istanbul had to all become fruits now and this is what is going to happen, as these times Birthday Puja in Delhi are very, very important... This is the power by which a drop becomes the Mahakali Puja in Paris Shri Krishna Puja in Cabella ocean, an individual becomes the collective. So all your powers that are there are enlightened by this All-Pervading Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule Power. It transforms you and it has such a beautiful, delicate way of handling Viratangana Puja in Los Angeles everything. The only thing that is needed is faith in this power, that only by Mahalakshmi Puja in Sofia Bulgaria having love for others is this enlightened love going to give you whatever you Shri Ganesha Pujas in Cabella and Berlin want. There is such a power, an All-Pervading Power. There is no doubt about Shri Ganesha Puja in Chhindwara it and we have to just accept it with our open heart so that it fills it and makes Navaratri Puja in Cabella Diwali Puja in Moscow us a great personality. There is no competition, there is no ambition, there is no jealousy, noth- Seven more pujas in India ing of that kind. The only desire then left is that as I am enjoying myself, let Thirty public programs in Europe others also enjoy. Ten public programs in North America People go out of their way to spread Sahaja Yoga. They work very hard, Twelve public programs in India travel with very little money. They try to convince people, do all kinds of things United Nations public program for no material gain. But the greatest joy is when you see that you have risen Royal Albert Hall public program the Kundalini of another person and given him Self Realization. That lights up Marriages in Ganapatipule and Moscow faces, I have seen many a time. Let this love grow more and more. your

 not a military thing 1994 Guru Puja in Cabella Easter Puja in Sydney Sadashiva Puja in Delhi Sahasrara Puja in Cabella Birthday Puja in Calcutta Mahamaya Puja in Auckland Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cabella Shri Yogeshwara Puja in the USA Shri Ganesha Puja in Moscow Shri Krishna Puja in Cabella Navaratri Puja in Cabella Shri Vishnu Puja in Paris Diwali Puja in Istanbul GURU PUJA • 24 JULY • CABELLA LIGURE Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Jaipur If you want, it can work out. The All-Pervading Divine Power of love is abso- Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule lutely working it out. More than you, the Divine wants this world to change, Shri Raja Lakshmi Puja in Delhi wants to transform the whole universe... You have these powers by which you can introspect yourself. You can wit- Shri Ganesha Puja in Kalwe India Two pujas in Hyderabad India ness yourself and you can surrender because mentally now you are convinced Programs in Hong Kong and Nepal about Sahaja Yoga. Emotionally you are convinced that Sahaja Yoga has given Programs in Tokyo, Taipei and Bangkok you such sense of love and compassion. Physically you are convinced that Marriages in Istanbul and Ganapatipule Sahaja Yoga has given you good health and confidence about your health. Now Thirteen programs in the Americas spiritually, you should be convinced – spiritually, that you are really spiritual Twelve public programs in India people selected by the Divine, that your last lives have been of great seeking. Six public programs in Australia That is why you are born now and you are getting all these blessings. So assume. Assumption of your personality is important. You must med- Eighteen programs in Europe Three programs in Tunisia itate. You should go into thoughtless awareness and all the time keep your The Advent published in Spanish attention alert. That is very important...

 Mother's love just Thoughtless awareness is the first beautiful state you have to achieve. That will give you peace and a witness state to enjoy the drama of life, to enjoy the different varieties of people, while you will be growing within yourself... I am very proud of you. I am very happy that never such disciples existed for any guru... But you don't know why you got Realization, why you are here, what is your speciality, what you have to get. You don't know that. And that is what you have to know.... I think for the first time I have been able to tell something to you which I was hesitating always. "Let it be, just now they are still little babies, it's all right." But now after this, you have to grow – grow in every way.... You are all seekers of truth for and now have come. You have ages you found the truth. So try to identify yourself with truth - that's all – and with you identify yourself with truth and with reality your Sahasrara is reality. If absolutely open. No problem. Truth is in your Sahasrara. And when the truth love. It is comes in, you are surprised that truth is love and love is truth – pure very, very joy-giving and all the niranandas you want to have you can have, if you understand this simple equation that absolute truth is absolute love. I have no expectations. I must tell you I am oversatisfied. As far as I am concerned, I think I have done My job. But now this has to be taken over. You have to be responsible. You have to work it out... There is, if you may call it, a defect: Sahaja Yoga is not a military thing. It is just plain, simple Mother's love. And of course, every mother wants her child to be great, to have all her powers. She wants that, no doubt. How she does it, Shri Mataji in Argentina, Austria how she works it out is her own problem. But how you take it and how you Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada Colombia, France, Germany, Greece use it is your own problem. I always bow to you people who have got Realization because I think so Hong Kong, India, Italy, Japan, Malaysia many saints were never there on this Earth. But the saintliness has to be com- Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand plete. Without that, you cannot help even your family, leave alone your coun- Poland, Romania, Russia, Spain Switzerland, Taiwan, Thailand, Tunisia try and no question of the whole world. So what is needed now is to raise your awakening, to raise your spirituality, Turkey, United Kingdom, Ukraine to go into a realm of complete support and surrender to the movement of this and the United States of America spontaneous movement of Sahaja Yoga.

 1995vemenrespected the most glorious time Shri Mataji addresses a United Nations conference on global issues facing women FOURTH WORLD CONFERENCE ON WOMEN • 13 SEPTEMBER • BEIJING META MODERN ERA This is beyond My imagination. The most glorious time in the history of the world – that at this time we are so much aware of the problems of women. Women as a whole have definitely suffered over the ages because they have not realized what their importance is and what their proper role is in human society. Society itself, which is her creation, tries to control or put down wom- anhood. In the East we can say that, due to the fundamentalist influence, women have been under great pressure and their morality is based on fear rather than freedom. In the West they have fought for their freedom, but what they have attained is a spurious freedom. The women in the West have freedom to abandon all social and moral values. Thus, in the East, we can say that most HER HOLINESS SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI of the women are timid, oppressed and cannot express themselves, while in the Meta Modern Era published West we find most of the women are reduced to a sex symbol. They are keen Birthday Puja in Delhi to expose their bodies. Their anxiety is to appear in fashion advertisements and Easter Puja in Calcutta very cheap popularity. Most of them accepted this position because otherwise they could not have survived in that chaotic world of the West. Sankranti Puja at Pratishthan What most of the women in the East would regard as very humiliating Adi Kundalini Puja in Cabella Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cabella and degrading is regarded as something very glorifying in the West. I have Mahashivaratri Puja in Australia seen both the worlds very deeply and I feel that unless and until you bring a Holi celebration and puja in Delhi new culture by which women from the East and West can both rise in their Guru and Shri Krishna Pujas in Cabella own esteem and express themselves in such a way that they create high moral Sahasrara and Navaratri Pujas in Cabella standards for their society, women neither in the East nor in the West will rise Devi Shakti Pujas in Moscow and USA to their full stature of feminine speciality. The speciality is that if women are Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule respected for their womanhood, understanding what they are capable of and Shri Ganesha Puja in Cabella how they can empower themselves with all the education needed, all the secu- Diwali Puja in Nargol India rity will be provided to them and they will provide security to the society. Programs in Beijing and Taipei Programs in Hong Kong and Tokyo Shri Mataji in Argentina, Austria, Australia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China Programs in Kathmandu and Bangkok Germany, Hong Kong, Hungary, India, Italy, Japan, Malaysia, Nepal, Romania, Russia Nine public Switzerland, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, UK and USA programs in Europe

 I am,satisfied 996 in my lifetime Shri Mataji in Australia, Austria Bulgaria, Canada, Czech Republic Egypt, Hong Kong, Hungary, India Italy, Malaysia, Nepal, Portugal Romania, Russia, Taiwan, Thailand United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom and the United States of America GURU PUJA • 28 JULY • CABELLA LIGURE In My lifetime, if I see so many of you so much transformed, looking so Sankranti Puja in Pune beautiful, so nice, creating such a good atmosphere, it is more than satisfaction Birthday Puja in Delhi for Me. And sometimes I think there is nothing to be done now any more, Easter Puja in Calcutta finished. But then they invite Me here and they invite Me there, so I am just Mahalakshmi Puja in Moscow Mahashivaratri Puja in Sydney doing. But to be very frank, I am over satisfied.... Once you have planted the mango tree and looked after it for three, four Shri Krishna Pujas in Cabella and USA years, then it looks after itself. It gives fruits. It doesn't need any water, nothing. Sahasrara and Guru Pujas in Cabella It just grows by itself. In the same way, it should happen with you. You should Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cabella Diwali Puja in Lisbon grow by yourself... This guru is supposed to tell something to the disciples about correcting Navaratri Puja in Cabella themselves. In My own sweet way, I have said it to you, which you should Shri Ganesha Puja in Cabella not mind. I do not mean to condemn you by any chance, but to give you a Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule proper sense of introspection, a proper sense of introspection by which you all Public program in Kuala Lumpur get your gurupada. My only – I should not say "desire" because I do not have Programs in Sydney and Bangkok CC - so My only vision is that I should see all the Sahaja Yogis drenched Programs in Kathmandu and Cairo desire in the power of love, enjoying each other's love, enjoying each other's rela- Programs in Hong Kong and Taipei tionships and improving relationships. I know there are problematic people. I Eight public programs in Europe know they are problematic, but if you cannot solve a problem, what is the use Six public programs in India of your becoming masters? Five programs in North America So I leave it to you to solve your own problems which you are facing with Shri Mataji at Gyaneshwar conference introspection, with love and compassion, not by condemning yourself. I am Health Centre opens in India sure you can manage it.

 1997eethe beaun Cuty this is sahaj dharma beautv SHRI KRISHNA PUJA • 23 AUGUST • CABELLA You are all children grown-up of Mine and I want you to know all the beauties that are within you that you have to enjoy. First of all, learn to laugh at yourself. That is the best way to enjoy yourself, not to spend much time at the mirror. That is another should see is inside. What way. you “Are we sahaj dharmis? Mother has CC established sahaj dharma much more than what Krishna wanted to establish. He wanted to establish the dharma of love, which of course, we have. But apart from that, we have so many other beautiful facets and such beautiful things within our personality that we have forgotten to enjoy..." You must try to see the beauty as Sahaja Yogis. You should be sensitive to see how you have been helped, Shri Mataji in Canada, India, Italy, Portugal, Russia, Ukraine UK and the USA how you have been guided, how Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cabella you have been blessed. This is sahaj Birthday Puja in Delhi Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule Shri Shiva Pujas in Mumbai and Delhi dharma.... This is the new dharma we have Shri Krishna Pujas in USA and Cabella Shakti New Year's Puja in Kalwe India established now in this world. A Sahasrara and Guru Pujas in Cabella Puja in Moscow Shri Ganesha Puja in Cabella Marriages in Cabella new race with a new dharma, which is much above even Shri Krishna's Navaratri Puja in Cabella Four public programs in Russia vision is coming true. Diwali Puja in Lisbon Five programs in North America

 1998 non-violénće the witness state surng SHRI KRISHNA PUJA • 16 AUGUST • CABELLA LIGURE This is the best way to bring non-violence. In violent places you go and stand steadily there, facing all the things that are happening. And that witness state acts, acts and stops that kind of a violence that is going on. But the witness state is not a mental state. It is a state of a spiritual ascent where you become a witness. The best way to practise the witness state is not to criticize anyone.... Actually there is nothing to be criticized. You just watch and see for yourself... Your attention itself is enlightened now. With that enlightened attention, you can just watch and stop the nonsense that is there. But we are always conscious that we are something great and we have to do this and we have to Shri Mataji in India, Italy, Russia do that. Under these circumstances what happens is that you become another Turkey, United Arab Emirates problem. Because what can you do? You cannot do anything. But what you and the United Kingdom can do is to watch. By watching and by just seeing things as they are, you really Guru Puja in Cabella develop a very different state of being... Birthday Puja in Delhi of witnessing you all should develop. Try to develop it so that Easter Puja in Istanbul This power when you are reacting, stop the reaction. Stop the reaction about everything. Sahasrara Puja in Cabella You will be amazed. You will find yourself a very, very powerful person in the Navaratri Puja in Cabella will have no ambitions, you will have no desires, you will have no Shri Krishna Puja in Cabella sense you Shri Ganesha Puja in Cabella special fondness or anything, but just you are witnessing the drama. It is very interesting to witness also because then you understand the Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cabella humour behind everything, you understand the stupidity behind everything. Diwali Puja in Novi Ligure Italy You understand also how people have been so violent and you just laugh at it. Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule You do not get upset, excited, nothing. You just laugh at it. After some time New Year's Puja in Kalwe India will be amazed. Your witness state will increase and, when in the collective Marriages in Cabella you all of you have that witness state, you can do wonders without doing anything, Medical conference in Italy without saying anything, without acting. Only your presence itself can work Scientific conference in Moscow it out. I do not say that it will have an effect on everyone ... but most of the Programs in Delhi and Moscow people. Any person who is in that state, he is the one who brings peace. He Marriages in Cabella and Ganapatipule brings joy.

 celebrate: ate ve realization DIWALI PUJA • 7 NOVEMBER • DELPHI GREECE The guideline is such that we should know that we are realized souls. And what is so important? Why have we become realized souls? Not only for our pure desires, but also for others. And in that understanding that we are not only for ourselves but for others, you become collectively conscious and you start helping others. You will stand very well, otherwise you are lost and the others are also lost. E6661 This way we have to really go ahead, go ahead towards the truth way is the Shri Mataji in Canada, Greece, India and bring that truth for the other people and save them. This is how you can Italy, Turkey, United Arab Emirates express your love to them, all your caring... To talk about this subject is much easier than to assimilate it within our- United Kingdom and the USA Birthday Puja in Delhi selves.... In meditation you will assimilate and the same power of discrimina- Shivaratri Puja in Delhi tion that you think is within you, of giving vibrations, of doing all kinds of Guru Nanak Puja in India things out of Sahaja Yoga will be completely, continuously acting... Celebrate and be happy that we have so many Sahaja Yogis all over the Gudi Padwa Puja in Noida India Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Canajoharie world. There is hope for the whole world and we can save all people who are Shri Hanuman Puja in Pune lost in the wilderness. That is a fact, no doubt. But after that celebration and everything, we should sit back ... and watch what is happening and you will be Sahasrara Puja in Cabella Easter Puja in Istanbul amazed that in meditation you will be revealed with all the beauties you have Guru Puja in Cabella achieved, all kinds of things that you have achieved. And all the worries and Virata Puja in Cabella botherations of things will disappear. This should happen to you all and this is Navaratri Puja in Cabella what I request you all to have – this special capacity to understand yourself. Shri Ganesha Puja in Cabella My own hope is fulfilled. To see you sitting down here I feel overjoyed, Diwali Puja in Delphi Greece the same way you will also feel when you all will try to raise the Kundalini of Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule others and establish them in Sahaja Yoga. You will be amazed what will happen Marriages in Cabella Ligure Italy to you. It is so joyous to give Realization to others... I bless all with this special power that you give Realization to people Public program in Istanbul Turkey you Programs in Toronto and Vancouver and look after the Nabhi of the people. It is very, very important to understand Programs in Los Angeles and London how far you can go. We have to change the world. We have to save the world. Public programs in Milan and Athens It is your responsibility. You have got Realization, not the others, so do not try in Mumbai and Pune to find faults with others. Think about you, that Public have Realization and it is you programs expected that you should spread Sahaja Yoga. Programs in New York and Washington

 BIRTHDAY CELEBRATIONS • 19 MARCH • DELHI INDIA I have been watching how Sahaja Yoga has grown from one person to all this.... This all has shown that the time has come for the whole world to change. And this transformation is the most important thing what we should aim at. Forget about everything. Forget about politics, economics, this, that, but get transformation. Once you are transformed, you know how to do the right thing, how to do the things that will help you and the society. All this you already have seen in your life.

 200i di64o live st way.tO sahaj culture t Shri Mataji in Canada, China, Italy India, Turkey, United Arab Emirates United Kingdom and the USA Easter Puja in Istanbul Shivaratri Puja in Pune India GOricape Gudi Padwa Puja in Noida India Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Canajoharie Birthday and Bhoomi Pujas in Delhi Guru and Sahasrara Pujas in Cabella Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule New Year's Puja in Kalwe India CHRISTMAS PUJA • 25 DECEMBER • GANAPATIPULE INDIA Shri Ganesha Puja in Cabella My vision is too great for one life. I want a global Realization. I want Shri Krishna Puja in Cabella people all over the world to have Realization.... You must try to learn Sahaj Diwali Puja in Los Angeles culture. In a Sahaj culture, how do we talk, how do we live, how do we Navaratri Puja in Cabella contact? It is something very different. And then, once you start Sahaj cul- Marriages in Canajoharie ture in your life, you will be amazed – others will be amazed – how you are Marriages at Ganapatipule having rapport with each other, how you are looking after everything so well. This is the best way to live in this world – as Sahaja Yogis, where there Marriages in Delhi and Cabella is no ego, there is no conditioning, nothing. You are just absolutely free Seven programs in North America from all these horrible attributes and then you will be amazed how people Public program at Royal Albert Hall Six public programs in Italy will trust you, how they will like you. Public program in Istanbul SHRI KRISHNA PUJA • 20 AUGUST • CABELLA LIGURE ITALY You have a beautiful enlightened society of very good friends, of very SO good spiritual people. With all this, if you cannot create, then what should I say? You have to create something. It may be art. It may be music. It may be poetry. It be literature. It may be writing. Whatever it is, you have may to create. And above all, you have to create Sahaja Yogis. That is the main creation you have to achieve.. Nothing is more important than becoming a mahayogi, by which your spirit gives joy, peace and blessings to every- one.

 den't keen it to vourself 12001 keep it, to you don't urse the kundalini knows Shri Mataji in China, India, Italy Greece, Turkey, United Arab Emirates United Kingdom and the USA Sankranti Puja in Pune Guru Puja in Cabella Shivaratri Puja in Pune Birthday Puja in Delhi Easter Puja in Istanbul Navaratri Puja in Greece SAHASRARA PUJA • 6 MAY • CABELLA LIGURE ITALY So many years have passed. I have worked quite hard, day and night, and My Sahasrara Puja in Cabella Diwali Puja in Los Angeles only desire was that you people should take it seriously and work it out. Do not keep your Realization to yourself. As many people as you can, give Shri Ganesha Puja in Cabella Realization. The greatest obligation will be on Me and on God Almighty. The Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cabella only thing is that you should try to give Realizations to others. You will never Shri Krishna Puja in Canajoharie make a mistake. You can never make a mistake because the Kundalini knows. Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule She knows you. She knows you are realized souls. She will respect you. Even if New Year's Puja in Kalwe India you make mistakes, she will correct it and she will help you, in every way. Marriages in Canajoharie I am just a housewife who had no support from anyone, but I was sure that Marriages in Cabella it was My job to find out how to break the Sahasrara ... which I did. Marriages in Ganapatipule also know that, so this is your job... You have to strengthen Public program at Royal Albert Hall Now you My hands. They say the Goddess has one thousand hands, but even the one Public programs in the United States thousand hands are now asking that you come along with your two hands and Programs in Delhi, Athens and Istanbul work it out. It is very important what you have to do. All kinds of problems in this world, they come because of ignorance.... How it is solved is also in your power with the Divine.

 2002miline face Ges learn from children Shri Mataji in Germany India, Italy, Singapore, Turkey United Arab Emirates, UK and USA Mahashivaratri Puja in Pune Gudi Padwa Puja in Delhi Birthday Puja in Delhi Guru Puja in Cabella Easter Puja in Istanbul Sahasrara Puja in Cabella Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cabella Shri Krishna Puja in Canajoharie Shri Ganesha Puja in Frankfurt Shri Ganesha Puja in Cabella Diwali Puja in Los Angeles Navaratri Puja in Los Angeles Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule New Year's Puja in Vaitarna India Marriages in Cabella Marriages in Ganapatipule Programs in Delhi and Istanbul Two public programs in New York SHRI GANESHA PUJA • 14 SEPTEMBER • CABELLA LIGURE ITALY One should look at things from Ganesha's angle. How will you do it? How will you use it? You will learn from children, how they watch things and how they work it out, how they think. You would be amazed how sensible they are and the very sensible things they say ... how innocent they are, how simple they are. They are very generous.... They are wonderful people and we have to learn a lot from children. Their smiling faces and their joy should teach us how to behave because Ganesha shines through them very clearly.

 203 a bromise our destinies are quided our destini es DIWALI PUJA • 9 NOVEMBER • LOS ANGELES USA We have to be very sincere with ourselves because it is not just a borrowed love or a borrowed joy, but it is from within the source that it is flowing, flow- ing and flowing. So that is to be awakened and that love should flow and our small petty things like jealousies and competitions and all those things which spoil us must be washed And it can be washed if your heart is full of love.... away. We should know also that our destinies are also guided and looked after. We are already a blessed people. There is no doubt about it and we should not worry about small things and small matters. It will all work out very well, you will see, if you just leave it to your destiny, which is very high, very great. With this, your own destiny you will go very far. This is the promise of Diwali to you all: that you will reach the highest and the noblest of life... way Whatever petty problems you have, they will all be washed off. All these are the messages from the Divine. You do not have to worry about petty things, about about jobs. That is not your job. Your destiny will work it out. Shri Mataji in China, France, India, Italy money, You have a promise that you will be looked after. I hope you believe in that the United Kingdom and the USA promise and are joyous in the highest way. Shivaratri and Birthday Pujas in Delhi Sahasrara and Guru Pujas in Cabella Shri Sadashiva Puja in Pune BIRTHDAY PUJA • 21 MARCH • NIRMAL DHAM DELHI INDIA These are special times, that you have fallen into this trap of love and enlight- Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cabella enment. I was not very sure that you would appreciate the love that one can Shri Krishna Puja in Canajoharie & Pune enjoy within yourself, what is spiritual understanding. I didn't know how you Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule would appreciate and enjoy your Self. That means you are all very much capa- Shri Ganesha Puja in Cabella ble of this tremendous love and this spiritual awakening.... Navaratri Puja in the USA People do not believe that there is something like Sahaja Yoga, that there Diwali Puja in Los Angeles is a power in every human being which is universal and which can be enlight- Marriages in Ganapatipule ened. It is something beyond the conception of human beings that they can Marriages in Cabella and Los Angeles achieve this kind of a spiritual growth within themselves. I wonder how many Vishwa Nirmala Prem inaugurated of you also realize that whatever you have achieved is something great. It is the Arts Academy opens in Vaitarna climax of human development, human growth and all the advancement we Public program in Delhi have made. This will definitely change the world and its understanding.

 love within 2004he greatest guru GURU PUJA • 4 JULY • OCABELLA LIGURE I do not have to say anything for love. Love is an absolute gift, a gift of just feeling others. There is no talking about it, discussing about it, nothing. You just feel that love. To feel the love, one has to have a heart. But how can you Shri Mataji in India have a heart? It is not your own doing. It is all there. So it is something that is already gifted to you. You have it, that you can Italy, United Arab Emirates United Kingdom and the USA feel that love. It is so much joy-giving, peace-giving. Love has its own qualities Sankranti Puja at Pratishthan and one of the qualities is that love understands. Its understanding is not in Shivaratri Puja in Pune words, not in thought, but it understands within. It can feel within, which is Guru Puja in Cabella very important. This is the most important part one has to realize: that love, Birthday Puja in Delhi you can only feel it. You cannot talk about it, you cannot show about it, but it Sahasrara Puja in Cabella is within and you can feel it. And that is why today is your celebration of the guru. It is the celebration where you can feel that love for your guru. That feel- Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cabella Shri Krishna Puja in Los Angeles ing is within and only within can you feel that. Shri Ganesha Puja in Los Angeles We have to understand it is not the show. It is nothing else, but just the Navaratri Puja in Los Angeles feeling within that you know that you have the love of the Divine... It has nothing to do with others. Whether the other loves you or not makes no differ- Diwali Puja in Los Angeles Christmas Puja in Pune ence. It is within yourself. This feeling, this depth is there, which you enjoy.. Marriages in Los Angeles Sometimes you feel that you have lost it. Sometimes you feel you have in Istanbul gained it, but it is there as much as the expanse of a sea. The sea you cannot say today is full and tomorrow is not. It is eternal. In the same the source way, of your love is eternal. You cannot measure it. It is difficult. But it is beyond all your human expressions and it shows your understanding of love, which has no words, which you cannot explain, but by itself you will know that “I have this quality to love within myself and I can enjoy with this love within myself...." within The greatest guru that we have is love, Sahaj love. It is the guru us which teaches us, which somehow or other leads us. We are led into that great line of understanding for which we do not have to go to any college, to any school for education. It is something so much within that it works and expresses itself, expresses like a light. Such people we can make out because they are fully enlightened. They have light and through that light they see the whole world, which is very innocent and simple for them...

 talk of your guru, you should have that love within you. Why do When you you feel it so much? The reason is the guru loves you and you love the guru.... we dre we are In this great opportunity of love that we are, we are here to enjoy each other fully from our heart, that there is this ocean within us. We have to just get sub- that love merged in that ocean. If we are lost in that ocean, then we will have no prob- lems, no questions. Everything will be our own and we can manage everything without any argument, without any questioning. That is what is being Sahaj. The Sahaj way, if you have this love, you enjoy. You enjoy yourself and enjoy everybody else because it is Sahaj. You do not have to make any efforts, do not have to try anything, it is just there and it works... It is without expression. It is just to be felt within yourself. Then you want to do so many things. You want to help everyone. You want to help yourself. You want to do good to others. So much has been done by great leaders of the world because they had that love. They had nothing else but this love, which they could not contain them within themselves, so they tried to spread it. And they are called now as our gurus, as our masters. But it is their love within which approached people in that unique manner. That is the thing that we cannot possess, you cannot claim. It is there and it works. It works automatically. This is what we have to know, that we are that love. That love is within us.... This is what is the guru. It is the love within which wants to share the love you and joy. with others, which wants to give love to others. This is what is peace

 2005 Shri Mataji in India Italy, UK and the USA Guru Puja in USA At the Christmas Puja in 2006 Diwali Puja in Pune Birthday Puja in Pune Christmas Puja in Pune one yogini asked Shri Mataji, Sahasrara Puja in Cabella Shri Krishna Puja in USA Shri Ganesha Puja in USA "Please give us the knowledge." Mahashivaratri Puja in Pune Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cabella Navaratri Puja in Gurgaon India Shri Mataji said, "You will have it." First edition of Nirmal Fragrance

 2006 Shri Mataji in Australia, India, Italy Singapore, the UK and the USA Guru Puja in Cabella Birthday Puja in Sydney Sahasrara Puja in the UK Shri Adi Shakti Puja in the UK Mahashivaratri Puja in Sydney Navaratri Puja in Los Angeles Shri Ganesha Puja in Los Angeles Shri Krishna Puja in Los Angeles Christmas Puja in Pune Diwali Puja in Pune

 2007e sió Ánthe love we are one SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA • 24 JUNE • CABELLA LIGURE Sahaja Yoga means we are one. We are all Sahaja Yogis, but not separately – together. If one understands this fact, have celebrated today's great day of the Adi Shakti. you Why did the Adi Shakti create this world? Why did all this happen? Why don't we think why so much love, so much prosperity has been given to us? We never realize where we are and how much we have got. It is not the money, but the love. And when you will understand, will really love each other and there is no hatred, there is no revenge, you nothing but just love and love and love. This is what is the message of today. We all have to be loving each other....

 We have to promise that for us love is most important.... Still the world is going on with wars, fighting and all kinds of trouble. The whole world has to come up to love each other. There is no other solution but to love and, in that love, there is no selfishness, but enjoyment. And that enjoyment you should feel and give it to others.... Love is the of the Adi Shakti. message think about it: one Adi Shakti created the whole world, how She Now you love is the must have done it, what She must have planned, how She must have organized it. It is not an easy thing. It is only because She loved. Her love is the expression that you are all there and that is why to be one with Her, one should learn to message of should forgive. If you don't love. Of course, in that, you have to know that you won't help. know how to forgive, and find mistakes of other people, you What is your job now is to see that you are loving, that there is no hatred the Adi Shakti for anyone, you do not think of hating someone or hitting somebody. This has to work out. I'm sure this will work out. Human beings, their love is so beautiful. They look beautiful only when they love. So I have to tell you not to make cheap love, but a love that will you enjoy and that another person will also enjoy. It is something to be understood. The way people understand love is sometimes very ridiculous, so one has to first understand what is love, also to understand whether love or not. If you you really love the world, if you really love this creation of God, then there should be no hatred, there should be no fights, but just to see the good points. Shri Mataji in Australia, India, Italy As a mother would see her child, you should see the whole world as a beautiful Singapore and United Arab Emirates WO peace that God has created for you. Shivaratri Puja in Pune Sahaja Yogis have a much greater job, much greater life. They have to show Birthday Puja in Pune that love is a very great thing.... You are all human beings and we have a right Easter Puja in Pune to love. And if you manage somehow to love people, I tell you Sahaja Yoga will Guru Puja in Cabella settle down. Sahaja Yoga is like a tree which requires love as the water. Sahasrara Puja in Cabella Try this. Try around your life and you will find how love pays itself. Not Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cabella to be seen by how much you spend or what you do, it is not that you count all Shri Ganesha Puja in Sydney those things. It is just like an ocean floats everything around, you become like Shri Krishna Puja in Cabella Navaratri Puja in Sydney that, a typical personality of Sahaja Yoga. So all the Sahaja Yogis must decide today that we are going to forgive all Diwali in Noida India the people we hate and we are going to love all of them. Let us see if it works Christmas Puja in Pune out. I am sure it will work out because, first of all, you are all realized souls and, secondly, love is the biggest, biggest boon on human beings, which, if you utilize, there will be no problem of any kind.

 2008"aking since1 970 born with responsibility WOr GURU PUJA • 20 JULY • CABELLA LIGURE ITALY Meta Modern Era You have to take over and work it out. That does not mean you cancel Me – no, not at all. I am there with you a message from the greatest spiritual leader of our time and in every place you work, you put My photograph... become gurus, how Can you imagine, all of you, if you many Sahaja Yogis we will have all over the world...? It is for you to carry the torch, the light. It is your responsibility now. You have got your Realization. I was born with the responsibility. I was born with all the understanding and now you are also. Understand yourself. Do not condemn yourself ... but be careful. Do not become egoistical. You have to be very humble, very humble with everyone. And work it out because, if they are not realized souls, you should not condemn them, but tell them very patiently and sweetly, "You are not all right." Tell them how to meditate, how to improve. It is now a very big responsibility. Actually I have done this SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI work and you can do this work also. So you all have to Everyone, stanal , a a matter of urgenrg, has to unders become a guru.... their vitul role in this great age of trandformation. I bless that you all become gurus. Whatever you you A new edition of Meta Modern Era published have got now, do not waste it, do not throw away it away, Shri Mataji in India, Italy and United Arab Emirates but useit for the betterment of people. I want to tell you what are the qualities needed for a Sahasrara and Shri Krishna Pujas in Cabella That Shri Ganesha and Christmas Pujas in Pune guru. First of all, he should be a detached person. Guru and Shri Adi Shakti Pujas in Cabella does not mean you give up your family or anything, but Mahashivaratri Puja at Prathishthan you should have a detached attitude that anybody from Sankranti Puja at Prathishthan your family does wrong, you should go away from him or Birthday Puja in Chhindwara her. Secondly, through your Realization, you can see that Shri Ganesha Puja in Cabella you can spread happiness and remove their problems. You Navaratri Puja in Cabella have seen whatever I have done. You can do it. You have will Diwali in Noida India got power to do it. But no hypocrisy, otherwise you Easter Puja in Nagpur spoil the name of Sahaja Yoga.

 I have done My best and I think I won't be able to do this again. It is not My old age, it free but I want to give you a complete freedom to spread Sahaja Yoga. You have got also have to give it to people free. and you Now I have been working since the year 1970. And today, so many years I have worked so hard, but I cannot now do it. I have to go back and take some rest.... All of you, promise Me that you will try to become gurus. I did not take any money from you, nothing from you. I just want that you should spread Sahaja Yoga.... You have to save the world. All My work is that.... May God bless you.... Thank you, all of you.

 2002 Sahaja Yoga is just one of My aspects The enjoyment of Sahaja Yoga is the best way to know Sahaja Yoga

 YOGA FORTY SSAHAJA it YEARSS PHOTOGRAPHS 1970: date and place uncertain 1973: India, 1973 1974: date and place uncertain 1975: Bombay, date uncertain 1976: Shri Mataji and six Sahaja Yogis, circa 1976, Oxted United Kingdom 1977: Guru Puja, London, 1 July 1977 1978: UK seminar, Easthampstead Park UK, October 1978 (Patricia Proenza) 1979: Holi Puja, India, 1979 1981: Shri Ganesha Puja, Sydney Australia, 4 April 1981 1982: Guru Puja, Nightingale Lane ashram, London, July 1982 1983: Guru Puja, Lodge Hill Sussex UK, July 1983 1984: Navaratri Puja, Paris, 30 September 1984 (Allesandra Pallini) 1987: Shri Mahalakshmi Puja, Belgium, 9 October 1987 (H. Reininger) 1988: Ganapatipule India, circa 1993 (Toni Grabmayer) 1989: boat to Capri Italy, May 1989 (Herbert Reininger) 1990: Shri Ganesha Puja 1990, Lanersbach Austria, 26 August 1990 1991: village in India, circa 1990 1993: place unknown, 1993 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE www.divinecoolbreeze.org SUBSCRIPTIONS: contact@divinecoolbreeze.org CONTENT: 1994: Tunis Tunisia, November 1994 editor@divinecoolbreeze.org 1994: India, 1994 1996: New York, September 1996 1997: New York public program, 10 June 1997 1998: Shri Adi Shakti Puja, Cabella Italy, June 1998 1999: Diwali Puja, Delphi Greece, November 1999 2000: beach at Ganapatipule India, December 2000 (Wolfgang Hollerweger) 2001: Shri Adi Shakti Puja, Cabella Italy, June 2001 PRINTED BY King Printing Company Inc. 181 Industrial Avenue East Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA 2002: Shri Ganesha Puja, Frankfurt Germany, September 2002 2003: Shri Ganesha Puja, Cabella Italy, September 2003 (Michal Markl) 2004: Birthday Puja entertainment, Delhi, 19 March 2004 (Anjan Upadhya) 2005: Shri Krishna Puja, Parsippanny USA, 28 August 2005 (Neil King) 2006: 11 February 2006, Sydney Australia (Matthew Cooper) 2007: Easter Puja, 8 April 2007, Pratishthan Pune India (Paul Anant) 2008 top: 26 January 2008, Pratishthan Pune India (Suneel Janakwar) 2009: Easter Puja, 12 April 2009, Cabella Italy (Calin Chirou) Back cover: Navaratri Puja, Los Angeles, 24 October 2004 (Neil King) PRINTED BY Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. No.8, Chandragupta Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411038 Maharashtra, India WORDS of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Opposite page top: Cowley Manor Seminar United Kingdom, 31 July 1982 Opposite page bottom: Shri Ganesha Puja, Kalwe India, 31 December 1991 Back cover and this page lower right: Sydney Australia, 17 March 1993 You are beyond time, Please forgive any errors is this publication. The information and facts included are based largely on the inventories of talks and pujas compiled over the years, articles and records published in The Divine Cool Breeze, Nirmala Yoga and other Sahaja Yoga periodicals, as well as timelines compiled by Sahaja Yogis. At all stages, errors are inevitable, but certainly our biggest error is that of omission. Even if this magazine was a hundredfold in size, it would still only represent a minute fraction of the forty years of labour, attention and love gifted to us by Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. This history of Sahaja Yoga is neither comprehensive nor definitive. It is a sampling. into the timeless dimension, enjoying yourself. That's the beauty we have to achieve. The Sahaja Yoga World Foundation's Media Project totals Shri Mataji's recorded talks at 3023. Of these, 632 are puja talks. Public programs are numbered at 1172. This is not a complete list and only accounts for those talks that have been recorded, identified and catalogued. That state we have to reach. Kaalateet. Beyond time. Timeless. Everything happens just in the right moment.

 You are beyond time



----------------------

2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Dvine Cool ODneeTOZ
Ihe
Dwime Tool VMreez
The
2010 issue 2 – volume twenty-three number two
ESAHAJA YOGA • FORTY YEARSS
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 like a cool breeze
DIWALI PUJA • 29 OCTOBER 1995 • NARGOL INDIA • TRANSLATED FROM HINDI
I used to think, "Why are men doing such a drama and what has happened
to them? Why are they doing all this nonsense?" But to whom was I to say all
these things? I was all alone then.
At the time when I arrived here, the only confusion was what must be
done. After coming here, when I saw this rakshasa was mesmerizing people, I
realized then if at that time somehow the Sahasrara was not opened, then God
knows where these people would ultimately be lead. Moreover, the spell of his
influence could not be ignored and also what would have been the fate of his
disciples, those who were trying to seek God and the truth?
Then I decided to stay the night at the seashore. I was all alone and felt
very
good. There was no one around to say a word. And then in meditation, I felt
that the time had arrived when the Sahasrara must be opened. The moment I
desired for the opening of the Sahasrara, what I noticed was that the Kundalini
rose like a telescope within Me, opening one stage after the other, travelling
khat, khat, khat. The colour of it was like the mixture of all the
upward
colours of these lamps put together, with which you have decorated. It was like
the colour of molten red-hot iron.
Then I saw the external structure of the Kundalini that kept on rising up,
Through the words
creating sounds at each chakra. The Kundalini rose up to pierce the Brahma-
of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi,
randhra. Piercing Mine was not a big deal, but then I thought it would now
we celebrate these forty years
become easier in the world.
of Sahaja Yoga. From the opening
I felt at that moment whatever energy was there above suddenly entered
within Me like a cool breeze from every direction. It was then I realized that
of the Sahasrara in 1970 to the
now there was no harm in starting the work.
moment that is now in 2010,
each year has been a stepping stone
SHRI MATAJI TALKS ABOUT HER EARLY LIFE • 8 JULY 1986 • VIENNA
in our collective story. Each of us is
The last chakra was opened. I saw the Kundalini, which is the primordial force
within us, which is the Holy Ghost within us, rising like a telescope opening
a thread in the fabric that is Sahaja
Yoga, all these years in the making.
out. I saw the whole thing open and a big torrential rain of breeze started flow-
Of Sahaja Yoga, She is the author.
ing through My head all over. I felt, "I am lost now. I am no more there. It is
that is there." I saw it completely happening to Me...
Of our ascent, She is the artist.
only the
grace
In 1970 this happened, on the fifth of May.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 I came for this purpose
DIWALI PUJA • 29 OCTOBER 1995 • NARGOL • TRANSLATED FROM HINDI
The confusion was all over. Yet not being completely certain about the deci-
sion, I thought with all calmness that at last the time had come now. “At most
what will happen? People will protest or beat Me up. At maximum, they will
laugh or make fun or, beyond that, they are going to kill Me." But then there
was nothing to fear. This ultimately had to be done. I had come on Earth for
this purpose only, to awaken the collective consciousness in human beings. I
thought, until people received their Self Realization or understood their own
Self, this task would be impossible.
Whatever else one would have tried to do in this world would be of no
use at all. That was the reason to begin with that I worked it out on an old
lady who knew Me well. When she received her Realization, then I was then
satisfied. I said to Myself, "Well, at least one has received her Realization." By
any means was it an easy task to give Realization in this Kali Yuga? But then
when one of them received Realization, I felt many others could also
their
get
Realization. And especially at the level of collective consciousness, it would be
easier to give awareness. It was easy to give Realization to one person. It was in
fact very easy to make a person aware. But to work it out on a collective level
on the masses, it demanded more work.
So I had to work a bit more with My acquired experiences with the humans.
As a matter of fact, I felt that when I had to stop, what would be the factors
that would be required to consider for taking out the bad habits or individual
problems or conditionings from human beings. Because one individual had one
type of problem, another had a second type, while the third had
yet another
type. I thought if it had to be worked out on a collective level, then everyone
should
the benefit with a single en-masse Realization. Everyone should be
get
able to gain out of it. Now I cannot explain it to you here, but it is true that
these types of workings had never been done before on a collective level.
I had achieved all these through meditation.
SSAHAJA YOGA FORTY YEARSS
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 1971 =1972
Twelve Sahaja Yogis
Talk in Dhulia India
Guru Purnima in Bombay
Shri Mataji travels from India to USA via Malaysia, Singapore, Hong Kong,
Taiwan
7 JANUARY 1990 • GANAPATIPULE
GURU PURNIMA • BOMBAY • 1 JUNE 1972 • TRANSLATED FROM HINDI
I had to become guru in this life, as this was not done in
For the first four years I did not
other lives. For
any
the first time, the work of a guru had to be done. Perhaps it is also a mother
even allow them to have any puja
whatsoever. Even when they said,
who had to become the guru. This is supposed to be the Kali Yuga and prob-
ably for that very reason especially, all the shaktis of the Divine
"You are our guru, so You should
put together
allow us to have Guru Puja,"
had to flow from the Mother's heart... It is all in our destiny and that is why
I said, “Nothing doing. I will not."
in this life the position of guru had to be accepted. If a mother has to become
כ
Then first, after four years, on the
a guru, it becomes rather a very difficult situation, as a mother is supposed to
Navaratri day, they wanted to have
be of a very soft nature. A guru may hit or strike or at times can also be very
one puja. I said, “All right, you
harsh. But to a mother, even if she has to speak harshly, it hurts in her heart and
is very painful for her. And when she finds how her children have struggled to
can have it, but very few people."
And then they found that that puja
rise after attaining all sadhana [penances and spiritual seeking], she is worried
them so much of vibrations,
how to nourish them with all love and care in order to salvage them...
gave
so much of elated spirituality and
Ramdas Swami, once speaking on the qualities of a guru, said that one
it touched so many dimensions
should accept a guru who indeed is as precious as a paras in his qualities [like
suddenly that then they started
Midas who changes stone into gold]. His Midas touch does not turn others
into gold but transforms them into another Midas like himself. And that is
requesting Me, “Mother, You must
why it is like the form of a mother. A mother is within her children. She feels
give us a puja." Even in India,
proud in the pride of her children. Perhaps that is why God Almighty had the
where we have this system of puja,
a mother.... Try to give
desire for you to get this love and knowledge through
people have no idea how to do it.
to others. Try to make them understand.... They are all My children.
It was very embarrassing, but I had
to tell them each and every thing...
DIWALI PUJA • 29 OCTOBER 1995 • NARGOL INDIA • TRANSLATED FROM HINDI
When the Kundalini was awakened in that lady, I felt that some kind of a
The complete attention, dedication
entered within her and she started recognizing Me with the help
and the complete importance that
power
of that subtle power. Then twelve more got their Realization.... I worked on
do is
you give to anything that
you
very important. If you do not give
each and every chakra of these first twelve people, as the foundation had to be
it the highest priority, it does not
strengthened in them. The foundation can become strong only when materials
work. If it is just “by the way," it
are piled on it. But to make it strong, one has to also put in a lot of labour...
doesn't work. So it is important to
By working on them, I then realized one thing that was needed at that time
understand that if you have to gain
to make these twelve people understand. Each of them had an entirely different
mentality. To integrate them as one with the help of the light of their spirits was
anything in this puja, you have to
give it the highest priority. | like the needle threading the flowers into a single garland.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 273
3
clickike a spark
C
SHRI KRISHNA PUJA • 28 AUGUST • BOMBAY
Oh, we tried and tried and tried in different lives. Nothing
worked. And now it is going to click like a spark. The chain
reaction will start. But we have to have strong machines to
carry that, otherwise the fuse will be off. Only the strength
that is in you is to be felt by your attention. That is the only
thing you have to do. It is to feel your attention and give up
all that is falsehood.... Accept only the truth and the truth
will give you that power to be the real instrument, to carry
this channel, that force of love....
Every moment you are in meditation, just think of the
moment and the dynamism of that moment, the complete
power that is feeding every moment just to go inside you.
It will flow through your Sahasrara inside your being and
completely revolve around your whole being and transform
the inside into a complete Chaitanya Shakti, a complete
Divine Power. Allow it to come in. Accept it. Accept it
without
fear. Let it get in. Every moment keep awake. It
any
is a very precarious time that we are up to. I have only two
hands. You can see that very clearly....
I can do everything, but not to make you do something.
First western Sahaja Yogis meet Shri Mataji in London Your will will be respected throughout. Every other thing
should be a
First Sahaja Yoga public program: Dhulia India can be looked after
for one, that
you
except
The talk Seven Chakras and Their Deities perfect machine, a perfect channel, a perfect flute for My
Talks in Delhi, Pune and Bordi Lord to play that tune of love. It is for you to clear out all
Shri Krishna Puja in Bombay your seven holes. It is for you to clear out your hollowness
Pubic programs in Bombay and to be complete within yourself and He knows His
Public program in Nagpur job. He is the artist. But you are the instruments. And the
Shri Mataji moves to UK harmonious music from so many souls can fill the ears of
Seminar in Bombay these evil people and can penetrate into their heart and put
love into them and it may be that they themselves will give
their evil ways and fall at the feet of love.
up
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 1974
9/something important
working
startea woking
SHRIMATAJI TALKS ABOUT HER EARLY LIFE • 8 JULY 1986 • VIENNA
got elected to his post [in 1974] ... so when I came to London
My husband
we had one program in Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan. They arranged it. The Indians
abroad are not so much interested in God. They are more interested in money,
so none of the Indians stayed there. They all ran away and it was only the for-
eigners who were there. There were about seven hippies. So I had to work on
them, seven hippies. For four years I was working on them to give them Real-
ization. In between I used to go to India and in India also the work was done
for three months. Always I would be in India.
So we started working in the villages, especially surprisingly where My
forefathers were ruling in that area. The work started moving in a very big way.
And then we started taking some people to India. Some people came from
Public programs in Bombay Australia to India like that and the work started moving in those directions.
Vibrations that are Love
Then gradually the work improved and people found that this is the way
we can transform ourselves. Many people who were taking drugs or alcoholic
or mad people or cancer people, they felt better. Then they got cured and it
was established that Sahaja Yoga is something very important.... That is how
we started our work....
It was a difficult task in the West. Of course, in India it spread very fast in
the villages, but city people in India also are westernized and they start ana-
lyzing. They don't know much about our past. They do not know anything
about our heritage, that we have our Kundalini and all that. But some people
do know about Self Realization. But these gurus could not stick on in India
because nobody would accept them. So they all ran away abroad. And that
was something of a blessing for Me also because I did not have to fight and it
started working out. And then people found that it helps in every way and they
found so many miracles about it. And that is how Sahaja Yoga got settled....
The
this industrial revolution has come in the West, people have lost
way
their moorings. Perhaps they are so confused. With all these gurus coming
CO.
down here confusing them and all kinds of new things coming, they don't know
where to look. But unless and until you get your evolution completed, unless
and until you reach that absolute state of understanding, the chaos will remain.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 joy in the heart975
one in love
2 SEPTEMBER • INDIA
CC
You must pray to God and ask what you want. Ask for “complete satisfac-
tion in my heart, joy in my heart, bliss in my heart, so that the whole world
becomes blissful. Give me love, love that I could love the whole world and that
the whole world becomes one in love. Give salvation to this humanity, which
is suffering. Take me to Your Feet. Cleanse me with Thy love."
Now see if there is God or not? You can feel within yourself. He hears
you.
He is the glory of all the glory. He loves you. He protects
He understands you.
you. He guides you. He created you to reveal His love, but accept it.
LETTER TO BOMBAY SAHAJA YOGIS TRANSLATED FROM MARATHI
This is the miracle of Sahaja Yoga working through you, My beautiful, dear-
est children. You are not like other people who have gone away from the field
of battle (Kurukshtra). Some are not even yet born to take the load of the future
building of Sahaja Yoga. Your task is tremndous and worthy of great glory. All
such adventures are to be treated like sports. Your mettle will be judged and
your power of love will be tested. Do not get entangled in the webs of maya.
Public programs in Dadar India
Public programs in Bombay
LETTER TRANSLATED FROM MARATHI
The Necessity of Meditation
The unreal starts soon after birth in this world. Your name, village, country,
horoscope, forecasts, many such things get attached to you or others attach Dharma and Adharma
them to you. Once the Brahmarandhra is closed, many types of illusory ideas On Prayer
become a part of your mind.... The atma is never disturbed or destroyed. Only
human attention, in pursuit of desires, leaves its inner path. This is maya.
She has been intentionally created. Without her, the attention would not have
developed. You should not be afraid of maya and should recognize her so that
she will illuminate your path. A cloud hides the sun and also makes it seen. In
the same way, once the maya is identified, she moves aside and the sun is seen.
The sun is always there, but what is the purpose of the cloud? Because of the
cloud, you have an urge to see the sun, which shines for a moment and again
hides somewhere. It gives strength and courage to your sight to see the sun.... I
have come as your Mother.... All this will not be understood by explaining. Just
showing the path will not help. The path will be known only after walking on it.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 197e state of infiniYody
a state of infinity
creates à
a'melody
те
GUDI PADWA • BEING IN THOUGHTLESS AWARENESS • 30 MARCH • DELHI
We have prayers and we have also puja.
Prayers ... if said in your heart with the feeling of complete surrendering
and asking for the eternal, it will be granted. Just ask for that and the rest will
take care of itself step-by-step...
If you get frustrated and unhappy with yourself, then there is going to be a
problem. You have to laugh at yourself and laugh at your mechanism that is out
of gear.
When
start identifying yourself, even with the instrument, then
you
you are not there. You are not the chakra. You are not the different channels.
You are the awareness. You are the power. You are the Kundalini....
The other method we employ is of puja. I have found that puja works
very
well with human beings because it satisfies lots of demands of
habits, that
past
you feel that you are doing something about it. Then you start giving what-
think God has given you, the blessings... When
you praise someone
ever you
from the heart that means you are accepting it. And that is the time when the
chakras start creating a force by which you are thrown, you are triggered, into
that realm of God.
So these puja methods and prayer methods and the mantra methods have
been devised and found out by great thinkers of Sahaja Yoga, the great masters
of Sahaja Yoga, and it is the effort – or you can say the effortless effort – of
the Sahaja Yogis that makes My body vibrate. It extracts the essence from My
body. It makes the infinite release itself through this finite being and it works.
It clicks.
Puja is the time something is oozing out – the nectar – and you just receive
it at that time with full devotion. It is oozing out. If you feel My vibrations
of My chakras at that time, you will realize that even the minute, small, little
wheels in My body are moving in a different space, at a different speed, in a
Seminar in Bombay
different dimension. And I really don't know how to explain, but you see it cre-
Gudi Padwa in Delhi ates a melody. You have to receive it and it is a melody individually – suitable
Description of the Kundalini for every individual. And when you receive it, it triggers in you that state of
Patience and Other Advice infinity. So at the time of puja, you must know that all your attention should
be in reception.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 path
C.Dat
last point of ignition
97atkamiddle.
BIRTHDAY CELEBRATION • 21 MARCH • BOMBAY
Think of love all the time. Love is all knowledge. Knowledge is all love. There
is nothing beyond.
If you have knowledge, it has to pass the test of love. If you know a person,
it makes no record on you because you know him from outside. But if
you
love a person, then you know the person out and out. You know him so well,
– everything, the way it is.... That is the knowledge we have to
you know him
seek.... Come to the stage of understanding the Divine within you, the love of
and enjoy the
God that is within you, which is trying to overflow from
you
sense of emitting and giving. Giving has the greatest joy and pleasure....
Get this eternal truth within yourself. Let your being be that subjective
instrument, to understand what is what. Do not be driven away by a few read-
ings here and a few readings there. Do not be driven away by the small-hearted
ideas and the egoistical tomfoolery that is going on. It is to make fun of every-
one.
Oh Man, please awaken yourself to this great occasion of understanding. Birthday Puja in Delhi
This dynamic force is dying to bubble out of you. We have to change this Mahashivaratri Puja in Delhi
world and transform it into a beautiful creation because the Creator will not Guru and Navaratri Pujas in London
allow His creation to be destroyed. If you do not accept the truth, you will be First public program in the West
Attention Collectivity Responsibility
destroyed..
As a Mother, I ask you to accept the divine truth, the divine love and to be Beyond Human Consciousness
one. I wish all of you – all the Sahaja Yogis and all the people who are seeking Shri Krishna's Sahaja Yoga
the
Love and Dharma
of greatest, highest of highest achievement in the awareness of God
greatest
and with love – that is what it is....
Sat Chit Ananda
You are simple people, ordinary people and that is why you are the best Creation
people, because you do not suffer from any extremes. You have a very simple
heart. You are leading a very religious life and a sanctified married life. This
place is for the people who are in the middle path of Lord Buddha. Sahaja Yoga
is the integration of all the truths of life...
I am not doing it. It is just happening. I have come on this Earth just for
this ignition. This is the last point of ignition. This has to happen and this will
happen.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 1978
high aspirationsves
LETTER TRANSLATED FROM MARATHI • 17 AUGUST
Many, many blessings to all. I have received the beautiful
rakhis lovingly sent by you. A rakhi denotes a protective
power. This protective bandhan is very powerful and, at
the same time, delicate as it represents pure love between
a brother and a sister. Whenever a sister ties this rakhi on a
brother's hand, it establishes a relation of enduring protec-
tion by the brother for the sister.
Unfortunately, the sensitivity of human beings to the
feelings of love has become so weak that tying a rakhi has
become a mechanical ritual. In the absence of a deep,
living faith, all human actions and rituals become dry and
lifeless. We are born in this life with a purposeful responsi-
bility towards all Sahaja Yogis and are all the time aware of
their love and devotion. Myself, being desireless, I depend
entirely on their desires.
It is customary for a brother to ask for something from
Easter Puja in London
the sister on this day. All Sahaja Yogis should therefore col-
Sahasrara and Guru Pujas in London lectively let Me know whatever they desire from My side.
Navaratri and Christmas Pujas in London I am keeping very good health, as this is the
desire of
pure
Public program in London and Birmingham
all of you...
Raksha Bandhan is a very important day and one
Public program in Northampton UK
Public
in Delhi should desire on this occasion to become a whole. You
programs
First seminar in the West should always have high aspirations and your attention
The Brahma Principle should be to larger perspectives. Sahaja Yogis are not
The Bija Mantras expected to waste their attention in petty, small things.
The Three Gunas We have to work very hard. Those of
who have
you
Becoming Subtle achieved good progress should still work out much more.
Satya Yuga We should open more centres. We must help the sick to
Dharma cure their ailments and, above all, strive to bring people
on the path of truth.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 to give meaning
теanin
I declare I am the one
Easter and Diwali Pujas in London
Guru Pujas in London and Delhi
Shri Ganesha Puja in Bombay
Sankranti Puja in Bombay
Sahasrara Puja in London
Birthday Puja in Bombay
Puja in Bordi India
Shri Mataji's Advent declaration
Marriages in Bombay and London
Seminars in Rahuri, London and Bombay
Public programs at Delhi University
GURU PUJA • 2 DECEMBER • DOLLIS HILL ASHRAM LONDON
I never said about Myself because it was felt that human beings have now Chakra series of programs in Delhi
achieved another dimension of ego even worse than at the time of Christ. If Anant Jeevan magazine published
The Meaning of Love
you blame anything, you can call it the Industrial Revolution because you were
The Meaning of Yoga
away from nature....
Today is the day I declare that I am the one who has to save the humanity.
The Advent is published
I declare I am the one who is Adi Shakti, who is the Mother of all the Mothers,
who is the Primordial Mother, the Shakti, the desire of God, who has incar-
nated on this Earth to give its meaning to itself, to this creation, to human
beings. And I am sure, through My love and patience and My powers, I am
going to achieve it.
I was the one who was born again and again, but now in My complete
I
form and complete powers, I have come on this Earth, not only for the salva-
tion of human beings, not only for their emancipation, but for granting them
the Kingdom of Heaven, the joy, the bliss that your Father wants to bestow
upon you.
These words are to be kept within the bounds of Sahaja Yogis only, for the
time being.
The Advent
And today is the day of Guru Puja, not My Puja, but your puja as gurus.
I
anoint all of you as gurus and today I will tell you what I have bestowed upon
you and what great powers you already have within you.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 198
understand sahaja yoga
á great privilege
27 JANUARY • BORDI INDIA
Try to preserve all your powers. Respect yourself. You are a lamp that is burn-
MAHA AVATAR
ing a light, which enlightens others in their mind. It is a very great thing. Even
महा अवतार
millions and billions of people and now
one person like that was born
among
here we have so many of you. But quality-wise if you do not rise, it is going to
be a hopeless case.
So
you must improve your quality. All of you must improve your quality
individually. Not criticizing others, not looking at others, but individually you
should understand your capacities and how much you have given to others and
how much you have really manifested out of what
have
got.
you
IATAJI
DIVI
You have control over the sun, over the moon, over the tides and over the
sea and all those things you have. But for that, you have to do a little more,
First issue Maha Avatar published which I will tell you some other time. Now I don't want you to control all these
Shri Mataji in India, France, Spain things and sit down on top of a hillock and start showing off. Better thing is
Switzerland and the United Kingdom you work it out first on human beings.
Sankranti Puja in Pune
Pujas in Paris and Brighton
SAHASRARA PUJA • 5 MAY • LONDON
Eight major pujas in London I am telling you these things because you are deserving. And in that condi-
Pujas in Bombay and Lausanne tion, you must understand that this is a great privilege that I am telling you all
Marriages in London and Bordi these things. You should feel enamoured that I am telling you that sincerity is
Inauguration of The Advent
the key of your success. It is a privilege. I am giving you the key...
Take it as a privilege. It is a V.I.P. treatment for you. You are all V.I.P.s. I
Programs in Paris, Pune and Bombay
Programs Rahuri, Nice and Lausanne cannot talk like this to the multitudes, but I can tell
this because I want to
you
Programs in Bern, Zurich and Geneva
give you the complete keys. If you can look at yourself as to how privileged you
Programs in Edinburgh and Glasgow are and understand it – understanding what all Sahaj Yoga is
then
you will
Chelsham Road ashram established understand that what a privilege it is for you to be here – what fortune, what
Old Alresford seminar in England
reward for what you have done. How many lives have been completely rewarded
The Meaning of Sahaja Yoga by being here? This will help you to do puja in a more sincere manner...
The Meaning of Reality
This is for your own nourishment, for your own growth, for your own
The Meaning of Puja enjoyment.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 981 adoh
Hol
I am the one Spirit
Hob
Shri Mataji in Australia, Canada
France, India, Italy, Japan, Malaysia
Switzerland, UK and the United States
Sankranti Puja in Pune
Mahashivaratri Puja in Bombay
Sahasrara and Guru Pujas in London
Diwali and Christmas Pujas in London
Shri Krishna Puja in United Kingdom
Navaratri Puja in New York
Mahalakshmi Puja in Rome
Four pujas in Australia
Ten public programs in Sydney
Nineteen public programs in Delhi
PUBLIC PROGRAM • 30 SEPTEMBER • NEW YORK
The greatest thing that is needed for Sahaja Yoga is wisdom. And logically Twenty-two programs in North America
you will reach a conclusion and understand that Sahaja Yoga is the end of all Marriages in Sydney, London and Rahuri
the problems of the world. For example, take capitalism and communism. Shri Mataji moves to Brompton Square
Now, I am a capitalist because I have all the powers and I am a communist Seminars in Paris and Dorset UK
because I cannot enjoy it without giving it to you. But it is spontaneous....
Programs throughout United Kingdom
You get completely integrated. Whatever you do, your heart supports it, Shri Mataji announces Satya Yuga
your mind supports it and your body supports it. You are completely inte- First issue of Nirmala Yoga
grated in one being. That is your spirit....
Normally I don't tell about Myself, but today he exposed Me. As soon as
I came I had to tell – because it is not tactful, it is not tactful to say anything.
NIRMALA YOGA
It is better that
discover Me than I tell
because Christ was crucified,
you
you
नि र्म ला
योग
everybody was tortured. I do not want to hamper My work because it makes
no difference by telling you anything before Realization. It is better to tell you
after Realization that I am the Holy Ghost – no doubt. I am the one about
which Christ has talked. I have told them. I had never said this from a platform
and I told. They have been telling Me, "Mother, You must say that once." I
said, "In America I'll declare it." So today I declare that I am the Holy Ghost. I
am the Holy Spirit, who has incarnated on this Earth for your Realization.
May God bless you. Now, any questions?
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 you are the spirit 982
dedication
Shri Mataji in Austria, Belgium, France
India, Italy, Spain, Switzerland, USA
United Kingdom and West Germany
Sankranti and Durga Pujas in Rahuri
Easter and Shri Rama Pujas in London
Navaratri and Diwali Pujas in London
Birthday Pujas in London and Delhi
Mahashivaratri Puja in Delhi
Guru Puja in London
Shri Krishna Puja in London
COWLEY MANOR SEMINAR • DEDICATION THROUGH MEDITATION • 31 JULY • UNITED KINGDOM
You have to recognize Me. And that recognition is fixed. That condition is Mahakali Puja in Lonavala India
Shri Ganesha Puja in Satara India
fixed. I cannot change it.... You have to dedicate yourself completely to Me –
not to Sahaja Yoga – but to Me. Sahaja Yoga is just one of My aspects. Leaving Sahasrara Puja in Le Raincy France
everything, you have to dedicate. Complete dedication, otherwise you cannot Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cheltenham UK
Shri Ganesha Puja in Switzerland
ascend any further....
You will create your own visions and complete them, fulfill them. You Shri Durga Puja in Vienna
look so simple, as ordinary people, but you are not. In dedication, in complete Christmas Puja in Pune
devotion, you have to do it now, not for your own gain, for your own achieve- First puja in Belgium
ment. That is over now. It is for completely getting out of the mire and stand- Marriages in Delhi
ing on the land, singing aloud the praise of your Father...
Seminar in Lonavala India
You are the ones who are capable of manifesting God's joy on this Earth. Cowley Manor seminar in the UK
You are the flutes which are going to play the melody of God.... You become Nightingale Lane ashram established
the ocean, you become the moon, you become the sun, you become the earth, Twenty public programs in India
you become the ether, the firmament and you become the spirit. You work for
Four public programs in Rome
all of them. All the stars and universes you become and take up their work. Three public programs in France
That is what it is because you have jumped onto your principle, onto your Three public programs in Madrid
tattwa. That is how you jump onto everybody's tattwa. But be dedicated on Programs throughout England
that tattwa because I am the principle of all these things. I am the tattwa - tat- Sahaja Yoga in South Africa
tvamasi. I am the principle. Keep to your principle. I am the Kundalini. I am Understand Your Own Importance
the essence.... With complete freedom and wisdom, you have to sail now, not Understanding the Love of God
afraid of any storms or any hails or any typhoons because from now on you You are Bound by One Thread
All is so Beautifully Made
know
your job is to cross through.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 for lave
greatness of heart
198
Shri Mataji in Australia, Austria, Canada
France, India, Italy, Spain, Switzerland
United Kingdom and the United States
Shri Ganesha Puja in Tivoli Italy
Shri Ganesha Pujas in Rahuri and Nasik
Shri Ganesha Pujas in Perth and Bombay
Shri Ganesha Puja in Vancouver
Sahasrara Puja in Bombay
Mahashivaratri Puja in Delhi
Shri Devi Pujas in Sydney and Paris
Shri Mahalakshmi Puja in Kolhapur
Birthday Pujas in Sydney and Bombay
Mother Earth & Diwali Pujas in London
Shri Buddha Puja in Brighton UK
MOTHER EARTH MAHALAKSHMI PUJA • 21 AUGUST • SURBITON ASHRAM LONDON
This is what today's Sahaja Yoga is: now the Mother Earth is the one who is Guru Puja in United Kingdom
symbolized within you as the Muladhara, as symbolized as the Adi Shakti here Shri Krishna Puja in Santa Cruz
who is sitting down before you to nourish you, to make you grow into new Shri Krishna Puja in Switzerland
Shri Krishna Puja in Los Angeles
personalities, into mature personalities. This concept we must understand....
For the first time after Realization, you can give Her back what you have Shri Krishna Puja in Vienna
from Her. You can give vibrations to Her trees that are created. You can Ekadesha Rudra Puja in New York
got
make them beautiful. You can transform a flower into a more beautiful flower. Guru and Shri Ganesha Pujas in Houston
from the Mother Earth, you can give because your Puja for beginners in Toronto
Whatever
have
got
you
Mother Earth is awakened within you now.
Navaratri Puja in Boston
you return Her back everything that you got from Her and give it to Shri Bhoomi Devi Puja in Delhi
So
others – generosity, the greatness of heart, nobility, forgiveness, love, affection, Shri Mahakali Puja in Lonavala India
bearing everything for love. For the mother to save her child, she will starve Shri Ganesha Puja in Vancouver
herself. She will do everything to save her child. Complete dedication she has Pujas in Houston and Melbourne
for her child. That is a real mother.... That is the real image of a mother. And Havan for America in London
you have an image before you.
Raksha Bandhan in Switzerland
So this is what one has to develop now. Whether you are men or women, Twenty-one programs in North America
as Sahaja Yogis you must develop a new consciousness of affection, love and Fourteen public programs in Australia
More than twelve programs in Delhi
compassion.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 love that thinks
beacon of Mother
1984
Shri Mataji in Austria, France, India
Italy, Switzerland, United Kingdom
the USA and West Germany
New Year and Holi Pujas in Delhi
Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Bombay
Sankranti Puja in Bombay NAVARATRI PUJA • 23 SEPTEMBER • LONDON
Shri Ganesha Puja in Bombay I play with you. I always try to say things that will please you. And it should
Shri Ganesha Puja in Switzerland please you much more that I have said how to reach your depths, reach that
Shri Devi Pujas in Rahuri and Bordi gravity that will make you the gurus... The time has come for all of
you to
Birthday Pujas in Delhi and Bombay become gurus of the right type, not with egos or talking big and creating a
Shri Mahalakshmi Puja in Kolhapur big show out of you, but a definite depth within
that people see that here
you
Shri Chandra Ma Puja in Vaitarna is a beacon of Mother.... I always work through you if you are one with Me.
Mahashivaratri Puja in Pandharpur Even when I am speaking, you are speaking. And when you are speaking, I am
Sahasrara Puja in France speaking. You know that. But with all this, that awe is very important. That
Guru Puja in Leysin Switzerland gives you the love that thinks, a complete integration of your heart and your
Shri Krishna Puja in New Jersey USA brain. The love that thinks is thoughtful.
Shri Mary-Mahalakshmi Puja in Munich
Then the third integration is the love that acts. But first this integration
must be brought in – the love that thinks, which understands, which feels and
Christmas and Easter Pujas in London
Navaratri Pujas in London and France then the love that acts. But the basic is the love. It starts from the heart...
Ekadesha Rudra Puja in Como Italy
Develop the depth in language, in speech, in feelings, in expressions, in the
Raksha Bandhan in London personality. It is only the awe that will make it, but awe which is not frighten-
Seminars in Leysin and Bordi ing, but awe that is joy-giving. This is the integration of it....
Open your
Marriages in Delhi, Bordi & Switzerland
hearts. It does not mean you should be frivolous. With all the
Twenty-one public programs in India care, have you seen a lotus opening, how beautifully it opens? Slowly every
Public programs throughout the UK
petal so careful not to hit another, slowly it opens out. And then the fragrance
Four public program series in London starts pouring in the most dignified manner. Such a flower only can be offered
at the Lotus Feet of the Adi Shakti.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 1985éteater cause
now forward on
A NEW ERA - SACRIFICE FREEDOM ASCENT • 6 FEBRUARY • BORDI INDIA
It is My life, My mission, My existence. My everything is for You have seen so many wars. You
have seen so many war pictures. You
the purpose of the emancipation of humanity. Even the last
have seen how people have fought,
how they have sacrificed themselves.
dif-
drop of My blood is for that. So My satisfactions are very
Let us see what we are doing in this
ferent. Please remember you are born of a very brave Mother. war... Get out of the slavery of your
body, of your conditionings and
Please try to rise. Be proud that we are doing such a tremen-
your nonsensical
ego.
I am sure as a mother I am not
dous task. Have that feeling of great valour. Then only we can
so bad, but as a father I think I lack
some things. Please try to come up
achieve results.
so that I should feel that I did not
Shri Mataji in Australia, Austria, Belgium, France, India, Italy, Mexico
lack in My fatherly attitude towards
Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, USA and West Germany
you – that awe, that understanding
of a father's expectations.
This I am not saying to
Trigunatmika Puja in Netherlands
Easter Puja in London
Sankranti Puja in Bombay
Shri Vishnumaya Puja in London
you because it is some present
Shri Devi Pujas in Pune and Sydney
Gruha Lakshmi Puja in London
situation.... It is My announcement
Mahalakshmi Puja in London
Shri Devi Puja in Dharamshala
of this new dimension into which we
Diwali Puja in Tivoli Italy
Shri Devi Puja in San Diego
have to rise. And as in the war, we
Mahashivaratri Puja in Delhi
Christmas Puja in Pune
have to declare, “Now forward on!"
Birthday Puja in Melbourne
Puja at Brahmapuri River India
In the same way, this is a declaration
Birthday Pujas in Bombay and Delhi
Eleven more pujas in India
in no way to degrade you, in no
Mother's Day Puja in Birmingham
way to insult you or to say anything
Marriages in Bordi and Melbourne
Navaratri Puja in Switzerland
Ten talks at seminar in Bordi
about any one of you, but to just
Navaratri Puja in Delhi
National seminar in the UK
infuse that inspiration which led
First seminar at Ganapatipule
Sahasrara Puja in Austria
thousands and thousands and
Shri Ganesha Puja in Brighton
millions and billions of people to
Four public programs in Munich
Shri Ganesha Pujas in Rome & London
Four public programs in New York
sacrifice for a greater cause.... You are
Shri Krishna Puja in the USA
Vishwa Nirmala Dharma established
the ones who are going to fight. You
та
A New Era talk in Bordi India
are the ones who are responsible.
Guru Puja in France
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 you are the spirit
become the existence
bесoте
SHRI BHOOMI DEVI PUJA • 3 AUGUST • SHUDY CAMPS UNITED KINGDOM
For a Sahaja Yogi, it is important to understand that we are not going to
1986
take anything from here. It is all nothing but clay. And clay is going to remain
here and is going to vanish for ever and ever. What are we going to carry with
us? What are we going to have with us? All the time it is our evolution. It is
now our spirit.
So we are the spirit. We are neither this, nor that, nor that. We are the spirit
Shri Mataji in Australia, Austria and we are absolutely not in any way contaminated by anything that is called
Belgium, France, India, Italy matter.
So we should see to the essence of the Mother Earth, that the Mother Earth
Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland
the UK, USA and West Germany uses Her matter to give joy to others. In the same way, if we use Her to give
Guru Puja in Gmunden Austria joy to others, then you have followed Her path. On the contrary, if you try to
exploit Her, it is like making holes or digging at Her, who is your Mother. If
Shivaratri Puja in Pune
Sahasrara Puja in Italy you try to separate Her into parts that means you are cutting Her body into
Diwali Puja in Delhi different parts. All these human concepts are anti-Mother...
It is very important to understand that unless and until we respect Shri
Christmas Puja in India
Shri Krishna Puja in USA Ganesha within us – our innocence, our chastity – we cannot allow ourselves
Navaratri Puja in Calcutta to be called Sahaja Yogis. That is the first beginning, the first step towards our
Shri Ganesha Puja in USA ascent. We cannot talk of anything else unless and until this foundation is laid
Shri Krishna Puja in Switzerland in the Mother Earth.
Shri Devi Puja in Dourdan France
Shri Mahalakshmi Puja in Belgium
CHALLENGE THE PAST AND THE FUTURE • 7 JULY • VIENNA
Shri Bhoomi Puja at Pratishthan site You will have experiences in life, one by one, and you will be amazed how
Birthday Pujas in Bombay and Delhi
things work out. And then you will realize that you are not an ordinary Sahaja
Shri Kartikeya Puja in West Germany
Yogi. Whatever you have committed wrong in the past or whatever you used to
Fourteen more pujas in India think of the future, the present becomes divine. And that divine present is the
Marriages in Ganapatipule ocean of joy of which you are the part and particle. Just enjoy that. Then you
Raksha Bandhan in London do not think about who is the enjoyer and who is the creator. You just become
the existence. Existence is the present.
Five public programs in Italy
That is how it works out, where you lose all words, all thoughts, all feel-
Three public programs in Madrid
Shudy Camps established in the UK ings, which are an emotional type. An absolutely silent confidence you drink
More than twenty-five programs in India like the nectar of life.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 1987fowE2fkone
2ue
way.
epitome of evolution
oflove
Shri Mataji in Australia, Austria
Belgium, France, India, Italy
Netherlands, New Zealand, Spain
Switzerland, United Kingdom
USA, USSR and West Germany
Easter Puja in Rome
Guru Puja at Shudy Camps UK
Birthday and Shivaratri Pujas in India
Sahasrara Puja in Thredbo Australia
Shri Vishnumaya Puja in the USA
Shri Krishna Puja in France
Shri Rama Puja in Switzerland
Shri Mahalakshmi Puja in Belgium
Shri Mahakali Puja in Munich
Shri Ganesha Puja in Madrid
Navaratri Puja in Calcutta
THE REVOLUTION OF LOVE PUBLIC PROGRAM • 26 OCTOBER • CINEMA CAPRANICA ROME
I am here to give you a message that you have got this energy within you. Diwali Puja in Lecco Italy
You are at the epitome of evolution. And it will hardly take a split of a second Christmas Puja in Pune
for
you to get your Realization, to enter into the Kingdom of God. There is
THE WIND
a beautiful instrument within you, which works it out. You are not to blame
Vishwa Nirmala Dharma
yourself for little, little things. You are not to feel guilty at all. You have to have
North American Newsletter
all the confidence. It is very important to understand that you are the high-
Volume 1, No. 7
April 1987
I| Oa twamewa sakshat, Shri Adi Shakti Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi,
est in the evolutionary process. It's only the human beings who are going to
achieve Realization, not the mosquitoes or the chickens or the pigs.
So we must respect our personality as human beings and do not believe all
these stories where it is all just a money-making proposition... It is all being
process of your evolution. It is your energy.
organized within
you during the
Within yourself is your own Mother who is going to give you your Realization.
heart resides the spirit and this spirit has its seat here on top
of your
In
your
head. And when the Kundalini touches that, you get on your central nervous
The Wind, a Sahaja Yoga newsletter,
is renamed by Shri Mataji. She calls
system the sensation of the All-Pervading Power.. This is a very big revolution
it The Divine Cool Breeze.
that is coming today.... That is the way of love.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 face life
and othèrs
1988
198ror vourself
WHAT CAN WE DO NOW • 30 DECEMBER • ALIBAG INDIA
Shri Mataji in Andorra, Austria The attention of Sahaj has gone beyond the realm of only few collective
Belgium, Colombia, Finland, France Sahaja Yogis. When you open your gates to this new dimension, then suddenly
India, Italy, Netherlands, Spain you start thinking about all the problematic things you have to face. So far you
Switzerland, United Kingdom have been like Brahmins keeping away from non-Brahmins, in the sense keep-
the USA and West Germany ing away from people who are not realized, keeping your society away from
Guru Puja in Andorra them, keeping your vibrations all right and trying not to expose yourself to
Navaratri Puja in Pune these people who are, according to you, maybe half-baked or maybe they are
Shri Krishna Puja near Milan not yet in Sahaja Yoga.
Easter Puja at Shudy Camps UK
But I think now you are quite capable. Now we have reached a stage where
Hamsa Swamini Puja in Germany nothing can harm you, nothing can catch you. Now you have to catch them....
Sahasrara Pujas in Italy and Bogota Now you know how to face life... Work it out for yourself and for others –
Shri Buddha Puja in San Diego USA with love.
Shivaratri and Birthday Pujas in Bombay
So I, for a Mother to see all of Her children going away, I have said quite
Ekadesha Rudra Puja in Austria a lot. It is not easy to say much on such an occasion, but I have to gather up
Shri Fatima Puja in Switzerland courage and time and decide that I have to tell them all about it – because now
Shri Gauri-Ganesha Puja in Bombay it is your responsibility to work it out. It is your responsibility.
Shri Vishnumaya Puja at Shudy Camps
In
your own way, think about it. "What can we do for Sahaja Yoga?" In
Diwali Pujas in Bombay & Shudy Camps everything you can see Sahaj. You will get ideas. Pass them on. Write them
Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule down. Write your poetry. So many things can be done by all of you and there is
First puja in South America no time to be wasted any more. It has to be a very fast job because this universe
Eleven more pujas in India is standing on the brink of its destruction and we are the only people who have
Puja in Barcelona Spain to save it.
Seminar in Ganapatipule
So it is an emergency for us. In that emergency one has to know that the
Four public programs in Spain nature of Sahaj itself is working out everything. But if this does not work in
Navaratri series of talks in Pune the right time, then we will have to have another world – which is another
Marriages in Ganapatipule and Italy problem.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 enjoy
theře is no problem
989
Shri Mataji in Austria, Brazil, Canada
Colombia, Finland, France, Greece
India, Italy, Nepal, Spain, Switzerland
Turkey, United Kingdom, USA
USSR, Ukraine and West Germany
Guru Puja in Lago Di Braie Italy
Diwali Puja in Montecatini Italy
Sahasrara Puja in Sorrento Italy
Easter Puja in Calcutta
Christmas Puja in Pune
Virata Puja in the USA
Devi Puja in Istanbul
Shivaratri Puja in Delhi
Shri Hanumana Puja in Margate UK
Shri Buddha Puja in Barcelona
Shri Krishna Puja in the UK
Shri Bhairavanath Puja in Milan
Shri Pallas Athena Puja in Athens
ENJOYING THE DISADVANTAGE • 5 MAY • BOAT TO CAPRI ITALY
In Sahaja Yoga you must always think, if there is a disadvantage, it is an advan- Shri Ganesha Puja in Switzerland
tage for us. You should see to the essence of the disadvantage and you will Navaratri Puja in United Kingdom
overcome it with an advantage....
Birthday Pujas in Delhi and Bombay
So in every way, if we can learn how to enjoy the disadvantage, the so- Pujas in Bogota and Rio de Janeiro
called problem, then you will see that the solving of that is the solution in a Pujas in San Diego and Vancouver
that there is no problem. It should not be taken as a challenge, but like a Pujas in Helsinki and Kathmandu
way,
big wave which comes onto a swimmer, how he enjoys to jump over it. That is Pujas in France and West Germany
we are not joy-killers and we are not also spoilsports – spoilsports spoiling Nine more pujas in India
why
Six public programs in Italy
the
sport.
"I don't like it, I don't enjoy it," but you should say, Twenty-five public programs in India
should not say,
So
you
"Why not?" Because if you decide not to like it, you will spoil the joy. But if Eight programs in North America
CC
you keep yourself open all the time and think, “Oh, I'm going to enjoy it," Ten public programs in the USSR
then you start enjoying. For example, cappuccino was difficult for Me in the Program at the United Nations
beginning. But now I enjoy.
Sahaja Yoga Mantra Book published
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 complete imaluement
етеnt
a commitment
Shri Mataji in Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bulgaria, Canada, Czechoslovakia, France, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong
Hungary, India, Italy, Malaysia, New Zealand, Poland, Romania, Singapore, Spain, Switzerland, Taiwan, Thailand
Turkey, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, the United Sates of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
19901
Mahavira Puja in Barcelona
Mahashivaratri Puja in Pune
Sahasrara Puja in Fiuggi Italy
Diwali Puja in Chioggia Italy
Sankranti Puja in Kalwe India
Shri Buddha Puja in Leningrad
SAHASRARA PUJA • 6 MAY • FIUGGI ITALY
Easter Puja in United Kingdom All these years, I have been waiting for this day. We have now the twenty-
Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Calcutta first Sahasrara Day, so is a very important turning point.
As you know, every twenty-first day we change our calendars as far as the
Shri Adi Kundalini Puja in Austria
Birthday Pujas in Sydney and Bombay horoscope is concerned. And so now a new change has to come and you can
Mahalakshmi Puja in Hydra Greece see the announcement – a new understanding, an awareness of a very new
Shri Krishna Pujas in UK and India dimension.
We have been so far dealing with collective consciousness. We are collec-
Pujas in San Diego and Vancouver
Guru Puja in Avignon France tively conscious. We have the idea that we are collectively conscious. Also we
Shri Ganesha Puja in Austria know we are a part and parcel of the whole and that we all are Sahaja Yogis.
Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule We know about our chakras and our nadis very clearly. But perhaps we do not
Shri Hanumana Puja in Germany know about our powers. How many powers have developed in those twenty-
Navaratri Puja in Arzia Switzerland one years within yourself...?
Shri Mahakali Puja in Le Raincy France
Sahaja Yoga is a commitment. It is a commitment and a complete involve-
More than nineteen other pujas in India ment, otherwise you are really useless for Sahaja Yoga – absolutely useless. It is
Seminars and marriages Ganapatipule better to have few people who are committed than to have thousands who are
just useless. So let us see what you have decided for yourself and what
Raksha Bandhan in Los Angeles
you have
Eighteen public programs in India decided for Sahaja Yoga. If you have decided to opt for Sahaja Yoga, then just
in eastern Europe know that this is the main thing which you have to do. The whole attention
Seven public programs in the USA should be on that.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 not vour brain
enlarge your heart
199t
GURU PUJA • 28 JULY • CABELLA LIGURE ITALY
When our knowledge is in the brain, it is just like a film. It is away from us.
Shri Mataji in Austria, Australia
It is not in our heart. But when it is in the heart, it acts, it works. It does not Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Germany
work through brain. In the brain it just stays, but in the heart it works. And in Hungary, India, Italy, Netherlands
the heart resides the spirit.
New Zealand, Singapore, Taiwan
It is
very simple that we are people who are more living with our brains, not UK, United States and the USSR
with our heart. But know that if in reality you see King Kong is standing before Shivaratri Pujas in Delhi and Italy
you, you are not seeing a film – it is in reality. And in reality, the heart has to Holi celebration and puja in Delhi
work, not the brain, because reality is only through the heart, not through the Birthday Pujas in Delhi and Bombay
Shri Mahavira Pujas in Perth & Bombay
brain.
Once you understand this, then
open your heart, enlarge it. "Now Easter Puja in Sydney Australia
you will
this is in my heart." So the whole thing will be so clear-cut. In your head you Sahasrara Puja in Ischia Italy
will know everything clearly, what is to be done, how to react, how to work it Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule
Pujas in Auckland and Canberra
out.
If you put all this knowledge of Sahaja Yoga into your heart, first of all you Pujas in Melbourne and Brisbane
will have to enlarge your heart, otherwise you cannot put this ocean. Then you Kundalini Puja in Weilburg Germany
will see this is Sahaja Yoga.
Shri Hamsa Swamini Puja in New York
To Me everything seems to be Sahaja Yoga... I can see clearly. Anything Guru and Shri Krishna Pujas in Cabella
that I see, I connect it to Sahaja Yoga immediately. “This is Sahaja Yoga. Why Shri Ganesha Pujas in Cabella & Prague
is this so? This is because of Sahaj Yoga. This is Sahaj Yoga."
Navaratri and Diwali Pujas in Cabella
So everywhere you start seeing Sahaja Yoga, when your heart knows what Shri Buddha Puja in Deinze Belgium
your brain knows. I have known people who know all the mantras very well, Eleven more pujas in India
Marriages in Ganapatipule
everything very well and all that, but in the heart –
So put it in the heart. In Sahaja Yoga the guru is not through his brain, but Seventeen public programs in India
through his heart.
Programs at the UN and in Honolulu
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 1992arávitvik manifest
it.W1
gravity is within
GURU PUJA • 19 JULY • CABELLA LIGURE
Easter Puja in Italy The word "guru" means gravity, that the Mother Earth has gravity. In the
Birthday Puja in Delhi same way, a person who is a guru has to have the gravity. But how do you
Sahasrara Puja in Cabella develop this gravity? Some people just artificially become very grave
and
some-
Shri Krishna Puja in Cabella times show that they are very serious or something like that.
Gravity is within yourself. In the second state of gurupada your gravity
Adi Kundalini Puja in Cabella
Mahasaraswati Puja in Auckland must manifest. As you become the witness, your gravity starts expressing itself.
Shri Vishnumaya Puja in Belgium It will not show as temper or seriousness or anything like that. But it will
Guru and Navaratri Pujas in Cabella manifest in a way that the whole thing will become extremely dignified and
Mahalaskshmi Puja in St. Petersburg majestic. It will just manifest by itself.
Shivaratri Puja in Glenrock Australia
So the state in which you rise now becomes effective. Before this it was not.
silence
Shri Ganesha Pujas in Cabella and Perth You had to all the time manipulate, say this, say that. But in
your
you
Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Togliatti Russia can manifest your gravity and this gravity acts like a magnet....
Shri Buddha Puja in Shudy Camps
So with our
what we do is to touch that depth within us, which can
gravity,
Diwali Puja in Timisoara Romania carry the divine power and manifest...
Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule
Your faith in God has to be absolutely untarnishable. Nothing can disturb
Mahalakshmi Puja in Barcelona that. That is very important. You have seen all the miracles of God. You have
Hamsa Chakra Puja in Canada seen how you are working out His powers. You have known all these things,
Shri Vishnumaya Puja in USA but still the faith in God is missing. The person who has complete faith in
Shri Durga Kali Puja in Paris God is God Himself, they say. It is called as Paramachaitanya. The
guru
is
Puja in Bogota Colombia called as the one who is himself Brahmachaitanya. So when this faith in God
Mahakali Puja in Brazil is absolutely established in you, that "There is God Almighty, He's Almighty
and I am the messenger of that God," just this understanding, when it becomes
Four more pujas in India
Two more pujas in Australia absolutely firm in you, then you are in the gurupada.
I bless you today that all of you achieve that state, that you reside in that
Nine
programs in eastern Europe
Eight programs in North America gurupada state. And wherever you are, whatever may be your position, what-
Fourteen public programs in India ever you may do, the faith in God Almighty that is so truly within
will
you
express itself not only, but that it will manifest. It will act just like God.
First Royal Albert Hall public program
Shri Mataji in Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Czechoslavakia
Finland, France, Hong Kong, Hungary, India, Italy, Malaysia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Romania
Russia, Spain, Switzerland, Taiwan, Thailand, Ukraine, the United Kingdom and the United States of America
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-24.txt 
 let others enion
the blossomtime
993
enjou
Shri Mataji in Austria, Belgium
Bulgaria, Canada, Czech Republic
France, Germany, Greece, India, Italy
Netherlands, Poland, Romania, Russia
Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine
United Kingdom and the USA
Easter Puja in Magliano Sabina Italy
Shri Pallas Athena Puja in Athens
Sahasrara and Guru Pujas in Cabella
Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Togliatti
SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA • 3 AUGUST • TOGLIATTI RUSSIA
These are the special times. I call them the blossomtime when so many flow- Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cabella
ers are there who are seeking the truth. And their fragrance is their love. They Shri Fatima Puja in Istanbul
had to all become fruits now and this is what is going to happen, as these times Birthday Puja in Delhi
are very, very important... This is the power by which a drop becomes the Mahakali Puja in Paris
Shri Krishna Puja in Cabella
ocean, an individual becomes the collective.
So all your powers that are there are enlightened by this All-Pervading Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule
Power. It transforms you and it has such a beautiful, delicate way of handling Viratangana Puja in Los Angeles
everything. The only thing that is needed is faith in this power, that only by Mahalakshmi Puja in Sofia Bulgaria
having love for others is this enlightened love going to give you whatever you Shri Ganesha Pujas in Cabella and Berlin
want. There is such a power, an All-Pervading Power. There is no doubt about Shri Ganesha Puja in Chhindwara
it and we have to just accept it with our open heart so that it fills it and makes Navaratri Puja in Cabella
Diwali Puja in Moscow
us a great personality.
There is no competition, there is no ambition, there is no jealousy, noth- Seven more pujas in India
ing of that kind. The only desire then left is that as I am enjoying myself, let Thirty public programs in Europe
others also enjoy.
Ten public programs in North America
People go out of their way to spread Sahaja Yoga. They work very hard, Twelve public programs in India
travel with very little money. They try to convince people, do all kinds of things United Nations public program
for no material gain. But the greatest joy is when you see that you have risen Royal Albert Hall public program
the Kundalini of another person and given him Self Realization. That lights up Marriages in Ganapatipule and Moscow
faces, I have seen many a time. Let this love grow more and more.
your
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-25.txt 
 not a military thing
1994
Guru Puja in Cabella
Easter Puja in Sydney
Sadashiva Puja in Delhi
Sahasrara Puja in Cabella
Birthday Puja in Calcutta
Mahamaya Puja in Auckland
Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cabella
Shri Yogeshwara Puja in the USA
Shri Ganesha Puja in Moscow
Shri Krishna Puja in Cabella
Navaratri Puja in Cabella
Shri Vishnu Puja in Paris
Diwali Puja in Istanbul
GURU PUJA • 24 JULY • CABELLA LIGURE
Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Jaipur If you want, it can work out. The All-Pervading Divine Power of love is abso-
Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule lutely working it out. More than you, the Divine wants this world to change,
Shri Raja Lakshmi Puja in Delhi wants to transform the whole universe...
You have these powers by which you can introspect yourself. You can wit-
Shri Ganesha Puja in Kalwe India
Two pujas in Hyderabad India ness yourself and you can surrender because mentally now you are convinced
Programs in Hong Kong and Nepal about Sahaja Yoga. Emotionally you are convinced that Sahaja Yoga has given
Programs in Tokyo, Taipei and Bangkok you such sense of love and compassion. Physically you are convinced that
Marriages in Istanbul and Ganapatipule Sahaja Yoga has given you good health and confidence about your health. Now
Thirteen programs in the Americas spiritually, you should be convinced – spiritually, that you are really spiritual
Twelve public programs in India people selected by the Divine, that your last lives have been of great seeking.
Six public programs in Australia That is why you are born now and you are getting all these blessings.
So assume. Assumption of your personality is important. You must med-
Eighteen programs in Europe
Three programs in Tunisia itate. You should go into thoughtless awareness and all the time keep your
The Advent published in Spanish attention alert. That is very important...
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Mother's love
just
Thoughtless awareness is the first beautiful state you have to achieve. That
will give you peace and a witness state to enjoy the drama of life, to enjoy the
different varieties of people, while you will be growing within yourself...
I am very proud of you. I am very happy that never such disciples existed
for any guru... But you don't know why you got Realization, why you are here,
what is your speciality, what you have to get. You don't know that. And that is
what you have to know....
I think for the first time I have been able to tell something to you
which
I was hesitating always. "Let it be, just now they are still little babies, it's all
right." But now after this, you have to grow – grow in every way....
You are all seekers of truth for
and now
have come. You have
ages
you
found the truth. So try to identify yourself with truth -
that's all – and with
you identify yourself with truth and with reality your Sahasrara is
reality. If
absolutely open. No problem. Truth is in your Sahasrara. And when the truth
love. It is
comes in, you are surprised that truth is love and love is truth –
pure
very, very joy-giving and all the niranandas you want to have you can have, if
you understand this simple equation that absolute truth is absolute love.
I have no expectations. I must tell you I am oversatisfied. As far as I am
concerned, I think I have done My job. But now this has to be taken over. You
have to be responsible. You have to work it out...
There is, if you may call it, a defect: Sahaja Yoga is not a military thing. It
is just plain, simple Mother's love. And of course, every mother wants her child
to be great, to have all her powers. She wants that, no doubt. How she does it, Shri Mataji in Argentina, Austria
how she works it out is her own problem. But how you take it and how you Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada
Colombia, France, Germany, Greece
use it is your own problem.
I always bow to you people who have got Realization because I think so Hong Kong, India, Italy, Japan, Malaysia
many saints were never there on this Earth. But the saintliness has to be com- Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand
plete. Without that, you cannot help even your family, leave alone your coun- Poland, Romania, Russia, Spain
Switzerland, Taiwan, Thailand, Tunisia
try and no question of the whole world.
So what is needed now is to raise your awakening, to raise your spirituality, Turkey, United Kingdom, Ukraine
to go into a realm of complete support and surrender to the movement of this and the United States of America
spontaneous movement of Sahaja Yoga.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-27.txt 
 1995vemenrespected
the most glorious time
Shri Mataji addresses a United Nations conference on global issues facing women
FOURTH WORLD CONFERENCE ON WOMEN • 13 SEPTEMBER • BEIJING
META MODERN ERA
This is beyond My imagination. The most glorious time in the history of
the world – that at this time we are so much aware of the problems of women.
Women as a whole have definitely suffered over the ages because they have
not realized what their importance is and what their proper role is in human
society. Society itself, which is her creation, tries to control or put down wom-
anhood. In the East we can say that, due to the fundamentalist influence,
women have been under great pressure and their morality is based on fear
rather than freedom. In the West they have fought for their freedom, but what
they have attained is a spurious freedom. The women in the West have freedom
to abandon all social and moral values. Thus, in the East, we can say that most
HER HOLINESS
SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
of the women are timid, oppressed and cannot express themselves, while in the
Meta Modern Era published West we find most of the women are reduced to a sex symbol. They are keen
Birthday Puja in Delhi to expose their bodies. Their anxiety is to appear in fashion advertisements and
Easter Puja in Calcutta very cheap popularity. Most of them accepted this position because otherwise
they could not have survived in that chaotic world of the West.
Sankranti Puja at Pratishthan
What most of the women in the East would regard as very humiliating
Adi Kundalini Puja in Cabella
Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cabella and degrading is regarded as something very glorifying in the West. I have
Mahashivaratri Puja in Australia seen both the worlds very deeply and I feel that unless and until you bring a
Holi celebration and puja in Delhi new culture by which women from the East and West can both rise in their
Guru and Shri Krishna Pujas in Cabella own esteem and express themselves in such a way that they create high moral
Sahasrara and Navaratri Pujas in Cabella standards for their society, women neither in the East nor in the West will rise
Devi Shakti Pujas in Moscow and USA to their full stature of feminine speciality. The speciality is that if women are
Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule respected for their womanhood, understanding what they are capable of and
Shri Ganesha Puja in Cabella how they can empower themselves with all the education needed, all the secu-
Diwali Puja in Nargol India rity will be provided to them and they will provide security to the society.
Programs in Beijing and Taipei
Programs in Hong Kong and Tokyo Shri Mataji in Argentina, Austria, Australia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China
Programs in Kathmandu and Bangkok Germany, Hong Kong, Hungary, India, Italy, Japan, Malaysia, Nepal, Romania, Russia
Nine public
Switzerland, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, UK and USA
programs in Europe
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-28.txt 
 I am,satisfied 996
in my lifetime
Shri Mataji in Australia, Austria
Bulgaria, Canada, Czech Republic
Egypt, Hong Kong, Hungary, India
Italy, Malaysia, Nepal, Portugal
Romania, Russia, Taiwan, Thailand
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
and the United States of America
GURU PUJA • 28 JULY • CABELLA LIGURE
In My lifetime, if I see so many of you so much transformed, looking so Sankranti Puja in Pune
beautiful, so nice, creating such a good atmosphere, it is more than satisfaction Birthday Puja in Delhi
for Me. And sometimes I think there is nothing to be done now any more, Easter Puja in Calcutta
finished. But then they invite Me here and they invite Me there, so I am just Mahalakshmi Puja in Moscow
Mahashivaratri Puja in Sydney
doing. But to be very frank, I am over satisfied....
Once you have planted the mango tree and looked after it for three, four Shri Krishna Pujas in Cabella and USA
years, then it looks after itself. It gives fruits. It doesn't need any water, nothing. Sahasrara and Guru Pujas in Cabella
It just grows by itself. In the same way, it should happen with you. You should Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cabella
Diwali Puja in Lisbon
grow by yourself...
This guru is supposed to tell something to the disciples about correcting Navaratri Puja in Cabella
themselves. In My own sweet way, I have said it to you, which you should Shri Ganesha Puja in Cabella
not mind. I do not mean to condemn you by any chance, but to give you a Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule
proper sense of introspection, a proper sense of introspection by which you all
Public program in Kuala Lumpur
get your gurupada. My only – I should not say "desire" because I do not have Programs in Sydney and Bangkok
CC
- so My only vision is that I should see all the Sahaja Yogis drenched Programs in Kathmandu and Cairo
desire
in the power of love, enjoying each other's love, enjoying each other's rela- Programs in Hong Kong and Taipei
tionships and improving relationships. I know there are problematic people. I Eight public programs in Europe
know they are problematic, but if you cannot solve a problem, what is the use Six public programs in India
of your becoming masters?
Five programs in North America
So I leave it to you to solve your own problems which you are facing with Shri Mataji at Gyaneshwar conference
introspection, with love and compassion, not by condemning yourself. I am Health Centre opens in India
sure you can manage it.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-29.txt 
 1997eethe beaun
Cuty
this is sahaj dharma
beautv
SHRI KRISHNA PUJA • 23 AUGUST • CABELLA
You are all
children
grown-up
of Mine and I want you to know all
the beauties that are within you that
you have to enjoy.
First of all, learn to laugh at
yourself. That is the best way to
enjoy yourself, not to spend much
time at the mirror. That is another
should see is inside.
What
way.
you
“Are we sahaj dharmis? Mother has
CC
established sahaj dharma much
more than what Krishna wanted to
establish. He wanted to establish the
dharma of love, which of course, we
have. But apart from that, we have
so many other beautiful facets and
such beautiful things within our
personality that we have forgotten to
enjoy..."
You must try to see the beauty as
Sahaja Yogis. You should be sensitive
to see how you have been helped,
Shri Mataji in Canada, India, Italy, Portugal, Russia, Ukraine UK and the USA
how you have been guided, how
Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cabella
you have been blessed. This is sahaj
Birthday Puja in Delhi
Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule
Shri Shiva Pujas in Mumbai and Delhi
dharma....
This is the new dharma we have
Shri Krishna Pujas in USA and Cabella
Shakti New Year's Puja in Kalwe India
established now in this world. A
Sahasrara and Guru Pujas in Cabella
Puja in Moscow
Shri Ganesha Puja in Cabella
Marriages in Cabella
new race with a new dharma, which
is much above even Shri Krishna's
Navaratri Puja in Cabella
Four public programs in Russia
vision is coming true.
Diwali Puja in Lisbon
Five programs in North America
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-30.txt 
 1998
non-violénće
the witness state
surng
SHRI KRISHNA PUJA • 16 AUGUST • CABELLA LIGURE
This is the best way to bring non-violence. In violent places you go
and
stand steadily there, facing all the things that are happening. And that witness
state acts, acts and stops that kind of a violence that is going on.
But the witness state is not a mental state. It is a state of a spiritual ascent
where you become a witness. The best way to practise the witness state is not
to criticize anyone.... Actually there is nothing to be criticized. You just watch
and see for yourself...
Your attention itself is enlightened now. With that enlightened attention,
you can just watch and stop the nonsense that is there. But we are always
conscious that we are something great and we have to do this and we have to Shri Mataji in India, Italy, Russia
do that. Under these circumstances what happens is that you become another Turkey, United Arab Emirates
problem. Because what can you do? You cannot do anything. But what you and the United Kingdom
can do is to watch. By watching and by just seeing things as they are, you really Guru Puja in Cabella
develop a very different state of being...
Birthday Puja in Delhi
of witnessing you all should develop. Try to develop it so that Easter Puja in Istanbul
This
power
when
you are reacting, stop the reaction. Stop the reaction about everything. Sahasrara Puja in Cabella
You will be amazed. You will find yourself a very, very powerful person in the Navaratri Puja in Cabella
will have no ambitions, you will have no desires, you will have no Shri Krishna Puja in Cabella
sense you
Shri Ganesha Puja in Cabella
special fondness or anything, but just you are witnessing the drama.
It is very interesting to witness also because then you understand the Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cabella
humour behind everything, you understand the stupidity behind everything. Diwali Puja in Novi Ligure Italy
You understand also how people have been so violent and you just laugh at it. Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule
You do not get upset, excited, nothing. You just laugh at it. After some time New Year's Puja in Kalwe India
will be amazed. Your witness state will increase and, when in the collective Marriages in Cabella
you
all of you have that witness state, you can do wonders without doing anything, Medical conference in Italy
without saying anything, without acting. Only your presence itself can work Scientific conference in Moscow
it out. I do not say that it will have an effect on everyone ... but most of the Programs in Delhi and Moscow
people. Any person who is in that state, he is the one who brings peace. He Marriages in Cabella and Ganapatipule
brings joy.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-31.txt 
 celebrate:
ate ve realization
DIWALI PUJA • 7 NOVEMBER
• DELPHI GREECE
The guideline is such that we should know that we are realized souls. And
what is so important? Why have we become realized souls? Not only for our
pure desires, but also for others. And in that understanding that we are not
only for ourselves but for others, you become collectively conscious and
you
start helping others. You will stand very well, otherwise you are lost and the
others are also lost.
E6661
This
way we have to really go ahead, go ahead towards the truth
way is the
Shri Mataji in Canada, Greece, India and bring that truth for the other people and save them. This is how you can
Italy, Turkey, United Arab Emirates express your love to them, all your caring...
To talk about this subject is much easier than to assimilate it within our-
United Kingdom and the USA
Birthday Puja in Delhi selves.... In meditation
you will assimilate and the same power of discrimina-
Shivaratri Puja in Delhi tion that you think is within you, of giving vibrations, of doing all kinds of
Guru Nanak Puja in India things out of Sahaja Yoga will be completely, continuously acting...
Celebrate and be happy that we have so many Sahaja Yogis all over the
Gudi Padwa Puja in Noida India
Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Canajoharie world. There is hope for the whole world and we can save all people who are
Shri Hanuman Puja in Pune lost in the wilderness. That is a fact, no doubt. But after that celebration and
everything, we should sit back ... and watch what is happening and you will be
Sahasrara Puja in Cabella
Easter Puja in Istanbul amazed that in meditation you will be revealed with all the beauties you have
Guru Puja in Cabella achieved, all kinds of things that you have achieved. And all the worries and
Virata Puja in Cabella botherations of things will disappear. This should happen to you all and this is
Navaratri Puja in Cabella what I request you all to have – this special capacity to understand yourself.
Shri Ganesha Puja in Cabella
My own hope is fulfilled. To see you sitting down here I feel overjoyed,
Diwali Puja in Delphi Greece the same way you will also feel when you all will try to raise the Kundalini of
Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule others and establish them in Sahaja Yoga. You will be amazed what will happen
Marriages in Cabella Ligure Italy to you. It is so joyous to give Realization to others...
I bless
all with this special power that you give Realization to people
Public program in Istanbul Turkey
you
Programs in Toronto and Vancouver and look after the Nabhi of the people. It is very, very important to understand
Programs in Los Angeles and London how far you can go. We have to change the world. We have to save the world.
Public programs in Milan and Athens It is your responsibility. You have got Realization, not the others, so do not try
in Mumbai and Pune to find faults with others. Think about you, that
Public
have Realization and it is
you
programs
expected that you should spread Sahaja Yoga.
Programs in New York and Washington
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-32.txt 
 BIRTHDAY CELEBRATIONS • 19 MARCH • DELHI INDIA
I have been watching how Sahaja Yoga has grown from one person to all
this.... This all has shown that the time has come for the whole world to change.
And this transformation is the most important thing what we should aim at.
Forget about everything. Forget about politics, economics, this, that, but
get
transformation. Once you are transformed, you know how to do the right
thing, how to do the things that will help you and the society. All this
you
already have seen in your life.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-33.txt 
 200i di64o live
st way.tO
sahaj culture
t
Shri Mataji in Canada, China, Italy
India, Turkey, United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom and the USA
Easter Puja in Istanbul
Shivaratri Puja in Pune India
GOricape
Gudi Padwa Puja in Noida India
Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Canajoharie
Birthday and Bhoomi Pujas in Delhi
Guru and Sahasrara Pujas in Cabella
Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule
New Year's Puja in Kalwe India
CHRISTMAS PUJA • 25 DECEMBER • GANAPATIPULE INDIA
Shri Ganesha Puja in Cabella
My vision is too great for one life. I want a global Realization. I want
Shri Krishna Puja in Cabella
people all over the world to have Realization.... You must try to learn Sahaj
Diwali Puja in Los Angeles
culture. In a Sahaj culture, how do we talk, how do we live, how do we
Navaratri Puja in Cabella
contact? It is something very different. And then, once you start Sahaj cul-
Marriages in Canajoharie
ture in your life, you will be amazed – others will be amazed – how
you are
Marriages at Ganapatipule
having rapport with each other, how you are looking after everything so
well. This is the best way to live in this world – as Sahaja Yogis, where there
Marriages in Delhi and Cabella
is no ego, there is no conditioning, nothing. You are just absolutely free
Seven programs in North America
from all these horrible attributes and then you will be amazed how people
Public program at Royal Albert Hall
Six public programs in Italy
will trust you, how they will like
you.
Public program in Istanbul
SHRI KRISHNA PUJA • 20 AUGUST • CABELLA LIGURE ITALY
You have a beautiful enlightened society of very good friends, of very
SO
good spiritual people. With all this, if you cannot create, then what should
I say? You have to create something. It may be art. It may be music. It may
be poetry. It
be literature. It may be writing. Whatever it is, you have
may
to create. And above all, you have to create Sahaja Yogis. That is the main
creation you have to achieve.. Nothing is more important than becoming
a mahayogi, by which your spirit gives joy, peace and blessings to every-
one.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-34.txt 
 den't keen it to vourself
12001
keep it, to you
don't
urse
the kundalini knows
Shri Mataji in China, India, Italy
Greece, Turkey, United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom and the USA
Sankranti Puja in Pune
Guru Puja in Cabella
Shivaratri Puja in Pune
Birthday Puja in Delhi
Easter Puja in Istanbul
Navaratri Puja in Greece
SAHASRARA PUJA • 6 MAY • CABELLA LIGURE ITALY
So many years have passed. I have worked quite hard, day and night, and My Sahasrara Puja in Cabella
Diwali Puja in Los Angeles
only desire was that you people should take it seriously and work it out.
Do not keep your Realization to yourself. As many people as you can, give Shri Ganesha Puja in Cabella
Realization. The greatest obligation will be on Me and on God Almighty. The Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cabella
only thing is that you should try to give Realizations to others. You will never Shri Krishna Puja in Canajoharie
make a mistake. You can never make a mistake because the Kundalini knows. Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule
She knows you. She knows you are realized souls. She will respect you. Even if New Year's Puja in Kalwe India
you make mistakes, she will correct it and she will help you, in every way.
Marriages in Canajoharie
I am just a housewife who had no support from anyone, but I was sure that Marriages in Cabella
it was My job to find out how to break the Sahasrara ... which I did.
Marriages in Ganapatipule
also know that, so this is your job... You have to strengthen Public program at Royal Albert Hall
Now
you
My hands. They say the Goddess has one thousand hands, but even the one Public programs in the United States
thousand hands are now asking that you come along with your two hands and Programs in Delhi, Athens and Istanbul
work it out.
It is very important what you have to do. All kinds of problems in this
world, they come because of ignorance.... How it is solved is also in your power
with the Divine.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-35.txt 
 2002miline face
Ges
learn from children
Shri Mataji in Germany
India, Italy, Singapore, Turkey
United Arab Emirates, UK and USA
Mahashivaratri Puja in Pune
Gudi Padwa Puja in Delhi
Birthday Puja in Delhi
Guru Puja in Cabella
Easter Puja in Istanbul
Sahasrara Puja in Cabella
Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cabella
Shri Krishna Puja in Canajoharie
Shri Ganesha Puja in Frankfurt
Shri Ganesha Puja in Cabella
Diwali Puja in Los Angeles
Navaratri Puja in Los Angeles
Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule
New Year's Puja in Vaitarna India
Marriages in Cabella
Marriages in Ganapatipule
Programs in Delhi and Istanbul
Two public programs in New York
SHRI GANESHA PUJA • 14 SEPTEMBER • CABELLA LIGURE ITALY
One should look at things from Ganesha's angle. How will you do it? How
will
you use it? You will learn from children, how they watch things and how
they work it out, how they think. You would be amazed how sensible they are
and the very sensible things they say ... how innocent they are, how simple they
are. They are very generous.... They are wonderful people and we have to learn
a lot from children. Their smiling faces and their joy should teach us how to
behave because Ganesha shines through them very clearly.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-36.txt 
 203
a bromise
our destinies are quided
our
destini es
DIWALI PUJA
• 9 NOVEMBER • LOS ANGELES USA
We have to be very sincere with ourselves because it is not just a borrowed
love or a borrowed joy, but it is from within the source that it is flowing, flow-
ing and flowing.
So that is to be awakened and that love should flow and our small
petty
things like jealousies and competitions and all those things which spoil us must
be washed
And it can be washed if your heart is full of love....
away.
We should know also that our destinies are also guided and looked after.
We are already a blessed people. There is no doubt about it and we should not
worry about small things and small matters. It will all work out very well,
you
will see, if you just leave it to your destiny, which is very high, very great. With
this, your own destiny you will go very far. This is the promise of Diwali to you
all: that you will reach the highest and the noblest
of life...
way
Whatever petty problems you have, they will all be washed off. All these are
the messages from the Divine. You do not have to worry about petty things,
about
about jobs. That is not your job. Your destiny will work it out. Shri Mataji in China, France, India, Italy
money,
You have a promise that you will be looked after. I hope you believe in that the United Kingdom and the USA
promise and are joyous in the highest way.
Shivaratri and Birthday Pujas in Delhi
Sahasrara and Guru Pujas in Cabella
Shri Sadashiva Puja in Pune
BIRTHDAY PUJA • 21 MARCH • NIRMAL DHAM DELHI INDIA
These are special times, that you have fallen into this trap of love and enlight- Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cabella
enment. I was not very sure that you would appreciate the love that one can Shri Krishna Puja in Canajoharie & Pune
enjoy within yourself, what is spiritual understanding. I didn't know how you Christmas Puja in Ganapatipule
would appreciate and enjoy your Self. That means you are all very much capa- Shri Ganesha Puja in Cabella
ble of this tremendous love and this spiritual awakening....
Navaratri Puja in the USA
People do not believe that there is something like Sahaja Yoga, that there Diwali Puja in Los Angeles
is a power in every human being which is universal and which can be enlight- Marriages in Ganapatipule
ened. It is something beyond the conception of human beings that they can Marriages in Cabella and Los Angeles
achieve this kind of a spiritual growth within themselves. I wonder how many Vishwa Nirmala Prem inaugurated
of you also realize that whatever you have achieved is something great. It is the Arts Academy opens in Vaitarna
climax of human development, human growth and all the advancement we Public program in Delhi
have made. This will definitely change the world and its understanding.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-37.txt 
 love within
2004he greatest guru
GURU PUJA • 4 JULY • OCABELLA LIGURE
I do not have to say anything for love. Love is an absolute gift, a gift of just
feeling others. There is no talking about it, discussing about it, nothing. You
just feel that love. To feel the love, one has to have a heart. But how can you
Shri Mataji in India have a heart? It is not your own doing. It is all there.
So it is something that is already gifted to you. You have it, that you can
Italy, United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom and the USA feel that love. It is so much joy-giving, peace-giving. Love has its own qualities
Sankranti Puja at Pratishthan and one of the qualities is that love understands. Its understanding is not in
Shivaratri Puja in Pune words, not in thought, but it understands within. It can feel within, which is
Guru Puja in Cabella very important. This is the most important part one has to realize: that love,
Birthday Puja in Delhi you can only feel it. You cannot talk about it, you cannot show about it, but it
Sahasrara Puja in Cabella is within and you can feel it. And that is why today is your celebration of the
guru. It is the celebration where you can feel that love for your guru. That feel-
Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cabella
Shri Krishna Puja in Los Angeles ing is within and only within can you feel that.
Shri Ganesha Puja in Los Angeles
We have to understand it is not the show. It is nothing else, but just the
Navaratri Puja in Los Angeles feeling within that you know that you have the love of the Divine... It has
nothing to do with others. Whether the other loves you or not makes no differ-
Diwali Puja in Los Angeles
Christmas Puja in Pune ence. It is within yourself. This feeling, this depth is there, which you enjoy..
Marriages in Los Angeles
Sometimes you feel that you have lost it. Sometimes you feel you have
in Istanbul gained it, but it is there as much as the expanse of a sea. The sea you cannot
say today is full and tomorrow is not. It is eternal. In the same
the source
way,
of your love is eternal. You cannot measure it. It is difficult. But it is beyond all
your human expressions and it shows your understanding of love, which has no
words, which you cannot explain, but by itself you will know that “I have this
quality to love within myself and I can enjoy with this love within myself...."
within
The greatest guru that we have is love, Sahaj love. It is the
guru
us which teaches us, which somehow or other leads us. We are led into that
great line of understanding for which we do not have to go to any college, to
any school for education. It is something so much within that it works and
expresses itself, expresses like a light. Such people we can make out because
they are fully enlightened. They have light and through that light they see the
whole world, which is very innocent and simple for them...
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-38.txt 
 talk of your guru, you should have that love within you. Why do
When
you
you feel it so much? The reason is the guru loves you and you love the
guru....
we dre
we are
In this great opportunity of love that we are, we are here to enjoy each other
fully from our heart, that there is this ocean within us. We have to just get sub-
that love
merged in that ocean. If we are lost in that ocean, then we will have no prob-
lems, no questions. Everything will be our own and we can manage everything
without any argument, without any questioning. That is what is being Sahaj.
The Sahaj way, if you have this love, you enjoy. You enjoy yourself and enjoy
everybody else because it is Sahaj. You do not have to make any efforts, do not
have to try anything, it is just there and it works... It is without expression. It
is just to be felt within yourself. Then you want to do so many things. You want
to help everyone. You want to help yourself. You want to do good to others.
So much has been done by great leaders of the world because they had
that love. They had nothing else but this love, which they could not contain
them within themselves, so they tried to spread it. And they are called now as
our gurus, as our masters. But it is their love within which approached people
in that unique manner. That is the thing that we cannot possess, you cannot
claim. It is there and it works. It works automatically.
This is what we have to know, that we are that love. That love is within us....
This is what is the guru. It is the love within
which wants to share the love
you
and joy.
with others, which wants to give love to others. This is what is
peace
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-39.txt 
 2005
Shri Mataji in India
Italy, UK and the USA
Guru Puja in USA
At the Christmas Puja in 2006
Diwali Puja in Pune
Birthday Puja in Pune
Christmas Puja in Pune
one yogini asked Shri Mataji,
Sahasrara Puja in Cabella
Shri Krishna Puja in USA
Shri Ganesha Puja in USA
"Please give us the knowledge."
Mahashivaratri Puja in Pune
Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cabella
Navaratri Puja in Gurgaon India
Shri Mataji said, "You will have it."
First edition of Nirmal Fragrance
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-40.txt 
 2006
Shri Mataji in Australia, India, Italy
Singapore, the UK and the USA
Guru Puja in Cabella
Birthday Puja in Sydney
Sahasrara Puja in the UK
Shri Adi Shakti Puja in the UK
Mahashivaratri Puja in Sydney
Navaratri Puja in Los Angeles
Shri Ganesha Puja in Los Angeles
Shri Krishna Puja in Los Angeles
Christmas Puja in Pune
Diwali Puja in Pune
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-41.txt 
 2007e sió Ánthe love
we are one
SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA • 24 JUNE • CABELLA LIGURE
Sahaja Yoga means we are one. We are all Sahaja Yogis, but not separately – together. If
one understands this fact,
have celebrated today's great day of the Adi Shakti.
you
Why did the Adi Shakti create this world? Why did all this happen? Why don't we
think why so much love, so much prosperity has been given to us? We never realize where
we are and how much we have got. It is not the money, but the love. And when you will
understand,
will really love each other and there is no hatred, there is no revenge,
you
nothing but just love and love and love. This is what is the message of today. We all have
to be loving each other....
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-42.txt 
 We have to promise that for us love is most important.... Still the world is
going on with wars, fighting and all kinds of trouble. The whole world has to
come up to love each other. There is no other solution but to love and, in that
love, there is no selfishness, but enjoyment. And that enjoyment you
should
feel and give it to others.... Love is the
of the Adi Shakti.
message
think about it: one Adi Shakti created the whole world, how She
Now
you
love is the
must have done it, what She must have planned, how She must have organized
it. It is not an easy thing. It is only because She loved. Her love is the expression
that
you are all there and that is why to be one with Her, one should learn to
message of
should forgive. If you don't
love. Of course, in that, you have to know that
you
won't help.
know how to forgive, and find mistakes of other people, you
What is your job now is to see that you are loving, that there is no hatred
the Adi Shakti
for anyone, you do not think of hating someone or hitting somebody. This has
to work out. I'm sure this will work out.
Human beings, their love is so beautiful. They look beautiful only when
they love. So I have to tell you not to make cheap love, but a love that
will
you
enjoy and that another person will also enjoy. It is something to be understood.
The way people understand love is sometimes very ridiculous, so one has to
first understand what is love, also to understand whether
love or not. If
you
you really love the world, if you really love this creation of God, then there
should be no hatred, there should be no fights, but just to see the good points. Shri Mataji in Australia, India, Italy
As a mother would see her child, you should see the whole world as a beautiful Singapore and United Arab Emirates
WO
peace that God has created for you.
Shivaratri Puja in Pune
Sahaja Yogis have a much greater job, much greater life. They have to show Birthday Puja in Pune
that love is a very great thing.... You are all human beings and we have a right Easter Puja in Pune
to love. And if you manage somehow to love people, I tell you Sahaja Yoga will Guru Puja in Cabella
settle down. Sahaja Yoga is like a tree which requires love as the water.
Sahasrara Puja in Cabella
Try this. Try around your life and you will find how love pays itself. Not Shri Adi Shakti Puja in Cabella
to be seen by how much you spend or what you do, it is not that you count all Shri Ganesha Puja in Sydney
those things. It is just like an ocean floats everything around, you become like Shri Krishna Puja in Cabella
Navaratri Puja in Sydney
that, a typical personality of Sahaja Yoga.
So all the Sahaja Yogis must decide today that we are going to forgive all Diwali in Noida India
the people we hate and we are going to love all of them. Let us see if it works Christmas Puja in Pune
out. I am sure it will work out because, first of all, you are all realized souls
and, secondly, love is the biggest, biggest boon on human beings, which, if you
utilize, there will be no problem of any
kind.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-43.txt 
 2008"aking since1 970
born with responsibility
WOr
GURU PUJA • 20 JULY • CABELLA LIGURE ITALY
Meta Modern Era
You have to take over and work it out. That does not
mean you cancel Me – no, not at all. I am there with you
a message from the greatest spiritual leader of
our time
and in every place you work, you put My photograph...
become gurus,
how
Can you imagine, all of you, if you
many Sahaja Yogis we will have all over the world...?
It is for you to carry the torch, the light. It is your
responsibility now. You have got your Realization.
I was born with the responsibility. I was born with
all the understanding and now you are also. Understand
yourself. Do not condemn yourself ... but be careful. Do
not become egoistical. You have to be very humble, very
humble with everyone. And work it out because, if they
are not realized souls, you should not condemn them,
but tell them very patiently and sweetly, "You are not all
right." Tell them how to meditate, how to improve. It is
now a very big responsibility. Actually I have done this
SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
work and you can do this work also. So you all have to
Everyone,
stanal
, a a
matter of urgenrg, has to unders
become a guru....
their vitul role in this great age of trandformation.
I bless
that
you all become gurus. Whatever you
you
A new edition of Meta Modern Era published have got now, do not waste it, do not throw away it away,
Shri Mataji in India, Italy and United Arab Emirates but useit for the betterment of people.
I want to tell you what are the qualities needed for a
Sahasrara and Shri Krishna Pujas in Cabella
That
Shri Ganesha and Christmas Pujas in Pune guru. First of all, he should be a detached
person.
Guru and Shri Adi Shakti Pujas in Cabella does not mean you give up your family or anything, but
Mahashivaratri Puja at Prathishthan you should have a detached attitude that anybody from
Sankranti Puja at Prathishthan your family does wrong, you should
go away from him or
Birthday Puja in Chhindwara her. Secondly, through your Realization, you can see that
Shri Ganesha Puja in Cabella you can spread happiness and remove their problems. You
Navaratri Puja in Cabella have seen whatever I have done. You can do it. You have
will
Diwali in Noida India got power to do it. But no hypocrisy, otherwise
you
Easter Puja in Nagpur spoil the name of Sahaja Yoga.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-44.txt 
 I have done My best and I think I won't be able to do this again. It is not My old
age,
it free
but I want to give you a complete freedom to spread Sahaja Yoga. You have got
also have to give it to people free.
and
you
Now I have been working since the year 1970. And today, so many years I have
worked so hard, but I cannot now do it. I have to go back and take some rest.... All of
you, promise Me that you will try to become gurus. I did not take any money from you,
nothing from you. I just want that you should spread Sahaja Yoga.... You have to save
the world. All My work is that.... May God bless you.... Thank you, all of you.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-45.txt 
 2002
Sahaja Yoga is just one of My aspects
The enjoyment of Sahaja Yoga is the best way to know Sahaja Yoga
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-46.txt 
 YOGA FORTY
SSAHAJA
it
YEARSS
PHOTOGRAPHS
1970: date and place uncertain
1973: India, 1973
1974: date and place uncertain
1975: Bombay, date uncertain
1976: Shri Mataji and six Sahaja Yogis, circa 1976, Oxted United Kingdom
1977: Guru Puja, London, 1 July 1977
1978: UK seminar, Easthampstead Park UK, October 1978 (Patricia Proenza)
1979: Holi Puja, India, 1979
1981: Shri Ganesha Puja, Sydney Australia, 4 April 1981
1982: Guru Puja, Nightingale Lane ashram, London, July 1982
1983: Guru Puja, Lodge Hill Sussex UK, July 1983
1984: Navaratri Puja, Paris, 30 September 1984 (Allesandra Pallini)
1987: Shri Mahalakshmi Puja, Belgium, 9 October 1987 (H. Reininger)
1988: Ganapatipule India, circa 1993 (Toni Grabmayer)
1989: boat to Capri Italy, May 1989 (Herbert Reininger)
1990: Shri Ganesha Puja 1990, Lanersbach Austria, 26 August 1990
1991: village in India, circa 1990
1993: place unknown, 1993
THE DIVINE
COOL BREEZE
www.divinecoolbreeze.org
SUBSCRIPTIONS:
contact@divinecoolbreeze.org
CONTENT:
1994: Tunis Tunisia, November 1994
editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
1994: India, 1994
1996: New York, September 1996
1997: New York public program, 10 June 1997
1998: Shri Adi Shakti Puja, Cabella Italy, June 1998
1999: Diwali Puja, Delphi Greece, November 1999
2000: beach at Ganapatipule India, December 2000 (Wolfgang Hollerweger)
2001: Shri Adi Shakti Puja, Cabella Italy, June 2001
PRINTED BY
King Printing Company Inc.
181 Industrial Avenue East
Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA
2002: Shri Ganesha Puja, Frankfurt Germany, September 2002
2003: Shri Ganesha Puja, Cabella Italy, September 2003 (Michal Markl)
2004: Birthday Puja entertainment, Delhi, 19 March 2004 (Anjan Upadhya)
2005: Shri Krishna Puja, Parsippanny USA, 28 August 2005 (Neil King)
2006: 11 February 2006, Sydney Australia (Matthew Cooper)
2007: Easter Puja, 8 April 2007, Pratishthan Pune India (Paul Anant)
2008 top: 26 January 2008, Pratishthan Pune India (Suneel Janakwar)
2009: Easter Puja, 12 April 2009, Cabella Italy (Calin Chirou)
Back cover: Navaratri Puja, Los Angeles, 24 October 2004 (Neil King)
PRINTED BY
Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd.
No.8, Chandragupta Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411038
Maharashtra, India
WORDS of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Opposite page top: Cowley Manor Seminar United Kingdom, 31 July 1982
Opposite page bottom: Shri Ganesha Puja, Kalwe India, 31 December 1991
Back cover and this page lower right: Sydney Australia, 17 March 1993
You are beyond time,
Please forgive any errors is this publication.
The information and facts included are based largely on the inventories of talks
and pujas compiled over the years, articles and records published in The Divine
Cool Breeze, Nirmala Yoga and other Sahaja Yoga periodicals, as well as timelines
compiled by Sahaja Yogis. At all stages, errors are inevitable, but certainly our
biggest error is that of omission. Even if this magazine was a hundredfold in size,
it would still only represent a minute fraction of the forty years of labour, attention
and love gifted to us by Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. This history of
Sahaja Yoga is neither comprehensive nor definitive. It is a sampling.
into the timeless dimension,
enjoying yourself.
That's the beauty
we have to achieve.
The Sahaja Yoga World Foundation's Media Project totals Shri Mataji's recorded
talks at 3023. Of these, 632 are puja talks. Public programs are numbered at 1172.
This is not a complete list and only accounts for those talks that have been recorded,
identified and catalogued.
That state we have to reach.
Kaalateet. Beyond time. Timeless. Everything happens just in the right moment.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-47.txt 
 You are beyond time
