Zhe Dvm ne oume Coel Sreeze 2010 issue 3 – volume twenty-three number three Ihe DDwine Cool

 life, dedicated to you My In this world, Brahma Shakti was awakened from the day of My birth. You have very received it to some extent and are using it in many ways.... The light of that great power of love will spread all over the world. The first lamp wil be lit on that day. But the night of Diwali is blind. It cannot see the lamps. In this Kali Yuga, this work will be done only if many lamps are lit. Whatever is God's work, it will be over. Hence, everyone should be alert and awake and also awaken others. My life is dedicated to you. Every moment it is working. All I want is that pure gold should enlighten human history while getting heated in the hell of Kali Yuga. My blessings are: may this lamp be kindled in every home, may its joy spread in the society, may the cheers of its victory resound in all countries and may this power of Brahma fill in every molecule of the universe.... I often feel that such a day of great joy of love should dawn in our life. Whatever you desire will happen, therefore your attention should be fully on Sahaja Yoga. VOLUME 23 NUMBER THREE page 2: five questions • page 4: castes children and freedom page 12: these marriages • page 14: desire and ascent page 30: bhaiyakayataya • page 26: to the seekers page28: fly like a bird • page 30: a message writ large

 What is the need for Sahaja Yoga? What is the need to be the spirit? We are all right as human beings, as flesh, everything. What is the need How do I solve to be realized? Once you understand my problems? the need, then you will understand what is Sahaja Yoga and what the With Sahaja Yoga all these prob- other sects are. The need is this: you lems... can be easily solved, but are a part and parcel of the whole one thing is that you must work like a big, primordial being you can think of. And He has many cells and in unison, as one person, part and parcel of one union. you are one of the cells.

 What is the most important thing to 3. know about love? Love is an absolute gift, a gift of just feeling others. There is no talking about it, discussing about it, noth- ing. You just feel that love. To feel the love, one has to have a heart, but What is surrender? how can you have a heart? It is not your own doing. It is all there. So it When do not accept the prin- is something that is already gifted to you you. You have it, that you can feel ciple of Sahaja Yoga, you put a bar- that love. It is so much joy-giving, rier in between the sap and the leaf. Now when that happens, the leaf peace-giving. Love has its own qual- ities and one of the qualities is that falls off. So you have to open out love understands. Its understanding yourself, your heart, everything to is not in words, not in thought, but suck in the sap to nourish. You have it understands within. It can feel to give up your ego and superego, What does your conditionings and ideas you within, which is very important. Shri Mataji have had from before. This is what This is the most important part one want from me? has to realize: that love, you can only is the surrender. It is the Islam. And feel it. You cannot talk about it, you that is to be achieved. But that is not I do not want anything from you going to help the tree. It is going to cannot show about it, but it is within help you. and you can feel it. except that you accept My love.

 CASTES, children CEREEDOM New Year Puja • 31 December 1998 • Kalwe India They have asked Me to talk about Indian culture today because Bombay is the place where Indian culture is disappearing. That is what they say. But I do not think so because the roots are so deep that we cannot give up that culture so fast. Now, as it is for the people who are coming from other countries, they have to realize that this country had no religion as such because there was not one book. They did not follow one person. They did not have any organizations as we have for other religions. We never had a higher priesthood or all those appointed people. It was all done very spontaneously. The whole thing worked out very spontaneously. But behind all that was the attitude of Indians. Our style was not to challenge or to ques- tion what these great saints have given us. Because we accepted their status as saints, as higher personalities in a way, in a sense they were higher than us. So we did not want to challenge them and whatever they said we accepted. As a result, that became ... a way of conduct or a way of life. But as a religion, we had nothing, except that later on the caste system developed. Before that there was no caste system because non-Brahmins wrote about Shri Rama or wrote about Shri Krishna. It is very surprising how we accepted all that, never challenged whether it was written by a Brahmin or not. A Brahmin was one who knew about Brahmic principle, the principle of all-pervading divine love. Everybody was not a Brahmin, but later on they made it like this – whosoever is born in a Brahmin family was a Brahmin, whosoever was born in another caste belonged to that. Because of the father's heritance, they also had the profession that they were following. So according to the professions, the religions – or you can say the castes – were established. No religion, but caste. And that is how we had different caste systems in India according to the professions.

 CASTE CHILDREN FREEDOM Beyond caste, beyond religion It is very interesting. Recently I discovered there is a caste called ghadani among Marathis, which you may not be knowing. They only believe in art. They do music or they have paintings. They make statues. They make temples. That is a caste. That is a profession. And they marry among themselves because it is easier to marry in the same profession and to have the same ideas and styles about life – and the profession especially. Now later on, apart from being a profession, it started becoming a very consolidated nonsense.... I think it is the British who used it very much to separate us from one to another. Now the scheduled castes* and all that was also not like a religious thing. saints like Chokha Mela ... who were also greatly respected and We have got regarded. Also Ekanath and Namdev – they all tried to be one with all the castes and especially the scheduled castes. So this saintliness was regarded as another caste which did not believe in any caste whatsoever. They had no caste. They were a casteless people without any religion, without any caste. The ultimate aim of every caste was to get to Self Realization. So they enter into the clan, into the system of saints. And all the saints – whether Muslims or Hindus or Jains or anything – they all were put together as saints. They were Sufis. Sufis from the Muslim heritage they came. Then we had also among Jains, Tirthankaras and all that. The main point was that they were the people who believed in the ethical life, ethics, believed in the higher life, spiritual life and lived like that. Now as you are all Sahaja Yogis, you have lost your religion, lost your caste. You have lost your heritage. You are Sahaja Yogis. Yogis means you are all the people who are believing into the ethical side of life. In this country this was used and was exploited also for politics, for all kinds of segregation of people. And that has really gone into such rigid ideas about everyone, every "What is your caste, that first thing they used to ask – not now, before - caste?" Now that is over. They do not ask. At least, thank God, that much sense is there that they do not ask for the caste. But they used to ask religion and caste formerly when we were entering into any examination or any kind of competition. * Scheduled castes: Those castes identified and protected in the Indian constution.

 CASTE CHILDREN FREEDOM The ethics of dharma Now because of this problem of creating artificial castes, this country is suf- fering a lot and the castes of the gurus, the castes of the Sufis, other castes of the saints were very much polluted and we had many people in our country who started becoming gurus and this and that. But the main thing is the ethics, which was the culture of this country. It was the ethics of dharma. Without that, they thought human beings were worse than animals. Ethics was very important to every caste, to every person. Even when I was young we had the same thing. But now it has become such a mixture and such a problem that, unless and until Sahaja Yoga really spreads the condition of this country. in a real way, I do not think we can improve Now the essence of it is that once your attention is only towards ethics and aadhyatama [spirituality], then you start discovering all the inner deeper meanings of your life. You work it out in a different a very different way. way you work it out. If it is material gain, then one can become like America. If it is some sort of a very low level hankerings, then also you cannot be an Indian. The principles of Indian life were embedded in spirituality, in morality. An immoral person was regarded as a very low level person. Such a person could not get married. He had no place in the society. He had no place even вс in the homes – their own homes. That was such a restriction on people, just to see that the society is kept clean and such a person was thrown out of the society. Anybody who even drank wine or anything was regarded as a person who is not dharmic. He is adharmic. Can you believe it? Drinking was regarded as adharmic. I think very few people must have seen drunkards.... Indian philosophy is such that it gives you complete freedom and you can do what you like. But not in the name of religion, you cannot do it, not in the name of God, not in the temple. And if they do it, people will throw them away. They bring a court case, do this do that and just remove it completely so it is kept pure.... Whatever is pure must be kept pure. Christ also, He took one hunter in his hand and started hitting people who were selling things in the temple. So the purity of that church or the purity of that religious place has to be kept. So the first thing I think was 8. purity. Eff

 CASTE CHILDREN FREEDOM Understanding ethics The restrictions came from the society, a society which was built up on ethics. And all these ethical values are penetrating up to everywhere. But unfortunately, now the other cultures are coming and people think we are rather rigid, very rigid people, we should really relax a little bit and take to other things. But I have to tell you that if you go out of the line of ethics in any direction, the only saving is Sahaja Yoga, to come back to nor- malcy. There is no other way out. And once you come to Sahaja Yoga, you cannot deviate from the path of dharma. you try to do that, you go out of Sahaja Yoga. It is as simple as that. It is not that "All right, doesn't matter, Mother should forgive" and these things. I forgive, all right. I forgive because you have still got some human weaknesses left in you. I forgive. But in Sahaja Yoga you cannot. Sahaja Yoga has to maintain its purity. If you allow all such people to enter into Sahaja Yoga, then there will be no purity of Sahaja Yoga and then everybody will start doing this or that just to say that “After all, you see, we are also Sahaja Yogis, they are also Sahaja Yogis, if they have done it, why not we?" What is very surprising to Me is the western people who have taken to Sahaja Yoga are scrupulously following Sahaja Yoga – scrupulously. I am not such a strict guru, as you know, but they understand one thing – that this is for our betterment, this is for our growth, this is a very, very important part of our lives. That is ethics. That has to be there. And once they understand it, I tell you, I am surprised how these western people who have seen their parents drinking and also other people doing all kinds of things - even their friends and all that – they just give up completely. I am very proud of them. For us Indians, it is natural because we are brought up that way. All the time we have seen people being corrected... We do not do all that – normally. I mean if somebody has been abroad and all that and thinks that they are very free people and “Why not, we can do," that is a very different thing. But normally we do not. We do not believe in that. If CC CC The freedom of the West Because they are very free in the West, it is difficult for you to accept. But once they come to Sahaja Yoga I am really surprised. I am really surprised how they have accepted Sahaja Yoga so beautifully. They had the freedom, complete freedom to do what they liked. In India we do not have such freedom for children. [In the West] they can go wher- ever they like. They can do whatever they like. The teacher cannot correct them. Because of that freedom that they had, there is one thing good that has happened. So many are lost, but those who are saved are rare people. Because of that growth of freedom within them, I think they learn our Indian music in five months, four months. No Indians can do it because they are restricted all the time. They are controlled all the time. They are kept on the path of religion. So ultimately the freedom that some of you had and enjoyed has given you a special personality, that you pick up very difficult things without any effort. Now whether you should have that freedom or not is your own lookout. But too much restriction on chil- dren I think is not a good thing. With Sahaja Yoga, born with Sahaja Yoga, those who are should be given full freedom I think. Such children should be given full freedom for they will not do anything wrong. And you will see they will pick up things very fast. It is not that westerners are more intelligent or alert, but the way they are given free- dom, their growth, their personality, sometimes they are like a vagabond. Sometimes just like a tomboy. Sometimes to Me they look like very vulgar. But once – with that wealth of freedom – they come to reality, they shine.

 So I would request also Indians not to suppress their children too much. We enjoy the children much in India, no doubt, but we suppress do not mind because it is accepted. This pattern is accepted in India. So too much restriction on children also curbs their personality. This is what I have discovered. But the western people go through such hell first of all, develop such prob- lems to begin with and ultimately what happens is this: they can be discarded as bad, bad, bad people. But if they come as good, good, good, they are marvelous. All the freedom they have enjoyed before is showing results, otherwise how can this miracle happen to western people. There is no justification. Now the problem is whether to give freedom or not. We have a proper sense now, after Realization, that a child is a born-realized. In the beginning he won't understand. He won't understand, but gradually such a child will show results, a maximum capacity to absorb and to express. them also very much.... Children very Freedom of the spirit Today I am telling you about this freedom, which is the freedom of the spirit. We should The freedom have an understanding of such children who have that spirituality in them. They have dharma in them. And we should not try to constrict them or to trouble them. Let them do what they like. They will never do anything wrong because they are born-realized. So I am talking about the future Indians. Some of them I have seen – children, six-year-old children – they are geniuses I tell you. They sing as if we feel that these old musicians are reborn. It is very surprising how they show their talent... They are born-realized, but also they have the talents from their past life. They have got it from that some eight-year-old of you had has given past life. So we should not try to control and check our children too much. That is a of our Sahaja culture. It does not fit into Indian culture, but it should fit into Sahaja culture, to understand the value of our children who are realized souls. I enjoy their company. They speak so sweetly of all the things, of all the persons and they describe about everyone so sweetly. Just allow them the freedom to talk and they will tell you all kinds of things. the you a special You d part personality. Freedom for expression Now I have praised you a lot I think – the outsiders we can call them, non-Indians. And it is a fact – the way they have taken to Sahaja Yoga is remarkable. But the way they are taking to this Indian music and to Indian art I can't believe it. Really I can't believe it. I can't understand it. So you have freedom, but now use this freedom for expression of whatever you have achieved in Sahaja Yoga. Because you are already grown up with your freedom and if you do not utilize that personality full of freedom in expressing Sahaja Yoga in your own lan- guages, you won't help your people. You have to help them because your percentage is very low. Your quality is high, but in your own country your percentage is low. So you have to go all out to get them into Sahaja Yoga and to let them know what they can achieve and what they are. You are duty bound. O 11

 13 These are the marriages which are going to change the society.

 Desire and 1. Shri Mahakali Puja • 19 December 1982 • Lonavala India

 Ascent We have to establish our desire within ourselves that we are seekers and that we have to achieve our full growth and maturity... Your desires should be so intense that they should emit out the pure vibrations of the Mahakali Shakti, which is the pure desire of attaining the spirit. That is the real desire. All the other desires are like a mirage. 15

 DESIRE AND ASCENT Desire, Kundalini and family You are the people who are chosen by God specially, first to express your desire and then to achieve it. And by the intense desire of purity, you have to purify the whole world – not only the seekers, but even those who are not seekers. You have to create an aura around this universe, of desire to achieve the ultimate, the spirit. Without desire this universe would not have been created. This desire of God is the one that is the Holy Ghost. It is this All-pervading Power. It is the to express your desire Kundalini within you. The Kundalini has only one desire. It is to be the spirit and then to achieve it and anything else, if you desire, the Kundalini does not rise. Only when it knows that this desire is going to be fulfilled by somebody who is facing the seeker, is it awakened. If you do not have the desire, no one can force you. Sahaja Yogis should never try to force this desire on other people... The sooner you realize the better, that this desire may be within you and may not be in any one of your so-called worldly relations. It makes no differ- ence. As Christ was told that His brothers and sisters are waiting outside, He said, "Who are My brothers and who are My sisters?" CC כי So one has to realize that those people who involve themselves into the problems of their family all the time and attract My attention, you must know that I am just playing about. It is of no value to you. For your ascent, it is important first of all to have no desires to create desire in your kith and kin. This is the first principle of the establishment of the Mahakali Power... Try to separate your pure desire from your worldly desires. It does not, by any means, suggest that you give up your family, you give up your mother or give up your sister – nothing. But you witness them and see, as you would see anybody else, and see for yourself whether they are really desirous or not. If they are, well and good. They should not be disqual- ified because they are your relations. It works both ways. As they cannot be qualified because they are your relations, they cannot be disqualified because they are your relations. So in Sahaja Yoga, to make your desire a pure desire, you have to get out of so many things. But for people who are attached to their family, they are bound by their family. They have to see to it that they do not force Sahaja Yoga on any one of their relations. At least do not force them on Me. 16

 To become the spirit Now this desire within us, which is the Mahakali Power which is manifest- ing, comes to us in so many ways. As I told you first of all, it comes to us after Realization because you are all Sahaja Yogis, to do something about our relations. Then the second desire that comes to us is that “let us try to cure people who are our relations." This is the second desire. You should face yourself and see that this has happened to many of you.... You should have only one intense desire within yourself: “Have I become You have the spirit? Have I achieved my ultimate? Have I risen above the worldly become desires?" Purify it. Once you start purifying, whatever falls off, I will look after that. This is just an assurance, but not a guarantee. If it deserves My the spirit. attention, I will definitely look after you. The rest You have to value your attention as I value My attention. I think you have to value much more of your attention than Me because I can manage many of it is My more things within Myself because everything is in My attention. But you headache. try to purify your desires away from the worldly problems that are facing you. you start thinking, “Mother, what about the problem of our country?" All right, give Me the map of your country – fin- then So you expand it more, ished. That's more than sufficient. Then purify yourself. The desire that you have, you leave it. And once you are purified, that area will be covered through your attention. It is very interesting. When you get over it, then only you can throw light. But if you are inside, you are hidden by that. Your light is hidden. There is no light emitted. You all rise above that desire. Every time you get a desire, you rise above it. So your light is emitted on that wider problem that you are facing, think should be solved by Me. which you These are all My headaches which you are taking on yourself. You have to do only one thing. It is to become the spirit. That is all. It is a simple thing. The rest of it is My headache. Ascent

 DESIRE AND ASCENT Desire and responsibility You are not facing Me. The problems that should take your desire on You are sitting with Me, the collective should be different. To sub- very stantiate your purity, to be fragrant with purity, your attention should be on the other your facing the whole world. side. Now you are not facing Me. You are sit- ting with Me, facing the whole world. See, the whole attitude will change. The attitude should be "What can I give? How can I give? What is my mistake in giving? I have to be more alert. Where is my attention? I have to be more alert towards myself. What am I doing? What's my responsibility?" You must desire that you should desire. That means be pure. You should be you should be the spirit. What is your respon- pure sibility to yourself? You should desire that your responsibility to yourself should be manifested, should be complete. Then your responsibility to this Sahaja Yoga Yoga, which is the work of God, which has started and you are My hands? You have to do the work of God and you have to fight the what is your responsibility to Sahaja anti-God elements, the satanic elements. You are not responsible for your family any more. Those who are half-baked Sahaja Yogis I said are useless, absolutely good-for-nothing. All such will drop out. Their families will suffer. I know this is going to happen because now the forces are gathering in such a way that sorting out will start. Your responsibility is to yourself, to be the spirit. Your responsibility is to Sahaja Yoga. Your responsibility is to understand Me better and better and better. Your responsibility is to understand this mechanism that is within you. Your responsibility is to understand how this mechanism works out everything. The responsibility is how to become a guru yourself. Your responsibility is to be a dignified and a glorified personality – responsibility to be a respectable person and not a cheap personal- ity.

 19

 Every one of you is worth the whole universe if you want to rise to that height. Universes of universes can be thrown away at your feet if you want to rise to that height, to that magnitude that is within you. To rise and be alert Every one of you is worth the whole universe, if you want to rise to that height. Uni- verses of universes can be thrown away at your feet if you want to rise to that height, to that magnitude that is within you to prosper. But those people, who still want to live on a very low level cannot rise. For example, the western Sahaja Yogis have certain problems of committing the sin against the Mother and the eastern Sahaja Yogis have the problem of committing the sin against the Father. It is not difficult at all for you to get out of it. The attention is to be kept pure. In Sahaja Yoga you know all the methods, how with the attention one can keep it pure. If the attention is not pure, then this desire will be always attacked by all petty, nonsensical things which have no meaning in your ascent. Now a person who is a good Sahaja Yogi is not bothered about clothes, what others say to him or what others are talking about to him, how they are behaving towards him. And the attention is not on that, criticism that this person is like this, that person is like that. Nor is there the aggressiveness of anyone else because nobody is the other. But the problem is, when I say that, no one thinks that I am saying about you, each person. Those who are aggressive take the other role and those who are non- aggressive think the other way. Like I say something for a person who is aggressive, the non-aggressive immediately thinks of the person who is aggressive, not about himself. You immediately start shifting your mind to the other person, finding faults with other people. So this desire becomes gradually lower and lower and lower because of the loads that are put on to it. So the alertness is very important – complete alertness, satarkata - that we should keep our attention purely for the sustenance of our pure desire. Desire comes from your heart and you are so built that your brahmarandra is also the heart. If you do not have a clean heart, this won't keep clean. 20

 DESIRE AND ASCENT Surrender of the heart There are people who think if they talk about Sahaja Yoga big and all that, they are all right. They are cheating themselves. If the heart is not open, then the Sahasrara is closed. So try to open your heart by projecting... Your outlook should be, "How much have I contributed to this? Am I still thinking | O Treasure-mine ever of other people? Am I still thinking of my petty small problems or am I thinking of my smiling, possessed of boundless qualities, spirit?" So the left side starts and ends with Shri Ganesha. Shri Ganesha has only one basic proficient in holding quality, that He is completely surrendered to His Mother. He does not know any other the scales even, God. He does not even know His Father. He only knows His Mother and is completely uninterrupted surrendered to Her.... Let us establish ourselves into that pure desire to be the spirit. Now, as it is with the western mind, we will say, “How?" It is always coming, “how to do it?" Should I tell you? It is very simple. Adi Shankaracharya wrote Viveka Chudamani and so many other books of treaties by no means bound to and then all these big intellectuals got after his life and they said, "How this and how conventions, that and how?" He said, "Forget these people." Then he wrote Saundarya Lahari. It is with Feet glorified by just a description of his Mother and his devotion to Her and every couplet that He wrote all the Upanishads, is a mantra. It is not the surrender of your mind through your mind, but the surrender void of risks and eternal, fountain of Wisdom, ever abiding in well- controlled minds, CC CC heart. It is absolutely the surrender of your heart. Western Sahaja Yogis know hallow this laudatory of your well how there have been attacks and attacks of negativity on them, especially when composition of mine horrible people like Freud came to destroy their basics, the roots – and how the West (Thy humble devotee). accepted it blindfolded – and put them on the path of hell. All that has to be brought out. That is all nonsense. It is wrong, absolutely against O Mother of diction, God. It is anti-God activity. Then you will realize that you will fight fully by saying, "This composing this hymn is the destruction of our basics, our roots, when our Mother is the source of everything (in praise) of Thee, that is sublime, noble, all that is nourishing, all that is elevating, emancipating. You have in words originating been cutting us from our roots.... very 01 from Thee, is very much like adoring the sun by offering a light, offering the moon drops of water flowing out So it is important for you to understand all the attacks that came on you and be alert and do not be identified with any one of these. Desire to become Let us establish within ourself on a subtler level the desire to be pure and to be cleansed of a moon-stone, and out, all the barriers and unclean things that are within us, to desire to be great Sahaja pleasing the ocean by Yogis, desire to be responsible Sahaja Yogis and desire to be surrendered to your Mother. pouring water into it. It is not difficult. That is the easiest. The last one is the easiest because what do you sur- the two concluding verses of "Saundarya Lahari" render? I do not want anything from you except that you accept My love. Surrendering just means you open your heart to accept My Love. Give That is all and it will work out. this up ego. I am sure it is going to work out. I am trying to push Myself into your hearts and I will definitely settle down there.... I hope all of you will take it in such a way that the subtlest of subtle will be awakened within I the sensitivity in every way and the love which culminates into joy. you, Love that flowers into the fragrance of joy will manifest in today's puja. May God bless you. Mother is the source of everything

 Bha Вратуaкау. ryakayai what is there to fear?

 Bhaiyakayataya Lodge Hill Seminar • 23 July 1983 • United Kingdom When we belong to God, what is there to fear? We forget everything in the Divinity And we become completely lost in God. When we belong to God, what is there to fear? The world is grateful to Him for His blessings, But still He doesn't belong to the world because He is in a completely detached state. When we belong to God, what is there to fear? You may be without any outward wealth. The real treasure of wealth is inside you. When we belong to God, what is there to fear? All the diseases and problems get completely dissolved Where the Feet of God reside. When we belong to God, what is there to fear? This song is written by a relation of ours. He was a convert to Christianity, but a realized soul, and he could never cope with the system of conversion and also the the Hindus were treated among themselves with the caste way system and all that. And he has written some of the very good hymns. This is one of the hymns. 23

 a mutual thing between 24

 ΒHAIYΑΚΑΥΑΤΑ ΥΑ The song is something I really always used to sing in My childhood very much. And the theme of the song is like this: the one who has God or the one who has owned God, why should he have fear? The one who moves about extensively for the sake of God and for doing good for others, but he does not belong to this world, such a person has no fear. He stands above the language. The Marathi language is a very, very intense language and it touches many corners when you say one word of it. It is like this: Adhi vyadhi varana varati payi asha purusha chari. It means a person of this calibre is standing above. His foot is above the sickness, the mental problems and death itself. But when you say that such a person has a foot on top of this, its mean- ing is that, with the effect of his foot, it can get over it. It is a double language, you see. Such a person has his foot on top of all these three things – the sickness, the mental problems and death. The foot is on top of that. It means that such a got any person is above this. Thus, if you have somebody of this calibre and the foot touches the sick or the mentally disturbed people or the dead, such a person can raise them higher, can take them out of it. It has a double meaning. So the whole theme works out this way, that the person who belongs to God, who owns God, should not have fear, should not frustrated.... get They sang the song. The song did fill Me. It completely brought out some of the expressions which would not spontaneously come out at this time. But the greatest thing it has done is to remind Me that “You are God. You are not to get frustrated. You have to look after all of them. And You are powerful when You talk." So such people should always keep a mirror and feel elevated. You are a Sahaja Yogi and in the mirror, in the reflection, you should see Me and not yourself... When the instrument is all right, after all, with all the powers you have, with all the blessings you have and the source of power behind it, everything should work out. It should work out. You have had experiences of things working out. You have had experiences of many miracles happening before your eyes, but stil the attention has not settled down with those experiences. Still gatanubhavas that means the old experiences continue. Old identifications continue. You still continue with that and the filth of that is still on your being. Change everything. Become a fresh new person. You are blooming out as a flower and then as a tree and assume your position. Assume your position as the Sahaja Yogi. So this attention must be brought around. You judge yourself. Where is your attention and what is the point of understanding? What is the measure of understanding? It is very simple. I have to be pleased because I am the attention. If I am pleased, then you have done the job. But I cannot be pleased by mundane things, by any arguments with that, but only by your ascent. So you judge yourself on that. Whether you give Me a flower or anything, I am only pleased when the essence of that doing has that height, has that special manifestation. You say, “I love you very much, Mother." All right, you say it, but I must see that love that you are saying or doing has that essence that gives Me joy. It is such a mutual thing between us. You can't imagine. I can't live without and you can't live without Me. It is so mutual. O us you

 to'the seekers of truth: part four sẽé a world of faith The experience of the truth has to be absolute. That means everyone should feel it the same way. I spoke to you about the experience of truth, that the truth has to be felt through your central nervous system. If anything has to happen to your evolution, you have to feel it through your central nervous system, otherwise it is just a projection of mind which forms it and you are surprised at yourself. Like we call somebody your as a friend, a dear friend and one day we find there is no friendship. Maybe one day the friend may try to murder you or you may try to murder that person. You just do not understand what happened to that love. It is the same thing about all of our projections. We find they have no basis. It is so superficial. When we realize that all is so superficial, it has no basis, we just get frustrated and we start thinking, "What is all this? We are playing games. Why can't we be On top sincere? What has happened to us? Why are we so frivolous? Why are we so super- of ficial?" We may start taking an interest in things which look superficially very great, the head but ultimately we find it does not have any depth. And suddenly, to our horror, we discover that everything seems to be relative in this world, nothing is absolute. there is So the experience of the truth has to be absolute. That means everybody should a lotus. feel that way. If not, then it is something poetic because each poet sees the reality describes in a different way. But if he is a truthful poet, he keeps in a differen way, the essence at least the same. But when we say we have to feel the truth by everyone in an absolute manner, what does that mean? 26

 That means when we get our Self Realization, when we think we have got a new awareness of collective consciousness, that means we are connected to the whole, with the absolute. Then every one of us who is like that should feel the same way. The truth is one When the truth is felt by everyone the same, then it is absolute. If somebody sees a blue colour and if somebody sees a red colour, then it is not the truth. And you will be amazed when you become self-realized. If you meet people who are self- realized, you will be amazed they will say the same thing in a different way.... But You move one they say the same.... Down within us there is something that is absolute, that tells us about the step forward absolute. So the second experience should be of absoluteness. The Divine Power into the faith that is all-pervading, if it is truthful, if it is real, then all of us who are feeling that of experience. power through this Realization should receive the same message. This is the second proof.. This is a very, very important thing for you to understand, that truth has to be one. It has to be absolute and, if you can establish your rapport with the absolute, you cannot have any other information but the truth. So as you ascend, you start learning that whatever messages you are getting are the truth, that all these messages that you are receiving you can yourself perceive them. You can feel them. Nobody has to tell Even a child can sense it. you. The line of evolution So you move one step forward into a world called faith, which is the faith of experi- ence. You call something as a stick. Now how do you know it is not artificial? It is real because you have experience of the artificial and the real and now, when you with faith, "Yes, it is a real stick." feel it, you can say In the same way, reality can be only accepted if you go through the experience of truth and then have faith... Our evolution starts going on a different line where we want to find ourselves 2 July 1984 London and what is the truth. O

 fly like bird 24

 We forget that we have risen and that we are completely transformed and we are free, absolutely free people. Nothing can dominate us, none of our conditionings, none of our egos. Nothing can dominate us, none of our habits. Everything has died out and we are free birds to fly and to enjoy our flights.

 large: a message writ laughter If you become unhappy and serious, you are very unkind to yourself and to others. Anybody who is a serious person, sits with a serious face, know that he is not a Sahaja Yogi at all. They should be bubbling with laughter – joy all the time. I cannot be serious for more than five seconds perhaps. I don't know. I because try lectures should be serious, to go into the hearts of the people.... Even when I'm getting angry, My eyes betray Me and there is a twinkle of laughter in the eyes. That is how a person should be. Don't worry what others have to say. The culture where people are just glum like this is the same as the people who are frivolous.. You have to be natural. And everything natural is always bubbling with joy. And a message: these flowers are the message of My coming, writ large on them. 30

 This Mother has a little love for you, but God Almighty has the ocean. You cannot pay for that ocean. Just accept it. It will flow, overflow, engulf beautiful. The time has come for all of you to get and make it.... you you You enter into a realm where there is nothing but enjoyment and laughter and happiness and joy. And, in that enjoyment, you are amazed to see that you are connected to each other so much like a part of the finger is connected to the whole body. happiness KEGO 6GO Now you must have seen how in My lecture I say quite serious things, but in your bubbles of laughter it just settles down in your mind. That is how should do it because humour is one of the greatest things that the puts you юу thing through, makes the person understand – and it doesn't harm anyone. That is how things improve. And when you see that, you are settled down in peace.

 As you people can absorb My vibrations, this fruit can absorb also My vibrations in the greatest amount. ప్యతే

 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE www.divinecoolbreeze.org SUBSCRIPTIONS contact@divinecoolbreeze.org CONTENT editor@divinecoolbreeze.org PRINTED BY King Printing Company Inc. 181 Industrial Avenue East Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA and Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. No.8, Chandragupta Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411038 Maharashtra, India All photographs by Gregoire de Kalbermatten except as noted: Pages 4 and 9: Shri Mataji enroute to Ganapatipule, 1985 Page 7: Shri Mataji in India, 1979 (photo by Malcolm Murdoch) Pages 12 and 13: Shri Mataji applies a bindhi marriages, Tannay Switzerland, circa 1984 Page 14: Volterra Italy, circa 1985 Page 22: music program in Sangli India, date uncertain Page 24: London, date uncertain Pages 28 and 29: Italy near Milan (photo by Axinia Samoilova) Pages 30 and 31: Shri Mataji in Kathmandu Nepal, 1970s Page 32: wedding coconut, Rome, December 2009 (photo by Axinia Samoilova) Back cover: sunset near Rome, December 2009 (A. Samoilova) Notes on Shri Mataji's words Contents page: letter translated from Marathi, 1979 Page 2: 24 September 1995 Page 2: 14 April 1982 Page 3: Mahalakshmi Puja 1987 Page 3: Guru Puja 2004 Page 3: 19 December 1982 Page 13: 3 March 1980 Page 29: 18 April 1992 Page 30: 26 October 1985 Page 31: 28 January 1980 Page 31: Birthday Puja 1985 Page 32: 13 December 1987 Back cover: 19 April 1982

 you are seekers of ancient times and this is the time that was promised



----------------------

2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Zhe Dvm
ne
oume
Coel Sreeze
2010 issue 3 – volume twenty-three number three
Ihe DDwine Cool
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-1.txt 
 life, dedicated to you
My
In this world, Brahma Shakti was awakened
from the
day of My birth. You have
very
received it to some extent and are using it in
many ways....
The light of that great power of love will
spread all over the world. The first lamp wil
be lit on that day. But the night of Diwali is
blind. It cannot see the lamps. In this Kali
Yuga, this work will be done only if many
lamps are lit.
Whatever is God's work, it will be over.
Hence, everyone should be alert and awake
and also awaken others.
My life is dedicated to you. Every moment
it is working. All I want is that pure gold
should enlighten human history while
getting heated in the hell of Kali Yuga.
My blessings are: may this lamp be kindled
in every home, may its joy spread in
the society, may the cheers of its victory
resound in all countries and may this
power
of Brahma fill in every molecule of the
universe....
I often feel that such a day of great joy of
love should dawn in our life. Whatever you
desire will happen, therefore your attention
should be fully on Sahaja Yoga.
VOLUME 23 NUMBER THREE
page 2: five questions • page 4: castes children and freedom
page 12: these marriages • page 14: desire and ascent
page 30: bhaiyakayataya • page 26: to the seekers
page28: fly like a bird • page 30: a message writ large
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-3.txt 
 What is the need
for Sahaja Yoga?
What is the need to be the spirit?
We are all right as human beings, as
flesh, everything. What is the need
How do I solve
to be realized? Once you understand
my problems?
the need, then you will understand
what is Sahaja Yoga and what the
With Sahaja Yoga all these prob- other sects are. The need is this:
you
lems... can be easily solved, but
are a part and parcel of the whole
one thing is that you must work like a big, primordial being you can
think of. And He has many cells and
in unison, as one person, part and
parcel of one union.
you are one of the cells.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-4.txt 
 What is the most
important thing to
3.
know about love?
Love is an absolute gift, a gift of just
feeling others. There is no talking
about it, discussing about it, noth-
ing. You just feel that love. To feel
the love, one has to have a heart, but
What is surrender?
how can you have a heart? It is not
your own doing. It is all there. So it
When
do not accept the prin-
is something that is already gifted to
you
you. You have it, that you can feel
ciple of Sahaja Yoga, you put a bar-
that love. It is so much joy-giving,
rier in between the sap and the leaf.
Now when that happens, the leaf peace-giving. Love has its own qual-
ities and one of the qualities is that
falls off. So you have to open out
love understands. Its understanding
yourself, your heart, everything to
is not in words, not in thought, but
suck in the sap to nourish. You have
it understands within. It can feel
to give up your ego and superego,
What does
your conditionings and ideas you within, which is very important.
Shri Mataji
have had from before. This is what
This is the most important part one
want from me?
has to realize: that love, you can only
is the surrender. It is the Islam. And
feel it. You cannot talk about it, you
that is to be achieved. But that is not
I do not want anything from you
going to help the tree. It is going to
cannot show about it, but it is within
help you.
and you can feel it.
except that you accept My love.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-6.txt 
 CASTES,
children
CEREEDOM
New Year Puja • 31 December 1998 • Kalwe India
They have asked Me to talk about Indian culture today because Bombay is the place where
Indian culture is disappearing. That is what they say. But I do not think so because the roots are
so deep that we cannot give up that culture so fast.
Now, as it is for the people who are coming from other countries, they have to realize that
this country had no religion as such because there was not one book. They did not follow one
person. They did not have any organizations as we have for other religions. We never had a
higher priesthood or all those appointed people. It was all done very spontaneously. The whole
thing worked out very spontaneously.
But behind all that was the attitude of Indians. Our style was not to challenge or to ques-
tion what these great saints have given us. Because we accepted their status as saints, as higher
personalities in a way, in a sense they were higher than us. So we did not want to challenge them
and whatever they said we accepted. As a result, that became ... a way of conduct or a way of
life.
But as a religion, we had nothing, except that later on the caste system developed. Before
that there was no caste system because non-Brahmins wrote about Shri Rama or wrote about
Shri Krishna. It is very surprising how we accepted all that, never challenged whether it was
written by a Brahmin or not.
A Brahmin was one who knew about Brahmic principle, the principle of all-pervading
divine love. Everybody was not a Brahmin, but later on they made it like this – whosoever is
born in a Brahmin family was a Brahmin, whosoever was born in another caste belonged to
that. Because of the father's heritance, they also had the profession that they were following.
So according to the professions, the religions – or you can say the castes – were established. No
religion, but caste. And that is how we had different caste systems in India according to the
professions.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-7.txt 
 CASTE CHILDREN FREEDOM
Beyond caste, beyond religion
It is very interesting. Recently I discovered there is a caste called ghadani among
Marathis, which you may not be knowing. They only believe in art. They do
music or they have paintings. They make statues. They make temples. That is
a caste. That is a profession. And they marry among themselves because it is
easier to marry in the same profession and to have the same ideas and styles
about life – and the profession especially. Now later on, apart from being a
profession, it started becoming a very consolidated nonsense.... I think it is
the British who used it very much to separate us from one to another.
Now the scheduled castes* and all that was also not like a religious thing.
saints like Chokha Mela ... who were also greatly respected and
We have
got
regarded. Also Ekanath and Namdev – they all tried to be one with all the
castes and especially the scheduled castes. So this saintliness was regarded as
another caste which did not believe in any caste whatsoever. They had no
caste. They were a casteless people without
any religion, without
any caste.
The ultimate aim of every caste was to get to Self Realization. So they
enter into the clan, into the system of saints. And all the saints – whether
Muslims or Hindus or Jains or anything – they all were put together as saints.
They were Sufis. Sufis from the Muslim heritage they came. Then we had also
among Jains, Tirthankaras and all that. The main point was that they were
the people who believed in the ethical life, ethics, believed in the higher life,
spiritual life and lived like that.
Now as you are all Sahaja Yogis, you have lost your religion, lost your
caste. You have lost your heritage. You are Sahaja Yogis. Yogis means you are
all
the people who are believing into the ethical side of life. In this
country
this was used and was exploited also for politics, for all kinds of segregation of
people. And that has really gone into such rigid ideas about everyone, every
"What is your
caste, that first thing they used to ask – not now, before -
caste?" Now that is over. They do not ask. At least, thank God, that much
sense is there that they do not ask for the caste. But they used to ask religion
and caste formerly when we were entering into any examination or any kind
of competition.
* Scheduled castes: Those castes identified and protected in the Indian constution.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-9.txt 
 CASTE CHILDREN FREEDOM
The ethics of dharma
Now because of this problem of creating artificial castes, this country is suf-
fering a lot and the castes of the gurus, the castes of the Sufis, other castes of
the saints were very much polluted and we had many people in our country
who started becoming gurus and this and that.
But the main thing is the ethics, which was the culture of this country.
It was the ethics of dharma. Without that, they thought human beings were
worse than animals. Ethics was very important to every caste, to every person.
Even when I was young we had the same thing. But now it has become such
a mixture and such a problem that, unless and until Sahaja Yoga really spreads
the condition of this country.
in a real way, I do not think we can improve
Now the essence of it is that once your attention is only towards ethics
and aadhyatama [spirituality], then you start discovering all the inner deeper
meanings of your life. You work it out in a different
a very different
way.
way you work it out. If it is material gain, then one can become like America.
If it is some sort of a very low level hankerings, then also you cannot be an
Indian.
The principles of Indian life were embedded in spirituality, in morality.
An immoral person was regarded as a very low level person. Such a person
could not get married. He had no place in the society. He had no place even
вс
in the homes – their own homes. That was such a restriction on people, just
to see that the society is kept clean and such a person was thrown out of the
society.
Anybody who even drank wine or anything was regarded as a person who
is not dharmic. He is adharmic. Can you believe it? Drinking was regarded as
adharmic. I think very few people must have seen drunkards....
Indian philosophy is such that it gives you complete freedom and you can
do what you like. But not in the name of religion, you cannot do it, not in
the name of God, not in the temple. And if they do it, people will throw them
away. They bring a court case, do this do that and just remove it completely
so it is kept pure.... Whatever is pure must be kept pure.
Christ also, He took one hunter in his hand and started hitting people
who were selling things in the temple. So the purity of that church or the
purity of that religious place has to be kept. So the first thing I think was
8.
purity.
Eff
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-11.txt 
 CASTE CHILDREN FREEDOM
Understanding ethics
The restrictions came from the society, a society which was built up on ethics. And all
these ethical values are penetrating up to everywhere. But unfortunately, now the other
cultures are coming and people think we are rather rigid, very rigid people, we should
really relax a little bit and take to other things. But I have to tell you that if you go out
of the line of ethics in any direction, the only saving is Sahaja Yoga, to come back to nor-
malcy. There is no other way out.
And
once you come to Sahaja Yoga, you cannot deviate from the path of dharma.
you try to do that, you go out of Sahaja Yoga. It is as simple as that. It is not that "All
right, doesn't matter, Mother should forgive" and these things. I forgive, all right. I forgive
because you have still got some human weaknesses left in you. I forgive.
But in Sahaja Yoga you cannot. Sahaja Yoga has to maintain its purity. If you allow
all such people to enter into Sahaja Yoga, then there will be no purity of Sahaja Yoga and
then everybody will start doing this or that just to say that “After all, you see, we are also
Sahaja Yogis, they are also Sahaja Yogis, if they have done it, why not we?"
What is very surprising to Me is the western people who have taken to Sahaja Yoga
are scrupulously following Sahaja Yoga – scrupulously. I am not such a strict guru, as
you know, but they understand one thing – that this is for our betterment, this is for our
growth, this is a very, very important part of our lives. That is ethics. That has to be there.
And once they understand it, I tell you, I am surprised how these western people who
have seen their parents drinking and also other people doing all kinds of things - even
their friends and all that – they just give up completely. I am very proud of them.
For us Indians, it is natural because we are brought up that way. All the time we have
seen people being corrected... We do not do all that – normally. I mean if somebody has
been abroad and all that and thinks that they are very free people and “Why not, we can
do," that is a very different thing. But normally we do not. We do not believe in that.
If
CC
CC
The freedom of the West
Because they are very free in the West, it is difficult for you to accept. But once they come
to Sahaja Yoga I am really surprised. I am really surprised how they have accepted Sahaja
Yoga so beautifully. They had the freedom, complete freedom to do what they liked.
In India we do not have such freedom for children. [In the West] they can go
wher-
ever they like. They can do whatever they like. The teacher cannot correct them. Because
of that freedom that they had, there is one thing good that has happened. So many are
lost, but those who are saved are rare people. Because of that growth of freedom within
them, I think they learn our Indian music in five months, four months. No Indians can
do it because they are restricted all the time. They are controlled all the time. They are
kept on the path of religion.
So ultimately the freedom that some of you had and enjoyed has given you a special
personality, that you pick up very difficult things without any effort. Now whether you
should have that freedom or not is your own lookout. But too much restriction on chil-
dren I think is not a good thing.
With Sahaja Yoga, born with Sahaja Yoga, those who are should be given full freedom
I think. Such children should be given full freedom for they will not do anything wrong.
And you will see they will pick up things very fast.
It is not that westerners are more intelligent or alert, but the way they are given free-
dom, their growth, their personality, sometimes they are like a vagabond. Sometimes just
like a tomboy. Sometimes to Me they look like very vulgar. But once – with that wealth
of freedom – they come to reality, they shine.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-12.txt 
 So I would request also Indians not to suppress their children too much. We enjoy the
children much in India, no doubt, but we suppress
do not mind because it is accepted. This pattern is accepted in India.
So too much restriction on children also curbs their personality. This is what I have
discovered. But the western people go through such hell first of all, develop such prob-
lems to begin with and ultimately what happens is this: they can be discarded as bad, bad,
bad people. But if they come as good, good, good, they are marvelous. All the freedom
they have enjoyed before is showing results, otherwise how can this miracle happen to
western people. There is no justification.
Now the problem is whether to give freedom or not. We have a proper sense now,
after Realization, that a child is a born-realized. In the beginning he won't understand.
He won't understand, but gradually such a child will show results, a maximum capacity
to absorb and to express.
them also very much.... Children
very
Freedom of the spirit
Today I am telling you about this freedom, which is the freedom of the spirit. We should The freedom
have an understanding of such children who have that spirituality in them. They have
dharma in them. And we should not try to constrict them or to trouble them. Let them
do what they like. They will never do anything wrong because they are born-realized.
So I am talking about the future Indians. Some of them I have seen –
children, six-year-old children – they are geniuses I tell you. They sing as if we feel that
these old musicians are reborn. It is very surprising how they show their talent... They
are born-realized, but also they have the talents from their past life. They have got it from
that some
eight-year-old of you had
has given
past life.
So we should not try to control and check our children too much. That is a of
our Sahaja culture. It does not fit into Indian culture, but it should fit into Sahaja culture,
to understand the value of our children who are realized souls.
I enjoy their company. They speak so sweetly of all the things, of all the persons and
they describe about everyone so sweetly. Just allow them the freedom to talk and they will
tell you all kinds of things.
the
you a special
You d
part
personality.
Freedom for expression
Now I have praised you a lot I think – the outsiders we can call them, non-Indians. And
it is a fact – the way they have taken to Sahaja Yoga is remarkable. But the way they are
taking to this Indian music and to Indian art I can't believe it. Really I can't believe it. I
can't understand it.
So you have freedom, but now use this freedom for expression of whatever you have
achieved in Sahaja Yoga. Because you are already grown up with your freedom and if you
do not utilize that personality full of freedom in expressing Sahaja Yoga in your own lan-
guages, you won't help your people.
You have to help them because your percentage is very low. Your quality is high, but
in your own country your percentage is low.
So
you have to go all out to get them into Sahaja Yoga and to let them know what
they can achieve and what they are.
You are duty bound. O
11
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-14.txt 
 13
These are the marriages which are
going to change the society.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Desire and
1.
Shri Mahakali Puja • 19 December 1982 • Lonavala India
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Ascent
We have to establish our
desire within ourselves that
we are seekers and that we
have to achieve our full
growth and maturity...
Your desires should be so
intense that they should emit
out the pure vibrations of
the Mahakali Shakti, which
is the pure desire of attaining
the spirit. That is the real
desire. All the other desires
are like a mirage.
15
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-17.txt 
 DESIRE AND ASCENT
Desire, Kundalini and family
You are the people who are chosen by God specially, first to express your
desire and then to achieve it. And by the intense desire of purity, you
have
to purify the whole world – not only the seekers, but even those who are not
seekers. You have to create an aura around this universe, of desire to achieve
the ultimate, the spirit.
Without desire this universe would not have been created. This desire of
God is the one that is the Holy Ghost. It is this All-pervading Power. It is the
to express your desire
Kundalini within you. The Kundalini has only one desire. It is to be the spirit
and then to achieve it and anything else, if you desire, the Kundalini does not rise. Only when it
knows that this desire is going to be fulfilled by somebody who is facing the
seeker, is it awakened. If you do not have the desire, no one can force you.
Sahaja Yogis should never try to force this desire on other people...
The sooner you realize the better, that this desire may be within you and
may not be in any one of your so-called worldly relations. It makes no differ-
ence. As Christ was told that His brothers and sisters are waiting outside, He
said, "Who are My brothers and who are My sisters?"
CC
כי
So one has to realize that those people who involve themselves into the
problems of their family all the time and attract My attention, you must
know that I am just playing about. It is of no value to you. For your ascent,
it is important first of all to have no desires to create desire in your kith and
kin. This is the first principle of the establishment of the Mahakali Power...
Try to separate your pure desire from your worldly desires.
It does not, by any means, suggest that you give up your family, you give
up your mother or give up your sister – nothing. But you witness them and
see, as you would see anybody else, and see for yourself whether they are
really desirous or not. If they are, well and good. They should not be disqual-
ified because they are your relations. It works both ways. As they cannot be
qualified because they are your relations, they cannot be disqualified because
they are your relations.
So in Sahaja Yoga, to make your desire a pure desire, you have to get out
of so many things. But for people who are attached to their family, they are
bound by their family. They have to see to it that they do not force Sahaja
Yoga on any one of their relations. At least do not force them on Me.
16
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-18.txt 
 To become the spirit
Now this desire within us, which is the Mahakali Power which is manifest-
ing, comes to us in so many ways. As I told you first of all, it comes to us
after Realization because you are all Sahaja Yogis, to do something about our
relations. Then the second desire that comes to us is that “let us try to cure
people who are our relations." This is the second desire. You should face
yourself and see that this has happened to many of you....
You should have only one intense desire within yourself: “Have I become
You have
the spirit? Have I achieved my ultimate? Have I risen above the worldly
become
desires?" Purify it. Once you start purifying, whatever falls off, I will look
after that. This is just an assurance, but not a guarantee. If it deserves My
the spirit.
attention, I will definitely look after
you.
The rest
You have to value your attention as I value My attention. I think you have
to value much more of your attention than Me because I can manage many
of it is My
more things within Myself because everything is in My attention. But
you
headache.
try to purify your desires away from the worldly problems that are facing
you.
you start thinking, “Mother, what about the
problem of our country?" All right, give Me the map of your country – fin-
then
So you expand it more,
ished. That's more than sufficient.
Then purify yourself. The desire that you have, you leave it. And once
you are purified, that area will be covered through your attention. It is
very
interesting. When you get over it, then only you can throw light. But if you
are inside, you are hidden by that. Your light is hidden. There is no light
emitted. You all rise above that desire. Every time you get a desire, you
rise
above it. So your light is emitted on that wider problem that you are facing,
think should be solved by Me.
which
you
These are all My headaches which you are taking on yourself. You have to
do only one thing. It is to become the spirit. That is all. It is a simple thing.
The rest of it is My headache.
Ascent
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-19.txt 
 DESIRE AND ASCENT
Desire and responsibility
You are not facing Me.
The problems that should take your desire on
You are sitting with Me,
the collective should be
different. To sub-
very
stantiate your purity, to be fragrant with
purity, your attention should be on the other
your
facing the whole world.
side.
Now you are not facing Me. You are sit-
ting with Me, facing the whole world. See, the
whole attitude will change. The attitude should
be "What can I give? How can I give? What is
my mistake in giving? I have to be more alert.
Where is my attention? I have to be more alert
towards myself. What am I doing? What's my
responsibility?" You must desire that you should
desire. That means
be pure. You should be
you should be the spirit. What is your respon-
pure
sibility to yourself? You should desire that your
responsibility to yourself should be manifested,
should be complete.
Then your responsibility to this Sahaja
Yoga
Yoga, which is the work of God, which has
started and you are My hands? You have to
do the work of God and you have to fight the
what is your responsibility to Sahaja
anti-God elements, the satanic elements. You
are not responsible for your family any more.
Those who are half-baked Sahaja Yogis I said
are useless, absolutely good-for-nothing. All
such will drop out. Their families will suffer. I
know this is going to happen because now the
forces are gathering in such a way that sorting
out will start.
Your responsibility is to yourself, to be the
spirit. Your responsibility is to Sahaja Yoga.
Your responsibility is to understand Me better
and better and better. Your responsibility is to
understand this mechanism that is within you.
Your responsibility is to understand how this
mechanism works out everything.
The responsibility is how to become a guru
yourself. Your responsibility is to be a dignified
and a glorified personality – responsibility to be
a respectable person and not a cheap personal-
ity.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-20.txt 
 19
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Every one of you is worth the whole universe
if you want to rise to that height.
Universes of universes can be thrown away at your feet
if you want to rise to that height,
to that magnitude that is within
you.
To rise and be alert
Every one of you is worth the whole universe, if you want to rise to that height. Uni-
verses of universes can be thrown away at your feet if you want to rise to that height, to
that magnitude that is within you to prosper. But those people, who still want to live
on a very low level cannot rise.
For example, the western Sahaja Yogis have certain problems of committing the sin
against the Mother and the eastern Sahaja Yogis have the problem of committing the
sin against the Father. It is not difficult at all for you to get out of it. The attention is
to be kept pure. In Sahaja Yoga you know all the methods, how with the attention one
can keep it pure. If the attention is not pure, then this desire will be always attacked by
all
petty, nonsensical things which have no meaning in your ascent.
Now a person who is a good Sahaja Yogi is not bothered about clothes, what others
say to him or what others are talking about to him, how they are behaving towards him.
And the attention is not on that, criticism that this person is like this, that person is like
that. Nor is there the aggressiveness of anyone else because nobody is the other.
But the problem is, when I say that, no one thinks that I am saying about you,
each person. Those who are aggressive take the other role and those who are non-
aggressive think the other way. Like I say something for a person who is aggressive, the
non-aggressive immediately thinks of the person who is aggressive, not about himself.
You immediately start shifting your mind to the other person, finding faults with other
people. So this desire becomes gradually lower and lower and lower because of the loads
that are put on to it.
So the alertness is very important – complete alertness, satarkata - that we should
keep our attention purely for the sustenance of our pure desire. Desire comes from your
heart and you are so built that your brahmarandra is also the heart. If you do not have
a clean heart, this won't keep clean.
20
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-22.txt 
 DESIRE AND ASCENT
Surrender of the heart
There are people who think if they talk about Sahaja Yoga big and all that, they are all
right. They are cheating themselves. If the heart is not open, then the Sahasrara is closed.
So try to open your heart by projecting...
Your outlook should be, "How much have I contributed to this? Am I still thinking | O Treasure-mine ever
of other people? Am I still thinking of my petty small problems or am I thinking of my smiling, possessed of
boundless qualities,
spirit?"
So the left side starts and ends with Shri Ganesha. Shri Ganesha has only one basic proficient in holding
quality, that He is completely surrendered to His Mother. He does not know any other the scales even,
God. He does not even know His Father. He only knows His Mother and is completely uninterrupted
surrendered to Her.... Let us establish ourselves into that pure desire to be the spirit.
Now, as it is with the western mind, we will say, “How?" It is always coming, “how to
do it?" Should I tell you? It is very simple.
Adi Shankaracharya wrote Viveka Chudamani and so many other books of treaties by no means bound to
and then all these big intellectuals got after his life and they said, "How this and how conventions,
that and how?" He said, "Forget these people." Then he wrote Saundarya Lahari. It is with Feet glorified by
just a description of his Mother and his devotion to Her and every couplet that He wrote all the Upanishads,
is a mantra. It is not the surrender of your mind through your mind, but the surrender void of risks and eternal,
fountain of Wisdom,
ever abiding in well-
controlled minds,
CC
CC
heart. It is absolutely the surrender of your heart. Western Sahaja Yogis know hallow this laudatory
of
your
well how there have been attacks and attacks of negativity on them, especially when composition of mine
horrible people like Freud came to destroy their basics, the roots – and how the West (Thy humble devotee).
accepted it blindfolded – and put them on the path of hell.
All that has to be brought out. That is all nonsense. It is wrong, absolutely against O Mother of diction,
God. It is anti-God activity. Then you will realize that you will fight fully by saying, "This composing this hymn
is the destruction of our basics, our roots, when our Mother is the source of everything (in praise) of Thee,
that is sublime, noble, all that is nourishing, all that is elevating, emancipating. You have in words originating
been cutting us from our roots....
very
01
from Thee, is very much
like adoring the sun
by offering a light,
offering the moon drops
of water flowing out
So it is important for you to understand all the attacks that came on you and be alert
and do not be identified with any one of these.
Desire to become
Let us establish within ourself on a subtler level the desire to be pure and to be cleansed of a moon-stone, and
out, all the barriers and unclean things that are within us, to desire to be great Sahaja pleasing the ocean by
Yogis, desire to be responsible Sahaja Yogis and desire to be surrendered to your Mother. pouring water into it.
It is not difficult. That is the easiest. The last one is the easiest because what do you sur-
the two concluding verses
of "Saundarya Lahari"
render? I do not want anything from you except that you accept My love.
Surrendering just means you open your heart to accept My Love. Give
That is all and it will work out.
this
up
ego.
I am sure it is going to work out.
I am trying to push Myself into your hearts and I will definitely settle down there....
I hope all of you will take it in such a way that the subtlest of subtle will be awakened
within
I
the sensitivity in every way and the love which culminates into joy.
you,
Love that flowers into the fragrance of joy will manifest in today's puja.
May God bless you.
Mother is the source of everything
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Bha
Вратуaкау.
ryakayai
what is there to fear?
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Bhaiyakayataya
Lodge Hill Seminar • 23 July 1983 • United Kingdom
When we belong to God, what is there to fear?
We forget everything in the Divinity
And we become completely lost in God.
When we belong to God, what is there to fear?
The world is grateful to Him for His blessings,
But still He doesn't belong to the world
because He is in a completely detached state.
When we belong to God, what is there to fear?
You may be without any outward wealth.
The real treasure of wealth is inside you.
When we belong to God, what is there to fear?
All the diseases and problems get completely dissolved
Where the Feet of God reside.
When we belong to God, what is there to fear?
This song is written by a relation of ours. He was a convert to Christianity,
but a realized soul, and he could never cope with the system of conversion
and also the
the Hindus were treated among themselves with the caste
way
system and all that. And he has written some of the very good hymns. This
is one of the hymns.
23
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-25.txt 
 a mutual thing between
24
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-26.txt 
 ΒHAIYΑΚΑΥΑΤΑ ΥΑ
The song is something I really always used to sing in My childhood very
much. And the theme of the song is like this: the one who has God or the one
who has owned God, why should he have fear? The one who moves about
extensively for the sake of God and for doing good for others, but he does not
belong to this world, such a person has no fear.
He stands above the language. The Marathi language is a very, very intense
language and it touches many corners when you say one word of it. It is like this:
Adhi vyadhi varana varati payi asha purusha chari. It means a person of this calibre
is standing above. His foot is above the sickness, the mental problems and death
itself. But when you say that such a person has a foot on top of this, its mean-
ing is that, with the effect of his foot, it can get over it. It is a double language,
you see. Such a person has his foot on top of all these three things – the sickness,
the mental problems and death. The foot is on top of that. It means that such a
got
any
person is above this.
Thus, if you have somebody of this calibre and the foot touches the sick or the
mentally disturbed people or the dead, such a person can raise them higher, can
take them out of it. It has a double meaning. So the whole theme works out this
way, that the person who belongs to God, who owns God, should not have fear,
should not frustrated....
get
They sang the song. The song did fill Me. It completely brought out some of
the expressions which would not spontaneously come out at this time. But the
greatest thing it has done is to remind Me that “You are God. You are not to get
frustrated. You have to look after all of them. And You are powerful when You
talk."
So such people should always keep a mirror and feel elevated. You are a Sahaja
Yogi and in the mirror, in the reflection, you should see Me and not yourself...
When the instrument is all right, after all, with all the powers you have, with
all the blessings you have and the source of power behind it, everything should
work out. It should work out. You have had experiences of things working out.
You have had experiences of many miracles happening before your eyes, but stil
the attention has not settled down with those experiences. Still gatanubhavas
that means the old experiences continue. Old identifications continue. You still
continue with that and the filth of that is still on your being. Change everything.
Become a fresh new person. You are blooming out as a flower and then as a tree
and assume your position.
Assume your position as the Sahaja Yogi. So this attention must be brought
around. You judge yourself. Where is your attention and what is the point of
understanding? What is the measure of understanding? It is very simple. I have
to be pleased because I am the attention. If I am pleased, then you have done the
job. But I cannot be pleased by mundane things, by any arguments with that, but
only by your ascent.
So you judge yourself on that. Whether you give Me a flower or anything, I
am only pleased when the essence of that doing has that height, has that special
manifestation. You say, “I love you very much, Mother." All right, you say it, but
I must see that love that you are saying or doing has that essence that gives Me
joy.
It is such a mutual thing between us. You can't imagine.
I can't live without and you can't live without Me.
It is so mutual. O
us
you
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-27.txt 
 to'the seekers of truth: part four
sẽé
a world of faith
The experience of the truth has to be absolute.
That means everyone should feel it the same way.
I spoke to you about the experience of truth, that the truth has to be felt through
your central nervous system. If anything has to happen to your evolution, you have
to feel it through your central nervous system, otherwise it is just a projection of
mind which forms it and you are surprised at yourself. Like we call somebody
your
as a friend, a dear friend and one day we find there is no friendship. Maybe one
day the friend may try to murder you or you may try to murder that person. You
just do not understand what happened to that love. It is the same thing about all
of our projections. We find they have no basis. It is so superficial.
When we realize that all is so superficial, it has no basis, we just get
frustrated
and we start thinking, "What is all this? We are playing games. Why can't we be
On top
sincere? What has happened to us? Why are we so frivolous? Why are we so super-
of
ficial?" We may start taking an interest in things which look superficially very great,
the head
but ultimately we find it does not have any depth. And suddenly, to our horror, we
discover that everything seems to be relative in this world, nothing is absolute.
there is
So the experience of the truth has to be absolute. That means everybody should
a lotus.
feel that way. If not, then it is something poetic because each poet sees the reality
describes in a different way. But if he is a truthful poet, he keeps
in a differen
way,
the essence at least the same. But when we say we have to feel the truth by everyone
in an absolute manner, what does that mean?
26
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-28.txt 
 That means when we get our Self Realization, when we think we have got a new
awareness of collective consciousness, that means we are connected to the whole,
with the absolute. Then every one of us who is like that should feel the same way.
The truth is one
When the truth is felt by everyone the same, then it is absolute. If somebody sees
a blue colour and if somebody sees a red colour, then it is not the truth. And
you
will be amazed when you become self-realized. If you meet people who are self-
realized, you will be amazed they will say the same thing in a different way.... But You move one
they say the same....
Down within us there is something that is absolute, that tells us about the step forward
absolute. So the second experience should be of absoluteness. The Divine Power
into the faith
that is all-pervading, if it is truthful, if it is real, then all of us who are feeling that
of experience.
power through this Realization should receive the same message. This is the second
proof..
This is a very, very important thing for you to understand, that truth has to be
one. It has to be absolute and, if you can establish your rapport with the absolute,
you cannot have any other information but the truth.
So as you ascend, you start learning that whatever messages you are getting are
the truth, that all these messages that you are receiving you can yourself perceive
them. You can feel them. Nobody has to tell
Even a child can sense it.
you.
The line of evolution
So you move one step forward into a world called faith, which is the faith of experi-
ence. You call something as a stick. Now how do you know it is not artificial? It is
real because you have experience of the artificial and the real and now, when you
with faith, "Yes, it is a real stick."
feel it, you can say
In the same way, reality can be only accepted if you go through the experience
of truth and then have faith...
Our evolution starts going on a different line where we want to find ourselves
2 July 1984 London
and what is the truth. O
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-29.txt 
 fly like
bird
24
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-30.txt 
 We forget that we have risen
and that we are completely transformed
and we are free, absolutely free people.
Nothing can dominate us, none of our conditionings, none of our egos.
Nothing can dominate us, none of our habits.
Everything has died out and we are free birds to fly
and to enjoy our flights.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-31.txt 
 large:
a message writ
laughter
If you become unhappy and serious, you are very unkind to yourself and to others.
Anybody who is a serious person, sits with a serious face, know that he is not a
Sahaja Yogi at all. They should be bubbling with laughter – joy all the time.
I cannot be serious for more than five seconds perhaps. I don't know. I
because
try
lectures should be serious, to go into the hearts of the people....
Even when I'm getting angry, My eyes betray Me and there is a twinkle of laughter
in the eyes. That is how a person should be. Don't worry what others have to say.
The culture where people are just glum like this is the same as the people who are
frivolous.. You have to be natural. And everything natural is always bubbling with
joy. And a message: these flowers are the message of My coming, writ large on them.
30
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-32.txt 
 This Mother has a little love for you, but God Almighty has the ocean.
You cannot pay for that ocean. Just accept it. It will flow, overflow, engulf
beautiful. The time has come for all of you to get
and make
it....
you
you
You enter into a realm where there is nothing but enjoyment and laughter
and happiness and joy. And, in that enjoyment, you are amazed to see that
you are connected to each other so much like a part of the finger is connected
to the whole body.
happiness
KEGO
6GO
Now you must have seen how in My lecture I say quite serious things,
but in your bubbles of laughter it just settles down in your mind. That is how
should do it because humour is one of the greatest things that
the
puts
you
юу
thing through, makes the person understand – and it doesn't harm anyone.
That is how things improve. And when you see that, you are settled down
in peace.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-33.txt 
 As you people can absorb My vibrations, this fruit can absorb also My vibrations in the greatest amount.
ప్యతే
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-34.txt 
 THE DIVINE
COOL BREEZE
www.divinecoolbreeze.org
SUBSCRIPTIONS
contact@divinecoolbreeze.org
CONTENT
editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
PRINTED BY
King Printing Company Inc.
181 Industrial Avenue East
Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA
and
Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd.
No.8, Chandragupta Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411038
Maharashtra, India
All photographs by Gregoire de
Kalbermatten except as noted:
Pages 4 and 9: Shri Mataji
enroute to Ganapatipule, 1985
Page 7: Shri Mataji in India,
1979 (photo by Malcolm Murdoch)
Pages 12 and 13: Shri Mataji
applies a bindhi marriages,
Tannay Switzerland, circa 1984
Page 14: Volterra Italy, circa 1985
Page 22: music program in
Sangli India, date uncertain
Page 24: London, date uncertain
Pages 28 and 29: Italy near
Milan (photo by Axinia Samoilova)
Pages 30 and 31: Shri Mataji
in Kathmandu Nepal, 1970s
Page 32: wedding coconut,
Rome, December 2009
(photo by Axinia Samoilova)
Back cover: sunset near Rome,
December 2009 (A. Samoilova)
Notes on Shri Mataji's words
Contents page: letter translated
from Marathi, 1979
Page 2: 24 September 1995
Page 2: 14 April 1982
Page 3: Mahalakshmi Puja 1987
Page 3: Guru Puja 2004
Page 3: 19 December 1982
Page 13: 3 March 1980
Page 29: 18 April 1992
Page 30: 26 October 1985
Page 31: 28 January 1980
Page 31: Birthday Puja 1985
Page 32: 13 December 1987
Back cover: 19 April 1982
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-35.txt 
 you are seekers of ancient times and this is the time that was promised
