The Divime Cool Breeze Fundamentals 2010 issue 5 – volume twenty-three number five 1072

 some FUNDAMENTALS of ehahaja. Yoga. I have already told you that the fundamental truth is that you are not this body, this mind, this ego, these conditionings, but you are the pure spirit. Se THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOLUME TWENTY-THREE NUMBER FIVE

 YOU ARE DEALING WITH THE FUNDAMENTALS OF WHICH A HUMAN BEING IS BUILT

 It is time for us to think, "Why has God created this beautiful being, the human being? Why did He take so much trouble to evolve us from the amoeba stage to this?" We have taken everything for granted. Even to talk of God We are the people | in these modern times, it is impossible because according to the intellectuals, He does not exist. They may say whatever they like, but He does – and very much so. who created this Now the time has come, first of all, for us to know why cobweb and are are we here. What is our fulfillment? Have we come in this world just to be born, eat our food, produce children, amass money for them and then die? Or is there any special reason entangled into it that God loved us so much, that He created a new world of human beings? and are worried Also the time has come for us to know that there is God and that His power of love exists – and not only that, but it about life organizes, it coordinates, it is dynamic – that He loves and, in His love, He wants to grant us the kingdom of God, the greatest that was planned for human beings. Let us forget our frustrations and our turmoils and our so- called political and economic problems, for they do not exist. It is only a mirage we are running after. We are the people who created this cobweb and are entangled into it and are worried about life. There is nothing to worry about, for the Lord God Almighty, who has created you, is the Almighty and He is anxious to give you the bounties of joy and happiness.

 If we sit down and try to understand, we will learn that God has created us into a human being without any one of us knowing about it. We do not know how did we become from monkeys to this state. We have no idea when did we get this great personality of a human being. What did we do to become a human being? We should ask this simple question to ourselves. What do we do to breathe so easily? What do we do when our heart beats regularly? What timing does it keep, the way it works. What have we done to achieve this kind of a beautiful body which works by itself? You have done nothing so far. At the most, what we can do is the dead work, like we might create a building out of dead stones or, if it dies, we can create nice, beautiful furniture. But have we done anything living so far that we are so proud that we deny the power that creates life? Thousands of flowers are turned into fruits every day and I am saying thousands because there is no word for that. It is infinite when this power is acting so minutely, infinitely and into such detail. For example, if you have a mango tree, you will get a mango fruit only. If you have a rose bush, you will get only roses out of that. All that is controlled, properly managed, everything done so beautifully. You are placed on this Mother Earth, which is moving with such tremendous speed, and still you are just there – no problem. All these things, how are they happening? We do not want to face it. We do not want to face the reality. Perhaps we think that reality would be too much. But the time has come for us to know the reality because it is the most beautiful thing and the reality and the truth is a very simple thing. The truth is that God has created all to make His power manifest to you. As we have created this microphone to make our voices go through it, in the same way, God has created you you can manifest His power, His God has created in such a beautiful manner that you you all to make shakti through your instrument. But the only difference between this instrument and this human instrument is this: that you are aware that you know everything, that you are capable of understanding the power that is flowing through you and its manifestation and a complete maneuvering of it. And the last of it is the joy of it. This has been told in various scriptures, especially in our country, which is endowed with God's greatest blessings of very beautiful atmosphere ... this country being especially made for a very simple living, without going into any encounter with the nature. We have seen that thousands of years back in this great country of ours there were many great saints who went into the jungle – because in this country you can live in the jungle with very little food – to find out about the underlying currents which are controlling this body. While in the West people went outward, first of all, to get their houses properly done up, to live even was a problem there. And then they went into things like science, outward, to see what comfort they can get out of matter, what help they can get out of matter. But here the people went within themselves. They took their attention within to find out what was the underlying forces that have created this whole universe and created the human being. His power manifest 4

 Ind lini They discovered that within us lies a power called as Kundalini. This Kundalini is the power lying at the base of the spine, at the sacrum bone, as we call it... Just think how people knew that it was the sacred bone and also it is said that when a man gets burnt, the whole of his body can be burned, but this bone does not get burnt. This has got three-and-a-half coils, this Kundalini. There is a special reason for having three and a half coils because that gives the manifestation of an eternal being... A complete zygote is created out of it. She creates and still remains the same – like a Mother creates a child, but remains the same. This Mother This Kundalini is your Mother. She is the one who is only your Mother. Every individual has got this Mother in the triangular bone, every individual. And this Mother is all the time recording, watching, coordinating and trying to give you what you call the symbol of the uni- versal unconscious. is all the time They say this Kundalini is sleeping. She is in a way because She has not yet arranged it. Below this Kundalini is a centre ... which is the centre of reception of all the information of what you have done in previous lives and what you are doing today. All your information is kept like All this was found out long, long time back. But “everything that is Indian should be dis- carded as useless" has been our idea for the last, I don't know for how many, years. recording in the sacrum bone of every human being.... a tape CC כי Why? This is a country of yoga, we are yoga-oriented people. Basically we are yoga-ori- ented. You may try to change the ideas and the new liberation and these nonsensical things, bring anything you like in this country, but it is going to be very difficult because this has been looked after, nurtured and is being put forward as the greatest leader of spirituality. You try any tricks on this country, it won't work out because it is not one day's job, it is not two day's job, but thousands of years the sages have worked on this country... We have never gone into the details, into the findings of these great sages who have found out so many things for us. It is all ready-made, just like your Kundalini being made by your Father, the Lord God Almighty, who has put the Kundalini just there for you, ready. watching coordinating

 CONE Absolute We talk of one world and one great understanding – and that is not possible. That is an impossible task that you have taken up. The reason is that you have not gone into the undercurrents of all the people. Secondly, you have not found out your absolute. It is all relative terminology. All your economic problems, all your economic theories and all your assumptions, as far as your political parts are concerned, are absolutely useless because they are not based on the absolute. You are moving in on a plane which has no base. Nothing is absolute. Actually, that is why we always go to extremes... The river flows in the centre and the more you are in the centre, it is deeper. All these ideologies will vanish into thin air as soon as you know absolute. And all these problems and turmoils and these useless talks will finish. Let us find out where is our absolute within us.... This absolute resides in your This absolute resides in your your heart heart as your spirit, as your atma.... The atma is in your heart. It is the reflection of God Almighty. Within our heart is the atma. It is like a flickering light, we can say, as is the gas light. We have the flickering light, which knows everything... This one knows what you are doing, where you are going, what are your plans and what is wrong and what is bad. And this is the one we do not know. It is the one that we have to seek. But we are aware that there is someone who knows all about us, whether in the darkness or you hide things, anything you do, you know that there is someone in your heart who knows everything about you. But what we have to do now is to go to Him. as your sDirit you go as your atma

 Realization When you get your Self Realization, then that, life has no meaning... What are you fighting about God – if He is there or not – when our eyes are not yet opened? It is like blind people fighting amongst themselves and declaring that there is no God or there is God, both the things are just the find your own meaning. Before you same. Whether it is blind faith or a intellectual assertion that there is no very God, it is just the same. It has no meaning because both ways you are not con- nected with God. So the first and foremost thing is that you should be connected to your spirit. All the rest of it is absolutely useless.. This Kundalini has to rise and has to give you Self Realization. This is what Adi Shankaracharya has said. This is what Christ has said. This is what everyone who is a person, regarded as a real person, has said – that you are to be born again. How are you going to be born again? This is the Mother, who is sitting down there waiting for that occasion to rise and pierce these six chakras, the centre is on top, to give you Realization. Central Path D Sahaja Yoga can only be granted to people who are normal, not to extremists who believe in running away from home or running towards the home t0o much, the people who lead a good life, who think of their society as well and who are very normal people in the middle course, not the extremists. The middle course people – we have never bothered about the middle course people. We are only both- ered about the absolutely poor people who are beggars or worried about the people who are very rich. Forget them. Both of them are in the same rank. You will see this in Sahaja Yoga, that they have the same characteristics. They have the same values. They are of the same standard. The only difference is one has too much money and one does not have. You see, this is the that makes the difference, but that is the denominator to know that both are in the same money condition. Now I am telling you that Sahaja Yoga only works out for people who do not go to extremes because you can see that it is in the centre that lies the vertebral column, not on one side or the other side. Those people who are simple people, who are leading a nice, good, righteous life are the best for Sahaja Yoga. 7

 Religi There is only one religion of God that exists. There are not a hundred religions as we think. They are all flowers of one big tree. We have removed all these flowers, "This is mine, this is mine." And then how do you talk of secularism? It is one and it has been flowered with one shakti, with one love. How can they be different? They are all one, absolutely unanimous. They are in com- plete concord and there is no problem with them. The problem is with us, the human beings. It is too much to believe, but it is a fact. CC It is one

 Love For this you cannot pay. I mean it is so absurd to tell, but people are so mad, that I have to say these things. How can you pay for your Mother's love...? Anybody who takes the name of God and takes money, lives like a parasite on the society, is a very sinful man. And those who follow those personalities are also going towards the same side, which goes to hell directly. You cannot take for this love. This love, it flows. This just flows. It does not want anything. You cannot pay it back. It just flows like light. It does not require anything. It just requires its flow. As long as it flows, it is satisfied, it does not want anything. Do not judge God by the norms human beings have about themselves. They are trying to organize Him also and they are going to buy Him. There are ... so-called religious insti- tutions where the people are just parasites, living there, doing no work. They are making money out of religion and it is very difficult for them to accept when I say you cannot pay for it. money But I tell you that from your Mother. You can know that this Mother has a little love for you, but God Almighty has the ocean. You cannot pay for that ocean. Just accept it. It will flow, overflow, engulf you and make you beautiful. Пом It happens. It is actualizațion. It is not lecturing that you are broth- no.At happens. You become that when the Kundalini rises. The enlightenment on your fingers, on your being, makes you aware that you are part and parcel of others also. It makes you. You don't have to tell yourself. You don't have to educate yourself. It just becomes. It is actualization. The collective consciousness becomes your ers and sisters – dharma. It becomes your being and that is what you have to gain and that is what you have to achieve. For that, no effort is needed and no money or anything is needed, except that when you get it, you have to maintain it for some short time until it is lit up properly... Please listen to Me. I am Mother and still you all are My chil- dren. Whether you are ninety or a hundred, it does not matter. In this your respect, you are all My children and you have to listen to Me. Get to your joy. Get to your happiness. And get to the key of your being. 9.

 Rebirth The source of joy is within yourself. Unless and until you seek yourself, you cannot seek God. They have all talked about the second birth. What we call the baptism is also the same where you have to be born again. It is not just a formal one that is done by unauthorized people. Mohammed-sahib has again and again talked of a rebirth. You have to find yourself. How do we find ourselves is the problem. Is there something like Self? Is there really something like God or is it all a myth? Is there any fact in following the religious, holy life that you get your salvation? So far we have had no proof of it. Naturally, in this scientific world today you have to give the proof of everything to convince people so that they seek themselves. But science tells us that we were evolved from a little amoeba to a human A human being being. Why is it that God took so much trouble? If you do not believe in God, you can say nature. “Why did nature work so hard to create a human being out of a small little amoeba?" is in transition Supposing we assemble some screws and we try to work out something, a passerby would ask, “Why? What are you going to make out of this instrument? What are you doing?" There must be some reason why we have become human beings after so much evolution. But science doesn't think of "why." It just tells you, "This is." And whatever is not there, it says, "We can't explain." The instrument, whatever it is, supposing, has to work on electrical energy or on any CC כ whatsoever, will come into force or will start working out when it is connected to energy the mains. Otherwise it is still in the making process or, you can say, it is in transition. A human being, as such, is in transition. It has not found its own meaning. He does not know why he exists, what is the purpose of his life. It is a meaningless life. So you have to be connected to the mains. That is what everybody has been saying, that you have to be reborn. You have to become that. Now, those who talked of this were born on the tenth storey. The rest of them are on this earth. When they talked, it all went over their heads. You have to at least reach the first or second storey to understand that there is something beyond this human con- sciousness, this human awareness. There is something more to this awareness. There is of an opening. There is a greater dimension which one has to achieve to understand more 10 your own meaning.

 onnection There must be some mechanism within us by which we are reborn, no doubt. There has to be some mechanism. If I am speaking through this microphone to you, there must be some mechanism which is doing the job. In every seed there is a premule, the mechanism which germinates and creates a big tree out of it. In the same way, we have a mechanism placed within us. But this is a very subtle thing, while human beings are absolutely gros. In this Kali Yuga, modern time, they are even worse – extremely gross and they cannot think of something subtle. If I tell you there is an energy which thinks, organizes, loves, you cannot think of such an energy. But how do we organize? How do we think? How do we love? From where do we get that energy? Why shouldn't we think about it? But as I said, modern man does not think of how. He takes it for granted. I want to tell about this mechanism that exists within It should not be just a mental feat with you, no. It should not be the so-called knowledge of Kundalini from outside. But it is a happening where the Kundalini rises and you get whatever is promised in all the scriptures. Today the time has come to prove the existence of the divine power of God all around us. We have been going and praying to God. Does He listen to us? Are we connected to Him? We do namaz. We spread our hands towards God Almighty. Are we connected with Him or we are just doing a mechanical thing? Even so many people are doing Hatha Yoga. They think they are doing it in the name of God. Is it a correct method? Can we do anything about it? If it is a living process, if it is an evolutionary process, we must think we have done nothing for our own evolution so far. From amoeba to this stage, we have come without doing anything about it. We have taken our human life for granted. So what can we do about it? If it is a living process, it has to be spontaneous. It has to work by itself like a seed which is planted and germinates by itself. At the most a gardener can pour a little water. I can pour the water of My love on your seed at the most, but the seed has to germinate by itself spontaneously. It is a living process and not the mechanical process. Perhaps we never realize what is a living process because we take it for granted. You see so many flowers turning into fruits, but we never think how it happens. We have no idea of spontaneity. We think by doing something we are being spontaneous. So one has to be effortless because Kundalini is born with you – Sahaja, born with you you. There is an energy which thinks organizes loves CC you. Saha means "with," born with you. Ja means “born."

 Awakening is a happening. It happens to you when somebody who is awakened, like an enlightened light or a candle, comes near other lights which are not yet enlightened and enlightens them spontaneously. Now you cannot argue it out. You cannot. You cannot rationalize it because rational- ity is a limited thing. You have to go to something that is unlimited. How can you do it with a limited mind? This is beyond the mind. You have to rise. If you argue it out, you are going to be away from it. But in science, we have found out many things which indicate, which actually pre- pares the stage for Sahaja Yoga, which prepares us to know that there is something beyond. We have accepted in medical science that we have an autonomous nervous system which works by itself. We call it "auto." Who is this auto? Who is this one, the one who beats CC your heart, the one who digests your food? When we said that it is done by a system, you just give it a name. But how do you explain? You cannot do it. You may be able to increase the rate of your heartbeat, but you cannot decrease it. It happens spontaneously, automatically. How does it happen? By giving it a name you do not explain. In psychology people have found out that there is something like a universal uncon- scious ... which gives symbolic suggestions in the dreams which are universally the same. They have accepted this. They have proved it by experiments that there is a universal unconscious... In the human body ... any foreign matter is thrown out. But when a mother conceives a child in the womb it is not thrown out, but it is nurtured and looked after. Who does that? Who understands that this is not a foreign matter, but is a future child? Is there somebody thinking inside your uterus or something that is controlling? Who takes the decision? There must be someone at least minimum of a human level who thinks for you? So already there are questions for scientists to ask and they all can be answered. Because the knowledge of science is analytical. It is in different corners and gives you part-knowledge.. But how long are we going to sit asking for proof of the Kundalini...? You must accept this as the hypothesis. Modern times are the worst times for one reason, that explain everything which is a very simple thing as far as religion is concerned. As far as other things are concerned, you do not have to explain. People just accept.... You think you have done this job, built this building, you have done. It is all dead, all dead things, dead converted into another dead. What living work have you done so far? What have you done so far that you can call as living? You cannot do even a seed sprout. The one who does millions and millions of such things, billions and billions of these seeds sprouted, when we have to know Him, at least let us have the humility to know that, through your rationality and so-called intellect, you are not going to know Him. A little drop wants to know the whole of the ocean. How can you explain to an ant A little drop have to you wants to know SO the whole of the ocean the human civilization and the human problems and how can you explain to a human being the working of the subtle, divine forces? God has been challenged by man. See the greatness. That is why in all the scriptures it is written, "Humble down yourself in your heart." That does not mean that you give up your intellect, doesn't mean at all. But have the balance of your heart also. you must 12

 You can generate Sahaja Yoga to go further You must have realized that you are the people who are the men of God and women of God and that you have to be prepared to take this banner of the new age, of transforming Sahaja Yoga into Mahayoga, into a vast area of spirituality. You are the channels and you are going to generate this energy through you. If you were just channels then your responsibility would have been much less, but Sahaja Yoga it is a very different type of a living process. Perhaps you might have noticed it that once you receive your Realization it starts transforming you firstly. Then it starts transforming other people. By your presence you start transforming others. By your existence you start transform- ing other people. You start transforming the atmosphere, the subtler problems of negativity. They all work out like a tree when it is blossoming. The fragrance of the blossom creates a different type of aura around itself that it attracts all the bees around to gather the honey. In the same way, when a person is realized, is enlightened, the aura springs and you start getting people attracted towards you. We have to remember a few points about Sahaja Yoga, that you receive the light first. The second step is that you generate the light which is never done in any other process, that you generate the light on your own, with your will, with your understanding, with For example, a tree may give rise to seeds and seeds might become trees. But seeds do not regenerate. They do not have a will, but here the seeds are human beings. Only the human beings have the will. Now you are being enlightened with your will. With your will, you can regenerate or, we should say, you can generate on your own Sahaja Yoga to go It is a your freedom. further. subtle understanding that when light comes into this candle, it cannot regener- very 14 ate of its will any other. Somebody else has to take it to that.

 Your will is very important in Sahaja Yoga. What do you will? That is very, very important. Now, will does not mean desire. Will means desire put into action. So what do is to desire and then you put it into action. you You can do it. First of all we have to know that we must have desire. That is there, no doubt. You are categorically seekers. I mean, you are that category. You are born as seekers. You cannot get out of it. You are seekers. What- be your problems, from whatever source you ever may might have come, whatever mistakes you may commit, but you are seekers. Seekers are seekers.... Not everybody is a light. You are the light-givers and it is going to work out through your will. So how powerful our will should be, how dedicated we should be about our will, that one has to know. You have to fathom out that will within you. Once you start doing this Sahaja Yoga, then recognize how important is Sahaja Yoga, that it gives a real meaning to the whole creation. In the and divine power, that has to work out. That is the pur- pose of life and, surprisingly, it is left to your will, not to My will. I have no will. I have no action. So it is your will which is going to work it out. So you have to dedicate and now you have to weigh yourself, "How much am I willed?" The seminars help you to see how much you really will that Sahaja Yoga should be successful... you of God eyes We must understand the basics of Sahaja Yoga and try to see within ourselves. Do we understand the basics and do we have those qualities by which we sustain those basics? The first basic of Sahaja Yogi is that you have to become your spirit so that your body emits the power of the spirit alone. This is the first basic of Sahaja Yoga.

 So far in all the religions, all the great books, even the Bible or Gita, it is written that you must have faith. You must have faith. The faith word was never clarified in any one of these books and mostly people thought blind faith is the only way – to believe is to have blind faith. It should have been clarified, but it was kept a vague term as “faith." They do use blind faith and faith. So the people started working it out. For example, you are walking on the road and you say, "I was thinking of God and suddenly I found a gold ring. So that was my which was substantiated. Yes, it is God who has helped me to get the gold ring." Or say that there was a divorce on or something like that and you prayed to God and the divorce did not take place. It is God's help. But this kind of faith can have another side. People can say that the people who do not believe in God at all are quite successful and how do you explain that? They have no faith. They are actually hideous and they are very successful in life. So how do you explain that side? Sahaja Yoga has another very great thing, that it is the revelation of all the vague terms that were used before. Because people were not given Realization, one could not talk of faith or blind faith and the real faith because if they do not have their eyes, how can you tell them about the light or the darkness? So at that time the faith was sustenance, how to sustain yourself. The second was to have faith that you will be resurrected, that you will be your spirit. Now the third state is today to know that Realization gives you experiences and then your faith is established, not blind but opened, enlightened faith. Sahaja Yoga is CC the revelation faith of all the vague terms 16

 Discretion You know how to be discreet, what to take, what not to take. It is very easy to criticize others. It is very easy to say the others are wrong, but it should be the easiest to see what with you because you cannot correct others, you can only correct yourself. It is is wrong as simple as that. Like a daughter is married to another man – now supposing there is any problem between the two. It is better to tell your daughter than to tell the other man because she is your own. In the same way, it is better to correct yourself than to correct others. It is the easiest thing to correct yourself if you could look at your ego which is stopping it. And who is the gainer? Who is the person who receives the benediction and the bliss of Sahaja Yoga? So the old habits that are within us, which give us obstinacy, must be seen with great discretion. And now, with all this training in Sahaja Yoga, you should be able to see even rationally the discretion part of it. I have seen people who go by the same road all the time are extremely discreet. They know how to turn, which turn to miss and which turn to take and how to reach. That is the sign of your maturity. So you have to be discreet. Another thing is that you have your vibrations there to teach you discretion. But sometimes you may be missing that. So with rationality, if you discriminate and try to find out, "What is wrong? Where am I going wrong?" you will very easily understand that "This part I'm doing wrong and better check myself and nobody else." Because you are driving your own car, you can only control your brakes and not the brakes of another person. It is such a funny situation that people are driving everybody else's car, but not their own. So with discretion, you will know how to correct yourself, even rationally. You will Now your rationality is absolutely logical. Before this, rationality was illogical, but now, with integration, your rationality becomes logical and you can see, "No, this is wrong, this cannot be." You know about everything now, practically everything. know how I do not think there is anything that requires information for you people. But you just try to think about something and you will get the answer. That is all in your brains. It is opened out. The only thing that I have said is develop your discretion. If you are indis- to correct you must develop it. You must grow up to it. You must mature. creet, then So then we go from discretion to understand that when we go into discrimination, discriminate and find out things, what we have to do is to find out our own fault, correct yourself it discreetly. And then about others, what are we to do? If you people are of that level that catch from even a butterfly flying around and a little leaf falling from the tree, I mean you if you were of that level, then I would never have put you into these tests. But you are not. You are capable of much bigger tests than these.

 Collectivity All the Gods and all the angels bow to you. They are in attention to you. You have seen even the sun has come around in these clouds. Just surrounded by the clouds, it is there. Then you have to come up. And a small thing like collectivity, it is still the beginning of Sahaja. If you do not want to become collective, Sahaja Yoga is not meant for individuality.... Become a collec- tive being because the spirit is the collective being. The quality of the spirit is that it is a collective being. It is a part of the collective, which is absolutely one with the collective. It is so collective that you cannot imagine on the human level how much it is collective. For example, I was criticizing the Gita and the Vishuddhi was opened. Krishna is sit- ting here and talking through Me. There is no difference in all of that. It is just the same. And I am Krishna, I am Mataji and I am Christ so much so one that you cannot imagine how much oneness is there. It is. Such a unison exists. So for the spirit to be absolutely enlivened within us, to be absolutely shining within us, we have to know how we articulate with others, how we talk to others, what is our A unison exists way of judging... In collectivity, for those who are Sahaja Yogis, those who have joined Sahaja Yoga, there should be a complete unison and articulation, absolutely. Enjoy each other's com- pany. Everyone is a beautiful flower.... You come to collectivity to understand that you are cells in My body and I have awakened you ... but those who have faith in themselves can only understand this. Those who have a superiority complex, an inferiority complex – a complex means no faith in yourself. You should have faith in yourself, that you are the chosen ones. You are really the people specially made for this, for this great thing. It is a tremendous thing that you are all born. Once you realize and recognize it, you won't bother about the small, small things of life. It is the quality in you that has to be nurtured and looked after through collectivity, but collectivity of the Sahaja Yogis. I know those who have proper reactions to things. If some Sahaja Yogis are coming, they feel very happy. “Oh, he is coming." We say there are five people who got Realization, they feel very happy. They will not shun. They will be happy to go all out to see a Sahaja Yogi, to meet a Sahaja Yogi, to do anything for Sahaja Yoga. This is the sign of a Sahaja Yogi. If a Sahaja Yogi is in difficulty, he will go secretly and help. Do not judge on money, anything, but in Sahaja Yoga. This is a new race that is coming up. Others are human beings. You are not. You are not human beings any more. You are Sahaja Yogis. It is a different race. All over the world CC this race has to come up. So we have to build up ourselves in one group, in one understanding, absolute unison. There should be no secrets. There should be no domination. Everything should articulate. Everybody should talk to each other. Everyone should know what is happening with the other. You have to be absolutely frank, open with each other, absolutely. Tell them your problems – "I catch on this. What to do? I catch on that. What to do? How to clear it out?" – not to feel shy. We have to enjoy ourselves. Also enjoy our weaknesses, so that we clear them out. Laugh it out. Somebody has some habits, laugh it out. That is the best 19 way to do it.

 Attention We do not realize what are we when we become Sahaja Yogis. We become so much still worried about things which have no value. If you should see in the ultimate, all these things have no value. They are so temporary and if you go on wasting your energy about things that have no spiritual value, that do not matter, you are going to waste your because now you are that which is described, the oceans which are talking nectar, oceans of talking nectar – nectar, not the nectar that we understand, nectar of spiritual bliss. You are there. And when you are that, then what is expected of you, about yourself? Just find out. Just find out yourself. Reflect back, "What is expected of me from myself? What am I doing about it? I am worried about this nonsense, that nonsense and I am supposed to be the ocean of blissful nectar. I am supposed to be the forest of the kalpa- tarus, the trees that give the boon to the people, huge big trees, then what am I doing? My giving capacity is so low. "What do I give to others? I do not even have the attention that can absorb the of the Divine. The attention should be such that I should be able to absorb the attention of the Divine. Instead of that, my attention is on wrong things – and what am I doing? What do I do about myself? Is it that I am not trying to manifest that special quality? "The highest quality, the one that I am – I am born after ages. I have been born so many times. I have been a saint. I have been going around seeking God and I have been going around and again, when I am born in this lifetime for such a tremendous task, again I am getting lost with the same nonsense.... Internationally, you are all related to each other.... These are the relations which are relations of deep friendship. Friendship has no bias, has no lust, no greed, nothing. It is just friendship. It is a pure relationship. Bring down your attention to what I am saying. It is important, otherwise how are you going to learn this. Where is your attention? So it is all right to say that it is all love, it is all affection, it's all goodness. It is all a very sweet state, but you must know that you have to come up. These trees have come up after a great struggle against the whole atmosphere, against the whole surroundings. They have come up on their own except for the Mother Earth to which they are connected. So you people must know that you all are here to come up, to fight yourself, to find out what is wrong with you. Where is your attention? First of all, the attention has to move in such a manner that outward you grow and inward you hold fast to your Mother with complete respect. Those who cannot do it are absolutely useless. If life energy Attention that can absorb the energy of the Divine any tree does not try to hold fast to this Mother Earth, it will fall out. I mean it is just what it is doing and for which it is evolved. It is nothing to do with the Mother Earth. The Mother Earth has this specialty. And if this Mother Earth is not going to be linked by you, by your purposeful adherence, continuous identification, you are going to fall out like a dead tree. So it is very important to understand that you are great, no doubt. These trees are great. They have fought through. They have come up. Where is 20 your attention?

 th The first and foremost thing that goes against us is our own nonsensical ego. We must understand this ego is the one. It is the greatest barrier within us and we have to get out of it. The Kundalini has to rise like the tree has risen now and the ego is the biggest, biggest hurdle for most of us. appears in You are the very being of that Mother. She has created it. She has given everything. Because of Her you have come up. You are fighting Her, arguing with Her, going against Her. This is many ways. We fight the Mother Earth which is giving you the source. It How will you grow? your ego. Once you start growing, the sun can help you. The sky can help you. Everything can help you. The nature can help you. But you must have complete desire to rise above your dwarfness, above your selfishness, above your conditionings and especially your ego... One has to become the big tree by pushing forward and that quality – like Gyanesh- wara, like Tukarama, like Ramdas – you all have to become that one. They never saw Me. I just nourished them without them reaching Me, but they nourished themselves on their own virtues, on their own qualities, on their own greatness. You have to be great like that. Instead of that, if you live with false notions about yourself, artificial things, absurd ideas, all nonsense that we have gathered through our upbringing, through our rational- ity, through our reading, through other gurus and through our own mental projections, it is going to be extremely dangerous for the growth of every individual Sahaja Yogi. As a whole, also it will affect. So we have to take a vow that we are going to behave in a manner which bevoves our advent, not for others, but our advent at this time which is being described and proph- esied. The prophecy was made a long time ago. If we understand that we have come on this Earth for that purpose, we will really separate ourselves from all the rest of the non- sense that goes on. Try You must know that Sahaja Yoga is a growth within and that growth expresses itself out, so that within growth is to be done by you fully, with full understanding.. You have to promise that "Mother, we'll work with the same zeal, with the same atten- tion as You are – and try to settle ourselves." Quiet within ourselves, we talk too much, talk too much, do nothing. Try to reserve your energy in that silence within.... You have to be the walking, talking, moving forests of that divine love. to rise towards the sky as these trees have done....

 Dedication is actually turning back to yourself and looking towards the divine personality in you.! Once there is divine personality in you, there is no problem of devotion. You will just become one with it. You will start enjoying it. But this rationality is the worst thing that plays tricks with you, which deviates you from under- standing that whatever life you have led so far has been on a very material, gross life. You came out of it. You have grown out of it. You have come up. Now to blossom, to become fragrant, you have to give up rationality... Now how do you do it? The tongue should be such that whatever you say should be the truth. Ulti- mately, it will come out as truth. And that is why the dedication should be there... So to develop that kind of understanding about the truth, first of all you should absolutely fix your- self on the truth. And the truth is that you are the instrument of God, that have Realization, got you that you have got a special awareness which people do not have. Stand on that and proclaim it. You are not to be afraid of it. You have got Realization, no doubt. You have felt it. Say it, "I have got Realization. Nothing doing, I know I am realized" – firm on that. In this expression of truth, you have to be like the light. The light asserts. It not only asserts, but it shows others also that it shines.... Whatever you will do will be the truth. But say, “I am the truth." But for that, a real purification is needed about facing yourself fully in dedication. That means you are holding on to your Mother, you are holding on to Sahaja Yoga, you are holding on to that truth which have found out. And here you are facing others. Without that, you cannot do it. Your source you is that. You are standing on the truth. And that is such a power, such a strength.... That is the first point one should know about dedication, that you are dedicated fully, that you are not afraid of anyone. You are not worried about your losses.... Now you know that you are standing on so-called sacrifice because you are the truth and for that you should be willing to sacrifice anything – not sacrificing the truth. What you are sacrificing is untruth.... The dedication part is the oil in you, is the attachment, complete attachment to your source. That is the dedication. But that dedication should not give you any other ideas, but of a light which shines, which corrects others, guides the path of other people. If that is not so, then the source that you are tapping is not coming to you fully and your light is not burning properly. So into dedication when you go, you must not think that it is any surrendering, the so-called sur- rendering that you become like a cabbage. That is the idea people have, that you become like a cabbage. You become dynamic. You become real power – not of destruction, but of construction.... And that power – a sustained power, a flowing power – has to be there. For that, dedication is needed. Holding on to your source of power, you have to stand firm, courageously, without any fear. That is the truth. That is the truth you have to achieve. That is very important. 22

 1UR5

 Being the truth, the aspect of one side is there. But the other side of it is that when this source comes to you, you become the compassion. The truth and the compassion are one thing. You won't believe, but it is so – like the wick and the oil combine to form the light. It is the burning of the oil that gives you the light. In the same way, the compassion gives you the truth. There is no difference what- soever. Only the state is different that you cannot see the light which is oil and oil which is burning. Compassion SS So compassion is the one which is the source as well as your store. From the source of compassion you get your compassion... If you have to grow, then you must store that compassion within you. Whatever com- and give passion I have given you, love I have given you, you must store that within you will be finished. You will be nowhere. It is the growth that back to others. Otherwise you which is sustained only, not only by sucking from one side, but by giving to others. Oth- erwise you will be stagnated. There has to be outflow... One has to give compassion to others. It should not be formal compassion or an affected one, but it should be a natural one, a very natural, spontaneous feeling from within. It is not an expression of your ego or super-ego or over-sentimentality, but it is a kind of an understanding that he is a Sahaja Yogi, you are a Sahaja Yogi, you are brothers – not the way the brothers have been, but a different type of brothers who are spiritual brothers. You are spiritual people... You have to really mother others and have that feeling of compassion and love for others. You do not have to thịnk about your own comfort, you do not have to think about your own advantages, but you have to think about the comfort of others. You have to think what you can do to make others comfortable, than to see what will make you comfortable. So this flow of compassion, when it starts, the dedication is complete because "what- CC ever we got from You, Mother, we are giving it to others." That is the dedication. So the flow of dedication is not one-sided. It is double-sided. You stick onto some- thing. You get connected with something to get something out of it and you give it to others. And ultimately that reaches the collective being. That means it reaches the source. It is in this light we have to understand. 24

 Pharma With Sahaj dharma you take people into your heart

 Dharma means our primordial taboos that are built-in in the human beings... The primordial taboos are only understood if people are trying to understand themself or else whatever has come to them through tradition. Now, Sahaj dharma is a little bit different in the sense that it is much higher than the Sahaj ideas that we talk of, but it is also much higher than even what Shri Krishna said or Shri Rama said.... At the time of Shri Rama, He had to put down A, B, C, D, E, F. At the time of Moses, also He had to put down ten commandments. But Krishna thought the other way around, to establish a dharma of pure love... Sahaja dharma is that you are just free – a complete freedom from lust, greed and all nonsense. You are above it. You are above. This Sahaj dharma is above the dharma established by Shri Krishna or by Shri Rama because you have reached that stage. It is in complete freedom you have to be dharmic. Whatever is not good for you, you should not do. I do not have to tell you that do not do this or you do not do that. Whatever I say may not you 300 be acceptable, but immediately your vibrations will tell you. This is Sahaj dharma. In the Sahaj dharma you get rid of all kinds of, as they say, kaama, krodha, mada, matsa, lobha, moha. That means lust, anger, attractions, then greed.... The free mind is that which has attention completely enlightened by the spirit. But the problem is we are still rising out of this human bondage to a higher life of Realization. And when we are going to that level, we have to realize that we have to give up all these shackles, all these horrible things within us. Like a bird, when it is born out of the egg, it shakes out all the parts of the egg... In Sahaj, you are absolutely free from all theis nonsense. If you want, you can wear a good dress. If you do not want, you need not. You are free. You are free from the money bondage.... In the Sahaj dharma, to you money is nothing but the dust of your feet, nothing so important... heart, you love them. With Sahaj dharma, you take people into your Your love flows all the time. Your compassion flows all the time.... This is the new dharma we have established now in this world. A new race with a new dharma, which is much above even Shri Krishna's vision is coming true.... You are all Sahaj Dharmis. You have accepted Sahaj dharma and in Sahaj dharma we have to have pure love of the heart – not hypocrisy – and a sen- sible life. 27

 Worship You have to be large, huge, big-hearted, great people. You are all born again, with who are great today again. But somehow, you are still mixed up your surroundings, so try to understand your own importance and the importance of the time. It is to worship yourselves. To worship, but are we worshipable? We should be worshipable to ourselves, to see that whatever we are doing, it has the greatness and beauty, the love and the greatness of the saints who are very great saints, not ordinary, but tremendous saints. It is being described actually, that Gyaneshwara in this poem has really worshipped you. I wish we had people like Gyaneshwara but they are all inside My body. You are all outside. Whatever is said has to be fulfilled. Not only that, but whatever is said is the truth. For all these pujas, you must have that depth, that greatness of those saints who came on this Earth, who worked for you, created this atmo- great sphere. Think of them, what they have done. They have fought all the time. They were tortured. They had none of the facilities that you have. They had it all, every- have none of the enjoyment, nothing of the kind. But got you thing on the plate. So be deserving. Be proactive and work it out in that way, otherwise this world we cannot change. Puja has a very special significance accordingly and has to be done by people who know that they are these great personalities. It has nothing to do Puja has with your so-called artificial positions in life or anything that is outside. It is the inside.. Just talk out about God, about your Mother or about Sahaja a very special Yoga. The best thing is to talk about your Mother so it neutralizes both the ends and it works out. It works out. It is a simple thing. One has to understand that God has significance saintliness, been so kind to you, so kind. You do not have to fight for your nothing. You are all brothers and sisters. You are all here, so much together. You are not alone. can know what you are. Who told them? Who You are so great that you looked after them? Who helped them? Today you are just like VIPS, so please try to understand that you have to have a very humble attitude towards all these saints and towards Sahaja Yoga. Try to absorb as much as possible. Be kind to yourself. all. 28 May God bless you

 Sh Donle want to judge Me. They have a right to do it. I mean I cannot say no. You can judge Me. You can do whatever you like. I mean I cannot say that you do not judge Me.... But what is the instrument you have got to judge Me? I am such a camouflage, just a bubble and such a receding personality. How are you going to judge Me? Is there a way? Is there any way of judging Me? And you can never catch Me anywhere. It is a camouflage. Firstly, I am prideless. I am egoless. I am actionless. Where are you going to catch Me? On the contrary, by all these attributes, I create a problem for you that I am a Mahamaya. You cannot understand a person who does not have pride. Because you all can talk to Me very nicely, you can be very sweet and you can just sit next to Me and suddenly you come out with a remark which shows you are not conscious with whom you are talking – sud- denly something you do where you are not conscious because I won't blame. I am extremely friendly with you, extremely nice to you, absolutely prideless. You see, anybody who has even this much position in life, he has a nose like that. Mine is bent all the time – nothing but humour. And then how are you going to understand My position? You see, there are no outside signs. There are no horns. There is nothing that I could be a cinema star. I am too simple, too simple. There is no way by which you can really feel that I am great. I am absolutely mun- dane, ordinary. But extraordinary of the ordinary I am. This is the thing which people do not understand. It is all right for those who are not realized – excused. But have felt the vibrations and your Realization through Me. I must be something. Put attention like that to understand it must be a tremendous thing inside this body. It cannot be possible otherwise. It is so obvious otherwise to you people. This is to be understood, that so far Krishna, Christ, Rama, all of them, nobody gave Self Realization to people en masse. They had other powers like Saubharya Shakti, Krishna had. He could kill anybody like this. I have also all these powers they do. But obviously I am a very simple, ordinary, mundane type of an Indian lady – finished. And Christ had a power to get Himself crucified. I too have that. But I am not going to do all that. I have a power to resurrect also. Why are these powers not used? One should understand because now the main attention is to raise the Kundalini and for that SO The way I should be old you I will be your I will be just these powers are not required.... Today the power of raising the Kundalini of thousands and thousands and millions and millions of people is required. And I am going to be just like you all My life, in the sense I am going to get old and you are going to. I mean the way I should be old I will be. I will be just like I am not going to do anything outside. It is like a German car. But it is you who has to know the power of the German car. It is the best type.... You go on judging Me, but that is not the way you will understand. Just realize and recognize that there has to be something tremendous. like you you. It was necessary to have someone like that to do this tremendous task. And it was necessary for I know those who are with Me. They will stand by Me throughout. I may test them a little here and there, but I know they will come along. They have to stand by Me. you to be born, to be with Me, to help Me. 30

 Sahaja. is not what I say That is not Sahaja Yoga. What you say, what you talk, you must walk. Because I say so, that does not mean by listening to Me you become Sahaj Yogis. No, you have to practise it. And practising is very easy. It is very easy to practise Sahaja Yoga because it is innately within you. It is joy-giving. You enjoy your virtues. And you are so secure, so confident. Moreover, there are such friendships, such brotherhood, such relationship. This so-called trend of individuality is not very useful because it is against the spirit of the totality of the whole. So individuality is all right. Like on a tree, every leaf is different, every flower is different. Everything is different in the nature because it is what you call variety. There should be variety. You should not be dressed all like military people, all of you looking the same. There should be variety. That is how there is beauty. But that does not mean that you have your own individual ideas about religion. You cannot. All these ideas must come from within. Whatever are your reactions to the outside should not be your ideas. There should be inspired revelation from within. And if it comes to revelation, then you will find that all of them are just the same. There is no inconsistency, nothing inconsistent. Everything just smoothly moves into one ocean.

 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE www.divinecoolbreeze.org SUBSCRIPTIONS: contact@divinecoolbreeze.org CONTENT: editor@divinecoolbreeze.org PRINTED BY King Printing Company Inc. 181 Industrial Avenue East Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA and Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. No.8, Chandragupta Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411038 Maharashtra, India PHOTOGRAPHS: All photos of Shri Mataji: date, place and photographer unknown, except: Page 1: inauguration Vaitarna Academy, January 2003, Vaitarna India Back cover: the sky at the time of Diwali Puja, November 2001, Lake Piru, near Los Angeles (Michael Markl) SHRI MATAJI'’S WORDS: Title page (inside front cover): public program, 13 August 1992, Kiev Ukraine and Sahasrara Puja, 5 May 1980, London Page 1: Shri Chakra and Shri Lalita Puja, 17 December 1990, Brahmapuri India Pages 2 to 9: seminar for new Sahaja Yogis, 28 January 1980, Bordi India Pages 10 to 12: 22 February 1977, Delhi (“Chakra and Deities") Pages 14 to 19 and 30: 16 November 1980, Sussex UK (“The New Age") Pages 20 and 28: international seminar, 13 February 1984, Bordi India Pages 22 and 24: 6 August 1982, London (“Dedication and Devotion") Page 27: Shri Krishna Puja, 23 August 1997, Cabella Italy Page 32: talk to Sahaja Yogis, 12 February 1992, Canberra Australia

 ONCE YOU HANDLE THE BASICS THEN YOU CAN HANDLE THE PE RMUTATIONS AND COMBINATIONS TTEA



----------------------

2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divime Cool Breeze
Fundamentals
2010 issue 5 – volume twenty-three number five
1072
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-1.txt 
 some
FUNDAMENTALS
of ehahaja. Yoga.
I have already told you
that the fundamental truth is that you are
not this body, this mind, this ego, these conditionings,
but you are the pure spirit.
Se
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE VOLUME TWENTY-THREE NUMBER FIVE
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-2.txt 
 YOU ARE DEALING WITH THE FUNDAMENTALS OF WHICH A HUMAN BEING IS BUILT
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-3.txt 
 It is time for us to think, "Why has God created this beautiful
being, the human being? Why did He take so much trouble
to evolve us from the amoeba stage to this?"
We have taken everything for granted. Even to talk of God
We are the people | in these modern times, it is impossible because according to
the intellectuals, He does not exist. They may say whatever
they like, but He does – and very much so.
who created this
Now the time has come, first of all, for us to know why
cobweb and are
are we here. What is our fulfillment? Have we come in this
world just to be born, eat our food, produce children, amass
money for them and then die? Or is there any special reason
entangled into it
that God loved us so much, that He created a new world of
human beings?
and are worried
Also the time has come for us to know that there is God
and that His power of love exists
– and not only that, but it
about life
organizes, it coordinates, it is dynamic – that He loves and,
in His love, He wants to grant us the kingdom of God, the
greatest that was planned for human beings.
Let us forget our frustrations and our turmoils and our so-
called political and economic problems, for they do not exist.
It is only a mirage we are running after. We are the people
who created this cobweb and are entangled into it and are
worried about life. There is nothing to worry about, for the
Lord God Almighty, who has created you, is the Almighty and
He is anxious to give you the bounties of joy and happiness.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-5.txt 
 If we sit down and try to understand, we will learn that God has created us into a human
being without any one of us knowing about it. We do not know how did we become from
monkeys to this state. We have no idea when did we get this great personality of a human
being. What did we do to become a human being? We should ask this simple question
to ourselves. What do we do to breathe so easily? What do we do when our heart beats
regularly? What timing does it keep, the way it works. What have we done to achieve this
kind of a beautiful body which works by itself?
You have done nothing so far. At the most, what we can do is the dead work, like
we might create a building out of dead stones or, if it dies, we can create nice, beautiful
furniture. But have we done anything living so far that we are so proud that we deny the
power that creates life? Thousands of flowers are turned into fruits every day and I am
saying thousands because there is no word for that. It is infinite when this power is acting
so minutely, infinitely and into such detail.
For example, if you have a mango tree, you will get a mango fruit only. If you have
a rose bush, you will get only roses out of that. All that is controlled, properly managed,
everything done so beautifully.
You are placed on this Mother Earth, which is moving with such tremendous speed,
and still you are just there – no problem. All these things, how are they happening? We
do not want to face it. We do not want to face the reality. Perhaps we think that reality
would be too much. But the time has come for us to know the reality because it is the
most beautiful thing and the reality and the truth is a very simple thing.
The truth is that God has created all to make His power manifest to you. As
we have created this microphone to make our voices go through it, in the same way,
God has
created you
you
can manifest His power, His
God has created
in such a beautiful manner that
you
you
all to make
shakti through your instrument. But the only difference between this instrument and
this human instrument is this: that you are aware that you know everything, that you are
capable of understanding the power that is flowing through you and its manifestation and
a complete maneuvering of it. And the last of it is the joy of it.
This has been told in various scriptures, especially in our country, which is endowed
with God's greatest blessings of very beautiful atmosphere ... this country being especially
made for a very simple living, without going into any encounter with the nature. We
have seen that thousands of years back in this great country of ours there were many great
saints who went into the jungle – because in this country you can live in the jungle with
very little food – to find out about the underlying currents which are controlling this
body. While in the West people went outward, first of all, to get their houses properly
done up, to live even was a problem there. And then they went into things like science,
outward, to see what comfort they can get out of matter, what help they can get out of
matter. But here the people went within themselves. They took their attention within to
find out what was the underlying forces that have created this whole universe and created
the human being.
His power
manifest
4
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Ind
lini
They discovered that within us lies a power called as Kundalini.
This Kundalini is the power lying at the base of the spine, at the sacrum bone, as we call
it... Just think how people knew that it was the sacred bone and also it is said that when a man
gets burnt, the whole of his body can be burned, but this bone does not get burnt.
This has got three-and-a-half coils, this Kundalini. There is a special reason for having
three and a half coils because that gives the manifestation of an eternal being... A complete
zygote is created out of it. She creates and still remains the same – like a Mother creates a child,
but remains the same.
This Mother
This Kundalini is your Mother. She is the one who is only your Mother. Every individual
has got this Mother in the triangular bone, every individual. And this Mother is all the time
recording, watching, coordinating and trying to give you what you call the symbol of the uni-
versal unconscious.
is all the time
They say this Kundalini is sleeping. She is in a way because She has not yet arranged it.
Below this Kundalini is a centre ... which is the centre of reception of all the information of
what you have done in previous lives and what you are doing today. All your information is
kept like
All this was found out long, long time back. But “everything that is Indian should be dis-
carded as useless" has been our idea for the last, I don't know for how many, years.
recording
in the sacrum bone of every human being....
a tape
CC
כי
Why? This is a country of yoga, we are yoga-oriented people. Basically we are yoga-ori-
ented. You may try to change the ideas and the new liberation and these nonsensical things,
bring anything you like in this country, but it is going to be very difficult because this has been
looked after, nurtured and is being put forward as the greatest leader of spirituality. You try any
tricks on this country, it won't work out because it is not one day's job, it is not two day's job,
but thousands of years the sages have worked on this country...
We have never gone into the details, into the findings of these great sages who have found
out so many things for us. It is all ready-made, just like your Kundalini being made by your
Father, the Lord God Almighty, who has put the Kundalini just there for you, ready.
watching
coordinating
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-7.txt 
 CONE
Absolute
We talk of one world and one great understanding – and that is not possible. That is
an impossible task that you have taken up. The reason is that you have not gone into
the undercurrents of all the people. Secondly, you have not found out your absolute. It
is all relative terminology. All your economic problems, all your economic theories and
all your assumptions, as far as your political parts are concerned, are absolutely useless
because they are not based on the absolute. You are moving in on a plane which has no
base. Nothing is absolute. Actually, that is why we always go to extremes...
The river flows in the centre and the more you are in the centre, it is deeper. All
these ideologies will vanish into thin air as soon as you know absolute. And all
these problems and turmoils and these useless talks will finish.
Let us find out where is our absolute within us.... This absolute resides in your
This absolute
resides in
your
your heart
heart as your spirit, as your atma.... The atma is in your heart. It is the reflection of God
Almighty. Within our heart is the atma. It is like a flickering light, we can say, as is the
gas light. We have the flickering light, which knows everything... This one knows what
you are doing, where you are going, what are your plans and what is wrong and what is
bad. And this is the one we do not know. It is the one that we have to seek. But we are
aware that there is someone who knows all about us, whether in the darkness or
you hide things, anything you do, you know that there is someone in your heart who
knows everything about you.
But what we have to do now is to go to Him.
as your sDirit
you go
as your atma
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Realization
When you get your Self Realization, then
that, life has no meaning...
What are you fighting about God – if He is there or not – when our eyes
are not yet opened? It is like blind people fighting amongst themselves and
declaring that there is no God or there is God, both the things are just the
find
your own meaning. Before
you
same. Whether it is blind faith or a
intellectual assertion that there is no
very
God, it is just the same. It has no meaning because both ways you are not con-
nected with God.
So the first and foremost thing is that you should be connected to your
spirit. All the rest of it is absolutely useless.. This Kundalini has to rise and has
to give you Self Realization. This is what Adi Shankaracharya has said. This is
what Christ has said. This is what everyone who is a person, regarded as a real
person, has said – that you are to be born again.
How are you going to be born again? This is the Mother, who is sitting
down there waiting for that occasion to rise and pierce these six chakras, the
centre is on top, to give you Realization.
Central Path
D
Sahaja Yoga can only be granted to people who are normal, not to extremists who believe in running away
from home or running towards the home t0o much, the people who lead a good life, who think of their
society as well and who are very normal people in the middle course, not the extremists.
The middle course people – we have never bothered about the middle course people. We are only both-
ered about the absolutely poor people who are beggars or worried about the people who are very rich. Forget
them. Both of them are in the same rank.
You will see this in Sahaja Yoga, that they have the same characteristics. They have the same values. They
are of the same standard. The only difference is one has too much money and one does not have. You see,
this is the that makes the difference, but that is the denominator to know that both are in the same
money
condition.
Now I am telling you that Sahaja Yoga only works out for people who do not go to extremes because you
can see that it is in the centre that lies the vertebral column, not on one side or the other side. Those people
who are simple people, who are leading a nice, good, righteous life are the best for Sahaja Yoga.
7
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Religi
There is only one religion of God that exists. There are not a hundred religions
as we think. They are all flowers of one big tree. We have removed all these
flowers, "This is mine, this is mine." And then how do you talk of secularism?
It is one and it has been flowered with one shakti, with one love. How can
they be different? They are all one, absolutely unanimous. They are in com-
plete concord and there is no problem with them. The problem is with us, the
human beings. It is too much to believe, but it is a fact.
CC
It is one
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Love
For this you cannot pay. I mean it is so absurd to tell, but people are so mad, that I have
to say these things. How can you pay for your Mother's love...? Anybody who takes the
name of God and takes money, lives like a parasite on the society, is a very sinful man. And
those who follow those personalities are also going towards the same side, which goes to
hell directly.
You cannot take for this love. This love, it flows. This just flows. It does not
want anything. You cannot pay it back. It just flows like light. It does not require anything.
It just requires its flow. As long as it flows, it is satisfied, it does not want anything.
Do not judge God by the norms human beings have about themselves. They are trying
to organize Him also and they are going to buy Him. There are ... so-called religious insti-
tutions where the people are just parasites, living there, doing no work. They are making
money out of religion and it is very difficult for them to accept when I say you cannot pay
for it.
money
But I tell you that from your Mother. You can know that this Mother has a little love
for you, but God Almighty has the ocean. You cannot pay for that ocean. Just accept it. It
will flow, overflow, engulf you and make you beautiful.
Пом
It happens. It is actualizațion. It is not lecturing that you are broth-
no.At happens. You become that when the Kundalini
rises. The enlightenment on your fingers, on your being, makes you
aware that you are part and parcel of others also. It makes you. You
don't have to tell yourself. You don't have to educate yourself. It just
becomes. It is actualization. The collective consciousness becomes your
ers and sisters –
dharma. It becomes your being and that is what you have to gain and
that is what you have to achieve.
For that, no effort is needed and no money or anything is needed,
except that when you get it, you have to maintain it for some short
time until it is lit up properly...
Please listen to Me. I am Mother and still you all are My chil-
dren. Whether you are ninety or a hundred, it does not matter. In this
your
respect, you are all My children and you have to listen to Me.
Get to your joy. Get to your happiness. And get to the key of your
being.
9.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Rebirth
The source of joy is within yourself.
Unless and until you seek yourself, you cannot seek God. They have all talked about
the second birth. What we call the baptism is also the same where you have to be born
again. It is not just a formal one that is done by unauthorized people.
Mohammed-sahib has again and again talked of a rebirth. You have to find yourself.
How do we find ourselves is the problem. Is there something like Self? Is there really
something like God or is it all a myth? Is there any fact in following the religious, holy life
that
you get your salvation? So far we have had no proof of it. Naturally, in this scientific
world today you have to give the proof of everything to convince people so that they seek
themselves. But science tells us that we were evolved from a little amoeba to a human
A human being
being. Why is it that God took so much trouble? If you do not believe in God, you can
say nature. “Why did nature work so hard to create a human being out of a small little
amoeba?"
is in transition
Supposing we assemble some screws and we try to work out something, a passerby
would ask, “Why? What are you going to make out of this instrument? What are you
doing?" There must be some reason why we have become human beings after so much
evolution. But science doesn't think of "why." It just tells you, "This is." And whatever is
not there, it says, "We can't explain."
The instrument, whatever it is, supposing, has to work on electrical energy or on any
CC
כ
whatsoever, will come into force or will start working out when it is connected to
energy
the mains. Otherwise it is still in the making process or, you can say, it is in transition.
A human being, as such, is in transition. It has not found its own meaning. He does
not know why he exists, what is the purpose of his life. It is a meaningless life.
So you have to be connected to the mains. That is what everybody has been saying,
that you have to be reborn. You have to become that.
Now, those who talked of this were born on the tenth storey. The rest of them are
on this earth. When they talked, it all went over their heads. You have to at least reach
the first or second storey to understand that there is something beyond this human con-
sciousness, this human awareness. There is something more to this awareness. There is
of an opening. There is a greater dimension which one has to achieve to understand
more
10
your own meaning.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-12.txt 
 onnection
There must be some mechanism within us by which we are reborn, no doubt. There has
to be some mechanism. If I am speaking through this microphone to you, there must be
some mechanism which is doing the job. In every seed there is a premule, the mechanism
which germinates and creates a big tree out of it. In the same way, we have a mechanism
placed within us. But this is a very subtle thing, while human beings are absolutely gros.
In this Kali Yuga, modern time, they are even worse – extremely gross and they cannot
think of something subtle. If I tell you there is an energy which thinks, organizes, loves,
you cannot think of such an energy. But how do we organize? How do we think? How
do we love? From where do we get that energy? Why shouldn't we think about it? But as
I said, modern man does not think of how. He takes it for granted.
I want to tell about this mechanism that exists within It should not be just
a mental feat with you, no. It should not be the so-called knowledge of Kundalini from
outside. But it is a happening where the Kundalini rises and you get whatever is promised
in all the scriptures.
Today the time has come to prove the existence of the divine power of God all around
us. We have been going and praying to God. Does He listen to us? Are we connected
to Him? We do namaz. We spread our hands towards God Almighty. Are we connected
with Him or we are just doing a mechanical thing? Even so many people are doing Hatha
Yoga. They think they are doing it in the name of God. Is it a correct method? Can we do
anything about it? If it is a living process, if it is an evolutionary process, we must think
we have done nothing for our own evolution so far. From amoeba to this stage, we have
come without doing anything about it. We have taken our human life for granted.
So what can we do about it? If it is a living process, it has to be spontaneous. It has to
work by itself like a seed which is planted and germinates by itself. At the most a gardener
can pour a little water. I can pour the water of My love on your seed at the most, but the
seed has to germinate by itself spontaneously. It is a living process and not the mechanical
process. Perhaps we never realize what is a living process because we take it for granted.
You see so many flowers turning into fruits, but we never think how it happens. We have
no idea of spontaneity. We think by doing something we are being spontaneous.
So one has to be effortless because Kundalini is born with you – Sahaja, born with
you
you.
There is
an energy
which thinks
organizes
loves
CC
you. Saha means "with," born with you. Ja means “born."
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Awakening is a happening. It happens to you when somebody who is awakened, like an
enlightened light or a candle, comes near other lights which are not yet enlightened and
enlightens them spontaneously.
Now you cannot argue it out. You cannot. You cannot rationalize it because rational-
ity is a limited thing. You have to go to something that is unlimited. How can you do it
with a limited mind? This is beyond the mind. You have to rise. If you argue it out, you
are going to be away from it.
But in science, we have found out many things which indicate, which actually pre-
pares the stage for Sahaja Yoga, which prepares us to know that there is something beyond.
We have accepted in medical science that we have an autonomous nervous system
which
works by itself. We call it "auto." Who is this auto? Who is this one, the one who beats
CC
your heart, the one who digests your food? When we said that it is done by a system,
you just give it a name. But how do you explain? You cannot do it. You may be able to
increase the rate of your heartbeat, but you cannot decrease it. It happens spontaneously,
automatically. How does it happen? By giving it a name you do not explain.
In psychology people have found out that there is something like a universal uncon-
scious ... which gives symbolic suggestions in the dreams which are universally the same.
They have accepted this. They have proved it by experiments that there is a universal
unconscious...
In the human body ... any foreign matter is thrown out. But when a mother conceives
a child in the womb it is not thrown out, but it is nurtured and looked after. Who does
that? Who understands that this is not a foreign matter, but is a future child? Is there
somebody thinking inside your uterus or something that is controlling? Who takes the
decision? There must be someone at least minimum of a human level who thinks for
you? So already there are questions for scientists to ask and they all can be answered.
Because the knowledge of science is analytical. It is in different corners and gives you
part-knowledge..
But how long are we going to sit asking for proof of the Kundalini...? You must accept
this as the hypothesis. Modern times are the worst times for one reason, that
explain everything which is a very simple thing as far as religion is concerned. As far as
other things are concerned, you do not have to explain. People just accept....
You think you have done this job, built this building, you have done. It is all dead, all
dead things, dead converted into another dead. What living work have you done so far?
What have you done so far that you can call as living? You cannot do even a seed sprout.
The one who does millions and millions of such things, billions and billions of these
seeds sprouted, when we have to know Him, at least let us have the humility to know
that, through your rationality and so-called intellect, you are not going to know Him.
A little drop wants to know the whole of the ocean. How can you explain to an ant
A little drop
have to
you
wants to know
SO
the whole
of the ocean
the human civilization and the human problems and how can you explain to a human
being the working of the subtle, divine forces? God has been challenged by man. See the
greatness. That is why in all the scriptures it is written, "Humble down yourself in your
heart."
That does not mean that you give up your intellect, doesn't mean at all. But
have the balance of your heart also.
you must
12
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-15.txt 
 You can generate
Sahaja Yoga
to go further
You must have realized that you are the people who are the men of God and women of God
and that you have to be prepared to take this banner of the new age, of transforming Sahaja
Yoga into Mahayoga, into a vast area of spirituality. You are the channels and you are going to
generate this energy through you.
If
you were just channels then your responsibility would have been much less, but Sahaja
Yoga it is a very different type of a living process. Perhaps you might have noticed it that once
you receive your Realization it starts transforming you firstly. Then it starts transforming other
people. By your presence you start transforming others. By your existence you start transform-
ing other people. You start transforming the atmosphere, the subtler problems of negativity.
They all work out like a tree when it is blossoming. The fragrance of the blossom creates a
different type of aura around itself that it attracts all the bees around to gather the honey. In
the same way, when a person is realized, is enlightened, the aura springs and you start getting
people attracted towards you.
We have to remember a few points about Sahaja Yoga, that you receive the light first. The
second step is that you generate the light which is never done in any other process, that you
generate the light on your own, with your will, with your understanding, with
For example, a tree may give rise to seeds and seeds might become trees. But seeds do not
regenerate. They do not have a will, but here the seeds are human beings. Only the human
beings have the will.
Now you are being enlightened with your will. With your will, you can regenerate or, we
should say, you can generate on your own Sahaja Yoga to go
It is a
your freedom.
further.
subtle understanding that when light comes into this candle, it cannot regener-
very
14
ate of its will any other. Somebody else has to take it to that.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Your will is very important in Sahaja Yoga. What do
you will? That is very, very important. Now, will does
not mean desire. Will means desire put into action. So
what
do is to desire and then you put it into action.
you
You can do it.
First of all we have to know that we must have
desire. That is there, no doubt. You are categorically
seekers. I mean, you are that category. You are born as
seekers. You cannot get out of it. You are seekers. What-
be
your problems, from whatever source you
ever may
might have come, whatever mistakes you may commit,
but you are seekers. Seekers are seekers....
Not everybody is a light. You are the light-givers
and it is going to work out through your will. So how
powerful our will should be, how dedicated we should
be about our will, that one has to know. You have to
fathom out that will within you.
Once you start doing this Sahaja Yoga, then
recognize how important is Sahaja Yoga, that it gives a
real meaning to the whole creation. In the
and divine power, that has to work out. That is the pur-
pose of life and, surprisingly, it is left to your will, not
to My will.
I have no will. I have no action. So it is your will
which is going to work it out.
So you have to dedicate and now you have to weigh
yourself, "How much am I willed?" The seminars help
you to see how much you really will that Sahaja Yoga
should be successful...
you
of God
eyes
We must understand the basics of Sahaja Yoga and
try to see within ourselves. Do we understand the basics
and do we have those qualities by which we sustain
those basics?
The first basic of Sahaja Yogi is that you have to
become your spirit so that your body emits the power
of the spirit alone. This is the first basic of Sahaja Yoga.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-17.txt 
 So far in all the religions, all the great books, even the Bible or Gita, it is written that you
must have faith. You must have faith. The faith word was never clarified in any one of
these books and mostly people thought blind faith is the only way – to believe is to have
blind faith. It should have been clarified, but it was kept a vague term as “faith." They do
use blind faith and faith.
So the people started working it out. For example, you are walking on the road and
you say, "I was thinking of God and suddenly I found a gold ring. So that was my
which was substantiated. Yes, it is God who has helped me to get the gold ring." Or
say that there was a divorce on or something like that and you prayed to God and the
divorce did not take place. It is God's help. But this kind of faith can have another side.
People can say that the people who do not believe in God at all are quite successful and
how do you explain that? They have no faith. They are actually hideous and they are very
successful in life. So how do you explain that side?
Sahaja Yoga has another very great thing, that it is the revelation of all the vague
terms that were used before. Because people were not given Realization, one could not
talk of faith or blind faith and the real faith because if they do not have their eyes, how
can you tell them about the light or the darkness?
So at that time the faith was sustenance, how to sustain yourself. The second was to
have faith that you will be resurrected, that you will be your spirit. Now the third state is
today to know that Realization gives you experiences and then your faith is established,
not blind but opened, enlightened faith.
Sahaja Yoga is
CC
the revelation
faith
of all the
vague terms
16
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Discretion
You know how to be discreet, what to take, what not to take. It is very easy to criticize
others. It is very easy to say the others are wrong, but it should be the easiest to see what
with you
because
you cannot correct others, you can only correct yourself. It is
is wrong
as simple as that.
Like a daughter is married to another man – now supposing there is any problem
between the two. It is better to tell your daughter than to tell the other man because she
is your own. In the same way, it is better to correct yourself than to correct others. It is
the easiest thing to correct yourself if you could look at your ego which is stopping it.
And who is the gainer? Who is the person who receives the benediction and the bliss of
Sahaja Yoga?
So the old habits that are within us, which give us obstinacy, must be seen with great
discretion. And now, with all this training in Sahaja Yoga, you should be able to see even
rationally the discretion part of it. I have seen people who go by the same road all the time
are extremely discreet. They know how to turn, which turn to miss and which turn to take
and how to reach. That is the sign of your maturity. So you have to be discreet.
Another thing is that you have your vibrations there to teach you discretion. But
sometimes you may be missing that.
So with rationality, if you discriminate and try to find out, "What is wrong? Where
am I going wrong?" you will very easily understand that "This part I'm doing wrong and
better check myself and nobody else." Because you are driving your own car, you can only
control your brakes and not the brakes of another person. It is such a funny situation that
people are driving everybody else's car, but not their own.
So with discretion, you will know how to correct yourself, even rationally.
You will
Now your rationality is absolutely logical. Before this, rationality was illogical, but
now, with integration, your rationality becomes logical and you can see, "No, this is
wrong, this cannot be." You know about everything now, practically everything.
know how
I do not think there is anything that requires information for you people. But you just
try to think about something and you will get the answer. That is all in your brains. It is
opened out. The only thing that I have said is develop your discretion. If you are indis-
to correct
you must develop it. You must grow up to it. You must mature.
creet, then
So then we go from discretion to understand that when we go into discrimination,
discriminate and find out things, what we have to do is to find out our own fault, correct
yourself
it discreetly. And then about others, what are we to do? If you people are of that level that
catch from even a butterfly flying around and a little leaf falling from the tree, I mean
you
if you were of that level, then I would never have put you into these tests. But you are not.
You are capable of much bigger tests than these.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Collectivity
All the Gods and all the angels bow to you. They are in attention to you. You have seen
even the sun has come around in these clouds. Just surrounded by the clouds, it is there.
Then you have to come up.
And a small thing like collectivity, it is still the beginning of Sahaja. If you do not
want to become collective, Sahaja Yoga is not meant for individuality.... Become a collec-
tive being because the spirit is the collective being. The quality of the spirit is that it is a
collective being. It is a part of the collective, which is absolutely one with the collective. It
is so collective that you cannot imagine on the human level how much it is collective.
For example, I was criticizing the Gita and the Vishuddhi was opened. Krishna is sit-
ting here and talking through Me. There is no difference in all of that. It is just the same.
And I am Krishna, I am Mataji and I am Christ so much so one that you cannot imagine
how much oneness is there. It is. Such a unison exists.
So for the spirit to be absolutely enlivened within us, to be absolutely shining within
us, we have to know how we articulate with others, how we talk to others, what is our
A unison exists
way of judging...
In collectivity, for those who are Sahaja Yogis, those who have joined Sahaja Yoga,
there should be a complete unison and articulation, absolutely. Enjoy each other's com-
pany. Everyone is a beautiful flower....
You come to collectivity to understand that you are cells in My body and I have
awakened you ... but those who have faith in themselves can only understand this. Those
who have a superiority complex, an inferiority complex – a complex means no faith in
yourself. You should have faith in yourself, that you are the chosen ones. You are really
the people specially made for this, for this great thing. It is a tremendous thing that you
are all born.
Once you realize and recognize it, you won't bother about the small, small things of
life. It is the quality in you that has to be nurtured and looked after through collectivity,
but collectivity of the Sahaja Yogis. I know those who have proper reactions to things. If
some Sahaja Yogis are coming, they feel very happy. “Oh, he is coming." We say there are
five people who got Realization, they feel very happy. They will not shun. They will be
happy to go all out to see a Sahaja Yogi, to meet a Sahaja Yogi, to do anything for Sahaja
Yoga. This is the sign of a Sahaja Yogi. If a Sahaja Yogi is in difficulty, he will go secretly
and help. Do not judge on money, anything, but in Sahaja Yoga.
This is a new race that is coming up. Others are human beings. You are not. You are
not human beings any more. You are Sahaja Yogis. It is a different race. All over the world
CC
this race has to come up.
So we have to build up ourselves in one group, in one understanding, absolute unison.
There should be no secrets. There should be no domination. Everything should articulate.
Everybody should talk to each other. Everyone should know what is happening with the
other. You have to be absolutely frank, open with each other, absolutely. Tell them
your
problems – "I catch on this. What to do? I catch on that. What to do? How to clear it
out?" – not to feel shy. We have to enjoy ourselves. Also enjoy our weaknesses, so that we
clear them out. Laugh it out. Somebody has some habits, laugh it out. That is the best
19
way to do it.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Attention
We do not realize what are we when we become Sahaja Yogis. We become so much still
worried about things which have no value. If you should see in the ultimate, all these
things have no value. They are so temporary and if you go on wasting your energy about
things that have no spiritual value, that do not matter, you are going to waste your
because now you are that which is described, the oceans which are talking nectar, oceans
of talking nectar – nectar, not the nectar that we understand, nectar of spiritual bliss.
You are there. And when you are that, then what is expected of you, about yourself?
Just find out. Just find out yourself. Reflect back, "What is expected of me from myself?
What am I doing about it? I am worried about this nonsense, that nonsense and I am
supposed to be the ocean of blissful nectar. I am supposed to be the forest of the kalpa-
tarus, the trees that give the boon to the people, huge big trees, then what am I doing?
My giving capacity is so low.
"What do I give to others? I do not even have the attention that can absorb the
of the Divine. The attention should be such that I should be able to absorb the attention
of the Divine. Instead of that, my attention is on wrong things – and what am I doing?
What do I do about myself? Is it that I am not trying to manifest that special quality?
"The highest quality, the one that I am – I am born after ages. I have been born so
many times. I have been a saint. I have been going around seeking God and I have been
going around and again, when I am born in this lifetime for such a tremendous task,
again I am getting lost with the same nonsense....
Internationally, you are all related to each other.... These are the relations which are
relations of deep friendship. Friendship has no bias, has no lust, no greed, nothing. It is
just friendship. It is a pure relationship. Bring down your attention to what I am saying.
It is important, otherwise how are you going to learn this. Where is your attention?
So it is all right to say that it is all love, it is all affection, it's all goodness. It is all a very
sweet state, but you must know that you have to come up. These trees have come up after
a great struggle against the whole atmosphere, against the whole surroundings. They have
come up on their own except for the Mother Earth to which they are connected.
So you people must know that you all are here to come up, to fight yourself, to find
out what is wrong with you. Where is your attention? First of all, the attention has to
move in such a manner that outward you grow and inward you hold fast to your Mother
with complete respect. Those who cannot do it are absolutely useless.
If
life
energy
Attention that
can absorb the
energy of
the Divine
any tree does not try to hold fast to this Mother Earth, it will fall out. I mean it
is just what it is doing and for which it is evolved. It is nothing to do with the Mother
Earth. The Mother Earth has this specialty. And if this Mother Earth is not going to be
linked by you, by your purposeful adherence, continuous identification, you are going to
fall out like a dead tree.
So it is very important to understand that you are great, no doubt. These trees are
great. They have fought through. They have come up.
Where is
20
your attention?
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-22.txt 
 th
The first and foremost thing that goes against us is our own nonsensical ego. We must
understand this ego is the one. It is the greatest barrier within us and we have to get out of
it. The Kundalini has to rise like the tree has risen now and the ego is the biggest, biggest
hurdle for most of us.
appears in
You are the very being of that Mother. She has created it. She has given everything.
Because of Her you have come up. You are fighting Her, arguing with Her, going against
Her. This is
many ways. We fight the Mother Earth which is giving you the source.
It
How will
you grow?
your ego.
Once you start growing, the sun can help you. The sky can help you. Everything can
help you. The nature can help you. But you must have complete desire to rise above your
dwarfness, above your selfishness, above your conditionings and especially your ego...
One has to become the big tree by pushing forward and that quality – like Gyanesh-
wara, like Tukarama, like Ramdas – you all have to become that one. They never saw
Me. I just nourished them without them reaching Me, but they nourished themselves
on their own virtues, on their own qualities, on their own greatness. You have to
be great
like that.
Instead of that, if you live with false notions about yourself, artificial things, absurd
ideas, all nonsense that we have gathered through our upbringing, through our rational-
ity, through our reading, through other gurus and through our own mental projections,
it is going to be extremely dangerous for the growth of every individual Sahaja Yogi. As a
whole, also it will affect.
So we have to take a vow that we are going to behave in a manner which bevoves our
advent, not for others, but our advent at this time which is being described and proph-
esied. The prophecy was made a long time ago. If we understand that we have come on
this Earth for that purpose, we will really separate ourselves from all the rest of the non-
sense that goes on. Try
You must know that Sahaja Yoga is a growth within and that growth expresses itself
out, so that within growth is to be done by you fully, with full understanding..
You have to promise that "Mother, we'll work with the same zeal, with the same atten-
tion as You are – and try to settle ourselves." Quiet within ourselves, we talk too much,
talk too much, do nothing. Try to reserve your energy in that silence within....
You have to be the walking, talking, moving forests of that divine love.
to rise towards the sky as these trees have done....
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Dedication is actually turning back to yourself and looking towards the divine personality in you.! Once
there is divine personality in you, there is no problem of devotion. You will just become one with it.
You will start enjoying it.
But this rationality is the worst thing that plays tricks with you, which deviates you from under-
standing that whatever life you have led so far has been on a very material, gross life. You came out of
it. You have grown out of it. You have come up. Now to blossom, to become fragrant, you have to give
up rationality...
Now how do you do it? The tongue should be such that whatever you say should be the truth. Ulti-
mately, it will come out as truth. And that is why the dedication should be there...
So to develop that kind of understanding about the truth, first of all you should absolutely fix your-
self on the truth. And the truth is that you are the instrument of God, that
have
Realization,
got
you
that you have got a special awareness which people do not have. Stand on that and proclaim it. You are
not to be afraid of it. You have got Realization, no doubt. You have felt it. Say it, "I have
got
Realization.
Nothing doing, I know I am realized" – firm on that.
In this expression of truth, you have to be like the light. The light asserts. It not only asserts, but it
shows others also that it shines.... Whatever you will do will be the truth. But say, “I am the truth."
But for that, a real purification is needed about facing yourself fully in dedication. That means you
are holding on to your Mother, you are holding on to Sahaja Yoga, you are holding on to that truth
which
have found out. And here you are facing others. Without that, you cannot do it. Your source
you
is that. You are standing on the truth. And that is such a power, such a strength....
That is the first point one should know about dedication, that you are dedicated fully, that you are
not afraid of anyone. You are not worried about your losses.... Now you know that you are standing on
so-called sacrifice because you are
the truth and for that you should be willing to sacrifice anything –
not sacrificing the truth. What you are sacrificing is untruth....
The dedication part is the oil in you, is the attachment, complete attachment to your source. That
is the dedication. But that dedication should not give you any other ideas, but of a light which shines,
which corrects others, guides the path of other people. If that is not so, then the source that
you are
tapping is not coming to you fully and your light is not burning properly.
So into dedication when you go, you must not think that it is any surrendering, the so-called sur-
rendering that you become like a cabbage. That is the idea people have, that you become like a cabbage.
You become dynamic. You become real power – not of destruction, but of construction.... And that
power – a sustained power, a flowing power – has to be there. For that, dedication is needed. Holding
on to your source of power, you have to stand firm, courageously, without any fear. That is the truth.
That is the truth you have to achieve. That is very important.
22
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-24.txt 
 1UR5
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Being the truth, the aspect of one side is there. But the other side of it is that when this
source comes to you, you become the compassion.
The truth and the compassion are one thing. You won't believe, but it is so – like the
wick and the oil combine to form the light. It is the burning of the oil that gives you the
light. In the same way, the compassion gives you the truth. There is no difference what-
soever. Only the state is different that you cannot see the light which is oil and oil which
is burning.
Compassion
SS
So compassion is the one which is the source as well as your store. From the source of
compassion you get your compassion...
If you have to grow, then you must store that compassion within you. Whatever com-
and give
passion I have given you, love I have given you, you must store that within
you
will be finished. You will be nowhere. It is the growth
that back to others. Otherwise
you
which is sustained only, not only by sucking from one side, but by giving to others. Oth-
erwise you will be stagnated. There has to be outflow...
One has to give compassion to others. It should not be formal compassion or an
affected one, but it should be a natural one, a very natural, spontaneous feeling from
within. It is not an expression of your ego or super-ego or over-sentimentality, but it is a
kind of an understanding that he is a Sahaja Yogi, you are a Sahaja Yogi, you are brothers
– not the way the brothers have been, but a different
type
of brothers who are spiritual
brothers. You are spiritual people...
You have to really mother others and have that feeling of compassion and love for
others. You do not have to thịnk about your own comfort, you do not have to think
about your own advantages, but you have to think about the comfort of others. You have
to think what you can do to make others comfortable, than to see what will make you
comfortable.
So this flow of compassion, when it starts, the dedication is complete because "what-
CC
ever we got from You, Mother, we are giving it to others." That is the dedication.
So the flow of dedication is not one-sided. It is double-sided. You stick onto some-
thing. You get connected with something to get something out of it and you give it to
others. And ultimately that reaches the collective being. That means it reaches the source.
It is in this light we have to understand.
24
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-27.txt 
 Pharma
With Sahaj dharma
you take people into your heart
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Dharma means our primordial taboos that are built-in in the human beings...
The primordial taboos are only understood if people are trying to understand
themself or else whatever has come to them through tradition.
Now, Sahaj dharma is a little bit different in the sense that it is much
higher than the Sahaj ideas that we talk of, but it is also much higher than
even what Shri Krishna said or Shri Rama said....
At the time of Shri Rama, He had to put down A, B, C, D, E, F. At the
time of Moses, also He had to put down ten commandments. But Krishna
thought the other way around, to establish a dharma of pure love...
Sahaja dharma is that you are just free – a complete freedom from lust,
greed and all nonsense. You are above it. You are above. This Sahaj dharma is
above the dharma established by Shri Krishna or by Shri Rama because
you
have reached that stage. It is in complete freedom you have to be dharmic.
Whatever is not good for you, you should not do. I do not have to tell you
that
do not do this or you do not do that. Whatever I say may not
you
300
be acceptable, but immediately your vibrations will tell you. This is Sahaj
dharma.
In the Sahaj dharma you get rid of all kinds of, as they say, kaama, krodha,
mada, matsa, lobha, moha. That means lust, anger, attractions, then greed....
The free mind is that which has attention completely enlightened by
the spirit. But the problem is we are still rising out of this human bondage
to a higher life of Realization. And when we are going to that level, we have
to realize that we have to give up all these shackles, all these horrible things
within us. Like a bird, when it is born out of the egg, it shakes out all the
parts of the
egg...
In Sahaj, you are absolutely free from all theis nonsense. If you want, you
can wear a good dress. If you do not want, you need not. You are free. You
are free from the money bondage.... In the Sahaj dharma, to you money
is
nothing but the dust of your feet, nothing so important...
heart, you love them.
With Sahaj dharma, you take people into
your
Your love flows all the time. Your compassion flows all the time.... This is the
new dharma we have established now in this world. A new race with a new
dharma, which is much above even Shri Krishna's vision is coming true....
You are all Sahaj Dharmis. You have accepted Sahaj dharma and in Sahaj
dharma we have to have pure love of the heart – not hypocrisy – and a sen-
sible life.
27
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-29.txt 
 Worship
You have to be large, huge, big-hearted, great people. You are all born again,
with
who are great today again. But somehow, you are still mixed
up
your
surroundings, so try to understand your own importance and the importance
of the time. It is to worship yourselves. To worship, but are we worshipable?
We should be worshipable to ourselves, to see that whatever we are doing,
it has the greatness and beauty, the love and the greatness of the saints who
are very great saints, not ordinary, but tremendous saints. It is being described
actually, that Gyaneshwara in this poem has really worshipped you. I wish
we had people like Gyaneshwara but they are all inside My body. You are all
outside. Whatever is said has to be fulfilled. Not only that, but whatever is
said is the truth.
For all these pujas, you must have that depth, that greatness of those
saints who came on this Earth, who worked for you, created this atmo-
great
sphere. Think of them, what they have done. They have fought all the time.
They were tortured. They had none of the facilities that you have. They had
it all, every-
have
none of the enjoyment, nothing of the kind. But
got
you
thing on the plate. So be deserving. Be proactive and work it out in that way,
otherwise this world we cannot change.
Puja has a very special significance accordingly and has to be done by
people who know that they are these great personalities. It has nothing to do
Puja has
with your so-called artificial positions in life or anything that is outside. It
is the inside.. Just talk out about God, about your Mother or about Sahaja
a very special
Yoga. The best thing is to talk about your Mother so it neutralizes both the
ends and it works out.
It works out. It is a simple thing. One has to understand that God has
significance
saintliness,
been so kind to you, so kind. You do not have to fight for
your
nothing. You are all brothers and sisters. You are all here, so much together.
You are not alone.
can know what you are. Who told them? Who
You are so great that
you
looked after them? Who helped them? Today you are just like VIPS, so please
try to understand that you have to have a very humble attitude towards all
these saints and towards Sahaja Yoga.
Try to absorb as much as possible. Be kind to yourself.
all.
28
May God bless
you
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Sh
Donle want to judge Me. They have a right to do it. I mean I cannot say no. You can
judge Me. You can do whatever you like. I mean I cannot say that you do not judge Me....
But what is the instrument you have got to judge Me?
I am such a camouflage, just a bubble and such a receding personality. How are you
going to judge Me? Is there a way? Is there any way of judging Me? And you can never
catch Me anywhere. It is a camouflage.
Firstly, I am prideless. I am egoless. I am actionless. Where are you going to catch Me?
On the contrary, by all these attributes, I create a problem for you that I am a Mahamaya.
You cannot understand a person who does not have pride. Because you all can talk to Me
very nicely, you can be very sweet and you can just sit next to Me and suddenly you come
out with a remark which shows you are not conscious with whom you are talking – sud-
denly something you do where you are not conscious because I won't blame.
I am extremely friendly with you, extremely nice to you, absolutely prideless. You see,
anybody who has even this much position in life, he has a nose like that. Mine is bent all
the time – nothing but humour. And then how are you going to understand My position?
You see, there are no outside signs. There are no horns. There is nothing that I could be a
cinema star. I am too simple, too simple.
There is no way by which you can really feel that I am great. I am absolutely mun-
dane, ordinary. But extraordinary of the ordinary I am. This is the thing which people do
not understand. It is all right for those who are not realized – excused. But have felt
the vibrations and your Realization through Me. I must be something.
Put attention like that to understand it must be a tremendous thing inside this
body. It cannot be possible otherwise. It is so obvious otherwise to you people.
This is to be understood, that so far Krishna, Christ, Rama, all of them, nobody
gave Self Realization to people en masse. They had other powers like Saubharya Shakti,
Krishna had. He could kill anybody like this. I have also all these powers they do. But
obviously I am a very simple, ordinary, mundane type of an Indian lady – finished.
And Christ had a power to get Himself crucified. I too have that. But I am not going
to do all that. I have a power to resurrect also. Why are these powers not used? One
should understand because now the main attention is to raise the Kundalini and for that
SO
The way I
should be old
you
I will be
your
I will be just
these powers are not required.... Today the power of raising the Kundalini of thousands
and thousands and millions and millions of people is required. And I am going to be just
like you all My life, in the sense I am going to get old and you are going to. I mean the
way I should be old I will be. I will be just like
I am not going to do anything outside. It is like a German car. But it is you who has
to know the power of the German car. It is the best type....
You go on judging Me, but that is not the way you will understand. Just realize and
recognize that there has to be something tremendous.
like you
you.
It was necessary to have someone like that to do this tremendous task. And it was
necessary for
I know those who are with Me. They will stand by Me throughout. I may test them a
little here and there, but I know they will come along. They have to stand by Me.
you to be born, to be with Me, to help Me.
30
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Sahaja.
is not what I say
That is not Sahaja Yoga.
What you say,
what
you talk, you must walk.
Because I say so, that does not mean by listening to Me you become Sahaj Yogis.
No, you have to practise it.
And practising is very easy.
It is very easy to practise Sahaja Yoga because it is innately within you.
It is joy-giving. You enjoy your virtues. And you are so secure, so confident.
Moreover, there are such friendships, such brotherhood, such relationship.
This so-called trend of individuality is not very useful because it is against
the spirit of the totality of the whole.
So individuality is all right. Like on a tree, every leaf is different, every flower is
different. Everything is different in the nature because it is what you call variety.
There should be variety. You should not be dressed all like military people,
all of you looking the same. There should be variety. That is how there is beauty.
But that does not mean that you have your own individual ideas about religion.
You cannot.
All these ideas must come from within. Whatever are your reactions to the outside
should not be your ideas. There should be inspired revelation from within.
And if it comes to revelation, then you will find that all of them are just the same.
There is no inconsistency, nothing inconsistent.
Everything just smoothly moves into one ocean.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-34.txt 
 THE DIVINE
COOL BREEZE
www.divinecoolbreeze.org
SUBSCRIPTIONS:
contact@divinecoolbreeze.org
CONTENT:
editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
PRINTED BY
King Printing Company Inc.
181 Industrial Avenue East
Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA
and
Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd.
No.8, Chandragupta Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411038
Maharashtra, India
PHOTOGRAPHS:
All photos of Shri Mataji: date, place
and photographer unknown, except:
Page 1: inauguration Vaitarna Academy,
January 2003, Vaitarna India
Back cover: the sky at the time of
Diwali Puja, November 2001, Lake Piru,
near Los Angeles (Michael Markl)
SHRI MATAJI'’S WORDS:
Title page (inside front cover): public
program, 13 August 1992, Kiev Ukraine
and Sahasrara Puja, 5 May 1980, London
Page 1: Shri Chakra and Shri Lalita Puja,
17 December 1990, Brahmapuri India
Pages 2 to 9: seminar for new Sahaja
Yogis, 28 January 1980, Bordi India
Pages 10 to 12: 22 February 1977, Delhi
(“Chakra and Deities")
Pages 14 to 19 and 30: 16 November
1980, Sussex UK (“The New Age")
Pages 20 and 28: international seminar,
13 February 1984, Bordi India
Pages 22 and 24: 6 August 1982,
London (“Dedication and Devotion")
Page 27: Shri Krishna Puja, 23 August
1997, Cabella Italy
Page 32: talk to Sahaja Yogis, 12 February
1992, Canberra Australia
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-35.txt 
 ONCE YOU HANDLE THE BASICS THEN YOU CAN HANDLE THE PE RMUTATIONS AND COMBINATIONS
TTEA
