The Divine Cool Breeze 2010 iss Ue 4 – volume tw enty-three number four

 Mt know this it is the greatest opportunity for you

 What do you have to surrender? A drop has to dissolve into the ocean to become the ocean. And a drop cannot be greater than the ocean, can it? So what is the surrendering? It is the surremdering of our conditionings, of our ego and the artificial barriers we have built around us. One can approach it mentally. One can approach it emotionally and also physically. We can approach ourselves through mantras, through seeing ourselves, through knowing ourselves. But one should know this is the greatest of greatest opportunity - for you – not for the Divine. VOLUME 23 NUMBER FOUR page 2: TRUST ME • page 6: YOUR HANDS • page 8: BHAIRAVA HOLDS A LIGHT page 14: SHRI KRISHNA AND MIRTH • page 16: THIS IS WHAT IT IS • page 18: SPIRITUALITY page 30: TO THE SEEKERS • page 32: EVERYTHING WORKS OUT

 Trist Me Believe Me 23 DECEMBER 1998 • GANAPATIPULE When you see the progress of Sahaja Yoga, it is amazing, absolutely amazing. We have to keep to this progressive attitude and spread Sahaja Yoga in every way possible. We have to, of course, be careful when we are spreading the Sahaja Yoga, that there might be some people who are quite negative and may try to pose that they are some special type of Sahaja Yogis. I have known such people throughout.... It is a very dangerous thing. Whatever is there is all open and for everyone. I have no favourites at all. I cannot have favourites. So anyone who talks like this, you must know that person must be mad and negative and just shun such company. Don't go near anyone like that. Another thing I have to warn you is that, by spreading Sahaja Yoga, we tend ove has done and this grouping business is extremely dangerous. We should to form groups all this great work have no groups. We belong to one Vishwa Nirmala Dharma, to the whole universe. We have not got any group whatsoever. We believe in all the reli- of Sahaia Yoga. gions. We respect all the religions. And we cannot group ourselves under any banner, saying that "You are from India," “You are from Ceylon" or “You are from England." You are all from one place ... even if you do not know the lan- guage. Love does not need any language. And all this atmosphere can improve a lot – even more, if we all start feeling within ourselves that we belong to one universal life. We don't have any individual life any more now. All our individual life is finished. We belong to the collectivity of the whole universe. We have to see to the good points of each one of us and respect each one of us because we are all saints. We cannot disrespect. We have to see that we have got something within ourselves which is the highest and others also have the same, so we must give them the greatest respect. The greatest understanding should be among all of you, of this love that has done all this great work of Sahaja Yoga.

 The third thing which I want to tell you is this: there are people who are against us and they will be against us because they are not with the truth. So the best is not to argue with them and to discuss anything with them. They are against us because they are not with us. You cannot force them to be with us, so please do not argue with such people. Just enjoy the company of all other Sahaja Yogis and enjoy the beauty of this love that is all-pervading, which you have felt so well. We are living in another world. You do not know. Ours is a very different world of great love, understanding and also of great knowledge of Sahaja Yoga, everyone. Whether you are a child or whether you are an old person, everybody can get the knowledge of Sahaja Yoga. And that is how we have to be very, very knowledgeable. This knowledge, without love, has no meaning. First of all, we must understand what is detached love and then we can really develop ourselves very well. knowledge. All of you try to get the So those who do not come to the collective cannot get cleansed. The collective is the ocean in which cleansed. You do not have to go to the Himalayas and do all kinds of penances, but you have to come to the collective and, once you start coming to collec- tive, then you will be amazed that you definitely get a great advantage of your cleansing. And those who can remain in the collective in a very peaceful manner will definitely rise you get within themselves. Also we have to have meditation every day, regularly. I can make out people who are not meditating and who are meditating. Very easy it is. Lastly I have to say that I normally do not say, "Don't do this" or “Don't do that." But if I say don't do something, please just don't do it because I can see so many things which you can't see... Now how do I know all these things, I can't tell you, but I know. So if I tell you some- CC CC I I know abOut ming, you should not question it, you should not answer it, but you should just try to I know about know that Mother knows everything.. Otherwise, I don't say anything about anything. And that is how you will work out better because I am like a mouthpiece of this All- every one pervading Power. It does not have a mouthpiece to talk to you, but I am like a mouthpiece and, if I tell you something, you have to just trust Me and do not do something which I of you. have said not to do.... I never said these things before. Nor did I ever feel that this was the time to tell, but now I think it is high time that I tell you that you have to trust Me and believe Me. When I tell you you are to believe in Me, I am telling you the truth which is for benevo- lence and for your safety, for I hope you will understand this and you must know that I love you very much and I care for all of you individually. I know about every one of you, what you are doing, where are you. I know everything somehow. I get concerned and I tell you something. I hope you will understand that Mother is doing it because of Her love. I don't want My children to suffer or to get into troubles or to get destroyed. I hope you won't mind when I tell you that you should not do like this or you should do like this. It is just an explanation of My own Self I think that I shouldn't really try to invade, dominate you, but the trouble is if I see something so clearly, I think I'd better tell your your caution. into difficulties. And I hope you don't mind.O 4 land otherwise you may you, up

 Ihope you wont mind I. won't mind

 Your hands start feeling the cool breeze, start feeling the chakras of yourself and the chakras of other people. With your hands you can cure people. With your hands you can raise the Kundalini. With your hands you can give Realization. These hands become powerful things. Even the movement of these hands has a meaning. Everything has a meaning. YOUR.

 HANDS

 SHRI BHAIRAVANATH PUJA • 6 AUGUST 1989 • GARLATE ITALY Bhairava holds a light so that you can see the fun We have not understood the significance of If you want to be positive, Bhairavanath, who runs up and down on the Ida it is very easy and for that you Nadi. The Ida Nadi is the nadi of Chandrama, should see where is your attention. who is of the moon. So this is a channel for us to cool down. The work of Bhairavanathji is to cool Are you only seeing problems us down. or dre you seeing some fun in it? For example, people have a hot temper with their with their liver, whatever it is. And if ego, a person is in a big temper, then Bhairavnath plays tricks on that person to cool him down. He organizes everything under His own control with the ganas' help, with Ganapati's help to cool down your temperament, to give you a balance. So if somebody is a very hot-tempered person and he crosses all the limits of his temper, then somehow or other Bhairavanath will organize – also with the help of Hanumana – to show that this stupidity of anger is no good. So for example, people who are depressed or who become left-sided, Hanumana tries to help them to come out of it, no doubt, but also Bhairavanath helps them very much more to come out of it.

 6.

 BHAIRAVA Now a person who is left-sided cannot be collective. It is very difficult for a person who is very left-sided, who is all the time feeling very sad, unhappy Remember that you and worried. He cannot enjoy the fun of collectivity. While a hot-tempered have come on this Earth person, a right-sided person, does not enjoy any collectivity, does not allow ... to enjoy the fun of life. anybody to enjoy collectivity, no doubt, but tries to be in the collective that You are not to suffer any more. he can assert. Because such a person tries to show superiority that he is some- And to be serious – for what? thing superior, naturally he cannot enjoy the collective. And to be tense is out On the contrary, the person who is depressed all the time thinks, “Nobody CC of the subject. It is useless. How can you be tense in the loves me, nobody cares for me, I'm so depressed..." all the time expecting from others something. He also cannot enjoy the collective. Such a left-sided atmosphere which is so relaxed? person will find everything is something unhappy. Seeing the fun Bhairava always has a light in His hand and He runs up and down the Ida Nadi to make light for you to see that there is nothing negative. And this CC negativity comes to us by many ways. One of the negativities is that “this is mine, my child, my husband, my property." So then, once you get attached in this manner, what you find is that your children also become negative. But if you want to be positive, it is very easy and for that you should see where your attention. Are you only seeing problems or are you seeing some fun is in it? There are people who cannot make fun out of anything. If it is a sunny day, they will cry, "Oh God, what a sunny day!" And if it is a day with clouds, CC they will say, "Oh, what a day!" Nothing can please them. But to enjoy the CC positivity in every negativity is the capacity of a Sahaja Yogi. The negativity does not exist. It is an ignorance. Also it is not ignorance because ignorance also doesn't exist. If everything is the All-Pervading Power, then how can there be ignorance? But supposing, in the folds of this power, if you hide, run away, you will say that there is negativity – like you hide yourself in a cave, close it properly and say that there is no sun.

 Fun is treasure Old age is really the golden age, where a person has got that wisdom shining through the complete behavior of that person. But why? Again, why to have this maturity, why to have this innocence? Again, because you are rational people, so one can ask the question why? Innocence is the way you really give fun to others, create the fun part of it. The fun is created only through innocence. And innocence is the only way you can really emit also the fun. Imagine this world without any fun. What would happen? But people are very much confused between fun and the pleasure. The pleasure is nice to begin with and horrible to end with. But fun is a treasure. Anything that is full of fun you remember all your life. You can tell others. It is such an embodiment of fun-creation.... These children create fun out of something. They make everything into a fun. And now you see, even when they speak or they say things also they create such a fun out of it.... It is all fun and natural fun that they have out of everything.... There is a twinkle of a mischief in their eyes that they want to create a fun out of everything. Fun is joy-giving. It gives you joy. It is not just a sort of a coaxing in any way or a hurting in any way or anything sadistic in it, but it is just a blossoming. Shri Ganesha Puja 1982 11

 BHAIRAVA So those people who cannot become collective are either right-sided or left- sided, but more left-sided. But left-sided people can be collective in negativity. They say there is a very big fraternity of bhoots.... They cannot see fun at all. They cannot enjoy at all and they think they are very meditative, they are some higher people, they are something superior in negativity. But the end of these people is that they become lunatics. While at the end of the right-sided, they become idiotic... This emotional attachment is too much and to emotionally worry about somebody ... and all the time wasting your precious life in these things is not the way a Sahaja Yogi should live. If a Sahaja Yogi cannot become collective, then know that he is not a Sahaja Yogi. So one has to know that this is the work of Bhairavanath within us. Another If you know how to get work where He gives us light in darkness is that He destroys all the bhoots within us and all kinds of bhootish ideas and funny ideas about attachments fun out of the so-called and also the depressiveness.... He is very much connected with Ganesha. As discomforts, then you know, Shri Ganesha is at the Muladhara while Bhairava moves onto the you should know you are left side and goes to the right side. So all kinds of conditionings, all kinds of habits can be conquered through the help of Bhairavanath... on the right lines. He protects us also from doing wrong things, sly things like thieving. Whatever we think we can do secretly can be hidden, but you cannot hide it from Bhairavanath. If you do not change, then He exposes you completely. That is how He has exposed all the horrible false gurus... This ulti- great Deity of Bhairavanath incarnated on this Earth later on, mately as Mahavira also. So He stands on the gate of hell and stops people from falling into hell. But if you want to go to hell, if it is your desire, your will-power is like that working, that "I should go to hell," then He "All CC says, right, you can go." But as you know, now hell is also full of people, so it is better that we should try to fight our negativity and become fun-loving, enjoying others, loving others, not worrying about what others are doing to you, but only thinking what good you can do for others. So today's special puja for Bhairavanath we offer to give us a sense to laugh, to enjoy, to have fun. O 12

 14

 and mirth Shri Krishna Shri Krishna tried to break all the concepts.... He was the one who created all kinds of mirth.... It is not fun. It is more than that. It is mirth. Mirth is sweeter than fun.... Now what is happening to His mirth? I am creating mirth in which feel tickled.... He tried to create mirth, never seriousness, but He was you not frivolous. He was Yogeshwara. He was not frivolous. So this differ- ence between frivolity and mirth is to be understood only through Him because He is also discretion. Mirth is joy-giving. Frivolity is destruc- You just become. tive.... You forget your colour. We have to be in a state of mirth so that no question of feeling guilty comes in. We are not prisoners, are we? We are prisoners of our own con- You forget your nationality. and our own ideas and our own degradation. We degrade ourselves. cepts You forget everything. God does not. So we should be in the state of complete mirth and enjoy- You just feel, "Oh." SHRI KRISHNA PUJA 1986 SWITZERLAND ment. As a Sahaja Yogi, Shri Krishna's incarnation came to show that this whole creation is fun. It is leela. That is why He is Leeladhar. He is called as Leeladhara. He was it is a very different plane the one who showed that everything is fun, there is nothing to be serious, into which you nothing to be dry, nothing to be ascetic, but the whole life is fun. He gave this idea because people had become so austere. You feel so happy, joyous. SHRI KRISHNA PUJA 1989 The whole thing is fun. What had come down was a very morose, gloomy religion. He wanted to transform it into a joyful fun. And that is why He also used other meth- fun. ods to create great This Alladadayini Shakti, that is Radha. He would play with Her and with the other friends and the friends of Radha in what we call Holi, which is with coloured water. You must have seen when the children get to the water, they just start playing with the water all the time, throwing water on each other and enjoying. As Christ has said, "You have to be like children if you have to enter into the Kingdom of God." So He started such a nice child-like play, like Holi, to make people very joyous and happy. SHRI KRISHNA PUJA 1987

 16

 This is what it is. It is such a joy-giving thing. It's such fun. The whole thing becomes such fun. Half of the time the Sahaja Yogis are only laughing and enjoying the jokes and it's so wonderful. There is nothing to be serious, one feels. And that is the way God is manifesting within us. This is God's work. And God's work has to be treated the way it is. It is a dignified thing. It is a glorifying thing that is the work human beings are supposed to do. That is why you have come on this Earth. You have come on this Earth to know your purpose and the truth is your purpose is to serve God and to serve Him with your spirit.

 spirituality BIRTHDAY PUJA 2001 DELHI your country You have to find out about your Self. Just try to find out also, as you love Me, how much you can love others. It will be much easier to find out through introspection how much you love others and how much you care for others. If that happens, many problems of Sahaja Yoga will be solved in no time.... What you have to get is an ocean of love within heart your and to seek that in others also. It is a love which helps you to do everything so smoothly, so beautifully. As I have always said, if you really love your country, you can never be dishonest. You will have no other interest but to freedom or whatever you want to do for your country. get your In India, we have had great martyrs. Perhaps you may not be knowing, some of you. And the way they sustained the torturous life, it was only because they loved their country. Your country is spirituality. It is the country of complete enjoyment of your Self. It is the country where nothing but peace prevails. And when you love that country, how can you have all these nonsensical ideas for money and for power and all that? I just can't understand. 19

 We have to create this world for people who live all over, who are even in the jungles, who are lost into the Himalayas. What have you imbibed? As it is you know very well, I am not bothered about these things at all in My life. Of course, we need money for work, for everything, but there is no need to run after it or hanker after it.... In Sahaja Yoga, you have to know you have to be really dedicated and honest. You should enjoy your honesty, you should enjoy your love, you should enjoy your generosity, everything... After coming to the paradise of love, if you are still bothered about these nonsensical things, then you will jump very fast into hell. I can see that clearly.... You must remember how many years you have spent doing Sahaja Yoga. You must understand all the nice times you had and how many, every year you have spent in enjoy- ing My birthday – also in understanding how you have grown into it, how you changed it and how you enjoyed and how you have imbibed all the qualities of Sahaja Yoga. The first and foremost quality of a Sahaja Yogi is that he has to be absolutely honest. Remember how many you have years spent doing He has not come here to make money – not money. He has not come here to make But he has come to rise into the new beautiful world that we are creating. We have to create this world for the whole world, for people who live all over, who are even in the jungles, who are lost into the Himalayas, anywhere. We have to spread this beautiful sensation or beautiful existence of self-respect and dignity. Very important it is to see if you are really the Self. Are you respecting your Self? Yesterday only you said, “Know thyself." If that is the case, do Very important it is first to respect yourself. If you do not know how to respect yourself and power. Sahaja Yoga. you respect your Self? you run after useless things, then what should we say? What is the quality that you have imbibed in Sahaja Yoga, except that you have started a business or something like that? 20

 SPIRITUALITY We have to spread this beautiful sensation or beautiful existence of self-respect and dignity. You are My children I want you all to be My decorations. In the whole world they should see that My children and that you are of such great value and such great understanding. You are My children. I have really worked for you in this sense: every minute moment of My life I have thought of you. I wanted to work it out in such a beautiful manner that you become really good people, ideal people, special people with understand- ing. So that is the day you should feel that your birthday is being celebrated. When you are completely cleared out, you have become nirmal, an absolutely pure person- ality of love. That is the day. It is your birthday and Mine too... The Self is the spirit. It is the spirit, the reflection of God Almighty. If you want to live like all other ordinary, nonsensical people, you should stay out of Sahaja Yoga. But if you think that you have to really show your worth coming into Sahaja Yoga and if you have to feel proud of yourself, then try to understand that in Sahaja Yoga to come into. you do not have to have all these weaknesses. When the Kundalini rises, She passes through the six chakras by enlightening them. I may tolerate you up to a point, but the Kundalini will punish you. She will do what is needed to correct you. Up to a point, She will do. And afterwards, when She finds it is not possible to correct you, then I do not know what will happen and how it will work out. you are Sahaja Yoga is very easy Sahaja Yoga is very easy to come into, to move in and to work it out. But you go against your Self if you try to behave like very ordinary, useless people. Then you cannot stay in Sahaja Yoga. You will be thrown out. As soon as you are thrown out, where will you land? What will happen? That you know very well.

 SPIRITUALITY To be auspicious On this auspicious day, I have to request you to be auspicious. Not to do anything that is inauspicious. They call it protocol. But there are small, small things which show you are auspicious – very, very minute, subtle things that show you are auspicious, which you not have to learn. Automatically, spontaneously it comes and you enjoy your auspicious- ness because you are holy, because you are nirmal and you enjoy that quality within you. And when that happens, that is your birthday. You were reborn, as you know. All of you were reborn. You were reborn, but still were children and now you have grown up. That growth has to be shown in every way. When a person grows, then he same way, when you are grown up, then you have to show that you are grown up in Sahaja Yoga, that you are very deep and you are a very senior person. I have seen some little chil- dren also. They are so grown up and so sensible that sometimes I am amazed. They are great saints reborn. They are great people who are reborn. But if you are still running after nonsensical things, if you are still full of lust and greed, then better you leave Sahaja Yoga up to itself and you can find some other area where you can do that. It is something surprising how people do not understand their position in Sahaja Yoga. Your growth has been on the whole very good. I know there are many people who are wonderful Sahaja Yogis, who are really great Sahaja Yogis and they have every right to call themselves Sahaja Yogis or mahayogis, but that is only possible and perceptible if you really grow up inside and your spirit shines like a crystal clear ocean of love. Now the connection has been done. You have the knowledge of all the chakras. You know how to raise the Kundalini. You know also how to cure people and how to treat people. With all that knowledge, with all that life you have got, it is like the milk you give to your energies and then you have to become energetic. You cannot be lethargic about it. When you are lethargic, then you are not a Sahaja Yogi. You have to be moving with this flame in your heart that you know what the Self is and you know what you have to do you All of you all out to do various things to express himself. In the goes were reborn. do for others. You must have been also great seekers in previous lives and that seeking that was there has brought you to Sahaja Yoga. Now, with that seeking, when you are here, still are seeking all these useless things. They cannot grow. You cannot grow and such people cannot make others also So the main thing one has to understand is how you have grown in your love. A person who is frightful, who is very strict, who talks very rudely is not a Sahaja Yogi – no way. But the one who looks after, cares, loves and is very generous is the real Sahaja Yogi. You are people of special qualities and those qualities must be shown in your life. you grow. Find out about your Self I know you love Me very much and you know what you have done to celebrate My birth- day. As you have so many of these decorations, I have already told you that you are My decorations. Your lives are My decorations and the way you behave and the way you know yourself, things will be so much appreciated all over the world. It is not for any other pur- pose, but only to remember that you all have to grow. You have to become very, very deep personalities. You have to grow within yourself, celebrating your own birthday. Every day try to see what is your experience. What did you see? Whom did How did they talk? I mean I know so many names. Practically everybody's name I know. Practically everybody's Kundalini I know. I also know whose Kundalini is all right, whose is not. I know so many people. So many ask Me, "How do You know so many names and how do You remember that?" you meet? 22

 I say, "I don't know that part, but it is that whenever I see a person, I see his Kundalini and from that Kundalini I know who he is." There can be thousands and thousands of Enter into Kundalinis, but I know who is who because I love them. If you love somebody, then you know what he is. It is not stupid love, as they call it – romance and all that. It is a very deep feeling. When you enter into the garden of your the garden heart and feel the beautiful fragrance all around – when you think of such nice people you of your heart. as there have been, as saints, great saviours and now the Sahaja Yogis – you feel so much grateful that you have achieved that state of collective enjoyment. I have never put any restrictions on you. Do what you like. Whatever way you want to do it, you can do it. I have never been bothering you about money or anything, but that is a testing ground. That is the testing ground where you are standing. If you do not test yourself, how will you know how far you have come? So you are the student, you are the examiner and you are the one who has to give yourself the certificate. And in that case, what happens is that you start understanding, understanding so many things which you have never understood. I mean the so-called knowledge is no knowledge because it is all falsehood. It is all mental. But the real absolute knowledge dawns upon you about everyone, about every aspect, about every surrounding that you have, so clearly that you know. And that should happen, that you should know very clearly – very, very clearly – what is the situation with you, where you are and what you are doing. It is not that you have any less powers. You have all the powers, but for that you have to go deep down. Like there is a well, the well has water in it, but if your bucket does not go down, how can it bring the water? If your bucket is filled with stones, what is the use of that well to you? In the same way, we have everything within us and Sahaja Yoga is the way you can go down and find about your Self, which is so beautiful, clean. And that is the thing to be enjoyed – not other nonsensical things after which you are running, which think are important. you

 If you are here to gain lots of ascending steps, you have to have your eyes upward. The fragrant garden I have already told you it is shuddha ichcha. It is the Kundalini, shudh ichchaa, desire because other desires are never fulfilled. You try to buy one thing, then you don't enjoy. pure You want to buy another one, you don't enjoy. You want to buy another one, you do not enjoy because it is not the real desire. This is the principle of economics, that you are never satisfied.... It has a quality that whatever you do repels back on you. Only the spiritual growth does not repel. It flowers. It is fragrant. It is beautiful – such a beautiful experience to be Self, as if you have entered into the beautiful garden of paradise. That feeling, if you want to have, give up all nonsensical ideas. Give nonsense. Everything you give up and then you will feel that you are now very much there should have been. You will have no doubts. You will have no hankerings. You with your up all worldly where you will not feel at all in any way dissatisfied.... If you are here to gain lots of ascending steps, you have to have your eyes upward and not downward. You must see what there are. You have to climb those dn With steps. steps enter? I tell you: in that beautiful garden, fragrant garden of these where do steps, you your Self, which is so beautiful. Instead of that, you are lost in the mire of the world as so many are lost. So why have you come to Sahaja Yoga? Give up those nonsensical ideas. Try to take to spirituality – pure spirituality. Purity is the word. Purity you must have. And purity within you can easily, easily establish with Sahaja Yoga. Your witness state has to improve. The witness state has to be projected so much that this conditioning and ego of reaction will finish up. You will have no more reactions, but will just witness. And the knowledge that is real comes always, always through wit- nessing. If you do not know how to witness, then whatever knowledge you have is noth- ing but through your ego or through your conditionings. It is not absolute knowledge. So to get the absolute knowledge about anything, what you have to do is to reach the point of absoluteness, to reach the point where you are absolutely clean, pure, nirmal. Now don't condemn yourself if you have some defects. There has to be. You are all human beings. But all these defects, with your power of spirituality, you can absolutely you overcome. For that, what have you to do?

 SPIRITUALITY The Self, introspection and satisfaction First is introspection. First is trying to find out. You separate yourself with Self your "Hello, Mister, how are you?" Start with that. “Hello, what are you up to?" and say, And you start seeing yourself outside and eradicating, removing all that is not your Self. That knowledge of Self comes to you when you want the knowledge. It should desire to know about the Self. You are special people, no doubt. You are all pure be a chosen to be very, very special, no doubt. There must be something about you have come to this state where you are trying to become the Self. The Self is absolutely self-satisfied. It does not need anything to satisfy itself. Actually, it is satisfaction personified. It just sees things. It just watches things. It just witnesses. And while witnessing anything, it knows. It knows. You don't have to tell.... You don't have to express too much of anything. It is just self-expressive if you are a clean person, your desires are clean and you just have the pure desire to that you ascend. So again I have to talk about Kundalini, that you must have a Kundalini com- pletely establishing itself within you, completely expressing within you, completely enlightening – enlightening your Self. Such a Kundalini should be there and is only possible if and it works out. you do not put hurdles in Her growth. If you allow it to grow, it grows As you know, I started this work only in 1970, not because I could not start it earlier, not because there were all bad people in this world, but because I was waiting, Myself, to be deft in dealing with all kinds of Kundalinis. I had to work out all the permutations and combinations that were there. And then I just thought if I could get hold of a way by which all these combinations can be worked out in one line, then only the Kundalini will rise. And it worked. It happened with a sincere desire because I felt very sad about people who are spending their lives in something very nonsensical. They cannot enjoy anything, they have no genuine feeling for anything, they have no genuine love for anything and they are not even loved. They cannot love, they are not loved and they are in misery. So it was a very deliberate action on My part.... I watched human beings very carefully. Why do they do it like this? Why do they behave like this? Why are they not understanding? Why are they harsh? Why do they shout? Why do they beat? Why do they do all these things? Because of imbalances within. But with introspec- tion, if you start seeing those imbalances, you now know how to cure yourself and you can really work it out. You have to just work on your chakras. See which chakra is catching, where is the problem. You have to respect yourself in such a way that you become your own doctor and you know everything about yourself.... This is the education you have to give to yourself, which will be only possible if you experience all those catches. It is for you to grow now. Grow into great people, great personalities, very tre- mendous people who have made history, who are respected. All those great saints and all that also were of great calibre, but they didn't know how to raise the Kundalini, which you know. You have something special, knowledge how to raise the Kundalini, how to judge the Kundalini, how to understand where is the problem. And also you know how to tell that person about his problems, very beautifully with love. 25

 SPIRITUALITY Love and courage The message of your spirit is that you should love each other.... The oneness in the whole world of brotherhood is something to be really enjoyed, enjoyed so beautifully. See all these things you have here. There is so much harmony among them, so much of harmony because it is done with love. If you do anything with love, it is very harmo- You stand for nious. It creates such harmony among people. You see, the enjoyment of each other's company, the enjoyment of each other's achievements is so much joy-giving that I all that is to cannot describe it in words. It is impossible. Words cannot communicate to you that feeling that you have. As I told you, you feel as if you are in the Garden of Eden. That sort of a feeling should come into you when you, your Self, you know. Because when you know your Self, actually you know your own being and you are so happy for bettering that your Self is so beautiful. That you are so beautiful, that you are so joyous, that you be achieved have all these things – to know that within you is really, really very much fragrant with human beings. enjoyment. That state you must have. I see sometimes when you are overjoyed you dance and sing and do. That is something really very good, but all the time your spirit should dance at the smallest things, at the little thing that is made, something artistic you see, something you see, a gesture of kindness, a gesture of gratitude. You feel that depth of that feeling. For example, today I saw the flag. Independence when we got, we made this flag. I had seen this flag being brought down and put up when the other flag was brought down. I cannot tell you what was the feeling at that moment – such a feeling that the truth has somehow or other overcome the untruth. The justice has been shown over the injustice. That feeling is still so much, I can't even see the flag. If I see it, I remem- ber the whole history, the whole thing, how many people sacrificed, how many martyrs there were and how much people have fought for it. That flag stands for that. And you stand for all that. You stand for all those ideals. You stand for all those sacrifices. And you stand for all that is to be achieved for bettering human beings. You have to achieve a great deal for others. You have to work within yourself what you can do for others, what you can achieve for others, what is the best way to imbibe those qualities within As I told you, there have been many great leaders and many great people who are remembered by many people. Now what you should see is what made them so great, that you become an absolutely unique personality. you why so many years people still remember.... Once you have this, you will not deter from doing anything that is important. You will have no fear of anything. You will not go round and round, but you will know how to find the solution and how to work it out. This will happen to you if you really know yourself. You will have such powers of courage. You will not be a daredevil, but with wisdom. Courage with wisdom you will have. And that is what is your Self, which will give you lots of wisdom and lots of courage. It is not a fighting spirit, it is not a violent nature, it is not a rude nature, but it is a very silent, beautiful, courageous attitude... Courage is silently very powerful. You do not have to bomb anybody, don't have to kill anybody, but you will with courage. And that is another quality which courage. I have to stand up which is very polite, very sweet. You will be standing with that express, know so many of you are like that. There is no struggle, there is no fight, just standing with courage and doing whatever is right. And that is quite possible because you have now the connection with the Almighty. You have the connection with the Parama- chaitanya and that will work it out – everything... 26

 SPIRITUALITY Dharmayudha and the personality of the Self So once you have really worked out, you should know this is the area that we call as dhar- mayudha. Dharmayudha means the war of religion, but not the way people are fighting it. Our dharmayudha is that we are standing on dharma. And dharma means not religion, but it is Vishwa Nirmala Dharma. We are standing on our religion and there is a negativ- ity. We can call it adharma which is fighting, so you stand on your dharma. Unless and you are dharmic, you cannot have any achievement in Sahaja Yoga.... We are not here to do anything wrong. We are not going to express ourselves as wrong people. But we are here to prove that we are perfect, we are wonderful people. That is what is the Self – that we are perfect. We do not have to go according to what we were. It is a new realm we have reached. It is a new area we have reached and let us enjoy that until great area.... Sahaja Yoga purifies you every day. You see one experience, you see one person, you see some events and it purifies you. That is the sign. Supposing I see somebody, a dishon- est man, immediately I start finding, “I hope Im not doing any dishonesty myself." Just imagine that you are the one who is the curator, a correcting influence on yourself. Where stand on the correction point or in getting finished with it...? I am telling you that you are very great people. You can save the whole world. I must say I never expected all this to happen in My lifetime. And it has happened. And I see you CC stand? Do do you you as very great, very great people.... I expect all of you to become beautiful, beautiful Sahaja Yogis and that nothing can convince the whole world but also your power to love. So many things I have seen, experienced about you people. When I think about them, I really feel very happy. I have seen people, how they have managed and looked after so many things which were difficult and have worked it out. So now we are in for a new world and, in that new world, a new race of Sahaja Yogis have to show their presence. They have to show their powers and their courage and their understanding. It is not serious. It is not frivolous. But it is joyous. It is just joy that you have to feel about yourself. I am telling you all this because this is within you, within your power. It is all the time residing within you and that you have faced it also. So I wish you all a very, very happy birthday so that you people have a new birth and a new understanding and a new personality. Try to accept that personality. Try to respect it. abilities and work, your your That the personality is your Self. 29

 Ibolekers of trutb: part five the seekers of truth: part five to the search for truth Some talked of the formless and some talked of the form. What has happened to human beings in the search of truth? We have discovered everything else but the truth because truth you cannot discover. It is a state that one has to achieve. One has to achieve to receive the truth, to know the truth. So some people felt that truth is what we have found. Like blind people, whatever Truth is a state that they have found out, they called it as truth. Even in India, where people have a great sense of meditation, people committed mistakes and what they found was the movement on the right-hand-side and they said, "Yes, there is the All-Pervading Power and that is formless." The left-hand people found while praying to God that there are forms, so they one has to achieve. talked of the forms. Some talked of the formless and some talked of the form. The right-sided people, being the worshippers of the Goddess of learning, wrote down everything as the Vedas, but in the very beginning of the Vedas. Vedas means "to know." And to know means to evolve, to become self-realized. It is not when I talk to you that what you know is the knowledge. It is not. The knowledge is that which is expressed, manifested on your cen- tral nervous system – the truth. So they wrote down what they found, that we have to first excite or initiate the nature. So they wrote all those things. Now that has become an authentic writing, the Vedas for intellectuals, that after many, many years people even knew it by heart.... All that writing, if you go by it, you will be lost into another wild goose chase and those who read only the Vedas can never find that which is suppose to be known. In the first chapter or the first verse of the Vedas, it is said that, by reading this book, if you not get the knowledge, no good reading the Vedas. But there are books and books and books, libraries and libraries and libraries – all a wild followed. There was the system of fearing God, then finding the forms of God, worship- ping God as a form. CC do chase. Many other systems goose Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi 2 July 1984 London

 Two types of people The incarnations came on this Earth and people worshipped them – like Christ, for example. Now there is a challenge on Christ. These intellectuals will challenge everything because they challenge everything through the intellect. The trouble is that they think they are the wisest.... You have to be a little humble. So the intellectuals, as usual, challenge and the others just believe. Without intellec- tuals, there were the people who just believed in things without knowing, who had just In the absence faith. All these extreme movements on both the sides created two different kinds of people OT th ought, - one who we can call as intellectuals and another as emotional or conditioned They did not create self-realized people because the ego makes a person so superficial the Kundalini and so stupid that he cannot grasp. It is beyond him. He is so stupid, he cannot grasp the truth. It is a barrier. It is a projection outside. He is a convex personality. His brain is WIl rise. convex. And the other one is so concave, is so conditioned that you cannot complete. That is how the quality of seekers came on this Earth, who are seeking truth. types. To be born again We should also know that God must be worried about His creation. He must be worried about the people who are created by Him, who became human beings, who are seekers, a special category. What hypocrites – you cannot tell people. You cannot help them, those who are real seekers. There are many real seekers and He must be worried about all these seekers and He must have arranged something for them. That is how Christ came on this Earth to guide you. He came on this Earth to guide you and tell you that you can find the truth by your second birth. You are to be born again. Then there are people who just believe that "I am born again" – you see, self-opin- ionated – "I'm all right, I've found it." Stupid people, they just believe, certify themselves, "I've found it." They just give themselves a certificate, "Oh, I have found." But who is the loser? It is not God. CC He is there to reveal Himself to you if you want to know Him through your evolu- tion, through your effortlessness. But as you have seen with Patanjali, all the shastras were written for central people, the real seekers. But people took out of Patanjali also what they tell these central people... It is like a person who has been invited to dinner is doing dish washing. It is that stupid. And that book, even today thank God, despite all the intellectual attacks and all non- sense, it does talk of the formless, not of the form so much. But it does say that have to neutralize your effort. You have to neutralize your thoughts ... and, in the absence of that thought, only the Kundalini will rise. Now a vicious circle is created. Even when we say we should not have these thoughts, we fight with them. Why? So something has to happen that the thoughts must stop. And that is what happens in Sahaja Yoga. O Patanjali: the compiler of the Yoga Sutras about two centuries before Christ. you 31

 everything R&EA

 works out THE DIVINE In Sahaja Yoga everything works out. COOL BREEZE www.divinecoolbreeze.org You must know that it all works out. SUBSCRIPTIONS: contact@divinecoolbreeze.org CONTENT: editor@divinecoolbreeze.org PRINTED BY But you must also know that you must King Printing Company Inc. 181 Industrial Avenue East Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA and have faith in the Paramachaitanya – Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. No.8, Chandragupta Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411038 Maharashtra, India also faith in yourself that you are in the kingdom of God ... PHOTOGRAPHS: not that you only enjoy this, but feel it as a responsibility... Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Page 2: Shri Mataji in the UK (Gregoire de Kalbermatten) Pages 6-7: mountains of Austria or Italy, 2009 (Axinia Samoilova) Christ came out and He was standing outside Pages 9, 11: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi (Gregoire de Kalbermatten) Page 13: Shri Mataji in the USA, 1985 Pages 14, 15: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, when His Mother came and asked Him, Shri Krishna Puja 1986 Page 18: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi (Gregoire de Kalbermatten) "Who are you?" She could not even recognize Him. Pages 20-21: Austrian farmland, 2009 (Axinia Samoilova) Page 27: Shri Mataji, Guru Puja 1983 She could not even believe that Christ had risen. Page 28: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Shri Krishna Puja 1986 (GdK) Opposite: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Guru Puja 1996 Back cover: sunset at Santa Monica In the same way, we also forget that we have risen California USA (Jim Gallagher) WORDS OF SHRI MATAJI: and that we are completely transformed Contents pages: Sahasrara Puja 1985 Page 6: Boston 11 October 1983 Page 10: Shri Devi Puja 1986 Page 12: Sahasrara Puja 1984 and we are free, absolutely free people. Page 15: 7 October 1981 Page 17: 27 February 1983 Left: Easter Puja music program 1992 Back cover: Sankranti Puja 1987

 THE WARMIH OE THE SUN REPRESENTS THE WARMIH OF GOD'S LOVE



----------------------

2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine
Cool Breeze
2010 iss
Ue 4 – volume tw
enty-three number four
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Mt
know this
it is the greatest opportunity for you
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 What do you have to surrender?
A drop has to dissolve
into the ocean
to become the ocean.
And a drop cannot be greater
than the ocean, can it?
So what is the surrendering?
It is the surremdering
of our conditionings, of our ego
and the artificial barriers
we have built around us.
One can approach it mentally.
One can approach it emotionally
and also physically.
We can approach ourselves
through mantras,
through seeing ourselves,
through knowing ourselves.
But one should know
this is the greatest
of greatest opportunity
- for you – not for the Divine.
VOLUME 23 NUMBER FOUR
page 2: TRUST ME • page 6: YOUR HANDS • page 8: BHAIRAVA HOLDS A LIGHT
page 14: SHRI KRISHNA AND MIRTH • page 16: THIS IS WHAT IT IS • page 18: SPIRITUALITY
page 30: TO THE SEEKERS • page 32: EVERYTHING WORKS OUT
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Trist
Me
Believe Me
23 DECEMBER 1998 • GANAPATIPULE
When you see the progress of Sahaja Yoga, it is amazing, absolutely amazing.
We have to keep to this progressive attitude and spread Sahaja Yoga in every
way possible.
We have to, of course, be careful when we are spreading the Sahaja Yoga,
that there might be some people who are quite negative and may try to pose
that they are some special type of Sahaja Yogis. I have known such people
throughout.... It is a very dangerous thing. Whatever is there is all open and
for everyone. I have no favourites at all. I cannot have favourites. So anyone
who talks like this, you must know that person must be mad and negative and
just shun such company. Don't go near anyone
like that.
Another thing I have to warn you is that, by spreading Sahaja Yoga, we tend
ove has done
and this grouping business is extremely dangerous. We should
to form
groups
all this great work
have no groups. We belong to one Vishwa Nirmala Dharma, to the whole
universe. We have not got any group whatsoever. We believe in all the reli- of Sahaia Yoga.
gions. We
respect all the religions. And we cannot group ourselves under
any
banner, saying that "You are from India," “You are from Ceylon" or “You are
from England." You are all from one place ... even if you do not know the lan-
guage. Love does not need any language. And all this atmosphere can improve
a lot – even more, if we all start feeling within ourselves that we belong to one
universal life.
We don't have any individual life any more now. All our individual life is
finished. We belong to the collectivity of the whole universe. We have to see
to the good points of each one of us and respect each one of us because we are
all saints. We cannot disrespect. We have to see that we have got something
within ourselves which is the highest and others also have the same, so we
must give them the greatest respect.
The
greatest understanding should be among all of you, of this love that
has done all this great work of Sahaja Yoga.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 The third thing which I want to tell you is this: there are people who are against us and
they will be against us because they are not with the truth. So the best is not to argue
with them and to discuss anything with them. They are against us because they are not
with us. You cannot force them to be with us, so please do not argue with such people.
Just enjoy the company of all other Sahaja Yogis and enjoy the beauty of this love that is
all-pervading, which you have felt so well.
We are living in another world. You do not know. Ours is a very different world of
great love, understanding and also of great
knowledge of Sahaja Yoga, everyone. Whether you are a child or whether you are an old
person, everybody can get the knowledge of Sahaja Yoga. And that is how we have to be
very, very knowledgeable. This knowledge, without love, has no meaning. First of all,
we must understand what is detached love and then we can really develop ourselves very
well.
knowledge. All of you
try to get the
So those who do not come to the collective cannot get cleansed. The collective is the
ocean in which cleansed. You do not have to go to the Himalayas and do all kinds
of penances, but you have to come to the collective and, once you start coming to collec-
tive, then you will be amazed that you definitely get a great advantage of your cleansing.
And those who can remain in the collective in a very peaceful manner will definitely rise
you get
within themselves.
Also we have to have meditation every day, regularly. I can make out people who are
not meditating and who are meditating. Very easy it is.
Lastly I have to say that I normally do not say, "Don't do this" or “Don't do that." But if
I say don't do something, please just don't do it because I can see so many things which
you can't see...
Now how do I know all these things, I can't tell you, but I know. So if I tell you some-
CC
CC
I
I know abOut ming, you should not question it, you should not answer it, but you should just try to
I know about know that Mother knows everything.. Otherwise, I don't say anything about anything.
And that is how you will work out better because I am like a mouthpiece of this All-
every one pervading Power. It does not have a mouthpiece to talk to you, but I am like a mouthpiece
and, if I tell you something, you have to just trust Me and do not do something which I
of you. have said not to do....
I never said these things before. Nor did I ever feel that this was the time to tell, but
now I think it is high time that I tell you that you have to trust Me and believe Me. When
I tell
you you are to believe in Me, I am telling you the truth which is for benevo-
lence and for your safety, for
I hope you will understand this and you must know that I love you very much and I
care for all of you individually.
I know about every one of you, what you are doing, where are you. I know everything
somehow. I get concerned and I tell you something. I hope you will understand that
Mother is doing it because of Her love. I don't want My children to suffer or to get into
troubles or to get destroyed.
I hope you won't mind when I tell you that you should not do like this or you should
do like this. It is just an explanation of My own Self I think that I shouldn't really try to
invade, dominate you, but the trouble is if I see something so clearly, I think I'd better tell
your
your caution.
into difficulties. And I hope you don't mind.O
4
land
otherwise
you may
you,
up
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Ihope you wont mind
I.
won't mind
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Your hands start feeling the cool breeze,
start feeling the chakras of yourself
and the chakras of other people.
With your hands you can cure people.
With your hands you can raise the Kundalini.
With your hands you can give Realization.
These hands become powerful things.
Even the movement of these hands has a meaning.
Everything has a meaning.
YOUR.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 HANDS
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 SHRI BHAIRAVANATH PUJA • 6 AUGUST 1989 • GARLATE ITALY
Bhairava holds a
light
so that you can see the fun
We have not understood the significance of
If you want to be positive,
Bhairavanath, who runs up and down on the Ida
it is very easy and for that
you
Nadi. The Ida Nadi is the nadi of Chandrama,
should see where is your attention.
who is of the moon. So this is a channel for us to
cool down. The work of Bhairavanathji is to cool
Are you only seeing problems
us down.
or dre you seeing some fun in it?
For example, people have a hot temper with
their
with their liver, whatever it is. And if
ego,
a person is in a big temper, then Bhairavnath
plays tricks on that person to cool him down.
He organizes everything under His own control
with the ganas' help, with Ganapati's help to cool
down
your temperament, to give you a balance.
So if somebody is a very hot-tempered person
and he crosses all the limits of his temper, then
somehow or other Bhairavanath will organize –
also with the help of Hanumana – to show that
this stupidity of anger is no good.
So for example, people who are depressed
or who become left-sided, Hanumana tries to
help them to come out of it, no doubt, but also
Bhairavanath helps them very much more to
come out of it.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 6.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 BHAIRAVA
Now a person who is left-sided cannot be collective. It is very difficult for
a person who is very left-sided, who is all the time feeling very sad, unhappy
Remember that you and worried. He cannot enjoy the fun of collectivity. While a hot-tempered
have come on this Earth
person, a right-sided person, does not enjoy any collectivity, does not allow
... to enjoy the fun of life.
anybody to enjoy collectivity, no doubt, but tries to be in the collective that
You are not to suffer any more.
he can assert. Because such a person tries to show superiority that he is some-
And to be serious – for what?
thing superior, naturally he cannot enjoy the collective.
And to be tense is out
On the contrary, the person who is depressed all the time thinks, “Nobody
CC
of the subject. It is useless.
How can you be tense in the loves me, nobody cares for me, I'm so depressed..." all the time expecting
from others something. He also cannot enjoy the collective. Such a left-sided
atmosphere which is so relaxed?
person will find everything is something unhappy.
Seeing the fun
Bhairava always has a light in His hand and He runs up and down the Ida
Nadi to make light for you to see that there is nothing negative. And this
CC
negativity comes to us by many ways. One of the negativities is that “this is
mine, my child, my husband, my property." So then, once you get attached
in this manner, what you find is that your children also become negative. But
if you want to be positive, it is very easy and for that you should see where
your attention. Are you only seeing problems or are you seeing some fun
is
in it?
There are people who cannot make fun out of anything. If it is a sunny
day, they will cry, "Oh God, what a sunny day!" And if it is a day with clouds,
CC
they will say, "Oh, what a day!" Nothing can please them. But to enjoy the
CC
positivity in every negativity is the capacity of a Sahaja Yogi.
The negativity does not exist. It is an ignorance. Also it is not ignorance
because ignorance also doesn't exist. If everything is the All-Pervading Power,
then how can there be ignorance? But supposing, in the folds of this
power,
if you hide, run away, you will say that there is negativity – like you hide
yourself in a cave, close it properly and say that there is no sun.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Fun is treasure
Old age is really the golden age, where a person has got that wisdom shining through the
complete behavior of that person. But why? Again, why to have this maturity, why to have
this innocence? Again, because you are rational people, so one can ask the question why?
Innocence is the way you really give fun to others, create the fun part of it. The fun is
created only through innocence. And innocence is the only way you can really emit also
the fun.
Imagine this world without any fun. What would happen? But people are very much
confused between fun and the pleasure. The pleasure is nice to begin with and horrible to
end with. But fun is a treasure. Anything that is full of fun you remember all your life. You
can tell others. It is such an embodiment of fun-creation....
These children create fun out of something. They make everything into a fun. And now
you see, even when they speak or they say things also they create such a fun out of it.... It is
all fun and natural fun that they have out of everything.... There is a twinkle of a mischief
in their eyes that they want to create a fun out of everything.
Fun is joy-giving. It gives you joy. It is not just a sort of a coaxing in any way or a hurting
in any way or anything sadistic in it, but it is just a blossoming. Shri Ganesha Puja 1982
11
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 BHAIRAVA
So those people who cannot become collective are either right-sided or
left- sided, but more left-sided. But left-sided people can be collective in
negativity. They say there is a very big fraternity of bhoots.... They cannot see
fun at all. They cannot enjoy at all and they think they are very meditative,
they are some higher people, they are something superior in negativity. But
the end of these people is that they become lunatics. While at the end of the
right-sided, they become idiotic...
This emotional attachment is too much and to emotionally worry about
somebody ... and all the time wasting your precious life in these things is not
the
way a Sahaja Yogi should live. If a Sahaja Yogi cannot become collective,
then know that he is not a Sahaja Yogi.
So one has to know that this is the work of Bhairavanath within us. Another
If you know how to get
work where He gives us light in darkness is that He destroys all the bhoots
within us and all kinds of bhootish ideas and funny ideas about attachments
fun out of the so-called
and also the depressiveness.... He is very much connected with Ganesha. As
discomforts, then you
know, Shri Ganesha is at the Muladhara while Bhairava moves onto the
you
should know you are
left side and goes to the right side. So all kinds of conditionings, all kinds of
habits can be conquered through the help of Bhairavanath...
on the right lines.
He protects us also from doing wrong things, sly things like thieving.
Whatever we think we can do secretly can be hidden, but you cannot hide it
from Bhairavanath. If you do not change, then He exposes you completely.
That is how He has exposed all the horrible false gurus...
This
ulti-
great Deity of Bhairavanath incarnated on this Earth later
on,
mately as Mahavira also. So He stands on the gate of hell and stops people
from falling into hell. But if you want to go to hell, if it is your desire, your
will-power is like that working, that "I should go to hell," then He
"All
CC
says,
right, you can go." But as you know, now hell is also full of people, so it is
better that we should try to fight our negativity and become fun-loving,
enjoying others, loving others, not worrying about what others are doing to
you, but only thinking what good you can do for others.
So today's special puja for Bhairavanath we offer to give us a sense to
laugh, to enjoy, to have fun. O
12
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 14
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 and mirth
Shri Krishna
Shri Krishna tried to break all the concepts.... He was the one who
created all kinds of mirth.... It is not fun. It is more than that. It is mirth.
Mirth is sweeter than fun....
Now what is happening to His mirth? I am creating mirth in which
feel tickled.... He tried to create mirth, never seriousness, but He was
you
not frivolous. He was Yogeshwara. He was not frivolous. So this differ-
ence between frivolity and mirth is to be understood only through Him
because He is also discretion. Mirth is joy-giving. Frivolity is destruc-
You just become.
tive....
You forget your colour.
We have to be in a state of mirth so that no question of feeling guilty
comes in. We are not prisoners, are we? We are prisoners of our own con-
You forget your nationality.
and our own ideas and our own degradation. We degrade ourselves.
cepts
You forget everything.
God does not. So we should be in the state of complete mirth and enjoy-
You just feel, "Oh."
SHRI KRISHNA PUJA 1986 SWITZERLAND
ment.
As a Sahaja Yogi,
Shri Krishna's incarnation came to show that this whole creation is fun.
It is leela. That is why He is Leeladhar. He is called as Leeladhara. He was
it is a very different plane
the one who showed that everything is fun, there is nothing to be serious,
into which you
nothing to be dry, nothing to be ascetic, but the whole life is fun. He
gave
this idea because people had become so austere.
You feel so happy, joyous.
SHRI KRISHNA PUJA 1989
The whole thing is fun.
What had come down was a very morose, gloomy religion. He wanted to
transform it into a joyful fun. And that is why He also used other meth-
fun.
ods to create great
This Alladadayini Shakti, that is Radha. He would play with Her and
with the other friends and the friends of Radha in what we call Holi,
which is with coloured water. You must have seen when the children
get
to the water, they just start playing with the water all the time, throwing
water on each other and enjoying. As Christ has said, "You have to be like
children if you have to enter into the Kingdom of God."
So He started such a nice child-like play, like Holi, to make people
very joyous and happy.
SHRI KRISHNA PUJA 1987
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 16
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 This is what it is.
It is such a joy-giving thing.
It's such fun. The whole thing becomes such fun.
Half of the time the Sahaja Yogis are only laughing
and enjoying the jokes and it's so wonderful.
There is nothing to be serious, one feels.
And that is the way God is manifesting within us.
This is God's work. And God's work has to be
treated the way it is. It is a dignified thing.
It is a glorifying thing that is the work
human beings are supposed to do.
That is why you have come on this Earth.
You have come on this Earth to know your purpose
and the truth is your purpose is to serve God
and to serve Him with your spirit.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 spirituality
BIRTHDAY PUJA 2001 DELHI
your country
You have to find out about your Self.
Just try to find out also, as you love Me, how much
you
can love others. It will be much easier to find out through
introspection how much you love others and how much you
care for others. If that happens, many problems of Sahaja Yoga
will be solved in no time....
What you have to get is an ocean of love within
heart
your
and to seek that in others also. It is a love which helps you to
do everything so smoothly, so beautifully.
As I have always said, if you really love your country, you
can never be dishonest. You will have no other interest but to
freedom or whatever you want to do for your country.
get your
In India, we have had great martyrs. Perhaps you may not
be knowing, some of you. And the way they sustained the
torturous life, it was only because they loved their country.
Your country is spirituality. It is the country of complete
enjoyment of your Self. It is the country where nothing but
peace prevails. And when you love that country, how can you
have all these nonsensical ideas for money and for power and
all that? I just can't understand.
19
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 We have to create this world for people who live all over,
who are even in the jungles, who are lost into the Himalayas.
What have you imbibed?
As it is you know very well, I am not bothered about these things at all in My life. Of
course, we need money for work, for everything, but there is no need to run after it or
hanker after it....
In Sahaja Yoga, you have to know you have to be really dedicated and honest. You
should enjoy your honesty, you should enjoy your love, you should enjoy your generosity,
everything... After coming to the paradise of love, if you are still bothered about these
nonsensical things, then you will jump very fast into hell. I can see that clearly....
You must remember how many years you have spent doing Sahaja Yoga. You must
understand all the nice times you had and how many, every year you have spent in enjoy-
ing My birthday – also in understanding how you have grown into it, how you changed it
and how you enjoyed and how you have imbibed all the qualities of Sahaja Yoga.
The first and foremost quality of a Sahaja Yogi is that he has to be absolutely honest.
Remember
how many
you have
years
spent doing
He has not come here to make money – not money. He has not come here to make
But he has come to rise into the new beautiful world that we are creating.
We have to create this world for the whole world, for people who live all over, who
are even in the jungles, who are lost into the Himalayas, anywhere. We have to spread this
beautiful sensation or beautiful existence of self-respect and dignity. Very important it is
to see if you are really the Self. Are you respecting your Self?
Yesterday only you said, “Know thyself." If that is the case, do
Very important it is first to respect yourself. If you do not know how to respect yourself
and
power.
Sahaja Yoga.
you respect your Self?
you run after useless things, then what should we say? What is the quality that you
have imbibed in Sahaja Yoga, except that you have started a business or something like
that?
20
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-22.txt 
 SPIRITUALITY
We have to spread this beautiful sensation or beautiful existence of self-respect and dignity.
You are My children
I want you all to be My decorations. In the whole world they should see that
My children and that you are of such great value and such great understanding. You
are My children. I have really worked for you in this sense: every minute moment of
My life I have thought of you. I wanted to work it out in such a beautiful manner
that you become really good people, ideal people, special people with understand-
ing.
So that is the day you should feel that your birthday is being celebrated. When
you are completely cleared out, you have become nirmal, an absolutely pure person-
ality of love. That is the day. It is your birthday and Mine too...
The Self is the spirit. It is the spirit, the reflection of God Almighty. If you want
to live like all other ordinary, nonsensical people, you should stay out of Sahaja Yoga.
But if you think that you have to really show your worth coming into Sahaja Yoga
and if you have to feel proud of yourself, then try to understand that in Sahaja Yoga to come into.
you do not have to have all these weaknesses.
When the Kundalini rises, She passes through the six chakras by enlightening
them. I may tolerate you up to a point, but the Kundalini will punish you. She will
do what is needed to correct you. Up to a point, She will do. And afterwards, when
She finds it is not possible to correct you, then I do not know what will happen and
how it will work out.
you are
Sahaja Yoga
is
very easy
Sahaja Yoga is very easy to come into, to move in and to work it out. But you
go against your Self if you try to behave like very ordinary, useless people. Then you
cannot stay in Sahaja Yoga. You will be thrown out. As soon as you are thrown out,
where will you land? What will happen? That you know very well.
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-23.txt 
 SPIRITUALITY
To be auspicious
On this auspicious day, I have to request you to be auspicious. Not to do anything that is
inauspicious. They call it protocol. But there are small, small things which show you are
auspicious – very, very minute, subtle things that show you are auspicious, which you
not have to learn. Automatically, spontaneously it comes and you enjoy your auspicious-
ness because you are holy, because you are nirmal and you enjoy that quality within you.
And when that happens, that is your birthday.
You were reborn, as you know. All of you were reborn. You were reborn, but still
were children and now you have grown up. That growth has to be shown in every way.
When a person grows, then he
same way, when you are grown up, then you have to show that you are grown up in Sahaja
Yoga, that you are very deep and you are a very senior person. I have seen some little chil-
dren also. They are so grown up and so sensible that sometimes I am amazed. They are
great saints reborn. They are great people who are reborn. But if you are still running after
nonsensical things, if you are still full of lust and greed, then better you leave Sahaja Yoga
up to itself and you can find some other area where you can do that.
It is something surprising how people do not understand their position in Sahaja
Yoga. Your growth has been on the whole very good. I know there are many people who
are wonderful Sahaja Yogis, who are really great Sahaja Yogis and they have every right to
call themselves Sahaja Yogis or mahayogis, but that is only possible and perceptible if you
really grow up inside and your spirit shines like a crystal clear ocean of love.
Now the connection has been done. You have the knowledge of all the chakras. You
know how to raise the Kundalini. You know also how to cure people and how to treat
people. With all that knowledge, with all that life you have got, it is like the milk you give
to your energies and then you have to become energetic. You cannot be lethargic about
it. When you are lethargic, then you are not a Sahaja Yogi. You have to be moving with
this flame in your heart that you know what the Self is and you know what you have to
do
you
All of you
all out to do various things to express himself. In the
goes
were reborn.
do for others.
You must have been also great seekers in previous lives and that seeking that was there
has brought you to Sahaja Yoga. Now, with that seeking, when you are here, still
are seeking all these useless things. They cannot grow. You cannot grow and such people
cannot make others also
So the main thing one has to understand is how you have grown in your love. A
person who is frightful, who is very strict, who talks very rudely is not a Sahaja Yogi – no
way. But the one who looks after, cares, loves and is very generous is the real Sahaja Yogi.
You are people of special qualities and those qualities must be shown in your life.
you
grow.
Find out about your Self
I know you love Me very much and you know what you have done to celebrate My birth-
day. As you have so many of these decorations, I have already told you that you are My
decorations. Your lives are My decorations and the way you behave and the way you know
yourself, things will be so much appreciated all over the world. It is not for any other pur-
pose, but only to remember that you all have to grow. You have to become very, very deep
personalities. You have to grow within yourself, celebrating your own birthday.
Every day try to see what is your experience. What did you see? Whom did
How did they talk? I mean I know so many names. Practically everybody's name I know.
Practically everybody's Kundalini I know. I also know whose Kundalini is all right, whose
is not. I know so many people. So many ask Me, "How do You know so many names and
how do You remember that?"
you meet?
22
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-24.txt 
 I say, "I don't know that part, but it is that whenever I see a person, I see his Kundalini
and from that Kundalini I know who he is." There can be thousands and thousands of
Enter into
Kundalinis, but I know who is who because I love them.
If you love somebody, then you know what he is. It is not stupid love, as they call it
– romance and all that. It is a very deep feeling. When you enter into the garden of your the garden
heart and feel the beautiful fragrance all around – when you think of such nice people
you
of your heart.
as there have been, as saints, great saviours and now the Sahaja Yogis – you feel so much
grateful that you have achieved that state of collective enjoyment.
I have never put any restrictions on you. Do what you like. Whatever way you want
to do it, you can do it. I have never been bothering you about money or anything, but
that is a testing ground. That is the testing ground where you are standing. If you do not
test yourself, how will you know how far you have come?
So you are the student, you are the examiner and you are the one who has to give
yourself the certificate. And in that case, what happens is that you start understanding,
understanding so many things which you have never understood. I mean the so-called
knowledge is no knowledge because it is all falsehood. It is all mental. But the real absolute
knowledge dawns upon you about everyone, about every aspect, about every surrounding
that you have, so clearly that you know. And that should happen, that you should know
very clearly – very, very clearly – what is the situation with you, where you are and what
you are doing.
It is not that you have any less powers. You have all the powers, but for that you have
to go deep down. Like there is a well, the well has water in it, but if your bucket does not
go down, how can it bring the water? If your bucket is filled with stones, what is the use
of that well to you? In the same way, we have everything within us and Sahaja Yoga is the
way you can go down and find about your Self, which is so beautiful, clean. And that is
the thing to be enjoyed – not other nonsensical things after which you are running, which
think are important.
you
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-25.txt 
 If you are here to gain lots of ascending steps,
you have to have your eyes upward.
The fragrant garden
I have already told you it is shuddha ichcha. It is the Kundalini, shudh ichchaa, desire
because other desires are never fulfilled. You try to buy one thing, then you don't enjoy.
pure
You want to buy another one, you don't enjoy. You want to buy another one, you do not
enjoy because it is not the real desire. This is the principle of economics, that you are
never satisfied....
It has a quality that whatever you do repels back on you. Only the spiritual growth
does not repel. It flowers. It is fragrant. It is beautiful – such a beautiful experience to be
Self, as if you have entered into the beautiful garden of paradise.
That feeling, if you want to have, give up all nonsensical ideas. Give
nonsense. Everything you give up and then you will feel that you are now very much there
should have been. You will have no doubts. You will have no hankerings. You
with
your
up all worldly
where
you
will not feel at all in
any way dissatisfied....
If you are here to gain lots of ascending steps, you have to have your eyes upward and
not downward. You must see what there are. You have to climb
those
dn
With
steps.
steps
enter? I tell you: in that beautiful garden, fragrant garden of
these
where do
steps,
you
your Self, which is so beautiful. Instead of that, you are lost in the mire of the world as
so many are lost.
So why have you come to Sahaja Yoga? Give up those nonsensical ideas. Try to take
to spirituality – pure spirituality. Purity is the word. Purity you must have. And purity
within you can easily, easily establish with Sahaja Yoga.
Your witness state has to improve. The witness state has to be projected so much that
this conditioning and ego of reaction will finish up. You will have no more reactions, but
will just witness. And the knowledge that is real comes always, always through wit-
nessing. If you do not know how to witness, then whatever knowledge you have is noth-
ing but through your ego or through your conditionings. It is not absolute knowledge.
So to get the absolute knowledge about anything, what you have to do is to reach the
point of absoluteness, to reach the point where you are absolutely clean, pure, nirmal.
Now don't condemn yourself if you have some defects. There has to be. You are all
human beings. But all these defects, with your power of spirituality, you can absolutely
you
overcome. For that, what have you to do?
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-26.txt 
 SPIRITUALITY
The Self, introspection and satisfaction
First is introspection. First is trying to find out. You separate yourself with
Self
your
"Hello, Mister, how are you?" Start with that. “Hello, what are you up to?"
and
say,
And you start seeing yourself outside and eradicating, removing all that is not your
Self.
That knowledge of Self comes to you when you want the knowledge. It should
desire to know about the Self. You are special people, no doubt. You are all
pure
be a
chosen to be very, very special, no doubt. There must be something about
you have come to this state where you are trying to become the Self.
The Self is absolutely self-satisfied. It does not need anything to satisfy itself.
Actually, it is satisfaction personified. It just sees things. It just watches things. It
just witnesses. And while witnessing anything, it knows. It knows. You don't have
to tell.... You don't have to express too much of anything. It is just self-expressive if
you are a clean person, your desires are clean and you just have the pure desire to
that
you
ascend.
So again I have to talk about Kundalini, that you must have a Kundalini com-
pletely establishing itself within you, completely expressing within you, completely
enlightening – enlightening your Self. Such a Kundalini should be there and is only
possible if
and it works out.
you do not put hurdles in Her growth. If you allow it to grow, it grows
As you know, I started this work only in 1970, not because I could not start it
earlier, not because there were all bad people in this world, but because I was waiting,
Myself, to be deft in dealing with all kinds of Kundalinis. I had to work out all the
permutations and combinations that were there. And then I just thought if I could
get hold of a way by which all these combinations can be worked out in one line,
then only the Kundalini will rise. And it worked. It happened with a sincere desire
because I felt very sad about people who are spending their lives in something very
nonsensical. They cannot enjoy anything, they have no genuine feeling for anything,
they have no genuine love for anything and they are not even loved. They cannot
love, they are not loved and they are in misery.
So it was a very deliberate action on My part.... I watched human beings very
carefully. Why do they do it like this? Why do they behave like this? Why are they
not understanding? Why are they harsh? Why do they shout? Why do they beat?
Why do they do all these things? Because of imbalances within. But with introspec-
tion, if you start seeing those imbalances, you now know how to cure yourself and
you can really work it out. You have to just work on your chakras. See which chakra
is catching, where is the problem. You have to respect yourself in such a way that
you become your own doctor and you know everything about yourself.... This is the
education you have to give to yourself, which will be only possible if you experience
all those catches.
It is for you to grow now. Grow into great people, great personalities, very tre-
mendous people who have made history, who are respected. All those great saints and
all that also were of great calibre, but they didn't know how to raise the Kundalini,
which you know. You have something special, knowledge how to raise the Kundalini,
how to judge the Kundalini, how to understand where is the problem. And also
you
know how to tell that person about his problems, very beautifully with love.
25
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-27.txt 
 SPIRITUALITY
Love and courage
The message of your spirit is that you should love each other.... The oneness in the
whole world of brotherhood is something to be really enjoyed, enjoyed so beautifully.
See all these things you have here. There is so much harmony among them, so much of
harmony because it is done with love. If you do anything with love, it is very harmo-
You stand for nious. It creates such harmony among people. You see, the enjoyment of each other's
company, the enjoyment of each other's achievements is so much joy-giving that I
all that is to cannot describe it in words. It is impossible. Words cannot communicate to you that
feeling that you have. As I told you, you feel as if you are in the Garden of Eden.
That sort of a feeling should come into you when you, your Self, you know. Because
when you know your Self, actually you know your own being and you are so happy
for bettering that your Self is so beautiful. That you are so beautiful, that you are so joyous, that you
be achieved
have all these things – to know that within you is really, really very much fragrant with
human beings. enjoyment.
That state you must have. I see sometimes when you are overjoyed you dance and
sing and do. That is something really very good, but all the time your spirit should
dance at the smallest things, at the little thing that is made, something artistic you see,
something you see, a gesture of kindness, a gesture of gratitude. You feel that depth of
that feeling.
For example, today I saw the flag. Independence when we got, we made this flag.
I had seen this flag being brought down and put up when the other flag was brought
down. I cannot tell you what was the feeling at that moment – such a feeling that the
truth has somehow or other overcome the untruth. The justice has been shown over
the injustice. That feeling is still so much, I can't even see the flag. If I see it, I remem-
ber the whole history, the whole thing, how many people sacrificed, how many martyrs
there were and how much people have fought for it. That flag stands for that.
And you stand for all that. You stand for all those ideals. You stand for all those
sacrifices. And you stand for all that is to be achieved for bettering human beings. You
have to achieve a great deal for others. You have to work within yourself what you can
do for others, what you can achieve for others, what is the best way to imbibe those
qualities within
As I told you, there have been many great leaders and many great people who are
remembered by many people. Now what you should see is what made them so great,
that you become an absolutely unique personality.
you
why so many years people still remember....
Once you have this, you will not deter from doing anything that is important. You
will have no fear of anything. You will not go round and round, but you will know how
to find the solution and how to work it out. This will happen to you if you really know
yourself. You will have such powers of courage. You will not be a daredevil, but with
wisdom. Courage with wisdom you will have. And that is what is your Self, which will
give you lots of wisdom and lots of courage. It is not a fighting spirit, it is not a violent
nature, it is not a rude nature, but it is a very silent, beautiful, courageous attitude...
Courage is silently very powerful. You do not have to bomb anybody, don't have to
kill anybody, but you
will
with courage.
And that is another quality which
courage. I
have to stand
up
which is very polite, very sweet. You will be standing with that
express,
know so many of you are like that. There is no struggle, there is no fight, just standing
with courage and doing whatever is right. And that is quite possible because you have
now the connection with the Almighty. You have the connection with the Parama-
chaitanya and that will work it out – everything...
26
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-30.txt 
 SPIRITUALITY
Dharmayudha and the personality of the Self
So once you have really worked out, you should know this is the area that we call as dhar-
mayudha. Dharmayudha means the war of religion, but not the way people are fighting
it. Our dharmayudha is that we are standing on dharma. And dharma means not religion,
but it is Vishwa Nirmala Dharma. We are standing on our religion and there is a negativ-
ity. We can call it adharma which is fighting, so you stand on your dharma. Unless and
you are dharmic, you cannot have any achievement in Sahaja Yoga....
We are not here to do anything wrong. We are not going to express ourselves as wrong
people. But we are here to prove that we are perfect, we are wonderful people. That is
what is the Self – that we are perfect. We do not have to go according to what we were.
It is a new realm we have reached. It is a new area we have reached and let us enjoy that
until
great area....
Sahaja Yoga purifies you every day. You see one experience, you see one person, you
see some events and it purifies you. That is the sign. Supposing I see somebody, a dishon-
est man, immediately I start finding, “I hope Im not doing any dishonesty myself." Just
imagine that you are the one who is the curator, a correcting influence on yourself. Where
stand on the correction point or in getting finished with it...?
I am telling you that you are very great people. You can save the whole world. I must
say I never expected all this to happen in My lifetime. And it has happened. And I see you
CC
stand? Do
do
you
you
as very great, very great people.... I expect all of you to become beautiful, beautiful Sahaja
Yogis and that nothing can convince the whole world but
also your power to love. So many things I have seen, experienced about you people. When
I think about them, I really feel very happy. I have seen people, how they have managed
and looked after so many things which were difficult and have worked it out.
So now we are in for a new world and, in that new world, a new race of Sahaja Yogis
have to show their presence. They have to show their powers and their courage and their
understanding. It is not serious. It is not frivolous. But it is joyous. It is just joy that you
have to feel about yourself.
I am telling you all this because this is within you, within your power. It is all the
time residing within you and that you have faced it also. So I wish you all a very, very
happy birthday so that you people have a new birth and a new understanding and a new
personality. Try to accept that personality. Try to respect it.
abilities and
work,
your
your
That the personality is your Self.
29
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Ibolekers of trutb: part five
the seekers of truth: part five
to
the search for truth
Some talked of the formless
and some talked of the form.
What has happened to human beings in the search of truth? We have discovered
everything else but the truth because truth you cannot discover. It is a state that one has
to achieve. One has to achieve to receive the truth, to know the truth.
So some people felt that truth is what we have found. Like blind people, whatever
Truth is a
state that they have found out, they called it as truth. Even in India, where people have a great
sense of meditation, people committed mistakes and what they found was the movement
on the right-hand-side and they said, "Yes, there is the All-Pervading Power and that is
formless." The left-hand people found while praying to God that there are forms, so they
one has to
achieve. talked of the forms.
Some talked of the formless and some talked of the form. The right-sided people,
being the worshippers of the Goddess of learning, wrote down everything as the Vedas,
but in the very beginning of the Vedas. Vedas means "to know." And to know means to
evolve, to become self-realized. It is not when I talk to you that what you know is the
knowledge. It is not. The knowledge is that which is expressed, manifested on your cen-
tral nervous system – the truth.
So they wrote down what they found, that we have to first excite or initiate the nature.
So they wrote all those things. Now that has become an authentic writing, the Vedas for
intellectuals, that after many, many years people even knew it by heart....
All that writing, if you go by it, you will be lost into another wild goose chase and
those who read only the Vedas can never find that which is suppose to be known. In the
first chapter or the first verse of the Vedas, it is said that, by reading this book, if you
not get the knowledge, no good reading the Vedas. But there are books and books and
books, libraries and libraries and libraries – all a wild
followed. There was the system of fearing God, then finding the forms of God, worship-
ping God as a form.
CC
do
chase. Many other
systems
goose
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
2 July 1984 London
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-32.txt 
 Two types of people
The incarnations came on this Earth and people worshipped them – like Christ, for
example. Now there is a challenge on Christ. These intellectuals will challenge everything
because they challenge everything through the intellect. The trouble is that they think
they are the wisest.... You have to be a little humble.
So the intellectuals, as usual, challenge and the others just believe. Without intellec-
tuals, there were the people who just believed in things without knowing, who had just
In the
absence
faith.
All these extreme movements on both the sides created two different kinds of people OT th ought,
- one who we can call as intellectuals and another as emotional or conditioned
They did not create self-realized people because the ego makes a person so superficial the Kundalini
and so stupid that he cannot grasp. It is beyond him. He is so stupid, he cannot grasp
the truth. It is a barrier. It is a projection outside. He is a convex personality. His brain is WIl rise.
convex. And the other one is so concave, is so conditioned that you cannot complete.
That is how the quality of seekers came on this Earth, who are seeking truth.
types.
To be born again
We should also know that God must be worried about His creation. He must be worried
about the people who are created by Him, who became human beings, who are seekers, a
special category. What hypocrites – you cannot tell people. You cannot help them, those
who are real seekers. There are many real seekers and He must be worried about all these
seekers and He must have arranged something for them. That is how Christ came on this
Earth to guide you. He came on this Earth to guide you and tell you that you can find the
truth by your second birth. You are to be born again.
Then there are people who just believe that "I am born again" – you see, self-opin-
ionated – "I'm all right, I've found it." Stupid people, they just believe, certify themselves,
"I've found it." They just give themselves a certificate, "Oh, I have found." But who is the
loser? It is not God.
CC
He is there to reveal Himself to you if you want to know Him through your evolu-
tion, through your effortlessness. But as you have seen with Patanjali, all the shastras were
written for central people, the real seekers. But people took out of Patanjali also what they
tell these central people... It is like a person who has been invited to dinner is doing dish
washing. It is that stupid.
And that book, even today thank God, despite all the intellectual attacks and all non-
sense, it does talk of the formless, not of the form so much. But it does say that have
to neutralize your effort. You have to neutralize your thoughts ... and, in the absence of
that thought, only the Kundalini will rise.
Now a vicious circle is created. Even when we say we should not have these thoughts,
we fight with them. Why? So something has to happen that the thoughts must stop.
And that is what happens in Sahaja Yoga. O
Patanjali: the compiler of
the Yoga Sutras about two
centuries before Christ.
you
31
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-33.txt 
 everything
R&EA
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-34.txt 
 works out
THE DIVINE
In Sahaja Yoga everything works out.
COOL BREEZE
www.divinecoolbreeze.org
You must know that it all works out.
SUBSCRIPTIONS:
contact@divinecoolbreeze.org
CONTENT:
editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
PRINTED BY
But you must also know that you must
King Printing Company Inc.
181 Industrial Avenue East
Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA
and
have faith in the Paramachaitanya –
Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd.
No.8, Chandragupta Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411038
Maharashtra, India
also faith in yourself that you are in the kingdom of God ...
PHOTOGRAPHS:
not that you only enjoy this, but feel it as a responsibility...
Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Page 2: Shri Mataji in the UK
(Gregoire de Kalbermatten)
Pages 6-7: mountains of Austria or
Italy, 2009 (Axinia Samoilova)
Christ came out and He was standing outside
Pages 9, 11: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
(Gregoire de Kalbermatten)
Page 13: Shri Mataji in the USA, 1985
Pages 14, 15: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi,
when His Mother came and asked Him,
Shri Krishna Puja 1986
Page 18: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
(Gregoire de Kalbermatten)
"Who are you?" She could not even recognize Him.
Pages 20-21: Austrian farmland, 2009
(Axinia Samoilova)
Page 27: Shri Mataji, Guru Puja 1983
She could not even believe that Christ had risen.
Page 28: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi,
Shri Krishna Puja 1986 (GdK)
Opposite: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Guru Puja 1996
Back cover: sunset at Santa Monica
In the same way, we also forget that we have risen
California USA (Jim Gallagher)
WORDS OF SHRI MATAJI:
and that we are completely transformed
Contents pages: Sahasrara Puja 1985
Page 6: Boston 11 October 1983
Page 10: Shri Devi Puja 1986
Page 12: Sahasrara Puja 1984
and we are free, absolutely free people.
Page 15: 7 October 1981
Page 17: 27 February 1983
Left: Easter Puja music program 1992
Back cover: Sankranti Puja 1987
 2010_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-35.txt 
 THE WARMIH OE THE SUN REPRESENTS THE WARMIH OF GOD'S LOVE
