दृष्धि Yuva Dec. 2010

 " THIS IS THE LAST JUDGMENT. REMEMBER, GOD WILL NOT BOW BEFORE YOU. YOU HAVE TO ACCOMPLISH HIM IN YOUR OWN FREEDOM. IF YOU HAVE NOT ACHIEVED HIM IT IS NOT HIS FAULT NOR IS IT OF SAHAJA YOGA. " - SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI

 AAAAA Inside Resurrection of this issue Jesus facilitated IS ISSUG the piercing of the Agnya chakra. ....4 An Interview with Shri Mataji ....6 AAAAAAAAAAAAA AAAA AAAA AAAAAAAAAA How to steady the Agnya ....8 Sugar & Salt ....12 Cancer ....14 AA AAAAAAAAA AAAAAA LAAAAAA तो गलत है... १६ कुछ तकनीक...१९ सफ़ाई...२१ AAAAAA AAAAAA MAAAAAAAAAAA AAAA FEERI

 RESURRECTION OF JESUS FACILITATED There is also a meaning why He was crucified. He was crucified on the cross and this cross is a symbol of the Swastika on the Agnya chakra. He was crucified and He left His body there only. He told some important things at that time and one most important thing out of this was 'Wait for the Mother' - Think of the Mother'. (Behold the Mother?) Everybody can interpret it in a different way, but it seems He said that He will send for us such a shakti (power) Trigunatmika, and that is described very beautifully. One of these Shaktis/powers will give us comfort. This comfort-giving power in us is Mahakali's power which gives us comfort, which cures our diseases, which corrects/solves many questions of our past. The second power, which He gave us, which He sent who has three channels to us, was Mahasaraswati and to this Mahasaraswati Power, He called Counsellor, the one who will counsel you - that means, who helps us for Yognirupena (to see the form of Yoga). With the help of this second power, we will get Gyan (Knowledge), we will know the subtle knowledge. And the third power, (Mahalakshmi) with the help of which we will get our redemption. Thus, He had talked about these three powers. Buddha also said that I will send you Matreya, that means three types of mothers - Matain-Ekritya-Matreya. People did not understand what this Matreya is, and they made it Maitrya. This Matreya can be only in Adishakti - simultaneously - Adishakti, He must have told as Primordial Mother. But the one who corrected Bible, he made it as Holy Ghost - and made a dove instead of it. Because the one who corrected the Bible hated women and he did not believe that a woman could also do such a great work. Because of this hatred, he made a strange form of it (the Holy Ghost) and the second thing is that it is a dove and a dove means that she will be the messenger of peace. But He did not talk of a woman or that she will be a woman. But in our Shatras it is written "Sahasrare Mahamaya", that means She will be in the form of Mahamaya. People will not recognize Her and you have to get your self realization to recognize Her. If you don't get your realization, you cannot recognize Her. In His lifetime He (Jesus) explained everything in a very open manner, He could do. Many things He told and many things He didn't, but still some truth came out which they 0

 THE PIERCING OF THE AGNYA CHAKRA. could not change. It was very necessary for Sahaja Yoga that Isa Messiah (Jesus) came. He was a Chir Balak (boy from olden times), and now it is proved that He was an incarnation of Shri Ganesha. Shri Ganesha incarnated only once in the world and that is in the form of Shri Jesus/Isa Messiah. The work of these three(Buddha, Mahavira, Jesus(Isa)) was done at the level of Tapasya and therefore they worked in the Murdha of Virata (Brain), and there is a place of Tapasya in the work of all the three, that means human beings should do the Tapasya and they can cross through Agnya only with Tapasya. It was very necessary to pierce through Agnya chakra, without that, Kundalini cannot rise. Resurrection of Jesus facilitated the piercing of the Agnya chakra. First He died and then His resurrection took place. Therefore there is a great message from Easter that because of Resurrection of Isa-Messiah (Jesus), we could get our resurrection. The most difficult chakra in a human being is the Agnya chakra because a human being is always thinking. This continuous thinking results in a condition of vaporization of mind in the head and he cannot go beyond these thoughts. He cannot go beyond these thoughts. You can go beyond thinking only when the Agnya Chakra is opened. Therefore it can be said that Sahaja Yoga would have been very difficult if Isa (Jesus) would not have resurrected after leaving his body. However the work was done by all the Incarnations at their respective places and at respective times. But the work which was done by the resurrection of Isa(Jesus) was marvelous. That is the reason why it is not difficult to open Agnya. It is not difficult to go beyond Agnya. There have been many Gurus, many great Gurus. They did a great work. They did so many things so that people could get their Jagruti (awareness) to God and they could attract their attention to self-realization. H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, extract from Hindi Talk, Easter Puja, 1996, Kolkata

 An Interview with Shri Mataji T October 1990

 Ques. : How did you develop Sahaja Yoga? Shri Mataji : It happened in very funny circumstances on the 5th of May, 1970. I had been going to all these gurus to see what they are doing, how they work and all that, just to study them. I was a born realized soul. I could have given realization to one or two also, but my idea was to find out a way by which I could give en masse realization. In my search, I found that there were no gurus, they were false people, most of them. So I said, "If that is the thing that those gurus are doing, better try myself." So the whole night I sat under a bilva tree near the seashore. I was just thinking, “How will I manage this en masse realization?" And that is the day when the seventh chakra opened and when I saw how the kundalini was going to rise. Of course, I cannot explain this to you because it is a different level of understanding. It is a siddhi (psychic power) which is beyond chitta (consciousness). So with the siddhi I worked it out. When that happened, this one didn't know anything about realization. Then I started this work. Ques. : Could you please throw some light on Shri Ganesha, who seems to be very important in Sahaja Yoga? Shri Mataji : Shri Ganesha is the symbol of eternal childhood that is innocence. He resides on the low centre called Mooladhara chakra. Mooladhara is actually the triangular bone in which the kundalini is. The pelvic plexus is responsible for excretions, even “sex." Now this child, who is an innocent child, is put there because he is innocent. When the kundalini starts rising all these functions stop and you immediately become like a child. Now, as mother I don't want to condemn anyone. But some people say that the kundalini resides in the sex, and that is why many people have misused and abused it, which is absolutely wrong. Shri Ganesha is the child of the mother, and He is sitting there watching over her chastity and honor. 66 Some scientists say that the carbon sits, because it is the beginning, as you know, of organic chemistry and from which it becomes amino acids. I asked scientists to make a model of a carbon atom. I told them "If you look at the model from the right to the left side you will see a swastika, and if you look from right to left you'll see Omkara." The 99 carbon atom itselfis the throne of Shri Ganesha, manifesting those forms. Ques. : Could you say something about music and mantras? Shri Mataji : Music is very important, especially our Indian music or even Western classical music, because it carries the vibrations very well. You are just a little late, otherwise I could have shown you when the music started how the whole vibrations started changing and how the lights started dancing. Music carries the vibrations, and they help a lot. Mantras are words which are awakened, and when said are understood by the deities. It says even in the Vedas, that first of all you must get your realization, and then you must know yantra, mantra and tantra. So yantra and mantra is the awakening of all these deities, but you have to be a realized soul. You have to have the connection. These mantras are words which carry the power to awaken the deity and to please them.

 How to steady the Agnya

 Agnya is placed at the crossing point of our nerves and also optic thalamus. Now, so it is said that if you have wobbling eyes you'll have a wobbling Agnya. You have to steady your eyes.

 There are many people who have asked Me one question. How to steady the Agnya? Agnya is placed at the crossing point of our nerves and also optic thalamus. Now, so it is said that if you have wobbling eyes you'll have a wobbling Agnya. You have to steady your eyes. You have to soothe them. Now it is very, very out of date, ancient, old and all sorts of names that you call it to a thing like that. But you must steady your eyes and steady them in such a way that it is very soothing for the eyes. Which is the most soothing thing for the eyes is the green grass. If you could see the green grass with your eyes means you walk with your eyes on the ground. Your eyes will be soothed, your Agnya will be all right. That's why Christ said that, "I tell you about the adulterous eyes". He talked about adulterous eyes. The eyes with which you do adultery. Is a very common thing these days. Every woman a man must see. Every man a woman must see. As if it is the most important job. If you have not seen one woman you're finished. I mean this is being modern. But I am an old fashioned lady. And at the time of Christ he said, "You should not have adulterous eyes." And the ones who have adulterous eyes are, no more than any other, but our Western Christians. Who all the time even in the church, even when they're giving sermons, their eyes are moving with adultery. These eyes have to be very, very pure, very, very deep and very loving when you want to have your Agnya all right. Because you receive through your eyes. Say if you have closed your eyes you do not put your attention to anything because your eyes are closed. You are not adding more thoughts to yourself. But if your eyes are open you are adding much more thoughts because everywhere the eyes go the attention goes and you see things and create thoughts and put in them. So your attention which has to go to the Spirit, which 99 has to to God, which has to shine through the window of Divine. This beautiful thing is go ruined by the way we use our eyes and we do not respect it. There's nothing so pure and beautiful as the grass on the ground or the ground itself, which takes our feet, which supports us, which looks after us, enriches us. We should put our eyes on the Mother Earth instead of looking at every person. But from Sahaja Yoga point of view now many of you know what happens to your eyes when you look at somebody. May be a entity might enter your eyes. And it is, you'll be amazed that it is the play of the entity what we call this so-called flirting is. I've talked about it before also and people didn't like it when I told them about it. But I have seen actual entities entering from eyes to eyes. I have seen very simple people who come down to such places, say in a party. In a party people are just exchanging entities from one eye to another. Once it goes to another person he puts his entity into another person. And that third goes into another person. All the time your attention is diverted. And you feel it is attracted towards something, you do not know why it is attracted. Now the certain symbols are also made like that. To add up to the problems, you see all the society is working at it. That you should appear in such a way that every man should look at you. Every woman should look at you. Why? What is the use? Supposing I look at you what do I get? What do I get by looking at a person? What is the advantage just looking at a person? We are wasting such a lot of energy for what? In the same way if you are walking on the roads, we are seeing some beautiful things all right. If you have to buy something, all right go ahead, see those things, whatever have to select is all right. But all the time just because your eyes are such, you are just you 10

 doing it and you do not know the reason why you are doing like this, all the time why your eyes are wobbling. And that is a sure and certain sign for a person to become mad. Absolutely, that's a sure and certain sign is, when a person is mad how do you make it out that a person is lunatic. If you see his eyes the iris in the eyes are all the time wobbling. They cannot keep it steady. Or they are sick they're also, you can see, that these eyes are all the time wobbling. There is no steadiness. Not only this but you have seen those people who have come in the Sahaja Yoga when they close their eyes they find their eyes are flickering. Their eyelids are flickering. That means there is some sort of a disturbance in the Kundalini rising. Whole tension if you call it as hundred then at least eighty percent of it comes through our eyes. Then how important it is to protect our eyes from all kind of useless activities we are doing. Christ - Christ's life shows so many aspects of how to respect others. But one of them which has been very much misused throughout is that of the prostitute. He saved the prostitute, He saved her no doubt. But you spoil these prostitutes. A good woman you make her into prostitutes. You give her ideas by which she becomes a prostitute. One has to think about all these things in the proper light of Sahaja Yoga. Unless and you are realized My talk is just useless for you. But once you are realized you will know that if you glance at someone you might suddenly get a headache at the back. You might feel a dart has gone into your head or something has happened. You might feel that you're blinding with somebody's face and you will get all kinds of experiences by which you will know how important are your eyes. All your nervousness and everything can be cured if you have pure eyes. But it is such a vicious circle that through your eyes you gather all the bad and is accumulated in the Agnya and you have to clear the Agnya to make the eyes clear. It's a vicious circle. But it can start at a point as I said, we have to ask for forgiveness. Secondly we have to bring Christ in our Agnya Chakra. Thirdly we have to give up all drugs and all intoxicants and all smoking. until That happens automatically when you are a Sahaja Yogi, it will work out. But eyes express the whole of your being, your brain, your body, your limbs everything. And if your Agnya is all right then your eyes are perfectly all right. They emit nothing but love wherever they glance. Only with a glance of your eyes you can raise the Kundalini. Only with the glance of your eyes you can cure people. Only with your glance you can bring joy into the destroyed and the ruined people. So these eyes which you see are the windows of your being, of your heart. When the Spirit is expressed through your eyes, you must have noticed yourself, that when the Kundalini rises then the eyes become dilated. And a realized soul has got black eyes because they have these; eyes are dilated. At least when I see them they are all dilated black eyes. Apart from that a realized soul can be made out by his eyes which are sparkling. There's a sparkle like diamonds. They sparkle all the time and you can make out from the eyes that this person is a realized soul. There's a tremendous difference between a non-realized soul's eyes and a realized soul's eyes. So you can imagine how your Spirit sees through your eyes. But if the eyes are not pure it doesn't stay there long. So if we have to understand Christ physically we have to respect our eyes. Mentally we have to give up all that is impure in our mind. 11

 Sugar and Salt So we have to be prepared to give up all the shackles of nonsense from our heads, all kinds of things there are, so much of conditionings, come down even to the colour scheme, then it's all conditioning. This is too much, not good, all funny, funny ideas and anything funny and nonsensical that comes up, such funny brains, fix it up. The other day I was telling a lady about her food that a new idea has come that you should not eat any salt and sugar, I mean just imagine! Salt is so important for our breathing. If you ask a doctor, I don't know what is happening to the doctors and sugar is so important for our combustion. But anybody says anything you people just jump at it and you people just try to be impressed by all these ideas and start torturing yourself. H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, extract from Welcome talk to western Sahaja yogis on India tour, Alibag, 13/12/87 Now attention has to be inward all the time. I have seen that our attention | is outward. Because of that, what we see outside is not good for vibrations. But if your attention is inside, you will not buy anything that is not good for vibrations, or you will not own something, so you just throw away. But the attention is outside, and because of that you just don't know how to judge anything. Nabhi Chakra has to be attended to; for that you don't have to think, you have to work it out. See which side of Nabhi is catching. If the right side is catching, for you sugar is the best. Sugar represents many things. Sugar means your tongue also should be sweet. You should talk sweetly. People think that if you talk sweetly to someone, then people will start thinking that you are

 good for nothing or you are absolutely a meek person. You have to be meek. We have to be meek and humble. We must learn how to talk sweetly to each other. And if you do not understand how to speak, then take more sugar, vibrated sugar. That will make your tongue sweeter and sweeter, and your ideas will be sweeter about another person than harsh and criticizing. So for the right-sided people sugar is suggested. For the left-sided people:salt - Left-sided people should take salt more, and with salt they can solve many problems, because salt gives them a personality, a composure by which they can express themselves in a way which is dignified, also not very lethargic. So the speed of your talks or behavior or everything should be in the center. It should not be lethargic, nor should be too quick, and fast and hectic. (Puja talk, Vaitarna, India, 16/3/83) Everybody everywhere will say, don't take sugar. I mean, this is absurd. Sugar is very much needed for liver and in this country [England] especially where it is ego-oriented, your liver gets spoiled and if you don't eat sugar, what are you going to do then? Your attention is going to be all mad. No wonder people land up in the lunatic asylum. They start thinking they are suffering from paranoid troubles. I mean, sugar is very important for liver. (Talk, Caxton Hall, 19/6/78)

 For cancer best treatment is of water, ie. putting feet in the river, sea or in the water at home with the photograph. Water has the dharma of cleansing and hence Shri Vishnu and Dattatraya responsible for the dharma of human beings are to be worshipped. They help you to cure also the local deity of the chakra that is attacked. Put the patient before the photograph with the candle and his feet in the water, bring down your hands across the sympathetic nervous system towards the water. The patient will cool down gradually. If he gets realization, then he is cured. (undated letter [1970s] to Dr.Raul in Nirmala Yoga no.8) You will be surprised, all those patients of deadly diseases, like cancer, etc, whom I have cured, all of them without exception were the victims of fake gurus and tantrikas. I have not seen any cancer patient who was not connected with a false guru. That's why it is said that doctors cannot cure cancer. (lecture in Hindi, Delhi, 18/8/79, English translation in Nirmala Yoga no.17) You can't hear the Vani in your stomach, but say you get some troubles, specially Cancer or any such diseases, you get a problem. Then it starts showing. There's a problem. That causes spandan, throbbing, is vibrations that you get, is the effect of that Paravani, which shows you that there is some trouble. That trouble you can see, then it starts throbbing. (Talk on 8th Day (Ashtmi) of Navaratri 1988) There are two sides of life, left side and right side, when they meet (when one side is overactive), you get the 'psychosomatic diseases'. If the Kundalini rises what happens is that it nourishes those centres. But suppose you are using right side too much, left side breaks up. Then what happens is that your connection with the main is lost. You are on your own and Cancer starts. Can be cured not at a galloping stage but at an early stage. We have also tried some galloping stage patients. (Talk to doctors in New Delhi, 6/4/1997. Transcript in New Delhi Medicos 13(4-5):32-34) 14

 CANCER The spleen produces red blood corpuscles for all emergencies. Modern life is always an emergency. Constant shocks to the spleen make it crazy and vulnerable to cancer. At such a moment of vulnerability if something triggers from the left side then blood cancer occurs. (Address to Medical Conference, Moscow, June 1990) The sense of chastity in the Indian women is so great that nothing can deter them as long as they are chaste. But if they are not chaste, then fear settles in them 'very' fast. Chastity is the strength of women. And that is why, those women who have fear, mostly, have a problem of their chastity being challenged. A woman who is frightened that her chastity may be disturbed, also can develop a problem with the heart chakra. Such women can develop breast cancer, breathing troubles, and other kind of frightening diseases on the emotional level also. (Talk on the Heart Chakra, Delhi, 1/2/83) If you smoke too much then this Vishnumaya gets very angry. She, She is the one who then causes cancer. She can spoil your throat. I mean all kinds of ear, nose, throat problems can come in with the smoking because she doesn't like that smoke. ... With that if you smoke, smoking, you can become also very much vulnerable to cancer of the throat. (Shri Vishnumaya Puja, New York, 19/7/92) Another thing which people do not know is the mantras. ... Now she [Shri Vishnumaya] is the Mantrika, she is the one who gives the power to the mantra. Now if you are not connected to this divine power then there's a short circuit takes place, and if you go on saying this mantra you develop all the troubles of the throat, throat cancer. You can develop also the stomach problems, because it is Krishna and Vishnu are the same; you might develop also the problem of Virata. (Shri Vishnumaya Puja, New York, 19/7/92) 15

 ६ ें कुछ ती गलत हैं... दी ० िय क

 मा ०ु ८ रे ि यदि हर समय आप किसी समस्या का सामना कर रहे हैं तो समझना चाहिए कि आप में कुछ समस्या है, आपके यन्त्र में कुछ तो गलत है और उसे सही करना है। हमारे साथ कई अनुभव हुए हैं, जिसमें समस्याओं का हल निकलता है, हमारी आँखों के सामने अनेक चमत्कार हुए हैं, परन्तु फिर भी इन नये अनुभवों के साथ भी, चित्त स्थिर नहीं हुआ है। अभी तक पुराने अनुभव एवं पहचान चल रही है-उसकी गन्दगी अभी भी हमारे ऊपर है। सब कुछ बदल कर एक नये इन्सान बनें। आप एक फूल की तरह खिल रहे हैं, उसके बाद एक पेड़ के समान-एक सहजयोगी की स्थिति को धारण करिए। जिसमें आत्मा के प्रकाश में आप देख सकते हैं कि आप कैसे गलत कर रहे हैं। आत्मा आईने के समान होती है, आप स्वयं को स्पष्ट देख सकते हैं और आप बदलना शुरू हो जाते हैं | जब आपकी आत्मा जागृत हो जाती है, आप स्वयं को देख सकते हैं, ज्यों ही आप उन्नत होते हैं या विकसित सहजयोगी होते हैं, आप एकदम स्पष्ट देख सकते हैं और इस एक विषय को देखना चाहिए। यदि यह आपके साथ घटित हुआ है, यदि आप देख सकते हो कि आपके अन्दर कुछ गलत है, यदि आप यह ढूंढ निकालें कि आपके अन्दर किस प्रकार की खराबियाँ हैं, यदि इन खराबियों से आप स्वयं को अलग कर सकते हैं और यदि आप यह समझ सकते हैं कि ये सब आसक्तियाँ, खराबियाँ और आदतें आप को नीचे खींच रही हैं तभी आप उन को छोड़ सकते हैं। यह तभी होता है, जब आपकी आत्मा का आईना चमकता है। (९८०७१२) इस आधुनिक समय में आप जान लीजिए कि ये सब दुष्ट प्रवृत्तियाँ थोड़ी-थोड़ी इधर -उधर आपके मस्तिष्क में चिपकी हुई हैं। इसलिए जो सहजयोगी आज यहाँ हैं, जान लें कि ये सब चीजज़ों ने हमें घेरा हुआ है.... और ये दुष्ट बाधाएं भी वहाँ हैं। कुछ हमारे अन्दर हैं.......कुछ हमारे बाहर......सो यह एक बड़ा कठिन कार्य लगता है........पर यह है नहीं......क्योंकि यदि आप एक शर्त समझ लें...... आपको मुझे पहचानना है। मैं जानती हूँ कि मैं महामाया बारे में बहुत होशियार हूँ.....पर मैं सत्यवादी हूँ . .......पर फिर भी मैं महामाया हूँ .....इसलिए मुझे यदि आप पहचान लें, तो आप सुरक्षित हैं। सहजयोग में सफाई सब से आसान तरीका है। आपको सामूहिक होना है। यदि आप सामूहिक नहीं हैं तो जानिए कि आप में कुछ खराबी है हूं...में इस पहचानने के लिए आपको क्या करना है . । ....यदि आप सामूहिक हैं, यदि आप सामूहिकता का आनन्द ले रहे हैं, तब आप समझ लें कि आप स्वच्छ हैं....कोई दाग नहीं है, आप एकदम सही है। यदि आपको सही मायने में जानकारी नहीं है, सही तरीके से जागरूक नहीं हैं, तब आप जान लें कि आपको सही संशोधन की जरूरत है। आपको दृढ़ होना है, हल निकालिए, अपने लीडर से कहिए, 'मुझ में कुछ खराबी है, कृपया | रार का

 ॐ. थ परथे म इसे सही करें (८७१२३०१) यदि हमें नींद आती है या कुछ, तो हमारे साथ कुछ गड़बड़ है, यदि आपको नींद आती है, तो अपना मुख धोईये...कुछ करिए......सक्रिय होने की कोशिश करें, स्वयं को प्रक्षेपी बनाएं, हर समय ( ८९१२०३) आईने के सामने अधिक समय न बिताएं..... यदि आप आईने के सामने बहुत समय बिताते हैं, तो आप में कुछ खराबी है, मैं स्वयं यह सोचती हूँ कि शायद यह कोई भूत बाधा है (९७०८२३.१) बिजली चमकना भी एक ऐसी चीज़ है जिसे सब कुछ पता होता है....यदि किसी के घर पर बिजली गिरती है तो उसमें भी कुछ खराबी है (८८०९२१)। सामूहिकता आदिशक्ति का कार्य है क्योंकि वह सहस्रार पर होती है। यदि हम सामूहिक नहीं हो सकते या सामूहिकता का आनन्द नहीं ले सकते तो आप में कुछ खराबी है। एक दूसरे की आलोचना न करें (९००९२३) हमें सामूहिकता में होना ही है। थोड़ी सी बात पर भी लोग सामूहिकता से दूर हो जाते हैं। यदि वे दूसरे सहजयोगियों के साथ अच्छे सम्बन्ध नहीं रख सकते, दूसरे सहजयोगियों के साथ बात नहीं कर सकते, दूसरे सहजयोगियों के साथ रह नहीं सकते, तो उनमें कुछ खराबी है, उन्हें समझ लेना चाहिए कि उनमें कुछ खराबी है न कि दूसरों में खराबी है। मुझे एक सहजयोगी के बारे में पता है, जिसने मेरे पास आकर कहा कि, 'श्रीमाताजी, वे मेरे प्रति बड़े निर्दयी हैं।, मुझ पर वे शंका करते हैं। वे ये करते हैं, वो ये करते हैं।' ऐसा कुछ भी नहीं था। यह उसका दिमाग ऐसा चल रहा था, जो दूसरे सहजयोगियों के विरूद्ध विचार दे रहा था। अपने भाई -बहनों की कभी आलोचना न करें, यदि आपको आलोचना करनी है तो अपनी आलोचना करें । सबसे बढ़िया यही है कि स्वयं की आलोचना करें और देखें कि आपमें क्या खराबी है कि आप सामूहिकता में जम नहीं सकते । (८६०८१८) यदि आप सोचते हैं कि आप बड़े दयनीय हैं, आप सुविधाजनक नहीं रहे हैं, आप आनन्द नहीं उठा सकते, तो समझें कि आप में कुछ खराबी है, न कि सहजयोग में (८७१२३०.१ ) । सहजयोग की सामूहिकता में कोई किसी के बारे में शिकायत नहीं करते, पर यदि वे करते हैं, तब वे जान लें कि उनमें कुछ खराबी है (९८०७०६); जब कोई हम से किसी के बारे में खराबी बताता है और हम उसे स्वीकार करते हैं, जब कि वह व्यक्ति सामान्य ही होता है और फिर भी हम कुछ कहते हैं कि यह सत्य है...... तो फिर यह हमारे मस्तिष्क में चला जाता है और हमारे मन को बीमार कर देता है.....यह बड़ा खतरनाक है, हमारे लिए, न कि दूसरों के लिए (९८०३२१)। यदि नये लोग नहीं आ रहे हैं तो शायद आप में कुछ खराबी है। हमें चुस्त एवं परिश्रमी होना है। हमें गम्भीर और प्रभावकारी होना है-अपना रहन-सहन बदलें (८९०६११) । ठण्डी चैतन्य लहरी-ऐसी नहीं होती है जैसे कोई कि जमा देने वाली ठण्ड हो, यदि वह जमा देने वाली ठण्डक के सम है तो इसका अर्थ है कि वह व्यक्ति बायीं ओर चला गया है। ठण्डी चैतन्य लहरी कभी भी ठण्डी नहीं होती यह बहुत जमा देने वाली ठण्डी नहीं होती। कुछ लोगों में बहुत गर्म होती है, यह बहुत ठण्डी भी हो सकती है...उनकी समस्याओं के कारण पर यदि आप नार्मल व्यक्ति हैं तो आपको ठण्डक की अनुभूति होती है, जो आपके शरीर के तापमान से थोड़ी कम होती है..... पर यह इतनी ठण्डी नहीं होती कि आपको जमा दे । यदि यह गर्म है तो आप में कुछ खराबी है। (८१०५२४) । 18

 तकनीक ल ये अनेक हैं, जैसे कि ध्यान- फोटो के साथ, बाईं या दाईं बाजू को उठाना, प्रकाश और अग्नि का उपयोग , मोमबत्तियाँ, भूमि माँ, पानी या बर्फ का उपयोग, खाने की सही व्यवस्था -नमक या चीनी का उपयोग, पानी में पैर रखना (८३०१२१), जूते मारना (८००९०१), (८७०४०८) - वाईब्रेटिड पानी का उपयोग (७८१००५) आदि। अपने शरीर को अलग-अलग प्रकार के ट्रिटमैन्ट दें- विवेक इस्तेमाल करें (८३०२०४) । यह सब कार्य करती हैं । हमें निर्मल विद्या में निपुण होना चाहिए (८१११०३)। सहजयोग की सब तकनीकियाँ सीखनी चाहिए और उनमें निपुण होना चाहिए (७६०३३०) । अन्तरपरिक्षण (इन्ट्रोस्पैक्शन) (९१०७२८), बन्धन देना सहजयोग मानसिक स्तर पर कार्य नहीं करता..... यह आध्यात्मिक स्तर पर कार्य करता है, जो कि मानसिक स्तर से कहीं ऊंचा है। सो हमें क्या करना है इसे समझ लें, हमें अपने चक्रों को कैसे ठीक करना है.... यदि आपके कोई चक्र पकड़ रहे हैं तो फोटो के साथ उन्हें सुधारने का प्रयत्न करें...... फोटो के पूर्ण सम्मान के साथ..... यह फोटो ही है जो सब कार्य करने वाली है। (८३०१२१) अब यदि हमें अहंकार है तो बाईं ओर को उठाकर उसे दाईं ओर डालें...... और कोई तरीका नहीं है.... आपको अपने हाथों का इस्तेमाल करना ही है। सबको प्रतिदिन पानी में पैर रखने चाहिए और रोज ध्यान करना चाहिए। दाईं ओर को ठीक करने के लिए आप भूमि माँ या पानी या बर्फ़ का इस्तेमाल करें और कार्बोहाईड्रेट या शाकाहारी भोजन खायें। बाईं ओर के लिए प्रकाश अग्नि या नाईट्रोजीनस भोजन अर्थात प्रोटीन लें। (८३०१२१) चीजें भूमि माँ द्वारा खींच ली जाती है.... कुछ अग्नि की लौ में खींच जाती हैं...... सूर्य भी खींच लेता कुछ है.... आकाश भी... यह इस पर निर्भर है कि आपके कौन से चक्र पकड़ रहे हैं.... आपकी कौनसी समस्या है। पर इन सब में, मेरे विचार में, भूमि माँ सबसे कृपालू हैं, वह सबसे अधिक सहायता करती हैं। (८२१००८)। 19

 सफ़ाई अपने चक्रों को सही करने के लिए आपको अपनी सोच का इस्तेमाल नहीं करना है-आप इसे सोच विचार के साथ हल नहीं कर सकते। आप बन्धन दे सकते हैं और स्वयं को सन्तुलन दें। यह आपके हाथ में बह रही है.... चाहे आपको इस चीज़ का अनुभव हो या न हो, पर यह आप के हाथ से बह रही है......आपके हाथ से बहाव बह रहा है....थोड़ा तो हर समय होता ही है (८००९०७) सहजयोग मानसिक स्तर पर काम नहीं करता...यह आध्यात्मिक स्तर पर कार्य करता है, जो कि मानसिक स्तर से ऊँचा है। लोग अभी तक मानसिक स्तर पर ही रह रहे हैं और उसी स्तर पर समस्या का हल निकालते हैं कुछ इसलिए ये सब समस्यायें उभरने लगती हैं। यदि आपके कुछ चक्र पकड़ रहे हैं तो चक्रों को फोटोग्राफ की मदद से ...... यह फोटो ही सब करने वाली है सुधारने का प्रयत्न करें......... सबसे पहले फोटो का आदरपूर्व नमन करें. (८३०१२१) आप स्वयं अपने मन्त्रों को बना सकते हैं क्योंकि आपके पास एक प्रकार का अधिकार है, और हर मन्त्र जो आप कहेंगे, जागरूक हो जाएगा चाहे आप में कोई पकड़े हो, या बाधा हो, तब भी आप इसे कर लेंगे...तब भी आप सबकी कुण्डलिनी उठा सकते हैं और जिस व्यक्ति की आप कुण्डलिनी उठा रहे हैं, उस पर कुछ भी गलत असर नहीं होगा....यह इतना शुद्ध है (७९११११) अधिकतर पश्चिम के लोगों में एक चक्र सही कार्य नहीं कर रहा है वह है हृदय चक्र। आपको फोटो को देखकर अपनी माँ के प्रति प्रेममयी भावना व्यक्त करते हुए अपने हृदय को शुद्ध करना है।... हृदय को स्वच्छ होना है......एकदम समर्पित और हर चीज़ के पहले अपनी माँ को रखिए । आपको इसे अपने मस्तिष्क से नहीं, हृदय से कार्यान्वित करना है (८३०१२१)। हमारे पास भिन्न-भिन्न चक्रों के लिए भिन्न-भिन्न मन्त्र हैं। यदि एक चक्र पकड़ रहा है तो आप उस चक्र के मन्त्र बना कर उस पर कार्य करें। उदाहरण के तौर पर यदि आपको अपने हृदय के लिए कुछ कहना है तो सबसे पहले आप ईश्वर से क्षमा मांगे क्योंकि आपका चित्त अपनी आत्मा पर जितना होना चाहिए था उतना नहीं है, या यदि आपने कुछ गलतियाँ करी हैं तो क्षमा मांगे। इसे अपने हृदय से मांगें..... जो भी आपको कहना है, उसे हृदय से कहें । (८००९०७) जब आप कोई मन्त्र कह रहे हैं तो बिना किसी विचार के अपना चित्त उस विशिष्ट चक्र पर डालें.....परन्तु यदि आप विचारशील हैं तो आप हृदय पर और भी ज़्यादा पकड़ेंगे। सोच विचार से, दाईं बाजू अत्याधिक कार्यान्वित होती है, अहंकार उत्पन्न होता है और हृदय को घेर लेता है। सो यह सोच कर कि अहंकार को कैसे ठीक करें, ऐसे सोच विचार से आपकी स्थिति और भी खराब हो जाती है, तब आप उस से लड़ रहे होते हैं। सो हमें सन्तुलन देना है.....अपने हाथों से अपने अहंकार को नीचे लाईये। इसे अपने मस्तिष्क से नहीं पर चैतन्य व मन्त्रों के साथ इसका हल करिये....सहजयोगियों के लिए मन्त्र बहुत महत्वपूर्ण हैं। अहंकार के लिए आप कहिए 'माँ आप हमारा अहंकार हैं, हम कुछ नहीं करते...आप ही सब करती हैं।' यदि आप इस प्रकार कहेंगे तो यह कार्यान्वित होगा..अन्यथा नहीं; विनम्र होईये....अपने हृदय में विनम्र होईये। आपको अपने अहंकार को समर्पित करना है..... इसका अर्थ है-अपनी सोच-विचार; यदि आप सोच रहे हैं तो अपनी आँखें खोलिए और कहिए, 'मैंने क्षमा किया, मैंने क्षमा किया' - यहां 21

 तक कि यदि आप मेरा नाम लें, वह भी काफ़ी है (८००९०७)। जब आप फ़ोटो के सामने बैठे हैं, केवल स्वयं को जांचने के लिए सबसे पहले विनम्र होईये और इस प्रकार कि जैसे कोई व्यक्ति सर्वोत्तम बनना चाहता है और स्वयं के दोषों को जानने का प्रयत्न करता है। विनम्र का अर्थ है कि अपना चित्त हृदय पर लाईये.....कुछ सोचिए नहीं.....अब देखिए कि कौन से चक्र पकड़ रहे हैं.....यह मत सोचें कि क्यों पकड़ रहे हैं। वह हमारे लिए महत्वपूर्ण नहीं है। यह पकड़ रहे हैं...ठीक है....आप सोचने के चक्कर में मत जाईये, एक बार जब आप सोचने लगते हैं तो आपके और आत्मा के बीच में दीवार खड़ी हो जाती है......किसी कला में या कुशलता में.....और इस प्रकार रचनात्मकता, सहजता समाप्त हो जाती है....सब सोचने के कारण। इसलिए सब कुछ मौन हो कर करिए.......निर्विचारिता में.....यही विशेष है। कम से कम बिना सोच विचार के मेरे मुख को देखे..... मेरा मुख ही आपको निर्विचार कर देता है....... फोटोग्राफ में आप मेरे मुख को बिना सोचे देख सकते हैं और यह कार्यान्वित होगा । अपने मन को मौन करें (८००९०७) । ध्यान में आपको कहना चाहिए, 'माँ, मुझे आत्मा बनाईये... मैं आत्मा हूं...... माँ मैं आत्मा हूं.... आप सब कुछ आत्मा की आँखों से देखना शुरू करते हैं.... का मज़ाक उड़ाते हैं..... आप आनन्दित होते हैं..... अपने साथ चुटकुले करते हैं.... और सब कुछ एक चुटकुला सा बन जाता है। अपने व्यक्तिगत कमरे में आप यह सब कर सकते हैं और कार्यान्वित कर सकते हैं। अपने आप को साफ करने तब आप को नहीं लगता, आप अपने आप पर हँसते हैं......खुद बुरा | के लिए नीम्बू, पानी, प्रकाश, आकाश, समुद्र का उपयोग कर सकते हैं। (८००९०७) एक बार आप स्वयं को आत्मा बन कर देखने लगेंगे तो आप इतने नहीं घबरायेंगे और आपको यह जानकर हैरानी होगी कि आप वास्तव में सुन्दर हैं और सब फ़ालतू चीज़ें छूट जाएंगी। अपनी आत्मा के साथ होने के लिए सबसे अच्छा तरीका क्षमा करना है क्योंकि तब आपके विचार चले जाएंगे। जितना कम आप सोचेंगे उतना ही शीघ्र आप अपने आत्मसाक्षात्कार के साथ बढ़ते हैं..... वाद- विवाद न करें..... केवल बनें.... आपको बनना है। सोचे नहीं, तब आपको अन्दर से प्रेरणा आएगी और जब प्रेरणा आएगी तो आप जानेंगे कि यह बहुत भिन्न है, यह बहुत सुन्दर है कुछ (८००९०७) । डायरिया और उल्टियाँ आपके लिए अच्छी है..यह सफ़ाई करती है। भवसागर दवाईयों और गलत गुरुओं के कारण खराब हो जाता है, और जब सहजयोग में आते हैं तो यह इस रूप (डायरिया और उल्टियाँ) में बाहर आता है। यदि यह पूजा के बाद होता है तो यह बहुत अच्छा है...... यह पूजा के बाद होना चाहिए (८८१२२१) अजवाइन की धूनी बड़ी अच्छी चीज़ है... यह आपको पूरी तरह से साफ़ कर देती है (८८१२२१)। यदि आपको लगता है कि भूत अन्दर बैठे हैं, तो उनसे पीछा लें। यह बड़ा आसान है.... केवल उनसे कहिए, 'श्रीमाताजी के नाम (के आधार) से बाहर जाओ। पर जब आप कहते हैं कि 'श्रीमाताजी के नाम से'; तो उसमें आपके अन्दर विश्वास की कितनी शक्ति है! (८००५१८ ) छुड़ा चीजें तो भूमि माँ खींच लेती है...... कुछ अग्नि में खींच जाते हैं...... सूर्य भी खींच लेता है, आकाश भी... कुछ यह इस बात पर आधारित है कि आपके कौन से चक्र में समस्या है..... आपकी क्या समस्याएं हैं। पर पूर्णत: भूमि माँ सबसे कृपालू है। मैं सोचती हूँ कि वह सबसे अधिक मदद करती है। (८२१००८) 22

 NEW RELEASES ACD | ACS VCD DVD Lang. Place Title Date 318 Н Kolkata सार्वजनिक प्रवचन th 12" Apr.1995 319* Cabella th 12-14 Mar.2010 Shiv Puja - Part I & II 72 320* Los Angeles Virat Viratangana Puja 10th Oct.1993 * 481 E 16 Aspects of Shri Krishna 242 242 H. Mumbai आत्मसाक्षात्कार का अर्थ 3rd Sep.1973 480 H. सार्वजनिक प्रवचन 9th Dec.1973 321 Noida Shri Virat Puja st 21" Nov.2010 The only thing where you can really hide yourself is the love of God; where you can really get the great restful, blissful feeling of His complete protection. - Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Published & Printed by Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. No. 8, Chandragupta Co-op Housing Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune, Maharashtra, India - 411 038. & : 25286537, 25286032 email:sale@nitl.co.in website: www.nitl.co.in (For queries & sending articles contact on above address)

 When Shri Mataji gives Her greetings on the occasion of Christmas then that moment is very good for our Agnya chakra. Everyone should know what order one should give and how to follow an order. Follow the orders of the Almighty. Follow the orders of your elders, follow your own orders but do not follow the orders of your ego. Then you can give orders to others. Not only to human beings but also to the Sun, Moon or Wind and all other things in Nature. You can control them. ......Those whose Agnya chakra is good can become the lord of anything. You can be your own lord. 18-12-1978



----------------------

2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 दृष्धि
Yuva
Dec. 2010
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-1.txt 
 " THIS IS THE LAST JUDGMENT.
REMEMBER, GOD WILL NOT BOW BEFORE YOU.
YOU HAVE TO ACCOMPLISH HIM IN YOUR OWN FREEDOM.
IF YOU HAVE NOT ACHIEVED HIM IT IS NOT HIS FAULT
NOR IS IT OF SAHAJA YOGA. "
- SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 AAAAA
Inside
Resurrection of
this issue
Jesus facilitated
IS ISSUG
the piercing of the
Agnya chakra. ....4
An Interview with
Shri Mataji ....6
AAAAAAAAAAAAA
AAAA
AAAA
AAAAAAAAAA
How to steady
the Agnya ....8
Sugar & Salt ....12
Cancer ....14
AA
AAAAAAAAA
AAAAAA
LAAAAAA
तो गलत है... १६
कुछ
तकनीक...१९
सफ़ाई...२१
AAAAAA
AAAAAA
MAAAAAAAAAAA
AAAA
FEERI
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 RESURRECTION OF JESUS FACILITATED
There is also a meaning why He was crucified. He was
crucified on the cross and this cross is a symbol of the
Swastika on the Agnya chakra. He was crucified and He left
His body there only. He told some important things at that
time and one most important thing out of this was 'Wait for
the Mother' - Think of the Mother'. (Behold the Mother?)
Everybody can interpret it in a different way, but it
seems He said that He will send for us such a shakti (power)
Trigunatmika, and that is
described very beautifully. One of these Shaktis/powers will
give us comfort. This comfort-giving power in us is
Mahakali's power which gives us comfort, which cures our
diseases, which corrects/solves many questions of our
past. The second power, which He gave us, which He sent
who has three channels
to us, was Mahasaraswati and to this Mahasaraswati
Power, He called Counsellor, the one who will counsel you -
that means, who helps us for Yognirupena (to see the form
of Yoga). With the help of this second power, we will get
Gyan (Knowledge), we will know the subtle knowledge. And
the third power, (Mahalakshmi) with the help of which we will
get our redemption.
Thus, He had talked about these three powers. Buddha
also said that I will send you Matreya, that means three
types of mothers - Matain-Ekritya-Matreya.
People did not understand what this Matreya is, and
they made it Maitrya. This Matreya can be only in Adishakti -
simultaneously - Adishakti, He must have told as Primordial
Mother. But the one who corrected Bible, he made it as Holy
Ghost - and made a dove instead of it. Because the one who
corrected the Bible hated women and he did not believe that
a woman could also do such a great work. Because of this
hatred, he made a strange form of it (the Holy Ghost) and
the second thing is that it is a dove and a dove means that
she will be the messenger of peace. But He did not talk of a
woman or that she will be a woman. But in our Shatras it is
written "Sahasrare Mahamaya", that means She will be in
the form of Mahamaya. People will not recognize Her and
you have to get your self realization to recognize Her. If you
don't get your realization, you cannot recognize Her.
In His lifetime He (Jesus) explained everything in a very
open manner, He could do. Many things He told and many
things He didn't, but still some truth came out which they
0
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 THE PIERCING OF THE AGNYA CHAKRA.
could not change. It was very necessary for Sahaja
Yoga that Isa Messiah (Jesus) came. He was a Chir
Balak (boy from olden times), and now it is proved
that He was an incarnation of Shri Ganesha. Shri
Ganesha incarnated only once in the world and that is
in the form of Shri Jesus/Isa Messiah.
The work of these three(Buddha, Mahavira,
Jesus(Isa)) was done at the level of Tapasya and
therefore they worked in the Murdha of Virata (Brain),
and there is a place of Tapasya in the work of all the
three, that means human beings should do the
Tapasya and they can cross through Agnya only with
Tapasya. It was very necessary to pierce through
Agnya chakra, without that, Kundalini cannot rise.
Resurrection of Jesus facilitated the piercing of the
Agnya chakra. First He died and then His
resurrection took place. Therefore there is a great
message from Easter that because of Resurrection
of Isa-Messiah (Jesus), we could get our
resurrection. The most difficult chakra in a human
being is the Agnya chakra because a human being is
always thinking. This continuous thinking results in a
condition of vaporization of mind in the head and he
cannot go beyond these thoughts. He cannot go
beyond these thoughts. You can go beyond thinking
only when the Agnya Chakra is opened. Therefore it
can be said that Sahaja Yoga would have been very
difficult if Isa (Jesus) would not have resurrected after
leaving his body. However the work was done by all
the Incarnations at their respective places and at
respective times. But the work which was done by the
resurrection of Isa(Jesus) was marvelous. That is the
reason why it is not difficult to open Agnya. It is not
difficult to go beyond Agnya. There have been many
Gurus, many great Gurus. They did a great work.
They did so many things so that people could get their
Jagruti (awareness) to God and they could attract
their attention to self-realization.
H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi,
extract from Hindi Talk,
Easter Puja, 1996, Kolkata
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 An Interview with
Shri Mataji
T
October 1990
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Ques. : How did you develop Sahaja Yoga?
Shri Mataji : It happened in very funny circumstances on the 5th of May, 1970. I had
been going to all these gurus to see what they are doing, how they work and all that,
just to study them. I was a born realized soul. I could have given realization to one or
two also, but my idea was to find out a way by which I could give en masse realization.
In my search, I found that there were no gurus, they were false people, most
of them. So I said, "If that is the thing that those gurus are doing, better try myself." So
the whole night I sat under a bilva tree near the seashore. I was just thinking, “How will
I manage this en masse realization?" And that is the day when the seventh chakra
opened and when I saw how the kundalini was going to rise. Of course, I cannot
explain this to you because it is a different level of understanding. It is a siddhi
(psychic power) which is beyond chitta (consciousness). So with the siddhi I worked it
out. When that happened, this one didn't know anything about realization. Then I
started this work.
Ques. : Could you please throw some light on Shri Ganesha, who seems to be very
important in Sahaja Yoga?
Shri Mataji : Shri Ganesha is the symbol of eternal childhood that is innocence. He
resides on the low centre called Mooladhara chakra. Mooladhara is actually the
triangular bone in which the kundalini is. The pelvic plexus is responsible for
excretions, even “sex." Now this child, who is an innocent child, is put there because
he is innocent. When the kundalini starts rising all these functions stop and you
immediately become like a child. Now, as mother I don't want to condemn anyone. But
some people say that the kundalini resides in the sex, and that is why many people have
misused and abused it, which is absolutely wrong. Shri Ganesha is the child of the
mother, and He is sitting there watching over her chastity and honor.
66
Some scientists say that the carbon sits, because it is the beginning, as you know, of
organic chemistry and from which it becomes amino acids. I asked scientists to make a
model of a carbon atom. I told them "If you look at the model from the right to the left
side you
will see a swastika, and if you look from right to left you'll see Omkara." The
99
carbon atom itselfis the throne of Shri Ganesha, manifesting those forms.
Ques. : Could you say something about music and mantras?
Shri Mataji : Music is very important, especially our Indian music or even Western
classical music, because it carries the vibrations very well. You are just a little late,
otherwise I could have shown you when the music started how the whole vibrations
started changing and how the lights started dancing. Music carries the vibrations, and
they help a lot. Mantras are words which are awakened, and when said are understood
by the deities. It says even in the Vedas, that first of all you must get your realization,
and then you must know yantra, mantra and tantra. So yantra and mantra is the
awakening of all these deities, but you have to be a realized soul. You have to have the
connection. These mantras are words which carry the power to awaken the deity and to
please them.
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 How to steady
the Agnya
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Agnya is placed at the crossing point of our nerves and also optic thalamus.
Now, so it is said that if you have wobbling eyes you'll have a wobbling Agnya.
You have to steady your eyes.
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 There are many people who have asked Me one question. How to steady the Agnya?
Agnya is placed at the crossing point of our nerves and also optic thalamus. Now, so it
is said that if you have wobbling eyes you'll have a wobbling Agnya. You have to steady
your eyes. You have to soothe them. Now it is very, very out of date, ancient, old and all sorts
of names that you call it to a thing like that. But you must steady your eyes and steady them
in such a way that it is very soothing for the eyes. Which is the most soothing thing for the
eyes is the green grass. If you could see the green grass with your eyes means you walk with
your eyes on the ground. Your eyes will be soothed, your Agnya will be all right. That's why
Christ said that, "I tell you about the adulterous eyes". He talked about adulterous eyes. The
eyes with which you do adultery. Is a very common thing these days. Every woman a man
must see. Every man a woman must see. As if it is the most important job. If you have not
seen one woman you're finished. I mean this is being modern. But I am an old fashioned
lady. And at the time of Christ he said, "You should not have adulterous eyes." And the ones
who have adulterous eyes are, no more than any other, but our Western Christians. Who all
the time even in the church, even when they're giving sermons, their eyes are moving with
adultery. These eyes have to be very, very pure, very, very deep and very loving when you
want to have your Agnya all right. Because you receive through your eyes. Say if you have
closed your eyes you do not put your attention to anything because your eyes are closed.
You are not adding more thoughts to yourself. But if your eyes are open you are adding
much more thoughts because everywhere the eyes go the attention goes and you see things
and create thoughts and put in them. So your attention which has to go to the Spirit, which
99
has to
to God, which has to shine through the window of Divine. This beautiful thing is
go
ruined by the way we use our eyes and we do not respect it. There's nothing so pure and
beautiful as the grass on the ground or the ground itself, which takes our feet, which
supports us, which looks after us, enriches us. We should put our eyes on the Mother Earth
instead of looking at every person.
But from Sahaja Yoga point of view now many of you know what happens to your eyes
when you look at somebody. May be a entity might enter your eyes. And it is, you'll be
amazed that it is the play of the entity what we call this so-called flirting is. I've talked about
it before also and people didn't like it when I told them about it. But I have seen actual
entities entering from eyes to eyes. I have seen very simple people who come down to such
places, say in a party. In a party people are just exchanging entities from one eye to another.
Once it goes to another person he puts his entity into another person. And that third goes into
another person. All the time your attention is diverted. And you feel it is attracted towards
something, you do not know why it is attracted. Now the certain symbols are also made like
that. To add up to the problems, you see all the society is working at it. That you should
appear in such a way that every man should look at you. Every woman should look at you.
Why? What is the use? Supposing I look at you what do I get? What do I get by looking at a
person? What is the advantage just looking at a person? We are wasting such a lot of energy
for what? In the same way if you are walking on the roads, we are seeing some beautiful
things all right. If you have to buy something, all right go ahead, see those things, whatever
have to select is all right. But all the time just because your eyes are such, you are just
you
10
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 doing it and you do not know the reason why you are doing like this, all the time why your
eyes are wobbling. And that is a sure and certain sign for a person to become mad. Absolutely,
that's a sure and certain sign is, when a person is mad how do you make it out that a person is
lunatic. If you see his eyes the iris in the eyes are all the time wobbling. They cannot keep it
steady. Or they are sick they're also, you can see, that these eyes are all the time wobbling.
There is no steadiness. Not only this but you have seen those people who have come in the
Sahaja Yoga when they close their eyes they find their eyes are flickering. Their eyelids are
flickering. That means there is some sort of a disturbance in the Kundalini rising. Whole
tension if you call it as hundred then at least eighty percent of it comes through our eyes. Then
how important it is to protect our eyes from all kind of useless activities we are doing.
Christ - Christ's life shows so many aspects of how to respect others. But one of them
which has been very much misused throughout is that of the prostitute. He saved the
prostitute, He saved her no doubt. But you spoil these prostitutes. A good woman you make
her into prostitutes. You give her ideas by which she becomes a prostitute.
One has to think about all these things in the proper light of Sahaja Yoga. Unless and
you are realized My talk is just useless for you. But once you are realized you will know
that if you glance at someone you might suddenly get a headache at the back. You might feel a
dart has gone into your head or something has happened. You might feel that you're blinding
with somebody's face and you will get all kinds of experiences by which you will know how
important are your eyes. All your nervousness and everything can be cured if you have pure
eyes. But it is such a vicious circle that through your eyes you gather all the bad and is
accumulated in the Agnya and you have to clear the Agnya to make the eyes clear. It's a
vicious circle. But it can start at a point as I said, we have to ask for forgiveness. Secondly we
have to bring Christ in our Agnya Chakra. Thirdly we have to give up all drugs and all
intoxicants and all smoking.
until
That happens automatically when you are a Sahaja Yogi, it will work out. But eyes
express the whole of your being, your brain, your body, your limbs everything. And if your
Agnya is all right then your eyes are perfectly all right. They emit nothing but love wherever
they glance. Only with a glance of your eyes you can raise the Kundalini. Only with the
glance of your eyes you can cure people. Only with your glance you can bring joy into the
destroyed and the ruined people. So these eyes which you see are the windows of your being,
of your heart. When the Spirit is expressed through your eyes, you must have noticed
yourself, that when the Kundalini rises then the eyes become dilated. And a realized soul has
got black eyes because they have these; eyes are dilated. At least when I see them they are
all dilated black eyes. Apart from that a realized soul can be made out by his eyes which are
sparkling. There's a sparkle like diamonds. They sparkle all the time and you can make out
from the eyes that this person is a realized soul. There's a tremendous difference between a
non-realized soul's eyes and a realized soul's eyes. So you can imagine how your Spirit sees
through your eyes. But if the eyes are not pure it doesn't stay there long. So if we have to
understand Christ physically we have to respect our eyes. Mentally we have to give up all that
is impure in our mind.
11
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Sugar
and
Salt
So we have to be prepared to give up all the shackles of nonsense from
our heads, all kinds of things there are, so much of conditionings, come down
even to the colour scheme, then it's all conditioning. This is too much, not good,
all funny, funny ideas and anything funny and nonsensical that comes up, such
funny brains, fix it up. The other day I was telling a lady about her food that a
new idea has come that you should not eat any salt and sugar, I mean just
imagine! Salt is so important for our breathing. If you ask a doctor, I don't know
what is happening to the doctors and sugar is so important for our combustion.
But anybody says anything you people just jump at it and you people just try to
be impressed by all these ideas and start torturing yourself.
H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, extract from Welcome talk to
western Sahaja yogis on India tour, Alibag, 13/12/87
Now attention has to be inward all the time. I have seen that our attention
|
is outward. Because of that, what we see outside is not good for vibrations. But
if your attention is inside, you will not buy anything that is not good for
vibrations, or you will not own something, so you just throw away. But the
attention is outside, and because of that you just don't know how to judge
anything. Nabhi Chakra has to be attended to; for that you don't have to think,
you have to work it out. See which side of Nabhi is catching. If the right side is
catching, for you sugar is the best. Sugar represents many things. Sugar
means your tongue also should be sweet. You should talk sweetly. People think
that if you talk sweetly to someone, then people will start thinking that you are
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 good for nothing or you are absolutely a meek person. You have to be meek. We
have to be meek and humble. We must learn how to talk sweetly to each other.
And if you do not understand how to speak, then take more sugar, vibrated sugar.
That will make your tongue sweeter and sweeter, and your ideas will be sweeter
about another person than harsh and criticizing.
So for the right-sided people sugar is suggested.
For the left-sided people:salt - Left-sided people should take salt
more, and with salt they can solve many problems, because salt gives
them a personality, a composure by which they can express themselves in
a way which is dignified, also not very lethargic. So the speed of your talks or
behavior or everything should be in the center. It should not be lethargic, nor
should be too quick, and fast and hectic.
(Puja talk, Vaitarna, India, 16/3/83)
Everybody everywhere will say, don't take sugar. I mean, this is absurd.
Sugar is very much needed for liver and in this country [England] especially
where it is ego-oriented, your liver gets spoiled and if you don't eat sugar, what
are you going to do then? Your attention is going to be all mad. No wonder people
land up in the lunatic asylum. They start thinking they are suffering from paranoid
troubles. I mean, sugar is very important for liver.
(Talk, Caxton Hall, 19/6/78)
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 For cancer best treatment is of water, ie. putting feet in the river, sea or in the water at
home with the photograph. Water has the dharma of cleansing and hence Shri Vishnu and
Dattatraya responsible for the dharma of human beings are to be worshipped. They help
you to cure also the local deity of the chakra that is attacked. Put the patient before the
photograph with the candle and his feet in the water, bring down your hands across the
sympathetic nervous system towards the water. The patient will cool down gradually. If he
gets realization, then he is cured.
(undated letter [1970s] to Dr.Raul in Nirmala Yoga no.8)
You will be surprised, all those patients of deadly diseases, like cancer, etc, whom I
have cured, all of them without exception were the victims of fake gurus and tantrikas. I
have not seen any cancer patient who was not connected with a false guru. That's why it is
said that doctors cannot cure cancer.
(lecture in Hindi, Delhi, 18/8/79, English translation in Nirmala Yoga no.17)
You can't hear the Vani in your stomach, but say you get some troubles, specially
Cancer or any such diseases, you get a problem. Then it starts showing. There's a
problem. That causes spandan, throbbing, is vibrations that you get, is the effect of that
Paravani, which shows you that there is some trouble. That trouble you can see, then it
starts throbbing.
(Talk on 8th Day (Ashtmi) of Navaratri 1988)
There are two sides of life, left side and right side, when they meet (when one side is
overactive), you get the 'psychosomatic diseases'. If the Kundalini rises what happens is
that it nourishes those centres. But suppose you are using right side too much, left side
breaks up. Then what happens is that your connection with the main is lost. You are on
your own and Cancer starts. Can be cured not at a galloping stage but at an early stage.
We have also tried some galloping stage patients.
(Talk to doctors in New Delhi, 6/4/1997. Transcript in New Delhi Medicos
13(4-5):32-34)
14
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 CANCER
The spleen produces red blood corpuscles for all emergencies. Modern life is
always an emergency. Constant shocks to the spleen make it crazy and vulnerable
to cancer. At such a moment of vulnerability if something triggers from the left side
then blood cancer occurs.
(Address to Medical Conference, Moscow, June 1990)
The sense of chastity in the Indian women is so great that nothing can deter
them as long as they are chaste. But if they are not chaste, then fear settles in them
'very' fast. Chastity is the strength of women. And that is why, those women who
have fear, mostly, have a problem of their chastity being challenged. A woman who
is frightened that her chastity may be disturbed, also can develop a problem with the
heart chakra. Such women can develop breast cancer, breathing troubles, and
other kind of frightening diseases on the emotional level also.
(Talk on the Heart Chakra, Delhi, 1/2/83)
If you smoke too much then this Vishnumaya gets very angry. She, She is the
one who then causes cancer. She can spoil your throat. I mean all kinds of ear, nose,
throat problems can come in with the smoking because she doesn't like that smoke.
... With that if you smoke, smoking, you can become also very much vulnerable to
cancer of the throat.
(Shri Vishnumaya Puja, New York, 19/7/92)
Another thing which people do not know is the mantras. ... Now she [Shri
Vishnumaya] is the Mantrika, she is the one who gives the power to the mantra. Now
if you are not connected to this divine power then there's a short circuit takes place,
and if you go on saying this mantra you develop all the troubles of the throat, throat
cancer. You can develop also the stomach problems, because it is Krishna and
Vishnu are the same; you might develop also the problem of Virata.
(Shri Vishnumaya Puja, New York, 19/7/92)
15
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 ६
ें
कुछ ती गलत हैं...
दी
०
िय
क
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 मा
०ु
८
रे
ि
यदि हर समय आप किसी समस्या का सामना कर रहे हैं तो समझना चाहिए कि आप में कुछ समस्या है, आपके
यन्त्र में कुछ तो गलत है और उसे सही करना है। हमारे साथ कई अनुभव हुए हैं, जिसमें समस्याओं का हल निकलता
है, हमारी आँखों के सामने अनेक चमत्कार हुए हैं, परन्तु फिर भी इन नये अनुभवों के साथ भी, चित्त स्थिर नहीं हुआ
है। अभी तक पुराने अनुभव एवं पहचान चल रही है-उसकी गन्दगी अभी भी हमारे ऊपर है। सब कुछ बदल कर एक
नये इन्सान बनें। आप एक फूल की तरह खिल रहे हैं, उसके बाद एक पेड़ के समान-एक सहजयोगी की स्थिति को
धारण करिए।
जिसमें
आत्मा के प्रकाश में आप देख सकते हैं कि आप कैसे गलत कर रहे हैं। आत्मा आईने के समान होती है,
आप स्वयं को स्पष्ट देख सकते हैं और आप बदलना शुरू हो जाते हैं | जब आपकी आत्मा जागृत हो जाती है, आप
स्वयं को देख सकते हैं, ज्यों ही आप उन्नत होते हैं या विकसित सहजयोगी होते हैं, आप एकदम स्पष्ट देख सकते हैं
और इस एक विषय को देखना चाहिए। यदि यह आपके साथ घटित हुआ है, यदि आप देख सकते हो कि आपके
अन्दर कुछ गलत है, यदि आप यह ढूंढ निकालें कि आपके अन्दर किस प्रकार की खराबियाँ हैं, यदि इन खराबियों से
आप स्वयं को अलग कर सकते हैं और यदि आप यह समझ सकते हैं कि ये सब आसक्तियाँ, खराबियाँ और आदतें
आप को नीचे खींच रही हैं तभी आप उन को छोड़ सकते हैं। यह तभी होता है, जब आपकी आत्मा का आईना
चमकता है। (९८०७१२)
इस आधुनिक समय में आप जान लीजिए कि ये सब दुष्ट प्रवृत्तियाँ थोड़ी-थोड़ी इधर -उधर आपके मस्तिष्क में
चिपकी हुई हैं। इसलिए जो सहजयोगी आज यहाँ हैं, जान लें कि ये सब चीजज़ों ने हमें घेरा हुआ है.... और ये दुष्ट
बाधाएं भी वहाँ हैं। कुछ हमारे अन्दर हैं.......कुछ हमारे बाहर......सो यह एक बड़ा कठिन कार्य लगता है........पर
यह है नहीं......क्योंकि यदि आप एक शर्त समझ लें...... आपको मुझे पहचानना है। मैं जानती हूँ कि मैं महामाया
बारे में बहुत होशियार हूँ.....पर मैं सत्यवादी हूँ .
.......पर फिर भी मैं महामाया हूँ .....इसलिए मुझे
यदि आप पहचान लें, तो आप सुरक्षित हैं। सहजयोग में सफाई सब से
आसान तरीका है। आपको सामूहिक होना है। यदि आप सामूहिक नहीं हैं तो जानिए कि आप में कुछ खराबी है
हूं...में इस
पहचानने के लिए आपको क्या करना है .
।
....यदि आप सामूहिक हैं, यदि आप सामूहिकता का आनन्द ले रहे हैं, तब आप समझ लें कि आप स्वच्छ हैं....कोई
दाग नहीं है, आप एकदम सही है।
यदि आपको सही मायने में जानकारी नहीं है, सही तरीके से जागरूक नहीं हैं, तब आप जान लें कि आपको सही
संशोधन की जरूरत है। आपको दृढ़ होना है, हल निकालिए, अपने लीडर से कहिए, 'मुझ में कुछ खराबी है, कृपया
|
रार
का
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 ॐ.
थ
परथे
म
इसे सही करें (८७१२३०१) यदि हमें नींद आती है या कुछ, तो हमारे साथ कुछ गड़बड़ है, यदि आपको नींद आती है,
तो अपना मुख धोईये...कुछ करिए......सक्रिय होने की कोशिश करें, स्वयं को प्रक्षेपी बनाएं, हर समय ( ८९१२०३)
आईने के सामने अधिक समय न बिताएं..... यदि आप आईने के सामने बहुत समय बिताते हैं, तो आप में कुछ खराबी है,
मैं स्वयं यह सोचती हूँ कि शायद यह कोई भूत बाधा है (९७०८२३.१) बिजली चमकना भी एक ऐसी चीज़ है जिसे सब
कुछ पता होता है....यदि किसी के घर पर बिजली गिरती है तो उसमें भी कुछ खराबी है (८८०९२१)।
सामूहिकता आदिशक्ति का कार्य है क्योंकि वह सहस्रार पर होती है। यदि हम सामूहिक नहीं हो सकते या सामूहिकता
का आनन्द नहीं ले सकते तो आप में कुछ खराबी है। एक दूसरे की आलोचना न करें (९००९२३) हमें सामूहिकता में
होना ही है। थोड़ी सी बात पर भी लोग सामूहिकता से दूर हो जाते हैं। यदि वे दूसरे सहजयोगियों के साथ अच्छे सम्बन्ध
नहीं रख सकते, दूसरे सहजयोगियों के साथ बात नहीं कर सकते, दूसरे सहजयोगियों के साथ रह नहीं सकते, तो उनमें कुछ
खराबी है, उन्हें समझ लेना चाहिए कि उनमें कुछ खराबी है न कि दूसरों में खराबी है। मुझे एक सहजयोगी के बारे में पता
है, जिसने मेरे पास आकर कहा कि, 'श्रीमाताजी, वे मेरे प्रति बड़े निर्दयी हैं।, मुझ पर वे शंका करते हैं। वे ये करते हैं, वो ये
करते हैं।' ऐसा कुछ भी नहीं था। यह उसका दिमाग ऐसा चल रहा था, जो दूसरे सहजयोगियों के विरूद्ध विचार दे रहा था।
अपने भाई -बहनों की कभी आलोचना न करें, यदि आपको आलोचना करनी है तो अपनी आलोचना करें । सबसे बढ़िया
यही है कि स्वयं की आलोचना करें और देखें कि आपमें क्या खराबी है कि आप सामूहिकता में जम नहीं सकते ।
(८६०८१८)
यदि आप सोचते हैं कि आप बड़े दयनीय हैं, आप सुविधाजनक नहीं रहे हैं, आप आनन्द नहीं उठा सकते, तो समझें
कि आप में कुछ खराबी है, न कि सहजयोग में (८७१२३०.१ ) । सहजयोग की सामूहिकता में कोई किसी के बारे में
शिकायत नहीं करते, पर यदि वे करते हैं, तब वे जान लें कि उनमें कुछ खराबी है (९८०७०६); जब कोई हम से किसी के
बारे में
खराबी बताता है और हम उसे स्वीकार करते हैं, जब कि वह व्यक्ति सामान्य ही होता है और फिर भी हम
कुछ
कहते हैं कि यह सत्य है...... तो फिर यह हमारे मस्तिष्क में चला जाता है और हमारे मन को बीमार कर देता है.....यह
बड़ा खतरनाक है, हमारे लिए, न कि दूसरों के लिए (९८०३२१)। यदि नये लोग नहीं आ रहे हैं तो शायद आप में कुछ
खराबी है। हमें चुस्त एवं परिश्रमी होना है। हमें गम्भीर और प्रभावकारी होना है-अपना रहन-सहन बदलें (८९०६११) ।
ठण्डी चैतन्य लहरी-ऐसी नहीं होती है जैसे कोई कि जमा देने वाली ठण्ड हो, यदि वह जमा देने वाली ठण्डक के
सम है तो इसका अर्थ है कि वह व्यक्ति बायीं ओर चला गया है। ठण्डी चैतन्य लहरी कभी भी ठण्डी नहीं होती यह
बहुत
जमा देने वाली ठण्डी नहीं होती। कुछ लोगों में बहुत गर्म होती है, यह बहुत ठण्डी भी हो सकती है...उनकी समस्याओं के
कारण पर यदि आप नार्मल व्यक्ति हैं तो आपको ठण्डक की अनुभूति होती है, जो आपके शरीर के तापमान से थोड़ी कम
होती है..... पर यह इतनी ठण्डी नहीं होती कि आपको जमा दे । यदि यह गर्म है तो आप में कुछ खराबी है। (८१०५२४) ।
18
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 तकनीक
ल
ये अनेक हैं, जैसे कि ध्यान- फोटो के साथ, बाईं या दाईं बाजू को उठाना, प्रकाश और अग्नि का उपयोग ,
मोमबत्तियाँ, भूमि माँ, पानी या बर्फ का उपयोग, खाने की सही व्यवस्था -नमक या चीनी का उपयोग, पानी में पैर
रखना (८३०१२१), जूते मारना (८००९०१),
(८७०४०८) - वाईब्रेटिड पानी का उपयोग (७८१००५) आदि। अपने शरीर को अलग-अलग प्रकार के ट्रिटमैन्ट दें-
विवेक इस्तेमाल करें (८३०२०४) । यह सब कार्य करती हैं । हमें निर्मल विद्या में निपुण होना चाहिए (८१११०३)।
सहजयोग की सब तकनीकियाँ सीखनी चाहिए और उनमें निपुण होना चाहिए (७६०३३०) ।
अन्तरपरिक्षण (इन्ट्रोस्पैक्शन) (९१०७२८), बन्धन देना
सहजयोग मानसिक स्तर पर कार्य नहीं करता..... यह आध्यात्मिक स्तर पर कार्य करता है, जो कि मानसिक
स्तर से कहीं ऊंचा है। सो हमें क्या करना है इसे समझ लें, हमें अपने चक्रों को कैसे ठीक करना है.... यदि आपके
कोई चक्र पकड़ रहे हैं तो फोटो के साथ उन्हें सुधारने का प्रयत्न करें...... फोटो के पूर्ण सम्मान के साथ..... यह फोटो
ही है जो सब कार्य करने वाली है। (८३०१२१)
अब यदि हमें अहंकार है तो बाईं ओर को उठाकर उसे दाईं ओर डालें...... और कोई तरीका नहीं है....
आपको अपने हाथों का इस्तेमाल करना ही है। सबको प्रतिदिन पानी में पैर रखने चाहिए और रोज ध्यान करना
चाहिए। दाईं ओर को ठीक करने के लिए आप भूमि माँ या पानी या बर्फ़ का इस्तेमाल करें और कार्बोहाईड्रेट या
शाकाहारी भोजन खायें। बाईं ओर के लिए प्रकाश अग्नि या नाईट्रोजीनस भोजन अर्थात प्रोटीन लें। (८३०१२१)
चीजें भूमि माँ द्वारा खींच ली जाती है.... कुछ अग्नि की लौ में खींच जाती हैं...... सूर्य भी खींच लेता
कुछ
है.... आकाश भी... यह इस पर निर्भर है कि आपके कौन से चक्र पकड़ रहे हैं.... आपकी कौनसी समस्या है। पर इन
सब में, मेरे विचार में, भूमि माँ सबसे कृपालू हैं, वह सबसे अधिक सहायता करती हैं। (८२१००८)।
19
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 सफ़ाई
अपने चक्रों को सही करने के लिए आपको अपनी सोच का इस्तेमाल नहीं करना है-आप इसे सोच विचार के
साथ हल नहीं कर सकते। आप बन्धन दे सकते हैं और स्वयं को सन्तुलन दें। यह आपके हाथ में बह रही है.... चाहे
आपको इस चीज़ का अनुभव हो या न हो, पर यह आप के हाथ से बह रही है......आपके हाथ से बहाव बह रहा
है....थोड़ा तो हर समय होता ही है (८००९०७)
सहजयोग मानसिक स्तर पर काम नहीं करता...यह आध्यात्मिक स्तर पर कार्य करता है, जो कि मानसिक स्तर
से
ऊँचा है।
लोग अभी तक मानसिक स्तर पर ही रह रहे हैं और उसी स्तर पर समस्या का हल निकालते हैं
कुछ
इसलिए ये सब समस्यायें उभरने लगती हैं। यदि आपके कुछ चक्र पकड़ रहे हैं तो चक्रों को फोटोग्राफ की मदद से
...... यह फोटो ही सब करने वाली है
सुधारने का प्रयत्न करें......... सबसे पहले फोटो का आदरपूर्व नमन करें.
(८३०१२१)
आप स्वयं अपने मन्त्रों को बना सकते हैं क्योंकि आपके पास एक प्रकार का अधिकार है, और हर मन्त्र जो आप
कहेंगे, जागरूक हो जाएगा चाहे आप में कोई पकड़े हो, या बाधा हो, तब भी आप इसे कर लेंगे...तब भी आप सबकी
कुण्डलिनी उठा सकते हैं और जिस व्यक्ति की आप कुण्डलिनी उठा रहे हैं, उस पर कुछ भी गलत असर नहीं
होगा....यह इतना शुद्ध है (७९११११)
अधिकतर पश्चिम के लोगों में एक चक्र सही कार्य नहीं कर रहा है वह है हृदय चक्र। आपको फोटो को देखकर
अपनी माँ के प्रति प्रेममयी भावना व्यक्त करते हुए अपने हृदय को शुद्ध करना है।... हृदय को स्वच्छ होना
है......एकदम समर्पित और हर चीज़ के पहले अपनी माँ को रखिए । आपको इसे अपने मस्तिष्क से नहीं, हृदय से
कार्यान्वित करना है (८३०१२१)।
हमारे पास भिन्न-भिन्न चक्रों के लिए भिन्न-भिन्न मन्त्र हैं। यदि एक चक्र पकड़ रहा है तो आप उस चक्र के मन्त्र
बना कर उस पर कार्य करें। उदाहरण के तौर पर यदि आपको अपने हृदय के लिए कुछ कहना है तो सबसे पहले आप
ईश्वर से क्षमा मांगे क्योंकि आपका चित्त अपनी आत्मा पर जितना होना चाहिए था उतना नहीं है, या यदि आपने कुछ
गलतियाँ करी हैं तो क्षमा मांगे।
इसे अपने हृदय से मांगें..... जो भी आपको कहना है, उसे हृदय से कहें ।
(८००९०७)
जब आप कोई मन्त्र कह रहे हैं तो बिना किसी विचार के अपना चित्त उस विशिष्ट चक्र पर डालें.....परन्तु यदि
आप विचारशील हैं तो आप हृदय पर और भी ज़्यादा पकड़ेंगे। सोच विचार से, दाईं बाजू अत्याधिक कार्यान्वित होती
है, अहंकार उत्पन्न होता है और हृदय को घेर लेता है। सो यह सोच कर कि अहंकार को कैसे ठीक करें, ऐसे सोच
विचार से आपकी स्थिति और भी खराब हो जाती है, तब आप उस से लड़ रहे होते हैं। सो हमें सन्तुलन
देना
है.....अपने हाथों से अपने अहंकार को नीचे लाईये। इसे अपने मस्तिष्क से नहीं पर चैतन्य व मन्त्रों के साथ इसका
हल करिये....सहजयोगियों के लिए मन्त्र बहुत महत्वपूर्ण हैं। अहंकार के लिए आप कहिए 'माँ आप हमारा अहंकार
हैं, हम कुछ नहीं करते...आप ही सब करती हैं।' यदि आप इस प्रकार कहेंगे तो यह कार्यान्वित होगा..अन्यथा नहीं;
विनम्र होईये....अपने हृदय में विनम्र होईये। आपको अपने अहंकार को समर्पित करना है..... इसका अर्थ है-अपनी
सोच-विचार; यदि आप सोच रहे हैं तो अपनी आँखें खोलिए और कहिए, 'मैंने क्षमा किया, मैंने क्षमा किया' - यहां
21
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 तक कि यदि आप मेरा नाम लें, वह भी काफ़ी है (८००९०७)।
जब आप फ़ोटो के सामने बैठे हैं, केवल स्वयं को जांचने के लिए सबसे पहले विनम्र होईये और इस प्रकार कि जैसे
कोई व्यक्ति सर्वोत्तम बनना चाहता है और स्वयं के दोषों को जानने का प्रयत्न करता है। विनम्र का अर्थ है कि अपना चित्त
हृदय पर लाईये.....कुछ सोचिए नहीं.....अब देखिए कि कौन से चक्र पकड़ रहे हैं.....यह मत सोचें कि क्यों पकड़ रहे
हैं। वह हमारे लिए महत्वपूर्ण नहीं है। यह पकड़ रहे हैं...ठीक है....आप सोचने के चक्कर में मत जाईये, एक बार जब
आप सोचने लगते हैं तो आपके और आत्मा के बीच में दीवार खड़ी हो जाती है......किसी कला में या कुशलता
में.....और इस प्रकार रचनात्मकता, सहजता समाप्त हो जाती है....सब सोचने के कारण। इसलिए सब कुछ मौन हो कर
करिए.......निर्विचारिता में.....यही विशेष है। कम से कम बिना सोच विचार के मेरे मुख को देखे..... मेरा मुख ही
आपको निर्विचार कर देता है....... फोटोग्राफ में आप मेरे मुख को बिना सोचे देख सकते हैं और यह कार्यान्वित होगा ।
अपने मन को मौन करें (८००९०७) ।
ध्यान में आपको कहना चाहिए, 'माँ, मुझे आत्मा बनाईये... मैं आत्मा हूं...... माँ मैं आत्मा हूं.... आप सब कुछ
आत्मा की आँखों से देखना शुरू करते हैं....
का मज़ाक उड़ाते हैं..... आप आनन्दित होते हैं..... अपने साथ चुटकुले करते हैं.... और सब कुछ एक चुटकुला सा
बन जाता है। अपने व्यक्तिगत कमरे में आप यह सब कर सकते हैं और कार्यान्वित कर सकते हैं। अपने आप को साफ करने
तब आप को
नहीं लगता, आप अपने आप पर हँसते हैं......खुद
बुरा
|
के लिए नीम्बू, पानी, प्रकाश, आकाश, समुद्र का उपयोग कर सकते हैं। (८००९०७)
एक बार आप स्वयं को आत्मा बन कर देखने लगेंगे तो आप इतने नहीं घबरायेंगे और आपको यह जानकर हैरानी
होगी कि आप वास्तव में सुन्दर हैं और सब फ़ालतू चीज़ें छूट जाएंगी। अपनी आत्मा के साथ होने के लिए सबसे अच्छा
तरीका क्षमा करना है क्योंकि तब आपके विचार चले जाएंगे। जितना कम आप सोचेंगे उतना ही शीघ्र आप अपने
आत्मसाक्षात्कार के साथ बढ़ते हैं..... वाद- विवाद न करें..... केवल बनें.... आपको बनना है। सोचे नहीं, तब
आपको अन्दर से प्रेरणा आएगी और जब प्रेरणा आएगी तो आप जानेंगे कि यह बहुत भिन्न है, यह बहुत सुन्दर है
कुछ
(८००९०७) ।
डायरिया और उल्टियाँ आपके लिए अच्छी है..यह सफ़ाई करती है। भवसागर दवाईयों और गलत गुरुओं के
कारण खराब हो जाता है, और जब सहजयोग में आते हैं तो यह इस रूप (डायरिया और उल्टियाँ) में बाहर आता है। यदि
यह पूजा के बाद होता है तो यह बहुत अच्छा है...... यह पूजा के बाद होना चाहिए (८८१२२१) अजवाइन की धूनी बड़ी
अच्छी चीज़ है... यह आपको पूरी तरह से साफ़ कर देती है (८८१२२१)। यदि आपको लगता है कि भूत अन्दर बैठे हैं,
तो उनसे पीछा लें। यह बड़ा आसान है.... केवल उनसे कहिए, 'श्रीमाताजी के नाम (के आधार) से बाहर जाओ।
पर जब आप कहते हैं कि 'श्रीमाताजी के नाम से'; तो उसमें आपके अन्दर विश्वास की कितनी शक्ति है! (८००५१८ )
छुड़ा
चीजें तो भूमि माँ खींच लेती है...... कुछ अग्नि में खींच जाते हैं...... सूर्य भी खींच लेता है, आकाश भी...
कुछ
यह इस बात पर आधारित है कि आपके कौन से चक्र में समस्या है..... आपकी क्या समस्याएं हैं। पर पूर्णत: भूमि माँ
सबसे कृपालू है। मैं सोचती हूँ कि वह सबसे अधिक मदद करती है। (८२१००८)
22
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-22.txt 
 NEW RELEASES
ACD | ACS
VCD
DVD
Lang.
Place
Title
Date
318
Н
Kolkata
सार्वजनिक प्रवचन
th
12" Apr.1995
319*
Cabella
th
12-14 Mar.2010
Shiv Puja - Part I & II
72
320*
Los Angeles
Virat Viratangana Puja
10th Oct.1993
*
481
E
16 Aspects of Shri Krishna
242
242
H.
Mumbai
आत्मसाक्षात्कार का अर्थ
3rd Sep.1973
480
H.
सार्वजनिक प्रवचन
9th Dec.1973
321
Noida
Shri Virat Puja
st
21" Nov.2010
The only thing
where you can really hide yourself
is the love of God;
where you can really get
the great restful, blissful feeling of
His complete protection.
- Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Published & Printed by
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
No. 8, Chandragupta Co-op Housing Society, Paud Road,
Kothrud, Pune, Maharashtra, India - 411 038. & : 25286537, 25286032 email:sale@nitl.co.in
website: www.nitl.co.in (For queries & sending articles contact on above address)
 2010_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-23.txt 
 When Shri Mataji gives Her
greetings on the occasion of
Christmas then that moment is
very good for our Agnya chakra.
Everyone should know what
order one should give and how to
follow an order.
Follow the
orders of the Almighty. Follow
the orders of your elders, follow
your own orders but do not follow
the orders of your ego. Then you
can give orders to others. Not
only to human beings but also to
the Sun, Moon or Wind and all
other things in Nature. You can
control them. ......Those whose
Agnya chakra is good can become
the lord of anything. You can be
your own lord.
18-12-1978
