The Divine Cool Breeze 2011 issue 6 – volume twenty-four number six wysrscsessces 533535335933339030390089933333333330

 fias Anand Thandev joyfuldance

 After coming to Sahaja Yoga, Mr. Koli put all the pictures of the Gods he had in the ocean. "If Mother is Shri Adi Shakti," he said, "I don't need the other pictures." But he did not have the heart to throw the picture away of the gods dancing at the Feet of Shri Adi Shakti. "Mother," he asked, "I feel You are the one who is sitting there, but what is the meaning of this picture?" "All the Gods had a meeting in heaven," Shri Mataji said, "because they did not know what to do with humanity. Whichever aspect of God was sent to the Earth, the people troubled them - Christ, Shri Rama, Shri Krishna. 'I will go as a Mother for mankind and I will go like a normal person with all the worries, sadness and happiness in life! go through everything and also through all the Shri Adi Shakti said. 'I will mayas! This announcement of Shri Adi Shakti was a blessing for the Gods and this was the joyful incident when all the Gods are dancing, so Adi Shakti is there to help them." Anand Thandev, meaning "Joyful Dance," was the name given by Shri Mataji to the picture. After this announcement Shri Mataji said Mr. Koli should make thousands of copies of this picture and give it out to yogis all over the world so each one could have one in his or her house. It brings joy and love to everyone.

 He is the giver of wisdom SHRI GANESHA The principle of Ganesha is extremely subtle. It is the subtlest of subtle. And it exists in everything. It exists in the matter in the form of vibrations.. Shri Ganesha is the first one who was established in the matter. As a result, we can see He exists in the sun. He exists in the moon. He exists in the whole universe, in the whole creation and He continues to exist in human beings also. He can go on a little mouse so He must be very minute. He is as minute as He is great. He surpasses all the Deities because of His wisdom. He is the giver of wisdom. He gives us wisdom. He makes us learn. He is our guru in that respect, Mahaguru, because He teaches us how we should behave. If you try to surpass Him and try to misbehave, even the Mother won't support because She knows that those who surpass Shri Ganesha are also the people who will never respect the Mother. So He is the epitome of respect for Mother – the epitome. He does not know other Gods. He does not know Sadashiva. He does any not know anybody else, but He only respects the Mother. So He is the one who is the power of devotion and complete surrender to Mother and that is why He is the most powerful Deity among all the Deities and nobody can surpass Him in His power. Vighna-nāshin the destroyer of obstacles Samastarjagad'adhāra dādhāra the supporter of all the worlds

 He is the commander-in-chief SHRI KARTIKEYA Kartikeya was the son of Parvati Uma, who was just a mother of these two children, Ganesha and Kartikeya. Kartikeya represents the great captain or the leader of all the ganas, like a commander- in-chief. Ganesha is the king, but He is the commander-in-chief. To be in command is different from being a master. The master owns it. A commander does not own it. He does not own it. That is also lost, possession is also lost. We just command it. And that is the state we have to come to now, from Ganesha state to the state of Kar- tikeya – the other way around. Ganesha is nice. He is the king, very nicely sitting down with all the powers. In a sense He is there, but Kartikeya is the one who commands innocence, gives you a power of that commandment. That commanding spirit comes in the men through their talking, through their dynamism, through their person- al achievements; for the women through their loving power, through their forbearance, through their gracious behaviour, forgiveness, compassion. So let us develop that today, that we can command it. That means it is not that which we have, but in a position we are to command. I hope you understand what is Kartikeya. Sura-sainya surakshaka) the benevolent guardian of the army of devas Shikhandi-kruta ketana the lord of the peacock banner

 She is the pure virgin SHRI´GAURI Gauri is the mother of Shri Ganesha and She produced Shri Ganesha because She was having a bath and, to protect Her chastity, She created Shri Ganesha. In the same way, the Kundalini is the Gauri and we have got Ganesha sitting in the Muladhara chakra. So we have the Muladhara as the abode of the Gauri, of the Kundalini.. This power of Gauri has to be respected because She is our Mother. She is our individual mother. She has given us second birth. She is the one who knows all about us. She is so gentle, so kind. How She slowly rises – She does not give us trouble. She takes all the trouble of penetrating through these centres and She gives us this second birth because She understands everything, She knows everything, She organizes everything. She brings forth all the beauty that you are. Once you start developing that beauty within yourself, then will be surprised how powerful you are. We have to thank you our Mother, our Kundalini, the Gauri for giving us Realization and to know that we have to every time awaken Her, every time we have to expand Her and every time to worship Her, so that we always keep our Realization intact and keep our ascent intact. Gauryai Dhatryai the supporter of the universe

 He is seated on the lotus SHRI BRAHMADEVA || In India, Brahmadeva is not worshipped except there is one temple where they worship Brahmadeva, otherwise Brahmadeva has no temple or anything. Sometimes Brahmadeva also incarnated, but He only takes forms. In our evolutionary process He has taken different forms. He came on this Earth in different ways. He created also an atmosphere of many great prophets around Himself so that they could preserve the dharma of this universe. Of course, Brahmadeva is the one who is the creator, who has created this universe and who is the one who is busy still creating and doing lots of things for you people. The right side is what you call the Brahma's, Brahmadeva's of creation and the Brahma Shakti, as they call it. This is the power Brahma that is flowing through you. We call it the power of the spirit, it is true, but the power of the spirit flows on your central nervous system. It is the most important thing, that the intellect has to leave its limitedness to the unlimited intelligence which covers the whole universe. That is the Brahma Shakti described. That is the all- pervading power of God. That is the power of the love of God. Hirany hecosmic egg of creation Gars

 She is the destroyer of ignorance SHRI SARASWATI V Saraswati is the Goddess of learning and Mahasaraswati is the God- dess of knowledge, which is pure knowledge. Now the Goddess of learning, Saraswati, has got four arms. She wears white clothes because it is a sign of purity. She is a virgin. Then She has in Her hand the veena. That is the instrument which was the first instru- ment that was created by the Gods to play the classical music or you can say the music that was appreciated by the Gods. So that one is the vina. And in the two other hands, one has got a rosary in the hand, in the sense a person who is learned should be a person who should be very much detached. And then in the left hand She has a book, so that means that the power of Saraswati gives you the full creativity by which you can create books. We must know hat are in the books, which means in the scriptures.. The creativity of Saraswati adds to the artist. With the worship of Saraswati, you can read books, you can create dances, music for the amusement of human beings, but actually the Saraswati Puja is meant for people of ordinary awareness. That means ordinary or normal human aware- ness. But for Sahaja Yogis, it is the Mahasaraswati which is to be wor- shipped.. Another blessing of Saraswati is that you can have the knowledge of Sahaja Yoga. Pradnyātmikā the essence of all intelligence Tariya union with the diviuriyā

 She is auspicious good fortune SHRI LAKSHMI Lakshmi is the Goddess who stands on the lotus. She represents all the well-being, the wealth, the glory of wealth, the decoration of wealth – whichever is auspicious. Whatever is not auspicious is not wealth. So She is a lady who stands on a lotus, showing that a per- son who has got wealth has to be a person who does not assert his pressures on people, who does not push people around, who does not pressurize. And then She is a lady. She is a mother. So wealth is the first opening to our seeking. But when you start seeking wealth, you realize that the superficial wealth that you are seeking is not suf ficient. It is not going to give you complete joy. So you start seeking the deeper wealth.. A Gruha Lakshmi is the one who has to be a noble woman, has to be an example in the family. She is the one who is the source of comfort. What comfort can you give Her? To food properly, you Her the greatest comfort is that you eat your sleep well, you keep well. A Raja Lakshmi is a dignified queen. She is the one who is the glory of the country. She has to be a glorious woman. She has to be a woman with all the attributes of a queen.. So with this left hand She is giving all the time. And with the right hand She protects. Shânti the one who is peace Yoga Lakshmi the spiritual richness of yoga

 He is the one who incarnated ten times SHRI VISHNU As Sahaja Yoga is established as dharma, we have to know about Shri Vishnu who is the basis of dharma. Later on He came on this Earth as Shri Ram, then as Shri Krishna and ultimately as Kalki. It is a beautiful evolution of Shri Vishnu.There were ten avatars, ten incarnations of Shri Vishnu. Now Vishnu is the one who grows to be the Virat, to be the macrocosm. Dharma is within and that is why this Vishnu principle is to be awakened within yourself. And this principle then expands in many ways. Because Vishnu is the one who cures, we call Him a Dhanvantari. That means a doctor. He is the one who cures because He is our preserver. He is the preserver of human beings. Also He is Yama. Yama means the one who is responsible for our death. Vishnu does not like smoking. Tobacco He does not like. He does not like alcohol. He does not like these drugs. He hates drugs. He does not like many medicines that human beings are produc- ing. The work of Vishnu is to give you Realization, the emancipation of human beings, the evolution of human beings. Larya-rasthita the one who pervades the universe Par Dharma-qupa the one who safeguards dharma

 She is the idealof womanhood SHRI FATIMA The last Mahalakshmi principle came as Fatima. Fatima, as the Gruha Lakshmi, She stayed at home. She did not show off. She was not the one who went out. She stayed at home, looked after the household, looked after their children and made them two great warriors. Her children and Her husband, they fought for right. They fought for the truth. She was a Gruha Lakshmi. The Gruha Lakshmi is the one who is represented in the life of Fatima, who was the daughter of Mohammed-sahib. Now She is always born in a relationship to a which is of virginity, of purity. So She comes as a sister or She guru comes as a daughter.. At a young age, She had these two sweet children who died in the war in Karbala. What a brave woman, the She established the Shia system. Her husband also died and way She did all that on Her own. Living behind the purdah, living behind the walls, She managed everything. You have to keep Fatima awak- ened within yourself. In the Islamic culture, a housewife was given a very, very important place. Mohammed understood that unless and until women are kept absolutely chaste, absolutely pure, there cannot be the Kingdom of God. Sayyeda-Tun- Nisa-el-Alameen घ the leader of all women Malik-e-tathir the owner of purity

 EGO

 He is the true garu SHRI ADI GURU Many people on this Earth came as gurus, as real gurus. The mani- festation of this great principle of the primordial master is called as Dattatreya. They came on this Earth many times and they tried to establish within us our sustenance, our dharma with this central force of evolution. It is only through the establishment of sustenance that we can evolve. All of them are the incarnation of the same spirit.. Thus we had the middle path built in by the gurus in the centre of our being. These gurus came on this Earth to remove fanaticism. The last of them came as Shirdi Sai Nath. He was the one who had said very clearly that to speak ill of any other religion is sin. Nothing can be more powerful than that. The greatest guru that we have is love, Sahaj love. It is the guru within us which teaches us, which somehow or other leads us. We are led into that great line of un- derstanding, for which we do not have to go to any college, to any school for education. It is something so much within that it works and expresses itself – expresses like a light. Loka-quru he guru of the universe Guru sākshat Parabrahma. the guru is truly the supreme spirit

 He is the bestower of auspriciousness SHRI SHIVA Look at Shiva. He likes everything. What does He wear? Snakes – He likes all kinds of animals. Every type of thing that we think is not good, ugly, for Him they are not.. He is the source of joy. He is the one who gives us joy and the one that makes us joyous. The real joy is only possible if, in your heart, His reflection is there. The quality of Shiva is that He beautifies everything that is created by Brahmadeva, evolved by Vishnu. He is the one who does the subtle work of cre- ating aestheticS. Shiva is the ultimate we have to achieve. Shiva is represented in our Spirit, so to become Shiva is the ultimate aim of everything else. The rest of it is all created, like Vishnu tattva and Brahmadeva, just to create human beings, to evolve them and then ultimately lead them to Shiva. That is the ultimate. Shiva tattva is in- nocent. Absolutely innocent it is. It is very powerful and extremely innocent. And the secret to achieve, it is only just to please - just to please. If you please Shiva . He will grant the Satchitananda state.. He gives that eternal longevity which comes through the spirit. This is the blessing of Shiva tattva. Sarva-sahaɔ the bearer of everything Vishwambharieshwara the supreme lord of the universe

 She is the protection SHRI PARVATI The cardiac centre is governed by the Deity Jagadamba, the Mother of the universe. Parvati, wife of Shiva, the power of Shiva, takes Her place here to help these struggling evolutionary human beings who are trying to evolve themselves, to protect them from the satanic, from the demonic forces. She is known as Lalita. She is known by many names. They say She has been incarnated 108 times.. She is the essence of raksha, that is the protection. And She is the Mother of this world, Jagadamba. Shiva is the guru. Parvati is the Shakti. When Parvati made Shri Ganesha, He was the son of Parvati alone. There was no father. Parvati Herself wanted to have a child of Her own. There were angels who were dedicated either to Vishnu or to Shiva, like the ganas who were dedicated to Shiva alone, so She wanted to have Her own son who could permeate Her powers on this Earth. So to begin with, when the Shakti created this universe and Sadashiva was watching Her creation, the first thing She created on this Earth was innocence and the embodiment of that innocence was Shri Ganesha. Naga-putrika the daughter of the mountain lord

 She destroys the demons SHRI DURGA Durga's qualities are that She is protective of Her children. She is very gentle, very soft with Her children and She is extremely hor- rifying to the satanic people, to the negative people. Either She is extremely gentle or She is extremely horrifying. So because She has a double function, it is one to look after Her children and another to protect Her children from the devils. She has to be very quick about it, to fight them and to, in every way, frighten them and to be alert about it. You have seen how Durga used to protect all the seek- ers, the sadhakas, and how She killed the people who have been troubling, torturing, killing the seekers of truth. Her whole advent was to protect them from all these evil forces. In those days that was the most important work. So that is how the sadhakas came up to these modern times and now they are seekers of truth or they have found the truth. You are worshipping Durga and all these Godesses to thank them because if they had not saved you at that time, you would have been so frightened. You would have become bad people and would not have been here. That is why we are you thankful to them for saving us and giving us this protection at that time when we were very helpless. Kala-rātri the dark night of dissolution Savitri the life-giving power of the sun

 He is the king of kings SHRI RAMA The sweetness of Shri Rama, the way He used to make people feel comfortable, an example is of an oyster who gets a little stone into the body of the shell, takes out a kind of a shiny liquid and covers it with that shiny liquid and makes it into a pearl to be comfortable. Now He did not want His own comfort. Rama is a little bit different, that He wanted to make everyone into a diamond or a pearl so that the other person would shine and would look nice and that is how He felt comforted. The benevolence of Shri Rama was shown when He started ruling the people. He was the one who cared for the needs of the people. For Him, it was important that the people whom He ruled should be happy and joyous. He looked after them with great love.. Shri Rama, by His character, by His balance, His peace and His mildness and His sweetness has shown us how a king should be a benevolent king and, at the same time, a very loving husband and a loving father and a person in dharma. He has given you a fatherhood within yourself because Shri Rama represents the fatherhood. Let us decide that we are going to have Ramraj in Sahaja Yoga, where there is benevolence, there is love, compassion, security, peace, joy, discipline among ourselves. The whole disciplining is within ourselves. Danta calm and patient Satya-vikrama. valiant in the name of truth

 She is the power of Shri Rama SHRI SITA From Shri Rama's life we learn a lot and from Sitaji's life also. Both of them have done so much for us, bringing forth such a great life. All their lives they suffered and suffered and suffered. They lived in the villages. They lived in the forest. While they were the king and the queen, they had never known what is discomfort. They travelled all the way with bare feet. They went through all kinds of tortures of life. Sita was taken away by Ravana who was a horrid man. There She showed Her greatness. The characters of different nature, like Sita and Shri Rama, they were showing the complementary attributes and if that is so, then the husband-wife's relations are beautiful.. Ravana was such a horrid fellow. He did all kinds of things to Her, but She kept absolutely calm and quiet, waiting for Her husband to come back. Can we think of such women in modern times, so satis- fied with themselves, so much in balance, so much full of confidence and strength? This is the message of Sita's life. A woman, when she acts, she has to act like a woman. The same thing she may do as the man does, but she has to be a woman. Sitaji was Shri Lakshmi and .... Sitaji was the one who was the power of Shri Rama. Nirmala. Sita, purity

 He is the essence of dharma SHRI KRISHNA He tried to break all the concepts. The first concept He broke was have to be like an ascetic in looks. He broke this that concept. you He lived like the king. In His childhood He used to go and play with the cows and there He would use a peacock's feather to decorate Himself. And He would listen to the beautiful music of the River Yamuna and reproduce it. He was leela. He was the one who created all kinds of mirth. Mirth is something where you feel tickled. So He tried to create mirth, never seriousness. But He was not frivolous. He was Yogeshwara. He was not frivolous, so this difference between frivolity and mirth is to be understood only through Him because He is also discretion. Mirth is joy-giving. Frivolity is destructive. Life is for us to enjoy, nothing else. But because we are not free people, we cannot enjoy. There is no bondage of any evil thought which keeps you down. It is so subtle, but penetrating into everything that i That is Shri Krishna's beautiful flute which creates a picture gross. of the nature. The description, the whole thing becomes silent like a picture. Maha-nidhi the one who encompasses all Covinda-pati supreme lord who knows pure speech

 She is the one who sustains the power re u SHRI RADHA The Adi Shakti came on this Earth as Radha. She is the same who came as the Mother of Christ.. Ra is energy and dha means the one who has sustained it. She is the sustainer of that energy. And Radha, who was His energy, was known for alhadadayini. Alhadada- yini means the one who is joy-giving. Alhad is even more than joy... Alhad means a bubbling of joy. When you see somebody and they are bubbling with joy, that is Her power. And She was the power of Shri Krishna ... the one who gives you that joy which creates, raises your hair with joy. One day She felt jealous of the flute that Shri Krishna was carrying on His lips and She asked Shri Krishna, "What is so special about this flute, that she is always at Your lips?" Shri Krishna smiled and said, "Why don't You go and ask the flute itself?" So She went to the flute and asked, "What is your speciality, that you are always at the lips of My Lord, the Lord of the Universe?" She said, "Shri Radha, don't You know that I have no speciality? I have left in me. I am a hollow personality. The only thing I know is No ego that the Lord is playing the melody and I listen to it. I am amused at people when they say that the flute is being played." Shri Radha's love was so great that for Her She did not think of dharma, but just to be at the command of Her Lord. Rādhā-Krishna the one who sustains the power of Shri Krishna

 She is the announcer SHRI VISHNUMAYA Shri Krishna was born the day His sister was born and this Vishn- maya was transformed into lightning later on. She was the one who announced the existence of Shri Krishna at that time, that "He is born and He is living, He is in the present" This is the job of the left Vishuddhi, of the lightning. Our destiny is to become part and parcel of the whole and that is how Vishnumaya asserts Herself, shines and announces. When you have become part and parcel of the whole, what is there to feel shy to tell about it.? Vishnumaya is the power of a woman. The power of a woman is not enslaving .... for men, that they should appreciate you morning until evening, every person on the road must look at you. The subtler part of this Vishnumaya is that She knows the truth. When She shines you can see everything in Her. Even for a short time, She exposes in the darkness everything. In the same way, when Vishnumaya starts acting on you, then She exposes the truth to you. The power of a woman is like that of the Mother Earth. See how much She has done for you. She has given you all the greenery, the beauty. Wherever She goes down, She fills Herself up with water and She gives you such joy and happiness and bears all the problems of the world despite whatever things we have done to Her. That is what we are. Ladillatā samaruchi dazzlingʻlike lightning Stri shakti the power of womanhood

 He is the God of wealih SHRI KUBERA Shri Krishna is Kubera. He is the God of wealth. But at the same time, He is a very mischievous God. Kubera, He is the supplier of wealth. He looks after people who do not have money. He gives money to people who stand by truth, who enjoy the life of truth. It is by His work that people enjoy wealth, otherwise they do not. They have this much, they want to have more – that means they do not enjoy the wealth. So this Kubera is working out all these tricks. He is a very tricky, an extremely tricky personality. He puts the tricks, every action after every action. Now money matters – He first befools you that you run after it and then you just discover that it was stupidity. It is so plain in every way that you should be generous. That is the quality of Kubera. He is an extremely generous personality and that is the personality you should be. If your Nabhi chakra is satisfied, you have achieved the state of Kubera. That is very important, to see that your Nabhi should be satisfied. He is doing His job. I should He is working it out. But people are not understanding that this say is a divine blessing. Lila-dhara. the one who has the material world as his play Santulaka the one who restores balance

 10

 He is the embodiment of forgiven iveness SHRI JESUS'CHRIST Christ has shown by His life that, although He had to suffer so much, He was so patient and courageous. His life has given us an example of what we should be, how we should behave when we are facing problems because of the ignorance of people. In these sufferings, Christ never cried or wept. He went through it in a very resolute manner. So what we have to learn from His life is that we should not be afraid. Whatever might be happening to us, we should not be afraid. But times have changed and people do not torture any- one because of spirituality. It is not there. It is finished. Christ wiped out all that from human minds and people respect you for being spiritual. This is the message of Christ's life and we all should be very happy that He has shown us this path. Christ was the embodiment of forgivenes. He is there to look after you in every trouble, in kind of turmoil. He is going to help us in every way, all the every time and the only way is to surrender, to forgive. That is the quality of Christ we have to imbibe. Alpha-cha-omegā. the one who is the alpha and the omega Dwāra the narrow gate

 He is the one who is enlightened SHRI BUDDHA Normally the right-sided people are extremely thin, but Buddha is very fat. Normally the right-sided people are extremely serious . but Buddha is laughing all the time with both His hands like this, en- joying Himself. See the contrast. Buddha is the one who is realized, the one who is the enlightened one. who was compassion, who was knowledge, who was joy. In His life He never criticized anyone. He .... is the one who has taught us so many beautiful things by His own life. And if we have to really imbibe His spirit within ourselves, we have to have that detachment from within. In the light of Buddha, you can see your ego very clearly. And He is the killer of your ego. He is the one who finishes off your ego. Now Buddha told three things which are very important, which are very useful for Sahaja Yogis to follow. He said, "Buddham Sharanam Gachami – I surrender myself to the enlightened one." The second is "Dhammam Sharanam Ga- .... chami." That is dharma. Our dharma is Vishwa Nirmala Dharma. That means now we have become universal beings. At the end He said, "Sangham Sharanam Gachami." This is a very important one also. It is the most important thing. Surrender yourself to collectivity. Shri Buddhao the one who is the knower

 She is the destroyer and the protecte or SHRI MAHAKALI Mahakali has a double role all the time. She is at two extremes. On One side She is full of joy, the giver of joy. She is very happy when She sees Her disciple are joyous. Joy is Her own quality. It is Her en- erg. This is the energy of Mahakali that gives you all that joy after Realization and the joy you enjoy among yourselves. All these are the qualities of Mahakali. She is extremely loving, full of joy, full of happiness and She is the one who is extremely cruel, wrathful. She is the one who is the slayer of all the demons and the evil and those people who try to do evil. The Mahakali Shakti is the primordial shakti within us and the Kundalini is the Mahakali Shakti. And She remains as a virgin within you. That means She is purity. She has a power to purify.. And that purity, if we cannot imbibe it within us, we cannot be Sahaja Yogis. She is giving you your ascent through Kundalini. She is purity. She is giving you all the powers. She is pro- tecting you all the time. She is giving you joy.. She is the expert of war affairs. She is the one who makes people work and She is the one who makes them fight. The power of Mahakali is that She de- stroys all the enemies that stand in your way. All the rakshasas, all the devils, all the negative forces, She tries to destroy so that your part should be all right. Shukra-nindakw nāshini the destroyer of the enemies of holiness Bhaktänandamayi the source of eternal joy

 He is the great warrior SHRI MAHAVIRA Mahavira is the incarnation of Bhairavanath or you call Him as Saint Michael. Mahavira had to go through lots of searching. Of course, He was a angel, but He came as a human being and He had to find out the thing of the left side and how the left side acts.. Vira means a person who is brave, who is chivalrous – because only He could do this. So only He could enter into the being fully and could kill or, you can say, destroy those horrible rakshasas, devils, all these nega- tive things that come to us.. So we have to thank really very much Mahavira who has given us this power to remove our left-sided problems, who has given us this light in our hand which He Himself vibrates and He Himself tries to throw some light on the obscure things - about Me also. Because of Him only, we can get cured of so many physical and mental troubles. You know that the left side can be easily cured if you use the three-candle treatment. That shows Mahavira is only fond of light. He does not like darknes. It is Mahavira who tries to save you and to correct you. Märtanda Bhairava bright like the sun Maha-Bhairara the great all-powerful Bhairava

 He is the doer ofmiraclos SHRI HANUMAN The speciality of Hanumana was that He was an angel. Angels are born like angels. They are angels and they are not human beings. They are born with the angelic qualities. The angels are a special category. They do not take up any problems upon themselves. They just solve them. If there is a problem, it is the angels who solve for the saints, as well as for the incarnations. And they are to be told sometimes, "Don't jump in just now, we are working out on the stage now, you will jump when we'll ask you." They are ready standing at the door just to jump in, so anxious. And they are fixed quantities. You can rely on them completely. For example, Shri Hanumana, as you know Him as an angel, has great capacities, great powers and it is His right to use them. And He is very aware of it. He does ev- erything very amusingly, uses His powers very amusingl. They are SO confident. They are absolutely aware, absolutely identified with their personality, with their powers, with themselves. So much of dynamism and so much of humility – what a combination it is. And that is what you have to just manifest. Vayu vāhana /the one whose vehicle is the wind Bhakti-shakti samādhikāri master of balancing power and devotion

 LEGO

 Sahaja.yoga. dae one who grants self realization Dera-kārya samudyatā the one who emerges for divine purpose

 She is the Divine Mother SHRI ADI SHAKTI Whatever is created in this universe, and in many uni- verses, is the work of the Adi Shakti. The Adi Shakti is the one who embodies the desire of God Almighty. But Adi Shakti, being the Mother, She had Her own way of ex- pression, that She thought She must create the mirrors for God Almighty to see His face, to see His image, to see His character and that is how this long range of evolution took place. This evolution had to work out this way because they had to know from where they came. We must know that we come from nature. The seeking also is given to you by Adi Shakti. If you leave it to this all-pervading power of Divine Love, to this power of Adi Shakti, Paramchaitanya, nothing is difficult, nothing is so bad that you cannot man- age.. This power of the Adi Shakti, which we call Param- chaitanya, is the power that loves you. It has complete con- trol of nature. It understands. It thinks. It knows everything. Everything about you it knows. It works in every angle, in every walk of your life. And what is Adi Shakti? It is the will of God.

 They are with Me THE DEITIES It was decided a long time back before l incarnated. They had a big meeting in the heavens, all the thirty-five crores of Gods. The Deities were there present to decide what was to be done. This is the ultimate that we have to do for human beings. It is to open their Sahasrara, to open their awareness to the spirit, to the real knowledge of the Divine, to remove the darkness of ignorance. And it has to be spontaneous because it has to work, the living force of God. Also it had to be very quick. So all the Gods requested that now I, the Adi Shakti, had to take birth. They all had tried their best. They did whatever was possible. The saints were made by them, few. They incarnated and people made religions out of but very them, which were perverted, brought them a bad name – no reality in those religions. These religions were money-oriented or power- oriented. There was no divine force working. Actually it was all anti- divine. How to now turn human beings away from these superficial religions, these perverted paths of destruction? How to tell them about all these established organizations? For ages they have been ruling, making money, making power. SUBSCRIPTIONS contact@divinecoolbreeze.org CONTENT editor@divinecoolbreeze.org PRINTED at King Printing Company Inc. Lowell Massachusetts USA and Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. Pune Maharashtra India renew your subscription to THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE at www.divinecoolbreeze.org

 It was a tremendous task. It had to be done with great patience and love. It was a very delicate work also because they believed in those religions – innocent people, simple people – to blast them, that this is all nonsense, they are not religions, they are against the incarnations, against all the prophets, against all the saints. That is why all the real saints had to suffer. It was a powerful work that was to be done and that is why Adi Shakti had to take birth on this Earth. It had to be before the sixth of May because the sixth of May was the doomsday in that year. So it was done on the fifth of May in the nick of the time. It was all decided beforehand and every Deity's job was allotted to all of them. Very efficient Deities, very obedient, they knew Me very well, completely dedicated and devoted. They knew Me very, very well. Every end of My hair they knew. I did not have to teach them protocol. Love itself gives you protocol, but love that is divine. It is not selfish love. It is not the way we "love my child, my husband, my country, my clothes." It is the love which is divine, which spreads from your heart, from your spirit, like the light of knowl- edge. What a tremendous task it was. PHOTOGRAPHS SHRI GANESHA Shri Ganesha Puja YEAR | SHRI LAKSHMI Rajalakshmi Puja 1983 | SHRI ADI GURU Guru Puja 1988 SHRI SHIVA Shivaratri Puja year uncertain | SHRI KRISHNA Shri Krishna Puja 1986 | SHRI KUBERA Shri Krishna Shri Kubera Puja 2002 SHRIJESUS Easter Puja 2008 | SHRI BUDDHA Buddha Purnima 1983 WORDS ANAND THANDEV Lena Koli | SHRI GANESHA Ganesha Puja 1989 | SHRI KARTIKEYA Shri Kartikeya Puja 1986 | SHRI GAURI Shri Gauri Puja 1991 | SHRI BRAHMADEVA Shri Krishna Pujas 1986 & 1994 and 18 May 1981 and 20 February 1986 | SHRI SARASWATI Shri Saraswati Puja 1990| SHRI LAKSHMI Diwali Puja 1982 | SHRI VISHNU Shri Vishnu Puja 1994 and Shivaratri Puja 2002 and 17 August 1990 SHRI FATIMA Diwali Puja 1990 and Hamsa Puja 1991 and Shri Fatima Pujas 1991 & 1993 | SHRI ADI GURU 6 & 7 February 1981 and Guru Puja 2004 | SHRI SHIVA Shivaratri Pujas 1999 & 1991 & 1983 | SHRI PARVATI 22 February 1977 and 4 September 1981 and 7 September 1986 | SHRI DURGA Shri Krishna Puja 1990 and Navaratri Pujas 1995 and 1991 | SHRI RAMA Shri Rama Puja 1887 | SHRI SITA Shri Rama Puja 1987 | SHRI KRISHNA 23 August 1986 | SHRI RADHA Shri Krishna Pujas 1983 & 1984 and Shri Saraswati Puja 1990 and 9 July 1989 SHRI VISHNUMAYA Shri Vishnumaya Puja 1988 and 8 August 1980| SHRI KUBERA Shri Kubera Puja 2002 and Shri Krishna Pujas 1997 & 1995 SHRI JESUS Christmas Pujas 2003 & 1993 | SHRI BUDDHA Shri Buddha Puja 1991| SHRI MAHAKALI Shri Mahakali Pujas 1990 & 1989| SHRI MAHAVIRA Shri Mahavira Puja 1991 | SHRI HANUMAN Shri Hanuman Puja 1989 | SHRI ADI SHAKTI Shri Adi Shakti Pujas 1996 & 1994 DEITIES Sahasrara Puja 1988| DEITIES (back cover) Shri Ganesha Puja 1982 and 20 April 1985

 Ta be awakened within you DEITIES THE All these miracles are done through the Mahamaya Power. This power acts through these forces, through these Deities, but today it is being incarnated in its full force. It is acting through you. It is act- ing towards you. It is helping you in a very big way which I do not know if the complicated brains are aware.. How the Deities, how My children are one with each other, how they are enjoying the rap- port of each other – that is the first sign of a Sahaja Yogi. Is he getting related to the Deities? Is he behaving in the way the Deities behave? They do not question. They just love Me. That is all – just love. And in that love, they play tricks on Me I know. I do not mind. All such little, little tricks played on Me are perfectly all right because they love Me. There are so many instances I can give you, where they have expressed their sweet love for Me. In the same way, I find the Sahaj Yogis. The Deities, they are working twenty-four hours, all the months and all the years around continuously because they have a continuous supply of energy, which you can also have. The Deities are around sitting now here, all of them peering into you, all of them judging you, having a big meeting there. "Who is who? Where is the attention of this gentleman? Where is he looking? What is he doing?" They are all sitting here. But at the same time, they have flowers, divine flowers, divine blessings and all the angels are just going around. I can see them.



----------------------

2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
2011 issue 6 – volume twenty-four number six
wysrscsessces
533535335933339030390089933333333330
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-1.txt 
 fias
Anand Thandev
joyfuldance
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-2.txt 
 After coming to Sahaja Yoga, Mr. Koli
put all the pictures of the Gods he had
in the ocean.
"If Mother is Shri Adi Shakti," he said,
"I don't need the other pictures." But
he did not have the heart to throw the
picture away of the gods dancing at the
Feet of Shri Adi Shakti.
"Mother," he asked, "I feel You are the
one who is sitting there, but what is the
meaning of this picture?"
"All the Gods had a meeting in heaven,"
Shri Mataji said, "because they did
not know what to do with humanity.
Whichever aspect of God was sent to
the Earth, the people troubled them
- Christ, Shri Rama, Shri Krishna. 'I will
go as a Mother for mankind and I will
go like a normal person with all the
worries, sadness and happiness in life!
go through
everything and also through all the
Shri Adi Shakti said. 'I will
mayas! This announcement of Shri Adi
Shakti was a blessing for the Gods and
this was the joyful incident when all the
Gods are dancing, so Adi Shakti is there
to help them."
Anand Thandev, meaning "Joyful
Dance," was the name given by Shri
Mataji to the picture. After this
announcement Shri Mataji said Mr. Koli
should make thousands of copies of this
picture and give it out to yogis all over
the world so each one could have one
in his or her house. It brings joy and
love to everyone.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-4.txt 
 He is the giver of wisdom
SHRI GANESHA
The principle of Ganesha is extremely subtle. It is the subtlest of
subtle. And it exists in everything. It exists in the matter in the form
of vibrations.. Shri Ganesha is the first one who was established in
the matter. As a result, we can see He exists in the sun. He exists in
the moon. He exists in the whole universe, in the whole creation and
He continues to exist in human beings also. He can go on a little
mouse so He must be very minute. He is as minute as He is great.
He surpasses all the Deities because of His wisdom. He is the giver
of wisdom. He gives us wisdom. He makes us learn. He is our guru
in that respect, Mahaguru, because He teaches us how we should
behave. If you try to surpass Him and try to misbehave, even the
Mother won't support because She knows that those who surpass
Shri Ganesha are also the people who will never respect the Mother.
So He is the epitome of respect for Mother – the epitome. He does
not know
other Gods. He does not know Sadashiva. He does
any
not know anybody else, but He only respects the Mother. So He is
the one who is the power of devotion and complete surrender to
Mother and that is why He is the most powerful Deity among all the
Deities and nobody can surpass Him in His power.
Vighna-nāshin
the destroyer of obstacles
Samastarjagad'adhāra
dādhāra
the supporter of all the worlds
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-5.txt 
 He is the commander-in-chief
SHRI KARTIKEYA
Kartikeya was the son of Parvati Uma, who was just a mother of
these two children, Ganesha and Kartikeya. Kartikeya represents
the great captain or the leader of all the ganas, like a commander-
in-chief. Ganesha is the king, but He is the commander-in-chief. To
be in command is different from being a master. The master owns
it. A commander does not own it. He does not own it. That is also
lost, possession is also lost. We just command it. And that is the state
we have to come to now, from Ganesha state to the state of Kar-
tikeya – the other way around. Ganesha is nice. He is the king, very
nicely sitting down with all the powers. In a sense He is there, but
Kartikeya is the one who commands innocence, gives you a power
of that commandment. That commanding spirit comes in the men
through their talking, through their dynamism, through their person-
al achievements; for the women through their loving power, through
their forbearance, through their gracious behaviour, forgiveness,
compassion. So let us develop that today, that we can command it.
That means it is not that which we have, but in a position we are to
command. I hope you understand what is Kartikeya.
Sura-sainya surakshaka)
the benevolent guardian of the army of devas
Shikhandi-kruta ketana
the lord of the peacock banner
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-6.txt 
 She is the pure virgin
SHRI´GAURI
Gauri is the mother of Shri Ganesha and She produced Shri Ganesha
because She was having a bath and, to protect Her chastity, She
created Shri Ganesha. In the same way, the Kundalini is the Gauri
and we have got Ganesha sitting in the Muladhara chakra. So we
have the Muladhara as the abode of the Gauri, of the Kundalini..
This power of Gauri has to be respected because She is our Mother.
She is our individual mother. She has given us second birth. She is
the one who knows all about us. She is so gentle, so kind. How She
slowly rises – She does not give us trouble. She takes all the trouble
of penetrating through these centres and She gives us this second
birth because She understands everything, She knows everything,
She organizes everything. She brings forth all the beauty that you
are. Once you start developing that beauty within yourself, then
will be surprised how powerful you are. We have to thank
you
our Mother, our Kundalini, the Gauri for giving us Realization and to
know that we have to every time awaken Her, every time we have to
expand Her and every time to worship Her, so that we always keep
our Realization intact and keep our ascent intact.
Gauryai Dhatryai
the supporter of the universe
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-7.txt 
 He is seated on the lotus
SHRI BRAHMADEVA
||
In India, Brahmadeva is not worshipped except there is one temple
where they worship Brahmadeva, otherwise Brahmadeva has no
temple or anything. Sometimes Brahmadeva also incarnated, but He
only takes forms. In our evolutionary process He has taken different
forms. He came on this Earth in different ways. He created also an
atmosphere of many great prophets around Himself so that they
could preserve the dharma of this universe. Of course, Brahmadeva
is the one who is the creator, who has created this universe and who
is the one who is busy still creating and doing lots of things for
you
people. The right side is what you call the Brahma's, Brahmadeva's
of
creation and the Brahma Shakti, as they call it. This is the
power
Brahma that is flowing through you. We call it the power of the
spirit, it is true, but the power of the spirit flows on your central
nervous system. It is the most important thing, that the intellect has
to leave its limitedness to the unlimited intelligence which covers the
whole universe. That is the Brahma Shakti described. That is the all-
pervading power of God. That is the power of the love of God.
Hirany hecosmic egg of creation
Gars
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-8.txt 
 She is the destroyer of ignorance
SHRI SARASWATI
V
Saraswati is the Goddess of learning and Mahasaraswati is the God-
dess of knowledge, which is pure knowledge. Now the Goddess
of learning, Saraswati, has got four arms. She wears white clothes
because it is a sign of purity. She is a virgin. Then She has in Her
hand the veena. That is the instrument which was the first instru-
ment that was created by the Gods to play the classical music or
you can say the music that was appreciated by the Gods. So that
one is the vina. And in the two other hands, one has got a rosary in
the hand, in the sense a person who is learned should be a person
who should be very much detached. And then in the left hand
She has a book, so that means that the power of Saraswati gives you
the full creativity by which you can create books. We must know
hat are in the books, which means in the scriptures.. The creativity
of Saraswati adds to the artist. With the worship of Saraswati, you
can read books, you can create dances, music for the amusement of
human beings, but actually the Saraswati Puja is meant for people of
ordinary awareness. That means ordinary or normal human aware-
ness. But for Sahaja Yogis, it is the Mahasaraswati which is to be wor-
shipped.. Another blessing of Saraswati is that you can have the
knowledge of Sahaja Yoga.
Pradnyātmikā
the essence of all intelligence
Tariya
union with the diviuriyā
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-10.txt 
 She is auspicious good fortune
SHRI LAKSHMI
Lakshmi is the Goddess who stands on the lotus. She represents all
the well-being, the wealth, the glory of wealth, the decoration of
wealth – whichever is auspicious. Whatever is not auspicious is not
wealth. So She is a lady who stands on a lotus, showing that a per-
son who has got wealth has to be a person who does not assert his
pressures on people, who does not push people around, who does
not pressurize. And then She is a lady. She is a mother. So wealth is
the first opening to our seeking. But when you start seeking wealth,
you realize that the superficial wealth that you are seeking is not suf
ficient. It is not going to give you complete joy. So you start seeking
the deeper wealth.. A Gruha Lakshmi is the one who has to be a
noble woman, has to be an example in the family. She is the one
who is the source of comfort. What comfort can you give Her? To
food properly, you
Her the greatest comfort is that
you eat your
sleep well, you keep well. A Raja Lakshmi is a dignified queen. She
is the one who is the glory of the country. She has to be a glorious
woman. She has to be a woman with all the attributes of a queen..
So with this left hand She is giving all the time. And with the right
hand She protects.
Shânti
the one who is peace
Yoga Lakshmi
the spiritual richness of yoga
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-11.txt 
 He is the one who incarnated ten times
SHRI VISHNU
As Sahaja Yoga is established as dharma, we have to know about Shri
Vishnu who is the basis of dharma. Later on He came on this Earth as
Shri Ram, then as Shri Krishna and ultimately as Kalki. It is a beautiful
evolution of Shri Vishnu.There were ten avatars, ten incarnations
of Shri Vishnu. Now Vishnu is the one who grows to be the Virat,
to be the macrocosm. Dharma is within and that is why this Vishnu
principle is to be awakened within yourself. And this principle then
expands in many ways. Because Vishnu is the one who cures, we call
Him a Dhanvantari. That means a doctor. He is the one who cures
because He is our preserver. He is the preserver of human beings.
Also He is Yama. Yama means the one who is responsible for our
death. Vishnu does not like smoking. Tobacco He does not like. He
does not like alcohol. He does not like these drugs. He hates drugs.
He does not like many medicines that human beings are produc-
ing. The work of Vishnu is to give you Realization, the emancipation
of human beings, the evolution of human beings.
Larya-rasthita
the one who pervades the universe
Par
Dharma-qupa
the one who safeguards dharma
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-12.txt 
 She is the idealof womanhood
SHRI FATIMA
The last Mahalakshmi principle came as Fatima. Fatima, as the Gruha
Lakshmi, She stayed at home. She did not show off. She was not the
one who went out. She stayed at home, looked after the household,
looked after their children and made them two great warriors. Her
children and Her husband, they fought for right. They fought for
the truth. She was a Gruha Lakshmi. The Gruha Lakshmi is the one
who is represented in the life of Fatima, who was the daughter of
Mohammed-sahib. Now She is always born in a relationship to a
which is of virginity, of purity. So She comes as a sister or She
guru
comes as a daughter.. At a young age, She had these two sweet
children who died in the war in Karbala. What a brave woman, the
She established the Shia system. Her husband also died and
way
She did all that on Her own. Living behind the purdah, living behind
the walls, She managed everything. You have to keep Fatima awak-
ened within yourself. In the Islamic culture, a housewife was given
a very, very important place. Mohammed understood that unless
and until women are kept absolutely chaste, absolutely pure, there
cannot be the Kingdom of God.
Sayyeda-Tun- Nisa-el-Alameen
घ
the
leader of all women
Malik-e-tathir
the owner of purity
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-13.txt 
 EGO
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-14.txt 
 He is the true
garu
SHRI ADI GURU
Many people on this Earth came as gurus, as real gurus. The mani-
festation of this great principle of the primordial master is called as
Dattatreya. They came on this Earth many times and they tried to
establish within us our sustenance, our dharma with this central force
of evolution. It is only through the establishment of sustenance that
we can evolve. All of them are the incarnation of the same spirit..
Thus we had the middle path built in by the gurus in the centre of
our being. These gurus came on this Earth to remove fanaticism.
The last of them came as Shirdi Sai Nath. He was the one who had
said very clearly that to speak ill of any other religion is sin. Nothing
can be more powerful than that. The greatest guru that we have
is love, Sahaj love. It is the guru within us which teaches us, which
somehow or other leads us. We are led into that great line of un-
derstanding, for which we do not have to go to any college, to any
school for education. It is something so much within that it works and
expresses itself – expresses like a light.
Loka-quru
he guru of the universe
Guru sākshat Parabrahma.
the guru is truly the supreme spirit
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-16.txt 
 He is the bestower of auspriciousness
SHRI SHIVA
Look at Shiva. He likes everything. What does He wear? Snakes – He
likes all kinds of animals. Every type of thing that we think is not good,
ugly, for Him they are not.. He is the source of joy. He is the one
who gives us joy and the one that makes us joyous. The real joy is
only possible if, in your heart, His reflection is there. The quality of
Shiva is that He beautifies everything that is created by Brahmadeva,
evolved by Vishnu. He is the one who does the subtle work of cre-
ating aestheticS. Shiva is the ultimate we have to achieve. Shiva is
represented in our Spirit, so to become Shiva is the ultimate aim of
everything else. The rest of it is all created, like Vishnu tattva and
Brahmadeva, just to create human beings, to evolve them and then
ultimately lead them to Shiva. That is the ultimate. Shiva tattva is in-
nocent. Absolutely innocent it is. It is very powerful and extremely
innocent. And the secret to achieve, it is only just to please - just to
please. If you please Shiva . He will grant the Satchitananda state..
He gives that eternal longevity which comes through the spirit. This
is the blessing of Shiva tattva.
Sarva-sahaɔ
the bearer of everything
Vishwambharieshwara
the supreme lord of the universe
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-17.txt 
 She is the protection
SHRI PARVATI
The cardiac centre is governed by the Deity Jagadamba, the Mother
of the universe. Parvati, wife of Shiva, the power of Shiva, takes Her
place here to help these struggling evolutionary human beings who
are trying to evolve themselves, to protect them from the satanic,
from the demonic forces. She is known as Lalita. She is known by
many names. They say She has been incarnated 108 times.. She is
the essence of raksha, that is the protection. And She is the Mother
of this world, Jagadamba. Shiva is the guru. Parvati is the Shakti.
When Parvati made Shri Ganesha, He was the son of Parvati alone.
There was no father. Parvati Herself wanted to have a child of Her
own. There were angels who were dedicated either to Vishnu or
to Shiva, like the ganas who were dedicated to Shiva alone, so She
wanted to have Her own son who could permeate Her powers on
this Earth. So to begin with, when the Shakti created this universe
and Sadashiva was watching Her creation, the first thing She created
on this Earth was innocence and the embodiment of that innocence
was Shri Ganesha.
Naga-putrika
the daughter of the mountain lord
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-18.txt 
 She destroys the demons
SHRI DURGA
Durga's qualities are that She is protective of Her children. She is
very gentle, very soft with Her children and She is extremely hor-
rifying to the satanic people, to the negative people. Either She is
extremely gentle or She is extremely horrifying. So because She has
a double function, it is one to look after Her children and another to
protect Her children from the devils. She has to be very quick about
it, to fight them and to, in every way, frighten them and to be alert
about it. You have seen how Durga used to protect all the seek-
ers, the sadhakas, and how She killed the people who have been
troubling, torturing, killing the seekers of truth. Her whole advent
was to protect them from all these evil forces. In those days that
was the most important work. So that is how the sadhakas came up
to these modern times and now they are seekers of truth or they
have found the truth. You are worshipping Durga and all these
Godesses to thank them because if they had not saved you at that
time, you would have been so frightened. You would have become
bad people and
would not have been here. That is why we are
you
thankful to them for saving us and giving us this protection at that
time when we were very helpless.
Kala-rātri
the dark night of dissolution
Savitri
the life-giving power of the sun
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-19.txt 
 He is the king of kings
SHRI RAMA
The sweetness of Shri Rama, the way He used to make people feel
comfortable, an example is of an oyster who gets a little stone into
the body of the shell, takes out a kind of a shiny liquid and covers
it with that shiny liquid and makes it into a pearl to be comfortable.
Now He did not want His own comfort. Rama is a little bit different,
that He wanted to make everyone into a diamond or a pearl so
that the other person would shine and would look nice and that
is how He felt comforted. The benevolence of Shri Rama was
shown when He started ruling the people. He was the one who
cared for the needs of the people. For Him, it was important that the
people whom He ruled should be happy and joyous. He looked
after them with great love.. Shri Rama, by His character, by His
balance, His peace and His mildness and His sweetness has shown
us how a king should be a benevolent king and, at the same time, a
very loving husband and a loving father and a person in dharma.
He has given you a fatherhood within yourself because Shri Rama
represents the fatherhood. Let us decide that we are going to have
Ramraj in Sahaja Yoga, where there is benevolence, there is love,
compassion, security, peace, joy, discipline among ourselves. The
whole disciplining is within ourselves.
Danta
calm and patient
Satya-vikrama.
valiant in the name of truth
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-20.txt 
 She is the power of Shri Rama
SHRI SITA
From Shri Rama's life we learn a lot and from Sitaji's life also. Both of
them have done so much for us, bringing forth such a great life. All
their lives they suffered and suffered and suffered. They lived in the
villages. They lived in the forest. While they were the king and the
queen, they had never known what is discomfort. They travelled all
the way with bare feet. They went through all kinds of tortures of life.
Sita was taken away by Ravana who was a horrid man. There She
showed Her greatness. The characters of different nature, like Sita
and Shri Rama, they were showing the complementary attributes
and if that is so, then the husband-wife's relations are beautiful..
Ravana was such a horrid fellow. He did all kinds of things to Her,
but She kept absolutely calm and quiet, waiting for Her husband to
come back. Can we think of such women in modern times, so satis-
fied with themselves, so much in balance, so much full of confidence
and strength? This is the message of Sita's life. A woman, when she
acts, she has to act like a woman. The same thing she may do as the
man does, but she has to be a woman. Sitaji was Shri Lakshmi and
....
Sitaji was the one who was the power of Shri Rama.
Nirmala. Sita,
purity
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-22.txt 
 He is the essence of dharma
SHRI KRISHNA
He tried to break all the concepts. The first concept He broke was
have to be like an ascetic in looks. He broke this
that
concept.
you
He lived like the king. In His childhood He used to go and play with
the cows and there He would use a peacock's feather to decorate
Himself. And He would listen to the beautiful music of the River
Yamuna and reproduce it. He was leela. He was the one who created
all kinds of mirth. Mirth is something where you feel tickled. So He
tried to create mirth, never seriousness. But He was not frivolous. He
was Yogeshwara. He was not frivolous, so this difference between
frivolity and mirth is to be understood only through Him because
He is also discretion. Mirth is joy-giving. Frivolity is destructive. Life
is for us to enjoy, nothing else. But because we are not free people,
we cannot enjoy. There is no bondage of any evil thought which
keeps you down. It is so subtle, but penetrating into everything that
i
That is Shri Krishna's beautiful flute which creates a picture
gross.
of the nature. The description, the whole thing becomes silent like
a picture.
Maha-nidhi
the one who encompasses all
Covinda-pati
supreme lord who knows pure speech
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-23.txt 
 She is the one who sustains the
power
re u
SHRI RADHA
The Adi Shakti came on this Earth as Radha. She is the same who
came as the Mother of Christ.. Ra is energy and dha means the
one who has sustained it. She is the sustainer of that energy. And
Radha, who was His energy, was known for alhadadayini. Alhadada-
yini means the one who is joy-giving. Alhad is even more than joy...
Alhad means a bubbling of joy. When you see somebody and they
are bubbling with joy, that is Her power. And She was the power of
Shri Krishna ... the one who gives you that joy which creates, raises
your hair with joy. One day She felt jealous of the flute that Shri
Krishna was carrying on His lips and She asked Shri Krishna, "What
is so special about this flute, that she is always at Your lips?" Shri
Krishna smiled and said, "Why don't You go and ask the flute itself?"
So She went to the flute and asked, "What is your speciality, that you
are always at the lips of My Lord, the Lord of the Universe?" She
said, "Shri Radha, don't You know that I have no speciality? I have
left in me. I am a hollow personality. The only thing I know is
No ego
that the Lord is playing the melody and I listen to it. I am amused at
people when they say that the flute is being played." Shri Radha's
love was so great that for Her She did not think of dharma, but just
to be at the command of Her Lord.
Rādhā-Krishna
the one who sustains the power of Shri Krishna
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-24.txt 
 She is the announcer
SHRI VISHNUMAYA
Shri Krishna was born the day His sister was born and this Vishn-
maya was transformed into lightning later on. She was the one who
announced the existence of Shri Krishna at that time, that "He is
born and He is living, He is in the present" This is the job of the
left Vishuddhi, of the lightning. Our destiny is to become part and
parcel of the whole and that is how Vishnumaya asserts Herself,
shines and announces. When you have become part and parcel of
the whole, what is there to feel shy to tell about it.? Vishnumaya is
the power of a woman. The power of a woman is not enslaving
....
for men, that they should appreciate you morning until evening,
every person on the road must look at you. The subtler part of
this Vishnumaya is that She knows the truth. When She shines you
can see everything in Her. Even for a short time, She exposes in the
darkness everything. In the same way, when Vishnumaya starts acting
on you, then She exposes the truth to you. The power of a woman
is like that of the Mother Earth. See how much She has done for
you. She has given you all the greenery, the beauty. Wherever She
goes down, She fills Herself up with water and She gives you such
joy and happiness and bears all the problems of the world despite
whatever things we have done to Her. That is what we are.
Ladillatā samaruchi
dazzlingʻlike lightning
Stri shakti
the power of womanhood
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-26.txt 
 He is the God of wealih
SHRI KUBERA
Shri Krishna is Kubera. He is the God of wealth. But at the same time,
He is a very mischievous God. Kubera, He is the supplier of wealth.
He looks after people who do not have money. He gives money to
people who stand by truth, who enjoy the life of truth. It is by His
work that people enjoy wealth, otherwise they do not. They have
this much, they want to have more – that means they do not enjoy
the wealth. So this Kubera is working out all these tricks. He is a
very tricky, an extremely tricky personality. He puts the tricks, every
action after every action. Now money matters – He first befools you
that you run after it and then you just discover that it was stupidity.
It is so plain in every way that you should be generous. That is the
quality of Kubera. He is an extremely generous personality and that
is the personality you should be. If your Nabhi chakra is satisfied,
you have achieved the state of Kubera. That is very important, to see
that your Nabhi should be satisfied. He is doing His job. I should
He is working it out. But people are not understanding that this
say
is a divine blessing.
Lila-dhara.
the one who has the material world as his play
Santulaka
the one who restores balance
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-27.txt 
 10
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-28.txt 
 He is the embodiment of forgiven
iveness
SHRI JESUS'CHRIST
Christ has shown by His life that, although He had to suffer so much,
He was so patient and courageous. His life has given us an example
of what we should be, how we should behave when we are facing
problems because of the ignorance of people. In these sufferings,
Christ never cried or wept. He went through it in a very resolute
manner. So what we have to learn from His life is that we should
not be afraid. Whatever might be happening to us, we should not
be afraid. But times have changed and people do not torture any-
one because of spirituality. It is not there. It is finished. Christ wiped
out all that from human minds and people respect you for being
spiritual. This is the message of Christ's life and we all should be very
happy that He has shown us this path. Christ was the embodiment
of forgivenes. He is there to look after you in every trouble, in
kind of turmoil. He is going to help us in every way, all the
every
time and the only way is to surrender, to forgive. That is the quality
of Christ we have to imbibe.
Alpha-cha-omegā.
the one who is the alpha and the omega
Dwāra
the narrow gate
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-29.txt 
 He is the one who is
enlightened
SHRI BUDDHA
Normally the right-sided people are extremely thin, but Buddha is
very fat. Normally the right-sided people are extremely serious .
but Buddha is laughing all the time with both His hands like this, en-
joying Himself. See the contrast. Buddha is the one who is realized,
the one who is the enlightened one. who was compassion, who was
knowledge, who was joy. In His life He never criticized anyone. He
....
is the one who has taught us so many beautiful things by His own life.
And if we have to really imbibe His spirit within ourselves, we have
to have that detachment from within. In the light of Buddha, you
can see your ego very clearly. And He is the killer of your ego. He is
the one who finishes off your ego. Now Buddha told three things
which are very important, which are very useful for Sahaja Yogis to
follow. He said, "Buddham Sharanam Gachami – I surrender myself
to the enlightened one." The second is "Dhammam Sharanam Ga-
....
chami." That is dharma. Our dharma is Vishwa Nirmala Dharma. That
means now we have become universal beings. At the end He said,
"Sangham Sharanam Gachami." This is a very important one also. It is
the most important thing. Surrender yourself to collectivity.
Shri Buddhao
the one who is the knower
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-31.txt 
 She is the destroyer and the protecte
or
SHRI MAHAKALI
Mahakali has a double role all the time. She is at two extremes. On
One side She is full of joy, the giver of joy. She is very happy when
She sees Her disciple are joyous. Joy is Her own quality. It is Her en-
erg. This is the energy of Mahakali that gives you all that joy after
Realization and the joy you enjoy among yourselves. All these are
the qualities of Mahakali. She is extremely loving, full of joy, full of
happiness and She is the one who is extremely cruel, wrathful. She
is the one who is the slayer of all the demons and the evil and those
people who try to do evil. The Mahakali Shakti is the primordial
shakti within us and the Kundalini is the Mahakali Shakti. And She
remains as a virgin within you. That means She is purity. She has a
power to purify.. And that purity, if we cannot imbibe it within us,
we cannot be Sahaja Yogis. She is giving you your ascent through
Kundalini. She is purity. She is giving you all the powers. She is pro-
tecting you all the time. She is giving you joy.. She is the expert of
war affairs. She is the one who makes people work and She is the
one who makes them fight. The power of Mahakali is that She de-
stroys all the enemies that stand in your way. All the rakshasas, all the
devils, all the negative forces, She tries to destroy so that your part
should be all right.
Shukra-nindakw nāshini
the destroyer of the enemies of holiness
Bhaktänandamayi
the source of eternal joy
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-32.txt 
 He is the great warrior
SHRI MAHAVIRA
Mahavira is the incarnation of Bhairavanath or you call Him as Saint
Michael. Mahavira had to go through lots of searching. Of course,
He was a angel, but He came as a human being and He had to find
out the thing of the left side and how the left side acts.. Vira means
a person who is brave, who is chivalrous – because only He could
do this. So only He could enter into the being fully and could kill
or,
you can say, destroy those horrible rakshasas, devils, all these nega-
tive things that come to us.. So we have to thank really very much
Mahavira who has given us this power to remove our left-sided
problems, who has given us this light in our hand which He Himself
vibrates and He Himself tries to throw some light on the obscure
things - about Me also. Because of Him only, we can get cured
of so many physical and mental troubles. You know that the left
side can be easily cured if you use the three-candle treatment. That
shows Mahavira is only fond of light. He does not like darknes. It
is Mahavira who tries to save you and to correct you.
Märtanda Bhairava
bright like the sun
Maha-Bhairara
the great all-powerful Bhairava
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-33.txt 
 He is the doer ofmiraclos
SHRI HANUMAN
The speciality of Hanumana was that He was an angel. Angels are
born like angels. They are angels and they are not human beings.
They are born with the angelic qualities. The angels are a special
category. They do not take up any problems upon themselves. They
just solve them. If there is a problem, it is the angels who solve for
the saints, as well as for the incarnations. And they are to be told
sometimes, "Don't jump in just now, we are working out on the stage
now, you will jump when we'll ask you." They are ready standing at
the door just to jump in, so anxious. And they are fixed quantities.
You can rely on them completely. For example, Shri Hanumana, as
you know Him as an angel, has great capacities, great powers and
it is His right to use them. And He is very aware of it. He does ev-
erything very amusingly, uses His powers very amusingl. They are
SO confident. They are absolutely aware, absolutely identified with
their personality, with their powers, with themselves. So much of
dynamism and so much of humility – what a combination it is. And
that is what you have to just manifest.
Vayu vāhana
/the one whose vehicle is the wind
Bhakti-shakti samādhikāri
master of balancing power and devotion
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-34.txt 
 LEGO
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-35.txt 
 Sahaja.yoga. dae one who grants self realization
Dera-kārya samudyatā
the one who emerges for divine purpose
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-36.txt 
 She is the Divine Mother
SHRI ADI SHAKTI
Whatever is created in this universe, and in many uni-
verses, is the work of the Adi Shakti. The Adi Shakti is
the one who embodies the desire of God Almighty. But
Adi Shakti, being the Mother, She had Her own way of ex-
pression, that She thought She must create the mirrors for
God Almighty to see His face, to see His image, to see His
character and that is how this long range of evolution took
place. This evolution had to work out this way because they
had to know from where they came. We must know that
we come from nature. The seeking also is given to you by
Adi Shakti. If you leave it to this all-pervading power of
Divine Love, to this power of Adi Shakti, Paramchaitanya,
nothing is difficult, nothing is so bad that you cannot man-
age.. This power of the Adi Shakti, which we call Param-
chaitanya, is the power that loves you. It has complete con-
trol of nature. It understands. It thinks. It knows everything.
Everything about you it knows. It works in every angle, in
every walk of your life. And what is Adi Shakti? It is the
will of God.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-37.txt 
 They are with Me
THE DEITIES
It was decided a long time back before l incarnated.
They had a big meeting in the heavens, all the thirty-five crores of
Gods. The Deities were there present to decide what was to be
done. This is the ultimate that we have to do for human beings. It is
to open their Sahasrara, to open their awareness to the spirit, to the
real knowledge of the Divine, to remove the darkness of ignorance.
And it has to be spontaneous because it has to work, the living force
of God. Also it had to be very quick. So all the Gods requested that
now I, the Adi Shakti, had to take birth. They all had tried their best.
They did whatever was possible. The saints were made by them,
few. They incarnated and people made religions out of
but
very
them, which were perverted, brought them a bad name – no reality
in those religions. These religions were money-oriented or power-
oriented. There was no divine force working. Actually it was all anti-
divine. How to now turn human beings away from these superficial
religions, these perverted paths of destruction? How to tell them
about all these established organizations? For ages they have been
ruling, making money, making power.
SUBSCRIPTIONS contact@divinecoolbreeze.org CONTENT editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
PRINTED at King Printing Company Inc. Lowell Massachusetts USA and Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. Pune Maharashtra India
renew your subscription to THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE at www.divinecoolbreeze.org
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-38.txt 
 It was a tremendous task. It had to be done with great patience
and love. It was a very delicate work also because they believed in
those religions – innocent people, simple people – to blast them,
that this is all nonsense, they are not religions, they are against the
incarnations, against all the prophets, against all the saints. That is
why all the real saints had to suffer. It was a powerful work that was
to be done and that is why Adi Shakti had to take birth on this Earth.
It had to be before the sixth of May because the sixth of May was
the doomsday in that year. So it was done on the fifth of May in the
nick of the time. It was all decided beforehand and every Deity's job
was allotted to all of them. Very efficient Deities, very obedient, they
knew Me very well, completely dedicated and devoted. They knew
Me very, very well. Every end of My hair they knew. I did not have
to teach them protocol. Love itself gives you protocol, but love that
is divine. It is not selfish love. It is not the way we "love my child, my
husband, my country, my clothes." It is the love which is divine, which
spreads from your heart, from your spirit, like the light of knowl-
edge. What a tremendous task it was.
PHOTOGRAPHS SHRI GANESHA Shri Ganesha Puja YEAR | SHRI LAKSHMI Rajalakshmi Puja 1983 | SHRI ADI GURU Guru Puja 1988
SHRI SHIVA Shivaratri Puja year uncertain | SHRI KRISHNA Shri Krishna Puja 1986 | SHRI KUBERA Shri Krishna Shri Kubera Puja 2002
SHRIJESUS Easter Puja 2008 | SHRI BUDDHA Buddha Purnima 1983
WORDS ANAND THANDEV Lena Koli | SHRI GANESHA Ganesha Puja 1989 | SHRI KARTIKEYA Shri Kartikeya Puja 1986 | SHRI GAURI
Shri Gauri Puja 1991 | SHRI BRAHMADEVA Shri Krishna Pujas 1986 & 1994 and 18 May 1981 and 20 February 1986 | SHRI SARASWATI
Shri Saraswati Puja 1990| SHRI LAKSHMI Diwali Puja 1982 | SHRI VISHNU Shri Vishnu Puja 1994 and Shivaratri Puja 2002 and 17 August 1990
SHRI FATIMA Diwali Puja 1990 and Hamsa Puja 1991 and Shri Fatima Pujas 1991 & 1993 | SHRI ADI GURU 6 & 7 February 1981 and Guru
Puja 2004 | SHRI SHIVA Shivaratri Pujas 1999 & 1991 & 1983 | SHRI PARVATI 22 February 1977 and 4 September 1981 and 7 September
1986 | SHRI DURGA Shri Krishna Puja 1990 and Navaratri Pujas 1995 and 1991 | SHRI RAMA Shri Rama Puja 1887 | SHRI SITA Shri Rama
Puja 1987 | SHRI KRISHNA 23 August 1986 | SHRI RADHA Shri Krishna Pujas 1983 & 1984 and Shri Saraswati Puja 1990 and 9 July 1989
SHRI VISHNUMAYA Shri Vishnumaya Puja 1988 and 8 August 1980| SHRI KUBERA Shri Kubera Puja 2002 and Shri Krishna Pujas 1997 & 1995
SHRI JESUS Christmas Pujas 2003 & 1993 | SHRI BUDDHA Shri Buddha Puja 1991| SHRI MAHAKALI Shri Mahakali Pujas 1990 & 1989| SHRI
MAHAVIRA Shri Mahavira Puja 1991 | SHRI HANUMAN Shri Hanuman Puja 1989 | SHRI ADI SHAKTI Shri Adi Shakti Pujas 1996 & 1994
DEITIES Sahasrara Puja 1988| DEITIES (back cover) Shri Ganesha Puja 1982 and 20 April 1985
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-39.txt 
 Ta be awakened within you
DEITIES
THE
All these miracles are done through the Mahamaya Power. This
power acts through these forces, through these Deities, but today
it is being incarnated in its full force. It is acting through you. It is act-
ing towards you. It is helping you in a very big way which I do not
know if the complicated brains are aware.. How the Deities, how
My children are one with each other, how they are enjoying the rap-
port of each other – that is the first sign of a Sahaja Yogi. Is he getting
related to the Deities? Is he behaving in the way the Deities behave?
They do not question. They just love Me. That is all – just love. And
in that love, they play tricks on Me I know. I do not mind. All such
little, little tricks played on Me are perfectly all right because they
love Me. There are so many instances I can give you, where they
have expressed their sweet love for Me. In the same way, I find the
Sahaj Yogis. The Deities, they are working twenty-four hours, all the
months and all the years around continuously because they have a
continuous supply of energy, which you can also have. The Deities
are around sitting now here, all of them peering into you, all of them
judging you, having a big meeting there. "Who is who? Where is
the attention of this gentleman? Where is he looking? What is he
doing?" They are all sitting here. But at the same time, they have
flowers, divine flowers, divine blessings and all the angels are just
going around. I can see them.
