The Divine Cool Breeze 2 issue 1 – volume twenty-four number one 2011

 It is all within you. All this horizon is there waiting for you to greet it. 2. Turn around 8. One with the Divine 20. Message of love 22. Gifts 32. Bandhan AZ' wāhanam na jānāmi na jānāmi tavārchanam I do not know how to invoke You, I do not know how to welcome You.

 unojeuunm

 One has to develop a kind of a humility that "I have to still receive, I have to still get it, it has to work out." Now when it comes to that kind of an attitude, then you turn around. Turn around upon yourself. What have you done for Sahaja Yoga? One simple question: what have you done for Sahaja Yoga? To how many people have you given Realization? How many people have you been able to cure? How much peace have you got within yourself? How blissful are you? How much compassion have you got? How much forgiveness and patience do you have for others? How much of sharing can you do? These are the signs of Sahaja Yogis, that you break your shell. You become collective. How much do you understand others? And how much do you understand giving to others? What have you given to others, even on a material level?

 Let us see. These questions should be put to yourself. On a very material level, these questions are to be asked because the light comes down to the material level. How many people can you forgive? You are realized souls. You are prophets, no doubt. You can make others prophets, but you have to be the quality also. The quality of a prophet is his nobility. He is so noble – nobleness. In comparison with other people, who are not realized souls, he is nobler. He is more dignified. He is much more forgiving. So the whole way of dealing with others will change. He is obedient. We have to obey in Sahaja Yoga. We have to obey our good will, otherwise you are difficult people. It is impossible. Nobody can do anything to you. If you are like a thorn, how can anybody help you? So the quality of a Sahaja Yogi is measured by another kind of a measure. It is not the way human beings measure the quality of other human beings.

 5

 The sign of Sahaja Yoga is how much we can love each other, how much we understand each other, how much we can endure for others with great joy and how much we do not bother about ourselves, our families, our children. This “mine, my, me" has CC to go. It does not go by saying “go." It is a state, again. But then only you CC should be convinced, “Now I am a Sahaja Yogi." CC If you are a Sahaja Yogi, then at the time of crisis you should become thoughtless. That is one of the signs. I have seen with Myself, if there is any crisis in the family, I just become thoughtless. That means ... that God just takes you in, your problems. He puts His hand, He puts His protection and He takes you out of it and makes you absolutely thoughtless. And in that thoughtless awareness, you discover what is right, what is wrong. So even in crisis, this thoughtless awareness is all the time extremely alert. It becomes much more alert than normal. That is the sign of a Sahaja Yogi and the sign of a Sahaja Yogini.

 AVX

 ONE WITH THE DIVINE Sahasrara Puja 2002 You You must It is a very unique thing that has happened, that your Sahasraras were opened out. There were very few people in this whole world. There were some Sufis, there were some saints, feel your some other people also in China, I know, but very few. Very few got their Sahasrara depth. opened out. So whatever they said or wrote was never understood by the people. They actually tortured them. They crucified them and did all kinds of horrible things because they couldn't bear somebody getting this Realization... Every one of you has got it. Also all over the world, you have many people who have WC got their Sahasraras open. Of course, we need many more for them to understand what is this great event of such a collective opening of Sahasrara. Some have grown very much after getting their Realization – very much. They have understood Sahaja Yoga very well and they have developed their depth and their con- sciousness is really a great awareness of oneness with the Divine. One with the Divine To be one with the Divine is the greatest blessing for human beings. So far, there were human beings at a lower level of existence and they had all the problems of that level. It is those jealousies, hatred, all kinds of problems that are today of fighting, of troubling others, destroying others and not loving others. All these problems existed because their Sahasrara was not opened. So our main problem is to open the Sahasrara of the people all over the world, which is very simple, which you can all do. And it will work better if you do it collectively. If you are collective, you can work it out very well. Like that in Sahaja Yoga, so many people have come whose Sahasrara was completely opened and they felt their depth. Firstly, you must feel your depth. If you do not feel your depth and you are not one with your personality, which is so deep, then you cannot enjoy the Self Realization. First of all, you should understand yourself. If you do not understand yourself, how can you understand other people? You cannot. So first this Sahasrara should be opened out fully. Fully means complete oneness with the Divine. That is not difficult. Only you have to meditate a little bit and then it will work out. It has worked out in many people I am very happy to see and I meet such people in Sahaja Yoga who have achieved such a lot of collectivity and also the awareness of a realized soul.

 225 348 To be one with the Divine is the greatest blessing IS for human beings.

 The power of love OV is the highest and the greatest.

 ONE WITH THE DIVINE Realized awareness What is the awareness of a realized soul? That is what we have to understand... The awareness is such that you should now know what is happening in this world and how you can help it. How can you help people to get to this awareness? Unless have this full knowledge about yourself, complete strength about yourself and the confidence, you cannot do it. Sahasrara Day is to be celebrated just to strengthen your bond with the Divine, so that your consciousness becomes absolutely enlightened and you see the right point in everything... When you are meditating, also outside you should develop a state of witnessing. You should try to find out what is the matter, what is you with what is wrong with wrong you, others and how you can help. Only with your vibrations can you correct so many things Just a drop in your country, in your family, everywhere. And as you see now how Sahaja Yoga is ing, that there is such a need and such a desire to get Self Realization, but the only thing In the ocean is your approach should be full of love and full of understanding. They are coming from the darkness of ignorance and they have to go into the element, the nature of the Divine, which can be very bright for them. So slowly, slowly if you develop this passionate kindness, love for them, I am sure you can do much more to raise them. No use getting angry with them because they are so ignorant. They do not know what they are doing.... So what you have to do is to make them understand whatever they are doing, whatever they are understanding is still It is not so much yet expanded as it could have been if they were realized souls. grow- of love. poor. Ego and the power of love Even after Realization I find people have a problem. They still have the problem of the life which is finished. It is dead, but they still carry on with that and the conscious- past ness. So much of illumination also does not show what is wrong with them. For example, take the case of ego. Ego is so developed. In the Western countries where they are so developed, ego has also developed and they have to find out what is wrong with them. This ego comes from a certain consciousness that you have been something great – you are this, you are that, your parents have been great maybe, your property is great or maybe you are occupying a very big position. It can come from anything and this consciousness is against your awareness because it is not true. You are not anything being molded by these outside things, but you are molded by your own awareness within yourself. This awareness has to grow from where? It is to understand how do point.... The main thing is to understand the power of love. The power of love is the highest and the greatest and if you can manage somehow or other to give up your anger, give up your greed and also your ego – if you can do that, you can be in Sahasrara. Now just see the sport of ego. It stops your ascent further. At ego only people get lost because at ego only they move to the left or to the right and they can go too much to the this from what get ego, we right side or can go up to the left side. They can go to any extreme of these two. So first of all, we have to correct our ego. For this ego, what should we do? For this we should watch ourselves and laugh at ourselves. What do we have, of what? We are human beings. Now we have become Divine. And with the Divine within us, with this light within us, we have to understand that we are a part and parcel of the Divine, just a drop in the ocean of love. If you can reduce your ego, if you can bring it to the actual sense of your being, then it will work out better. ego ego 11

 ONE WITH THE DIVINE Faith in yourself Ego is your own enemy created by you, so you have to fight it and see for yourself from where it is coming. It might be country-wise. It might be family-wise. It can be from any- where. So first of all, we must watch out for the ego, if it is Sahasrara we have to enter into. When I was looking out for a collective happening of Sahasrara opening, I found it was the Because I am a woman of very simple habits – no pride, nothing – people used to sup- of people which was keeping Me down. I had to fight the ego of people. ego all kinds of things to Me. But I understood them because they had an ego press Me, problem. And once this ego evolves and tries to dominate, we can have Hitlers in this country. We can have all these horrible people all over the world. So the first thing you should understand is those who have ego, we should not ever subdue to them. Of course, you should not start fighting, but you have faith in yourself that you are people who have got Self Realization. You are much more powerful than they are. My powers only work out when you are realized souls. You will be surprised. They work out many things which may not work out with people with ego.... So you must have, first of all, complete faith in yourself that you are Sahaja Yogis, but not the ego. Sahaja Yogis means you cannot have ego. This ego business has come from various sources, you know that, but it has to be cleansed out. Like when the river flows, all kinds of dirt, filth flows into it, but when it say You should meets the sea it becomes the sea. In the same way, you have to become that. To become the sea, what you have to do is to forget all these tributaries which were coming into you De models of and all these wrong ideas which came to you. It can be from any source. I do not know how to name them because there is a big list of these sources. People are mad sometimes Sahaja Yoga. with this ego. Models of Sahaja Yoga So the main thing is how to watch and witness your ego, how it works, how it spoils your temperament, how it spoils your relationships, how it makes you stupid. The first thing it does is to make you very stupid and you start behaving in such a manner that people start thinking that "Oh, you are the great, stupidest person ever living." But it is of no help because if they believe that you are a stupid person what will happen? On the contrary, if you have the wisdom, if you have that peace, if you have that special temperament of enjoying everything in life and also the collective temperament, it will work out. They will be impressed because in that light they can see their own stupid- ity, their own falsehood, everything and they will realize that what they think is not true. “This gentleman is much deeper than me. What he has got, I haven't got it." This is the main thing for all of us.... You should be models of Sahaja Yoga. And that is what I have been always telling you, CC that rid of your ego. It is the worst thing because, first of all, it brings anger. You think get you are something great and you can do this, you can do that because you are a Sahaja Yogi. It is not true. On the contrary, become extremely humble – extremely humble and do right things. You do not become any more arrogant and also not full of Anger departs from you completely – completely. It gives you a balance. It gives you wisdom by which you see what is your job, why are you on this Earth, why this energy has come to you, why you are a divine personality. It is a very, very great responsibility. You do not have to look after yourself. No, the Divine will look after you – absolutely. It anger. you you. It will look after you. It will do whatever is needed for you. But in case will protect you have this ego, you shut out yourself from the reality, from the truth and you become very hot-tempered and an arrogant personality. This has to go away. 12

 Sahaja Yogis means you cannot have ego.

 ONE WITH THE DIVINE More than saints ... more than saints because they can express themselves better. They Tam here have powers in them which they can utilize, which they can show to other people that Sahaja Yogis are you are so powerful, that you can manage things much better than what you think. For to tell you example, say there is a problem and the whole world is upset about it. The only thing is if you know how to witness it, it will disappear. It will disappear in the whole world. It about it. cannot remain there. So nowadays the world is full of turmoil, as you see, full of nonsensical people coming up, full of quarrelsome people. Dominating people are overpowering. At this time, if you just see this in the witness state, this will disappear because you are very powerful. But you must know, first of all, that you must have the equipment to use the power. If you that equipment within you, you can do it. But with your ego you cannot. Ego is the greatest hurdle for your ascent. You see that ego is at a place where you have to just cross to go to the Sahasrara. And to break the Sahasrara is very easy otherwise. But if there is ego, you are already lost in that ego. So against all this one has to understand to “watch yourself." Is it egoistical? What does it think about itself? Ego is very limited. It makes you a realized soul? You do not understand. You just are involved in your own affairs, in your family, in your children, in your something like that – very low. But if have a egoless temperament, then you are very effective, the whole power works. What I have seen, the power of Sahasrara is so great. In some people it has worked wonders. They have worked it well, greatly. But, because of ego, so many people are still not of that level that we can say they are Sahaja Yogis. Now, as it is, I am here to tell about it. In those days when these saints came in, nobody was there to guide them, to tell them anything. On the contrary, they were so much destroyed by the surroundings and people never understood why they did not have any ego, why they were so humble, so they were misused. But now you have powers. You must know how to use your powers. But that should not give you, by any chance, any ego that you have powers. On the contrary, you should be humble. You have the be humble and you can be humble and understand that these people are not yet realized souls. They are at a lower level. Still their ego is catching them and they are at a lower level. They have to come up. When you understand that, then you will have not only pity, but also understanding about them and a kind of a help will come to you from the Divine that will solve your problems. I find most of you have problems of a very low level sometimes. And then I am sur- prised why you are bothered about these problems. You see, you are so powerful. CC limited and you do not see the purpose of your life. Why have you become you have, if you you power to No more ego So in Sahasrara, you must know what powers are there. There are one thousand powers, one thousand powers within you which are being enlightened. If you can understand that, then of powers within you, which you have not utilized. We should use, but because of ego you cannot. With love you can. With love you can and you can do a lot. So I would request all of you today to take a vow that “We will have no more chances for our egos. We will give it up. We will give up our ego." Because there is no sense, that is an obstruction between us. When the Sahasrara wants to work, it cannot because of the ego obstruction, so better not have ego of anything. You may be a good singer. You may be anything in life. You may be some big man or anything. What is so-called has no 14 meaning. will understand what is the use of having ego because you have such a lot you manage

 WE

 ONE WITH THE DIVINE A special job What we need today are people who are egoless and who have powers completely flowing in them. With the opening of the Sahasrara, all these powers should flow. If the Sahasrara People should is fully opened, all these powers of love should flow. You will be amazed. I mean wherever Igo people just fall in love with Me. I don't know why. I do not do anything to them, but just they feel My love. That is what it should be, that people should feel your love and they should know that This is the thing: you are made as special people, very special for this whole world's emancipation. That is your job and not otherwise just collecting money and doing all kinds of nonsensical things. You are here for a very, very sensible job, which is to raise the Kundalini of people and make them aware of their greatness. feel your love. you are a lovable person. Human beings are not created only to war and fight, not created here to play politics and do all dirty tricks. Here they are not made to lead a life which is very, I would say, filthy and dirty, but in this world we are here to do such a great job of God who has created us. So this is possible if you are aware that your Sahasraras are being opened out and that in this Sahasrara resides the purity, not all these small little things about which you are worried. The power of love Some people try to take advantage of Sahaja Yoga, thinking that they can do better, they can have the help of others. Nothing of the kind – you can be helped by yourself. You do not need any help. On the contrary, you have to help others. There is no need to expect any help from anyone. Look at Me. I am an ordinary housewife otherwise, but how it has worked all over the world – by what? By just the power of love. The only trouble is that I can use My power of love, but you do not know how to use. That is the only problem. If you want to use your power of love, in meditation you can develop that love. With that, you can capture people. With that, you can understand. Their problems are that they are not Sahaja Yogis. They are not the people who are having all the blessings or the connection with the Divine. Imagine, you are connected with the Divine and the Divine is such a great thing which has created this whole universe, created you and has done all the great jobs. So what are you? You are a part and parcel of that divine power. So why not we use our divine power fully within us with love and with understanding so that you develop this wisdom within you? power of This is what is to be told to yourself, that “we are realized souls." This one is some- thing, a personality – special, very much special. In this world there are very few people who are realized souls, but now we have so many. I can see them. But still, if it is lacking, some problems are there because of our ego. One should not have ego of anything. Everything is perishable. What is not perish- able is divine love. What is not perishable is the Divine Personality. All the time you see the saints and all that. Although they are dead, people remember them. All their is remembered. Though they could not do much of Sahasrara work, they could not give Realization to people, still, because of their personality, they are still respected and people 16 know that these people have been doing marvelous things, miraculous things. CC poetry

 Soldiers of truth You can see your own miracles and you can see for yourself what you are capable of because now you are connected with the Divine. This is one fact you should know. Whenever there is danger, whenever there is a problem, you will say you will be saved. Many have been saved out of you, no doubt, but that is not sufficient. You are saved for what? What is the value of your life? Why are you living? What is the matter? Why has God saved you, given you all this? Because there is so much to be done for this world. You are the, I should say, soldiers of truth, soldiers of goodness and all that is to be done with great and understanding about yourself. courage So what you have to do is to have self-knowledge. You have to know about yourself. You must have self-knowledge about what you are. If that you do not have, what is the use of opening the Sahasrara? Self-knowledge does not give you any pride, nothing, but gives you the duty of what you have to do, what you have to work out. It is not only just for you, that Sahaja Yoga, but you are for the whole world. Please try to understand. Sometimes we think Sahaja Yoga is there for our betterment, for our good health, this, that. It is not so. It is for the betterment of others. Your powers are there, which you are not utilizing...

 ONE WITH THE DIVINE More than saints I can see that there is an understanding going into your understanding that you are great I and you are not ordinary people and this has to be practised and to be used in a manner that will show that you are Sahaja Yogis. You are no less than any Sufi or any realized soul or any saint – no less. But you have powers which they did not have, of which they were not conscious, while you have these powers. should Try to understand what powers you have. But by understanding that, you not have pride about it in any way, but that is your job. You have to do it. You are there and you will enjoy it because it is not with ego, but egoless work. If you can manage that much, it will be very good... Whatever work has been done all these years, people have worked it out among them- selves. So you have to watch yourself and see for yourself what ego you have, why should you be egoistical. Some of the people have ego of their country. It is all mythical. You COL could have been born anywhere. So you are born in a particular country, you have that ego. And it is something, I must say, one has to be ashamed of because your country, whatever it is, is not doing very well. It is not spiritually equipped, so why should you be so proud of your country? When you will work it out and they will become spiritually equipped, then, of course, you can have pride in your country, but I see that not happen- ing. And so you have to work it out. And I am also happy to see that so much of Sahaja Yoga is now spread out everywhere. It is spreading very fast. In countries where I never expected, it is spreading out. So there are people everywhere in the world who want to have it. They want to have their Realiza- tion and they want to know what is beyond this human life. They do not want to waste their life any more as human beings, but as super-human beings, I should call them, as Sahaja Yogis. has to be seen. It is to be watched in a witness state, how it works and how So our ego it tries to dissuade us from the right path of movement. One has to be only careful on that point because that is the last centre which has to be opened out. Once it is completely open, you are one with the Divine and all your problems will be solved because these problems are so frivolous and have no meaning. They will go away in no time as long as you work it out, your Sahasrara.... If your powers increase, all these people who are very bad, who are trying to capture the society with their political nonsense and all that, they all will disappear. They have no powers. They will all disappear. So, first of all, your egoless nature will help. It will help everyone. May God bless you all.

 These problems are so frivolous and have no meaning.

 It is being expected that you all will follow My message of love I do not have to say anything for love. Love is an absolute gift, a gift of just feeling others. There is no talking about it, discussing about it, nothing. You just feel that love. To feel the love, I would say, one has to have a heart. 20

 But how can you have a heart? It is not your own doing. It is all there. So it is something which is already gifted to you. You have it, that you can feel that love. It is so much joy-giving, peace-giving. Love has its own qualities and one of the qualities is that love understands. Its understanding is not in words, not in thought, but it understands within. It can feel within, which is very important. This is the most important part one has to realize: that love, you can only feel it. You cannot talk about it. You cannot show about it. But it is within and you can feel it.... That feeling is within. And only within you can feel that. So we have to understand it is not the show. It is nothing else, but just the feeling within that you know that you have the love of the Divine. This you can have because it is just there. No one can give to you. No one can sell it.... It is just there. And that love has to be felt and shared. It has nothing to do with others. Whether the other loves you or not makes no difference. It is a within yourself, this feeling. This depth is there which you enjoy.

 GIR | HAVE COME HERE TO GIV E YOU A GIFT wbich you deserve We are human beings. What did we do to become human beings? Nothing. It is all a gift. The whole thing was so spontaneous and living. Please remember that this is a gift for what you are. And also, if there is any problem, it can be corrected and can be put right. It is all free and it is a gift because it has to happen. It is all promised. 22

 TS God is. He is so gracious. He is anxious to give. That is the way Even in taking a gift, we think we should return. There is no return. It is just giving. It is just flowing... Like the sunshine, it is a gift, a gift of God. We cannot demand it, but it works. If somebody is so gracious, won't it work out? Like the sun's rays – you see, we may not demand it, but we can have it.

 CONFI Believe in yourself An absolute gift, a gift of just feeling others It is the love that you give and the love that you receive, which is not a love which is entangled into anything with any purpose, with any idea. But just to feel that love, pure love within yourself and within others is the greatest gift of the Divine. All other things are useless.

 DENCE Have confidence and faith in yourself and that you are a storehouse of innocence which is nothing but compassion and love. If you have that faith, you will definitely develop a beautiful way of talking to others, of having relationship with others. It is something that is really a gift of Shri Ganesha. VIGDOM The greatest gift anything from you. You must know one thing, that I cannot take I cannot receive. My nature is not to receive, but just to give. you take it from Me, it is a gift. Just take it and have it and enjoy it. So This is what you have been seeking, not in this life, but many lives before. And the time has come and the chance has come. iftsS these are šts are gitts- 25

 KUNDALINI It is the giver of everything, giver of all the gifts. It is this tree of life. It is the Kundalini. If you think that by standing on your heads or paying Me some money you can achieve your Realization, I am sorry this is not the shop that sells it. This is a gift from God. It is a grace of God which is bestowed which you have to receive. upon you, have received everything else, you are going to receive it also. As you REALIZATION A GIFT FROM GOD The things are happening, but be patient and believe in the mercy of God, in the kindness of God, in His compassion ... to give you this gift of Realization. PEACE THE GIFT OF GRUHA LAKSHMI 26

 When you get yoga, when you get Realization, you get your well-being WELL-BEING Your health improves, your mind improves and, last of all, you become the giver of gifts to others in the sense that wherever you are, you are auspiciousness. You are so pure that your purity fills the atmosphere with auspiciousness and this auspiciousness, when it acts, you are amazed how people are helped and how people are granted these beautiful blessings through you. And you become aware of it. You understand it. THE GIFT OF SHRI KRISHNA DISCRIMINATION Apart from anything else, He gives us the gift of discrimination. That is His style, to teach you how to discriminate and then you will become experts on discrimination, on vibrations. On vibrations you can get everything so clearly, so beautifully. Others may not agree with you – that is a different point – but you know what is right and what is wrong and that is what Shri Krishna's gift is. Cthese are gifts ES

 COLLECTIVE CONSCIOUSNESS You are a universal being and parcel of the whole. You are the part The microcosm becomes the macrocosm. And this is not a lecture, but has to happen within yourself, that have to develop your collective consciousness. you And this is the gift of Shri Krishna because at the brain He becomes the Virata. I wonder if you understand your calibre ... how much the whole atmosphere has worked out for you, the science has been worked out for you. SCIENCE A GIFT OF NATURE All this has been worked out for you to achieve the highest state in the shortest time. But for that, one has to be extremely introspective. Instead of thinking of what you have to achieve, be introspective. This introspection will help you and you will really become real gurus. these are giftS

 I am asking for two things from you. It is a funny thing that Mother has to ask for a gift. The first gift you have to give is that you should express peacefulness through your own character. But it does not mean that you should be people who are timid or people who are morbid or who tolerate nonsense, no – but the people who are peaceful resistance. You are not afraid of anything. You are not going to bow down to anything, compromise with anything, but you have that sort of a temperament you should develop and express. It is very important. And the second one is that this peace and all this should express your love – love to others. I ASK FOR TWO GIFTS This is what you have: a very great, generous, beautiful, dharmic heart. CoNEROSITY Enjoy it You have got it as a present from the Divine, which you must respect. You should be proud of it and enjoy it, as you should enjoy your generosity. You should enjoy the way all this nature is enjoying itself. 29

 SAHAJA YOGA You cannot measure it. It is an ocean. Just enjoy it and be your Self. It is a gift for which have been asking, so just take it. It is absolutely free. You cannot pay for it. Do not think on in these hopeless worldly ways. It is the love of God, the grace of God, which one has to receive. Just enjoy it. Just have it. That is what it is. you The immensity of this experience, the glory of your Mother's coming or the precious gift of your Self Realization, nothing can be realized through your understanding. Try to think what have you got. Can you measure it with your understanding? Can you understand what has happened? No, you cannot because rationality cannot give you the dimensions into which you have fallen. The rationality is actually broken up. There is no any more to even communicate as to what you have been seeking and rationality left now where have you landed. So the only method you have got now or the only way left to you is for a drop, which has become an ocean, to dissolve more in the ocean, so that the ocean at least, and to communicate with other drops in such a way that you know the whole through all of them. feel you All this is your own. One enlightened light enlightens another light. There is no obliga- tion. It is all your own, but you have to get it and then establish it. All this has to be free because it is nature's gift. It is a living process. You cannot pay for it. Remember that you are all Sahaja Yogis and you deserve very good help – very good help from Me and from God Almighty. There is nothing to be upset about. These are all dif- ferent tests which will work out the goodness in you and will the results. get So many of you are aspiring to ascend to that state where you would have complete joy, bliss and peace. This is what I could give you. And a mother is only happy when she can give whatever she has to her children. Her unhappiness, all her restlessness, everything is just to achieve that end, to gift all that she has. I do not know how much to thank you people, to go through all this to get to that treasure that you have within yourself. You do not come to Sahaja Yoga for money. You come here for everything, in a sense – in totality. You have to get that higher situation. Like that, you have to give also, with an open heart. Know that you have got such a great gift. 30

 I am the source of all the shaktis, of all the powers. So you can have all the powers from Me, whatever you like. I am desireless, but whatever desire you have will be fulfilled. Even about Me, you have to desire. Look at that, how much I am bound by you. GIFTS God does not want us to suffer. He wants us to enjoy, enjoy His gifts, His blessings.... You have to get your own keys from Me. Pathese are all gifts

 BANDHAN- FM Attachment does not mean in any way that you have to give Me anything. What do you give Me? Nothing but detachment from the cause. And this works out. You have seen it in You also that it works out. “Mother, somehow it worked out." lifetime. your say What is a bandhan? It is nothing but you are attaching yourself to your Mother. You are just telephoning to Her. It is a telephone going to your Mother, that's all. You know I also play with you. I also say, “All right, I am giving you a bandhan." I am giving a bandhan to Myself. It is a telephone call, just a telephone call. But the faith has developed now that, yes, this is the real faith where you get completely detached in your emotional things. "It is just my mother. All right, just give her a bandhan, fin- ished. My father – give him a bandhan. My brother – give him a bandhan," whatever it is. Bandhan, whatever it is, you are putting them in the bonds of your Mother. But you are not conscious that you are doing that. You are just binding them with the love of your Mother which is flowing through your hands. What are these vibrations? It is your Mother's love. You have got it. It is flowing through you. But what about your love for your Mother? And that is what I find, that at the time when there is a complete emergency, that surrender comes in and it works. 32

 like a telephone call to your Mother THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE www.divinecoolbreeze.org SUBSCRIPTIONS: contact@divinecoolbreeze.org CONTENT: editor@divinecoolbreeze.org PRINTED BY King Printing Company Inc. 181 Industrial Avenue East Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA and Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. No.8, Chandragupta Housing Society Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411038 Maharashtra, India PHOTOGRAPHS: All photos: place and date unknown Cover: photo by Gregoire de Kalbermatten Page 2, 5, 7: Shri Mataji, India 1983 Page 31: Shri Ganesha Puja 1980 Brighton United Kingdom Left: photo by Gregoire de Kalbermatten Back cover: Palace Schönbrunn Vienna 29 October 2010 SHRI MATAJI’S WORDS: Contents page: 5 July 1998, London ("I do not know how to involve you...' כי from the song Twameva Mata) Pages 2 and 5: 7 June 1982, London Page 6 top: 24 December 1990, India Page 6 bottom: Diwali 1991 Pages 20 and 21: Guru Puja 2004 Page 22: 22 March 1981, 16 June 1983 and 26 July 1979 Give a bandhan together for this problem and it will be solved. Any kind of a basic problem which is corroding the life of people in any country can be solved very simply. You have to use this bandhan for all kinds of big problems in the collective. Any national problems or international problems, you can work it out on your bandhans and really you can solve the problems. It is not so difficult. Giving a bandhan is a very good thing. It and so efficiently. Very efficiently it works out.... But for problems which are collective problems, you must give a collective bandhan. Whichever are personal, you can give a personal bandhan. I have already told that those who are Page 23: 18 June 1981, London Page 24 (love): Birthday Puja 1996 Page 25: Shri Ganesha Puja 1995 Page 25 (wisdom): 3 December 1979 Page 26 (kundalini): Christmas Puja 1981 Page 26 (realization): 30 June 1979 and 26 November 1982 Page 27 (well-being): 30 May 1985 Page 27: Shri Krishna Puja 2001 Page 28: Shri Krishna Puja 1988 works out in such a tremendous SO way Page 28 (science): Guru Puja 1996 Page 28 (marriage): 11 June 1979 Page 29 (two gifts): Birthday Puja 1984 Page 29 (generosity): Sahasrara Puja 1995 Page 30: 8 October 1979, 6 August 1982 11 June 1985, Easter Puja 2007 going out of their houses must take a bandhan before leaving because you are going out. God knows what sort of people there are. 6 February 1985, Guru Puja 1980 Page 31: Easter Puja 1991, 22 July 1988 Left: 23 November 1984 & Malaysia 1996 Back cover: 1 February 1983, Delhi

 The chakra of the Goddess lies behind the sternum bone in the spinal chord. This chakra is placed above the Bhavasagara, above the Void, as we call it in Sahaja Yoga. And the bridge that has to be crossed by the bhaktas, by the seekers, is guarded by Her. She is the one. She helps Her children to come through that passage when there are negative forces trying to attack on a seeker. She helps Her children to come through that passage



----------------------

2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze 2
issue 1 – volume twenty-four number one
2011
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-1.txt 
 It is all within you.
All this horizon is there
waiting for you
to greet it.
2. Turn around
8. One with the Divine
20. Message of love
22. Gifts
32. Bandhan
AZ'
wāhanam na jānāmi na jānāmi tavārchanam
I do not know how to invoke You, I do not know how to welcome You.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-3.txt 
 unojeuunm
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-4.txt 
 One has to develop a kind of a humility that
"I have to still receive, I have to still get it, it has to work out."
Now when it comes to that kind of an attitude,
then you turn around. Turn around upon yourself.
What have you done for Sahaja Yoga?
One simple question: what have you done for Sahaja Yoga?
To how many people have you given Realization?
How many people have you been able to cure?
How much peace have you got within yourself?
How blissful are you?
How much compassion have you got?
How much forgiveness and patience do you have for others?
How much of sharing can you do?
These are the signs of Sahaja Yogis, that you break your shell.
You become collective.
How much do you understand others?
And how much do you understand giving to others?
What have you given to others, even on a material level?
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Let us see.
These questions should be put to yourself.
On a very material level, these questions are to be asked
because the light comes down to the material level.
How many people can you forgive?
You are realized souls. You are prophets, no doubt.
You can make others prophets, but you have to be the quality also.
The quality of a prophet is his nobility. He is so noble – nobleness.
In comparison with other people, who are not realized souls, he is nobler.
He is more dignified. He is much more forgiving.
So the whole way of dealing with others will change.
He is obedient. We have to obey in Sahaja Yoga.
We have to obey our good will, otherwise you are difficult people.
It is impossible. Nobody can do anything to you.
If you are like a thorn, how can anybody help you?
So the quality of a Sahaja Yogi is measured by another kind of a measure.
It is not the way human beings measure the quality of other human beings.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-6.txt 
 5
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-7.txt 
 The sign of Sahaja Yoga
is how much we can love each other, how much we understand each other,
how much we can endure for others with great joy and how much we do not
bother about ourselves, our families, our children. This “mine, my, me" has
CC
to go. It does not go by saying “go." It is a state, again. But then only you
CC
should be convinced, “Now I am a Sahaja Yogi."
CC
If you are a Sahaja Yogi, then at the time of crisis you should become thoughtless.
That is one of the signs. I have seen with Myself, if there is any crisis in the family,
I just become thoughtless. That means ... that God just takes you in, your
problems. He puts His hand, He puts His protection and He takes you out of
it and makes you absolutely thoughtless. And in that thoughtless awareness,
you discover what is right, what is wrong.
So even in crisis, this thoughtless awareness is all the time extremely alert.
It becomes much more alert than normal.
That is the sign of a Sahaja Yogi and the sign of a Sahaja Yogini.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-8.txt 
 AVX
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-9.txt 
 ONE WITH THE DIVINE
Sahasrara Puja 2002
You
You must
It is a very unique thing that has happened, that your Sahasraras were opened out. There
were very few people in this whole world. There were some Sufis, there were some saints,
feel your
some other people also in China, I know, but very few. Very few got their Sahasrara
depth.
opened out. So whatever they said or wrote was never understood by the people. They
actually tortured them. They crucified them and did all kinds of horrible things because
they couldn't bear somebody getting this Realization...
Every one of you has got it. Also all over the world, you have many people who have
WC
got their Sahasraras open. Of course, we need many more for them to understand what is
this great event of such a collective opening of Sahasrara.
Some have grown very much after getting their Realization – very much. They have
understood Sahaja Yoga very well and they have developed their depth and their con-
sciousness is really a great awareness of oneness with the Divine.
One with the Divine
To be one with the Divine is the greatest blessing for human beings. So far, there were
human beings at a lower level of existence and they had all the problems of that level. It
is those jealousies, hatred, all kinds of problems that are today of fighting, of troubling
others, destroying others and not loving others. All these problems existed because their
Sahasrara was not opened.
So our main problem is to open the Sahasrara of the people all over the world, which
is very simple, which you can all do. And it will work better if you do it collectively. If you
are collective, you can work it out very well.
Like that in Sahaja Yoga, so many people have come whose Sahasrara was completely
opened and they felt their depth. Firstly, you must feel your depth. If you do not feel your
depth and you are not one with your personality, which is so deep, then you cannot enjoy
the Self Realization. First of all, you should understand yourself. If you do not understand
yourself, how can you understand other people? You cannot.
So first this Sahasrara should be opened out fully. Fully means complete oneness
with the Divine. That is not difficult. Only you have to meditate a little bit and then it
will work out. It has worked out in many people I am very happy to see and I meet such
people in Sahaja Yoga who have achieved such a lot of collectivity and also the awareness
of a realized soul.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-10.txt 
 225
348
To be one with the Divine
is the greatest blessing
IS
for human beings.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-11.txt 
 The power of love
OV
is the highest and the greatest.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-12.txt 
 ONE WITH THE DIVINE
Realized awareness
What is the awareness of a realized soul? That is what we have to understand... The
awareness is such that you should now know what is happening in this world and how
you can help it. How can you help people to get to this awareness? Unless have this
full knowledge about yourself, complete strength about yourself and the confidence, you
cannot do it. Sahasrara Day is to be celebrated just to strengthen your bond with the
Divine, so that your consciousness becomes absolutely enlightened and you see the right
point in everything...
When you are meditating, also outside you should develop a state of witnessing. You
should try to find out what is the matter, what is
you
with
what is wrong with
wrong
you,
others and how you can help. Only with your vibrations can you correct so many things Just a drop
in your country, in your family, everywhere. And as you see now how Sahaja Yoga is
ing, that there is such a need and such a desire to get Self Realization, but the only thing In the ocean
is your approach should be full of love and full of understanding. They are coming from
the darkness of ignorance and they have to go into the element, the nature of the Divine,
which can be very bright for them.
So slowly, slowly if you develop this passionate kindness, love for them, I am sure you
can do much more to raise them. No use getting angry with them because they are so
ignorant. They do not know what they are doing.... So what you have to do is to make
them understand whatever they are doing, whatever they are understanding is still
It is not so much yet expanded as it could have been if they were realized souls.
grow-
of love.
poor.
Ego and the power of love
Even after Realization I find people have a problem. They still have the problem of the
life which is finished. It is dead, but they still carry on with that and the conscious-
past
ness. So much of illumination also does not show what is wrong with them. For example,
take the case of ego. Ego is so developed. In the Western countries where they are so
developed, ego has also developed and they have to find out what is wrong with them.
This ego comes from a certain consciousness that you have been something great – you
are this, you are that, your parents have been great maybe, your property is great or maybe
you are occupying a very big position. It can come from anything and this consciousness
is against your awareness because it is not true. You are not anything being molded by
these outside things, but you are molded by your own awareness within yourself. This
awareness has to grow from where? It is to understand how do
point....
The main thing is to understand the power of love. The power of love is the highest
and the greatest and if you can manage somehow or other to give up your anger, give up
your greed and also your ego – if you can do that, you can be in Sahasrara.
Now just see the sport of ego. It stops your ascent further. At ego only people get lost
because at ego only they move to the left or to the right and they can go too much to the
this
from what
get
ego,
we
right side or can go up to the left side. They can go to any extreme of these two.
So first of all, we have to correct our ego. For this ego, what should we do? For this
we should watch ourselves and laugh at ourselves. What do we have, of what? We are
human beings. Now we have become Divine. And with the Divine within us, with this
light within us, we have to understand that we are a part and parcel of the Divine, just
a drop in the ocean of love. If you can reduce your ego, if you can bring it to the actual
sense of your being, then it will work out better.
ego
ego
11
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-13.txt 
 ONE WITH THE DIVINE
Faith in yourself
Ego is your own enemy created by you, so you have to fight it and see for yourself from
where it is coming. It might be country-wise. It might be family-wise. It can be from any-
where. So first of all, we must watch out for the ego, if it is Sahasrara we have to enter into.
When I was looking out for a collective happening of Sahasrara opening, I found
it was the
Because I am a woman of very simple habits – no pride, nothing – people used to sup-
of people which was keeping Me down. I had to fight the ego of people.
ego
all kinds of things to Me. But I understood them because they had an ego
press Me,
problem. And once this ego evolves and tries to dominate, we can have Hitlers in this
country. We can have all these horrible people all over the world.
So the first thing you should understand is those who have ego, we should not ever
subdue to them. Of course, you should not start fighting, but you have faith in yourself
that you are people who have got Self Realization. You are much more powerful than they
are. My powers only work out when you are realized souls. You will be surprised. They
work out many things which may not work out with people with ego....
So you must have, first of all, complete faith in yourself that you are Sahaja Yogis, but
not the ego. Sahaja Yogis means you cannot have ego.
This ego business has come from various sources, you know that, but it has to be
cleansed out. Like when the river flows, all kinds of dirt, filth flows into it, but when it
say
You should
meets the sea it becomes the sea. In the same way, you have to become that. To become
the sea, what you have to do is to forget all these tributaries which were coming into you
De models of and all these wrong ideas which came to you. It can be from any source. I do not know
how to name them because there is a big list of these sources. People are mad sometimes
Sahaja Yoga. with this ego.
Models of Sahaja Yoga
So the main thing is how to watch and witness your ego, how it works, how it spoils your
temperament, how it spoils your relationships, how it makes you stupid. The first thing it
does is to make you very stupid and you start behaving in such a manner that people start
thinking that "Oh, you are the great, stupidest person ever living." But it is of no help
because if they believe that you are a stupid person what will happen?
On the contrary, if you have the wisdom, if you have that peace, if you have that
special temperament of enjoying everything in life and also the collective temperament, it
will work out. They will be impressed because in that light they can see their own stupid-
ity, their own falsehood, everything and they will realize that what they think is not true.
“This gentleman is much deeper than me. What he has got, I haven't got it." This is the
main thing for all of us....
You should be models of Sahaja Yoga. And that is what I have been always telling you,
CC
that
rid of your ego. It is the worst thing because, first of all, it brings anger. You think
get
you are something great and you can do this, you can do that because you are a Sahaja
Yogi. It is not true. On the contrary, become extremely humble – extremely humble and
do right things. You do not become any more arrogant and also not full of
Anger departs from you completely – completely. It gives you a balance. It gives you
wisdom by which you see what is your job, why are you on this Earth, why this energy
has come to you, why you are a divine personality. It is a very, very great responsibility.
You do not have to look after yourself. No, the Divine will look after you – absolutely. It
anger.
you
you. It will look after you. It will do whatever is needed for you. But in case
will
protect
you have this ego, you shut out yourself from the reality, from the truth and you become
very hot-tempered and an arrogant personality. This has to go away.
12
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Sahaja Yogis means
you cannot have ego.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-15.txt 
 ONE WITH THE DIVINE
More than saints
... more than saints because they can express themselves better. They
Tam here have powers in them which they can utilize, which they can show to other people that
Sahaja Yogis are
you are so powerful, that you can manage things much better than what you think. For
to tell you example, say there is a problem and the whole world is upset about it. The only thing is
if you know how to witness it, it will disappear. It will disappear in the whole world. It
about it. cannot remain there.
So nowadays the world is full of turmoil, as you see, full of nonsensical people coming
up, full of quarrelsome people. Dominating people are overpowering. At this time, if you
just see this in the witness state, this will disappear because you are very powerful. But you
must know, first of all, that you must have the equipment to use the power. If you
that equipment within you, you can do it. But with your ego you cannot.
Ego is the greatest hurdle for your ascent. You see that ego is at a place where you have
to just cross to go to the Sahasrara. And to break the Sahasrara is very easy otherwise. But
if there is ego, you are already lost in that ego. So against all this one has to understand
to “watch yourself." Is it egoistical? What does it think about itself? Ego is very limited.
It makes you
a realized soul? You do not understand. You just are involved in your own affairs, in your
family, in your children, in your something like that – very low. But if
have a egoless temperament, then you are very effective, the whole power works. What I
have seen, the power of Sahasrara is so great. In some people it has worked wonders. They
have worked it well, greatly. But, because of ego, so many people are still not of that level
that we can say they are Sahaja Yogis.
Now, as it is, I am here to tell about it. In those days when these saints came in,
nobody was there to guide them, to tell them anything. On the contrary, they were so
much destroyed by the surroundings and people never understood why they did not have
any ego, why they were so humble, so they were misused. But now you have powers. You
must know how to use your powers. But that should not give you, by any chance, any
ego that you have powers. On the contrary, you should be humble. You have the
be humble and you can be humble and understand that these people are not yet realized
souls. They are at a lower level. Still their ego is catching them and they are at a lower
level. They have to come up. When you understand that, then you will have not only pity,
but also understanding about them and a kind of a help will come to you from the Divine
that will solve your problems.
I find most of you have problems of a very low level sometimes. And then I am sur-
prised why you are bothered about these problems. You see, you are so powerful.
CC
limited and you do
not see the purpose of your life. Why have you become
you have, if
you
you
power to
No more ego
So in Sahasrara, you must know what powers are there. There are one thousand powers,
one thousand powers within you which are being enlightened. If you can understand
that, then
of powers within you, which you have not utilized. We should use, but because of ego you
cannot. With love you can. With love you can and you can do a lot.
So I would request all of you today to take a vow that “We will have no more chances
for our egos. We will give it up. We will give up our ego." Because there is no sense, that
is an obstruction between us. When the Sahasrara wants to work, it cannot because of
the ego obstruction, so better not have ego of anything. You may be a good singer. You
may be anything in life. You may be some big man or anything. What is so-called has no
14 meaning.
will understand what is the use of having ego because you have such a lot
you
manage
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-16.txt 
 WE
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-17.txt 
 ONE WITH THE DIVINE
A special job
What we need today are people who are egoless and who have powers completely flowing
in them. With the opening of the Sahasrara, all these powers should flow. If the Sahasrara
People should
is fully opened, all these powers of love should flow. You will be amazed. I mean wherever
Igo people just fall in love with Me. I don't know why. I do not do anything to them, but
just they feel My love. That is what it should be, that people should feel your love and
they should know that
This is the thing: you are made as special people, very special for this whole
world's emancipation. That is your job and not otherwise just collecting money
and doing all kinds of nonsensical things. You are here for a very, very sensible job,
which is to raise the Kundalini of people and make them aware of their greatness.
feel your
love.
you are a lovable person.
Human beings are not created only to war and fight, not created here to play politics
and do all dirty tricks. Here they are not made to lead a life which is very, I would
say, filthy and dirty, but in this world we are here to do such a great job of God who
has created us.
So this is possible if you are aware that your Sahasraras are being opened out and that
in this Sahasrara resides the purity, not all these small little things about which
you are
worried.
The power of love
Some people try to take advantage of Sahaja Yoga, thinking that they can do better, they
can have the help of others. Nothing of the kind – you can be helped by yourself. You do
not need any help. On the contrary, you have to help others. There is no need to expect
any help from anyone. Look at Me. I am an ordinary housewife otherwise, but how it has
worked all over the world – by what? By just the power of love. The only trouble is that I
can use My power of love, but you do not know how to use. That is the only problem.
If
you want to use your power of love, in meditation you can develop that
love. With that, you can capture people. With that, you can understand. Their problems
are that they are not Sahaja Yogis. They are not the people who are having all the blessings
or the connection with the Divine.
Imagine, you are connected with the Divine and the Divine is such a great thing
which has created this whole universe, created you and has done all the great jobs. So
what are you? You are a part and parcel of that divine power. So why not we use our divine
power fully within us with love and with understanding so that you develop this wisdom
within you?
power of
This is what is to be told to yourself, that “we are realized souls." This one is some-
thing, a personality – special, very much special.
In this world there are very few people who are realized souls, but now we have so
many. I can see them. But still, if it is lacking, some problems are there because of our
ego. One should not have ego of anything. Everything is perishable. What is not perish-
able is divine love. What is not perishable is the Divine Personality. All the time you see
the saints and all that. Although they are dead, people remember them. All their
is remembered. Though they could not do much of Sahasrara work, they could not give
Realization to people, still, because of their personality, they are still respected and people
16 know that these people have been doing marvelous things, miraculous things.
CC
poetry
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-18.txt 
 Soldiers of truth
You can see your own miracles and you can see for yourself what you are capable of because
now you are connected with the Divine. This is one fact you should know. Whenever
there is danger, whenever there is a problem, you will say you will be saved. Many have
been saved out of you, no doubt, but that is not sufficient. You are saved for what? What
is the value of your life? Why are you living? What is the matter? Why has God saved
you, given you all this? Because there is so much to be done for this world. You are the,
I should say, soldiers of truth, soldiers of goodness and all that is to be done with
great
and understanding about yourself.
courage
So what you have to do is to have self-knowledge. You have to know about yourself.
You must have self-knowledge about what you are. If that you do not have, what is the
use of opening the Sahasrara? Self-knowledge does not give you any pride, nothing, but
gives you the duty of what you have to do, what you have to work out. It is not only just
for you, that Sahaja Yoga, but you are for the whole world. Please try to understand.
Sometimes we think Sahaja Yoga is there for our betterment, for our good health, this,
that. It is not so. It is for the betterment of others. Your powers are there, which you are
not utilizing...
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-19.txt 
 ONE WITH THE DIVINE
More than saints
I can see that there is an understanding going into your understanding that you are great
I
and you are not ordinary people and this has to be practised and to be used in a manner
that will show that you are Sahaja Yogis. You are no less than any Sufi or any realized soul
or any saint – no less. But you have powers which they did not have, of which they were
not conscious, while you have these powers.
should
Try to understand what powers you have. But by understanding that,
you
not have pride about it in any way, but that is your job. You have to do it. You are there
and you will enjoy it because it is not with ego, but egoless work. If you can manage that
much, it will be very good...
Whatever work has been done all these years, people have worked it out among
them-
selves. So you have to watch yourself and see for yourself what ego you have, why should
you be egoistical. Some of the people have ego of their country. It is all mythical. You
COL
could have been born anywhere. So you are born in a particular country, you have that
ego. And it is something, I must say, one has to be ashamed of because your country,
whatever it is, is not doing very well. It is not spiritually equipped, so why should you be
so proud of your country? When you will work it out and they will become spiritually
equipped, then, of course, you can have pride in your country, but I see that not happen-
ing. And so you have to work it out.
And I am also happy to see that so much of Sahaja Yoga is now spread out everywhere.
It is spreading very fast. In countries where I never expected, it is spreading out. So there
are people everywhere in the world who want to have it. They want to have their Realiza-
tion and they want to know what is beyond this human life. They do not want to waste
their life any more as human beings, but as super-human beings, I should call them, as
Sahaja Yogis.
has to be seen. It is to be watched in a witness state, how it works and how
So our ego
it tries to dissuade us from the right path of movement. One has to be only careful on that
point because that is the last centre which has to be opened out. Once it is completely
open, you are one with the Divine and all your problems will be solved because these
problems are so frivolous and have no meaning. They will go away in no time as long as
you work it out, your Sahasrara....
If your powers increase, all these people who are very bad, who are trying to capture
the society with their political nonsense and all that, they all will disappear. They have no
powers. They will all disappear.
So, first of all, your egoless nature will help. It will help everyone.
May God bless you all.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-20.txt 
 These problems are so frivolous
and have no meaning.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-21.txt 
 It is being expected that you all will follow
My message of love
I do not have to say anything for love.
Love is an absolute gift, a gift of just feeling others.
There is no talking about it, discussing about it, nothing.
You just feel that love.
To feel the love, I would say, one has to have a heart.
20
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-22.txt 
 But how can you have a heart?
It is not your own doing. It is all there.
So it is something which is already gifted to you.
You have it, that you can feel that love.
It is so much joy-giving, peace-giving.
Love has its own qualities and one of the qualities is that love understands.
Its understanding is not in words, not in thought, but it understands within.
It can feel within, which is very important.
This is the most important part one has to realize: that love, you can only feel it.
You cannot talk about it.
You cannot show about it.
But it is within and you can feel it....
That feeling is within. And only within you can feel that.
So we have to understand it is not the show.
It is nothing else, but just the feeling within
that you know that you have the love of the Divine.
This you can have because it is just there.
No one can give to you.
No one can sell it....
It is just there.
And that love has to be felt and shared.
It has nothing to do with others.
Whether the other loves you or not makes no difference.
It is a within yourself, this feeling.
This depth is there which you enjoy.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-23.txt 
 GIR
| HAVE
COME HERE
TO GIV
E YOU
A GIFT wbich you deserve
We are human beings.
What did we do to become human beings?
Nothing. It is all a gift.
The whole thing was so spontaneous and living.
Please remember that this is a gift for what
you are.
And also, if there is any problem, it can be corrected and can be put right.
It is all free and it is a gift because it has to happen.
It is all promised.
22
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-24.txt 
 TS
God is.
He is so gracious. He is anxious to give. That is the
way
Even in taking a gift, we think we should return. There is no return.
It is just giving. It is just flowing...
Like the sunshine, it is a gift, a gift of God.
We cannot demand it, but it works.
If somebody is so gracious, won't it work out?
Like the sun's rays – you see, we may not demand it, but we can have it.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-25.txt 
 CONFI
Believe in yourself
An absolute gift, a gift of just feeling others
It is the love that you give and the love that
you receive,
which is not a love which is entangled into anything
with
any purpose, with any idea. But just to feel that love,
pure love within yourself and within others is the greatest gift
of the Divine. All other things are useless.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-26.txt 
 DENCE
Have confidence and faith in yourself and that you are a storehouse of innocence
which is nothing but compassion and love. If you have that faith, you will definitely
develop a beautiful way of talking to others, of having relationship with others.
It is something that is really a gift of Shri Ganesha.
VIGDOM
The greatest gift
anything from you.
You must know one thing, that I cannot take
I cannot receive. My nature is not to receive, but just to give.
you take it from Me, it is a gift. Just take it and have it and enjoy it.
So
This is what you have been seeking, not in this life, but
many
lives before.
And the time has come and the chance has come.
iftsS
these are
šts
are gitts-
25
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-27.txt 
 KUNDALINI
It is the giver of everything, giver of all the gifts. It is this tree of life. It is the Kundalini.
If you think that by standing on your heads or paying Me some money
you can achieve your Realization, I am sorry this is not the shop that sells it.
This is a gift from God. It is a grace of God which is bestowed
which you have to receive.
upon you,
have received everything else, you are going to receive it also.
As
you
REALIZATION
A GIFT FROM GOD
The things are happening,
but be patient and believe in the mercy of God,
in the kindness of God, in His compassion ...
to give you this gift of Realization.
PEACE
THE GIFT OF GRUHA LAKSHMI
26
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-28.txt 
 When you get yoga, when you get Realization, you get your well-being
WELL-BEING
Your health improves, your mind improves and, last of all, you become the giver
of gifts to others in the sense that wherever you are, you are auspiciousness.
You are so pure
that
your purity fills the atmosphere with auspiciousness and
this auspiciousness, when it acts, you are amazed how people are helped and how
people are granted these beautiful blessings through you.
And you become aware of it.
You understand it.
THE GIFT OF SHRI KRISHNA
DISCRIMINATION
Apart from anything else, He gives us the gift of discrimination.
That is His style, to teach you how to discriminate
and then you will become experts on discrimination, on vibrations.
On vibrations you can get everything so clearly, so beautifully.
Others
may not agree with you – that is a different point –
but you know what is right and what is wrong
and that is what Shri Krishna's gift is.
Cthese are gifts
ES
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-29.txt 
 COLLECTIVE
CONSCIOUSNESS
You are a universal being
and parcel of the whole.
You
are the
part
The microcosm becomes the macrocosm.
And this is not a lecture, but has to happen within yourself,
that
have to develop your collective consciousness.
you
And this is the gift of Shri Krishna because at the brain He becomes the Virata.
I wonder if you understand
your calibre ...
how much the whole atmosphere has worked out for you,
the science has been worked out for you.
SCIENCE
A GIFT OF NATURE
All this has been worked out for you to achieve the highest state in the shortest time.
But for that, one has to be extremely introspective.
Instead of thinking of what you have to achieve, be introspective.
This introspection will help you and you will really become real gurus.
these are giftS
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-30.txt 
 I am asking for two things from you.
It is a funny thing that Mother has to ask
for a gift. The first gift you have to give
is that you
should
express peacefulness
through your own character. But it does
not mean that you should be people
who are timid or people who are morbid
or who tolerate nonsense, no – but the
people who are peaceful resistance. You are
not afraid of anything. You are not going
to bow down to anything, compromise
with anything, but you have that sort of
a temperament you should develop and
express. It is very important. And the
second one is that this peace and all this
should express your
love – love to others.
I ASK FOR TWO GIFTS
This is what you have: a very great, generous, beautiful, dharmic heart.
CoNEROSITY
Enjoy it
You have got it as a present from the Divine, which you must respect.
You should be proud of it and enjoy it, as you should enjoy your generosity.
You should enjoy the way all this nature is enjoying itself.
29
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-31.txt 
 SAHAJA YOGA
You cannot measure it. It is an ocean. Just enjoy it and be your Self. It is a gift for which
have been asking, so just take it. It is absolutely free. You cannot pay for it. Do not
think on in these hopeless worldly ways. It is the love of God, the grace of God, which
one has to receive. Just enjoy it. Just have it. That is what it is.
you
The immensity of this experience, the glory of your Mother's coming or the precious
gift of your Self Realization, nothing can be realized through your understanding. Try
to think what have you got. Can you measure it with your understanding? Can you
understand what has happened? No, you cannot because rationality cannot give you the
dimensions into which you have fallen. The rationality is actually broken
up. There is no
any more to even communicate as to what you have been seeking and
rationality left now
where have you landed. So the only method you have got now or the only way left to you
is for a drop, which has become an ocean, to dissolve more in the ocean, so that
the ocean at least, and to communicate with other drops in such a way that you know the
whole through all of them.
feel
you
All this is your own. One enlightened light enlightens another light. There is no obliga-
tion. It is all your own, but you have to get it and then establish it. All this has to be free
because it is nature's gift. It is a living process. You cannot pay
for it.
Remember that you are all Sahaja Yogis and you deserve very good help – very good help
from Me and from God Almighty. There is nothing to be upset about. These are all dif-
ferent tests which will work out the goodness in you and will
the results.
get
So many of you are aspiring to ascend to that state where you would have complete joy,
bliss and peace. This is what I could give you. And a mother is only happy when she can
give whatever she has to her children. Her unhappiness, all her restlessness, everything is
just to achieve that end, to gift all that she has. I do not know how much to thank
you
people, to go through all this to get to that treasure that you have within yourself.
You do not come to Sahaja Yoga for money. You come here for everything, in a sense – in
totality. You have to get that higher situation. Like that, you have to give also, with an
open heart. Know that you have got such a great gift.
30
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-32.txt 
 I am the source of all the shaktis, of all the powers.
So you can have all the powers from Me, whatever you like.
I am desireless, but whatever desire you have will be fulfilled.
Even about Me, you have to desire.
Look at that, how much I am bound by you.
GIFTS
God does not want us to suffer.
He wants us to enjoy, enjoy His gifts, His blessings....
You have to get your own keys from Me.
Pathese are all gifts
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-33.txt 
 BANDHAN-
FM
Attachment does not mean in any way that you have to give Me anything. What do you give Me?
Nothing but detachment from the cause. And this works out. You have seen it in
You also that it works out. “Mother, somehow it worked out."
lifetime.
your
say
What is a bandhan? It is nothing but you are attaching yourself to your Mother. You are just
telephoning to Her. It is a telephone going to your Mother, that's all.
You know I also play with you. I also say, “All right, I am giving you a bandhan." I am giving
a bandhan to Myself. It is a telephone call, just a telephone call.
But the faith has developed now that, yes, this is the real faith where you get completely
detached in your emotional things. "It is just my mother. All right, just give her a bandhan, fin-
ished. My father – give him a bandhan. My brother – give him a bandhan," whatever it is.
Bandhan, whatever it is, you are putting them in the bonds of your Mother. But you are not
conscious that you are doing that. You are just binding them with the love of your Mother which
is flowing through your hands.
What are these vibrations? It is your Mother's love. You have got it. It is flowing through you.
But what about your love for your Mother? And that is what I find, that at the time when there
is a complete emergency, that surrender comes in and it works.
32
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-34.txt 
 like a telephone call to your Mother
THE DIVINE
COOL BREEZE
www.divinecoolbreeze.org
SUBSCRIPTIONS:
contact@divinecoolbreeze.org
CONTENT:
editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
PRINTED BY
King Printing Company Inc.
181 Industrial Avenue East
Lowell, Massachusetts 01852 USA
and Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd.
No.8, Chandragupta Housing Society
Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune 411038
Maharashtra, India
PHOTOGRAPHS:
All photos: place and date unknown
Cover: photo by Gregoire de Kalbermatten
Page 2, 5, 7: Shri Mataji, India 1983
Page 31: Shri Ganesha Puja 1980
Brighton United Kingdom
Left: photo by Gregoire de Kalbermatten
Back cover: Palace Schönbrunn
Vienna 29 October 2010
SHRI MATAJI’S WORDS:
Contents page: 5 July 1998, London
("I do not know how to involve you...'
כי
from the song Twameva Mata)
Pages 2 and 5: 7 June 1982, London
Page 6 top: 24 December 1990, India
Page 6 bottom: Diwali 1991
Pages 20 and 21: Guru Puja 2004
Page 22: 22 March 1981, 16 June 1983
and 26 July 1979
Give a bandhan together for this problem and it will be
solved. Any kind of a basic problem which is corroding
the life of people in any country can be solved very
simply. You have to use this bandhan for all kinds of
big problems in the collective. Any national problems
or international problems, you can work it out on your
bandhans and really you can solve the problems. It is not
so difficult. Giving a bandhan is a very good thing. It
and so efficiently.
Very efficiently it works out.... But for problems which
are collective problems, you must give a collective
bandhan. Whichever are personal, you can give a
personal bandhan. I have already told that those who are
Page 23: 18 June 1981, London
Page 24 (love): Birthday Puja 1996
Page 25: Shri Ganesha Puja 1995
Page 25 (wisdom): 3 December 1979
Page 26 (kundalini): Christmas Puja 1981
Page 26 (realization): 30 June 1979
and 26 November 1982
Page 27 (well-being): 30 May 1985
Page 27: Shri Krishna Puja 2001
Page 28: Shri Krishna Puja 1988
works out in such a tremendous
SO
way
Page 28 (science): Guru Puja 1996
Page 28 (marriage): 11 June 1979
Page 29 (two gifts): Birthday Puja 1984
Page 29 (generosity): Sahasrara Puja 1995
Page 30: 8 October 1979, 6 August 1982
11 June 1985, Easter Puja 2007
going out of their houses must take a bandhan before
leaving because you are going out. God knows what sort
of people there are.
6 February 1985, Guru Puja 1980
Page 31: Easter Puja 1991, 22 July 1988
Left: 23 November 1984 & Malaysia 1996
Back cover: 1 February 1983, Delhi
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-35.txt 
 The chakra of the Goddess lies behind the sternum bone in the spinal chord.
This chakra is placed above the Bhavasagara, above the Void, as we call it in Sahaja Yoga.
And the bridge that has to be crossed by the bhaktas, by the seekers, is guarded by Her.
She is the one. She helps Her children to come through that passage
when there are negative forces trying to attack on a seeker.
She helps Her children to come through that passage
