a r h t i Sept 2011

 In the early 1920s, national flag discussions gained prominence across most British dominions following the peace treaty between Britain and Ireland. In November 1920, the Indian delegation to the League of Nations wanted to use an Indian flag, and this prompted the British Indian government to place renewedemphasis on the flag as a national symbol. In April 1921, Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi wrote in his journal Young charkha or spinning wheel at the centre. The idea of the spinning wheel was put forth by Lala Hansraj and Gandhi commissioned Venkayya to design a flag with the spinning wheel on a red and green banner, the red colour signifying Hindus and the green standing for Muslims. Gandhi wanted the flag to be presented at the Congress session of1921, but it was not delivered on time, and another flag was proposed at the session. Gandhi later wrote that thie delay was fortuitous since it allowed him to realise that other religions were not represented; he then added white to the banner colours, to represent all the other religions. However, soon the Sikhs wanted the banner to include the black colour and Gandhi was forced to address these issues in his writings and India about the need for an Indian flag, proposing a flag with the speeches. Finally, owing to the religious-political sensibilities, in 1929, Gandhi moved towards a more secular interpretation of the flag colours, stating that red stood for the sacrifices of the people, white for purity, and green for hope.

 Sub Kuch Toh Kar Diya Bija (seed) Mantras - Part III ....4 Guru Purnima Message ...8 Guru has to be very steady ...10 Sign of a Good Guru ...11 Rakhi Message ...12 Navaratri Message ...14 Diwali Message ...16 नवरात्रि - संदेश ...18 Note : Subscriptions for all 2012 Magazines would be open from 1st Sept.2011 to 30th Nov.2011 only.

 Bija (seed) Mantras Part III How to say Bīja Mantras. The bījas may be said on their own, or preceded by Om, or what seems to be effective, is to say them in a series. A series of Bijas consists of the five long vowels with the addition of visarga-'aspirated ending'-ah. For example a series of Gaņeśha Bijas is gām, gīm, gūm, gaim, gaum, gaḥ, or for Dha- we can say 'Dhām, dhīm, dhūm, dhaim, dhaum, dhaḥ' The Fifteen-Syllabled Mantra Traditionally the Goddess is worshipped with the fifteen-syllabled mantra, as described in the *Saundarya Lahari, Devi Atharva Sheersha, the 300 and 1000 Names of Shri Lalitā etc. The mantra is composed of Bijas:- Ka e ī la hrīm, ha sa ka ha la hrīm, sa ka la hrīm. The addition of Shrīm at the end makes this the sixteen-syllabled mantra which is very secret (although we're telling you!) The three sections of the mantra are the Man dalas-'Circles'of Fire, Sun and Moon, and the three Śhaktis, Mahākālī, Mahāsaraswatī and Mahālakshmī respectively. The addition of Śhrīm makes a fourth (or three and a half) section which is always implied, even if not stated. *The word Laharī-'wave, billow' may be a pun on the fact that each section of the fifteen-syllabled mantra ends with 'La Hrīm'. The following Kuñjika Stotram (not to be confused with the Kubjika Tantra!) says a lot about Bija Mantras. The prayer mostly addresses the Left Side aspects of the Goddess, Shri Chandī, the Destroyer of Demons, Bhairavi, Pārvatī, etc. Śhrī Kuñjikā Stotram. Kuñjikā-'a shady bower, murmuring' Om Śhrī Gaņeśhāya namaḥ. Om Salutations to Shri Ganesha Asya Shrī Kuñjikā Stotra-mantrasya Of these Kunjika Stotram mantras 4

 Sadāśhiva rişhiḥ . The Sage is Shri Sadāśhiva The metre is Anushtubh, Anuşhtup chhandaḥ . Śhri Triguņātmika devatā, Om Aim bījam, The Deity is the three-braided Goddess, Aim is the Seed, Om Hrīm śhaktiḥ , Hrīm is the Power, Om Klīm kīlakam, Klīm is the Root Mantra. For the removal of all fear and Mama sary ābhīşhţa-siddhy arthe jape viniyogaḥ . Śhiva uvācha, fulfilment of my purposes, this is recited. Shri Shiva said- Śhriņu Devi pravakşhāmi kuñjikā stotram uttamam, Listen, O Devi, while I recite this excellent Praise of Kunjika. Yena mantra prabhāveņa Chandī jāpah śhubho bhavet. By recitation of these most excellent mantras, Shri Chandi may be pleased. (1) Na kavacham nārgalā stotram kīlakam na rahasyakam, No prayer for protection, no introductory praise, no secret mantras, Na sūktam nāpi vā dhyānam na nyāso na vārchanam. (2) No eulogies or meditations, no attention exercises or worship, Kuñjikā pātha-mātreņa durgā-pātha-phalam labhet, Only by practice of this Kunjika may one attain the fruits of the inaccessible path, (3) Ati-guhya-taram Devi devānām-api dur-labham The most secret, O Devi, which is hard for even the Gods to attain. Gopanīyam prayatnena swa-yoniriva Pārvati, With diligent effort by oneself one may become protected, 0 Parvati,

 Māranam mohanam vaśhyam stambhanoch-ch'āțanādikam. (4) Death, illusion and domination by others can be arrested and destroyed. Pātha-mātreņa sam-siddhyet kuñjikā stotram uttamam, Only by practising this excellent Kunjika Stotram may one succeed, Om Śhrūm Śhrūm Śhrūm Śham Phat Om Śhrūm Śhrūm Śhrūm hear this and peace will be, Aim Hrīm Klīm jvala ujjvala prajvala Aim Hrīm Klīm-flame (Kundalini) igniting, blazing up, Hrīm Hrīm Klīm srāvaya srāvaya śhāpam nāśhaya nāśhaya Hrīm Hrīm Klīm, listen, listen, all curses are destroyed, destroyed, Śhrīm Śhrīm Śhrīm jūm saḥsrāvaya ādaya Swāhā. Śhrīm Śhrīm Śhrīm, he who listens receives good fortune quickly, (5) Om Śhlīm Hūm Klīm Glām jūm saḥjvala ujjvala mantram prajvala Om Śhlīm Hūm Klīm Glām, saying these mantras, quickly the flame blazes up Ham Sam Lam Kşham Phat Swāhā. (6) Shiva Shakti Mother Earth bearing up. So, well-said! Namaste rudra-rūpāyai namaste madhu-mardini,. We bow to You of Fierce Form, O Crusher of the demon Madhu, Namaste kaițabha-nāśhinyai namaste mahişh'ārdini, Salutations to You, O Destroyer of Kaitabha and Tormentor of Mahishasura (7) Namaste śhumbha-hantryai cha niśhumbḥ āsura-sūdini. Prostrations to You, O Slayer of Shumbha and Nishumbha. Namaste jāgrate devi jape siddhim kuruşhva me, Salutations to You O awakened Devi, may this recitation bring success to me, Aim-kārīsrişhți-rūpiņyai hrīm-kārī prati-pālikā. The sound Aim is the form of Creation, Hrīm is the Preserver. * (8) Klīm kālī kāla-rūpiņyai bīja-rūpe namō-'stu te. Klīm is Shri Kālī of the Seed Form of the Destroyer*, Salutations to You. Chāmuņdā chanda-rūpā cha yaiñkārī vara-dāyinī, O Goddess Chāmundā, the form of anger, by which sound. Boons are granted. (9) Vichche tw-abhaya-dā nityam namaste mantra-rūpiņī, Vichche gives freedom from fear always, Salutations to You, who is of the form of mantras, Dhām Dhīm Dhūm dhūrjațehpatnī Vām Vīm vāgīśhwarī tathā. (10) Dhām dhīm dhūm O Wife Of Lord Shiva of matted locks, vām vīm O Goddess of Speech. Krām Krīm Krūm kuñjikā devi, Śhrām Śhrīm Śhrūm me śhubham kuru, Krām krīm krūm O Devi Kuñjika, śhrām śhrīm śhrūm, make me auspicious, 6.

 Hūm Hūm Hūm-kāra-rūpinyai, Jrām Jrīm Jrūm bhāla-nādinī. (11) Hūm Hūm, of the Form of the sound Hüm, Jrām Jrīm Jrūm, resonating on forehead. Bhrām Bhrīm Bhrūm bhairavī bhadre, bhavānyai te namo namaḥ . Bhrām bhrīm bhrūm We bow to You, O fierce and auspicious One who is all existence. Om Am Kam Cham Tam Tam Pam Sām These are the first letters of the eight groups, (the seventh- Yam- is missing) vidurām vidurām vimardaya vimardaya wise, wise, destruction, destruction. Hrīm Kşhām Kşhīm Srīm jīvaya jīvaya troțaya troțaya Hrīm Kşhām Kşhīm Srīm, soul, soul, destruction, destruction, jambhaya jambhaya dīpaya dīpaya mochaya mochaya crushing, crushing, light, light, liberation, liberation, Hūm Phat Jrām Vaushat Hūm Phat Jrām, thus it goes auspiciously, Aim Hrīm Klīm rañjaya rañjaya sañjaya sañjaya Aim Hrīm Klīm, worship, worship, Creator, Creator' guñjaya guñjaya bandhaya bandhaya humming, humming, binding, binding Bhrām Bhrīm Bhrūm bhairavī bhadre Bhrām Bhrīm Bhrūm, Fierce and Auspicious Goddess, sañkucha sañkucha troțaya troțaya mlīm swāhā. (12) Modesty, modesty, destruction, destruction, mlīm swāhā-'well spoken' Pām pīm Pūm pārvatī pūrņā Pām pīm Pūm, the complete Shri Parvatī, Khām Khīm Khūm khecharī tatha, Khām Khīm Khūm 'flying'- Shri Kartikeya is thus. Mlām Mlīm Mlūm mūla-vistīrņā kuñjikā stotra hetave, Mlām Mlīm Mlūm extended roots on account of this Kunjika praise, Abhaktāya na dātavyam rakşha Pārvati, This protection should not be given to a non-devotee, O Pārvatī, Vihīnā kuñjikā devyā yastu sapta-śhatīm pațhet, Without the Divine power of Kunjuika one may recite the Sapta-shati (700 verses) Na tasya jāyate siddhir-hyaranye ruditam yasyā. (13) Without victory, only succeeding in weeping. Iti śhrī-dāmara-tantra īśhwara pārvatī samvāde kuñjikā stotram sam-pūrņam. Here ends the Kunjika Stotram recited by Lord Shiva to Śhrī Pārvatī in the Shri Damara Tantra..

 Guru Purnima Message hin My Dear Sahaja Yogis, Received your cable on the eve of Guru Purnima. The sentiments, which you have expressed in very beautiful words have gone to heart. On the occasion of Guru Purnima day celebrations in London, I have explained what is self realisation and whether you have got it or not. I will send the tape recording of this speech with some one instead of sending it by post. I suggested, in my earlier letters, to think of "Atma tatwa". Because you are "Atma Swaroop", your mind, intellect and ego, should be enlightened by the "atma jyoti". The light of wisdom shines in the intellect only when Atma-jyoti illumines in its fullness. Then, mind emits fragrance of love and ego does great and noble works, the whole of inner being is fully enlightened. You should be able to rely on the Atma tatwa, accommodate others in it, but first stabilize it. your Many of the Sahaja Yogis have cured a number of diseases. They have immense love for me and others. These people could do all this because they have become experts owning to their "Poorva-Sampada". However, there are many intellectuals among us who have not been able to go very far on the strength of their knowledge or wisdom. Sahaja Yoga is lacking in books. We will have to write books in each language. Also, Sahaja Yogis should go to different cities and give lectures. Many people send their poems to me. We should collect all these. Similarly my letters can also be printed. Such publicity is necessary. Let it be known all over the world that Sahaja Yoga is the only way to save the world in Kaliyuga. I am writing a book but it is not useful to all at the present. Al should think on what I have suggested. Every centre may also be accordingly advised. Many blessings from Mother to all Sahaja Yogis. Always remembering you Your mother NIRMALA 8

 Guru has to be very steady т: he word Guru comes from the one that is magnetic, the person who is magnetic, the one who attracts the attention of the seekers, is the Guru. Also it means the heaviness, or you can say a person who is very steady, who is very deep, who has the knowledge, and who can act like the mother earth. For the power of magnetism in the mother earth also is called as magnetic, but in sanskrit is 'Gurutwakareshwari' – which means the attraction of the heaviness of the mother earth. But actually it is a power of the mother earth that makes us stand properly on our legs when it is rotating with such a tremendous speed, otherwise we would be all thrown away. With that velocity that she is moving, we are still attached, or we are one in our balance, this is only because she has gravity. Guru Puja, Cabella, Italy, July 12, 1998 This gravity has to be in a Guru. Gravity means a kind of a serious understanding of oneself and ones own responsibilities. So a Guru has to be very steady.' H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi 10

 Sign of a Good Guru S: o the difference between the ancient-times guru and modern-times guru is that the ancient-time gurus didn't care if they gave realizations to people. It was not their style, most of them. Only they cared for themselves, nicely sitting down somewhere in the Himalayas away from all the madding crowd, and enjoying themselves. But you must share this enjoyment. I think that is the sign of a good guru. The one who cannot share only looks after his own pleasures or looks after his own ashram, you can call it, or looks after his own family, looks after maybe some disciples he has. Attention has to be for the whole world. In Sahaja Yoga now it has reached such a stage that you have to worry about the complete humanity. It's not only you or few Sahaja yogis or many more Sahaja yogis, but all over the world, whatever is the problem, you people have to solve it. But first get out of your own little, little problems Guru Puja, Cabella, 08.07.2001 H.H.Shri Mataji 11

 Many many blessings to all I have received the beautiful RAKHEES, lovingly sent by you. RAKHEE denotes a protective power. This protective bandhan is very powerful and at the same time delicate as it represents pure love between a brother and a sister. Whenever a sister ties this RAKHEE on a brother's hand, it establishes a relation of enduring protection by the brother for the sister. Unfortunately, the sensitivity of human beings to the feelings of love has become so weak that tying a RAKHEE has become a mechanical ritual. In absence of a deep living faith all human actions and rituals become dry and lifeless. We are born in this life with a purposeful responsibility towards all Sahaj yogis and are all the time aware of their love and devotion. Myself being desireless, I depend entirely on their desires. It is customary for a brother to ask for something from the sister on this day. All sahajayogis should therefore collectively let me know whatever they desire from side. my 12

 I am keeping very good health as this is the pure desire of all of you. I have to undergo a minor surgery for ear which is not a problem, and you need not worry about it nor feel unduly concerned. RAKHEE bandhan is a very important day and one should desire on this occasion to become a 'whole', you should always have high aspirations and your attention should be to larger perspectives. Sahaj-yogis are not expected to waste their attention in petty small things. We have to work very hard, those of you who have achieved good progress should still work out much more. We should open more centers. We must help the sick to cure their ailments and above all strive to bring people on the path of TRUTH. Please circulate this letter to all the sahaj yogis. Always remembering you all -NIRMALA (Translation of the original letter written in marathi by MOTHER to all Sahaj yogis on receiving RAKHEES from them. 17 Aug.1978) 13

 E3 My Dear Sahaja Yogis, Received your loving and beautiful letters and messages of greetings. Here, I am busy in the work in London and could not write. Once I told you that Sahaja Yoga is beginning from Navaratri this year. That is Satya - Yuga for which you were so far preparing, will now be seen. As a tree has to sprout first in the earth and then its sapling peeps out, in the same way, on the first day of Navaratri i.e. on 8th April the sapling of Satya - Yuga will be seen. It is the day of great joy. Whole nature will now have new life. You must understand that the importance of this day will be known only if 14 AMA

 Navaratri Message the whole mankind is enlightened with vibrations of love. In this world Brahma Shakti was awakened from the very day of My birth. You have received it to some extent, and are using it in many ways. I was telling you that light of the great power of love will spread all over the world. The first lamp will be lit on that day. But the night of Diwali is blind. It cannot see the lamps. In this Kali- Yuga, this work will be done only if many lamps are lit. Whatever is God's work, it will be over. Hence all should be alert and awake and also awaken others. My life is dedicated to you. Every moment it is working. All I want is that pure gold should enlighten human history while getting heated in the hell of Kali -yuga. My blessings are: may this lamp be kindled in every home, may its joy spread in the society, may the cheers of its victory resound all countries and may this power of Brahman fill every molecule of this Universe. I have to be away from you for a very long time. But your brothers are living here and also in other countries. You will meet each other in course of time. But I often feel that one day of such great joy of love should dawn in our life. Whatever you desire your desire will happen. Therefore, your attention should be fully on Sahaja Yoga. I have offered My body, mind and wealth, everything. You have to take care of only your Chitta because only that will be enlightened. Always remembering you, Your separated Mother, Nirmala 15

 Diwali is the day of real aspirations. Invoke the whole universe. Many lamps have to be lit, and looked after. Add the oil of love, Kundalini is the wick and awaken the Kundalini of others with light of the spirit within you.

 Diwali Message "My dear Sahaja Yogis, my dear children, Let this Diwali enlighten you with light of love. You yourself are the lamps which burn high and don't get pressed by the cover. They become much more powerful than the cover. It is their own asset. When they are hit upon, they are disturbed and extinguished. Why are our lamps disturbed ? You should think over it. Is there no transparent sheath around them ? Have you forgotten your Mother's love and therefore you are so disturbed? As the glass protects the lamp, in the same way my love will protect you. But the glass should be kept clean. How can I explain? Have I to say like Shri Krishna “Leave all religions and surrender to me" or as 99 Shri Jesus "I am the way, I am the door". I want to tell that I am that destination. But will you people accept it ? Will this fact go to your hearts? Although what I say is distorted, the truth will always stand. You cannot change what it is. Only you will remain ignorant and backward. I am unhappy because of that. Diwali is the day of real aspirations. Invoke the whole universe. Many lamps have to be lit, and looked after. Add the oil of love, Kundalini is the wick and awwaken the Kundalini of others with light of the spirit within you. This flame of Kundalini will be kindled and one within you will become the torch. Torch is not extinguished. Then there will be spotless sheath of my love. It will neither have any limits nor any end. I will be watching you. My love for you is showering as many, many blessings. Yours always loving Mother NIRMALA (letter from Shri Mataji on Diwali 1976 occasion...with love... 21 October 1976) 17

 ट २ ी 700 क हि ९ ९ ु र· य नी यू अर प्रजा नवरात्रि - संदेश र् र] १९.१०.१९८८

 इन २भी नौ चंक्रों को इसी जीवन में पा२ करनी आवश्यक है। येही आपका लक्य होनी चीहिए। आज नवरात्रि का अन्तिम दिन है। जैसे आप अपने अन्दर देखते हैं, हम सबके लिए यह परमोत्कर्ष बिन्दु होना चाहिए। हमारे अन्दर उत्थान के लिए सात चक्र हैं और दो चक्र इनसे ऊपर हैं। अत: इन सभी नौ चक्रों को इसी जीवन में पार करना आवश्यक है। यही आपका लक्ष्य होना चाहिए। परन्तु आप लोग यदि केवल आज्ञा में ही चलेंगे तो आप अधिक ऊँचे नहीं उठ सकते। इसी चक्र ( आज्ञा) पर बहुत से लोग खो गए। अत: यह अत्यन्त महत्वपूर्ण चक्र है। दुर्गा की षष्टी को बहुत महत्वपूर्ण माना जाता है। कहा जाता है कि देवी नाव पर सवार होकर आती हैं। कलकत्ता के लोगों को इस बात पर विश्वास है कि षष्टी का दिन इसे पार करने के लिए बहुत बड़ा दिन है। हम सब लोगों के साथ भी यही समस्या है कि यह षष्टी का दिन (आज्ञा) अभी भी हमारे सिर पर सवार है और हम इसमें से निकल नहीं सकते। अत: नवम अवस्था तक आने के लिए चाहे हम पूजा करें या कुछ और परन्तु अभी तक हम छठी अवस्था में हैं। हम बाह्य रूप से ही पूजा कर रहे हैं। सप्तमी का दिन ऐसा होता है जहाँ मैं विद्यमान होती हूँ। परन्तु सातवीं, आठवीं और नौवीं अवस्था को छठी अवस्था पार करने के बाद ही प्राप्त किया जा सकता है। आज मैं आपको छठी अवस्था के विषय में बताऊँगी क्योंकि इसके विषय में जानना हम सबके लिए महत्वपूर्ण है, यह जानना कि षष्ठी के दिन देवी ने क्या किया। महालक्ष्मी मेरी रूप में अवतरित हुई और अपने पुत्र को जन्म दिया। ये ईसामसीह थे। 'मेरी' की इच्छा थी कि ईसामसीह अन्य सभी लोगों के लिए आज्ञा चक्र को पार करें और इस प्रकार से ईसामसीह को चैतन्य का सूक्ष्म रूप बनना पड़ा। वे चैतन्य के सूक्ष्म रूप थे। जिस प्रकार से वे पानी पर चले, जिस प्रकार से उन्होंने अन्य बहुत से चमत्कारिक कार्य किए, उससे उन्होंने दर्शाया कि वे चैतन्य थे और अन्तत: वे चैतन्य बन गए और अपने सूक्ष्म शरीर को त्याग कर उन्होंने छठी अवस्था को पार कर लिया। यह धारणा अब वास्तविकता है परन्तु किसी ऐसे व्यक्ति के लिए जो अभी तक आत्मसाक्षात्कारी 19

 ये री बातें आपको बाई आज़ञा की बहुत भयंकर पकड़ दे कती है और यदि आपकी आज्ञा पकड़ जाए तौ इसे ढू२ करन बहुत कठिन है नहीं है, जिसने चैतन्य लहरियाँ महसूस नहीं की है, वह इस सत्य को स्वीकार नहीं कर सकता। अत: वह ईसामसीह के विरुद्ध चला जाता है और अपनी आज्ञा के माध्यम से ईसा विरोधी कहानियाँ गढ़ता है। वह ऐसी बातें करता है जैसे ईसामसीह एक सर्वसाधारण मानव थे, क्योंकि इससे परे वह जा ही नहीं सकता। अभी तक वह आज्ञा की अवस्था में है और इन सब चीज़ों को करते हुए वह ईसामसीह के चक्र (आज्ञा) को पार नहीं कर सकता। अब आज्ञा चक्र की बात ऐसी है कि मानव इसके दोनों ओर बायें और दायें पर कार्यरत है। बाईं आज्ञा आपके भूतकाल को जाती है और आप अपने देश के विषय में सोचते हैं कि यह एक महान देश था, या इंग्लैण्ड की तरह वे सोचते हैं कि वे महान शासक थे। इसके बाद वे सोच सकते हैं कि उनका जन्म बहुत ऊँचे परिवार में हुआ-आदि-आदि-ये सभी चीज़ें वे सोच सकते हैं। इस प्रकार की सोच उन्हें बाईं आज्ञा की बाधा दे सकती है। ये सारी चीजें जब आप महसूस करते हैं तो इसमें आपका भूतकाल होता है। इसके अतिरिक्त अन्य लोगों के भूतकाल में जाना भी बाईं आज्ञा की पकड़ का कारण बनता है। जैसे कोई व्यक्ति आपको अपने भूतकाल के विषय में बता रहा हो, ऐसा हुआ, वैसा हुआ या कोई स्वयं आदि अपने भूतकाल के विषय में सोचे कि मेरे साथ इतनी बुरी घटना हुई, ऐसा नहीं होना चाहिए था या इसके विषय में रोए- भयंकर पकड़ दे सकती है और यदि आपकी आज्ञा बिलबिलाए। ये सारी बातें आपको बाईं आज्ञा की बहुत पकड़ जाए तो इसे दूर करना बहुत कठिन है क्योंकि आपने स्वयं ये समस्या खड़ी की है। तीसरी बात ये है कि जब किसी नकारात्मक शक्ति का आक्रमण आप पर होता है तो आप बिल्कुल भूल जाते हैं कि आप क्या हैं। आप नहीं जानते कि आप क्या हैं। जो भी कुछ लोग आपको बताते हैं आप उस पर विश्वास कर लेते हैं। लोग कहते हैं कि ऐसा करो और आप वैसा करने लगते हैं। लोग आपसे धन माँगते हैं | और आप उन्हें धन दे देते हैं, वे कहते हैं समुद्र में कूद पड़ो और आप कूद पड़ते हैं। ये लोग सामूहिक | 20

 में प्रवेश कर जाती है जब बाई औज्ञी दाई आ़ ्ञी तंब व्यक्ति इ प्रकार के भयानक तत्वों के हाथ में २ेलने लगती है। आत्महत्यायें करवा सकते हैं। इसी बाईं आज्ञा के माध्यम से वे सम्मोहन करते हैं और एक बार जब वे सम्मोहन कर लेते हैं तो फिर आपसे कुछ भी ले लेते हैं। सम्मोहन के माध्यम से वे लोगों का इलाज भी करते हैं। कोई भी व्यक्ति जब सम्मोहित हो जाता है तो ऊर्जा उसके उस शारीरिक पक्ष की ओर बहने लगती है जो उसके शारीरिक रोगों को प्रभावित करती है और उसके शारीरिक रोग ठीक होने लगते हैं परन्तु उसकी बाईं ओर पकड़ जाती है। अत: वह व्यक्ति बाईं ओर की बाधाओं से ग्रस्त हो जाता है यद्यपि शारीरिक रूप से वह ठीक हो जाता है। बहुत से लोगों पर ये इस प्रकार के हत्थकण्डे अपनाते हैं और उनमें मृत आत्माएं डाल देते हैं। अस्थायी रूप से उनमें यह सब घटित होता है और लगता है कि वह सामान्य बन गए हैं परन्तु वास्तव में उनके अन्दर कोई और ही बैठा होता है। वे बहुत अधिक थक जाते हैं और अकेले ही पड़े रहना चाहते हैं। किसी का सामना वे नहीं कर सकते। बाईं ओर की नकारात्मक शक्तियों के कारण ऐसी बहुत सी चीजें हो सकती हैं, इनका वर्णन नहीं किया जा सकता जैसे कैन्सर, स्नायु रोग और पारकिन्सन रोग आदि मनोदैहिक रोग इस कारण से हो जाते हैं। उस दिन मैं एक महिला से मिली, अचानक उसका रंग काला पड़ गया, शरीर सूज गया, उसके शरीर पर गाँठे थीं, उन्हें कोई भी ठीक न कर पा रहा था। केवल तीन दिन सहजयोग उपचार करवाने पर वह काफी ठीक हो गई। तो ये सारी समस्यायें व्यक्ति को बाईं आज्ञा से आती हैं और कुछ गलत लोग इनका दुरुपयोग करते हैं। मुसलमान लोगों में ऐसे कुकृत्य मैंने विशेष रूप से देखे हैं। मैं नहीं जानती क्यों? परन्तु उनमें इस प्रकार का रोना-बिलखना, क्रोध आदि करना पाया जाता है । अपनी तकलीफों और कष्टों के गीत वे गाते हैं। विशेषरूप से विरह-गीत और इसी तरह की अन्य मूर्खतायें, तथा इस प्रकार वे बाईं आज्ञा पर पकड़ जाते हैं। बाईं आज्ञा की पकड़ जब दृढ़ हो जाती है तो यह दाईं आज्ञा को भी बेंधने लगती है। बाईं और दाईं आज्ञा परस्पर सम्बन्धित हैं। जब बाईं आज्ञा दाईं आज्ञा में प्रवेश कर जाती है तब व्यक्ति इस प्रकार के भयानक तत्वों के हाथ में खेलने लगता है। जब वह व्यक्ति इनका विरोध करता है उसे दर्द होंगे, शारीरिक कष्ट हो जाएंगे परन्तु ज्योंही वह 21

 इन २भी नौ चक्रों को इसी जीवन में पा२ क२नी आविश्यक है। यही आपका लक््य होनी चाहिए। उन्हें स्वीकार करने लगता है तो यह नकारात्मक तत्व उसके माध्यम से कार्य करने लगते हैं। तब वे कई प्रकार के चमत्कार दिखाते हैं, जैसे उनके अन्दर से कुंकुम का निकलना। ये लोग अत्यन्त प्रभावशाली हो उठते हैं और इस प्रकार से बातचीत करते हैं कि लोग इन पर मोहित हो जाते हैं। ये लोग इस प्रकार से बातें करते हैं मानो डेल्फी के दिव्य पुरुष सा कोई महान व्यक्ति बात कर रहा हो। सारा कुछ आसुरी प्रदर्शन सा बन जाता है। तो जब ये बाईं आज्ञा दाईं ओर को चली जाती है तो ये लोग बहुत बड़े गुरु- महागुरु बन बैठते हैं। आजकल जो भी कुछ आप देख रहे हैं, ऐसा सभी कुछ वे बन जाते हैं। वो महागुरु बन सकते हैं। ये सारे बाईं ओर के कृत्य करते हुए और इन पर नियंत्रण करते हुए, दाईं ओर से इनका उपयोग करते हुए वे वास्तव में यह स्थिति प्राप्त करते हैं। यह बहुत ही भयंकर स्थिति है। जब बाईं आज्ञा बहुत अधिक बढ़ जाती है तो व्यक्ति का स्वभाव अत्यन्त अहंकारपूर्ण हो सकता है। तब आप एकदम से उसका उपयोग करने लगते हैं और अत्यन्त डींगबाज बन जाते हैं। इस प्रकार से आचरण करने वाले सहजयोग में भी हमने देखा है, जिन लोगों को दाईं आज्ञा थी, जो बाईं आज्ञा की पकड़ से हो गई और वे दुर्व्यवहार करने लगे। ऐसी स्थिति में उन्हें सहजयोग में वापिस नहीं लाया जा सकता। वे सभी प्रकार के कार्य करते हैं, सभी प्रकार की चालाकियाँ करते हैं और इस प्रकार से लोगों को प्रभावित करते हैं, वे दिखावा करने का प्रयत्न करते हैं परन्तु उनके माध्यम से भूत बोल रहे होते हैं। तो यह अवस्था है जहाँ हम कहते हैं कि वे सहजयोग से बाहर हैं। हम उन्हें अन्दर नहीं ले सकते। तो ये एक बात है इससे बचना चाहिए। किसी को यदि बाईं आज्ञा की पकड़ है तो कृपा करके इसे ठीक करें और हर समय स्वयं पर ही नाराज हों, हर समय। क्यों मुझमें ये क्रोध है? क्यों मुझे क्रोध करना चाहिए? हो सकता है इस अहं से किसी को चोट पहुँचती हो। ऐसा व्यक्ति अत्यन्त अटपटा भी हो सकता है। चोट खाया हुआ अहं गुब्बारे की तरह से फूल भी सकता है। गुब्बारे को आप बाहर से चोट मारें या अन्दर से वह फूलेगा ही। ऐसा व्यक्ति अत्यन्त अजीबोगरीब हो सकता है और बनावटी रूप से विनम्रता और आनन्द का दिखावा कर सकता है। तो इस प्रकार का व्यक्तित्व भी व्यक्ति में विकसित हो सकता है।... 22

 Hep Rokiha Bardler Bandhan If you call somebody a sister, the sisterly & daughterly relationships, and motherly relationships, always bring down the so-called ego, which is hiding in the left Vishuddhi. (Raksha Bandhan, London, 11.8.1984 Published & Printed by Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. No. 8, Chandragupta Co-op Housing Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune, Maharashtra, India website: www.nitl.co.in (For queries & sending articles contact on above address) 411 038. © : 25286537, 25286032 email:sale@nitl.co.in -

 arAYOYOYOYAYOPOZ 00 अगত dioinimie Krishna Janmashtami, also known as Krishnashtami, Saatam Aatham, Gokulashtami, Ashtami Rohini, Srikrishna Jayanti, Sree Jayanthi or sometimes merely as Janmashtami. Krishna Janmashtami is observed on the Ashtami tithi, the eighth day of the dark half or Krishna Paksha of the month of Bhadrapada in the Hindu calendar, when the Rohini Nakshatra is ascendant. The festival always falls within mid- August to mid-September in the Gregorian calendar. In 2009, for example, the festival was celebrated on 14h August, while in 2010, the festival was celebrated on 2nd September. Rasa lila, dramatic enactments of the life of Krishna, are a special feature in regions of Mathura and Vrindavan, and regions following Vaishnavism in Manipur. While the Rasa lila re-creates the aspects of Krishna's youthful days, the Dahi Handi celebrate God's playful and mischievous side, where teams of young men form human pyramids to reach a high-hanging pot of butter and break it. This tradition, also known as uriadi, is a major event in Tamilnadu on Gokulashtami. CG 253



----------------------

2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-0.txt 
 a
r
h
t
i
Sept 2011
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-1.txt 
 In the early 1920s, national flag discussions gained prominence across
most British dominions following the peace treaty between Britain and
Ireland. In November 1920, the Indian delegation to the League of Nations
wanted to use an Indian flag, and this prompted the British Indian
government to place renewedemphasis on the flag as a national symbol.
In April 1921, Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi wrote in his journal
Young
charkha or spinning wheel at the centre. The idea of the spinning wheel was
put forth by Lala Hansraj and Gandhi commissioned Venkayya to design a
flag with the spinning wheel on a red and green banner, the red colour
signifying Hindus and the green standing for Muslims. Gandhi wanted the
flag to be presented at the Congress session of1921, but it was not delivered on
time, and another flag was proposed at the session. Gandhi later wrote that thie
delay was fortuitous since it allowed him to realise that other religions were
not represented; he then added white to the banner colours, to represent all the
other religions. However, soon the Sikhs wanted the banner to include the
black colour and Gandhi was forced to address these issues in his writings and
India about the need for an Indian flag, proposing a flag with the
speeches.
Finally, owing to the religious-political sensibilities, in 1929, Gandhi
moved towards a more secular interpretation of the flag colours, stating that
red stood for the sacrifices of the people, white for purity, and green for hope.
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Sub Kuch Toh Kar Diya
Bija (seed) Mantras - Part III ....4
Guru Purnima Message ...8
Guru has to be very steady ...10
Sign of a Good Guru ...11
Rakhi Message ...12
Navaratri Message ...14
Diwali Message ...16
नवरात्रि - संदेश ...18
Note : Subscriptions for all 2012 Magazines would be open from
1st Sept.2011 to 30th Nov.2011 only.
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Bija (seed) Mantras
Part III
How to say Bīja Mantras.
The bījas may be said on their own, or preceded by Om, or what seems to
be effective, is to say them in a series. A series of Bijas consists of the five long
vowels with the addition of visarga-'aspirated ending'-ah.
For example a series of Gaņeśha Bijas is gām, gīm, gūm, gaim, gaum,
gaḥ,
or for Dha- we can say 'Dhām, dhīm, dhūm, dhaim, dhaum, dhaḥ'
The Fifteen-Syllabled Mantra
Traditionally the Goddess is worshipped with the fifteen-syllabled
mantra, as described in the *Saundarya Lahari, Devi Atharva Sheersha, the
300 and 1000 Names of Shri Lalitā etc. The mantra is composed of Bijas:-
Ka e ī la hrīm, ha sa ka ha la hrīm, sa ka la hrīm.
The addition of Shrīm at the end makes this the sixteen-syllabled mantra
which is very secret (although we're telling you!)
The three sections of the mantra are the Man dalas-'Circles'of Fire, Sun
and Moon, and the three Śhaktis, Mahākālī, Mahāsaraswatī and
Mahālakshmī respectively. The addition of Śhrīm makes a fourth (or three
and a half) section which is always implied, even if not stated.
*The word Laharī-'wave, billow' may be a pun on the fact that each
section of the fifteen-syllabled mantra ends with 'La Hrīm'.
The following Kuñjika Stotram (not to be confused with the Kubjika
Tantra!) says a lot about Bija Mantras.
The prayer mostly addresses the Left Side aspects of the Goddess, Shri
Chandī, the Destroyer of Demons, Bhairavi, Pārvatī, etc.
Śhrī Kuñjikā Stotram.
Kuñjikā-'a shady bower, murmuring'
Om Śhrī Gaņeśhāya namaḥ.
Om Salutations to Shri Ganesha
Asya Shrī Kuñjikā Stotra-mantrasya Of these Kunjika Stotram mantras
4
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Sadāśhiva rişhiḥ .
The Sage is Shri Sadāśhiva
The metre is Anushtubh,
Anuşhtup chhandaḥ .
Śhri Triguņātmika devatā,
Om Aim bījam,
The Deity is the three-braided Goddess,
Aim is the Seed,
Om Hrīm śhaktiḥ ,
Hrīm is the Power,
Om Klīm kīlakam,
Klīm is the Root Mantra.
For the removal of all fear and
Mama sary ābhīşhţa-siddhy arthe
jape viniyogaḥ .
Śhiva uvācha,
fulfilment of my purposes, this is recited.
Shri Shiva said-
Śhriņu Devi pravakşhāmi kuñjikā stotram uttamam,
Listen, O Devi, while I recite this excellent Praise of Kunjika.
Yena mantra prabhāveņa Chandī jāpah śhubho bhavet.
By recitation of these most excellent mantras, Shri Chandi may be pleased.
(1)
Na kavacham nārgalā stotram kīlakam na rahasyakam,
No prayer for protection, no introductory praise, no secret mantras,
Na sūktam nāpi vā dhyānam na nyāso na vārchanam.
(2)
No eulogies or meditations, no attention exercises or worship,
Kuñjikā pātha-mātreņa durgā-pātha-phalam labhet,
Only by practice of this Kunjika may one attain the fruits of the inaccessible
path,
(3)
Ati-guhya-taram Devi devānām-api dur-labham
The most secret, O Devi, which is hard for even the Gods to attain.
Gopanīyam prayatnena swa-yoniriva Pārvati,
With diligent effort by oneself one may become protected, 0
Parvati,
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Māranam mohanam vaśhyam stambhanoch-ch'āțanādikam. (4)
Death, illusion and domination by others can be arrested and destroyed.
Pātha-mātreņa sam-siddhyet kuñjikā stotram uttamam,
Only by practising this excellent Kunjika Stotram may one succeed,
Om Śhrūm Śhrūm Śhrūm Śham Phat
Om Śhrūm Śhrūm Śhrūm hear this and peace will be,
Aim Hrīm Klīm jvala ujjvala prajvala
Aim Hrīm Klīm-flame (Kundalini) igniting, blazing up,
Hrīm Hrīm Klīm srāvaya srāvaya śhāpam nāśhaya nāśhaya
Hrīm Hrīm Klīm, listen, listen, all curses are destroyed, destroyed,
Śhrīm Śhrīm Śhrīm jūm saḥsrāvaya ādaya Swāhā.
Śhrīm Śhrīm Śhrīm, he who listens receives good fortune quickly,
(5)
Om Śhlīm Hūm Klīm Glām jūm saḥjvala ujjvala mantram prajvala
Om Śhlīm Hūm Klīm Glām, saying these mantras, quickly the flame blazes up
Ham Sam Lam Kşham Phat Swāhā.
(6)
Shiva Shakti Mother Earth bearing up. So, well-said!
Namaste rudra-rūpāyai namaste madhu-mardini,.
We bow to You of Fierce Form, O Crusher of the demon Madhu,
Namaste kaițabha-nāśhinyai namaste mahişh'ārdini,
Salutations to You, O Destroyer of Kaitabha and Tormentor of Mahishasura
(7)
Namaste śhumbha-hantryai cha niśhumbḥ āsura-sūdini.
Prostrations to You, O Slayer of Shumbha and Nishumbha.
Namaste jāgrate devi jape siddhim kuruşhva me,
Salutations to You O awakened Devi, may this recitation bring success to me,
Aim-kārīsrişhți-rūpiņyai hrīm-kārī prati-pālikā.
The sound Aim is the form of Creation, Hrīm is the Preserver. *
(8)
Klīm kālī kāla-rūpiņyai bīja-rūpe namō-'stu te.
Klīm is Shri Kālī of the Seed Form of the Destroyer*, Salutations to You.
Chāmuņdā chanda-rūpā cha yaiñkārī vara-dāyinī,
O Goddess Chāmundā, the form of anger, by which sound. Boons are granted.
(9)
Vichche tw-abhaya-dā nityam namaste mantra-rūpiņī,
Vichche gives freedom from fear always, Salutations to You, who is of the form of mantras,
Dhām Dhīm Dhūm dhūrjațehpatnī Vām Vīm vāgīśhwarī tathā. (10)
Dhām dhīm dhūm O Wife Of Lord Shiva of matted locks, vām vīm O Goddess of Speech.
Krām Krīm Krūm kuñjikā devi, Śhrām Śhrīm Śhrūm me śhubham kuru,
Krām krīm krūm O Devi Kuñjika, śhrām śhrīm śhrūm, make me auspicious,
6.
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Hūm Hūm Hūm-kāra-rūpinyai, Jrām Jrīm Jrūm bhāla-nādinī. (11)
Hūm Hūm, of the Form of the sound Hüm, Jrām Jrīm Jrūm, resonating on forehead.
Bhrām Bhrīm Bhrūm bhairavī bhadre, bhavānyai te namo namaḥ .
Bhrām bhrīm bhrūm We bow to You, O fierce and auspicious One who is all existence.
Om Am Kam Cham Tam Tam Pam Sām
These are the first letters of the eight groups, (the seventh- Yam- is missing)
vidurām vidurām vimardaya vimardaya
wise, wise, destruction, destruction.
Hrīm Kşhām Kşhīm Srīm jīvaya jīvaya troțaya troțaya
Hrīm Kşhām Kşhīm Srīm, soul, soul, destruction, destruction,
jambhaya jambhaya dīpaya dīpaya mochaya mochaya
crushing, crushing, light, light, liberation, liberation,
Hūm Phat Jrām Vaushat
Hūm Phat Jrām, thus it goes auspiciously,
Aim Hrīm Klīm rañjaya rañjaya sañjaya sañjaya
Aim Hrīm Klīm, worship, worship, Creator, Creator'
guñjaya guñjaya bandhaya bandhaya
humming, humming, binding, binding
Bhrām Bhrīm Bhrūm bhairavī bhadre
Bhrām Bhrīm Bhrūm, Fierce and Auspicious Goddess,
sañkucha sañkucha troțaya troțaya mlīm swāhā. (12)
Modesty, modesty, destruction, destruction, mlīm swāhā-'well spoken'
Pām pīm Pūm pārvatī pūrņā
Pām pīm Pūm, the complete Shri Parvatī,
Khām Khīm Khūm khecharī tatha,
Khām Khīm Khūm 'flying'- Shri Kartikeya is thus.
Mlām Mlīm Mlūm mūla-vistīrņā kuñjikā stotra hetave,
Mlām Mlīm Mlūm extended roots on account of this Kunjika praise,
Abhaktāya na dātavyam rakşha Pārvati,
This protection should not be given to a non-devotee, O Pārvatī,
Vihīnā kuñjikā devyā yastu sapta-śhatīm pațhet,
Without the Divine power of Kunjuika one may recite the Sapta-shati (700 verses)
Na tasya jāyate siddhir-hyaranye ruditam yasyā. (13)
Without victory, only succeeding in weeping.
Iti śhrī-dāmara-tantra īśhwara pārvatī samvāde kuñjikā stotram sam-pūrņam.
Here ends the Kunjika Stotram recited by Lord Shiva to Śhrī Pārvatī in the Shri Damara Tantra..
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Guru Purnima Message
hin
My Dear Sahaja Yogis,
Received your cable on the eve of Guru Purnima. The sentiments,
which you have expressed in very beautiful words have gone to heart. On
the occasion of Guru Purnima day celebrations in London, I have
explained what is self realisation and whether you have got it or not. I
will send the tape recording of this speech with some one instead of
sending it by post.
I suggested, in my earlier letters, to think of "Atma tatwa". Because
you are "Atma Swaroop", your mind, intellect and ego, should be
enlightened by the "atma jyoti". The light of wisdom shines in the
intellect only when Atma-jyoti illumines in its fullness. Then, mind
emits fragrance of love and ego does great and noble works, the whole of
inner being is fully enlightened. You should be able to rely on the
Atma tatwa, accommodate others in it, but first stabilize it.
your
Many of the Sahaja Yogis have cured a number of diseases. They
have immense love for me and others. These people could do all this
because they have become experts owning to their "Poorva-Sampada".
However, there are many intellectuals among us who have not been able
to go very far on the strength of their knowledge or wisdom. Sahaja
Yoga is lacking in books. We will have to write books in each language.
Also, Sahaja Yogis should go to different cities and give lectures. Many
people send their poems to me. We should collect all these. Similarly my
letters can also be printed. Such publicity is necessary. Let it be known all
over the world that Sahaja Yoga is the only way to save the world in
Kaliyuga. I am writing a book but it is not useful to all at the present. Al
should think on what I have suggested. Every centre may also be
accordingly advised.
Many blessings from Mother to all Sahaja Yogis.
Always remembering you
Your mother NIRMALA
8
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Guru
has to be very steady
т:
he word Guru comes from the one that is
magnetic, the person who is magnetic, the
one who attracts the attention of the seekers, is the
Guru.
Also it means the heaviness, or you can say a
person who is very steady, who is very deep, who has
the knowledge, and who can act like the mother earth.
For the power of magnetism in the mother earth also
is called as magnetic, but in sanskrit is
'Gurutwakareshwari' – which means the attraction of
the heaviness of the mother earth.
But actually it is a power of the mother earth that
makes us stand properly on our legs when it is rotating
with such a tremendous speed, otherwise we would be
all thrown away. With that velocity that she is moving,
we are still attached, or we are one in our balance, this
is only because she has gravity.
Guru Puja,
Cabella, Italy,
July 12, 1998
This gravity has to be in a Guru. Gravity means a
kind of a serious understanding of oneself and ones
own responsibilities. So a Guru has to be very steady.'
H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
10
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Sign of a Good Guru
S:
o the difference between the ancient-times
guru and modern-times guru is that the
ancient-time gurus didn't care if they gave
realizations to people. It was not their style, most of
them. Only they cared for themselves, nicely sitting
down somewhere in the Himalayas away from all
the madding crowd, and enjoying themselves. But
you must share this enjoyment. I think that is the
sign of a good guru.
The one who cannot share only looks after his
own pleasures or looks after his own ashram, you
can call it, or looks after his own family, looks after
maybe some disciples he has. Attention has to be for
the whole world.
In Sahaja Yoga now it has reached such a stage
that you have to worry about the complete
humanity. It's not only you or few Sahaja yogis or
many more Sahaja yogis, but all over the world,
whatever is the problem, you people have to solve it.
But first get out of your own little, little problems
Guru Puja,
Cabella,
08.07.2001
H.H.Shri Mataji
11
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Many many blessings to all
I have received the beautiful RAKHEES, lovingly sent by you. RAKHEE denotes a
protective power. This protective bandhan is very powerful and at the same time delicate as
it represents pure love between a brother and a sister.
Whenever a sister ties this RAKHEE on a brother's hand, it establishes a relation of
enduring protection by the brother for the sister. Unfortunately, the sensitivity of human
beings to the feelings of love has become so weak that tying a RAKHEE has become a
mechanical ritual. In absence of a deep living faith all human actions and rituals become
dry and lifeless.
We are born in this life with a purposeful responsibility towards all Sahaj yogis and are
all the time aware of their love and devotion. Myself being desireless, I depend entirely on
their desires. It is customary for a brother to ask for something from the sister on this day. All
sahajayogis should therefore collectively let me know whatever they desire from
side.
my
12
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-12.txt 
 I am keeping very good health as this is the pure desire of all of you. I have to
undergo a minor surgery for ear which is not a problem, and you need not worry about it
nor feel unduly concerned.
RAKHEE bandhan is a very important day and one should desire on this occasion
to become a 'whole', you should always have high aspirations and your attention should
be to larger perspectives. Sahaj-yogis are not expected to waste their attention in petty
small things. We have to work very hard, those of you who have achieved good progress
should still work out much more. We should open more centers. We must help the sick to
cure their ailments and above all strive to bring people on the path of TRUTH. Please
circulate this letter to all the sahaj yogis.
Always remembering you all -NIRMALA
(Translation of the original letter written in marathi by MOTHER to all Sahaj yogis
on receiving RAKHEES from them. 17 Aug.1978)
13
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-13.txt 
 E3
My Dear Sahaja Yogis,
Received your loving and beautiful letters and messages of
greetings. Here, I am busy in the work in London and could not write.
Once I told you that Sahaja Yoga is beginning from Navaratri this
year. That is Satya - Yuga for which you were so far preparing, will now
be seen. As a tree has to sprout first in the earth and then its sapling
peeps out, in the same way, on the first day of Navaratri i.e. on 8th April
the sapling of Satya - Yuga will be seen.
It is the day of great joy. Whole nature will now have new life. You
must understand that the importance of this day will be known only if
14
AMA
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Navaratri Message
the whole mankind is enlightened with vibrations of love.
In this world Brahma Shakti was awakened from the very day
of My birth. You have received it to some extent, and are using it
in many ways.
I was telling you that light of the great power of love will
spread all over the world. The first lamp will be lit on that day. But
the night of Diwali is blind. It cannot see the lamps. In this Kali-
Yuga, this work will be done only if many lamps are lit.
Whatever is God's work, it will be over. Hence all should be
alert and awake and also awaken others.
My life is dedicated to you. Every moment it is working. All I
want is that pure gold should enlighten human history while
getting heated in the hell of Kali -yuga.
My blessings are: may this lamp be kindled in every home,
may its joy spread in the society, may the cheers of its victory
resound all countries and may this power of Brahman fill every
molecule of this Universe.
I have to be away from you for a very long time. But your
brothers are living here and also in other countries. You will meet
each other in course of time. But I often feel that one day of such
great joy of love should dawn in our life. Whatever you desire
your desire will happen. Therefore, your attention should be fully
on Sahaja Yoga. I have offered My body, mind and wealth,
everything.
You have to take care of only your Chitta because only that
will be enlightened.
Always remembering you,
Your separated Mother,
Nirmala
15
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Diwali is the
day of real
aspirations.
Invoke the
whole
universe.
Many lamps
have to be
lit, and
looked after.
Add the oil
of love,
Kundalini is
the wick and
awaken the
Kundalini of
others with
light of the
spirit within
you.
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Diwali Message
"My dear Sahaja Yogis, my dear children, Let this Diwali
enlighten you with light of love. You yourself are the lamps which
burn high and don't get pressed by the cover. They become much
more powerful than the cover. It is their own asset. When they are
hit upon, they are disturbed and extinguished.
Why are our lamps disturbed ? You should think over it. Is
there no transparent sheath around them ? Have you forgotten
your Mother's love and therefore you are so disturbed? As the glass
protects the lamp, in the same way my love will protect you. But
the glass should be kept clean. How can I explain? Have I to say
like Shri Krishna “Leave all religions and surrender to me" or as
99
Shri Jesus "I am the way, I am the door".
I want to tell that I am that destination. But will you people
accept it ? Will this fact go to your hearts? Although what I say is
distorted, the truth will always stand. You cannot change what it
is. Only you will remain ignorant and backward. I am unhappy
because of that.
Diwali is the day of real aspirations. Invoke the whole
universe. Many lamps have to be lit, and looked after. Add the oil
of love, Kundalini is the wick and awwaken the Kundalini of others
with light of the spirit within you. This flame of Kundalini will be
kindled and one within you will become the torch. Torch is not
extinguished. Then there will be spotless sheath of my love. It will
neither have any limits nor any end. I will be watching you.
My love for you is showering as many, many blessings.
Yours always loving Mother
NIRMALA
(letter from Shri Mataji on Diwali 1976 occasion...with love...
21 October 1976)
17
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-17.txt 
 ट
२
ी
700
क
हि
९
९
ु
र·
य
नी
यू
अर
प्रजा
नवरात्रि - संदेश
र्
र]
१९.१०.१९८८
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-18.txt 
 इन २भी नौ चंक्रों को इसी जीवन में
पा२ करनी आवश्यक है।
येही आपका लक्य होनी चीहिए।
आज नवरात्रि का अन्तिम दिन है। जैसे आप अपने अन्दर देखते हैं, हम सबके लिए यह परमोत्कर्ष
बिन्दु होना चाहिए। हमारे अन्दर उत्थान के लिए सात चक्र हैं और दो चक्र इनसे ऊपर हैं। अत: इन सभी
नौ चक्रों को इसी जीवन में पार करना आवश्यक है। यही आपका लक्ष्य होना चाहिए। परन्तु आप लोग
यदि केवल आज्ञा में ही चलेंगे तो आप अधिक ऊँचे नहीं उठ सकते। इसी चक्र ( आज्ञा) पर बहुत से लोग
खो गए। अत: यह अत्यन्त महत्वपूर्ण चक्र है।
दुर्गा की षष्टी को बहुत महत्वपूर्ण माना जाता है। कहा जाता है कि देवी नाव पर सवार होकर आती
हैं। कलकत्ता के लोगों को इस बात पर विश्वास है कि षष्टी का दिन इसे पार करने के लिए बहुत बड़ा दिन
है। हम सब लोगों के साथ भी यही समस्या है कि यह षष्टी का दिन (आज्ञा) अभी भी हमारे सिर पर सवार
है और हम इसमें से निकल नहीं सकते। अत: नवम अवस्था तक आने के लिए चाहे हम पूजा करें या कुछ
और परन्तु अभी तक हम छठी अवस्था में हैं। हम बाह्य रूप से ही पूजा कर रहे हैं। सप्तमी का दिन ऐसा
होता है जहाँ मैं विद्यमान होती हूँ। परन्तु सातवीं, आठवीं और नौवीं अवस्था को छठी अवस्था पार करने
के
बाद ही प्राप्त किया जा सकता है। आज मैं आपको छठी अवस्था के विषय में बताऊँगी क्योंकि इसके
विषय में जानना हम सबके लिए महत्वपूर्ण है, यह जानना कि षष्ठी के दिन देवी ने क्या किया।
महालक्ष्मी मेरी रूप में अवतरित हुई और अपने पुत्र को
जन्म दिया। ये ईसामसीह थे। 'मेरी' की
इच्छा थी कि ईसामसीह अन्य सभी लोगों के लिए आज्ञा चक्र को पार करें और इस प्रकार से ईसामसीह
को चैतन्य का सूक्ष्म रूप बनना पड़ा। वे चैतन्य के सूक्ष्म रूप थे। जिस प्रकार से वे पानी पर चले, जिस
प्रकार से उन्होंने अन्य बहुत से चमत्कारिक कार्य किए, उससे उन्होंने दर्शाया कि वे चैतन्य थे और
अन्तत: वे चैतन्य बन गए और अपने सूक्ष्म शरीर को त्याग कर उन्होंने छठी अवस्था को पार कर लिया।
यह धारणा अब वास्तविकता है परन्तु किसी ऐसे व्यक्ति के लिए जो अभी तक आत्मसाक्षात्कारी
19
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-19.txt 
 ये री बातें आपको बाई आज़ञा की
बहुत भयंकर पकड़ दे कती है और यदि आपकी आज्ञा
पकड़ जाए तौ इसे ढू२ करन बहुत कठिन है
नहीं है, जिसने चैतन्य लहरियाँ महसूस नहीं की है, वह इस सत्य को स्वीकार नहीं कर सकता। अत: वह
ईसामसीह के विरुद्ध चला जाता है और अपनी आज्ञा के माध्यम से ईसा विरोधी कहानियाँ गढ़ता है। वह
ऐसी बातें करता है जैसे ईसामसीह एक सर्वसाधारण मानव थे, क्योंकि इससे परे वह जा ही नहीं सकता।
अभी तक वह आज्ञा की अवस्था में है और इन सब चीज़ों को करते हुए वह ईसामसीह के चक्र (आज्ञा) को
पार नहीं कर सकता।
अब आज्ञा चक्र की बात ऐसी है कि मानव इसके दोनों ओर बायें और दायें पर कार्यरत है। बाईं आज्ञा
आपके भूतकाल को जाती है और आप अपने देश के विषय में सोचते हैं कि यह एक महान देश था, या
इंग्लैण्ड की तरह वे सोचते हैं कि वे महान शासक थे। इसके बाद वे सोच सकते हैं कि उनका जन्म बहुत ऊँचे
परिवार में हुआ-आदि-आदि-ये सभी चीज़ें वे सोच सकते हैं। इस प्रकार की सोच उन्हें बाईं आज्ञा की
बाधा दे सकती है। ये सारी चीजें जब आप महसूस करते हैं तो इसमें आपका भूतकाल होता है। इसके
अतिरिक्त अन्य लोगों के भूतकाल में जाना भी बाईं आज्ञा की पकड़ का कारण बनता है। जैसे कोई व्यक्ति
आपको अपने भूतकाल के विषय में बता रहा हो, ऐसा हुआ, वैसा हुआ या कोई स्वयं आदि अपने भूतकाल
के विषय में सोचे कि मेरे साथ इतनी बुरी घटना हुई, ऐसा नहीं होना चाहिए था या इसके विषय में रोए-
भयंकर पकड़ दे सकती है और यदि आपकी आज्ञा
बिलबिलाए। ये सारी बातें आपको बाईं आज्ञा की
बहुत
पकड़ जाए तो इसे दूर करना बहुत कठिन है क्योंकि आपने स्वयं ये समस्या खड़ी की है।
तीसरी बात ये है कि जब किसी नकारात्मक शक्ति का आक्रमण आप पर होता है तो आप बिल्कुल भूल
जाते हैं कि आप क्या हैं। आप नहीं जानते कि आप क्या हैं। जो भी कुछ लोग आपको बताते हैं आप उस पर
विश्वास कर लेते हैं। लोग कहते हैं कि ऐसा करो और आप वैसा करने लगते हैं। लोग आपसे धन माँगते हैं
|
और आप उन्हें धन दे देते हैं, वे कहते हैं समुद्र में कूद पड़ो और आप कूद पड़ते हैं। ये लोग सामूहिक
|
20
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-20.txt 
 में प्रवेश कर जाती है
जब बाई औज्ञी दाई आ़
्ञी
तंब व्यक्ति इ प्रकार के भयानक तत्वों के
हाथ में २ेलने लगती है।
आत्महत्यायें करवा सकते हैं। इसी बाईं आज्ञा के माध्यम से वे सम्मोहन करते हैं और एक बार जब वे
सम्मोहन कर लेते हैं तो फिर आपसे कुछ भी ले लेते हैं। सम्मोहन के माध्यम से वे लोगों का इलाज भी
करते हैं। कोई भी व्यक्ति जब सम्मोहित हो जाता है तो ऊर्जा उसके उस शारीरिक पक्ष की ओर बहने
लगती है जो उसके शारीरिक रोगों को प्रभावित करती है और उसके शारीरिक रोग ठीक होने लगते हैं
परन्तु उसकी बाईं ओर पकड़ जाती है। अत: वह व्यक्ति बाईं ओर की बाधाओं से ग्रस्त हो जाता है यद्यपि
शारीरिक रूप से वह ठीक हो जाता है। बहुत से लोगों पर ये इस प्रकार के हत्थकण्डे अपनाते हैं और उनमें
मृत आत्माएं डाल देते हैं। अस्थायी रूप से उनमें यह सब घटित होता है और लगता है कि वह सामान्य
बन गए हैं परन्तु वास्तव में उनके अन्दर कोई और ही बैठा होता है। वे बहुत अधिक थक जाते हैं और
अकेले ही पड़े रहना चाहते हैं। किसी का सामना वे नहीं कर सकते। बाईं ओर की नकारात्मक शक्तियों के
कारण ऐसी बहुत सी चीजें हो सकती हैं, इनका वर्णन नहीं किया जा सकता जैसे कैन्सर, स्नायु रोग और
पारकिन्सन रोग आदि मनोदैहिक रोग इस कारण से हो जाते हैं। उस दिन मैं एक महिला से मिली,
अचानक उसका रंग काला पड़ गया, शरीर सूज गया, उसके शरीर पर गाँठे थीं, उन्हें कोई भी ठीक न कर
पा रहा था। केवल तीन दिन सहजयोग उपचार करवाने पर वह काफी ठीक हो गई। तो ये सारी समस्यायें
व्यक्ति को बाईं आज्ञा से आती हैं और कुछ गलत लोग इनका दुरुपयोग करते हैं। मुसलमान लोगों में ऐसे
कुकृत्य मैंने विशेष रूप से देखे हैं। मैं नहीं जानती क्यों? परन्तु उनमें इस प्रकार का रोना-बिलखना,
क्रोध आदि करना पाया जाता है । अपनी तकलीफों और कष्टों के गीत वे गाते हैं। विशेषरूप से विरह-गीत
और इसी तरह की अन्य मूर्खतायें, तथा इस प्रकार वे बाईं आज्ञा पर पकड़ जाते हैं। बाईं आज्ञा की पकड़
जब दृढ़ हो जाती है तो यह दाईं आज्ञा को भी बेंधने लगती है। बाईं और दाईं आज्ञा परस्पर सम्बन्धित हैं।
जब बाईं आज्ञा दाईं आज्ञा में प्रवेश कर जाती है तब व्यक्ति इस प्रकार के भयानक तत्वों के हाथ में खेलने
लगता है। जब वह व्यक्ति इनका विरोध करता है उसे दर्द होंगे, शारीरिक कष्ट हो जाएंगे परन्तु ज्योंही वह
21
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-21.txt 
 इन २भी नौ चक्रों को इसी जीवन में
पा२ क२नी आविश्यक है।
यही आपका लक््य होनी चाहिए।
उन्हें स्वीकार करने लगता है तो यह नकारात्मक तत्व उसके माध्यम से कार्य करने लगते हैं। तब वे कई
प्रकार के चमत्कार दिखाते हैं, जैसे उनके अन्दर से कुंकुम का निकलना। ये लोग अत्यन्त प्रभावशाली हो
उठते हैं और इस प्रकार से बातचीत करते हैं कि लोग इन पर मोहित हो जाते हैं। ये लोग इस प्रकार से बातें
करते हैं मानो डेल्फी के दिव्य पुरुष सा कोई महान व्यक्ति बात कर रहा हो। सारा कुछ आसुरी प्रदर्शन सा बन
जाता है। तो जब ये बाईं आज्ञा दाईं ओर को चली जाती है तो ये लोग बहुत बड़े गुरु- महागुरु बन बैठते हैं।
आजकल जो भी कुछ आप देख रहे हैं, ऐसा सभी कुछ वे बन जाते हैं। वो महागुरु बन सकते हैं। ये सारे बाईं
ओर के कृत्य करते हुए और इन पर नियंत्रण करते हुए, दाईं ओर से इनका उपयोग करते हुए वे वास्तव में यह
स्थिति प्राप्त करते हैं। यह बहुत ही भयंकर स्थिति है। जब बाईं आज्ञा बहुत अधिक बढ़ जाती है तो व्यक्ति का
स्वभाव अत्यन्त अहंकारपूर्ण हो सकता है। तब आप एकदम से उसका उपयोग करने लगते हैं और अत्यन्त
डींगबाज बन जाते हैं। इस प्रकार से आचरण करने वाले सहजयोग में भी हमने देखा है, जिन लोगों को दाईं
आज्ञा थी, जो बाईं आज्ञा की पकड़ से हो गई और वे दुर्व्यवहार करने लगे। ऐसी स्थिति में उन्हें सहजयोग में
वापिस नहीं लाया जा सकता। वे सभी प्रकार के कार्य करते हैं, सभी प्रकार की चालाकियाँ करते हैं और इस
प्रकार से लोगों को प्रभावित करते हैं, वे दिखावा करने का प्रयत्न करते हैं परन्तु उनके माध्यम से भूत बोल
रहे होते हैं। तो यह अवस्था है जहाँ हम कहते हैं कि वे सहजयोग से बाहर हैं। हम उन्हें अन्दर नहीं ले सकते।
तो ये एक बात है इससे बचना चाहिए। किसी को यदि बाईं आज्ञा की पकड़ है तो कृपा करके इसे ठीक करें
और हर समय स्वयं पर ही नाराज हों, हर समय। क्यों मुझमें ये क्रोध है? क्यों मुझे क्रोध करना चाहिए? हो
सकता है इस अहं से किसी को चोट पहुँचती हो। ऐसा व्यक्ति अत्यन्त अटपटा भी हो सकता है। चोट खाया
हुआ अहं गुब्बारे की तरह से फूल भी सकता है। गुब्बारे को आप बाहर से चोट मारें या अन्दर से वह फूलेगा
ही। ऐसा व्यक्ति अत्यन्त अजीबोगरीब हो सकता है और बनावटी रूप से विनम्रता और आनन्द का दिखावा
कर सकता है। तो इस प्रकार का व्यक्तित्व भी व्यक्ति में विकसित हो सकता है।...
22
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Hep Rokiha Bardler
Bandhan
If you call somebody a sister,
the sisterly & daughterly
relationships, and motherly
relationships, always bring
down the so-called ego, which
is hiding in the left Vishuddhi.
(Raksha Bandhan, London,
11.8.1984
Published & Printed by
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
No. 8, Chandragupta Co-op Housing Society, Paud Road,
Kothrud, Pune, Maharashtra, India
website: www.nitl.co.in (For queries & sending articles contact on above address)
411 038. © : 25286537, 25286032 email:sale@nitl.co.in
-
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-23.txt 
 arAYOYOYOYAYOPOZ
00
अगত
dioinimie
Krishna Janmashtami, also known as Krishnashtami, Saatam Aatham,
Gokulashtami, Ashtami Rohini, Srikrishna Jayanti, Sree Jayanthi or sometimes
merely as Janmashtami.
Krishna Janmashtami is observed on the Ashtami tithi, the eighth day of the
dark half or Krishna Paksha of the month of Bhadrapada in the Hindu calendar,
when the Rohini Nakshatra is ascendant. The festival always falls within mid-
August to mid-September in the Gregorian calendar. In 2009, for example, the
festival was celebrated on 14h August, while in 2010, the festival was celebrated
on 2nd September.
Rasa lila, dramatic enactments of the life of Krishna, are a special feature in
regions of Mathura and Vrindavan, and regions following Vaishnavism in Manipur.
While the Rasa lila re-creates the aspects of Krishna's youthful days, the Dahi
Handi celebrate God's playful and mischievous side, where teams of young men
form human pyramids to reach a high-hanging pot of butter and break it. This
tradition, also known as uriadi, is a major event in Tamilnadu on Gokulashtami.
CG
253
