a t i Dec. 2011

 The first thing is that Kundalini is the Devi. She's the reflection of the Adi Shakti. So when you worship Devi, first you worship also your own Kundalini, by giving Her credit because She has given you this realization. It's much deeper understanding than normally people have about the Devi Puja, because they are not realized souls. Adishakti puja 1997

 INSIDE THIS ISSUE No discriminations and identifications...4 Trust of a Mother ...8 श्री ईसा विश्व के आधार है ...16 AND MORE If you're deceiving yourself, then how can you become a guru? ...7 Detachment is purity, is innocence ...10 Gayatri Mantra ...14 Third Eye ...15 Note : Subscriptions for all 2012 Magazines would be open from 1st Sept.2011 to 30th Nov.2011 only.

 No discriminations and identifications 'hen we have to know that Sahaja Yogis have to get over all kinds of discrimination and identifications according to races, color or different religions into you are born. Because you are born as a Christian, you do not belong to a church. You were not born in a church, thank God, otherwise all the spirits there would capture you immediately. But these identifications will linger on. To accept anything new, you are to be reborn, and you are reborn now. Now are dharmatita - means you need not follow any particular type of religion. You are to all the religions, and all the essence of religions you have to take. you open You are not to denounce any religion any time, to insult any religion any time, or to insult any religious Incarnation at any time: its sin, it is a great sin in Sahaja Yoga;

 any one of them, and you know who they are. There should be no racial understanding of oneself. You could have been a Chinese or you could have been a Negro, you been anything. As long as we are all human beings, we should know that we laugh the could have same way, we smile the same way, we hold the same way. This is all conditioned in our mind of this society that you, some are untouchables, some are touchables: this is in our Indian community - horrible people. Brahminism of India has ruined India completely, and you learn from them. For example, who was Vyasa, the one who wrote Gita? Who was he? He was illegitimate son of a fisherwoman. That's why deliberately he was born like that. All these Brahmins who read Gita, tell them who was Vyasa? Brahmins are those

 who are realized souls, and for realized souls there's nothing like all these nonsensical things, like where are you born, in what caste and community you are born. With all education and everything in the West, you find this nonsense of racialism; I just can't understand. If somebody is fair or dark, after all God has to make variety, in color, in every way. Who told you that you are the most handsome people going round? May be for some of the markets here, or may be in the Hollywood it may fit in; but in the kingdom of God all these so- called handsome people will be denied entry; marrying seven husbands and all sorts of things. They will be all put in hell. The beauty is of the heart, not of the face, and that shows and shines. God I mean, people are a little bit aware of it, that's why they go and tan their faces. I dont know. They are quite aware that it is too much showing off we are doing. has But to have vanity, to have such absurd ideas! Some people like red hair, some like black hair, some like this; I mean, there have to be different types of hair. And why do you like a particular type of hair? This I cant understand. created all of you There's nothing like 'like' and 'dislike', whatever God has created is all beautiful. Who are you to judge whether 'I like this' and 'I like that?', who is this 'I'? Who likes is Mr.Ego, which is being pampered by this society, which teaches you how to smoke cigars and how to have your lager, morning till evening. All this training and all this conditioning has to be thrown away, just like filth, and see that God has created all of you as His own children. Its such a beautiful thing! Why do you want to make it ugly with these ugly ideas? All this ugliness of 'I like' and 'I dislike' are nonsensical. Only there should be one word: 'I love'. as His own children. Forget everything. There's no need to remember what British did to Indians and what Germans did to Jews: forget it. Those people who did anything are dead and finished; we are different people, we are different people. We are saints. This is for your Statutes, I have told you, which you have to imbibe. Guru Puja, 1980, Hampstead Temple, United Kingdom 6.

 If you're deceiving yourself, 'Se then how can you become a guru? Now ow your job is to give them Self-realization and change the people. That's the real thing you have to do as gurus. But what are we doing? We come to Sahaja Yoga with what idea? We are working only on the periphery. Firstly we are worried about ourselves, how we can prosper, how can we become better off. Also there is greed. We do not see ourselves if we are aggressive, if we are trying to trouble others, if we have wrong ideas about ourself, how we torture others. So first of all you have to cleanse yourself and accept your own problems, your own misgivings – these are to be faced. And challenge yourself: what are you doing? You are a Sahaja yogi, how can you hate someone, how can you trouble someone, how can you torture someone? This is the beginning of introspection, it's very important. I can make out a person who meditates in the real sense of the word, and the one who just meditates. You should not deceive yourself. If you're deceiving yourself, then how can you become a guru"?

 Trust of a mother Supposing you show your love... It's so subtle. It's so innate within you, built-in. It's there. We have to just open out. Every human being is a bundle of love.... In pure love, there is a kind of a beautiful light which protects you, which guides you and which enlightens your life completely. This light is just nourished and also, we can say, like the lamp has to have the oil, this is the one that is for our spirituality – the love of a person. You are the embodiment of love, take it from Me, because you are a human being... If you try to love anybody who is very cruel and very bad, gradually he will calm down. He will harm you a little bit, he will do this, he will see things and he might be mean with you, do all kinds of things, but then gradually you find love works and works and works. And ultimately it is your love which is important to that person. Now your love is really firstly appreciated more by innocent people like children. Children know what love is.... your With all this telling... you are not confident. You get upset. You feel, "How can this be?" You have no trust in yourself. You have no faith in yourself.... At the end of the whole thing, I must tell you that when you are a guru, you are also a

 mother. You have to express yourself like a mother. She is kind. She is gentle. She forgives. She also corrects whenever it's necessary, but in her own sweet way she corrects so the correction takes place. It is not that a rebellion starts. So all that wisdom of a mother is within you. It is already there, so please try to use it. I am sure it will all work out and, as it is, we are a very beautiful group of people who are something out of the blue, who are so much in peace and injoy together. (H.H.Shri Mataji, Guru Puja -1995)

 he third thing for a guru in Sahaja Yoga has to do, is to develop detachment. Gradually you do develop it, because you find that unless and until develop that detachment, you are not receiving vibrations in full way. All kinds of you detachments have to be developed, means your priorities change. Once your attention gets fixed up with your Spirit, the catch or the hold on things 10

 Detachment is purity, is innocence Two types of attachments are there, one through mohah, through involvement into them which are of no importance starts reducing by itself. For example, you have a father, you have a mother, you have a sister, this is a bigger problem in India. Here you are over-detached, but in India people are very much involved in their own children, in their own: 'This is my son', and others are all orphans. Only your sons are the real children: your daughter, your sons. 'My daughter', 'I must do this for my son, for my father, mother' here also. Two types of attachments are there, one through mohah, 11

 through involvement into them; that you want to do this for them and that for them, and give all the property to them, insurance for them, every sort of thing. And another could be, the way we have here, that you hate your mother, you hate your father, you hate everyone. Both things are just the same. So a detachment must be developed. The detachment is that you are your father, you are your mother, you are everything, your Spirit is everything to you. You have to enjoy only your Spirit, as everything. Then the detachment comes from there, and then you really do good to them by detaching, because you see the complete vision about them and about what is to be done. For example, people have also attachments to certain crazes. Human beings always become crazy after something, I mean it can be anything. One has to understand there should be only one craze: is to be settled absolutely into your Spirit. All other crazes will disappear, because that's the greatest joy-giving thing, that's the most nourishing thing, that's the most beautiful thing. So the, all the other things fall off, you enjoy only that which is the source ofall enjoyments. you get yourself attached to your Spirit : detachment starts working. Sometimes detachment is taken as a license for becoming dry to others, which is absurd. This is only human quality also: make everything ugly, whatever is beautiful. Actually, a person who is detached is the most beautiful person, is the So extremely loving person, he's love. Look at the flowers, they are detached. They are dying, tomorrow they are not going to live, but every minute they live, they are emitting fragrance to you. The trees are not attached to anything, they will die tomorrow, doesn't matter; but anybody who comes to them, they give shadow, they give fruits. Attachment means death of love, complete death of love is attachment. For example, in a tree, say, the sap rises, goes to all the leaves, goes to all the necessary parts, all the flowers, all the fruits, and goes back to the Mother Earth. He is not attached to anyone. Supposing the sap goes and gets attached into one fruit. What will happen? The tree will die, and the fruit will die. Detachment gives you the movement of your love, circulation of it. For things now, things have no value unless and until there are emotions behind it. Now for example, a sari, this one I am wearing today, was bought for Guru day, Guru Purnima, but they had no sari. The other day they wanted to have a sari for Puja, so I said: 'All right, use this.' 12

 But I wore it again today, just to say that this was bought with that emotion that on a Guru day, Mother would like to wear something of a lighter shade: white, the pure color of silk, its complete detachment. But in white all the colors are mixed, then only it becomes white. In such a balance and unity it is, should be, that you become white, and whiter than snow. Detachment is purity, is innocence. Innocence is such a light, I tell you, light that really blinds you to all that is filthy. You wouldn't even know that a person has come with bad intentions. You look at the person, you see, say somebody comes to you, you'll say: 'Oh, come along, what do you offer him tea and all that, and he'll say: 'I have come to rob you.' want?' You'll 'All right, rob me if you want to, its all right.' He may not at all rob you! That is what is innocence, which one can develop only through detachment. Detachment is of the attention. Do not allow your attention to get involved into something too much, even rituals of anything. committed, what does it matter? If some mistakes are If you see on the abstract plane, it's love. This is just a step forward. Like somebody ran very fast and fell down before reaching me, and he said: 'Mother, I fell down before reaching You, I should have not done that. But see how Iprostrated before You!' Its complete poetry, detachment. sorry So one has to develop that detachment to be a guru, and that detachment doesn't mean sanyas or anything like that. Yes, sometimes one has to wear those dresses to announce, because if you have to do lot of work in a short time, then you have to take such intensive behavior, like Christ, we can say, Adi Shankaracharya. All these people had a very, very short life, and in that short life they had to achieve such a tremendous task that they had to actually take a military uniform, just to avoid problems, not to impress others. Now-a-days people wear that dress just to impress others that they are detached, and do just the thing opposite of it. H.H.Shri Mataji Guru Puja, 1980, Hampstead Temple, United Kingdom (DCB July-August 2001) 13

 Gayatri Mantra Aum Bhur Bhuva Swah Tatsavitur Varenyam Bhargo Devasya Dhimahi Dhiyo Yo Naha Prachodayat Ts oday it's a different day, altogether, for all of you, because this is the Puja ofAdi Shakti. And Adi Shakti is the Complete Personality. It's not only the left side that you know. You all know only the left side, from Shri Ganesha, through the ascent of different Chakras on the left side. I didn't want to tell you about the right side, to begin with, because those who have gone through the right side just got lost. They got Gayatri Mantra from the writings. But they didn't know what it was about. They just used to learn it by heart. They didn't also know the real meaning of it, and that is how they moved on the right side, and, I don't know, they landed up at the Agnya. And then they were trying for the Self Realisation. They were promised that if you do this right side properly, you will reach to the ultimate goal of Self Realisation. But none of them reached there. Most of them got into a terrible temper. Terrible temper, of cursing others, of destroying others, all these things they learnt, through their right side movement. There was no Kundalini awakening. And they were made to go up to, at the most, Agnya Chakra. And then they collapsed into different places of complete ignorance. All these books were written without understanding that it's not easy to go via right side. But best was, to awaken your Kundalini. (H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Shri Adi Shakti Puja 2002) 14

 Third eye oday we are going to understand the center of Agnya - Agnya Chakra which is placed on the crossing of the optic chiasma. The nerves that supply the eyes go backwards in the opposite direction and wherever they cross, this subtle center is situated. It has a continuous connection with the other center through the medulla oblongata. This center has got two petals. And this subtle center on one side acts through the eyes and at the back of the head where you have some protrusion. This is the physical side of this center is. Now the people who talk of the third is the third eye. So that we have two eyes with which we see and there's a third eye, which is a subtler eye through which we can see. this eye, If you see this eye, that means you are away from it. For example, if you can see your eyes, that means you are seeing your reflection, not the reality. If you see anything, that means you are looking at it. So those people who say they see an eye, for example people who take LSD and all such things, they start seeing another They just see this eye and they think their third eye has opened. Actually you are very much away from the eye, that's why you can see it. You go to a supraconcious level on the right side, and on the left side to the subconscious level you can see the eye. But in Sahaja Yoga you have to see through that eye, like a window, you can look at the window but if you see through the window, you can't look at the window. So this illusion that people have that “we can see third eye and that's why our Kundalini is awakened", they are sadly mistaken. eye. This is a very narrow passage through which attention cannot pass normally. Is an impossible thing. Is a very narrow passage where the ego and superego fit onto each other and cross each other just like this. And there is no gap in between for the Kundalini to pass through. This superego and ego go back, go downward, and come to the Vishuddhi Chakra and circle round it and go in the same direction. So, you find that they come up to this place, they start from this place, go up to the Agnya Chakra and then they cross over. But here, they are in the same direction as they were. Here they cross over. So when you have a problem on the left hand side, you get the effects of that on the right hand side.... So this third eye is to be penetrated through. (H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Talk on Agnya Chakra, Delhi, 1983) 15

 स ाम श्री ईसा विश्व के आधार हैं। इस पवित्रता, इस मंगलमयता का सृजन एक अण्डे के रूप में किया गया और फिर इसे दो भागों में तोड़ा गया| पहला भाग श्री गणेश हैं और अवस्था में ईसामसीह बना। ईसा स्वयं ओंकार हैं तथा चैतन्य लहरियाँ भी स्वयं ही हैं। शेष सभी अवतरणों को शरीर धारण करने के लिये पृथ्वीतत्व लेना पड़ा। ईसा का शरीर पूर्णत: ओंकार है तथा श्री गणेश उनका आधा विकसित होकर परिपक्व दूसरा पृथ्वीतत्व हैं। अत: हम कह सकते हैं कि ईसा श्री गणेश की अवतरित शक्ति हैं। यही कारण है कि वे जल पर चल सकते हैं। वे देवत्व का निर्मलतम रूप हैं। प.पू.श्री माताजी, ३.४.१९९४ आरम्भ में जब श्री गणेश के रूप में उनका (श्री ईसामसीह का) सृजन किया गया...... इस शिशु से में केवल पृथ्वीतत्व का अंश विद्यमान था.....आज्ञा चक्र पर जिस अन्तिम तत्व में गुज़रना पड़ा वह था 16

 श्री ईसा विश्व के आधार हैं। प्रकाशतत्व अर्थात उन्हें दिव्य शक्ति के सच्चे रूप में आना पड़ा-ओंकार रूप में। आप यह भी कह सकते हैं कि चैतन्य लहरियों के रूप में जिसे आप नाद या शब्द ब्रह्म आदि कुछ कहते है। अत: उन्हें ब्रह्मतत्व बनना पड़ा और ब्रह्मतत्व बनने के लिए उन्हें अन्य सभी महातत्वों से अलग होना पड़ा। अंतिम तत्व प्रकाशतत्व था, इन्हें (श्री ईसामसीह) इसको पार करना पड़ा। तो उनके अन्दर पृथ्वीतत्व था क्योंकि उबटन के मल से उनका सृजन हुआ तथा और भी तत्व उनमें थे, परन्तु जब वे आज्ञा चक्र पर आते हैं तो बाकी सभी तत्व उन्हें छोड़ने पड़ते हैं और अपने अन्दर मौजूद इन सभी तत्वों को निकालने के लिए उन्हें (श्री ईसामसीह) मरना पड़ता है-पूर्ण, संपूर्ण पावन आत्मा बनने के लिए जो कार्य उन्होंने सूक्ष्म रूप में किया वह स्थूल रूप में कार्यान्वित होता है, इसी कार्य को करने के लिए उन्हें मरना पड़ा। उनके अन्दर जिस चीज़ की मृत्यु हुई थी वह थी उनके अन्दर का पृथ्वीतत्व तथा अन्य तत्व और उनसे 'पावन आत्मा' का उद्भव हुआ। उनका पुनर्जन्म हुआ, पावन आत्मा का, शुद्ध ब्रह्मतत्व का, जिसने ईसामसीह के 17

 शरीर की रचना की...उन्हें रक्षक इसलिए कहा जाता है क्योंकि मानव को शारीरिक संवेदना से ऊपर उठाने के लिए उन्होंने यह द्वार पार किया अर्थात् उन लोगों को जो पंचमहाभूतों पर निर्भर करते हैं उन्हें आत्मा के स्तर पर लाने के लिए। अत: पुनर्जन्म वह है जहाँ आप....अपने चित्त से आत्मा के चित्त पर छलाँग लगा लेते हैं, जहाँ आप अपने चित्त को महसूस कर पाते हैं। यही घटना आपके साथ घटित हुई है, परन्तु जब उनका पुनर्जन्म हुआ तो वे शुद्ध आत्मा, शुद्ध ब्रह्मतत्व बन गए। पुनर्जन्म, मूलाधार चक्र से पृथ्वी तत्व के रूप में आरम्भ हुई, उस दिव्य शक्ति की उत्क्रान्ति की घटना है जिसने वहाँ (मूलाधार चक्र) जन्म लिया और आज्ञा चक्र पर आई । वहाँ पर सभी तत्वों को पार करके अन्तत: सहस्रार में प्रवेश करके पूर्ण ब्रह्मतत्व बनने के लिए ईसामसीह का सृजन किया गया। प.पू.श्री माताजी, ११.४.१९८२ ईसामसीह श्रीकृष्ण के पुत्र थे। वे मानव के चारित्रिक आधार हैं। प.पू.श्री माताजी, २३.४.२००१ .....वे एक आदर्श थे, एक आदर्श सन्त, आदर्श साक्षात्कारी व्यक्ति, एक ऐसे व्यक्ति की प्रतिमूर्ति जो हमारी रक्षा करने के लिये स्वर्ग से आए। ईसामसीह ने मृत्यु के पश्चात पुनर्जन्म लिया था। सहजयोग में हमने भी मृत्यु के पश्चात जीवन में प्रवेश किया है । यह बात समझ लेनी चाहिए कि पुनर्जन्म हम सबके लिये, पूरे विश्व के लिये, ये सन्देश है कि हमें पुनर्जन्म प्राप्त करना है। ईसामसीह उस समय पर अवतरित हुए जब लोगों को आध्यात्मिकता का बिल्कुल भी ज्ञान न था परन्तु जैसे तैसे सभी कुछ इतनी सुन्दरतापूर्वक कार्यान्वित हुआ कि लोग समझने लगे कि पुनरुत्थान महत्वपूर्ण है। आपका भी जब पुनर्जन्म होता है तो कुण्डलिनी उठती है और आपका सम्बन्ध दिव्य शक्ति से जोड़ती है। ईसामसीह एक अत्यन्त साधारण एवं गरीब व्यक्ति थे, एक बढ़ई के पुत्र। उनके लिये पैसा अधिक महत्वपूर्ण न था। बेकार था। उनके लिये आत्मा सभी कुछ था। वे अत्यन्त ही विवेकशील थे और जिस प्रकार उन्होंने गिरजाघरों में बड़े-बडे पादरियों से धर्म की बातचीत की, वह अत्यन्त आश्चर्यजनक है कि किस प्रकार एक नन्हा बालक धर्म को इतनी गहनतापूर्वक समझता है। नि:सन्देह उस समय वे छोटे से बालक थे परन्तु वे परमात्मा के बन्दे थे, परमात्मा द्वारा सृजित। वे श्री गणेश थे, वे ॐ हैं, वे ज्ञान हैं, सभी कुछ हैं। इसके बावजूद भी उन्हें कोई पहचान नहीं सका क्योंकि लोग सत्य को नहीं पहचान सकते। प.पू.श्री माताजी, टर्की, २२.४.२००१ ईसामसीह के जीवन का सबसे बड़ा उद्देश्य ये था कि आपके अन्दर जो आज्ञाचक्र है उसका भेदन करें और इसलिए उन्होंने अपने को क्रॉस पर टंगवा लिया और उसके बाद फिर से जीवित हो गए | यह चमत्कार लगता है, पर परमेश्वरी कार्य कोई चमत्कार नहीं। इस प्रकार उन्होंने दिखाया कि मनुष्य 18

 इस आज्ञाचक्र से बाहर जा सकता है। प.पू.श्री माताजी, २५.१२.२००० आज्ञाचक्र को खोलने के लिये फाँसी चढ़ने की आवश्यकता नहीं है और न ही क्रूसारोपित होने की आवश्यकता है। आवश्यकता है अहम् को क्रूसारोपित करने की। अहं ऐसी चीज़ है जिससे जल्दी से मुक्ति नहीं प्राप्त की जा सकती। ईसामसीह को अत्यन्त युवावस्था में ही क्रूसारोपित कर दिया गया। उनका क्रूसारोपित होना बताता है कि वे मृत्यु से नहीं डरते थे और जानते थे कि वे पुनर्जन्म पा लेंगे। ये कार्य उन्हें आज्ञाचक्र के माध्यम से करना पड़ा। आज्ञाचक्र बहुत ही तंग है और उन्हें इस मार्ग में से गुज़रना था और इस पर स्थापित होना था। प.पू.श्री माताजी, २२.४.२००१ आज्ञाचक्र पर उन्होंने दो मन्त्र बताये, इन्हें हम बीजमन्त्र कहते हैं - हूँ और क्षम्। क्षमा का मतलब क्षमा करो। क्षमा करना, यह सबसे बड़ा मन्त्र है, जो आदमी क्षमा करना जानता है उसका ईगो (अहं) जो है वो नष्ट हो जाता है।......सो दो चीज़ें ईसामसीह ने बतायीं, एक तो यह कि आप सबको क्षमा कर दो, दूसरी बात जो कही उन्होंने कि तुम आत्मा हो, इस आत्मा को जानो। आत्मा को तो कोई छू भी नहीं सकता। उसको सता नही सकता। प.पू.श्री माताजी, २५.१२.२००० ईसामसीह ने आत्मबलिदान किया। अपने जीवन को बलिदान करने का कार्य स्वीकार करके और फिर स्वयं को पुनर्जीवित किया। आज्ञाचक्र के संकुचित मार्ग से वे गुज़रे ताकि आप लोग केवल इतना कहकर ठीक हो सको कि 'मैं सबको क्षमा करता हूँ।' क्षमा का गुण जब इतना शक्तिशाली है कि आप इसके माध्यम से मृत्यु से भी लड़ सकते हैं तो क्यों न क्षमा कर दी जाये? हमारे आज्ञाचक्र को खोलने के लिये ईसा का पुनर्जन्म हुआ। आज्ञाचक्र अति सूक्ष्म केन्द्र है। अपने बन्धनों तथा अहं से प्राप्त विचारों के कारण लोगों की आज्ञा इतनी अवरोधित हो गयी थी कि इसमें से कुण्डलिनी का पार होना असम्भव था। ईसा क्योंकि चैतन्य का ही रूप थे, अत: पुनर्जन्म का खेल रचा गया। हमें समझना चाहिए कि ईसा की मृत्यु द्वारा ही हमें हमारा पुनर्जन्म प्राप्त हुआ है और भूतकाल की मृत्यु हो गयी, हमारे पश्चाताप और बन्धन समाप्त हो गए। प.पू.श्री माताजी, इटली, १४.४.१९९२ ईसामसीह ने हमें यह शिक्षा दी कि उनके हृदय में मानव मात्र के लिये प्रेम था और वे सभी लोगों को पुनरुत्थान के लिये तैयार करना चाहते थे। वे सहजयोग के आने के पूर्व अवतरित हुए। उन्होंने यदि यह कार्य न किया होता तो मेरे लिये यह उपलब्धि प्राप्त करना कठिन होता। इस प्रकार उन्होंने सहजयोग के लिये स्थितियाँ बनायीं जिसके कारण आप लोगों के आज्ञाचक्र खुले और आज्ञाचक्र को पार करके 19

 कुण्डलिनी को ऊपर ले जाकर आप अपने सहस्रार को, अपने तालूअस्थि क्षेत्र खोल सकते हैं। उन्होंने सोचा कि लोगों के प्रति प्रेम का यही अंग-प्रत्यंग है, इसलिये ईसा ने यह कार्य किया और से लोगों का हित बहुत किया। प.पू.श्री माताजी, २२.४.२००१ अगर ईसामसीह इस संसार में न आते और अपने को आज्ञा चक्र में बिठाकर तारण का मार्ग, पुनर्जीवन का मार्ग न बताते तो सहजयोग साध्य न हो सकता। उनका आना अति आवश्यक था। प.पू.श्री माताजी, २५.१२.१९९० सहजयोग में ईसामसीह हमारे अत्यन्त सहायक हैं। ......ईसामसीह हमें इस बात का ज्ञान करवाते हैं कि हम अपने आज्ञा चक्र खोलें, इससे ऊपर उठें। यहाँ हम इसे तीसरी आँख कहते हैं । तीसरी आँख खुलने का अर्थ यह है कि आपके आज्ञाचक्र पर ईसामसीह जागृत हो गये हैं। यही तीसरी आँख हैं। ईसामसीह आपके अन्दर साक्षी भाव का सृजन करते हैं और आप पूरे नाटक के दृष्टा मात्र बन जाते हैं। पूरे नाटक को आप देखने लगते हैं और आश्चर्यचकित होते हैं कि आप कितने शान्त हैं, किस प्रकार निर्विचार चेतना में हैं और बिना प्रतिक्रिया करे किस प्रकार हर चीज़ को देखते हैं। यह वह स्थान है जहाँ हमे ये बात माननी पड़ती है कि ईसामसीह हमारे आज्ञाचक्र पर प्रकट हुए, वहीं उनका पुनर्जन्म हुआ। ये सब हमारे अन्दर घटित हो चुका है। मशीन के पुज़जों की तरह से हमारे अन्दर सूक्ष्म तन्त्र को बनाया गया है और हमारे अन्दर भिन्न चक्र और ऊर्जा केन्द्र हैं। यह अन्तिम चक्र कठिनतम है, उसे वास्तव में ईसामसीह ने खोला। ईसामसीह ने ही ये कार्य करने का साहस किया और इसे इतने सुन्दर ढंग से किया कि अब हमारे अन्दर अहं को देख पाने की योग्यता है। जब आप अपने अहं को देखते हैं तो हैरान होते हैं कि जो भी कार्य आप करते हैं, जितना भी कुछ आप करते रहें, आप थकेंगे नहीं । थकते तो आप इसलिए हैं कि आपका अहं सदैव यही कहता रहता है ओह! आप इतने महान हैं, अन्य लोगो के लिये आप इतना सारा काम कर रहे हैं, आपने तो इतना कुछ प्राप्त कर लिया है, आदि-आदि। तो इसी प्रकार अहम् हर समय हमारी झूठी महानता के विषय में हमें बढावा देता रहता है और हम स्वयं को महान मान बैठते है। | ...इस दुष्ट अहकार का दूसरा पक्ष बन्धन (Conditioning) है। इसका भी अत्यन्त सूक्ष्म सम्बन्ध है। ईसामसीह के प्रति हमें आभारी होना है कि उन्होंने पुनरुत्थान को कार्यान्वित किया ताकि हर विवेक बुद्धि को प्राप्त कर सकें, परमेश्वरी विवेक को प्राप्त कर सकें। ये ऐसा संघर्ष है, ऐसा मार्ग है, जिसका सृजन उन्होंने किया ताकि अत्यन्त आसानी से हम कठिनाई को पार कर सकें जिससे हमारे अहं और बन्धनों का अन्त हो जाए। प.पू.श्री माताजी, २२.४.२००१ अहंकार को देखने का प्रयत्न करें और उस समय यदि आप ईसामसीह का नाम लेंगे तो अहंकार चला जाएगा। ईसामसीह का नाम लेने मात्र से आपका अहंकार दूर हो जाएगा। 20

 हमारे उत्थान के लिये ईसामसीह अत्यन्त महत्वपूर्ण अवतरण थे। यदि वे स्वयं पुनर्जीवित न हुए होते तो हमे उत्थान प्राप्त न हो पाता। ईसा का पुनर्जीवन आपके जीवन से प्रत्यक्ष है। पहले आप क्या थे और आज क्या हैं, कितना अन्तर है, कितना कायापलट है? उनके बलिदान और पुनर्जीवन ने हम सबके लिये यह परिवर्तित अवस्था प्राप्त करने का मार्ग बनाया है। पर यह अवस्था मानव के लिये भिन्न है तथा ईसा के लिये भिन्न। ईसा स्वयं पवित्रता तथा विशुद्धता थे। उनका पुनर्जीवन मात्र एक शारीरिक घटना थी क्योंकि उन्हें कायापलट की कोई आवश्यकता नहीं थी, उन्हें शुद्धिकरण नहीं करना पड़ा। मृत्यु से उनका पुनर्जीवित होना इस बात का प्रतीक है कि मानव का आध्यात्मविहीन जीवन मृत्युसम है, क्योंकि मानव पूर्णत्व, वास्तविकता तथा पूर्ण सत्य को समझे बिना ही सभी कुछ करता रहता है। उसका हर कर्म अन्ततोगत्वा उसे विनाश की ओर ले जाता है। यहाँ तक कि इन अवतरणों द्वारा चलाये धर्म भी पतनोन्मुख हैं, इन अवतरणों के प्रतिनिधि कहलाने वाले लोगों में भी धार्मिकता का नामोनिशान नहीं मिलता। प.पू.श्री माताजी, इटली, ११.४.१९९३ 21

 सहजयोग के द्वारा ही लोगों को पुनर्जीवित करें, उन्हें पुनरुत्थान दें, उन्हें आत्मा का प्रकाश दें। एक ऐसी अवस्था तक उन्हें लायें जहाँ वे समझ सकें कि ठीक क्या है और गलत क्या है। लोगों को आप करुणा एवं प्रेम का एहसास करने दें। ऐसा जब होने लगता है तो हमारे अन्तर्निहित तीसरी शक्ति कार्यान्वित हो जाती है। ईसा अपने पर तथा सर्वव्यापक शक्ति पर विश्वास तथा श्रद्धा के अवतरण थे। यही ज्योतिर्मय श्रद्धा है। इस श्रद्धा को समझा जाना चाहिए। वे जानते थे कि वे परमात्मा के बेटे हैं। इसको उन्होंने कभी चुनौती नहीं दी। श्रद्धा के मामले में सहजयोगियों को ईसा की तरह बनना होगा। जब ईसामसीह की मृत्यु हुई तो सारे पंचभूत डोल गये। ईसामसीह पंचभूतों के स्वामी थे, पंचभूत डोल गए, भूचाल आ गए और प्राकृतिक विपदायें आयीं। पंचभूतों ने उनकी मृत्यु को महसूस किया, स्वयं ईसामसीह ने नहीं, उन्हें लगा कि इतनी महान शक्ति नष्ट कर दी गयी है। वे नहीं जानते थे कि ईसामसीह पुनर्जीवित हो उठेंगे, इसका उन्हें ज्ञान न था, पर वे इससे बाहर आए। उनकी मृत्यु हमें शक्ति प्रदान करती है, हमारी मृत्यु नहीं, हम पुनर्जन्म ले चुके हैं और पुनर्जीवन हमारे साथ है, परन्तु हमें इसमें स्थापित होना है। अपने सहजयोग को हमें स्थापित करना है। अपनी ध्यान-धारणा को हमें स्थापित करना है, यही महत्वपूर्ण चीज़ है।----और आपको अन्य लोगों को पुनरुत्थान प्रदान करना है, यही महत्वपूर्णतम कार्य है। | प.पू.श्री माताजी, २५.४.१९९९ श्री ईसामसीह ने सारे ब्रह्माण्डों का सृजन किया। ब्रह्माण्ड अर्थात ग्रह। सूर्य ग्रह के अन्दर से पृथ्वी ग्रह का सृजन हुआ और उसमें से आप लोग उत्पन्न हुए और आपके चक्रों में उन्होंने एक छोटे विराट का सृजन किया, वह तुम्हारे आज्ञा चक्र में हैं। यह बलिदान अत्यन्त अत्यन्त महत्वपूर्ण है और यद्यपि यह स्थूल है फिर भी बहुत सूक्ष्म है। चेतना को आज्ञा चक्र के बीच से ऊपर ले जाने के लिए यह घटित हुआ। सूक्ष्म में जो कुछ भी घटित होना होता है उसकी अभिव्यक्ति इस प्रकार से स्थूल में भी होती है और जब ईसामसीह को क्रूसारोपित किया गया तब भी ऐसा ही हुआ। परन्तु पुनः आप ईसामसीह को क्रूसारोपित नहीं कर सकते, जैसे वर्णन किया गया है अब वे एकादश रुद्र बन गए हैं......शिव की सभी ( ग्यारह रुद्रों की) शक्तियाँ उन्हें प्रदान की गई है। अब तक जब भी उनका जन्म हुआ श्री कृष्ण ने उन्हे अपनी शक्तियाँ प्रदान कीं और वे महाविराट बन गए। यहाँ तक कि उन्हें श्री कृष्ण से भी ऊपर (आज्ञा चक्र) में स्थान दिया गया परंतु अब यदि वे अवतरित होंगे तो उनके पास शिव की विध्वंसक शक्तियाँ होंगी-ग्यारह विध्वंसक शक्तियाँ, केवल एक शक्ति सभी ब्रह्माण्डों को समाप्त करने के लिए काफ़ी है....अब आप उन्हें क्रूसारोपित नहीं कर सकते और समय आ गया है कि हम सब उनका स्वागत करने के लिए तैयार हो जाए......सभी मूर्खतापूर्ण चीजों को नष्ट करने के लिए वे आएंगे। अत: ये बीच का थोड़ासा समय आपकी उत्क्रान्ति और मोक्ष के लिए लगना चाहिए। प.पू.श्री माताजी, लन्दन आश्रम, ६.४.१९८१ 22

 Let this Diwali enlighten you with light of love. You yourself are the lamps which burn high and don't get pressed by the cover. They become much more powerful thanthe cover. It is their own asset. When they are hit upon, they are disturbed and distinguished. October 21, 1976 Published & Printed by Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. No. 8, Chandragupta Co-op Housing Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune, Maharashtra, India website: www.nitl.co.in (For queries & sending articles contact on above address) 411 038. © : 25286537, 25286032 email:sale@nitl.co.in -

 HAPPY NEW YEARI Anew Year has just begun and on this important occasion I convey my love and blessings to all my children throughout the world. As we all know from daily news, the world is in a dangerous state. There is abiding hatred and violence. The whole world needs the soothing and loving message of Sahaja Yoga. I urge you all, especially the National Sahaja Yoga Leaders and Coordinators throughout the world, to do your best to spread the loving and caring message of Sahaja Yoga not only in your own respective countries but, most importantly, in the neighbouring countries by sending out small team of Sahaja Yogis to convey the pure, caring and loving message of Sahaja Yoga. I wish you all the very best in the New Year and all success in your efforts to spread the loving message of Sahaja Yoga H.H.SHRI MATAJI NIRMALADEVI, 3 January 2010



----------------------

2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 a
t
i
Dec. 2011
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-1.txt 
 The first thing is that Kundalini is the Devi. She's the reflection of the
Adi Shakti. So when you worship Devi, first you worship also your own
Kundalini, by giving Her credit because She has given you this
realization. It's much deeper understanding than normally people have
about the Devi Puja, because they are not realized souls.
Adishakti puja 1997
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 INSIDE
THIS ISSUE
No discriminations and identifications...4
Trust of a Mother ...8
श्री ईसा विश्व के आधार है ...16
AND MORE
If you're deceiving yourself, then how can you become a guru? ...7
Detachment is purity, is innocence ...10
Gayatri Mantra ...14
Third Eye ...15
Note : Subscriptions for all 2012 Magazines would be open from
1st Sept.2011 to 30th Nov.2011 only.
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 No
discriminations and
identifications
'hen we have to know that Sahaja Yogis have to get over all kinds of
discrimination and identifications according to races, color or different
religions into you are born.
Because you are born as a Christian, you do not belong to a church. You were not
born in a church, thank God, otherwise all the spirits there would capture you
immediately. But these identifications will linger on.
To accept anything new, you are to be reborn, and you are reborn now. Now
are dharmatita - means you need not follow any particular type of religion. You are
to all the religions, and all the essence of religions you have to take.
you
open
You are not to denounce any religion any time, to insult any religion any time, or
to insult any religious Incarnation at any time: its sin, it is a great sin in Sahaja Yoga;
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 any one of them, and you know who they are. There should be no racial understanding
of oneself.
You could have been a Chinese or you could have been a Negro, you
been anything. As long as we are all human beings, we should know that we laugh the
could have
same way, we smile the same way, we hold the same way.
This is all conditioned in our mind of this society that you, some are
untouchables, some are touchables: this is in our Indian community - horrible people.
Brahminism of India has ruined India completely, and you learn from them. For
example, who was Vyasa, the one who wrote Gita? Who was he? He was illegitimate
son of a fisherwoman. That's why deliberately he was born like that.
All these Brahmins who read Gita, tell them who was Vyasa? Brahmins are those
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 who are realized souls, and for realized souls there's nothing
like all these nonsensical things, like where are you born, in
what caste and community you are born.
With all education and everything in the West, you find this
nonsense of racialism; I just can't understand. If somebody is
fair or dark, after all God has to make variety, in color, in every
way.
Who told you that you are the most handsome people going
round? May be for some of the markets here, or may be in the
Hollywood it may fit in; but in the kingdom of God all these so-
called handsome people will be denied entry; marrying seven
husbands and all sorts of things. They will be all put in hell. The
beauty is of the heart, not of the face, and that shows and shines.
God
I mean, people are a little bit aware of it, that's why they go
and tan their faces. I dont know. They are quite aware that it is
too much showing off we are doing.
has
But to have vanity, to have such absurd ideas! Some people
like red hair, some like black hair, some like this; I mean, there
have to be different types of hair. And why do you like a
particular type of hair? This I cant understand.
created
all of you
There's nothing like 'like' and 'dislike', whatever God has
created is all beautiful. Who are you to judge whether 'I like this'
and 'I like that?', who is this 'I'? Who likes is Mr.Ego, which is
being pampered by this society, which teaches you how to
smoke cigars and how to have your lager, morning till evening.
All this training and all this conditioning has to be thrown
away, just like filth, and see that God has created all of you as
His own children. Its such a beautiful thing! Why do you want to
make it ugly with these ugly ideas? All this ugliness of 'I like'
and 'I dislike' are nonsensical. Only there should be one word: 'I
love'.
as His
own
children.
Forget everything. There's no need to remember what
British did to Indians and what Germans did to Jews: forget it.
Those people who did anything are dead and finished; we are
different people, we are different people. We are saints. This is
for your Statutes, I have told you, which you have to imbibe.
Guru Puja, 1980, Hampstead Temple, United
Kingdom
6.
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 If you're deceiving yourself,
'Se
then
how can you become a guru?
Now
ow your job is to give them Self-realization and
change the people. That's the real thing you
have to do as gurus. But what are we doing? We come to
Sahaja Yoga with what idea?
We are working only on the periphery. Firstly we are
worried about ourselves, how we can prosper, how can
we become better off. Also there is greed. We do not see
ourselves if we are aggressive, if we are trying to trouble
others, if we have wrong ideas about ourself, how we
torture others.
So first of all you have to cleanse yourself and accept
your own problems, your own misgivings – these are to
be faced. And challenge yourself: what are you doing?
You are a Sahaja yogi, how can you hate someone, how
can you trouble someone, how can you torture someone?
This is the beginning of introspection, it's very
important. I can make out a person who meditates in the
real sense of the word, and the one who just meditates.
You should not deceive yourself. If you're deceiving
yourself, then how can you become a guru"?
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Trust
of a mother
Supposing you show your love... It's so subtle. It's so innate within
you, built-in. It's there. We have to just open out. Every human being
is a bundle of love....
In pure love, there is a kind of a beautiful light which protects you, which
guides you and which enlightens your life completely. This light is just nourished
and also, we can say, like the lamp has to have the oil, this is the one that is for our
spirituality – the love of a person.
You are the embodiment of love, take it from Me, because you are a human
being... If you try to love anybody who is very cruel and very bad, gradually he
will calm down. He will harm you a little bit, he will do this, he will see things and
he might be mean with you, do all kinds of things, but then gradually you find
love works and works and works. And ultimately it is your love which is
important to that person. Now your love is really firstly appreciated more by
innocent people like children. Children know what love is....
your
With all this telling... you are not confident. You get upset. You feel, "How
can this be?" You have no trust in yourself. You have no faith in yourself.... At the
end of the whole thing, I must tell you that when you are a guru, you are also a
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 mother. You have to express yourself like a mother. She is kind. She is gentle. She
forgives. She also corrects whenever it's necessary, but in her own sweet way she
corrects so the correction takes place. It is not that a rebellion starts.
So all that wisdom of a mother is within you. It is already there, so please try to
use it. I am sure it will all work out and, as it is, we are a very beautiful group of people
who are something out of the blue, who are so much in peace and injoy together.
(H.H.Shri Mataji, Guru Puja -1995)
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 he third thing for a guru in Sahaja Yoga has to do, is to develop detachment.
Gradually you do develop it, because you find that unless and until
develop that detachment, you are not receiving vibrations in full way. All kinds of
you
detachments have to be developed, means your priorities change.
Once your attention gets fixed up with your Spirit, the catch or the hold on things
10
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Detachment
is purity, is innocence
Two types of attachments
are there,
one through mohah,
through involvement
into them
which are of no importance starts reducing by itself. For
example, you have a father, you have a mother, you have a
sister, this is a bigger problem in India.
Here you are over-detached, but in India people are very
much involved in their own children, in their own: 'This is
my son', and others are all orphans. Only your sons are the
real children: your daughter, your sons. 'My daughter', 'I
must do this for my son, for my father, mother' here also.
Two types of attachments are there, one through mohah,
11
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 through involvement into them; that you want to do this for them and that for
them, and give all the property to them, insurance for them, every sort of thing.
And another could be, the way we have here, that you hate your mother,
you hate your father, you hate everyone. Both things are just the same. So a
detachment must be developed. The detachment is that you are your father, you
are your mother, you are everything, your Spirit is everything to you.
You have to enjoy only your Spirit, as everything. Then the detachment
comes from there, and then you really do good to them by detaching, because
you see the complete vision about them and about what is to be done. For
example, people have also attachments to certain crazes. Human beings always
become crazy after something, I mean it can be anything.
One has to understand there should be only one craze: is to be settled
absolutely into your Spirit. All other crazes will disappear, because that's the
greatest joy-giving thing, that's the most nourishing thing, that's the most
beautiful thing. So the, all the other things fall off, you enjoy only that which is
the source ofall enjoyments.
you get yourself attached to your Spirit : detachment starts working.
Sometimes detachment is taken as a license for becoming dry to others, which
is absurd. This is only human quality also: make everything ugly, whatever is
beautiful. Actually, a person who is detached is the most beautiful person, is the
So
extremely loving person, he's love.
Look at the flowers, they are detached. They are dying, tomorrow they are
not going to live, but every minute they live, they are emitting fragrance to you.
The trees are not attached to anything, they will die tomorrow, doesn't matter;
but anybody who comes to them, they give shadow, they give fruits.
Attachment means death of love, complete death of love is attachment. For
example, in a tree, say, the sap rises, goes to all the leaves, goes to all the
necessary parts, all the flowers, all the fruits, and goes back to the Mother Earth.
He is not attached to anyone. Supposing the sap goes and gets attached into one
fruit. What will happen? The tree will die, and the fruit will die.
Detachment gives you the movement of your love, circulation of it. For
things now, things have no value unless and until there are emotions behind it.
Now for example, a sari, this one I am wearing today, was bought for Guru day,
Guru Purnima, but they had no sari. The other day they wanted to have a sari for
Puja, so I said: 'All right, use this.'
12
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 But I wore it again today, just to say that this was bought with that emotion
that on a Guru day, Mother would like to wear something of a lighter shade:
white, the pure color of silk, its complete detachment. But in white all the colors
are mixed, then only it becomes white. In such a balance and unity it is, should
be, that you become white, and whiter than snow.
Detachment is purity, is innocence. Innocence is such a light, I tell you,
light that really blinds you to all that is filthy. You wouldn't even know that a
person has come with bad intentions. You look at the person, you see, say
somebody comes to you, you'll say: 'Oh, come along, what do you
offer him tea and all that, and he'll say: 'I have come to rob you.'
want?' You'll
'All right, rob me if you want to, its all right.' He may not at all rob you! That
is what is innocence, which one can develop only through detachment.
Detachment is of the attention. Do not allow your attention to get involved into
something too much, even rituals of anything.
committed, what does it matter?
If some mistakes are
If you see on the abstract plane, it's love. This is just a step forward. Like
somebody ran very fast and fell down before reaching me, and he said: 'Mother,
I fell down before reaching You, I should have not done that. But see how
Iprostrated before You!' Its complete poetry, detachment.
sorry
So one has to develop that detachment to be a guru, and that detachment
doesn't mean sanyas or anything like that. Yes, sometimes one has to wear those
dresses to announce, because if you have to do lot of work in a short time, then
you have to take such intensive behavior, like Christ, we can say, Adi
Shankaracharya.
All these people had a very, very short life, and in that short life they had to
achieve such a tremendous task that they had to actually take a military
uniform, just to avoid problems, not to impress others. Now-a-days people
wear that dress just to impress others that they are detached, and do just the
thing opposite of it.
H.H.Shri Mataji
Guru Puja, 1980, Hampstead Temple, United Kingdom
(DCB July-August 2001)
13
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Gayatri Mantra
Aum Bhur Bhuva Swah
Tatsavitur Varenyam
Bhargo Devasya Dhimahi
Dhiyo Yo Naha Prachodayat
Ts
oday it's a different day, altogether, for all of you,
because this is the Puja ofAdi Shakti. And Adi Shakti is
the Complete Personality. It's not only the left side that you know.
You all know only the left side, from Shri Ganesha, through the
ascent of different Chakras on the left side. I didn't want to tell
you
about the right side, to begin with, because those who have gone
through the right side just got lost. They got Gayatri Mantra from
the writings. But they didn't know what it was about. They just
used to learn it by heart. They didn't also know the real meaning of
it, and that is how they moved on the right side, and, I don't know,
they landed up at the Agnya. And then they were trying for the Self
Realisation. They were promised that if you do this right side
properly, you will reach to the ultimate goal of Self Realisation.
But none of them reached there. Most of them got into a terrible
temper. Terrible temper, of cursing others, of destroying others, all
these things they learnt, through their right side movement. There
was no Kundalini awakening. And they were made to go up to, at
the most, Agnya Chakra. And then they collapsed into different
places of complete ignorance. All these books were written
without understanding that it's not easy to go via right side. But
best was, to awaken your Kundalini.
(H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Shri Adi Shakti Puja 2002)
14
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Third eye
oday we are going to understand the center of Agnya - Agnya Chakra which
is placed on the crossing of the optic chiasma. The nerves that supply the
eyes go backwards in the opposite direction and wherever they cross, this subtle
center is situated. It has a continuous connection with the other center through the
medulla oblongata. This center has got two petals. And this subtle center on one side
acts through the eyes and at the back of the head where you have some protrusion.
This is the physical side of this center is. Now the people who talk of the third
is the third eye. So that we have two eyes with which we see and there's a third eye,
which is a subtler eye through which we can see.
this
eye,
If you see this eye, that means you are away from it. For example, if you can see
your eyes, that means you are seeing your reflection, not the reality. If you see
anything, that means you are looking at it. So those people who say they see an eye,
for example people who take LSD and all such things, they start seeing another
They just see this eye and they think their third eye has opened. Actually you are very
much away from the eye, that's why you can see it. You go to a supraconcious level on
the right side, and on the left side to the subconscious level you can see the eye. But in
Sahaja Yoga you have to see through that eye, like a window, you can look at the
window but if you see through the window, you can't look at the window. So this
illusion that people have that “we can see third eye and that's why our Kundalini is
awakened", they are sadly mistaken.
eye.
This is a very narrow passage through which attention cannot pass normally. Is an
impossible thing. Is a very narrow passage where the ego and superego fit onto each
other and cross each other just like this. And there is no gap in between for the
Kundalini to pass through. This superego and ego go back, go downward, and come
to the Vishuddhi Chakra and circle round it and go in the same direction. So, you find
that they come up to this place, they start from this place, go up to the Agnya Chakra
and then they cross over. But here, they are in the same direction as they were. Here
they cross over. So when you have a problem on the left hand side, you get the effects
of that on the right hand side.... So this third eye is to be penetrated through.
(H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Talk on Agnya Chakra, Delhi, 1983)
15
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 स
ाम
श्री ईसा विश्व के आधार हैं। इस पवित्रता, इस मंगलमयता का सृजन एक अण्डे के रूप में किया गया
और फिर इसे दो भागों में तोड़ा गया| पहला भाग श्री गणेश हैं और
अवस्था में ईसामसीह बना। ईसा स्वयं ओंकार हैं तथा चैतन्य लहरियाँ भी स्वयं ही हैं। शेष सभी अवतरणों को
शरीर धारण करने के लिये पृथ्वीतत्व लेना पड़ा। ईसा का शरीर पूर्णत: ओंकार है तथा श्री गणेश उनका
आधा विकसित होकर परिपक्व
दूसरा
पृथ्वीतत्व हैं। अत: हम कह सकते हैं कि ईसा श्री गणेश की अवतरित शक्ति हैं। यही कारण है कि वे जल पर
चल सकते हैं। वे देवत्व का निर्मलतम रूप हैं।
प.पू.श्री माताजी,
३.४.१९९४
आरम्भ में जब श्री गणेश के रूप में उनका (श्री ईसामसीह का) सृजन किया गया...... इस शिशु
से
में केवल पृथ्वीतत्व का अंश विद्यमान था.....आज्ञा चक्र पर जिस अन्तिम तत्व में
गुज़रना पड़ा वह था
16
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 श्री ईसा विश्व के आधार हैं।
प्रकाशतत्व अर्थात उन्हें दिव्य शक्ति के सच्चे रूप में आना पड़ा-ओंकार रूप में। आप यह भी
कह सकते हैं कि चैतन्य लहरियों के रूप में जिसे आप नाद या शब्द ब्रह्म आदि कुछ कहते है।
अत: उन्हें ब्रह्मतत्व बनना पड़ा और ब्रह्मतत्व बनने के लिए उन्हें अन्य सभी महातत्वों से अलग
होना पड़ा। अंतिम तत्व प्रकाशतत्व था, इन्हें (श्री ईसामसीह) इसको पार करना पड़ा। तो
उनके अन्दर पृथ्वीतत्व था क्योंकि उबटन के मल से उनका सृजन हुआ तथा और भी तत्व
उनमें थे, परन्तु जब वे आज्ञा चक्र पर आते हैं तो बाकी सभी तत्व उन्हें छोड़ने पड़ते हैं और
अपने अन्दर मौजूद इन सभी तत्वों को निकालने के लिए उन्हें (श्री ईसामसीह) मरना पड़ता
है-पूर्ण, संपूर्ण पावन आत्मा बनने के लिए जो कार्य उन्होंने सूक्ष्म रूप में किया वह स्थूल रूप
में कार्यान्वित होता है, इसी कार्य को करने के लिए उन्हें मरना पड़ा। उनके अन्दर जिस चीज़
की मृत्यु हुई थी वह थी उनके अन्दर का पृथ्वीतत्व तथा अन्य तत्व और उनसे 'पावन आत्मा'
का उद्भव हुआ।
उनका पुनर्जन्म हुआ, पावन आत्मा का, शुद्ध ब्रह्मतत्व का, जिसने ईसामसीह के
17
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 शरीर की रचना की...उन्हें रक्षक इसलिए कहा जाता है क्योंकि मानव को शारीरिक संवेदना से ऊपर उठाने
के लिए उन्होंने यह द्वार पार किया अर्थात् उन लोगों को जो पंचमहाभूतों पर निर्भर करते हैं उन्हें आत्मा के
स्तर पर लाने के लिए।
अत: पुनर्जन्म वह है जहाँ आप....अपने चित्त से आत्मा के चित्त पर छलाँग लगा लेते हैं, जहाँ आप
अपने चित्त को महसूस कर पाते हैं। यही घटना आपके साथ घटित हुई है, परन्तु जब उनका पुनर्जन्म हुआ तो
वे शुद्ध आत्मा, शुद्ध ब्रह्मतत्व बन गए। पुनर्जन्म, मूलाधार चक्र से पृथ्वी तत्व के रूप में आरम्भ हुई, उस दिव्य
शक्ति की उत्क्रान्ति की घटना है जिसने वहाँ (मूलाधार चक्र) जन्म लिया और आज्ञा चक्र पर आई । वहाँ पर
सभी तत्वों को पार करके अन्तत: सहस्रार में प्रवेश करके पूर्ण ब्रह्मतत्व बनने के लिए ईसामसीह का सृजन
किया गया।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, ११.४.१९८२
ईसामसीह श्रीकृष्ण के पुत्र थे। वे मानव के चारित्रिक आधार हैं।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, २३.४.२००१
.....वे एक आदर्श थे, एक आदर्श सन्त, आदर्श साक्षात्कारी व्यक्ति, एक ऐसे व्यक्ति की प्रतिमूर्ति जो
हमारी रक्षा करने के लिये स्वर्ग से आए। ईसामसीह ने मृत्यु के पश्चात पुनर्जन्म लिया था। सहजयोग में हमने
भी मृत्यु के पश्चात जीवन में प्रवेश किया है । यह बात समझ लेनी चाहिए कि पुनर्जन्म हम सबके लिये, पूरे
विश्व के लिये, ये सन्देश है कि हमें पुनर्जन्म प्राप्त करना है।
ईसामसीह उस समय पर अवतरित हुए जब लोगों को आध्यात्मिकता का बिल्कुल भी ज्ञान न था
परन्तु जैसे तैसे सभी कुछ इतनी सुन्दरतापूर्वक कार्यान्वित हुआ कि लोग समझने लगे कि पुनरुत्थान
महत्वपूर्ण है। आपका भी जब पुनर्जन्म होता है तो कुण्डलिनी उठती है और आपका सम्बन्ध दिव्य शक्ति से
जोड़ती है।
ईसामसीह एक अत्यन्त साधारण एवं गरीब व्यक्ति थे, एक बढ़ई के पुत्र। उनके लिये पैसा अधिक
महत्वपूर्ण न था। बेकार था। उनके लिये आत्मा सभी कुछ था। वे अत्यन्त ही विवेकशील थे और जिस प्रकार
उन्होंने गिरजाघरों में बड़े-बडे पादरियों से धर्म की बातचीत की, वह अत्यन्त आश्चर्यजनक है कि किस
प्रकार एक नन्हा बालक धर्म को इतनी गहनतापूर्वक समझता है। नि:सन्देह उस समय वे छोटे से बालक थे
परन्तु वे परमात्मा के बन्दे थे, परमात्मा द्वारा सृजित। वे श्री गणेश थे, वे ॐ हैं, वे ज्ञान हैं, सभी कुछ हैं।
इसके बावजूद भी उन्हें कोई पहचान नहीं सका क्योंकि लोग सत्य को नहीं पहचान सकते।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, टर्की, २२.४.२००१
ईसामसीह के जीवन का सबसे बड़ा उद्देश्य ये था कि आपके अन्दर जो आज्ञाचक्र है उसका
भेदन करें और इसलिए उन्होंने अपने को क्रॉस पर टंगवा लिया और उसके बाद फिर से जीवित हो गए |
यह चमत्कार लगता है, पर परमेश्वरी कार्य कोई चमत्कार नहीं। इस प्रकार उन्होंने दिखाया कि
मनुष्य
18
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 इस आज्ञाचक्र से बाहर जा सकता है।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, २५.१२.२०००
आज्ञाचक्र को खोलने के लिये फाँसी चढ़ने की आवश्यकता नहीं है और न ही क्रूसारोपित
होने की आवश्यकता है। आवश्यकता है अहम् को क्रूसारोपित करने की। अहं ऐसी चीज़ है जिससे जल्दी
से मुक्ति नहीं प्राप्त की जा सकती।
ईसामसीह को अत्यन्त युवावस्था में ही क्रूसारोपित कर दिया गया। उनका क्रूसारोपित होना
बताता है कि वे मृत्यु से नहीं डरते थे और जानते थे कि वे पुनर्जन्म पा लेंगे। ये कार्य उन्हें आज्ञाचक्र के
माध्यम से करना पड़ा। आज्ञाचक्र बहुत ही तंग है और उन्हें इस मार्ग में से गुज़रना था और इस पर स्थापित
होना था।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, २२.४.२००१
आज्ञाचक्र पर उन्होंने दो मन्त्र बताये, इन्हें हम बीजमन्त्र कहते हैं - हूँ और क्षम्। क्षमा का
मतलब क्षमा करो। क्षमा करना, यह सबसे बड़ा मन्त्र है, जो आदमी क्षमा करना जानता है उसका ईगो (अहं)
जो है वो नष्ट हो जाता है।......सो दो चीज़ें ईसामसीह ने बतायीं, एक तो यह कि आप सबको क्षमा कर दो,
दूसरी बात जो कही उन्होंने कि तुम आत्मा हो, इस आत्मा को जानो। आत्मा को तो कोई छू भी नहीं
सकता। उसको सता नही सकता।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, २५.१२.२०००
ईसामसीह ने आत्मबलिदान किया। अपने जीवन को बलिदान करने का कार्य स्वीकार करके
और फिर स्वयं को पुनर्जीवित किया। आज्ञाचक्र के संकुचित मार्ग से वे गुज़रे ताकि आप लोग केवल इतना
कहकर ठीक हो सको कि 'मैं सबको क्षमा करता हूँ।' क्षमा का गुण जब इतना शक्तिशाली है कि आप इसके
माध्यम से मृत्यु से भी लड़ सकते हैं तो क्यों न क्षमा कर दी जाये?
हमारे आज्ञाचक्र को खोलने के लिये ईसा का पुनर्जन्म हुआ। आज्ञाचक्र अति सूक्ष्म केन्द्र है।
अपने बन्धनों तथा अहं से प्राप्त विचारों के कारण लोगों की आज्ञा इतनी अवरोधित हो गयी थी कि इसमें से
कुण्डलिनी का पार होना असम्भव था। ईसा क्योंकि चैतन्य का ही रूप थे, अत: पुनर्जन्म का खेल रचा गया।
हमें समझना चाहिए कि ईसा की मृत्यु द्वारा ही हमें हमारा पुनर्जन्म प्राप्त हुआ है और भूतकाल की मृत्यु हो
गयी, हमारे पश्चाताप और बन्धन समाप्त हो गए।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, इटली, १४.४.१९९२
ईसामसीह ने हमें यह शिक्षा दी कि उनके हृदय में मानव मात्र के लिये प्रेम था और वे सभी लोगों
को पुनरुत्थान के लिये तैयार करना चाहते थे। वे सहजयोग के आने के पूर्व अवतरित हुए। उन्होंने यदि यह
कार्य न किया होता तो मेरे लिये यह उपलब्धि प्राप्त करना कठिन होता। इस प्रकार उन्होंने सहजयोग के
लिये स्थितियाँ बनायीं जिसके कारण आप लोगों के आज्ञाचक्र खुले और आज्ञाचक्र को पार करके
19
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-19.txt 
 कुण्डलिनी को ऊपर ले जाकर आप अपने सहस्रार को, अपने तालूअस्थि क्षेत्र खोल सकते हैं। उन्होंने सोचा
कि लोगों के प्रति प्रेम का यही अंग-प्रत्यंग है, इसलिये ईसा ने यह कार्य किया और से लोगों का हित
बहुत
किया।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, २२.४.२००१
अगर ईसामसीह इस संसार में न आते और अपने को आज्ञा चक्र में बिठाकर तारण का मार्ग,
पुनर्जीवन का मार्ग न बताते तो सहजयोग साध्य न हो सकता। उनका आना अति आवश्यक था।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, २५.१२.१९९०
सहजयोग में ईसामसीह हमारे अत्यन्त सहायक हैं। ......ईसामसीह हमें इस बात का ज्ञान
करवाते हैं कि हम अपने आज्ञा चक्र खोलें, इससे ऊपर उठें। यहाँ हम इसे तीसरी आँख कहते हैं । तीसरी
आँख खुलने का अर्थ यह है कि आपके आज्ञाचक्र पर ईसामसीह जागृत हो गये हैं। यही तीसरी आँख हैं।
ईसामसीह आपके अन्दर साक्षी भाव का सृजन करते हैं और आप पूरे नाटक के दृष्टा मात्र बन जाते
हैं। पूरे नाटक को आप देखने लगते हैं और आश्चर्यचकित होते हैं कि आप कितने शान्त हैं, किस प्रकार
निर्विचार चेतना में हैं और बिना प्रतिक्रिया करे किस प्रकार हर चीज़ को देखते हैं। यह वह स्थान है जहाँ हमे ये
बात माननी पड़ती है कि ईसामसीह हमारे आज्ञाचक्र पर प्रकट हुए, वहीं उनका पुनर्जन्म हुआ। ये सब हमारे
अन्दर घटित हो चुका है। मशीन के पुज़जों की तरह से हमारे अन्दर सूक्ष्म तन्त्र को बनाया गया है और हमारे
अन्दर भिन्न चक्र और ऊर्जा केन्द्र हैं। यह अन्तिम चक्र कठिनतम है, उसे वास्तव में ईसामसीह ने खोला।
ईसामसीह ने ही ये कार्य करने का साहस किया और इसे इतने सुन्दर ढंग से किया कि अब हमारे
अन्दर अहं को देख पाने की योग्यता है। जब आप अपने अहं को देखते हैं तो हैरान होते हैं कि जो भी कार्य
आप करते हैं, जितना भी कुछ आप करते रहें, आप थकेंगे नहीं । थकते तो आप इसलिए हैं कि आपका अहं
सदैव यही कहता रहता है ओह! आप इतने महान हैं, अन्य लोगो के लिये आप इतना सारा काम कर रहे हैं,
आपने तो इतना कुछ प्राप्त कर लिया है, आदि-आदि। तो इसी प्रकार अहम् हर समय हमारी झूठी महानता
के विषय में हमें बढावा देता रहता है और हम स्वयं को महान मान बैठते है।
|
...इस दुष्ट अहकार का दूसरा पक्ष बन्धन (Conditioning) है। इसका भी अत्यन्त सूक्ष्म सम्बन्ध
है। ईसामसीह के प्रति हमें आभारी होना है कि उन्होंने पुनरुत्थान को कार्यान्वित किया ताकि हर विवेक बुद्धि
को प्राप्त कर सकें, परमेश्वरी विवेक को प्राप्त कर सकें। ये ऐसा संघर्ष है, ऐसा मार्ग है, जिसका सृजन उन्होंने
किया ताकि अत्यन्त आसानी से हम कठिनाई को पार कर सकें जिससे हमारे अहं और बन्धनों का अन्त हो
जाए।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, २२.४.२००१
अहंकार को देखने का प्रयत्न करें और उस समय यदि आप ईसामसीह का नाम लेंगे तो अहंकार
चला जाएगा। ईसामसीह का नाम लेने मात्र से आपका अहंकार दूर हो जाएगा।
20
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 हमारे उत्थान के लिये ईसामसीह अत्यन्त महत्वपूर्ण अवतरण थे। यदि वे स्वयं पुनर्जीवित न हुए होते
तो हमे उत्थान प्राप्त न हो पाता। ईसा का पुनर्जीवन आपके जीवन से प्रत्यक्ष है। पहले आप क्या थे और आज
क्या हैं, कितना अन्तर है, कितना कायापलट है? उनके बलिदान और पुनर्जीवन ने हम सबके लिये यह
परिवर्तित अवस्था प्राप्त करने का मार्ग बनाया है।
पर यह अवस्था मानव के लिये भिन्न है तथा ईसा के लिये भिन्न। ईसा स्वयं पवित्रता तथा विशुद्धता
थे। उनका पुनर्जीवन मात्र एक शारीरिक घटना थी क्योंकि उन्हें कायापलट की कोई आवश्यकता नहीं थी,
उन्हें शुद्धिकरण नहीं करना पड़ा। मृत्यु से उनका पुनर्जीवित होना इस बात का प्रतीक है कि मानव का
आध्यात्मविहीन जीवन मृत्युसम है, क्योंकि मानव पूर्णत्व, वास्तविकता तथा पूर्ण सत्य को समझे बिना
ही सभी कुछ करता रहता है। उसका हर कर्म अन्ततोगत्वा उसे विनाश की ओर ले जाता है। यहाँ तक
कि इन अवतरणों द्वारा चलाये धर्म भी पतनोन्मुख हैं, इन अवतरणों के प्रतिनिधि कहलाने वाले लोगों में भी
धार्मिकता का नामोनिशान नहीं मिलता।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, इटली, ११.४.१९९३
21
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 सहजयोग के द्वारा ही लोगों को पुनर्जीवित करें, उन्हें पुनरुत्थान दें, उन्हें आत्मा का प्रकाश दें।
एक ऐसी अवस्था तक उन्हें लायें जहाँ वे समझ सकें कि ठीक क्या है और गलत क्या है। लोगों को आप
करुणा एवं प्रेम का एहसास करने दें। ऐसा जब होने लगता है तो हमारे अन्तर्निहित तीसरी शक्ति कार्यान्वित
हो जाती है।
ईसा अपने पर तथा सर्वव्यापक शक्ति पर विश्वास तथा श्रद्धा के अवतरण थे। यही ज्योतिर्मय
श्रद्धा है। इस श्रद्धा को समझा जाना चाहिए। वे जानते थे कि वे परमात्मा के बेटे हैं। इसको उन्होंने कभी
चुनौती नहीं दी। श्रद्धा के मामले में सहजयोगियों को ईसा की तरह बनना होगा।
जब ईसामसीह की मृत्यु हुई तो सारे पंचभूत डोल गये। ईसामसीह पंचभूतों के स्वामी थे, पंचभूत
डोल गए, भूचाल आ गए और प्राकृतिक विपदायें आयीं। पंचभूतों ने उनकी मृत्यु को महसूस किया, स्वयं
ईसामसीह ने नहीं, उन्हें लगा कि इतनी महान शक्ति नष्ट कर दी गयी है। वे नहीं जानते थे कि ईसामसीह
पुनर्जीवित हो उठेंगे, इसका उन्हें ज्ञान न था, पर वे इससे बाहर आए।
उनकी मृत्यु हमें शक्ति प्रदान करती है, हमारी मृत्यु नहीं, हम पुनर्जन्म ले चुके हैं और पुनर्जीवन हमारे
साथ है, परन्तु हमें इसमें स्थापित होना है। अपने सहजयोग को हमें स्थापित करना है। अपनी ध्यान-धारणा
को हमें स्थापित करना है, यही महत्वपूर्ण चीज़ है।----और आपको अन्य लोगों को पुनरुत्थान प्रदान
करना है, यही महत्वपूर्णतम कार्य है।
|
प.पू.श्री माताजी, २५.४.१९९९
श्री ईसामसीह ने सारे ब्रह्माण्डों का सृजन किया। ब्रह्माण्ड अर्थात ग्रह। सूर्य ग्रह के अन्दर से
पृथ्वी ग्रह का सृजन हुआ और उसमें से आप लोग उत्पन्न हुए और आपके चक्रों में उन्होंने एक छोटे विराट का
सृजन किया, वह तुम्हारे आज्ञा चक्र में हैं। यह बलिदान अत्यन्त अत्यन्त महत्वपूर्ण है और यद्यपि यह स्थूल है
फिर भी बहुत सूक्ष्म है। चेतना को आज्ञा चक्र के बीच से ऊपर ले जाने के लिए यह घटित हुआ। सूक्ष्म में जो
कुछ भी घटित होना होता है उसकी अभिव्यक्ति इस प्रकार से स्थूल में भी होती है और जब ईसामसीह को
क्रूसारोपित किया गया तब भी ऐसा ही हुआ। परन्तु पुनः आप ईसामसीह को क्रूसारोपित नहीं कर सकते,
जैसे वर्णन किया गया है अब वे एकादश रुद्र बन गए हैं......शिव की सभी ( ग्यारह रुद्रों की) शक्तियाँ उन्हें
प्रदान की गई है। अब तक जब भी उनका जन्म हुआ श्री कृष्ण ने उन्हे अपनी शक्तियाँ प्रदान कीं और वे
महाविराट बन गए। यहाँ तक कि उन्हें श्री कृष्ण से भी ऊपर (आज्ञा चक्र) में स्थान दिया गया परंतु अब यदि
वे अवतरित होंगे तो उनके पास शिव की विध्वंसक शक्तियाँ होंगी-ग्यारह विध्वंसक शक्तियाँ, केवल एक
शक्ति सभी ब्रह्माण्डों को समाप्त करने के लिए काफ़ी है....अब आप उन्हें क्रूसारोपित नहीं कर सकते और
समय आ गया है कि हम सब उनका स्वागत करने के लिए तैयार हो जाए......सभी मूर्खतापूर्ण चीजों को नष्ट
करने के लिए वे आएंगे। अत: ये बीच का थोड़ासा समय आपकी उत्क्रान्ति और मोक्ष के लिए लगना चाहिए।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, लन्दन आश्रम, ६.४.१९८१
22
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Let this Diwali enlighten you with light of love. You yourself are the
lamps which burn high and don't get pressed by the cover. They become
much more powerful thanthe cover. It is their own asset. When they are
hit upon, they are disturbed and distinguished.
October 21, 1976
Published & Printed by
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
No. 8, Chandragupta Co-op Housing Society, Paud Road,
Kothrud, Pune, Maharashtra, India
website: www.nitl.co.in (For queries & sending articles contact on above address)
411 038. © : 25286537, 25286032 email:sale@nitl.co.in
-
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-23.txt 
 HAPPY
NEW
YEARI
Anew Year has just begun and on this important occasion
I convey my love and blessings
to all my children throughout the world.
As we all know from daily news, the world is in a dangerous state. There is abiding hatred
and violence. The whole world needs the soothing and loving message of Sahaja Yoga.
I urge you all, especially the National Sahaja Yoga Leaders and Coordinators throughout
the world, to do your best to spread the loving and caring message of Sahaja Yoga not only in
your own respective countries but, most importantly, in the neighbouring countries by sending
out small team of Sahaja Yogis to convey the pure, caring and loving message of Sahaja Yoga.
I wish you all the very best in the New Year and all success in your efforts to spread the
loving message of Sahaja Yoga
H.H.SHRI MATAJI NIRMALADEVI, 3 January 2010
