The Divine Cool Breeze 2011 issue 5 – volume twenty-four number five

 BREEZE The Divine Cool The whole thing is to be understood in totality, that we are Sahaja Yogis, we have a purpose, we have come here to learn something from each other and from ourselves. I AM WITH YOU 2 OUTER LIFE BECOMES INNOCENT 6 MOTHERING EARTH 10 STRENGTH FROM WITHIN 20 BREEZE COOL AND DIVINE 22 LEARN TO ENJOY IN MARRIAGE 24 CLOUDS UNFOLD 26

 Recognition does not mean that you recognize Me as Adi Shakti, but recognition means that in every part of your life you should know that I am with you. | am with |am In the morning you get up, have your bath, sit down, take some tea. Don't talk, don't talk, don't talk in the morning. Sit down, meditate because that time, may be whatever, maybe your timing is easier, no difference to Me. I am with you. But that is the best time because at that time the sun comes afterwards. Before that, the divine rays come in. That is how the birds get up. That is how the flowers get up. They are all awakened by that. And if you are sensitive, you will also feel that, by getting up in the morning, you will look at least ten years younger. Really it is such a good thing to get up in the morning. WI

 you nO. 3.

 You have everything within you. You are the storehouse of chastity, which is your power. Everything is within you. Nothing has gone out. It is all there. All that fragrance is within you. It is all preserved. Do not condemn yourself. And to tell you all about it. You are so fortunate I am with point? Shri Ganesha Puja 1984 you are so fortunate I am here understand that you. Do you You will take it over from Me.... I am with you. You know that, but it need not be in this body because I do not know if I exist in this body or not. Sahasrara Puja 1984 One should not have all these inhibitions or those fears about Me – at least, when I am you. I am your Mother. You can tell Me everything and I have to work it out. 27 February 1992 Sydney with As long as you have a deep axis, you are with Me, I am with you, absolutely one with each other.... This widening comforts you. That is the comforting thing and that really makes so comfortable in any circumstance, in any position, in any lifestyle and you do not want to have other comfort. And this one has to develop through meditative effort. Surya Puja 1998 any 14 I have loved you. That is why I am with you.... Please listen to Me. I am your Mother and still all are My children, whether you you are ninety or a hundred does not matter. In this respect, you are all My children and you have to listen to Me. Get to your joy, get to your happiness and get to the key of your being. 28 January 1980 Bordi Compassion just flows. It does not say anything. Even if you do not see Me, even if you are in the hospital, you know I am with you. It works. Even if you just think of Me it works. Even if you make a mistake, you know Mother will forgive. That is compassion. March 1987 London

 You feel that dearth or that kind of a gap within yourself which forces you to seek some- thing. And great seekers were born in the West or in the East. Today I am facing you. I am with you. So for all practical purposes, I am a Britisher and a western person because we have to face the problem as we are. 8 July 1980 Oxted Christ could not tolerate insult or any kind of a neglect of His Mother. He Himself has said that this will not be tolerated. In the same way, you people also, if you are only for that, I am with you. I am absolutely with feeling of guilt or anything within yourself. When you understand that whatever you are doing, you are doing with complete sincerity, with complete understanding. Even if you make mistakes, it does not matter. The mistake will bring forth something lacking. But you have to be extremely sincere. This feeling should be within you. Easter Puja 1991 any do not have you, that any more the Wherever you are together, I am with you. But when you are away from each other, I am not with you. Only in difficulties, when you are pushed into some places where I am not there, where you think I am not there, I am there. But if you deliberately are keeping out of collectivity, I am not with you. So try to grow your collectivity, otherwise you cannot go deep into your own depths, you cannot become a great Sahaja Yogi, you cannot really be called a Sahaja Yogi. Those who have a sense of collectivity can only become that. Virata Puja 1991 You have to humble yourself. By seeing your past, whatever mistakes we have committed, I am with you in this – not to feel guilty. It is very embarrassing, but please try to face yourself. We have to face ourselves as we are. Navaratri Puja 1982 Whether you have seen Me or not, I am with you. And also I am pleased with some people, those who have love for Me. Guru Puja 1985 What about the present? I am with you.... All religions were built for this day, that get your Realization to give you the balance, to give you that property by which you ascend. 28 November 1985 London you Now I am with you, I have to give you Realization. 27 March 1981 I am always with you. Whenever you think of Me, you will know I am with you.... There is nothing to feel that I am away from you.... As you trust Me, you trust yourself. You must trust yourself. You must have faith in yourself that you are quite capable and you can do it. You can do it and there are people who will help you. They are very humble, sweet, beautiful people. You will like them and they will all help you until you become perfect – such love, I tell you. 10 August 1990 Vancouver Lam with you May God bless you. 5

 The inner being can be charged with the energy of Shri Ganesha The outer life becomes innocent

 • Children should not be exposed to the public. We should not try to make photographs out of our children and expose them in the newspaper or give them for advertisement or anything there. It is a very wrong idea to expose your children to gain some money out of them in any way – in the smallest way also – because we are selling the innocence, the innocence which is invaluable, writ large on the children. Shri Ganesha Puja 1993 • Some people are only worried about their own children. If anything happens to them, they just get upset. That means you are respecting your child because he is your child. But if you are respecting him because he carries innocence with him, then you have to respect every child and understand every child – what they say, how they behave. Luckily, you all have children now who are born-realized. It is such a great thing, such a blessing. got • This innocence also gives you a power of self-understanding. You know where you stand. A person who is innocent knows very well that he is standing on the pedestal of virtues. He should not give in to all kinds of nonsensical things which are very popular, may be fashionable, may be accepted. For what? For what are we going to sacrifice our innocence? What is our gain? • One should understand a difference between a protocol and ritualism. An innocent child knows the protocol... For innocent children, the worship is everything. It is not ritualistic. It is heartfelt. You feel it from the heart, how to do the worship, how to show WO does it. your love. It is a very sweet way an innocent person • If you do it with your open heart, innocently, anything is all right. It is the open heart which is necessary, not the closed heart.... You are in the Kingdom of God and here there are no such rules and regulations that you should be ritualistic. We kill our children's innocence by putting materialistic ideas into their heads.... It is the whole tradition of materialism which has brought this innocence to a stop. Then a child starts growing in the same materialistic way. He starts judging people.. This is what is now the mind of people in the West who have grown up. But even the children today they want this, tomorrow they want that. All the time there is a competition for materialistic things, asking for this, asking for that. Just imagine what a race will be there after some years when there will be just people who will be only worried about collecting things and buying things. I mean buyers and sellers, nothing else. The open heart is necessary. NeCESsar • Be very careful with your children that you do not pamper them, do not get too much worried about them, do not keep them on a materialistic level. Find out. If they are going on a materialistic level, bring them down. It is very simple to do that and one has to work it out because we have to save our children and their innocence. People will be enamoured by your innocence, no doubt, they will be surprised how are so innocent. How can you be so nice in these modern times...? Try to be innocent yourself. It should not be cunning. You should not be smart. You should not try to show that you are very brilliant or anything because the ego might, in between, come and try to put ideas into your head. It is better to show that you are innocent and to be innocent inside. The whole inner being can be really charged with the energy of Shri Ganesh, no doubt, and the outer life becomes innocent. It becomes innocent. you

 Innocence should be respected, looked after, nourished and protected. That is why I am very particular about the children.

 4% 9. 1081

 MOTHERING To say something about the connection of Sahaja Yoga with this Mother Earth, it is very important that we must understand the value of the Mother Earth. She has been very kind to all of you. She has been sucking your vibrations... She has given you everything that you see around. So today we have to understand the connec- tion and the symbolic expression of the Mother Earth within our- selves. I have told you before also that the Kundalini, which is in three and a half coils, is placed within a triangular bone. Now this abode of the Kundalini is called as Muladhara and is represented in the kumbba: a vase or pot symbolic of the womb universe as this Mother Earth. Or in the puja it is represented as yagya: a ritual sacrifice performed to please God the kumbha...

 MOTHER EARTH PUJA 1983 FARTHbecome one with the whole So far, in the movement of our consciousness, we have been trying to understand the God Almighty and all other five elements that we call as important. And also, the consciousness has been moving towards the understanding of all the other four elements but the Mother Earth. That had to be such because unless and until the understanding of all these four other elements are brought to a certain degree, the Mother Earth cannot express itself. Like if all your chakras, four chakras, are caught up, you cannot raise the Kundalini, you cannot give Self Realization. You cannot have a mass evolutionary process done. That is why we had yagyas, all other methods of exciting the four elements. They worshipped the water and they worshipped air, the sky, the firmament, the light. And that is how they came up to the time of Christ where light was worshipped. 11

 MOTHERING EARTH The of Aquarius age Today, when we are in this modern Sahaja Yoga, we are actually at the level of the Mother Earth because this is the of the Aquarius. And Aquarius is the same as the kumbha. It is the Mother Earth. So we are at the level of the Mother Earth. You can also see in the consciousness of human beings – I am saying not only men, but women also and men – the consciousness is moving more towards the feminine expres- OF sion of life. But as stupid as human beings are, the feminists also have been age THIS IS THE AGE very stupid, that they are fighting on the level of rationality, of economics, of politics – all useless things... The Mother's development, the feminine development is not equality in the the men have been stupid. There is no use competing with men in their stupidity. The amount of stupidity has been created already for us quite sufficiently. The whole world is today expressing that nonsense that they have – the competition, the aggression, the oppression. So the other side of the woman, which was called as the dominated one, the dark side, the oppressed and all that has to express itself in a different way. The whole mode, the style has to change. See now, in Christianity one should understand why Christianity – even Judaism, any religion, even Hinduism and all that, but it is more in Christianity – surprisingly they just had no place for Mary. And Muslims even crowned it by completely cancelling Fatima. And on top of that, you will see that among Christians, I think that ordination is not given to the women – while Christ was not born of a man. But that does not in any way mean that you compete with men in their foolish enterprises by which they have practi- cally brought this world to such a ruinous state. AQUARIUS things. way For meditation, if you can The motherly qualities sit on the Mother Earth, Today we have to understand that it is the time for the motherly qualities to develop. Even it will be extremely good a man, when he becomes motherly only, becomes a great man. Like Christ, when he had because the special quality compassion, He was called as a saint. So the quality of a woman as a Mother-Goddess is of the Mother Earth ... always as a mother. And She is the power most important to ignite Sahaja Yoga. She sucks your problems. Now how She ignites, I will tell you. I will give an analogy, but the analogy should not be carried too far. As wise Sahaja Yogis, you should not carry it too far. Say there is a zero. It has no meaning. In the same way, God Almighty has no meaning until you put some sort of one or two before it. It is a zero. It has an existence, but it has no capacity or power to express itself. So it is a zero. Like that we should say the masculine growth is a zero. Another analogy I will give you to understand it, that if you see very high power wires going over your head, they are absolutely harmless. There is no trouble... Until this high power thing is connected with the earth it has no meaning at all. But the Earth is very different from this dynamic power that is flowing through those wires, which are zero, which means nothing. In the same way, in a woman, the womb of a woman is the Kundalini. Now what That is a womb? Now if that is the Kundalini, that expresses the Kundalini in the gross. means the Mother Earth is also like the womb. Now what does a womb do? It receives the sperm, which is just a frivolous act of man or you can say just an aggression and she then nourishes, looks after it, corrects it and allows it to grow – not in an aggressive way, but in a very compassionate and a sensible way until it is expelled out of the womb when it is grown up. So the idea of the womb is that the expression has to be in such a manner that it does not dominate, it does not dominate the embryo. If it dominates, how can it grow? So it nourishes it and makes it grow.

 Becoming one with the whole This is what today's Sahaja Yoga is, that now the Mother Earth is the one who is symbolized within you as the Muladhara, as symbolized as the Adi Shakti here, who is sitting down before you to nourish you, to make you grow into new personalities, into mature personalities. This concept we must understand. So the women of the West must understand that the nonsensical ideas they have taken from men must be completely discarded. They have to become women first. Those women who just are talking like men can never help in Sahaja Yoga. They have to be like this Mother Earth who allows you to do what stupid to exploit Her to the maximum. Not only that, but also She bears a lot of nonsense upon Herself. But then a time reaches where She becomes She is just made out of nothing explosive. Then She starts consuming people inside Herself. And when She is consuming people, then you see the earthquakes and droughts and how She is conscious, this and that. All these things start coming in and people get engulfed into how She is particular, these problems, which they blame Mother Earth for that. The problems how She works it out, that human beings have created out of an aggressive nature, even aggression how She is attentive, towards the Mother Earth, they have to a pay a dividend for that. And they how She is careful. are paying. Now to stop this kind of a movement of aggressiveness, which brings If we do not know how all kinds of disturbances, one has to recede back and should develop the sense of totality, of compassion. Unless and until you understand totality, we do not know how the total, the complete, the whole, that is the womb that is your Mother, as long as you try to be individualistic, you cannot be a good Sahaja Yogi. You have to become one with the whole. like with Her. I mean you human beings have been so See this Mother Earth, you how She knows Her responsibility. but soils and mud, but look at Her, to respect the Mother Earth. to respect ourselves. Now we have to face ourselves for that. Very important it is. Especially in the West, I would say we have to face ourselves very clearly. What are we up to? That is a very important thing. First of all, let us see where is our ир attention. Ask a question. We are Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yogis within our fold and I am sometimes surprised that even now the attention can be very funny. Like a simple thing, like we can have attention on material things - “this is mine, this is yours, that I should have my privacy" – then you are into another realm of aggressiveness. If you try to have your own pri- CC gone vacy, then you are depriving others of their privacy. It was all right when you were not Sahaja Yogis to have your privacy because you had to grow in your privacy at that time. But after Sahaja Yoga, you have to become one with everyone else. That is very important. Before Sahaja Yoga you were different and after Sahaja Yoga you are different. The whole concept must change after Sahaja Yoga, that now you have become one with the whole. And to feel that you are one with the whole, should try to give up all your individualistic attitudes... How can I say that I like some thing? Think of a mother who has to you bear the child, has to give birth to a child, has to look after the child, the needs of the child, protect the child, train the child. How can she say, "I like this" and "I like that"? Where is the time? To think what like and what you don't like, “I like this food, I like that food," where is the time? Where is the left for that? Where is the attention? The attention is on the you energy 13 upbringing of the child.

 MOTHERING EARTH The growth of the spirit In the same way, a Sahaja Yogi must know that the child within him is born the spirit. The spirit is the child which has been born within him. Now he has to nourish through the Kundalini. He has to water it. He has to look after it. He has to make it grow. Now where is the time for other nonsensi- cal things? You have a child in hand. You are all mothers looking after That is your spirit. So where do you have time for all these things? What the attention should be is "What can I do to make this child happy, to make this YOU HAVE child. your TO MOTHER grow, to make this child completely manifest my Self." The mother replaces herself as soon as the child becomes a mature child. child YOUR CHILD So now, in you hood – motherhood towards yourself. The attitude should be like a mother the motherh0ood must take over more than the father- towards the child. How is her attention towards the child? You can see in every day-to-day life how we behave... Dedication can only be developed if you realize that you have to mother your child. Now if the mother is ugly, the child will be ugly too because it is the mother who is expressed in the child. She does not dominate the child, but she definitely can corrupt the image of the child. And that is what exactly happens when we, the Sahaja Yogis, are not bothered as to look after our spirit and our spiritual growth... In Sahaja Yoga it is not a child which is an individual child look after. One should understand, this is where we miss It was very important first to create a very holy Mother Earth for human beings to be born on. have to you much, espe- very cially by the intellectuals. They think it is their own child which should be all right. It does not matter about others' children – or does not matter if you have a connection with others or not. It is very common because, in the rationality, it gives them that sense, "Oh, my spirits are all right, my vibra- tions are all right, so it is all right if I do not go to puja or if I do not go to any collective thing or if I do not support in any collective work or if I do not take any responsibility of Sahaja Yoga." Once you become collective, satisfied with yourself, "that is good, that I need not take up any responsibil- ity, all the Sahaja Yogis are bad or some of them are bad, I have nothing to do with them...." It is not understood by human beings how they are connected CC to this Mother Earth. This Kundalini passed through different centres, creating different centres in the Mother Earth and ultimately broke through Kailasha. you take responsibilities. So you are over- But in Sahaja Yoga, as it is, the motherhood is universal because if you are the nose, say, then somebody is the eye. If you are the ears, somebody is the lips. So it is essential for you to understand that if anybody who is a Sahaja Yogi is in trouble, you are in trouble. It is threat to your growth. It is a threat to your growth because it is the whole that is growing.... You must worry about the whole. And you have to take up the responsibility. Those who do not take up the responsibility are not the people who have yet matured their child. That is the spirit. Every type of responsibility that you can take, think of what responsibilities you can take. One has to understand that the child is your responsibility. You have to look after the child. And the whole is also your responsibility. Now, how to establish the connection between your spirit or keep the connection on between the spirit and the womb or the Kundalini is the big- gest problem that we all face – that our connections are very loose and that is why this Kundalini cannot look after the spirit.

 Feminine and masculine I wonder if you have noticed one thing in Sahaja Yoga, that you can manoeu- vre the Kundalini, but not the spirit. You can raise your hand, the Kundalini will move. You can manoeuvre it. You can give it a bandhan. It will and around and around. But what about the spirit? You cannot manoeuvre around go it. There is only one mantra to awaken the spirit in the sense that to please him you have to say you are the spirit. But you cannot manoeuvre it. You have to bring in the Kundalini to look after it. You have to take the Kundalini there, to the heart, so that this child, which is the little offspring, just now has to be carefully developed and matured. So on both the sides of men or women, we have to understand that if The way we insult our Mother Earth, you are a man and if you are a dominating man, it is all right. But if you are a what we are doing is we are insulting woman and if you are dominating, then it is a difficult thing for Sahaja Yoga the Adi Shakti. So many ways there are to cure you because you have lost your quality of being a woman. At least you we should respect the Mother Earth. have to be a woman to begin with. If you are not even a woman, then what can you do with these third persons who are neither man nor woman? Now the men, when they are dominating, they have to understand that when you got up from your bed and you they have to be compassionate. They have to be kind, they have to be con- touched the Mother Earth with your siderate, but never subservient – never subservient. This is one you should feet, you have to say, "Oh, Mother Earth, understand, that have to be is to be great, large, receptive, receiving and nourishing all that.... touching You with my feet." This is one of the biggest problems of the West today, that men are nei- ther men and women are not women. I find the quality so horrid that I do not know how to deal with the mixtures. You must understand this very simple thing in life, that if you are a hybrid stuff, you cannot have the quality of a Sahaja Yogi. If you mix it up, it is a very funny thing, isn't it? So a woman It was an Indian custom to begin with, should not be subservient. Now the women, what they please forgive me because I'm you must try to be a woman and a man must try to be a man. Now see what is the situation of a man as a masculine effect on the development of consciousness? So as the manliness was expressed we have developed science. We have developed all this knowledge, all these things IS EVERYTHING READY which are outside. Now everything is ready. Now the woman has to come up. I mean, I am saying in the very abstract way, do not think of women, but you can say the feminine. The feminine nature has to rise now. Now every- thing is ready. It has to just spark. All the chakras are ready. Now awaken the Kundalini. The Kundalini is as important as the other chakras are. So o JUST SPARK now awaken the Kundalini. Now Kundalini's behaviour and mode of action is different from the mode of action of the chakras. If the Kundalini very becomes the chakras and the chakras become the Kundalini, how will you manage Sahaja Yoga? But we must assume our own nature in all dignity and in all pride, not to feel in any way low down. Because a man sits on a horse, the woman wants to sit on a horse. What is the need for a woman to sit on a horse...? There is no need for women to do all the things that men have already done. Say, for example, there is one personality of the masculine personality that has to come and do a certain job. Now you have done it. All right, now another personality has to do this job. Now see the situation of the Divine also. Now the whole complication comes in that once a kind of a thing has been done, another one that comes wants to do the same. Do you follow My point? So the whole energy is completely wasted. 15

 MOTHERING EARTH Creation of Mother Earth The whole preparation has been made for this Aquarius age to come in to bring in the Kundalini upward and to make the whole thing work out in such by the movement of the earth, a way that the left and right meet and you all become ignited, enlightened. It by the sea, by all the elements, was a question of our being sharing the whole job in a proper understanding. has to be respected. Now see how Mother Earth Herself was created. It is also a very simple thing. First, the movement of the energy started flowing. Now this is a com- bined energy. around like that. And when it consolidated there was this big bang. When If people are saintly they will be the big bang took place – now this is the manly work, I should say, in a way always protected by Mother Earth. a manly style because still the Mother Earth is not produced. So then these little fragments again went around and around. With the momentum, they became roundish. Out of them the Mother Earth was selected for one job - not to do anything. On the Mother Earth, out of the water came the life. The carbon came Whatever is created on this Earth We should not try to curse the Mother Earth for any mishaps on this Earth. Then the combined energy went around and around and in. Everybody helped there and a human being was created. Then the men went around to improve their societies and whatever. They have done to it. Whatever was possible with their ego is done, finished now. Now they have done their job. Now they are on dole, you can say. Now the womb – or we can say the Kundalini which has been waiting all these years – was resting, waiting for that time. So we call it “the blossomtime has now come." At that time, the Kundalini has to rise and ignite in such a way that the completion of the whole work takes place. It is simple. Do you understand now? CC Revolution not rebellion There is no competition between men or women, but the style of work is different. If you understand that, then only this kind of revolution will take place and not turn out a rebellion. Actually women are rebelling against men and a nonsense it is. It is such a headache, that you create something, allow them to grow and another party comes which has to complete the job and starts rebelling. So the revolution has to take place and this revolution is only possible when we understand that what is left out now to be done.... That part is now Realization, our awakening of the Kundalini. For that, your feminine qualities are going to help you, not your masculine qualities. So aggressiveness must be given up by men. Also, because they are Sahaja Yogis now, they have to take feminine qualities, not of fighting. If women fight they are not women. You see, women are told that “you are useless, you are good for nothing," so now they are trying to show, "no, we are also all right, if you have eaten one crow, we will eat three." Now this under- standing and the wise perception would be such that "what do we have to do now to change the mode and the style of our lives, what's wrong A turning point has come. Now the evolution is not rebellion at all, by any chance. It is a wrong idea people have. It is not rebellion that and I hit you, go on hitting each other, like a pendulum you move. You see the movement of a pendulum. It is not like a boom, this thing, that, today you are born as a Muslim, tomorrow you are born as a Jew, then you are born as a Jew, then you are born as a Hindu.... A TURNING POINT HAS COME part כי CC here?" you hit me 17

 MOTHERING EARTH The spiral movement It is not a pendulum. It is spiral movement. So every time you achieve an evo- lution, you are at a higher level than before. So the movement is spiral. Now to achieve the higher position in our whole being, what should we do? It is to understand that from this point to that point we have to rise. We have to rise in a way that we move in such a way that it is not in a pendulum way, but in a spiral way. And to move spirally, you have to use another kind of force. Whatever you have used so far has to be endowed with another kind of force and that is the feminine qualities of women. But where are the femi- nine women? They dress up like women. They will try to be feminine and all that. That is not the way – from inside, from the heart, feminine heart. Christ showed that in His life. He forgave. Only a woman can forgive. A man cannot because he is aggressive. How can he forgive? Krishna never forgave anyone. He used to kill in a right royal fashion... MOTHER EARTH IS AWAKENED WITHIN YOU Christ ... forgave to such an extent to show that He is now giving a turn to the spiral and now a feminine quality has to be developed among human beings. But that does not mean that you start walking like women or develop- ing waistlines because that is another stupidity, but to be motherly – not to be fatherly, but to be motherly. That kindness, that gentleness should be in your behaviour towards each other. Of course, this force also corrects, sometimes also gets angry also. Mother also has to get angry sometimes. Especially with people who never get with their behaviour, She has to be shouting, punishing and sometimes She also destroys. It is all right. But that is sometimes, not all the time. So just now, one has to accept that to be like the Mother Earth we have to be forbearing – dhara. She is the sustenance of everything. She takes every- thing. The vibrations are sucked in. all right You put a seed in the Mother Earth and see how it sprouts. Giving back to Mother Earth For the first time, after Realization, you can give Her back what you have got She is so spontaneous. from Her. You can give vibrations to Her trees that are created. You can make Her activity is so spontaneous, them beautiful. You can transform a flower into a more beautiful flower. Now we never wonder about it. whatever you have got from the Mother Earth, you can give because your See different types of flowers, Mother Earth is awakened within you now. So you return Her back every- different types of fragrance, thing that you got from Her and give it to others – generosity, the greatness different types of shrubs and trees, of heart, nobility, forgiveness, love, affection, bearing everything for love. And how She grows with such balance for the mother to save her child, she will starve herself. She will do everything to save her child. Complete dedication she has for her child. That is a real and molecule of that Mother Earth mother... That is the real image of a mother. And you have an image before in every place. In every minute atom there is sense. you. So this is what one has to develop now, whether you are men or women. Before us is the best reflection of the Adi Shakti and that is this Mother Earth. As Sahaja Yogis, you must develop a new consciousness of affection, love and compassion. Getting angry, getting into a temper, shouting at people, scream- ing at people is not going to help you much. If have to help the whole, the growth of the whole, try to make with yourself that you are losing tempers you yourself a milder and are so unkind to others. All the problems have come out of the over- growth of the masculinity – over-growth. It reaches a certain point, you see. It has reached such a wretched point now that it has to come down. person. Be you

 But also femininity, at a lower level without Realization, could be very, very small-hearted, chicken-hearted, could be all the time worried about her own child. That is what one has to change. It is to have love and affection for every Sahaja Yogi, for every person. When it comes to fighting others, you are all one. But among yourselves, you can look after each other. Changing the mode hope you have understood the whole thing. In a nutshell, it is that we have to change the whole mode. A radical change has to come in the society of Sahaja Yogis.... The problem comes in where you are not the whole.... If you are the whole, then who is the other...? In Sahaja Yoga you are all free to develop your sense of discretion. And once you develop your sense of discretion, gradually you will know what to do. In the beginning you will hurt, no doubt, because you are used to that. I have seen people here, just barking at each other.... But after Realization, do say because you feel concerned, you are worried. But you say in such a way that ACHIEVE you THE RESULTS achieve the result. you See, My point is that that is the criteria – that you should achieve the results.... First you think of being gentle, nice, embalming, sweet. Let's see, find out ways and methods. There is a very good way: in the evening, to write down “how many sweet things I've said today...." There are some very good words you can say, like “Are you warm enough?" – a very sweet way of asking a question. Then it is very simple... Looking after others' comforts – somebody is sitting, he wants water, awkwardly sitting. You just go, rush and give him water.... Immediately the In that reflection that you are Me, question comes into the head, little bit trying to do something here and there. in that reflection that the Mother Earth Or sometimes thinking, going in the market, you find something. "Oh, let is Me, in that beautiful creation me take it for him." Children do. I have seen children all the time, they think within you, you have to become of their friends, what they can buy for others.... Sometimes even a small thing very sensitive to the need of the world. like early in the morning you get up, you find another person is sleeping on one side, his blanket on the third side and his pillow in the fourth side, so Just like the Mother Earth cares for you, you just put his head on the pillow and cover him with the blanket. That is I also care for you. And just like as the a mother's job – not out of fear, but out of sheer love. Like even if it is cold Mother Earth loves you, I also love you. you know. and buttons are open, you can button up a person you like – little-little things Women have very little-sweet things which they do, which make men very happy. But women have lost now that sense, not the fighting, but think- ing of what sweet things you can do for him. And also, sometimes teasing is all right. Sometimes tickling is all right, but a kind of a sweet rapport between each other, even the feeling that we can do that. It is a master's job. The one who is a master can do it. Those who are not, will not be able to. They will CC CC again come back to hurt. Ultimately, they will land up with hurting or biting or coming to blows. But those who are masters will be so beautifully doing the whole job that you see a kind of a very sweet relationship. It is called madhurya – without any lust, without any money-business, anything – such sweet relationships. And the joy would be bubbling. All these perversions, all these things will drop off, but a very sweet relationship, all right? Even saying that, you are feeling happy. O 19

 20

 Strength The strength comes from within. Your spirit strengthens you. You must just put in your willpower, that "yes, let my spirit act." And then you start acting according to the spirit. And once you start acting according to the spirit, you find you have no slavery to anything. You become samarth. That means equal to your meaning. Samarth also means a powerful personality.

 genuine than genuineness qenui nen es s more BREEZE DIVΙΓΕC C OL DIVINE When you get your Realization, you start feeling the cool vibrations flowing from your hands. And these cool vibrations are the indication that the divine power has started flowing through you. Now these vibrations that you have are flowing through you like a cool breeze. They are absolutely genuine. They are much more genuine than genuineness.... Truth that is the basic thing cannot change. You cannot mould it. You cannot befool it. You cannot act it. When these vibrations are flowing from you-if there are no vibrations, then you are not there.... In Sahaja Yoga you have to gain. Nobody else has to gain. It is you who has to gain. So you have to be genuine about it. You cannot purchase it with money. You cannot hide it by any false means. You cannot kill it. It is eternal. 23

 IT IS A REALLY GREAT DAY FOR US TO FEEL VERY PROUD AND TO TALK TO EACH OTHER. Moreover, I think this marriage ceremony has not been performed before where so many realized souls have attended a wedding, so the grace of God has descended on it in such a beautiful way. It has many dimensions of purity and joy, very hard to explain beyond this feeling and understanding. It is really great. learn to ENJOY in marriage My only advice is that we must learn to enjoy. This capacity we have lost. That is the only thing we have left, the method of enjoyment. Everything is there. Just try to find out ways and methods of enjoyment so you will not get into arguments, will not try to criticize, will not try to find faults with each other. Just try to enjoy each other. Enjoyment comes out of whatever is good. Say if a fruit has got some part which is sour and some part is rotten, you take out same way, when you are dealing your partners and friends and other Sahaja Yogis, you must put your attention to the good points of other Sahaja Yogis and then you will imbibe those good points within part of the fruit which is all right and enjoy it. In the that with you. attention should be on good points because that is what is enjoyable in the other But your person. By seeing the bad points, you become a miserable creature and make the other fellow also miserable. By that, you do not help yourself, neither do you help the other person. So the best thing to do is to enjoy the best part with the others. You will be amazed. By that enjoyment, the other feels very secure, happy, joyous and, with that, goodness starts spreading to other parts of the body, to other parts of the being, to other give you the real insight into the understanding of others. If you cannot enjoy another person that means something is wrong with you, not with that person. After Realization especially, it should be very easy. Before Realization, of course, I do not say. That could be very difficult. But after Realization one should try to see the good points. Like in a room there is light, in the other room there is no light. So we take the light from one room to another, to another and another. We cannot bring light from the dark room. In the same way, we have to go, move from the part that is enjoyable to other parts and this has a very subtle effect – extremely subtle. When you start enjoying another person, he develops self-esteem and he tries to be enjoyable also. But the relationship between a husband and wife is very, very intimate. And the enjoy- ment should be maximum between them when they are Sahaja Yogis. But they should give up the old patterns of married life as they are – like the husband can do whatever he likes and he is free and the wife is free to do whatever she likes, she is on her own and he is on his own and nobody should object and that sort of a nonsensical life – because you of the mind and the whole can be made very beautiful. An enjoyment can parts are not on your own. You are part of the whole. You are all joined together. You all have to work in such a way that you feel that unity within yourself. You see, what one does not realize is that we cannot be on our own. Your freedom is in enjoying the freedom of others, not abandonment. After Realization the freedom lies in understanding the freedom of others, not your own freedom, so-called. That is how get over your aggressiveness. And for small, small things, for things, a Sahaja Yogi is not going to argue because he has found out something so high, so absolute.... you will petty things, for useless 24

 For example, a non-Sahaja Yogi comes to a room which is decorated by a wife. Now he Try to eniov comes and says, "Oh, I don't like this colour.... Why did you put that? And this could have been cheaper," some sort of thing like that. Or a wife can do the same. But when a Sahaja Yogi each marries a non-Sahaja Yogi, he says, "Do you like it? Then I like it. Did you like it? Really, you liked it, then I like it. If you have liked it, I would like. Whatever you believe, I will believe into it." This “I believe, I believe, I like" – these words go away.... CC other Sahaja Yogis do not think. We are beyond thinking. So you should say, "I enjoy being with you. I enjoy being your wife" or your husband. Our terminology has to change because now we have become the seekers of joy, not of misery. Whole priorities must be changed in life. How to please others should be the priority, how to make the other person feel the trust, how much can you give and not take. Who outbeats the other in giving? Who is more generous between the two...? This is a very subtle thing one should understand for which one should ask for wisdom, that you are not pampering the ego of the person because you know what is ego. But if you think by saying something it hurts another Sahaja Yoga takes its own course and works out all those corrections. You do not have to about correcting others, but just enjoying others. That you leave to Me. That is My job. If you just enjoy each other and love each other, see how really I return all My love. That is all I want – that, as I have loved, you have to love each other with all your heart and will, all your soul, without expecting any return except the feeling that you have loved. May God bless this marriage and all other marriages that are going to come forward. As a mother, it is so fulfilling. Now I can retire gradually. I think I can. The great souls are going to be born, so we must await their coming. That is why it is necessary to establish a good relationship and harmony because we have to all work together, not separately on our own. not say. person, better worry London 4 July 1980

 R. ALEM And did those feet in ancient time WILLIAM BLAKE Walk upon England's mountains green? THOUGHT And was the holy Lamb of God On England's pleasant pastures seen? OF YOU And did the Countenance Divine Shine forth upon our clouded hills? And was Jerusalem builded here Among these dark Satanic Mills? Bring me my bow of burning gold! Bring me my arrows of desire! Bring me my spear! O clouds, unfold! Bring me my chariot of fire! | will not cease from mental fight, Nor shall my sword sleep in my hand, Till we have built Jerusalem In England's green and pleasant land. It shows how William Blake thought of you people. He represents that hope for England in this poem that I had about you people. As I have told you that England is the heart and the heart has to be first of all established, otherwise Sahaja Yoga is not going to be established.... He could see the vision very clearly and he said that England has to become the Jeru- salem. In the Sanskrit language it is called as teevtha. Teevtha means a pilgrimage place, a place where pilgrims come in. And this indication here of this poem, which is so beauti- fully written by William Blake, shows that he saw the vision of Sahaja Yoga prospering in England in this beautiful manner. But as it is, this heart is so materially bound. There is so much of materialism that has come into our veins even. And we have to realize that we have to get it out of our mind, out of our body. It has gone into us so much, the materialistic approach towards life, that we have to really take a strong action against it. It is so much that anybody who comes to this country also becomes materialistic. Imagine the heart becoming a matter. Think of the heart becoming a stone...

 clouds unfold Guru Puja 1981 S bring me my chariot of fire Materialism My desire is only one. And that is that you all should become gurus your- self.... But when you join Me, you have to realize that have to really transform yourself. You have to know that you are, first of all, realized souls, which also very few people really realize and are aware, that they are realized souls. They are not the other mundane type of people, ordinary people. They are realized souls. So as it is, they have to get out of this shell in which they have been living, the ideas of securities, that have so far come to you all from materialism. If you study yourself correctly, everything is trickling down to you that is materialism. How many people read William Blake? How many understand him and how many believe in him? And then how many follow him? He is a lost poet of this country. After getting Realization, unless and until the people of Eng- land understand that they have to completely transform themselves into a new awareness of understanding, that you are now realized souls, you are part and parcel of the whole and you are aware of it. Firstly, materialism crawls into you in so many ways. Because there has been an industrial revolution, people have created many things. Matter has been comforting you and you got used to matter. You just cannot do without it.... By this over-preservation of yourself and by this domination of matter upon yourself, you have really become delicate darlings, absolutely delicate darlings... Gradually try to give up certain things that you think so important in life. Try – one day it may pain, second day it may pain – because unless and until you you make a really great effort to get rid of the materialistic body and mind, you cannot be all right. And this is the biggest stumbling block for the western seekers. You have to get out of that cocoon, as I said. The whole transmutation has to take place.... Now you have to change. You have to come out of it. You have to stand out and see for yourself that you are no more one of these mad people who run after matter. And you leave each and every thing, every particle of it here and die. Again you are born. Again you are doing the same thing. You have to run away from comfort. You must learn how to overcome your comforts. You must train your body – a little noise here and there. Englishmen, I am saying “Englishmen" because we are in England. Americans are much worse. Any noise, fifty percent would die with any blasting they hear, just by hearing. They are so sensitive. I mean they have made their bodies, their everything, so sensitive that they are really dainty darlings... 27

 CLOUDS UNFOLD To be great gurus "Bring me my bow of burning gold. Bring me my arrows of desire." What is going to happen? You have no answer. "Bring me my spear. Oh, clouds unfold. Bring me my chariot of fire." Of fire? You cannot sit even on a chariot, really, because it shakes and you have to hold it tight and you have to stand erect with it. "I will not cease from mental fight nor shall my sword sleep in my hand till we have built Jerusalem in England's green and pleasant land." I think better give swords into everybody's hand. Let's see how many can hold it straight. You see, Sahaja Yoga is not a simple thing like dishwashing. It is a very serious thing and on certain things you are very well equipped, but on certain things where you are not equipped, that must be sustained. strong points are your strong points, so forget about them. Whatever are your weak points, hit them there. Mentally you are very well equipped. If I have to argue with you I will give up. I really cannot because you are very knowledgeable people. You have read all the books of the world. You are over-read. You are too great. But as far as your body is concerned, your body is a slave of matter. In a way, your mind is also a slave of matter. So to understand that we have to be great gurus, first of all a guru has to go great discipline of self-emancipation. Great discipline is needed.... One has to realize that to overcome this material drag upon yourself, you have to work it out on yourself. Then once you have controlled this, minimum of minimum, then you can sleep anywhere you feel like. Try to sleep on the ground for a while. That you may do for sun-tanning, and people cannot resist all this nonsense because these are ideas put into YOU HAVE TO BE MY Your PROTOTYPE TOTTFE through a you. They have exploited you. They have told you that this should be done, that should be done, this is necessary, that is necessary. They have to sell their goods. Try to sometimes fast. I have prohibited Indians from fasting because what they do is to fast. At the slightest pretext they fast. I mean, as it is, there is a dearth of food in India, so they fast. What is the need for them to fast? But here it is necessary that people should learn to fast and should not get attracted towards food so much. I mean the attraction towards food also is a sign that your senses are just driving you mad, isn't it? Think of it. Now separate yourself from your senses and see how it drives you mad. First of all the body, then the senses we should attack. The biggest enemy we have is our own tongue. It acts in two ways. One is the taste – the food, taste. And the second way it attacks is the we talk. Either we do not talk or when we talk we just hit. We cannot be kind. We cannot be compassionate. We cannot communicate our heart to anyone. Control your tongue.... Try to change. Try to make your speech a sweet one. Make it a beautiful one, attractive. You cannot be a guru in Sahaja Yoga, I can tell you, with a sharp tongue.... You have a guru who is a mother. I never hit you. I do not think I have hit anyone of you. You got your Realization. In all My compassion I looked after you. I have given you compassion. I have never asked for anything, nor have I complained for anything or grudged for anything. I have been extremely, extremely, extremely patient with you. way have to be My prototype. You are a guru in Sahaja Yoga in this Maha Yoga. You So you are not a guru of this type who can only create one disciple in twenty-one thousand years. You have got the knowledge of Kundalini much more than any one of these gurus have powers much more than any one of these gurus have. Indiscriminately got. You have the this power has been given to you. Now only those who will come up and grow as proper trees will be called as gurus. And that is why one has to know how to grow properly as a guru. First of all, you must give up all materialistic attitude towards Sahaja Yoga...

 The humility of the guru You have to learn humility. First of all, you have to be humble people. Unless GREATNESS IS IN and until you have a large heart, you can never humble down. You have to be an extremely humble person. Humility does not mean that you bow to a person who is dominating. It never means that. But it means a strength within you. The person who is weak can never be humble. He can never bear the load like this Mother Earth bears our load so well because She is so great. HUMILITY AND SWEETNESS You have to be strong enough within yourself to bear the load of your disciples, of people who try to follow you. Humility should be that "I was like them, absolutely like them. I was nothing. Without Sahaja Yoga what was I?" I mean you may be the governor of some place – all right, so what? Before God's eyes what are you? Nothing, nobody knows who you are. You may be having cars and anything. You might be a very educated, anything. What does it matter in the name of God? You have known that saints have not been so educated. Christ never went to any university, did He? All these ideas that we have got of our greatness must be absolutely made zero. The greatness is in humility and sweetness. Speak something that will be dear to others, that would be appealling to them in a proper discriminating diplomatic manner. Some people in the name of honesty just are sadistic or useless. You can talk to people nicely, say something in such a way that they feel attracted towards you, that they feel that there is complete humility, that you accept them as they are because you want to give to them.... Sahaja Yoga depends on you more than it depends on Me. You have to change. You have to change yourself very much more. Just by taking up some sort of a role or assuming something great, you are not going to progress at all. 29

 CLOUDS UNFOLD Supposing a little bush says, "I am a tree." Will it become a tree? Supposing it behaves like a tree, will it become a tree? It has to become the tree. Then there is no need to behave. You are a tree. A woman walks like a woman and a man walks like a man. If you behave like a woman, will you become a woman? It has to be innate. It has to be within us. If you are a guru, you are a guru anybody can see and say, “Ah that's a guru." Then you can do lots of things. We are not willing to give up these things. That is why we go on catching on the same point.. Decide today that we are going to change ourselves completely. Let us start on the changing. We meet others, we greet others, talk to them. We should be able to talk. There are some people who just do not know how to talk.... You must talk, open out. What is there to have fear? Humility does not mean fear. It means complete love. You must talk, open out, be interesting. Try to do something for others. I have been saying this again and again. You have to all become gurus. I am just a mother. And Mother is the first and the last everyone. That is how I am your guru and I am the Guru of all the gurus. But to become your own guru. And for that, you have to think that have to hold swords in your hand – not only to hold swords in your hand, you have teach others to hold the swords. What should be the character of that man who has to guide others? If he himself cannot hold the sword in his hand, what is he going to teach to others? You just tell Me that – a simple question. At least you should have that personality that can hold the sword CC for guru have you you in the hand.... You are asking, but now you have to face. You have to give. This asking is over now, finished. You have got everything. You are not aware you have got everything now within yourself. Just reverse the position and you can give to others. But if you are hankering still, worried about these nonsensical things, then nobody is going to respect you. The detachment of the guru I would suggest one thing: take to detachment. In a way be a sanyasa, absolutely a san- yasa. You know I am a sanyasi. Though I live in a household and all that, I am not both- ered about things. I am a sanyasi. But the day I will announce that I have taken a sanyasa, people will be much more impressed by Me than they are today. If a person is over-attached to things – attached to money, attached to this, that and all those things – such a person is not going to impress others in spiritual matters. You can be a nice prime minister of England, but you have no place in Sahaja Yoga if you do not have TAKE TO DETACHMENT of detachment. That does not mean that you become hippies by any chance - a way not at all. But it means that you become detached. Specially it is very important for you to develop that – a detachment. Detach yourself from things that you are supposed to be possessing. I can tell you, you cannot take anything with you.... Then why are you attached? All kinds of disgraceful behaviour ensues when you are attached. Become a sanyasi. It does not mean you wear that yellow or red and all kinds of horrible dresses, but from inside you become a sanyasi. That is the best way you conquer your void.... Surrendering is the best way.... You must surrender completely, blindly you can say. Just jump into it. Do not reason it out – complete surrendering. Once you have done that, you will be surprised how you will be so blessed with the powers of a guru, that you will rise to heights and will do all that William Blake has said because it is like a drop submerging into the ocean and becoming the ocean. And you know the ocean is the not a drop. It is the ocean and the ocean has everything in it. So we have to learn from the ocean to be the ocean by becoming the ocean yourself. you guru,

 The Sahaj guru I have told you in many ways how it is important that we have to have many gurus of Sahaja Yoga. But if Sahaja fails, it fails because of Sahaja Yogis, not because of Me – always.... You are the reflection of Sahaja Yoga. You are the mirrors, not Me. You have to reflect Sahaja Yoga. So first of all, you have to become good reflectors, the good gurus.... You can also [raise the Kundalini] just through your character and through abilities as Sahaja Yogis, which are tremendous. Even those who are great in India cannot raise the Kundalini the way you can raise. Under their your gurus finger – they cannot believe it. It is Shri Ganesha's powers you have got. Look at the surrendering of Shri Ganesha. Look at His surrendering, completely surrendered to His Mother. Who is wiser than Him? And in His wisdom, He has chosen complete surrender to His Mother. To Him, His Mother is Guru, She is Brahma, Vishnu, Mahesha everything, even Sadashiva is Her, His Mother, nothing else. And His power of Kundalini raising is within you. You have it. You are made after His power. He is holiness. He is auspi- cious. He is innocence. got has to be innocent, has to be an innocent person. His innocence guru can be crafty – but innocence should be crafty, he should not be crafty. Inno- cence is the power which works the craftiness. It is the Krishna shakti. It does. It works out. Suddenly you face it. You try anything, it will be there. And He depends on His powers and not on His own methods of maneuvering things. YOU WITHOUT But how many of you are religiously working it out morning, evening, every moment of life? How many of you are thinking that we are on the path of becoming full-fledged gurus of Sahaja Yoga and nothing else? You are noth- ing else but that. How many of you decide like that every moment? WHAT ARE SAHAJA YOGA? It is very easy just to say, "Oh, it's all right. I don't believe in it." Then what are you going to do? What are you without Sahaja Yoga? Think of it. You can say, "I don't want to do it." You will have to do it. You are in it now. You better do it. You have to do it fast. For heaven's sake, better do it fast. Achieve it. You have all the powers. Believe Me, you have all the powers. Believe Me, you are better than all these gurus put together. But be humble. Do not talk big. And do not become silent bores.... You have to be interesting. You have to be dynamic. You should know some stories here and there. You have to make them laugh. They should enjoy you. This is Sahaja Yoga guruship. You see, for such boring gurus, one or two would stick on if they are equally boring or more boring. But such gurus are not going to help us in Sahaja Yoga. They are not. You have to be joyous, cheerful, helpful, understanding, concerned. You have to be concerned about others. You have to behave in a way that they feel that you CC are the security for them... You have to be a tree which makes others into trees and not to make grow them dwarfs under it. You see, no grass can even grow under such trees, let alone trees. Even the grass cannot grow if the trees are of this type. So you should be actually the tree of brilliance, of sun, the sun's rays. From the you should flow and they should grow, not to obstruct every growth of your disciples. What sort of a guru could he be whose disciples are all toddlers or still sucking their thumbs? So you should be a guru of a calibre that makes sun's rays others grow too. 31

 CLOUDS UNFOLD I have hopes that My disciples will grow more than I am. I have hopes we will see that. That is My desire. That is what I want, that My disciples should grow. I mean that will be My pride. Like Ganesha grew more than His own Mother who created Him. That is what is My desire. And that is what I want you to realize, that you are the hope of the world... You have to be so strong, that nothing should make you frightened. And such a person is the most benevolent personality. He is not frightened of anyone. Why should REAL IS THE WORD he harm anyone? Today I hope you people really do not listen to My lecture, but put it in your heart and understand that you have to become very dignified, majestic gurus of this uni- verse. I would like to ask William Blake what is he doing. When is he going to take his birth on this Earth...? The good of this country should be taken, whatever is good in it, and transform this country into a beautiful thing. I mean if you really love this country, then create it into a lovable place. You must try to destroy all that is retarding the progress, the spiritual progress of this country if you are a real Eng- lishman. Real is the word. You should not be proud of all the weaknesses that have crawled up in all these hills and dales. All unholy thoughts, all inauspicious behaviours, all must be discarded. We are not that.

 You become a completely free bird . then it becomes your job to achieve your flight. One flight is up to the thoughtless awareness. The second one is up to the doubtless awareness. And the third one is to God's Realization. PHOTOS cover and page 1: Belgium 1985 (Colin Heinsen) Page 9: Shri Mataji in India (Avdut Pai) page 10 and 16: Mother Earth Puja 1983 page 20: music program in Sangli India, date uncertain (Gregoire de Kalbermatten) page 22: India circa 1990 (Colin Heinsen) pages 27, 29, 31 and 32: Guru Puja 1981 this page and back cover: delta of the Danube River near Murighiol Romania (Mircea Sorin) THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE www.divinecoolbreeze.org SUBSCRIPTIONS: contact@divinecoolbreeze.org WORDS CONTENT: contents page: 30 December 1987 page 2: Christmas Puja 1994 and Diwali Puja 1983 page 8: Shri Ganesha Puja 1993 pages 12 to 19 editor@divinecoolbreeze.org PRINTED BY King Printing Company Inc. Lowell Massachusetts USA and Shri Adi Shakti Puja 1997 page 21: 4 February 1983 side quotes: page 23: 16 July 1979 this page: Shivaratri Puja 1996 back cover: Shivaratri Puja 1995 Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. Pune Maharashtra India

 This pure spirit within us is the reflection of God Almighty Sadashiva. It is like the sun that falls on the water and gives a clear reflection.



----------------------

2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
2011 issue 5 – volume twenty-four number five
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-1.txt 
 BREEZE
The Divine Cool
The whole thing is to be
understood in totality,
that we are Sahaja Yogis,
we have a purpose,
we have come here
to learn something
from each other
and from ourselves.
I AM WITH YOU 2
OUTER LIFE BECOMES INNOCENT 6
MOTHERING EARTH 10
STRENGTH FROM WITHIN 20
BREEZE COOL AND DIVINE 22
LEARN TO ENJOY IN MARRIAGE 24
CLOUDS UNFOLD 26
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Recognition does not mean that you recognize Me as Adi Shakti,
but recognition means that in every part of your life
you should know that I am with you.
| am with
|am
In the morning you get up, have your bath, sit down, take some tea.
Don't talk, don't talk, don't talk in the morning. Sit down, meditate
because that time, may be whatever, maybe your timing is easier, no
difference to Me. I am with you. But that is the best time because at
that time the sun comes afterwards. Before that, the divine rays come
in. That is how the birds get up. That is how the flowers get up. They
are all awakened by that. And if you are sensitive, you will also feel that,
by getting up in the morning, you will look at least ten years younger.
Really it is such a good thing to get up in the morning.
WI
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-4.txt 
 you
nO.
3.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-5.txt 
 You have everything within you. You are the
storehouse of chastity, which is your power.
Everything is within you. Nothing has gone
out. It is all there. All that fragrance is within
you. It is all preserved. Do not condemn
yourself. And
to tell you all about it. You are so fortunate
I am with
point? Shri Ganesha Puja 1984
you are so fortunate I am here
understand that
you. Do
you
You will take it over from Me.... I am with
you. You know that, but it need not be in
this body because I do not know if I exist in
this body or not. Sahasrara Puja 1984
One should not have all these inhibitions or
those fears about Me – at least, when I am
you. I am your Mother. You can tell
Me everything and I have to work it out.
27 February 1992 Sydney
with
As long as you have a deep axis, you are with
Me, I am with you, absolutely one with each
other.... This widening comforts you. That is
the comforting thing and that really makes
so comfortable in any circumstance,
in any position, in any lifestyle and you do
not want to have other comfort. And
this one has to develop through meditative
effort. Surya Puja 1998
any
14
I have loved you. That is why I am with
you.... Please listen to Me. I am your Mother
and still
all are My children, whether
you
you are ninety or a hundred does not matter.
In this respect, you are all My children and
you have to listen to Me. Get to your joy, get
to your happiness and get to the key of your
being. 28 January 1980 Bordi
Compassion just flows. It does not say anything.
Even if you do not see Me, even if you are in the hospital, you know I am with
you.
It works. Even if you just think of Me it works.
Even if you make a mistake, you know Mother will forgive.
That is compassion.
March 1987 London
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-6.txt 
 You feel that dearth or that kind of a gap within yourself which forces you to seek some-
thing. And great seekers were born in the West or in the East. Today I am facing you.
I am with you. So for all practical purposes, I am a Britisher and a western person because
we have to face the problem as we are. 8 July 1980 Oxted
Christ could not tolerate insult or any kind of a neglect of His Mother. He Himself
has said that this will not be tolerated. In the same way, you people also, if you are only
for that, I am with you. I am absolutely with
feeling of guilt or anything within yourself. When you understand that whatever you are
doing, you are doing with complete sincerity, with complete understanding. Even if you
make mistakes, it does not matter. The mistake will bring forth something lacking. But
you have to be extremely sincere. This feeling should be within you. Easter Puja 1991
any
do not have
you, that
any more the
Wherever you are together, I am with you. But when you are away from each other, I am
not with you. Only in difficulties, when you are pushed into some places where I am not
there, where you think I am not there, I am there. But if you deliberately are keeping out
of collectivity, I am not with you. So try to grow your collectivity, otherwise you cannot
go deep into your own depths, you cannot become a great Sahaja Yogi, you cannot really
be called a Sahaja Yogi. Those who have a sense of collectivity can only become that.
Virata Puja 1991
You have to humble yourself. By seeing your past, whatever mistakes we have committed,
I am with you in this – not to feel guilty. It is very embarrassing, but please try to face
yourself. We have to face ourselves as we are. Navaratri Puja 1982
Whether you have seen Me or not, I am with you. And also I am pleased with some
people, those who have love for Me. Guru Puja 1985
What about the present? I am with you.... All religions were built for this day, that
get your Realization to give you the balance, to give you that property by which you
ascend. 28 November 1985 London
you
Now I am with you, I have to give you Realization. 27 March 1981
I am always with you. Whenever you think of Me, you will know I am with you.... There
is nothing to feel that I am away from you.... As you trust Me, you trust yourself. You
must trust yourself. You must have faith in yourself that you are quite capable and you
can do it. You can do it and there are people who will help you. They are very humble,
sweet, beautiful people. You will like them and they will all help you until you become
perfect – such love, I tell you. 10 August 1990 Vancouver
Lam with you
May God bless
you.
5
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-7.txt 
 The inner being can be charged with the energy of Shri Ganesha
The outer life becomes innocent
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-8.txt 
 • Children should not be exposed to the public. We should not try to make photographs
out of our children and expose them in the newspaper or give them for advertisement or
anything there. It is a very wrong idea to expose your children to gain some money out
of them in any way – in the smallest way also – because we are selling the innocence, the
innocence which is invaluable, writ large on the children.
Shri Ganesha Puja 1993
• Some people are only worried about their own children. If anything happens to them,
they just get upset. That means you are respecting your child because he is your child. But
if you are respecting him because he carries innocence with him, then you have to respect
every child and understand every child – what they say, how they behave. Luckily, you all
have
children now who are born-realized. It is such a great thing, such a blessing.
got
• This innocence also gives you a power of self-understanding. You know where you
stand. A person who is innocent knows very well that he is standing on the pedestal of
virtues. He should not give in to all kinds of nonsensical things which are very popular,
may be fashionable, may be accepted. For what? For what are we going to sacrifice our
innocence? What is our gain?
• One should understand a difference between a protocol and ritualism. An innocent
child knows the protocol... For innocent children, the worship is everything. It is not
ritualistic. It is heartfelt. You feel it from the heart, how to do the worship, how to show
WO
does it.
your love. It is a very sweet way an innocent
person
• If you do it with your open heart, innocently, anything is all right. It is the open heart
which is necessary, not the closed heart.... You are in the Kingdom of God and here there
are no such rules and regulations that you should be ritualistic.
We kill our children's innocence by putting materialistic ideas into their heads.... It is the
whole tradition of materialism which has brought this innocence to a stop. Then a child
starts growing in the same materialistic way. He starts judging people.. This is what is
now the mind of people in the West who have grown up. But even the children today they
want this, tomorrow they want that. All the time there is a competition for materialistic
things, asking for this, asking for that. Just imagine what a race will be there after some
years when there will be just people who will be only worried about collecting things and
buying things. I mean buyers and sellers, nothing else.
The
open
heart is
necessary.
NeCESsar
• Be very careful with your children that you do not pamper them, do not get too much
worried about them, do not keep them on a materialistic level. Find out. If they are going
on a materialistic level, bring them down. It is very simple to do that and one has to work
it out because we have to save our children and their innocence.
People will be enamoured by your innocence, no doubt, they will be surprised how
are so innocent. How can you be so nice in these modern times...? Try to be innocent
yourself. It should not be cunning. You should not be smart. You should not try to show
that you are very brilliant or anything because the ego might, in between, come and try
to put ideas into your head. It is better to show that you are innocent and to be innocent
inside. The whole inner being can be really charged with the energy of Shri Ganesh, no
doubt, and the outer life becomes innocent. It becomes innocent.
you
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Innocence should
be respected,
looked after,
nourished
and protected.
That is why I am
very particular
about the children.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-10.txt 
 4%
9.
1081
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-11.txt 
 MOTHERING
To say something about the connection of Sahaja Yoga with this
Mother Earth, it is very important that we must understand the
value of the Mother Earth. She has been very kind to all of you. She
has been sucking your vibrations... She has given you everything
that you see around. So today we have to understand the connec-
tion and the symbolic expression of the Mother Earth within our-
selves.
I have told you before also that the Kundalini, which is in three
and a half coils, is placed within a triangular bone. Now this abode
of the Kundalini is called as Muladhara and is represented in the
kumbba: a vase or pot
symbolic of the womb universe as this Mother Earth. Or in the puja it is represented as
yagya: a ritual sacrifice
performed to please God the kumbha...
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-12.txt 
 MOTHER EARTH PUJA 1983
FARTHbecome one with the whole
So far, in the movement of our consciousness, we have been trying to
understand the God Almighty and all other five elements that we call
as important. And also, the consciousness has been moving towards the
understanding of all the other four elements but the Mother Earth. That
had to be such because unless and until the understanding of all these four
other elements are brought to a certain degree, the Mother Earth cannot
express itself. Like if all your chakras, four chakras, are caught up, you
cannot raise the Kundalini, you cannot give Self Realization. You cannot
have a mass evolutionary process done. That is why we had yagyas, all
other methods of exciting the four elements. They worshipped the water
and they worshipped air, the sky, the firmament, the light. And that is
how they came up to the time of Christ where light was worshipped.
11
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-13.txt 
 MOTHERING EARTH
The
of Aquarius
age
Today, when we are in this modern Sahaja Yoga, we are actually at the level of the Mother
Earth because this is the of the Aquarius. And Aquarius is the same as the kumbha. It
is the Mother Earth. So we are at the level of the Mother Earth.
You can also see in the consciousness of human beings – I am saying not only men, but
women also and men – the consciousness is moving more towards the feminine expres-
OF sion of life. But as stupid as human beings are, the feminists also have been
age
THIS IS
THE AGE
very stupid,
that they are fighting on the level of rationality, of economics, of politics – all useless
things...
The Mother's development, the feminine development is not equality in the
the men have been stupid. There is no use competing with men in their stupidity. The
amount of stupidity has been created already for us quite sufficiently. The whole world
is today expressing that nonsense that they have – the competition, the aggression, the
oppression. So the other side of the woman, which was called as the dominated one, the
dark side, the oppressed and all that has to express itself in a different way. The whole
mode, the style has to change.
See now, in Christianity one should understand why Christianity – even Judaism, any
religion, even Hinduism and all that, but it is more in Christianity – surprisingly they just
had no place for Mary. And Muslims even crowned it by completely cancelling Fatima.
And on top of that, you will see that among Christians, I think that ordination is not
given to the women – while Christ was not born of a man. But that does not in any way
mean that you compete with men in their foolish enterprises by which they have practi-
cally brought this world to such a ruinous state.
AQUARIUS things.
way
For meditation, if you can The motherly qualities
sit on the Mother Earth, Today we have to understand that it is the time for the motherly qualities to develop. Even
it will be extremely good a man, when he becomes motherly only, becomes a great man. Like Christ, when he had
because the special quality compassion, He was called as a saint. So the quality of a woman as a Mother-Goddess is
of the Mother Earth ... always as a mother. And She is the power most important to ignite Sahaja Yoga.
She sucks your problems.
Now how She ignites, I will tell you. I will give an analogy, but the analogy should not
be carried too far. As wise Sahaja Yogis, you should not carry it too far. Say there is a zero.
It has no meaning. In the same way, God Almighty has no meaning until you put some
sort of one or two before it. It is a zero. It has an existence, but it has no capacity or power
to express itself. So it is a zero. Like that we should say the masculine growth is a zero.
Another analogy I will give you to understand it, that if you see very high power wires
going over your head, they are absolutely harmless. There is no trouble... Until this high
power thing is connected with the earth it has no meaning at all. But the Earth is very
different from this dynamic power that is flowing through those wires, which are zero,
which means nothing.
In the same way, in a woman, the womb of a woman is the Kundalini. Now what
That
is a womb? Now if that is the Kundalini, that expresses the Kundalini in the
gross.
means the Mother Earth is also like the womb. Now what does a womb do? It receives
the sperm, which is just a frivolous act of man or you can say just an aggression and she
then nourishes, looks after it, corrects it and allows it to grow – not in an aggressive way,
but in a very compassionate and a sensible way until it is expelled out of the womb when
it is grown up.
So the idea of the womb is that the expression has to be in such a manner that it does
not dominate, it does not dominate the embryo. If it dominates, how can it grow? So it
nourishes it and makes it grow.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Becoming one with the whole
This is what today's Sahaja Yoga is, that now the Mother Earth is the one
who is symbolized within you as the Muladhara, as symbolized as the Adi
Shakti here, who is sitting down before you to nourish you, to make you
grow into new personalities, into mature personalities. This concept we
must understand.
So the women of the West must understand that the nonsensical ideas
they have taken from men must be completely discarded. They have to
become women first. Those women who just are talking like men can never
help in Sahaja Yoga. They have to be like this Mother Earth who allows
you to do what
stupid to exploit Her to the maximum. Not only that, but also She bears a
lot of nonsense upon Herself. But then a time reaches where She becomes She is just made out of nothing
explosive. Then She starts consuming people inside Herself. And when
She is consuming people, then you see the earthquakes and droughts and how She is conscious,
this and that. All these things start coming in and people get engulfed into how She is particular,
these problems, which they blame Mother Earth for that. The problems how She works it out,
that human beings have created out of an aggressive nature, even aggression how She is attentive,
towards the Mother Earth, they have to a pay a dividend for that. And they how She is careful.
are paying.
Now to stop this kind of a movement of aggressiveness, which brings If we do not know how
all kinds of disturbances, one has to recede back and should develop the
sense of totality, of compassion. Unless and until you understand totality, we do not know how
the total, the complete, the whole, that is the womb that is your Mother, as
long as you try to be individualistic, you cannot be a good Sahaja Yogi. You
have to become one with the whole.
like with Her. I mean you human beings have been so
See this Mother Earth,
you
how She knows Her responsibility.
but soils and mud, but look at Her,
to respect the Mother Earth.
to respect ourselves.
Now we have to face ourselves for that. Very important it is. Especially
in the West, I would say we have to face ourselves very clearly. What are
we up to? That is a very important thing. First of all, let us see where is our
ир
attention. Ask a question. We are Sahaja Yogis and Sahaja Yogis within our
fold and I am sometimes surprised that even now the attention can be very
funny. Like a simple thing, like we can have attention on material things -
“this is mine, this is yours, that I should have my privacy" – then you are
into another realm of aggressiveness. If you try to have your own pri-
CC
gone
vacy, then you are depriving others of their privacy.
It was all right when you were not Sahaja Yogis to have your privacy
because you had to grow in your privacy at that time. But after Sahaja Yoga,
you have to become one with everyone else. That is very important. Before
Sahaja Yoga you were different and after Sahaja Yoga you are different. The
whole concept must change after Sahaja Yoga, that now you have become
one with the whole. And to feel that you are one with the whole, should
try to give up all your individualistic attitudes...
How can I say that I like some thing? Think of a mother who has to
you
bear the child, has to give birth to a child, has to look after the child, the
needs of the child, protect the child, train the child. How can she say, "I like
this" and "I like that"? Where is the time? To think what like and what
you don't like, “I like this food, I like that food," where is the time? Where
is the left for that? Where is the attention? The attention is on the
you
energy
13
upbringing of the child.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-15.txt 
 MOTHERING EARTH
The growth of the spirit
In the same way, a Sahaja Yogi must know that the child within him is born
the spirit. The spirit is the child which has been born within him. Now
he has to nourish through the Kundalini. He has to water it. He has to look
after it. He has to make it grow. Now where is the time for other nonsensi-
cal things?
You have a child in hand. You are all mothers looking after
That is your spirit. So where do you have time for all these things? What the
attention should be is "What can I do to make this child happy, to make this
YOU HAVE
child.
your
TO MOTHER
grow, to make this child completely manifest my Self." The mother
replaces herself as soon as the child becomes a mature child.
child
YOUR CHILD
So now, in you
hood – motherhood towards yourself. The attitude should be like a mother
the motherh0ood must take over more than the father-
towards the child. How is her attention towards the child? You can see in
every day-to-day life how we behave...
Dedication can only be developed if you realize that you have to mother
your child. Now if the mother is ugly, the child will be ugly too because
it is the mother who is expressed in the child. She does not dominate the
child, but she definitely can corrupt the image of the child. And that is what
exactly happens when we, the Sahaja Yogis, are not bothered as to look after
our spirit and our spiritual growth...
In Sahaja Yoga it is not a child which is an individual child
look after. One should understand, this is where we miss
It was very important
first to create
a very holy Mother Earth
for human beings to be born on.
have to
you
much,
espe-
very
cially by the intellectuals. They think it is their own child which should be
all right. It does not matter about others' children – or does not matter if
you have a connection with others or not. It is very common because, in the
rationality, it gives them that sense, "Oh, my spirits are all right, my vibra-
tions are all right, so it is all right if I do not go to puja or if I do not go to
any collective thing or if I do not support in any collective work or if I do
not take any responsibility of Sahaja Yoga."
Once you become collective,
satisfied with yourself, "that is good, that I need not take up any responsibil-
ity, all the Sahaja Yogis are bad or some of them are bad, I have nothing to
do with them...."
It is not understood
by human beings
how they are connected
CC
to this Mother Earth.
This Kundalini passed
through different centres,
creating different centres
in the Mother Earth
and ultimately broke
through Kailasha.
you take responsibilities. So you are over-
But in Sahaja Yoga, as it is, the motherhood is universal because if you
are the nose, say, then somebody is the eye. If you are the ears, somebody
is the lips. So it is essential for you to understand that if anybody who is
a Sahaja Yogi is in trouble, you are in trouble. It is threat to your growth.
It is a threat to your growth because it is the whole that is growing.... You
must worry about the whole. And you have to take up the responsibility.
Those who do not take up the responsibility are not the people who have yet
matured their child. That is the spirit. Every type of responsibility that you
can take, think of what responsibilities you can take. One has to understand
that the child is your responsibility. You have to look after the child. And the
whole is also your responsibility.
Now, how to establish the connection between your spirit or keep the
connection on between the spirit and the womb or the Kundalini is the big-
gest problem that we all face – that our connections are very loose and that
is why this Kundalini cannot look after the spirit.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Feminine and masculine
I wonder if you have noticed one thing in Sahaja Yoga, that you can manoeu-
vre the Kundalini, but not the spirit. You can raise your hand, the Kundalini
will move. You can manoeuvre it. You can give it a bandhan. It will
and around and around. But what about the spirit? You cannot manoeuvre
around
go
it. There is only one mantra to awaken the spirit in the sense that to please
him you have to say you are the spirit. But you cannot manoeuvre it. You
have to bring in the Kundalini to look after it. You have to take the Kundalini
there, to the heart, so that this child, which is the little offspring, just now has
to be carefully developed and matured.
So on both the sides of men or women, we have to understand that if The way we insult our Mother Earth,
you are a man and if you are a dominating man, it is all right. But if you are a what we are doing is we are insulting
woman and if you are dominating, then it is a difficult thing for Sahaja Yoga the Adi Shakti. So many ways there are
to cure you because you have lost your quality of being a woman. At least you we should respect the Mother Earth.
have to be a woman to begin with. If you are not even a woman, then what
can you do with these third persons who are neither man nor woman?
Now the men, when they are dominating, they have to understand that when you got up from your bed and you
they have to be compassionate. They have to be kind, they have to be con- touched the Mother Earth with your
siderate, but never subservient – never subservient. This is one you should feet, you have to say, "Oh, Mother Earth,
understand, that
have to be is to be great, large, receptive, receiving and nourishing all that.... touching You with my feet."
This is one of the biggest problems of the West today, that men are nei-
ther men and women are not women. I find the quality so horrid that I do
not know how to deal with the mixtures. You must understand this very
simple thing in life, that if you are a hybrid stuff, you cannot have the quality
of a Sahaja Yogi. If you mix it up, it is a very funny thing, isn't it? So a woman
It was an Indian custom to begin with,
should not be subservient. Now the women, what they please forgive me because I'm
you
must try to be a woman and a man must try to be a man.
Now see what is the situation of a man as a masculine effect on the
development of consciousness? So as the manliness was expressed we have
developed science. We have developed all this knowledge, all these things IS
EVERYTHING
READY
which are outside. Now everything is ready. Now the woman has to come
up. I mean, I am saying in the very abstract way, do not think of women, but
you can say the feminine. The feminine nature has to rise now. Now every-
thing is ready. It has to just spark. All the chakras are ready. Now awaken
the Kundalini. The Kundalini is as important as the other chakras are. So
o JUST SPARK
now awaken the Kundalini. Now Kundalini's behaviour and mode of action
is
different from the mode of action of the chakras. If the Kundalini
very
becomes the chakras and the chakras become the Kundalini, how will you
manage Sahaja Yoga?
But we must assume our own nature in all dignity and in all pride, not to
feel in any way low down. Because a man sits on a horse, the woman wants
to sit on a horse. What is the need for a woman to sit on a horse...? There is
no need for women to do all the things that men have already done.
Say, for example, there is one personality of the masculine personality
that has to come and do a certain job. Now you have done it. All right, now
another personality has to do this job. Now see the situation of the Divine
also. Now the whole complication comes in that once a kind of a thing has
been done, another one that comes wants to do the same. Do you
follow My
point? So the whole energy is completely wasted.
15
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-18.txt 
 MOTHERING EARTH
Creation of Mother Earth
The whole preparation has been made for this Aquarius age to come in to
bring in the Kundalini upward and to make the whole thing work out in such by the movement of the earth,
a way that the left and right meet and you all become ignited, enlightened. It by the sea, by all the elements,
was a question of our being sharing the whole job in a proper understanding. has to be respected.
Now see how Mother Earth Herself was created. It is also a very simple
thing. First, the movement of the energy started flowing. Now this is a com-
bined energy.
around like that. And when it consolidated there was this big bang. When If people are saintly they will be
the big bang took place – now this is the manly work, I should say, in a way always protected by Mother Earth.
a manly style because still the Mother Earth is not produced. So then these
little fragments again went around and around. With the momentum, they
became roundish. Out of them the Mother Earth was selected for one job -
not to do anything.
On the Mother Earth, out of the water came the life. The carbon came
Whatever is created on this Earth
We should not try to curse the Mother
Earth for any mishaps on this Earth.
Then the combined energy went around and around and
in. Everybody helped there and a human being was created. Then the men
went around to improve their societies and whatever. They have done to it.
Whatever was possible with their ego is done, finished now. Now they have
done their job. Now they are on dole, you can say.
Now the womb – or we can say the Kundalini which has been waiting all
these years – was resting, waiting for that time. So we call it “the blossomtime
has now come." At that time, the Kundalini has to rise and ignite in such a
way that the completion of the whole work takes place. It is simple. Do you
understand now?
CC
Revolution not rebellion
There is no competition between men or women, but the style of work is
different. If you understand that, then only this kind of revolution will take
place and not turn out a rebellion. Actually women are rebelling against men
and a nonsense it is. It is such a headache, that you create something, allow
them to grow and another party comes which has to complete the job and
starts rebelling.
So the revolution has to take place and this revolution is only possible
when we understand that what is left out now to be done.... That part
is now Realization, our awakening of the Kundalini. For that, your feminine
qualities are going to help you, not your masculine qualities. So aggressiveness
must be given up by men. Also, because they are Sahaja Yogis now, they have
to take feminine qualities, not of fighting.
If women fight they are not women. You see, women are told that “you are
useless, you are good for nothing," so now they are trying to show, "no, we are
also all right, if you have eaten one crow, we will eat three." Now this under-
standing and the wise perception would be such that "what do we have to do
now to change the mode and the style of our lives, what's wrong
A turning point has come. Now the evolution is not rebellion at all, by
any chance. It is a wrong idea people have. It is not rebellion that
and I hit you, go on hitting each other, like a pendulum you move. You see
the movement of a pendulum. It is not like a boom, this thing, that, today
you are born as a Muslim, tomorrow you are born as a Jew, then you are born
as a Jew, then you are born as a Hindu....
A TURNING
POINT HAS COME
part
כי
CC
here?"
you hit me
17
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-19.txt 
 MOTHERING EARTH
The spiral movement
It is not a pendulum. It is spiral movement. So every time you achieve an evo-
lution, you are at a higher level than before. So the movement is spiral.
Now to achieve the higher position in our whole being, what should we
do? It is to understand that from this point to that point we have to rise. We
have to rise in a way that we move in such a way that it is not in a pendulum
way, but in a spiral way. And to move spirally, you have to use another kind
of force. Whatever you have used so far has to be endowed with another kind
of force and that is the feminine qualities of women. But where are the femi-
nine women? They dress up like women. They will try to be feminine and all
that. That is not the way – from inside, from the heart, feminine heart. Christ
showed that in His life. He forgave. Only a woman can forgive. A man cannot
because he is aggressive. How can he forgive? Krishna never forgave anyone.
He used to kill in a right royal fashion...
MOTHER EARTH
IS AWAKENED
WITHIN YOU
Christ ... forgave to such an extent to show that He is now giving a turn
to the spiral and now a feminine quality has to be developed among human
beings. But that does not mean that you start walking like women or develop-
ing waistlines because that is another stupidity, but to be motherly – not to be
fatherly, but to be motherly. That kindness, that gentleness should be in your
behaviour towards each other.
Of course, this force also corrects, sometimes also gets angry also. Mother
also has to get angry sometimes. Especially with people who never get
with their behaviour, She has to be shouting, punishing and sometimes She
also destroys. It is all right. But that is sometimes, not all the time.
So just now, one has to accept that to be like the Mother Earth we have
to be forbearing – dhara. She is the sustenance of everything. She takes every-
thing. The vibrations are sucked in.
all right
You put a seed in the Mother
Earth and see how it sprouts.
Giving back to Mother Earth
For the first time, after Realization, you can give Her back what you
have
got
She is so spontaneous. from Her. You can give vibrations to Her trees that are created. You can make
Her activity is so spontaneous, them beautiful. You can transform a flower into a more beautiful flower. Now
we never wonder about it. whatever you have got from the Mother Earth, you can give because your
See different types of flowers, Mother Earth is awakened within you now. So you return Her back every-
different types of fragrance, thing that you got from Her and give it to others – generosity, the greatness
different types of shrubs and trees, of heart, nobility, forgiveness, love, affection, bearing everything for love. And
how She grows with such balance for the mother to save her child, she will starve herself. She will do everything
to save her child. Complete dedication she has for her child. That is a real
and molecule of that Mother Earth mother... That is the real image of a mother. And you have an image before
in every place. In every minute atom
there is sense.
you.
So this is what one has to develop now, whether you are men or women.
Before us is the best
reflection of the Adi Shakti
and that is this Mother Earth.
As Sahaja Yogis, you must develop a new consciousness of affection, love and
compassion. Getting angry, getting into a temper, shouting at people, scream-
ing at people is not going to help you much.
If
have to help the whole, the growth of the whole, try to make
with yourself that you are losing tempers
you
yourself a milder
and are so unkind to others. All the problems have come out of the over-
growth of the masculinity – over-growth. It reaches a certain point, you see. It
has reached such a wretched point now that it has to come down.
person. Be
you
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-20.txt 
 But also femininity, at a lower level without Realization, could be very,
very small-hearted, chicken-hearted, could be all the time worried about her
own child. That is what one has to change. It is to have love and affection for
every Sahaja Yogi, for every person. When it comes to fighting others, you are
all one. But among yourselves, you can look after each other.
Changing the mode
hope you have understood the whole thing. In a nutshell, it is that we have
to change the whole mode. A radical change has to come in the society of
Sahaja Yogis.... The problem comes in where you are not the whole.... If you
are the whole, then who is the other...?
In Sahaja Yoga you are all free to develop your sense of discretion. And
once you develop your sense of discretion, gradually you will know what to
do. In the beginning you will hurt, no doubt, because you are used to that. I
have seen people here, just barking at each other.... But after Realization,
do say because you feel concerned, you are worried. But you say in such a way
that
ACHIEVE
you
THE RESULTS
achieve the result.
you
See, My point is that that is the criteria – that you should achieve the
results.... First you think of being gentle, nice, embalming, sweet. Let's see,
find out ways and methods. There is a very good way: in the evening, to write
down “how many sweet things I've said today...." There are some very good
words you can say, like “Are you warm enough?" – a very sweet way of asking
a question. Then it is very simple...
Looking after others' comforts – somebody is sitting, he wants water,
awkwardly sitting. You just go, rush and give him water.... Immediately the In that reflection that you are Me,
question comes into the head, little bit trying to do something here and there. in that reflection that the Mother Earth
Or sometimes thinking, going in the market, you find something. "Oh, let is Me, in that beautiful creation
me take it for him." Children do. I have seen children all the time, they think within you, you have to become
of their friends, what they can buy for others.... Sometimes even a small thing very sensitive to the need of the world.
like early in the morning you get up, you find another person is sleeping on
one side, his blanket on the third side and his pillow in the fourth side, so Just like the Mother Earth cares for you,
you just put his head on the pillow and cover him with the blanket. That is I also care for you. And just like as the
a mother's job – not out of fear, but out of sheer love. Like even if it is cold Mother Earth loves you, I also love you.
you know.
and buttons are open, you can button up a person you like – little-little things
Women have very little-sweet things which they do, which make men
very happy. But women have lost now that sense, not the fighting, but think-
ing of what sweet things you can do for him. And also, sometimes teasing is
all right. Sometimes tickling is all right, but a kind of a sweet rapport between
each other, even the feeling that we can do that. It is a master's job. The one
who is a master can do it. Those who are not, will not be able to. They will
CC
CC
again come back to hurt.
Ultimately, they will land up with hurting or biting or coming to blows.
But those who are masters will be so beautifully doing the whole job that you
see a kind of a very sweet relationship. It is called madhurya – without any
lust, without any money-business, anything – such sweet relationships. And
the joy would be bubbling. All these perversions, all these things will drop off,
but a very sweet relationship, all right?
Even saying that, you are feeling happy. O
19
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-21.txt 
 20
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Strength
The strength
comes from within.
Your spirit strengthens
you. You must just put
in your willpower, that
"yes, let my spirit act."
And then you start
acting according to the
spirit. And once you
start acting according
to the spirit, you find
you have no slavery to
anything. You become
samarth. That means
equal to your meaning.
Samarth also means a
powerful personality.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-24.txt 
 genuine than genuineness
qenui nen es s
more
BREEZE
DIVΙΓΕC C OL
DIVINE
When you get your Realization, you start feeling the cool
vibrations flowing from your hands. And these cool vibrations
are the indication that the divine power has started flowing
through you. Now these vibrations that you have are flowing
through you like a cool breeze. They are absolutely genuine.
They are much more genuine than genuineness.... Truth that
is the basic thing cannot change. You cannot mould it. You
cannot befool it. You cannot act it. When these vibrations
are flowing from you-if there are no vibrations, then you are
not there.... In Sahaja Yoga you have to gain. Nobody else has
to gain. It is you who has to gain. So you have to be genuine
about it. You cannot purchase it with money. You cannot
hide it by any false means. You cannot kill it. It is eternal.
23
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-25.txt 
 IT IS A REALLY GREAT DAY FOR US TO FEEL VERY PROUD AND TO TALK TO EACH OTHER.
Moreover, I think this marriage ceremony has not been performed before where so many
realized souls have attended a wedding, so the grace of God has descended on it in such a
beautiful way. It has many dimensions of purity and joy, very hard to explain beyond this
feeling and understanding. It is really great.
learn to ENJOY
in marriage My only advice is that we must learn to enjoy. This capacity we have lost. That is the only
thing we have left, the method of enjoyment. Everything is there. Just try to find out ways
and methods of enjoyment so you will not get into arguments, will not try to criticize,
will not try to find faults with each other. Just try to enjoy each other. Enjoyment comes
out of whatever is good.
Say if a fruit has got some part which is sour and some part is rotten, you take out
same way, when you are dealing
your partners and friends and other Sahaja Yogis, you must put your attention to the
good points of other Sahaja Yogis and then you will imbibe those good points within
part of the fruit which is all right and enjoy it. In the
that
with
you.
attention should be on good points because that is what is enjoyable in the other
But
your
person. By seeing the bad points, you become a miserable creature and make the other
fellow also miserable. By that, you do not help yourself, neither do you help the other
person. So the best thing to do is to enjoy the best part with the others.
You will be amazed. By that enjoyment, the other feels very secure, happy, joyous and,
with that, goodness starts spreading to other parts of the body, to other parts of the being,
to other
give you the real insight into the understanding of others.
If you cannot enjoy another person that means something is wrong with you, not
with that person. After Realization especially, it should be very easy. Before Realization,
of course, I do not say. That could be very difficult. But after Realization one should try
to see the good points. Like in a room there is light, in the other room there is no light.
So we take the light from one room to another, to another and another. We cannot bring
light from the dark room. In the same way, we have to go, move from the part that is
enjoyable to other parts and this has a very subtle effect – extremely subtle. When you
start enjoying another person, he develops self-esteem and he tries to be enjoyable also.
But the relationship between a husband and wife is very, very intimate. And the enjoy-
ment should be maximum between them when they are Sahaja Yogis. But they should
give up the old patterns of married life as they are – like the husband can do whatever he
likes and he is free and the wife is free to do whatever she likes, she is on her own and he
is on his own and nobody should object and that sort of a nonsensical life – because you
of the mind and the whole can be made very beautiful. An enjoyment can
parts
are not on your own. You are part of the whole. You are all joined together. You all have
to work in such a way that you feel that unity within yourself.
You see, what one does not realize is that we cannot be on our own. Your freedom is in
enjoying the freedom of others, not abandonment. After Realization the freedom lies in
understanding the freedom of others, not your own freedom, so-called. That is how
get over your aggressiveness. And for small, small things, for
things, a Sahaja Yogi is not going to argue because he has found out something so high,
so absolute....
you
will
petty things, for useless
24
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-26.txt 
 For example, a non-Sahaja Yogi comes to a room which is decorated by a wife. Now he Try to eniov
comes and says, "Oh, I don't like this colour.... Why did you put that? And this could have
been cheaper," some sort of thing like that. Or a wife can do the same. But when a Sahaja Yogi each
marries a non-Sahaja Yogi, he says, "Do you like it? Then I like it. Did you like it? Really, you
liked it, then I like it. If you have liked it, I would like. Whatever you believe, I will believe into
it." This “I believe, I believe, I like" – these words go away....
CC
other
Sahaja Yogis do not think. We are beyond thinking. So you should say, "I enjoy being with
you. I enjoy being your wife" or your husband. Our terminology has to change because now we
have become the seekers of joy, not of misery. Whole priorities must be changed in life. How
to please others should be the priority, how to make the other person feel the trust, how much
can you give and not take. Who outbeats the other in giving? Who is more generous between
the two...?
This is a very subtle thing one should understand for which one should ask for wisdom,
that
you are not pampering the ego of the person because you know what is ego. But if you
think by saying something it hurts another
Sahaja Yoga takes its own course and works out all those corrections. You do not have to
about correcting others, but just enjoying others. That you leave to Me. That is My job.
If you just enjoy each other and love each other, see how really I return all My love. That is all
I want – that, as I have loved, you have to love each other with all your heart and will, all your
soul, without expecting any return except the feeling that you have loved.
May God bless this marriage and all other marriages that are going to come forward.
As a mother, it is so fulfilling. Now I can retire gradually. I think I can. The great souls are
going to be born, so we must await their coming. That is why it is necessary to establish a good
relationship and harmony because we have to all work together, not separately on our own.
not say.
person, better
worry
London
4 July 1980
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-27.txt 
 R.
ALEM
And did those feet in ancient time
WILLIAM BLAKE
Walk upon England's mountains green?
THOUGHT
And was the holy Lamb of God
On England's pleasant pastures seen?
OF YOU
And did the Countenance Divine
Shine forth upon our clouded hills?
And was Jerusalem builded here
Among these dark Satanic Mills?
Bring me my bow of burning gold!
Bring me my arrows of desire!
Bring me my spear! O clouds, unfold!
Bring me my chariot of fire!
| will not cease from mental fight,
Nor shall my sword sleep in my hand,
Till we have built Jerusalem
In England's green and pleasant land.
It shows how William Blake thought of you people. He represents that hope for England
in this poem that I had about you people. As I have told you that England is the heart
and the heart has to be first of all established, otherwise Sahaja Yoga is not going to be
established....
He could see the vision very clearly and he said that England has to become the Jeru-
salem. In the Sanskrit language it is called as teevtha. Teevtha means a pilgrimage place, a
place where pilgrims come in. And this indication here of this poem, which is so beauti-
fully written by William Blake, shows that he saw the vision of Sahaja Yoga prospering in
England in this beautiful manner.
But as it is, this heart is so materially bound. There is so much of materialism that has
come into our veins even. And we have to realize that we have to get it out of our mind,
out of our body. It has gone into us so much, the materialistic approach towards life, that
we have to really take a strong action against it. It is so much that anybody who comes to
this
country also becomes materialistic. Imagine the heart becoming a matter. Think of
the heart becoming a stone...
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-28.txt 
 clouds unfold
Guru Puja 1981
S
bring me my chariot of fire
Materialism
My desire is only one. And that is that you all should become gurus your-
self.... But when you join Me, you have to realize that have to really
transform yourself. You have to know that you are, first of all, realized souls,
which also very few people really realize and are aware, that they are realized
souls. They are not the other mundane type of people, ordinary people. They
are realized souls. So as it is, they have to get out of this shell in which they
have been living, the ideas of securities, that have so far come to you all from
materialism. If you study yourself correctly, everything is trickling down to
you that is materialism.
How many people read William Blake? How many understand him and
how many believe in him? And then how many follow him? He is a lost poet
of this country. After getting Realization, unless and until the people of Eng-
land understand that they have to completely transform themselves into a
new awareness of understanding, that you are now realized souls, you are part
and parcel of the whole and you are aware of it.
Firstly, materialism crawls into you in so many ways. Because there has
been an industrial revolution, people have created many things. Matter has
been comforting you and you got used to matter. You just cannot do without
it.... By this over-preservation of yourself and by this domination of matter
upon yourself, you have really become delicate darlings, absolutely delicate
darlings...
Gradually try to give up certain things that you think so important in
life. Try – one day it may pain, second day it may pain – because unless and
until
you
you make a really great effort to get rid of the materialistic body and
mind, you cannot be all right. And this is the biggest stumbling block for
the western seekers. You have to get out of that cocoon, as I said. The whole
transmutation has to take place....
Now you have to change. You have to come out of it. You have to stand
out and see for yourself that you are no more one of these mad people who
run after matter. And you leave each and every thing, every particle of it here
and die. Again you are born. Again you are doing the same thing. You have
to run away from comfort. You must learn how to overcome your comforts.
You must train your body – a little noise here and there. Englishmen, I am
saying “Englishmen" because we are in England. Americans are much worse.
Any noise, fifty percent would die with any blasting they hear, just by hearing.
They are so sensitive. I mean they have made their bodies, their everything, so
sensitive that they are really dainty darlings...
27
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-29.txt 
 CLOUDS UNFOLD
To be great gurus
"Bring me my bow of burning gold. Bring me my arrows of desire." What is going to
happen? You have no answer.
"Bring me my spear. Oh, clouds unfold. Bring me my chariot of fire." Of fire? You
cannot sit even on a chariot, really, because it shakes and you have to hold it tight and you
have to stand erect with it.
"I will not cease from mental fight nor shall my sword sleep in my hand till we have
built Jerusalem in England's green and pleasant land." I think better give swords into
everybody's hand. Let's see how many can hold it straight. You see, Sahaja Yoga is not a
simple thing like dishwashing. It is a very serious thing and on certain things you are very
well equipped, but on certain things where you are not equipped, that must be sustained.
strong points are your strong points, so forget about them. Whatever are your weak
points, hit them there. Mentally you are very well equipped. If I have to argue with you
I will give up. I really cannot because you are very knowledgeable people. You have read
all the books of the world. You are over-read. You are too great. But as far as your body is
concerned, your body is a slave of matter. In a way, your mind is also a slave of matter.
So to understand that we have to be great gurus, first of all a guru has to go
great discipline of self-emancipation. Great discipline is needed.... One has to realize that
to overcome this material drag upon yourself, you have to work it out on yourself. Then
once you have controlled this, minimum of minimum, then you can sleep anywhere you
feel like. Try to sleep on the ground for a while. That you may do for sun-tanning, and
people cannot resist all this nonsense because these are ideas put into
YOU HAVE
TO BE MY
Your
PROTOTYPE
TOTTFE
through a
you. They have
exploited you. They have told you that this should be done, that should be done, this is
necessary, that is necessary. They have to sell their goods.
Try to sometimes fast. I have prohibited Indians from fasting because what they do is
to fast. At the slightest pretext they fast. I mean, as it is, there is a dearth of food in India,
so they fast. What is the need for them to fast? But here it is necessary that people should
learn to fast and should not get attracted towards food so much. I mean the attraction
towards food also is a sign that your senses are just driving you mad, isn't it? Think of it.
Now separate yourself from your senses and see how it drives you mad. First of all the
body, then the senses we should attack.
The biggest enemy we have is our own tongue. It acts in two ways. One is the taste –
the food, taste. And the second way it attacks is the we talk. Either we do not talk or
when we talk we just hit. We cannot be kind. We cannot be compassionate. We cannot
communicate our heart to anyone. Control your tongue.... Try to change. Try to make
your speech a sweet one. Make it a beautiful one, attractive. You cannot be a guru in
Sahaja Yoga, I can tell you, with a sharp tongue....
You have a guru who is a mother. I never hit you. I do not think I have hit anyone
of you. You got your Realization. In all My compassion I looked after you. I have given
you compassion. I have never asked for anything, nor have I complained for anything or
grudged for anything. I have been extremely, extremely, extremely patient with you.
way
have to be My prototype. You are a guru in Sahaja Yoga in this Maha Yoga. You
So
you
are not a guru of this type who can only create one disciple in twenty-one thousand years.
You have got the knowledge of Kundalini much more than any one of these
gurus have
powers much more than any one of these gurus have. Indiscriminately
got. You have the
this power has been given to you.
Now only those who will come up and grow as proper trees will be called as gurus.
And that is why one has to know how to grow properly as a guru. First of all, you must
give up
all materialistic attitude towards Sahaja Yoga...
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-30.txt 
 The humility of the guru
You have to learn humility. First of all, you have to be humble people. Unless
GREATNESS IS IN
and until you have a large heart, you can never humble down. You have to
be an extremely humble person. Humility does not mean that you bow to a
person who is dominating. It never means that. But it means a strength within
you. The person who is weak can never be humble. He can never bear the
load like this Mother Earth bears our load so well because She is so great.
HUMILITY AND
SWEETNESS
You have to be strong enough within yourself to bear the load of your
disciples, of people who try to follow you. Humility should be that "I was like
them, absolutely like them. I was nothing. Without Sahaja Yoga what was I?"
I mean you may be the governor of some place – all right, so what? Before
God's eyes what are you? Nothing, nobody knows who you are. You may be
having cars and anything. You might be a very educated, anything. What does
it matter in the name of God? You have known that saints have not been so
educated. Christ never went to any university, did He? All these ideas that we
have got of our greatness must be absolutely made zero. The greatness is in
humility and sweetness.
Speak something that will be dear to others, that would be appealling
to them in a proper discriminating diplomatic manner. Some people in the
name of honesty just are sadistic or useless. You can talk to people nicely, say
something in such a way that they feel attracted towards you, that they feel
that there is complete humility, that you accept them as they are because you
want to give to them....
Sahaja Yoga depends on you more than it depends on Me. You have to
change. You have to change yourself very much more. Just by taking up some
sort of a role or assuming something great, you are not going to progress at
all.
29
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-31.txt 
 CLOUDS UNFOLD
Supposing a little bush says, "I am a tree." Will it become a tree? Supposing it behaves
like a tree, will it become a tree? It has to become the tree. Then there is no need to
behave. You are a tree. A woman walks like a woman and a man walks like a man. If you
behave like a woman, will you become a woman? It has to be innate. It has to be within
us. If you are a guru, you are a guru anybody can see and say, “Ah that's a guru." Then
you can do lots of things. We are not willing to give up these things. That is why we go
on catching on the same point.. Decide today that we are going to change ourselves
completely. Let us start on the changing.
We meet others, we greet others, talk to them. We should be able to talk. There are
some people who just do not know how to talk.... You must talk, open out. What is there
to have fear? Humility does not mean fear. It means complete love. You must talk, open
out, be interesting.
Try to do something for others. I have been saying this again and again. You have
to all become gurus. I am just a mother. And Mother is the first and the last
everyone. That is how I am your guru and I am the Guru of all the gurus. But
to become your own guru. And for that, you have to think that have to hold swords
in your hand – not only to hold swords in your hand, you have teach others to hold the
swords. What should be the character of that man who has to guide others? If he himself
cannot hold the sword in his hand, what is he going to teach to others? You just tell Me
that – a simple question. At least you should have that personality that can hold the sword
CC
for
guru
have
you
you
in the hand....
You are asking, but now you have to face. You have to give. This asking is over now,
finished. You have got everything. You are not aware you have got everything now within
yourself. Just reverse the position and you can give to others. But if you are hankering still,
worried about these nonsensical things, then nobody is going to respect you.
The detachment of the guru
I would suggest one thing: take to detachment. In a way be a sanyasa, absolutely a san-
yasa. You know I am a sanyasi. Though I live in a household and all that, I am not both-
ered about things. I am a sanyasi. But the day I will announce that I have taken a sanyasa,
people will be much more impressed by Me than they are today.
If a person is over-attached to things – attached to money, attached to this, that and
all those things – such a person is not going to impress others in spiritual matters. You can
be a nice prime minister of England, but you have no place in Sahaja Yoga if you do not
have
TAKE TO
DETACHMENT
of detachment. That does not mean that you become hippies by any chance -
a way
not at all. But it means that you become detached. Specially it is very important for you
to develop that – a detachment.
Detach yourself from things that you are supposed to be possessing. I can tell you,
you cannot take anything with you.... Then why are you attached? All kinds of disgraceful
behaviour ensues when you are attached. Become a sanyasi. It does not mean you wear
that yellow or red and all kinds of horrible dresses, but from inside you become a sanyasi.
That is the best way you conquer your void....
Surrendering is the best way.... You must surrender completely, blindly you can say.
Just jump into it. Do not reason it out – complete surrendering. Once you have done
that, you will be surprised how you will be so blessed with the powers of a guru, that you
will rise to heights and will do all that William Blake has said because it is like a drop
submerging into the ocean and becoming the ocean. And you know the ocean is the
not a drop. It is the ocean and the ocean has everything in it. So we have to learn from the
ocean to be the ocean by becoming the ocean yourself.
you
guru,
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-32.txt 
 The Sahaj guru
I have told you in many ways how it is important that we have to have many
gurus of Sahaja Yoga. But if Sahaja fails, it fails because of Sahaja Yogis, not
because of Me – always.... You are the reflection of Sahaja Yoga. You are the
mirrors, not Me. You have to reflect Sahaja Yoga. So first of all, you have to
become good reflectors, the good gurus....
You can also [raise the Kundalini] just through your character and through
abilities as Sahaja Yogis, which are tremendous. Even those who are great
in India cannot raise the Kundalini the way you can raise. Under their
your
gurus
finger – they cannot believe it. It is Shri Ganesha's powers you have got. Look
at the surrendering of Shri Ganesha. Look at His surrendering, completely
surrendered to His Mother. Who is wiser than Him? And in His wisdom,
He has chosen complete surrender to His Mother. To Him, His Mother is
Guru, She is Brahma, Vishnu, Mahesha everything, even Sadashiva is Her,
His Mother, nothing else. And His power of Kundalini raising is within you.
You have it. You are made after His power. He is holiness. He is auspi-
cious. He is innocence.
got
has to be innocent, has to be an innocent person. His innocence
guru
can be crafty – but innocence should be crafty, he should not be crafty. Inno-
cence is the power which works the craftiness. It is the Krishna shakti. It does.
It works out. Suddenly you face it. You try anything, it will be there. And He
depends on His powers and not on His own methods of maneuvering things. YOU WITHOUT
But how many of you are religiously working it out morning, evening,
every moment of life? How many of you are thinking that we are on the path
of becoming full-fledged gurus of Sahaja Yoga and nothing else? You are noth-
ing else but that. How many of you decide like that every moment?
WHAT ARE
SAHAJA YOGA?
It is very easy just to say, "Oh, it's all right. I don't believe in it." Then
what are you going to do? What are you without Sahaja Yoga? Think of it. You
can say, "I don't want to do it." You will have to do it. You are in it now. You
better do it. You have to do it fast. For heaven's sake, better do it fast. Achieve
it. You have all the powers. Believe Me, you have all the powers. Believe Me,
you are better than all these gurus put together.
But be humble. Do not talk big. And do not become silent bores.... You
have to be interesting. You have to be dynamic. You should know some stories
here and there. You have to make them laugh. They should enjoy you. This is
Sahaja Yoga guruship. You see, for such boring gurus, one or two would stick
on if they are equally boring or more boring.
But such gurus are not going to help us in Sahaja Yoga. They are not. You
have to be joyous, cheerful, helpful, understanding, concerned. You have to
be concerned about others. You have to behave in a way that they feel that you
CC
are the security for them...
You have to be a tree which makes others
into trees and not to make
grow
them dwarfs under it. You see, no grass can even grow under such trees, let
alone trees. Even the grass cannot grow if the trees are of this type. So you
should be actually the tree of brilliance, of sun, the sun's rays. From
the
you
should flow and they should grow, not to obstruct every growth of
your disciples. What sort of a guru could he be whose disciples are all toddlers
or still sucking their thumbs? So you should be a guru of a calibre that makes
sun's
rays
others grow too.
31
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-33.txt 
 CLOUDS UNFOLD
I have hopes that My disciples will grow more than I
am. I have hopes we will see that. That is My desire. That
is what I want, that My disciples should grow. I mean that
will be My pride. Like Ganesha grew more than His own
Mother who created Him. That is what is My desire. And
that is what I want you to realize, that you are the hope of
the world...
You have to be so strong, that nothing should make
you frightened. And such a person is the most benevolent
personality. He is not frightened of anyone. Why should
REAL IS THE WORD he harm anyone?
Today I hope you people really do not listen to My
lecture, but put it in your heart and understand that you
have to become very dignified, majestic gurus of this uni-
verse. I would like to ask William Blake what is he doing.
When is he going to take his birth on this Earth...?
The good of this country should be taken, whatever
is good in it, and transform this country into a beautiful
thing. I mean if you really love this country, then create it
into a lovable place.
You must try to destroy all that is retarding the progress,
the spiritual progress of this country if you are a real Eng-
lishman. Real is the word. You should not be proud of all
the weaknesses that have crawled up in all these hills and
dales. All unholy thoughts, all inauspicious behaviours, all
must be discarded. We are not that.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-34.txt 
 You become a completely free bird .
then it becomes your job to achieve your flight.
One flight is up to the thoughtless awareness.
The second one is up to the doubtless awareness.
And the third one is to God's Realization.
PHOTOS
cover and page 1: Belgium 1985 (Colin Heinsen) Page 9: Shri Mataji
in India (Avdut Pai) page 10 and 16: Mother Earth Puja 1983
page 20: music program in Sangli India, date uncertain (Gregoire de
Kalbermatten) page 22: India circa 1990 (Colin Heinsen) pages 27,
29, 31 and 32: Guru Puja 1981 this page and back cover: delta of
the Danube River near Murighiol Romania (Mircea Sorin)
THE DIVINE
COOL BREEZE
www.divinecoolbreeze.org
SUBSCRIPTIONS:
contact@divinecoolbreeze.org
WORDS
CONTENT:
contents page: 30 December 1987 page 2: Christmas Puja 1994 and
Diwali Puja 1983 page 8: Shri Ganesha Puja 1993 pages 12 to 19
editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
PRINTED BY
King Printing Company Inc.
Lowell Massachusetts USA and
Shri Adi Shakti Puja 1997 page 21: 4 February 1983
side
quotes:
page 23: 16 July 1979 this page: Shivaratri Puja 1996 back cover:
Shivaratri Puja 1995
Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd.
Pune Maharashtra India
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-35.txt 
 This pure spirit within us is the reflection of God Almighty Sadashiva.
It is like the sun that falls on the water and gives a clear reflection.
