The Divine Cool Breeze 2011 issue 4 – volume twenty-four number four 1990m shaja Yoya ath

 The audience was small. About fifty employees gathered in the Dag Hammarskjold Auditorium in the early evening. A Sahaja Meditation Society had just two days before been chartered and sanctioned by the United Nations and now the members gathered to hear their keynote speaker. This was a break from their desks, meetings and global concerns. It was a chance to hear the words of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, a chance to look within. The topic was spiritual enlightenment, global peace and a better world. It was June 6th in 1990. The venue was the United Nations headquarters in New York City.

 ONE YEAR WE HAVE COME HERE FOR OUR ASCENT AND EVERY MOMENT OF OUR ASCENT IS A FESTIVE OCCASION 1990 ite a festival of ascent Perhaps the minds of the UN staff on that day were on a European arms reductions promise from the Soviet Union. Or perhaps some were lending assistance to an exodus of UN personnel in the wake of another civil war in Liberia.

 1990 THE WORLD SEEMED FULL OF TURMOIL AND CHANGE. The first anniversary of the demonstrations and massacre in Beijing's Tiananmen Square was being observed that week. No one could anticipate what would be next. Within twelve months that same Soviet Union would no longer exist. It would be replaced by a new Russian federation. There had already been free elections in Romania after the previous year's dismantling of the Berlin Wall. In less than four months, the two Germanys would complete their reunification. And in less than two months, Iraq would invade Kuwait. The United Nations building would soon become an even busier place. Now was the time to pause and listen. On that Wednesday evening, Shri Mataji spoke calmly to the small audience. This was not the general assembly. These people were not decision-makers. They were clerks and administrative assistants. But, as small as the gathering was, it represented the world on another, perhaps more real level. Her tone was intimate. She chose Her words to meet the needs of the audience. And, as always, She spoke in terms that were both global and personal. During Her talk, Shri Mataji spoke of truth and the need to actualize the collective doctrine of the United Nations. She spoke of the Kundalini's role in bringing about that actualization. At the end of the talk Shri Mataji granted Self Realization. She personally greeted everyone and most signed up for follow-up classes. It seemed that the United Nations was finally coming of age. In the week previous to Her appearance at the UN, Shri Mataji had given similar talks in both Miami and San Diego. Early in the year She had spoken in Australia, India, Italy, New Zealand, Russian, Singapore and the United Kingdom. A medical conference in Moscow, a press conference in Calcutta, to Perth, Melbourne, Cairns, Sydney, Bangalore,

 Hyderabad, Jaipur, Leningrad, Auckland and Calcutta – Her appearances for the year were already approaching one hundred and it was still only June. To come, before the year was out: Athens, Bangkok, Barcelona, Berlin, Bucharest, Budapest, Dresden, Frankfurt, Geneva, Hong Kong, Istanbul, Kiev, Kuala Lumpur, Leningrad, London, Los Angeles, Madrid, Milan, Munich, Paris, Prague, Pune, Rome, Sofia, Taipei, Turin, Toronto, Vancouver, Vienna, Warsaw and the villages and towns of central India, all before the New Year's Day – more than two hundred stops in twenty- six countries, all in one year. Her travels in 1990 totalled in excess of 135,000 kilometres – more than three times the distance around the world. In addition to the scheduled talks, there were countless informal events. In homes and airports, halls and schools. Each conversation, every speech was different. And yet each was also the same, highlighted with concern and insight, with humour and love. Every talk served the same purpose. It addressed the need for spiritual ascent. While another person might say, "Be your better self," Shri Mataji reached for an even higher plateau: “Be your true Self." And this was not an unusual year, 1990. But it was pivotal. From the late 1970s, through the 80s and 90s and into the new century, Her travels and outreach, Her efforts to create a better world were to continue. Her travels were largely unchronicled by newspapers and undocumented in the popular consciousness, but they were not unnoticed by those seeking enlightenment in a meta-modern world. In Her own words, when speaking of that year's tour of India, She called it both a pilgrimage and a festival. And so it was for the entire year 1990 and for each of our lives: always a festival of ascent.

 I am gelling a cool breeze from you ttis Sangli India: puja and advice to women january The heritage of our country is spirituality. And this is the nourishment. Only the one-sided growth in the West, due to machinery or whatever you will call it, has ruined it completely. And one-sided growth in this country, and all such countries, where religion has become a blind faith, has also ruined it. But in the centre lies Sahaja Yoga.... I am getting a cool breeze from you. So I want you to be very great Sahaja Yogis – very you should really manifest your powers of wisdom. great. And JANUARY 2: KOLHAPUR PUBLIC PROGRAM JANUARY 4: GANAPATIPULE – TALK AND MUSIC PROGRAM JANUARY 5: GANAPATIPULE MUSIC EVENING AND TALK – ENJOY EACH OTHER JANUARY 6: GANAPATIPULE – ENTERTAINMENT EVENING AND TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS give il the highest priority Ganapatipule: puja january In India we believe that God Himself takes incarnations with His Vishnu Principle when- ever there is the decline of righteousness and He tries to elevate. Every incarnation has done a lot of work and has done also work within ourselves.... What importance you give to everything that you want to do, it is very important. It is the complete attention, dedication and the complete importance that you give to anything that you do. It is very important. If you do not give it the highest priority, it does not work. If it is just by the way, it does not work. So it is important to understand that if you have to gain anything in this puja, you have to give it the highest priority. And then just before puja, if your mind is telling you or doubting, just tell him to stop because that mind can act against you. So for the puja, you should be all prepared in a way, in a receptive way and receive it. JANUARY 8: GANAPATIPULE – MARRIAGES JANUARY 9: GANAPATIPULE – TALKS AND INTERVIEW

 lbveze coo Shri Mataji arrived at the main pendal at midday. A picture of dignity and serenity, She walked up the clay steps, unaccompanied, lightly lifting Her white cotton sari from Her painted feet. She then took a seat on the beautifully carved Indian throne, the lion on Her left and the other conveyance of the Goddess, the tiger, supporting Her right arm. To our surprise and wonder, Shri Mataji gave each of us the beautiful gift of a shawl, each unique, a different design and colour combination. Shri Mataji came and spoke to the grooms and really the tone of that beautiful speech gave the feeling of a For the filming of a documentary for Indian television, Shri Mataji came to the beach. talk by a great empress to Her warriors on the eve of The water and sky looked like they never had a great battle. She stood in the middle of that small pendal, Her right hand on the central support, gently before – the water glassy, with an offshore breeze. The sky was full of vibrations and the surveying their sparkling faces. There was so much atmosphere one of joyful anticipation. Shri motherly advice to Her sons about how to look after Mataji arrived and, unaccompanied, walked to the water's edge. a young bride.

 board the ship JANUARY 13: KALWE – ENTERTAINMENT EVENING 1.4 Kalwe India: Sankranti Puja january We are at a point where we have to trigger a new jump. A new flight we have to take and for this flight we have to see that we really become very light in our ideas, in our thoughts and in our conditionings. We are so much full of conditionings. All kinds of conditionings are on us. They are so deep that sometimes I fail to understand human beings. I just do not understand how they get stuck to things which are of no value, which have no sense and they get lost. In this higher jump that we are going to take, many will be left behind as a result, those who won't be able to come out of that.... Fully dedicate yourself to meditation and surrender yourself to collectivity and every day you must think in the evening what have I done for Sahaja Yoga? What have I done for myself? Please try to understand that there is a very big jump that we have to take. It is to be triggered and for that I would like you to be ready to be absolutely prepared because in this jump many might be lost and many might be just left behind because they could not get over their conditionings. The conditionings are of various types, as you know very well of ignorance, blind faith and all other things that we have gone through. Also we have conditionings of our country, of our race, of our styles and so many other things by which we judge others. But we have to judge ourselves, that are we in a Sahaj culture or not? If we are not in the Sahaj culture, then it is going to be very difficult that you board the ship which is going to take us all.... So far I am very happy that whatever I have been telling you and whatever I have been guiding you, you have accepted it very well, calmly and sweetly and that you have tried to imbibe it in your lifestyle. Actually, after some time, I do not think that I will have to tell you. You will get your own light to see for yourself what is right and what is wrong. But still, I would say for all the western people especially, that you must open your heart in the puja, in the music, in anything. Just see that you open your heart. If you cannot open your heart, this won't work because this works to the spirit, which resides in your heart. So please try to open your heart for everything. All disappear when you decide that “I have to open my heart in Sahaja Yoga." conditionings, all your ego will FEBRUARY 5: HYDERABAD PUJA FEBRUARY 6 AND 7: HYDERABAD PUBLIC PROGRAM FEBRUARY 8: CHENNAI PUBLIC PROGRAM (SANKARA HALL) FEBRUARY 9: CHENNAI – SHRI KRISHNA PUJA FEBRUARY 1l: CHENNAI PUBLIC PROGRAM (BHARATIYA VIDYA BHAVAN) FEBRUARY 13: BANGALORE – MAHISHASURA MARDINI PUJA FEBRUARY 23: PUNE – MAHASHIVARATRI PUJA FEBRUARY 25: HYDERABAD PUJA FEBRUARY 28: SINGAPORE AIRPORT TALK

 In the evening, while watching a variety show sponsored by local factory workers' children, Shri Mataji surprised us by arriving mid-performance. She asked the European musicians, who had performed so well all tour, to take the stage and sing songs to awaken the Kundalini. Sankranti Puja was held the next morning inside a grassy courtyard and Shri Mataji, radiant, addressed us from Her seat at the top of the temple steps. She urged us to open our hearts and repeatedly urged us to be extremely dedicated and sincere about our spiritual growth. And, with the Shri Ganesha Puja, the atmosphere built, first solemn and royal and then it welled over with joy. In the protective shell of love, it was less difficult to take leave of our Mother and depart to our countries. The last vision was one of Shri Mataji sitting atop the marble steps and Sahaja Yogis embracing one another as family down the long avenue outside the puja gardens. individually about our spiritual and personal On 28th February 1990, almost twenty Sahaja problems. With infinite love and patience, She Yogis from Malaysia took the short shuttle attended to us, teaching and advising us as the flight from Kuala Lumpur to Singapore to meet Mother when She arrived in Singapore, in the Counsellor, the Comforter and the Redeemer. As we sat on the floor around Her, we were all evening on Her way from Bombay to Perth. As we waited at the exit of the ramp leading from given the opportunity to massage Her Lotus the plane, the vibrations became stronger and Feet. Shri Mataji demonstrated Her love and stronger as Shri Mataji approached us. The joy compassion yet again when it was announced that Her flight to Perth would be delayed by bubbled over as Mother emerged. A collective garland of braided jasmine flowers was presented one hour. There were cheers all around that Mother had given us the joy of Her company and She then accepted our individual roses. We found a nice place near the indoor waterfall for an extra hour. Afterwards, Mother, with and, as we sat around Mother's Feet, She spoke all of us in tow, went to the shops to buy to us. In Her talk She said that Sahaja Yoga is some presents for Her Australian tour and, spreading fast because people are now becoming in a typical gesture of Her love, She bought chocolates for all of us. more aware. Commenting on the situation in China, Mother said that the Chinese government claimed to follow Confucius, who taught that humanity is important, that collectivity is important. However, without Realization, how can one understand collectivity, She asked. Otherwise how could they kill their own people. Mother said that if they were realized souls, they would not have killed the student demonstrators [in Tiananmen Square in June 1989]. Mother expressed regret that China has got a very bad name from this o incident. Mother then graciously dealt with us

 one culture Perth Australia: talk to Sahaja Yogis march Coming back to the basics in Sahaja Yoga, we have to know that in Sahaja Yoga we have no hard and fast rules for anything because you are awakened people, you are saints and you know what is good for you. But you must keep that quality of saintliness within you and certain things you should avoid if possible. And if not that, see what is wrong with your centres. If something is wrong with your centres, you start getting into problems, getting into ideas, some things which are destructive. So it is best to judge yourself first of all how are your vibrations... There are certain things missing in Indian culture, something missing in Western culture. We have to understand this, that both are wrong and we are not going to have them – and it will work out very well. For us, there is only one culture and that is Sahaja culture. MARCH 2: PERTH – TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS Melbourne Australia: talk to Sahaja Yogis march A human being is a social being. He is not a person who wants to live in a single way. That is why if you jail someone, if somebody is in jail, it becomes a punishment. Though in the SO jail you have all the conveniences, everything is there, on the contrary, you do not have to work so hard, you get your food all right, everything is fine, somebody cooks for you, but it is a punishment. And for our ascent it is very important to be collective. It is said that wherever you are together, I reside there.... We understand the essence, now we are on the essence because we are on the Kundalini. Then we must know the essence of joy. And the joy is in sharing.... So you see this love, this affection, this deeper understanding that we have within ourselves, that we are in love with each other, where can we express it...? All over the world we have people. It is like one big body. And as soon as there is a problem with the eyes, some hand is there to help us. That is how we are going to work it out. Do you understand the importance of Sahaja Yoga at this juncture? It is not by the way. It is very important, an extremely important thing. I do not know if you really know about it. Such work was never done in the history of spirituality, in the history of this world or the universe whatsoever. And this is a kind of a mass transformation that is taking place which is going to transform the whole world. MARCH 5: MELBOURNE – INTERVIEW MARCH 5: MELBOURNE – MUSIC EVENING MARCH 6: MELBOURNE PUBLIC PROGRAM MARCH 7: MELBOURNE PUBLIC PROGRAM

 The Sahaja Yogis can enjoy each other very well. It is so sweet, it is, and so beautiful that all can you live together like that. I wish I could all the time be with all. But it is not in My fate. I have to you travel from one place to another. I left them there [in Singapore]. I was so much wrenched in My heart really and I was so heavy that I just closed My eyes trying to get over it. And there I find all the flowers smiling at Me at the airport and the whole thing finished, neutralized. I said, "Now these were also waiting. After all, I have to come for them here." SHRI MATAJI, MARCH 4TH For many yogis it had been three years since they had seen Shri Mataji. For those who were not fortunate Right on time, Shri Mataji arrived from Perth to a warm reception. She spent much enough to go on any tours, it had been over five Perth is one of the most isolated cities in the world. time talking to everyone, receiving everyone's It is over three thousand miles from the main flowers. She commented on how big all the population centres on Australia's east coast. children had grown. We were all invited back to where She was staying. Shri Mataji came to the garden and talked to us. She said Sahaja Yogis should live together. She said if Sahaja Yogis cannot live together, how can the world live together? When we live together, we protect each other. The negativity has less of from SINGAPORE an effect when we are together. Cairns to HONG KONG Brisbane Perth Sydney Canberra Auckland N. Melbourne The public programs were held over two nights to the accompani- ment of the Nagpur musicians. Shri Mataji spoke for a very o short time before answering questions from the crowd and giving Realization to the people. It seemed that the time She had spared with Her short discourse was saved to meet every person after the program. She greeted each seeker, the look of love and recognition on Her face. It was like She was meeting an old lost friend. %24

 MARCH 8: CAIRNS AUSTRALIA MARCH 10: BRISBANE · TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS AND MUSIC EVENING MARCH 11: BRISBANE PRESS INTERVIEW AND PUBLIC PROGRAM MARCH 13: AUCKLAND PUBLIC PROGRAM AND TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS MARCH 14: AUCKLAND RADIO INTERVIEW 14 Auckland New Zealand: Mahalakshmi Puja march I am very happy to be here with you, after such a long time. And I missed very you all much. I know you are very far away from the rest of them, but you are always in My heart you shouldn't worry about the distance.... If we live on a superficial level of Sahaja and Yoga, then we cannot do much for ourselves nor for the country and it is just a wasteful CO life, neither here nor there. It is like a seed, which is sprouted and has not grown into the tree. So first of all, we have to learn that we have to become very deep people – very deep. We must reach our depth.... It is My humble request that all of you should know that I am to act in a sensible way, up and your Mother, directly.... I would like New Zealand to come so that people should say that New Zealanders are the wisest in Sahaja Yoga. MARCH 14: AUCKLAND PUBLIC PROGRAM 15 MARCH 15: SYDNEY UNIVERSITY RELIGIOUS STUDIES PROGRAM Sydney Australia: talk before katak dance nare march In our chakras, there are three gunas. Now you start from the fourth – number four. Four divided by three is eternity, so Ganesha can take an incarnation. Then six – six has divided by three, so Brahmadeva does not take an incarnation. Then comes ten. Ten divided by three is again eternity. So the Vishnu can take incarnations. Also all the gurus can take incarnations. Then comes twelve, at the heart. Twelve is divided by three, so Shiva does not take His form, only the Goddess does because it is divided completely. Then comes sixteen. Sixteen divided by three – again eternity. That is why then Vishnu takes the form of Krishna and He incarnates. Two divided by four is the same. So all these incarnations come because the three gunas, when they are divided by the number of petals they have, the number of powers they have. Some can produce eternities so they can incarnate and some cannot. That is why they could not incarnate. MARCH 16: SYDNEY PUBLIC PROGRAM 17 Sydney public program march Australia is very far off, but this is the land which is the land of purity. This is the land in the universe that is the first centre that you see there. And Uluru, that have – Uluru you means the Chaitanya. It is the symbol of that purity. So you stand for the innocence of the world. You are such a great nation here that stands for the innocence.... The whole world can be helped with your own purity and beautiful lives.

 This was Shri Mataji's first visit to Cairns, a city A live interview with New Zealand's most in the far north of Australia, above the tropic of renowned, but very cynical radio broadcaster was Capricorn. It's a very tropical, beautiful place, arranged. He started asking some very penetrating much visited by tourists. During Her visit, Shri Mataji went to the Great Barrier Reef, a two questions. The interviewer had diabetes and Shri thousand mile coral reef, forty miles off the Mataji explained to the listeners the causes of diabetes and the ability to overcome it through Quennsland coast, one of Her great natural Self Realization. As the interview progressed, he creations of the world. Over the last ten years, an alarming problem has developed, which has got more and more positive. Then he asked, “Are had the whole country concerned. There is a you a messiah, a prophet?" Shri Mataji did not reply, but he started feeling the cool breeze in his particular creature called the Crown of Thorn starfish, which consumes small coral animals, hand. He forgot he was on live radio. “When I bring my hands together I feel like I am holding thus killing the reef. Normally there are other a cool ball of wind – me, the greatest skeptic!" As predators which help keep the starfish under control. However, in the last few years, the starfish this was being broadcast, all the office workers have been in plague proportions, destroying vast could not believe what he was saying, as it was so out of character. They started coming from their areas of the reef. Due to the delicate nature of desks and looking through the studio window in the ecosystem, there is no chemical solution the disbelief. The interviewer then said that he could authorities can use to control the starfish and it not feel it on his head. Shri Mataji worked on would be difficult to physically remove them. So him. He asked, "What about everyone else?" She we have been watching as the reef has been slowly degraded. Due to its vast size, it would be a long time before the whole reef would be destroyed, replied, "They can get it too. Just tell them to put their hands out to the radio." It was an incredible however the damage already done is disturbing. scene as the interviewer and all the office workers Shri Mataji met with the mayor of Cairns, who peering into the studio had one hand directed to informed Her of this situation. Shri Mataji told Shri Mataji and one hand above their head feeling the cool breeze. Later, Shri Mataji said that, CC him, “Once your powers are awakened, you can although the interviewer had a bad reputation, do something about it," but he was a bit cynical. underneath he was quite humble and really ready While Shri Mataji was in Cairns, She waded into for it. That is why he felt it so strongly. the water for a time and said, "Let's see what can CC be worked out." A few days later, we were with Shri Mataji on the plane to New Zealand and the There were about a hundred people at the Sydney news came, informing passengers that something airport to greet Her. Everyone was gathered incredible was happening in Queensland on the around the arrival gate indicated for Her flight. Great Barrier Reef. Without warning, thousand The plane had landed, but no one had come out of Crown of Thorn starfish had been found dead, yet. We were all waiting, wondering what was floating to the surface of the reef area. When She happening. Then there was a shout of excitement heard this, Shri Mataji said to tell the mayor to and everyone turned around. Shri Mataji had have more faith in his powers. come out of another gate and had walked up behind us. She said She wanted to surprise us. 11

 needed a mother те Jou MARCH 18: SYDNEY – HOLI CELEBRATIONS MARCH 19: CANBERRA PUBLIC PROGRAM 20 Ah Sydney: evening before Birthday Puja march My tour of Australia has come to an end. Today is a day I can say it is all well done. We very have had a very good response. I didn't expect that much everywhere. It was tremendous and very great things have happened, some miracles also, during this visit. And one has to know that Sahaja Yogis have to be with great potential manifesting. If they are, then it triggers very well. Otherwise I cannot work it out. For that, we have to understand that in Sahaja Yoga there is no sacrifice of any kind. You do not have to sacrifice anything. It is all the time blessings throughout. are Sydney: Birthday Puja march What enthusiasm all over the world! The whole of Sydney, I think, has been lynched of all the flowers. And such nice things to say – the cards and the letters and the beautiful poems. The children are singing beautifully. Words fail to express the feelings of such jubilation and such sincere feeling of happiness. You needed a Mother to look after you, to care for you and to be able to transform you with a lot of wisdom. So every birthday I find that Sahaja Yogis are also expanding their hearts and realizing that they are no more drops, but they are part and parcel of the ocean and that the ocean itself is going to strengthen them and look after them. It is the ocean that is going to nourish them. And the same ocean is going to guide them. So the connection between a drop and an ocean has to be fully established. So the limitations of a drop have to be absolutely dissolved into the greatness of the ocean... The words fail. Because Australia is such a far-off country, to come here with so many people sitting and singing Agata Swagata, it is unbelievable – unbelievable because I have not given you any money, you have not given Me any money, you are not bound to say anything like that – but not only that you are doing it, but you are enjoying heart is it. It is something great. You are enjoying it and that is what it is, that when your large, then whatever you do for others, you enjoy. You enjoy doing good things. You enjoy saying nice things. So we should have the choicest flowers of beautiful sayings. We should have the choicest emotions, which we should be able to express to each other. Now start on that from today ... that from 1990 we are all the time going to speak something beautiful to each other all the time. And just keep your ears open, keep your eyes open and wherever you get a chance, whenever you hear something like that, keep it in your mind and use it back. Today I am so enamoured and it is too much for Me, really, to believe even that there are so many Sahaja Yogis in Australia, which is so far away. Now it is your responsibility to be sincere about Sahaja Yoga.... You will just think that "We love Mother and we have to be together and we have to love each other and all the time we have to say nice things to each other so that the love increases."

 Shri Mataji started cooking for us at 6 am. In all, She spent Shri Mataji spoke for some time about collective living, loving each about six hours cooking. It other and working it out together. Her finger works with the rest of was such a great experience to oHer body. It does not all of a sudden start doing its own thing. She witness our Mother cooking said that Sahaja Yogis should not form groups supporting one thing or four very large pots of chicken another. Know that this activity is against the collective and anything biryani – enough to feed hundreds of people. We all against the collective is a sin in the eyes of God and will be punished, so be careful. She said, "I am your Mother and I have to tell the you helped tend the four large fires and I am truth. You can accept Me or not, but I am what I am in the backyard and all the unchanging." She then said: "When you get to heaven, God is going other jobs required to cook you do for Sahaja Yoga?' and what are you to ask you, What did such a meal. going to say?" The power of Her words left us all speechless. The venue for the puja was a place known as Curzon Hall, an old federation style manor house of sandstone construction set among English gardens. This place was chosen because it had a ballroom large enough to fit everybody comfortably and the house itself had a grand style of architecture befitting the celebration of our Holy Mother's birthday. The stage was constructed with a backdrop consisting of a large lotus. The lotus was made of wood, draped with dyed silk and chiffon. At the centre of the lotus was a beautiful arrangement of flowers, giving life and colour to the setting. Around the stage were gathered As Shri Mataji's tour has progressed, most of us have felt a vast increase in the vibrations. The blessings of having Shri Mataji in the country are tremendous. all the flowers sent from all corners of the Sahaja Yoga world – three hundred roses from Her physical presence creates such a subtle feeling of joy which I am sure affects the general public. Austria, bouquets from England, the USA and from all over Europe. Our Holy Mother was surrounded by a bed of flowers. Shri Mataji arrived as the assembled yogis sang Swagata Agata and twenty-one conches sounded in welcome. As She took Her seat, Shri Mataji smiled and said that, as She was entering the hall, She felt that She was entering the ocean of collective joy. She said that She was immersed in joy. Such beautiful things were said that it was overwhelming.

 to LONDON agreat revolution MARCH 22: HONG KONG MARCH 24: BOMBAY – BIRTHDAY TALKS Delhi MARCH 28: JAIPUR INDIA PUBLIC PROGRAM Jaipur MARCH 30: DELHI – BIRTHDY PUJA APRIL 3, 4 AND 5: DELHI PUBLIC PROGRAMS Calcutta APRIL 7: DELHI – ADVICE TO SAHAJA YOGIS APRIL 7: DELHI – WEDDING ANNIVERSAY TALK Bombay APRIL 9: CALCUTTA PRESS CONFERENCE from HONG KONG APRIL 9: CALCUTTA – SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA• 21) Eastbourne UK: evening before Easter Puja april If I tell you some of the things that have happened in this short time after I left India, I am Myself amazed that in geometrical proportions Sahaja Yoga is rising very high. But that should not be a complete satisfaction. Individually also we have to rise. And every one of you has to rise. Vertical ascent has to be achieved by all of you. Some might have lost a little bit. Some might have been a little bit away from themselves. The attention might have frit- tered away quite a lot, but we have to know why we are here and then it is very easy. We are here to be part and parcel of a very great revolution... So many events are going to happen and we are on the stage and we have to cooperate and coordinate and understand... I have given you all My powers. They are at your disposal. But there is one thing: you have to be detached like Me. You have to have concern for each other, complete detachment.... Res- urrect from the sense of time, sense of aggressiveness, sense of worldly things – mundane, useless rubbish they are – and fly out into the open sky. 22 april Eastbourne UK: Easter Puja Be aware that the twenty-first year is going to be a very big jump. I am warning you again and again, and again and again. And you have to work very hard to develop yourself ver- tically, in balance with your horizontal growth. It is not My lecture for entertainment or anything, but it should go to your heart, to your brain, to your being, as this is very impor- tant and you are not going to waste it. All the time you have to think that you are a Sahaja Yogi and you have to know what you have to do in Sahaja Yoga and how to achieve it. You should not be satisfied unless and until you have achieved that excellence... If you try just to exploit Sahaja Yoga, you will be exploited, too. But it is for the exploitation of joy. But that is only possible if you grow, you touch your depth. If you are not deep enough, you will hang in the air, as I said, and that has to be worked out. That has to be found out, how best you can do it, how much you can reach people, how many people you can give Realization, how many people you are going to help improve their health, their mental conditions and then how much you are going to talk about Sahaja Yoga. So that is going to work out what I call the collective ascent of human beings.

 The puja in Calcutta was the first puja to the Adi Shakti. All the shaktis arise from the Adi Shakti and absorbed back into Her. Only get the Adi Shakti can do this work because She has supremacy over all the chakras. She knows the subtlest of subtle. The Adi Shakti is of the CC nature of Mahamaya, "otherwise you o cannot approach Me." Shri Mataji said we should understand that we are "tied by a subtle and strong thread" and there is nothing greater than love for one another. The feeling of "mine" takes away from CC the spirit. that is a thing where they worship Gauri. That is Only one gentleman from Delhi went down to Jaipur to organize. And the Jaipur people said, the biggest festival where the queen, maharani has to worship the Gangauri. It is a statue which goes round the whole of Jaipur state and everybody "It's very difficult, you see, here." He said, “No, I'll have the program in Govinjis Mandir, where celebrates it. It is regarded as the biggest festival. nobody can have a program. I'll go and see the maharani." So the maharani would not meet him. So in the morning she came and touched My feet and she said, “Mother, can I worship You?" I said, He was insisting. He was sitting there, waiting "Why?" “Because You are my Gangaur, really. for her. Ultimately he got a chance. He went and talked to her. He showed her My photograph. That is just a statue." She made me stand the Immediately she took to Me. She asked about same way. She did everything. She made Me eat Sahaja Yoga, "What is Sahaja Yoga?" Then she betel. I don't eat all that, but she said, "You have said, "Give me Realization." She CC Realization. to. You are Gangaur, so You have to eat it." And got The maharaja got Realization. They said, "Yes, she worshipped Me and her whole rituals she did for about forty-five minutes and then she said, כ you can have the program here." She said, “Ill and worship that statue." Nobody is "Now I'll come to the program." She came down herself. go She fell at My feet in the public, sitting there all allowed to go there. She took Me there. She made the time, her husband sitting there and somebody Me sit in a very nice place, like this, decorated. How much she respected Me! Among all the offered them some water to drink. They said, "How can I? She is the Goddess. I can't drink maharajas, Jaipur is the highest and that maharani before Her." She sat there. Imagine, she just got is the highest lady.... Just from Realization only, her Realization – what a depth! But that's not she completely got drenched into Sahaja Yoga. enough. They have one festival called Gangaur SHRI MATAJI, APRIL 21ST 15

 mahayogis пош MAY 1: Mosco MEDICAL CONFERENCE MAY 5: FIUGGI ITALY – SAHAJA YOGA AND MEDICINE Fiuggi Italy: Sahasrara Puja may years, I have been waiting, for this day. We have now the twenty-first Sahasrara, All these so it is a very important turning point.... A new change has to come. And you can see the SO announcement, a new understanding, an awareness of a very new dimension. We have been so far dealing with collective consciousness. We are collectively conscious. We have the idea that we are collectively conscious. Also we know we are part and parcel of the whole and that we all are Sahaja Yogis. We know about our chakras and our nadis very clearly. But perhaps we do not know about our powers. How many powers have developed in those twenty-one years within yourself? [A roar of thunder is heard.] So far we had kept Sahaja Yoga at a low ebb because I wanted you, first of all, to develop into really very beau- tiful Sahaja Yogis, so that from your life, from your behaviour, from your lifestyle, from your understanding, from your thoughts, people will realize that these people are very unique and a very different type of people. Now that assumption has to be there. You have to understand that all these powers are bubbling in you and just out of formality or maybe out of shyness or maybe a little cowardice, you are hiding them.... This is the new era we are starting from today. And this is the day I was waiting for all of you to realize that you are not Sahaja Yogis for only your selfish ends, nor for your families, nor for your commu- who is nities, nor for your country, but for the whole world. Expand yourself.... Any person a king and does not belong to his kingdom is a failure, is useless. If he thinks about himself, about his own comfort, about his own fame, about his own achievements, then he is a fail- ure. He has to think about the country on which he is ruling. In the same way, you have to also turn your mind away from all these petty things that you have been dealing with.... So let us see what you have decided for yourself and what you have decided for Sahaja Yoga. If ve decided to opt for Sahaja Yoga, then just know that this is the main thing which have you you have to do. The whole attention should be on that.... Today we have here people from all over the world. And you go and tell this message to all the rest of the people whom I have not met, that "Mother has already announced – through the Vishnumaya also – that you all have become now mahayogis." And try to express that. Manifest that with full con- fidence in yourself. And with this power of love, I am sure you will all win over. MAY 7 AND 8: ROME PUBLIC PROGRAMS MAY 9: PERUGIA ITALY PUBLIC PROGRAM MAY 10: MAGLIANO SABINA ITALY MAY 12 & 13: MoscoW PROGRAMS AND MEDICAL CONFERENCE (DATES APPROXIMATE) MAY 14: LENINGRAD – SHRI BUDDHA PUJA

 In Russia people were just waiting for a Mother to come, that's all. They are Mother worshippers to begin with and they were wanting somebody just to love them, every one of them, to tell them about love because they felt they were never loved by their mother.... The pattern of the government there and the pattern of the people are two different types. The government people are very – you can call them very dominating, extremely strict and exploiting type. But the people are the exploited ones. SHRI MATAJI, MAY 28TH Leningrad to SAN DIEGO Moscow Eastbourne Perugia from CALCUTTA Rome Everywhere you go, they know Me and they know about Sahaja Yoga. Just imagine I was surprised at Russians, who have never I very well known the name of God. They were not supposed to know anything about God, Christ or anyone, these people, who have been all the time cursed no conditioning of any religion whatsoever. But will be amazed in My first meeting only, there by communism, as they say, had no freedom of choice, nothing, but they are not materialistic you were two thousand in the hall and two thousand people. They are not materialistic because the waiting outside. The whole of Leningrad was matter, whatever was available was available, there. I was amazed at them, surprised. Look at whatever was not available was not available. Like on the ship, if something is available on the ship, these people. They have never known of God or it is there. Otherwise it is not. So they have no anything and how am I to talk to them about God? And I did talk and you will be surprised that problems and no solutions, that's why. If there are no solutions, how can there be problems? Moscow was even worse. We had to arrange a big, So they had to deal with whatever was available. huge, open place for them and it was impossible to control these people because they were so many. And this is the reason why they are very, very, And now the government has taken over and they centrally placed people. have publicized Sahaja Yoga on the television. SHRI MATAJI, JUNE 3RD 17

 all there, so beautiful 28 San Diego: national puja – Divine Discretion may It is another great pleasure to come to America to meet all you people here. This one is a very important country in the field of spirituality. Not because it is a large country or because it is very prosperous, but because it is the Vishuddhi in the plan of the Virata. The Vishuddhi is such an important chakra. It has a very great manifestation also. For example, it has another subsidiary chakra, which we call as the Hamsa chakra. And the star which is increasing this centre – we say the star that resides on which this centre is working – is Saturn. And as you know with Saturn, there is another small little Saturn moving. In the same way, with this Vishuddhi chakra, there is another one which is a very important chakra, which we call as the Hamsa chakra.. So we are really on a warpath in America, I you – for Sahaja Yogis, really on a warpath. Unless and until must tell up Sahaja you take Yoga as your only concern, it is not going to work out.... The first thing that the Sahaja Yogis must have is collectivity in America because America stands for the Vishuddhi chakra, which is manifesting collectivity within us. And if people cannot be collective, then how can you have Sahaja Yoga manifesting here? Impossible – because that is the greatest qual- ity you have. That is the basic power you have in this country. It is the collectivity within A Sahaja Yogi is the one who is completely connected with this Paramachaitanya... you.... Understand that to be in Sahaja Yoga is only possible if we are having that depth because a new jump is needed in Sahaja Yoga, which will work out, which is working out and many will be thrown out. You have to jump. And for that jumping, you really need people who are honest and deep and serious. Do not get lost into frivolous things and worldly things. Just seek your depth. It is all there, so beautiful. MAY 30 AND 31: SAN DIEGO PUBLIC PROGRAMS JUNE 3 AND 4: MIAMI PUBLIC PROGRAMS JUNE 5: NEw YORK – TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS JUNE 6: NEW YORK – NEWSPAPER INTERVIEWS AND UNITED NATIONS PROGRAM JUNE 7: NEW YORK RADIO INTERVIEW JUNE 7 AND 8: NEW YOORK PUBLIC PROGRAMS JUNE 11 AND 12: MILAN PUBLIC PROGRAM JUNE 14: MADRID PUBLIC PROGRAM JUNE 15 AND 17: BARCELONA PUBLIC PROGRAMS Four hundred people awaited the awakening of their gift from God. They were white, Chinese, Indian, Hispanic, young and old. They smiled proudly as Mother praised their diversity and the creativity of God. They listened to Her wisdom, willingly received their Realization, then eagerly swarmed to Her Feet. This time, even New York – usually bold and defiantly diffident – was prepared to participate, glorify and behold the Mother.

 Shri Mataji arrived in San Diego on Saturday May 26th in the evening. Yogis from all over the Puja was offered to Shri Mataji, who sat in great country had gathered to greet Mother's plane and there was a feeling of anticipation and hope that beauty and splendour. The talk addressed the Vishuddhi chakra, but there was a tremendous many seekers might get their Realization and take feeling of heart, of fear being removed and confidence restored. We worshipped Shri Mataji to Sahaja Yoga. The children, who seemed to have sprung up overnight, ran to Mother with flowers in their hands and She exclaimed, "I must take as the Devi. Much to our amazement, it was announced that Shri Mataji had brought gifts flowers from the children first." for all the yogis. Mother showed concern for our Vishuddhis by giving the men watches and ties and the ladies perfume, scarves, earrings and Shri Mataji explained that we are ardent seekers necklaces. There was such warmth and love in this and that, through our frantic seeking for truth, exchange, a feeling that “Yes, there is a great deal into trouble, gone down us have many of gotten to be accomplished here, but we have the power the wrong path. She said that Americans are the within us to do it. Our Mother has told us so and greatest seekers, but we do not have the wisdom She has given us such love." There was a clear and the discrimination that the Russians have. understanding that we must rise higher. She posed the question, "If the Russians are so sensitive, why not the Americans?" She also spoke about racism and the ignorance that causes No one left the hall without feeling that a racism. We are all universal beings, just made a profound thing had occurred. Later in private, little differently to allow for variety in the beauty Shri Mataji said that this is a land blessed by of creation. When all the questions were done, God. Last year it was a gate to hell. It is humbling She gave Realization. Shri Mataji met all those indeed to see that the Feet of the Divine can o who came on stage and worked on all of them. change a place from hell to heaven. often punctuated by applause, especially when She Shri Mataji graced the world famous Apollo Theater o with Her divine presence. The occasion was a fifteen said Sahaja Yogis hit lots of "jackpots." Her divine minute live radio interview before a studio audience. blend of love, wit and wisdom melted the hearts and thoughts of the audience. Fifteen minutes came Arriving just five minutes before showtime, Shri Mataji listened as the hurried host ran down a list all too soon and the show was over. The host said of questions he would ask. "Remember," he said, a reluctant goodbye. As he escorted Shri Mataji from the stage, he hugged Her and thanked Her for CC "you're my guest and I'll treat you as my guest. Shri Mataji smiled, thanked him and took Her coming to his show. He concluded by extending Her "carte blanche" for future appearances. As She CC seat on stage. Shri Mataji explained Kundalini and Sahaja Yoga. The repartee between Her and the host left the Apollo Theater, the usual lacklustre veneer that reflects Harlem's poverty seemed beautifully sounded beautifully rehearsed, belying the three minute backstage introduction. Her comments were transformed. 19

 (16 Barcelona: Shri Mahavira Puja june Today we are going to do puja of Mahavira and we never had this puja before. The reason for this was that Mahavira's life was an ascetic's life, just like Buddha.... Unless and until you touch your depth, you will become like any other religion because you won't be actu- ally Sahaja Yogis, just nominal. So we have to work in such a manner that we understand ourselves and we understand our attention and we try to ascend. I do not have to tel you. You yourself have to work it out in such a manner that you touch your depth and you become an ascetic within yourself. Then only you will be really doing the divine work properly with proper understanding. Sahaja Yoga is the integration of all these great proph- ets and these incarnations. So I have to tell you that, whatever were your conditionings and all that, to get rid of them. You must get out of this ocean of illusion. So this is the only thing I can just now say about Mahavira... I hope My lecture goes into your head and settles into your heart and you understand what you have to do about yourself, about your ascent. You have to be genuine people. Then only it is going to show results in the whole world. I hope you will pass this tape to all the people, so they should know why I did not have Mahavira's puja all these years. JUNE 17 AND 18: BARCELONA – TALKS TO SAHAJA YOGIS JUNE 18: VIENNA PUBLIC PROGRAM 19 Tun Moedling Austria: Shri Kundalini Puja e If you really want to achieve the full results of your ascent and if you want to really trans- form the world, then you must know you have to be ideal people. You cannot be prob- lematic people.... You have to have full determination and understanding that this is a tremendous work and a tremendous task. And all your powers to be awakened within yourself, Divine. Unless and until you have that readiness, that "I don't want anything. I don't want. have to be first of all fully equipped with readiness, readiness to serve the you I just want to serve the Divine" - as long as you are striving for it and asking for it with a full heart, with full sincerity, then I am sure this Kundalini will be strengthened and She will cleanse you completely. JUNE 19: VIENNA PUBLIC PROGRAM JUNE 20: VIENNA AIRPORT DEPARTURE TALK JUNE 22 AND 23: ATHENS PUBLIC PROGRAMS (DATES APPROXIMATE) JUNE 23-24: HYDRA GREECE – SHRI MAHALAKSHMI PUJA JUNE 24: ATHENS – TALK TO LADIES JUNE 25: Moscow PUBLIC PROGRAM JUNE 26: Moscow PRESS CONFERENCE AND PUBLIC PROGRAM JUNE 28: LENINGRAD PUBLIC PROGRAM JUNE 28: LENINGRAD TALK TO SCIENTISTS

 Imagine, in Greece, Sahaja Yoga is only two years old. Only two years old, Greece, but that is a traditional and country. It is an ancient country the Greeks have really fallen the way into Sahaja Yoga is beyond. SHRI MATAJI, MARCH 12TH Leningrad (St. Petersberg) Moscow London Kiev Vienna from NEW YORK Milan Barcelona Madrid Athens After Austria, Shri Mataji went to Greece, where She blessed this country with two public programs, which were attended by approximately thirteen hundred seekers. A puja to Mahalakshmi was performed in a huge house on the island of o Hydra surrounded by the Aegean Sea. The whole time Mother was in Greece, She worked intensely on the Nabhi and gave a lot of speeches on Lakshmi Tattwa. She went shopping almost every day and gave Realization to shop owners in the well-known shopping region of Plaka in Athens. She bought lots of presents, showing us always how to save money, although buying high quality. Looking at everything which She had bought, we experienced the joy that matter can emit if vibrations are put inside. 21

 quru within JUNE 29: MOSCOW MEDICAL CONFERENCE JUNE 29: KIEV UKRAINE PUBLIC PROGRAM JUNE 29: KIEV MEDIA INTERVIEW JULY 1: MOSCOW PUBLIC PROGRAM 8 Avignon France: Guru Puja july In Sahaja Yoga, the Guru Puja has a very different significance from any other guru puja. This is not When you worship your guru, you are also worshipping the guru within you. any other guru-disciple system because, in you, the guru, the master has been awakened. in And so, when you are worshipping your guru, then this master within you is also wor- shipped. You respect it, you glorify it, you awaken it and you manifest it. This we have to realize.... All of us are now sitting like in a big vimana, like an airplane, and we all have to land into the beautiful area. But first of all, we have to develop that humility in your heart. Complete humility and surrender, that is very important. Unless and until you have that humility and surrender in your heart, the guru principle cannot be awakened. First, you have to be the disciple and then the guru. So you have to develop that humility. And that humility comes very easily if you love Me, respect Me. It is not only love, but respect. That respect has to be there and then people will respect you. JULY 9: LONDON – SIR CP RECEIVES KNIGHTHOOD JULY 13 AND 14: WARSAW PUBLIC PROGRAMS JULY 16: BERLIN PUBLIC PROGRAM JULY 17: BERLIN – TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS JULY 17: DRESDEN PUBLIC PROGRAM JULY 19: PRAGUE PUBLIC PROGRAMS JULY 21: VIENNA MUSIC EVENING JULY 22: BUDAPEST PUBLIC PROGRAM JULY 23: BUDAPEST PUBLIC PROGRAM JULY 24: SOFIA BULGARIA PUBLIC PROGRAM JULY 25: SOFIA PRESS CONFERENCE AND PUBLIC PROGRAM JULY 27: VIENNA – ARRIVAL TALK AND MUSIC EVENING Thirty journalists from leading papers and magazines met for a conference at the hotel. Shri Mataji talked and answered press questions for more than two hours. She said that yes, She was able to read thoughts and perceive deities and other beings present, but Her sole interest was to give Realization. After all, Christ had promised a Comforter, a Counselor and a Redeemer.

 The divine discretion that manifests through your Hamsa chakra first started in Germany. And now you see how East Germany is entering into the German territory, West Germany, and how they are welcoming them, looking after them.... In those countries where there has been a tremendous war problem and they had czars and they had to go through hell, even Germans had to suffer a lot because of Hitler's misguidance. They have known hard- ships. They have known sacrifices. They have known all kinds of ordeals they had to go through.... Hardships have been in all these countries which we call as the Eastern Bloc. And Sahaja Yoga is spreading like wildfire in all these Eastern Bloc countries, where they have been com- pletely under the rule of Russians, we can say, or under the rule of terror. And the same terror has acted in Russia, throughout. In that terror, in that fear, it is surprising how this wisdom has grown in all these people much more than in countries where we have the greatest affluence, the greatest comfort of life. The hardship has taught them. The fear has taught them to be wise. And the best is part the discretion. SHRI MATAJI, MAY 28TH At the airport, Shri Mataji expressed Her concern that the hall we had Berlin Warsaw rented, with its capacity of 2800, London might not be large enough. When we arrived at the hall, half the people in Dresden Prague the tram got off with us and stood to LOS ANGELES Vienna outside. It was impossible to be in • Budapest o Sofia and not know about the program. People had even come from Sofia Plovdiv and Varna, hundreds of miles Avignon away. Well before the program started, the hall was full, with people crammed into the aisles and surrounding the stage. The excitement and pressure of the crowd entering the hall was so great that a large glass panel outside was broken. Fortunately a stadium had been booked for the next evening. 23

 my promise to you Los Angeles: Raksha Bandhan Puja august You have got, of course, Realization. You have got great qualities. You are not even aware as to what you have got so easily. You have got the knowledge also so easily and did not have to go to college or anything and you are capable of so many things. But remember that the power that is within you is cleverer than you and anything you try to do which is not correct, which is not righteous, which is not holy, it will try to correct you. So try to be a deeper person. Try to understand what is behind this person, what is the spiritual quality of this person and then only you will know that pure relationships are so fragrant and so beautiful. I really enjoy you people because you have such pure relationships among yourselves and such understanding. AUGUST 10: VANCOUVER PUBLIC PROGRAM 11 Vancouver: Shri Saraswati Puja august When they asked Me what puja we should have in Vancouver, I had heard about this ashram, that it is placed in very beautiful surroundings of nature and, as nature is being created by the power of Saraswati, I thought best would be to have the puja of Saraswati here. Another thing is that when people live in nature, they become extremely creative. Their delicate feelings are preserved and they are never in a rush or they are not what we can call too much modernized because nature soothes them down. So also the creativity of Saraswati adds to the artist and I knew that there must have been many artists in this country created since long. Canada as such, I feel is the Hamsa Chakra of the Vishuddhi. AUGUST 13: TORONTO CANADA AUGUST 17: IPSWICH UNITED KINGDOM – TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS 19 eugus Ipswich UK: Shri Krishna Puja One thing you must ask in your prayer in the evening when you are sleeping, "What have I done for Sahaja Yoga?" One sentence – all of you just ask this question: "What have I CC done for Sahaja Yoga?" Persons like Me or Shri Krishna or anyone, we do not even feel we are doing anything. So what can we ask? If I want to ask Myself, I will fall into an ocean I think. I don't know. I will be lost. If I want to analyze Myself, I get lost. If I want to think about Myself, I get lost. It is beyond Me. Then let it be. It does not matter. I do not want to know Myself. But you better know yourself. You can't be Me. So as far as I am concerned, I only think that, as long as I live – I don't know, I may live forever, I am living forever maybe, you might say that – but whatever it is, as long as I am on this Earth, I will see that Sahaja Yoga is fully established. This is My promise to you. AUGUST 23: LONDON – TALK To INDIANS

 Shri Mataji said we should offer this puja as a Shri Ganesha Puja because o the essence of the raksha bandhan, the brother-sister relationship, is innocence and purity, which are the aspects of Shri Ganesha. As we said Shri Ganesha's names, Shri Mataji took the mantra book and started reading the names and explaining them to us. After the puja, Shri Mataji said that during the puja, in meditation, She saw Shri Ganesha and that the Muladharas of all the yogis were shining. Just before sunset a big thunder- storm developed right over us. The cloudy sky was bright orange, reddish and violet. It became dark quickly and soon the first lightning and thunder came down from the sky. It was raining heavily. Mother asked everyone to watch Late at night the puja commenced. The stage was redone the thunderstorm because She said according to Shri Mataji's directions. To one side, Shri Krishna stood in the chariot explaining the truth to Arjuna. On the that She was orchestrating it. So we all stood in front of the windows other side, Shri Krishna was depicted lifting Mount Govardhan beholding big lightning bolts that with one finger. The puja was very powerful, the rain cascading, shot down right in front of us, blowing around the tent. Shri Mataji was offered a pair of dandia right into the ocean. Every two to sticks, which She took up and played victoriously. Dandia sticks, three seconds the lightning struck hand-painted in America, were distributed to all. The sticks were in different parts of the sky and it gleefully taken up by the crowd. Many stood up and danced to went on for hours. Mother described keep time to the music. A wonderful array of musical instruments it as a real fireworks. The next day was presented to Shri Mataji. She explained that the instruments, local newspapers reported that the which were slowly going out of circulation, would be revived now. lightning had struck sixteen hundred times. Later in the evening, the She especially loved a rare antique organ and a tiny guitar-like instrument. They were all played for Her or by Her. The puja lights in the ashram went out. There ended at nearly 3 am. We felt Shri Krishna had been roused from was no electricity in the area due to His great slumber and we were grateful to Shri Mataji for being the lightning storm. A lantern and able to reach Him through the Heart of the Universe. two party candles were brought in and the bhajans continued. 25

 (26 august Today we are celebrating the birthday of Shri Ganesha. You all know the story of His birth and I need not repeat it. But as He was created by the Mother only, by Adi Shakti, in the same way you are all created after Him. So you are on the path of Shri Ganesha already. Your eyes sparkle the same way His eyes sparkle. You all have the beautiful glow on your face as He had. Whether you are small, big or old makes no difference. All the beauty comes to us through the glow of Shri Ganesha. If He is satisfied, then we do not have to other Deities because the of all the Deities is Shri Ganesha. He worry about any power is like a vice-chancellor sitting on every chakra. Unless and until He signs, the Kundalini cannot cross through because Kundalini is the Gauri and is the Virgin Mother of Shri Ganesh.... So let us try to be innocent within ourself. Be proud that we are innocent. We need not be smart people. Smartness is your mental attitude and innocence is your innate quality, which is connected with this all-pervading power. 31 Shri Hanuman Duia Schwetzingen Cermany: We have come here to do Hanumana's Puja. Shri Hanumana is a great character in our being and He runs all the way from the Swadisthana to your brain. And He supplies all the necessary guidance we need in our futuristic planning or in our mental activities. He gives us guidance and protection... I wish sometimes you could get His photograph also, as you have got the photographs of Shri Ganesha. Then you will really fall in love with Him. He is such a sweet thing. And although He is so huge and so big and though He has nails, but when He caresses My Feet, He pulls back His nails. He is so gentle, extremely gentle, and very beautifully He caresses My Feet. And I have seen Him, the way He handles every- thing. It is extremely gentle ways. So that is what I feel, that now Germans are becoming very gentle in handling things, in handling people. This change is coming and I think it is the blessing of Hanumana on them.

 London from VANCOUVER Paris Frankfurt Bucharest Geneva Chioggia Turin Rome to ISTANBUL 27

 dancing in StFTEmBEr 142: LoyN PUBLIC PRAM jay Jaaer es SEPTEMBER 14?: LONDON PUBLIC PROGRAM SEPTEMBER 18 AND 19: GENEVA PUBLIC PROGRAMS SEPTEMBER 21: ARZIER SWITZERLAND - TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS Geneva: Navaratri Puja september Yesterday, when the last song started, it did penetrate into many souls, to many hearts, that unique joy which we call as nirananda. I did feel it yesterday. But keep it up. It is to be kept very safely into your kumbhas. That is the Kundalini and She is the one who has come up. So My idea was that today, it is not only the worship of the kumbha where the kundalini resides, but the kumbha becomes like a flowerpot. It is like that. That has happened .. the kumbha becoming flowers and flowers becoming light and the lights with fragrance. I hope you will understand My vision and you will stand by Me and will come up to you up to that. I depend on you entirely for My vision. We have to change this whole world into a beautiful place and, for that, not much sacrifice is needed. You are already blessed. You do not have to do much. The only thing is keep your attention on the source of power. OCTOBER 5: ROME – TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS OCTOBER 16: BUCHAREST PUBLIC PROGRAM OCTOBER 17: BUCHAREST PRESS CONFERENCE Chioggia Italy: Diwali Puja october It was such a surprise to see you all in that procession. Actually, I was waiting and waiting and I thought, “Why these people are not coming to call Me for puja?" It was a beautiful surprise. It's very joy-giving. The joy was dancing in your eyes. I could see the lights in your and this is the real Diwali. The Diwali word comes from two words: dipa and awali. eyes Dipa means lights. And awali means rows – rows and rows of lights. It seems it is a very, very ancient idea and, all over in the world, whenever they have to celebrate something, then they put lights and lights because light gives joy, gives happiness. So to overcome the darkness of ignorance, also we have to enlighten ourselves. And that is why it is important Self Realization to feel the light within themselves. And that everybody should get you must have noticed that after Realization the eyes also sparkle. There is light in the eyes of every Sahaja Yogi. OCTOBER 22: TURIN ITALY PUBLIC PROGRAM OCTOBER 30: ISTANBUL TURKEY NOVEMBER 1 AND 2: KUALA LUMPUR MALAYSIA PUBLIC PROGRAMS NOVEMBER 3 AND 4: KUALA LUMPUR – TALKS TO SAHAJA YOGIS NOVEMBER 5 AND 6: BANGKOK PUBLIC PROGRAMS (DATES APPROXIMATE) NOVEMBER 8 AND 9: TAIPEI TAIWAN PUBLIC PROGRAMS AND RADIO INTERVIEW NOVEMBER l1: HONG KONG (DATE APPROXIMATE)

 On Thursday evening, Shri Mataji very kindly cooked a wonderful mutton biryani for us at the Givrins ashram. In Her address, Shri Mataji seemed And on Friday, She again cooked lunch and dinner. The to cover the whole of Sahaja Yoga and Friday evening experience was particularly intense, as what we all have to do as Sahaja Yogis. Shri Mataji was sitting in the kitchen stirring and the pot Addressing Herself to the women, She giving instructions to the ladies around Her. The rest of commented on how the woman is very us sat just outside in the living room and watched. much the background force and they should let the men manifest more. "I am The look of surprise and delight on our Divine Mother's not God," She said. "Sadashiva is God. face was so joyful to see as She beheld this small sample But I am God also. Without Me what is He? I am His Power. He is powerless. But of India transported to Italy – hundreds of Sahaja Yogis let Him be God, good. Because if you in Indian costume were dancing and singing. Slowly the procession advanced towards the hall, Shri Mataji's car have to blame someone, blame Him. you He is God. But I have to work hard to behind us. Mother made Her way to the throne, which had been prepared for Her on the stage under a huge keep Him pleased." decorated cloth awning. We resumed our places and Shri Mother began to talk to us. Taipei Hong Kong to PUNE Bangkok from ISTANBUL and BOMBAY Kuala Lumpur Singapore Shri Mataji stayed four days in Thailand in a little house near the river and She showered Her infinite motherly olove on us all. The first night She asked some Sahaja Yogis to massage Her feet and Her arms. This cleared a lot of Thailand's negativity and Shri Mataji said that by this massage, the public program would be successful. "This body is only compassion," She explained. "I will bless this country with morality and prosperity. Ask for this." CC

 afestival of ascent at NoyEMBER 22: PUNE INDIA DOCTORS CONFERENCE Pune India: puja december This tour is a festival for us. Of course, I say it is a pilgrimage, but there are no signs of pilgrimage because, if you see the pilgrims, horrible they look, while you are looking like roses, all of you. So it is a festival for us and you have to feel that festivity within your heart, that joy within your heart and small, small things you should not worry because these things cannot be provided in all the places. Gradually we will be building ashrams in all the places wherever you have been visiting, but you know how difficult it is in those OW days where India is passing through such a bad phase for so many years, where everything is delayed. So the attitude should be that "We have come here for our ascent." We have to work out everything with that attitude, that we have come here for our ascent, and every moment of our ascent is a festive occasion. Everything is a festival. If you understand that, I am sure you will see the beauty in everything, you will enjoy everything, whatever may be the rustic style. Maybe you may not like the colour of these lights because you may not enjoy it so much. You might get much better things in your own country. But whatever it is, it is not your conditioning that should stop you from enjoying. So please remember that you are now the member of the universal society and we cannot have our conditionings to mar our happiness and joy. I want you to enjoy this trip fully, absolutely, in a way that you have never enjoyed anything before. DECEMBER 5: PUNE PUBLIC PROGRAM · DECEMBER 6: PUNE – NEW ENGLISH SCHOOL PROGRAM DECEMBER 9 AND 10: SHRIRAMPUR PUBLIC PROGRAMS desember) Shrirampur India: puja In these modern times, we are so many. We have so many Sahaja Yogis all over the world. So first of all, we are collectively very strong. And secondly, the Brahmachaitanya itself has become active. It is a very great thing. We must realize it within ourselves, that no amount of cruelty, planning against us, any kind of violence of other people can harm us.... You have to know that your Mother is with you and you should have no fear at all. To boast of your fear is nonsensical. Once you realize how powerful you are and how much you are connected to that power which is so powerful and all-pervading, which does all the living work, you will never get any one of these funny ideas which are to be left behind. You have to cross the threshold of these conditionings that you have had. Just open your heart and see for yourself where are you sitting, where have you reached, under what blessings you are here. DECEMBER 13: SANGAMNER INDIA PUBLIC PROGRAM

 In Alibag we had bhajans at night with the local villagers, singing together with western Sahaja Yogis. Mother came unexpectedly, since the puja had been cancelled. She was glowing with motherly love and said how much She enjoyed seeing and hearing us all singing together, dropping our artificiality and superficiality and just praising the Mother with one heart. It is in this spirit that one day the whole world will be united. After Shri Mataji left the stage and went up to Her room, the Sahaja Yogis gathered below Her balcony and continued singing and dancing. Shri Mataji gave very long talks, but the Realization was extremely quick. She just asked them to raise their hands and ask, "Is this Brahmachaitanya? Is this the cool breeze of God?" They all felt it and raised their hands. The time in Pune made us feel we had left the West far behind. At dusk there was a truly beautiful procession with Shri Mataji, under a sky suffused with pink and blue light. There were lots On the glittering stage, decorated with of people in the procession, all gaily dancing through the streets. The local boys leapt and jumped around with an energy and the most beautiful silk saris, Shri Mataji appeared to be sitting in a celestial rhythm that was incredible to see. Other villagers, the local throne adorned with flowers and lights. Sahaja Yogis, and all the westerners were copying the dance The gold thread of the saris glittered steps and movements of their Indian brothers and sisters. Shri behind Her like stars in the firmament. Mataji smiled down at all of us from a cart adorned with young At the close of the puja, crowned with banana trees. The cart moved slowly through the crowd behind fresh flowers and with a beautiful smile a very loud band which could be heard all over. The procession on Her face, She received the long was followed by a wonderful public program in Shrirampur. line of Sahaja Yogis who offered Her It was one of the fullest and most joyful programs of the whole garlands. tour. 31

 DECEMBER 14: PRATISHTHAN PUNE – TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS DECEMBER 15: WAI PUBLIC PROGRAM DECEMBER 16: SATARA PUBLIC PROGRAM 17 Brahmapuri: Shri Chakra and Shri Lalita Puja december The materialistic life, unless and until there is the foundation of the spiritual life, takes you to a very partial development. But to get a full development, you must have your founda- tion on spirituality. That is why spirituality, being the foundation, has to be deep, has to be fully equipped, has to be absolutely perfect. Then the whole building can be built ... and will be surprised how you will become really solid people.. I think I should sit then you down and write all about it and it will be a nice, handy thing for you to read. But you must know that beyond thought, when you go, these chakras become extremely efficient because the thought puts a pressure on them and, because of the pressure, the movement of these chakras is very slow and ineffective. But once you can get out of your thoughts and go into thoughtless awareness, then these chakras start working it out and you start moving much deeper into your own being. DECEMBER 21: KOLHAPUR – MAHALAKSHMI PUJA DECEMBER 24: GANAPATIPULE – TALK ABOUT SHRI JESUS december Ganapatipule: Christmas Puja Without Him you cannot go to the Sahasrara. In the whole play He is like the sutradhara. He is the one who is the conductor, the one who moves the strings in a puppet show. And so it is very important to pray to Shri Ganesha every time we have puja. We have to pray to Him and that is how we are praying to Lord Jesus Christ every time. Without His auspi- ciousness, without His help, we cannot do Sahaja Yoga. He is the manager. See I am sitting here and He is the manager. Supposing there is no management, how will I speak here? Nothing can happen. But He is so efficient and you never see Him working out everything. DECEMBER 26: GANAPATIPULE – ENTERTAINMENT AND TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS 27 Ganapatipule: talk to Sahaja Yogis december After Realization you will know which is real, which is unreal. Once you know that, then it is different. But when you do not know, you will fall into anything, like any stone you will worship.... But today it is not so. Today you all have become the saints, you have become walis, have become realized souls. Now you know what is real, what is not real. So you to understand these things deeply we have to know that we must have our vibrations to understand what is right and what is wrong. DECEMBER 28: GANAPATIPULE – GAURI PUJA AND MARRIAGES DECEMBER 31: KALWE – NEW YEAR PUJA

 1990 As we arrived in Pratishthan, Shri Mataji and Sir C.P. Srivastava were waiting for us. We were greeted with a gracious gift of a shawl every Sahaja Yogi from Sir C.P. He welcomed for us to Pratishthan, saying that it is our home and we should feel at home there. We were told that we are their children and they are our parents and we were together with our real family there. That afternoon we went into an open courtyard for a delious, completely satisfying biryani lunch. As we ate, Shri Mataji and Sir C.P. sat with the children from the Dharamsala school, enjoying their company. THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE www.divinecoolbreeze.org There are sure to be errors and omissions in this compilation of events from 1990. It is not comprehensive, nor com- plete. The sources drawn upon are The Divine Cool Breeze magazines of 1990, the Sahaja Yoga Media Project website and the International Book Project's transcriptions of Shri Mataji's talks. Sometimes these sources do not agree in the sequencing and dating of events. In these cases, priority has been given to The Divine Cool Breeze reports, as they were written shortly after each event by people who were there. Additionally, some unverified events have not been included so that we do not repeat and perpetuate an error. In the end, we hope that the truth of Shri Mataji's travels does not lie so much in the details, but in the scope, range and love She gave every day of 1990 – and every day since. PHOTOGRAPHS Colin Heinsen: Cover, pages 5, 15, 23, 25, 31 and 33 Toni Grabmayer: pages 21 and 27 BACK COVER WORDS: SUBSCRIPTIONS: Contact@divinecoolbreeze.org CcONTENT: editor@divinecoolbreeze.org Birthday Puja 1990 PRINTED BY King Printing Company Inc. Lowell Massachusetts USA and Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. Pune Maharashtra India

 Thope this will happen this year ODe and people will try to make it a point that we have a large heart. A large heart does not mean stupidity. It doesn't mean that. A large heart means the heart in which you can put Me. It is quite a big person, Myself, so you have to have a very large heart that I can reside.... If that happens, then everything will work out very well.



----------------------

2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
2011 issue 4 – volume twenty-four number four
1990m shaja Yoya
ath
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-1.txt 
 The audience was small. About fifty employees
gathered in the Dag Hammarskjold Auditorium
in the early evening. A Sahaja Meditation
Society had just two days before been chartered
and sanctioned by the United Nations and now
the members gathered to hear their keynote
speaker. This was a break from their desks,
meetings and global concerns. It was a chance
to hear the words of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi,
a chance to look within. The topic was spiritual
enlightenment, global peace and a better world.
It was June 6th in 1990. The venue was the
United Nations headquarters in New York City.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 ONE YEAR
WE HAVE COME HERE FOR OUR ASCENT AND EVERY MOMENT OF OUR ASCENT IS A FESTIVE OCCASION
1990
ite
a festival of ascent
Perhaps the minds of the UN staff on that day were on
a European arms reductions promise from the Soviet Union.
Or perhaps some were lending assistance to an exodus of
UN personnel in the wake of another civil war in Liberia.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 1990
THE WORLD SEEMED FULL OF TURMOIL AND CHANGE.
The first anniversary of the demonstrations and massacre in Beijing's Tiananmen Square
was being observed that week. No one could anticipate what would be next.
Within twelve months that same Soviet Union would no longer exist. It would be
replaced by a new Russian federation. There had already been free elections in Romania
after the previous year's dismantling of the Berlin Wall. In less than four months, the two
Germanys would complete their reunification. And in less than two months, Iraq would
invade Kuwait. The United Nations building would soon become an even busier place.
Now was the time to pause and listen.
On that Wednesday evening, Shri Mataji spoke calmly to the small audience. This was
not the general assembly. These people were not decision-makers. They were clerks and
administrative assistants. But, as small as the gathering was, it represented the world
on another, perhaps more real level.
Her tone was intimate. She chose Her words to meet the needs of the audience. And, as
always, She spoke in terms that were both global and personal.
During Her talk, Shri Mataji spoke of truth and the need to actualize the collective
doctrine of the United Nations. She spoke of the Kundalini's role in bringing about that
actualization. At the end of the talk Shri Mataji granted Self Realization. She personally
greeted everyone and most signed up for follow-up classes. It seemed that the United
Nations was finally coming of age.
In the week previous to Her appearance at the UN, Shri Mataji had given similar talks
in both Miami and San Diego. Early in the year She had spoken in Australia, India, Italy,
New Zealand, Russian, Singapore and the United Kingdom. A medical conference in
Moscow, a press conference in Calcutta, to Perth, Melbourne, Cairns, Sydney, Bangalore,
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Hyderabad, Jaipur, Leningrad, Auckland and Calcutta – Her appearances for the
year
were already approaching one hundred and it was still only June.
To come, before the year was out: Athens, Bangkok, Barcelona, Berlin, Bucharest,
Budapest, Dresden, Frankfurt, Geneva, Hong Kong, Istanbul, Kiev, Kuala Lumpur,
Leningrad, London, Los Angeles, Madrid, Milan, Munich, Paris, Prague, Pune, Rome,
Sofia, Taipei, Turin, Toronto, Vancouver, Vienna, Warsaw and the villages and towns of
central India, all before the New Year's Day – more than two hundred stops in twenty-
six countries, all in one year.
Her travels in 1990 totalled in excess of 135,000 kilometres – more than three times the
distance around the world.
In addition to the scheduled talks, there were countless informal events. In homes and
airports, halls and schools. Each conversation, every speech was different. And yet each
was also the same, highlighted with concern and insight, with humour and love. Every
talk served the same purpose. It addressed the need for spiritual ascent.
While another person might say, "Be your better self," Shri Mataji reached for an even
higher plateau: “Be your true Self."
And this was not an unusual year, 1990. But it was pivotal. From the late 1970s, through
the 80s and 90s and into the new century, Her travels and outreach, Her efforts to create
a better world were to continue. Her travels were largely unchronicled by newspapers
and undocumented in the popular consciousness, but they were not unnoticed by those
seeking enlightenment in a meta-modern world.
In Her own words, when speaking of that year's tour of India, She called it both a
pilgrimage and a festival. And so it was for the entire year 1990 and for each of our
lives: always a festival of ascent.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 I am gelling a cool breeze from you
ttis
Sangli India: puja and advice to women
january
The heritage of our country is spirituality. And this is the nourishment. Only the one-sided
growth in the West, due to machinery or whatever you will call it, has ruined it completely.
And one-sided growth in this country, and all such countries, where religion has become a
blind faith, has also ruined it. But in the centre lies Sahaja Yoga....
I am getting a cool breeze from you. So I want you to be very great Sahaja Yogis – very
you should really manifest your powers of wisdom.
great. And
JANUARY 2: KOLHAPUR PUBLIC PROGRAM
JANUARY 4: GANAPATIPULE – TALK AND MUSIC PROGRAM
JANUARY 5: GANAPATIPULE MUSIC EVENING AND TALK – ENJOY EACH OTHER
JANUARY 6: GANAPATIPULE – ENTERTAINMENT EVENING AND TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
give il the highest priority
Ganapatipule: puja
january
In India we believe that God Himself takes incarnations with His Vishnu Principle when-
ever there is the decline of righteousness and He tries to elevate. Every incarnation has
done a lot of work and has done also work within ourselves.... What importance you
give to everything that you want to do, it is very important. It is the complete attention,
dedication and the complete importance that you give to anything that you do. It is very
important. If you do not give it the highest priority, it does not work. If it is just by the
way, it does not work. So it is important to understand that if you have to gain anything in
this puja, you have to give it the highest priority. And then just before puja, if your mind is
telling you or doubting, just tell him to stop because that mind can act against you. So for
the puja, you should be all prepared in a way, in a receptive way and receive it.
JANUARY 8: GANAPATIPULE – MARRIAGES
JANUARY 9: GANAPATIPULE – TALKS AND INTERVIEW
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 lbveze
coo
Shri Mataji arrived at the main
pendal at midday. A picture of
dignity and serenity, She walked
up the clay steps, unaccompanied,
lightly lifting Her white cotton
sari from Her painted feet. She
then took a seat on the beautifully
carved Indian throne, the lion on
Her left and the other conveyance
of the Goddess, the tiger,
supporting Her right arm. To our
surprise and wonder, Shri Mataji
gave each of us the beautiful gift
of a shawl, each unique, a different
design and colour combination.
Shri Mataji came and spoke to the grooms and really
the tone of that beautiful speech gave the feeling of a
For the filming of a documentary for Indian
television, Shri Mataji came to the beach.
talk by a great empress to Her warriors on the eve of
The water and sky looked like they never had
a great battle. She stood in the middle of that small
pendal, Her right hand on the central support, gently
before – the water glassy, with an offshore
breeze. The sky was full of vibrations and the
surveying their sparkling faces. There was so much
atmosphere one of joyful anticipation. Shri
motherly advice to Her sons about how to look after
Mataji arrived and, unaccompanied, walked to
the water's edge.
a young bride.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 board the ship
JANUARY 13: KALWE – ENTERTAINMENT EVENING
1.4
Kalwe India: Sankranti Puja
january
We are at a point where we have to trigger a new jump. A new flight we have to take and
for this flight we have to see that we really become very light in our ideas, in our thoughts
and in our conditionings. We are so much full of conditionings. All kinds of conditionings
are on us. They are so deep that sometimes I fail to understand human beings. I just do not
understand how they get stuck to things which are of no value, which have no sense and
they get
lost. In this higher jump that we are going to take, many will be left behind as a
result, those who won't be able to come out of that....
Fully dedicate yourself to meditation and surrender yourself to collectivity and every day
you must think in the evening what have I done for Sahaja Yoga? What have I done for
myself? Please try to understand that there is a very big jump that we have to take. It is to
be triggered and for that I would like you to be ready to be absolutely prepared because in
this jump many might be lost and many might be just left behind because they could not
get over their conditionings. The conditionings are of various types, as you know very well
of ignorance, blind faith and all other things that we have gone through. Also we have
conditionings of our country, of our race, of our styles and so many other things by which
we judge others. But we have to judge ourselves, that are we in a Sahaj culture or not? If
we are not in the Sahaj culture, then it is going to be very difficult that you board the ship
which is going to take us all....
So far I am very happy that whatever I have been telling you and whatever I have been
guiding you, you have accepted it very well, calmly and sweetly and that you have tried to
imbibe it in your lifestyle. Actually, after some time, I do not think that I will have to tell
you. You will get your own light to see for yourself what is right and what is wrong. But
still, I would say for all the western people especially, that you must open your heart in
the puja, in the music, in anything. Just see that you open your heart. If you cannot open
your heart, this won't work because this works to the spirit, which resides in your heart.
So please try to open your heart for everything. All
disappear when you decide that “I have to open my heart in Sahaja Yoga."
conditionings, all
your ego will
FEBRUARY 5: HYDERABAD PUJA
FEBRUARY 6 AND 7: HYDERABAD PUBLIC PROGRAM
FEBRUARY 8: CHENNAI PUBLIC PROGRAM (SANKARA HALL)
FEBRUARY 9: CHENNAI – SHRI KRISHNA PUJA
FEBRUARY 1l: CHENNAI PUBLIC PROGRAM (BHARATIYA VIDYA BHAVAN)
FEBRUARY 13: BANGALORE – MAHISHASURA MARDINI PUJA
FEBRUARY 23: PUNE – MAHASHIVARATRI PUJA
FEBRUARY 25: HYDERABAD PUJA
FEBRUARY 28: SINGAPORE AIRPORT TALK
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 In the evening, while watching a variety show sponsored by local factory workers' children, Shri
Mataji surprised us by arriving mid-performance. She asked the European musicians, who had
performed so well all tour, to take the stage and sing songs to awaken the Kundalini. Sankranti
Puja was held the next morning inside a grassy courtyard and Shri Mataji, radiant, addressed
us from Her seat at the top of the temple steps. She urged us to open our hearts and repeatedly
urged us to be extremely dedicated and sincere about our spiritual growth. And, with the Shri
Ganesha Puja, the atmosphere built, first solemn and royal and then it welled over with joy. In
the protective shell of love, it was less difficult to take leave of our Mother and depart to our
countries. The last vision was one of Shri Mataji sitting atop the marble steps and Sahaja Yogis
embracing one another as family down the long avenue outside the puja gardens.
individually about our spiritual and personal
On 28th February 1990, almost twenty Sahaja
problems. With infinite love and patience, She
Yogis from Malaysia took the short shuttle
attended to us, teaching and advising us as the
flight from Kuala Lumpur to Singapore to meet
Mother when She arrived in Singapore, in the
Counsellor, the Comforter and the Redeemer.
As we sat on the floor around Her, we were all
evening on Her way from Bombay to Perth. As
we waited at the exit of the ramp leading from
given the opportunity to massage Her Lotus
the plane, the vibrations became stronger and
Feet. Shri Mataji demonstrated Her love and
stronger as Shri Mataji approached us. The joy
compassion yet again when it was announced
that Her flight to Perth would be delayed by
bubbled over as Mother emerged. A collective
garland of braided jasmine flowers was presented
one hour. There were cheers all around that
Mother had given us the joy of Her company
and She then accepted our individual roses. We
found a nice place near the indoor waterfall
for an extra hour. Afterwards, Mother, with
and, as we sat around Mother's Feet, She spoke
all of us in tow, went to the shops to buy
to us. In Her talk She said that Sahaja Yoga is
some presents for Her Australian tour and,
spreading fast because people are now becoming
in a typical gesture of Her love, She bought
chocolates for all of us.
more aware. Commenting on the situation
in China, Mother said that the Chinese
government claimed to follow Confucius,
who taught that humanity is important,
that collectivity is important. However,
without Realization, how can one understand
collectivity, She asked. Otherwise how could
they kill their own people. Mother said that if
they were realized souls, they would not have
killed the student demonstrators [in Tiananmen
Square in June 1989]. Mother expressed regret
that China has got a very bad name from this
o incident. Mother then graciously dealt with us
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 one culture
Perth Australia: talk to Sahaja Yogis
march
Coming back to the basics in Sahaja Yoga, we have to know that in Sahaja Yoga we have no
hard and fast rules for anything because you are awakened people, you are saints and you
know what is good for you. But you must keep that quality of saintliness within
you and
certain things you should avoid if possible. And if not that, see what is wrong with your
centres. If something is wrong with your centres, you start getting into problems, getting
into ideas, some things which are destructive. So it is best to judge yourself first of all
how are your vibrations... There are certain things missing in Indian culture, something
missing in Western culture. We have to understand this, that both are wrong and we are
not going to have them – and it will work out very well. For us, there is only one culture
and that is Sahaja culture.
MARCH 2: PERTH – TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
Melbourne Australia: talk to Sahaja Yogis
march
A human being is a social being. He is not a person who wants to live in a single way.
That
is why if you jail someone, if somebody is in jail, it becomes a punishment. Though in the
SO
jail you have all the conveniences, everything is there, on the contrary, you do not have to
work so hard, you get your food all right, everything is fine, somebody cooks for you, but
it is a punishment. And for our ascent it is very important to be collective. It is said that
wherever you are together, I reside there.... We understand the essence, now we are on the
essence because we are on the Kundalini. Then we must know the essence of joy. And the
joy is in sharing.... So you see this love, this affection, this deeper understanding that we
have within ourselves, that we are in love with each other, where can we express
it...? All
over the world we have people. It is like one big body. And as soon as there is a problem
with the eyes, some hand is there to help us. That is how we are going to work it out. Do
you understand the importance of Sahaja Yoga at this juncture? It is not by the way. It is
very important, an extremely important thing. I do not know if you really know about it.
Such work was never done in the history of spirituality, in the history of this world or the
universe whatsoever. And this is a kind of a mass transformation that is taking place which
is going to transform the whole world.
MARCH 5: MELBOURNE – INTERVIEW
MARCH 5: MELBOURNE – MUSIC EVENING
MARCH 6: MELBOURNE PUBLIC PROGRAM
MARCH 7: MELBOURNE PUBLIC PROGRAM
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 The Sahaja Yogis can enjoy each other very well. It is so sweet, it is, and so beautiful that
all can
you
live together like that. I wish I could all the time be with
all. But it is not in My fate. I have to
you
travel from one place to another. I left them there [in Singapore]. I was so much wrenched in My
heart really and I was so heavy that I just closed My eyes trying to get over it. And there I find all
the flowers smiling at Me at the airport and the whole thing finished, neutralized. I said, "Now these
were also waiting. After all, I have to come for them here."
SHRI MATAJI, MARCH 4TH
For many yogis it had been three years since they had
seen Shri Mataji. For those who were not fortunate
Right on time, Shri Mataji arrived from
Perth to a warm reception. She spent
much
enough to go on any tours, it had been over five
Perth is one of the most isolated cities in the world.
time talking to everyone, receiving everyone's
It is over three thousand miles from the main
flowers. She commented on how big all the
population centres on Australia's east coast.
children had grown. We were all invited back
to where She was staying. Shri Mataji came to
the garden and talked to us. She said Sahaja
Yogis should live together. She said if Sahaja
Yogis cannot live together, how can the world
live together? When we live together, we
protect each other. The negativity has less of
from SINGAPORE
an effect when we are together.
Cairns
to HONG KONG
Brisbane
Perth
Sydney
Canberra
Auckland
N.
Melbourne
The public programs were held over two nights to the accompani-
ment of the Nagpur musicians. Shri Mataji spoke for a very
o short time before answering questions from the crowd and giving
Realization to the people. It seemed that the time She had spared
with Her short discourse was saved to meet every person
after the
program. She greeted each seeker, the look of love and recognition
on Her face. It was like She was meeting an old lost friend.
%24
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 MARCH 8: CAIRNS AUSTRALIA
MARCH 10: BRISBANE
· TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS AND MUSIC EVENING
MARCH 11: BRISBANE
PRESS INTERVIEW AND PUBLIC PROGRAM
MARCH 13: AUCKLAND PUBLIC PROGRAM AND TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
MARCH 14: AUCKLAND RADIO INTERVIEW
14
Auckland New Zealand: Mahalakshmi Puja
march
I am very happy to be here with you, after such a long time. And I missed
very
you all
much. I know you are very far away from the rest of them, but you are always in My heart
you shouldn't worry about the distance.... If we live on a superficial level of Sahaja
and
Yoga, then we cannot do much for ourselves nor for the country and it is just a wasteful
CO
life, neither here nor there. It is like a seed, which is sprouted and has not grown into the
tree. So first of all, we have to learn that we have to become very deep people – very deep.
We must reach our depth.... It is My humble request that all of you should know that I am
to act in a sensible way,
up and
your Mother, directly.... I would like New Zealand to come
so that people should say that New Zealanders are the wisest in Sahaja Yoga.
MARCH 14: AUCKLAND PUBLIC PROGRAM
15
MARCH 15: SYDNEY UNIVERSITY RELIGIOUS STUDIES PROGRAM
Sydney Australia: talk before katak dance
nare
march
In our chakras, there are three gunas. Now you start from the fourth – number four. Four
divided by three is eternity, so Ganesha can take an incarnation. Then six – six has divided
by three, so Brahmadeva does not take an incarnation. Then comes ten. Ten divided by
three is again eternity. So the Vishnu can take incarnations. Also all the gurus can take
incarnations. Then comes twelve, at the heart. Twelve is divided by three, so Shiva does
not take His form, only the Goddess does because it is divided completely. Then comes
sixteen. Sixteen divided by three – again eternity. That is why then Vishnu takes the form
of Krishna and He incarnates. Two divided by four is the same. So all these incarnations
come because the three gunas, when they are divided by the number of petals they have,
the number of powers they have. Some can produce eternities so they can incarnate and
some cannot. That is why they could not incarnate.
MARCH 16: SYDNEY PUBLIC PROGRAM
17
Sydney public program
march
Australia is very far off, but this is the land which is the land of purity. This is the land in
the universe that is the first centre that you see there. And Uluru, that
have – Uluru
you
means the Chaitanya. It is the symbol of that purity. So you stand for the innocence of the
world. You are such a great nation here that stands for the innocence.... The whole world
can be helped with your own purity and beautiful lives.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 This was Shri Mataji's first visit to Cairns, a city
A live interview with New Zealand's most
in the far north of Australia, above the tropic of
renowned, but very cynical radio broadcaster was
Capricorn. It's a very tropical, beautiful place,
arranged. He started asking some very penetrating
much visited by tourists. During Her visit, Shri
Mataji went to the Great Barrier Reef, a two
questions. The interviewer had diabetes and Shri
thousand mile coral reef, forty miles off the
Mataji explained to the listeners the causes of
diabetes and the ability to overcome it through
Quennsland coast, one of Her great natural
Self Realization. As the interview progressed, he
creations of the world. Over the last ten years,
an alarming problem has developed, which has
got more and more positive. Then he asked, “Are
had the whole country concerned. There is a
you a messiah, a prophet?" Shri Mataji did not
reply, but he started feeling the cool breeze in his
particular creature called the Crown of Thorn
starfish, which consumes small coral animals,
hand. He forgot he was on live radio. “When I
bring my hands together I feel like I am holding
thus killing the reef. Normally there are other
a cool ball of wind – me, the greatest skeptic!" As
predators which help keep the starfish under
control. However, in the last few years, the starfish
this was being broadcast, all the office workers
have been in plague proportions, destroying vast
could not believe what he was saying, as it was so
out of character. They started coming from their
areas of the reef. Due to the delicate nature of
desks and looking through the studio window in
the ecosystem, there is no chemical solution the
disbelief. The interviewer then said that he could
authorities can use to control the starfish and it
not feel it on his head. Shri Mataji worked on
would be difficult to physically remove them. So
him. He asked, "What about everyone else?" She
we have been watching as the reef has been slowly
degraded. Due to its vast size, it would be a long
time before the whole reef would be destroyed,
replied, "They can get it too. Just tell them to put
their hands out to the radio." It was an incredible
however the damage already done is disturbing.
scene as the interviewer and all the office workers
Shri Mataji met with the mayor of Cairns, who
peering into the studio had one hand directed to
informed Her of this situation. Shri Mataji told
Shri Mataji and one hand above their head feeling
the cool breeze. Later, Shri Mataji said that,
CC
him, “Once your powers are awakened, you can
although the interviewer had a bad reputation,
do something about it," but he was a bit cynical.
underneath he was quite humble and really ready
While Shri Mataji was in Cairns, She waded into
for it. That is why he felt it so strongly.
the water for a time and said, "Let's see what can
CC
be worked out." A few days later, we were with
Shri Mataji on the plane to New Zealand and the
There were about a hundred people at the Sydney
news came, informing passengers that something
airport to greet Her. Everyone was gathered
incredible was happening in Queensland on the
around the arrival gate indicated for Her flight.
Great Barrier Reef. Without warning, thousand
The plane had landed, but no one had come out
of Crown of Thorn starfish had been found dead,
yet. We were all waiting, wondering what was
floating to the surface of the reef area. When She
happening. Then there was a shout of excitement
heard this, Shri Mataji said to tell the mayor to
and everyone turned around. Shri Mataji had
have more faith in his powers.
come out of another gate and had walked up
behind us. She said She wanted to surprise us.
11
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 needed a mother
те
Jou
MARCH 18: SYDNEY – HOLI CELEBRATIONS
MARCH 19: CANBERRA PUBLIC PROGRAM
20
Ah
Sydney: evening before Birthday Puja
march
My tour of Australia has come to an end. Today is a day I can say it is all
well done. We
very
have had a very good response. I didn't expect that much everywhere. It was tremendous
and
very great things have happened, some miracles also, during this visit. And one has
to know that Sahaja Yogis have to be with great potential manifesting. If they are, then it
triggers very well. Otherwise I cannot work it out. For that, we have to understand that in
Sahaja Yoga there is no sacrifice of any kind. You do not have to sacrifice anything. It is all
the time blessings throughout.
are
Sydney: Birthday Puja
march
What enthusiasm all over the world! The whole of Sydney, I think, has been lynched of all
the flowers. And such nice things to say – the cards and the letters and the beautiful
poems.
The children are singing beautifully. Words fail to express the feelings of such jubilation
and such sincere feeling of happiness. You needed a Mother to look after you, to care for
you and to be able to transform you with a lot of wisdom. So every birthday I find that
Sahaja Yogis are also expanding their hearts and realizing that they are no more drops, but
they are part and parcel of the ocean and that the ocean itself is going to strengthen them
and look after them. It is the ocean that is going to nourish them. And the same ocean
is going to guide them. So the connection between a drop and an ocean has to be fully
established. So the limitations of a drop have to be absolutely dissolved into the greatness
of the ocean... The words fail. Because Australia is such a far-off country, to come here
with so many people sitting and singing Agata Swagata, it is unbelievable – unbelievable
because I have not given you any money, you have not given Me any money, you are not
bound to say anything like that – but not only that you are doing it, but you are enjoying
heart is
it. It is something great. You are enjoying it and that is what it is, that when
your
large, then whatever you do for others, you enjoy. You enjoy doing good things. You enjoy
saying nice things. So we should have the choicest flowers of beautiful sayings. We should
have the choicest emotions, which we should be able to express to each other. Now start on
that from today ... that from 1990 we are all the time going to speak something beautiful
to each other all the time. And just keep your ears open, keep your eyes open and wherever
you get a chance, whenever you hear something like that, keep it in your mind and use it
back. Today I am so enamoured and it is too much for Me, really, to believe even that there
are so many Sahaja Yogis in Australia, which is so far away. Now it is your responsibility to
be sincere about Sahaja Yoga.... You will just think that "We love Mother and we have to
be together and we have to love each other and all the time we have to say nice things to
each other so that the love increases."
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Shri Mataji started cooking for
us at 6 am. In all, She spent
Shri Mataji spoke for some time about collective living, loving each
about six hours cooking. It
other and working it out together. Her finger works with the rest of
was such a great experience to
oHer body. It does not all of a sudden start doing its own thing. She
witness our Mother cooking
said that Sahaja Yogis should not form groups supporting one thing or
four very large pots of chicken
another. Know that this activity is against the collective and anything
biryani – enough to feed
hundreds of people. We all
against the collective is a sin in the eyes of God and will be punished,
so be careful. She said, "I am your Mother and I have to tell
the
you
helped tend the four large fires
and I am
truth. You can accept Me or not, but I am what I am
in the backyard and all the
unchanging." She then said: "When you get to heaven, God is going
other jobs required to cook
you do for Sahaja Yoga?' and what are you
to ask you, What did
such a meal.
going to say?" The power of Her words left us all speechless.
The venue for the puja was a place known as
Curzon Hall, an old federation style manor
house of sandstone construction set among
English gardens. This place was chosen
because it had a ballroom large enough to fit
everybody comfortably and the house itself
had a grand style of architecture befitting the
celebration of our Holy Mother's birthday.
The
stage was constructed with a backdrop
consisting of a large lotus. The lotus was made
of wood, draped with dyed silk and chiffon.
At the centre of the lotus was a beautiful
arrangement of flowers, giving life and colour
to the setting. Around the stage were gathered
As Shri Mataji's tour has progressed, most of us have
felt a vast increase in the vibrations. The blessings of
having Shri Mataji in the country are tremendous.
all the flowers sent from all corners of the
Sahaja Yoga world – three hundred roses from
Her physical presence creates such a subtle feeling of
joy which I am sure affects the general public.
Austria, bouquets from England, the USA and
from all over Europe. Our Holy Mother was
surrounded by a bed of flowers. Shri Mataji
arrived as the assembled yogis sang Swagata
Agata and twenty-one conches sounded in
welcome. As She took Her seat, Shri Mataji
smiled and said that, as She was entering
the hall, She felt that She was entering the
ocean of collective joy. She said that She was
immersed in joy. Such beautiful things were
said that it was overwhelming.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 to LONDON
agreat revolution
MARCH 22: HONG KONG
MARCH 24: BOMBAY – BIRTHDAY TALKS
Delhi
MARCH 28: JAIPUR INDIA PUBLIC PROGRAM
Jaipur
MARCH 30: DELHI – BIRTHDY PUJA
APRIL 3, 4 AND 5: DELHI PUBLIC PROGRAMS
Calcutta
APRIL 7: DELHI – ADVICE TO SAHAJA YOGIS
APRIL 7: DELHI – WEDDING ANNIVERSAY TALK
Bombay
APRIL 9: CALCUTTA PRESS CONFERENCE
from HONG KONG
APRIL 9: CALCUTTA – SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA•
21)
Eastbourne UK: evening before Easter Puja
april
If I tell you some of the things that have happened in this short time after I left India, I
am Myself amazed that in geometrical proportions Sahaja Yoga is rising very high. But that
should not be a complete satisfaction. Individually also we have to rise. And every one of
you has to rise. Vertical ascent has to be achieved by all of you. Some might have lost a little
bit. Some might have been a little bit away from themselves. The attention might have frit-
tered away quite a lot, but we have to know why we are here and then it is very easy. We are
here to be part and parcel of a very great revolution... So many events are going to happen
and we are on the stage and we have to cooperate and coordinate and understand... I have
given you all My powers. They are at your disposal. But there is one thing: you have to be
detached like Me. You have to have concern for each other, complete detachment.... Res-
urrect from the sense of time, sense of aggressiveness, sense of worldly things – mundane,
useless rubbish they are – and fly out into the open sky.
22
april
Eastbourne UK: Easter Puja
Be aware that the twenty-first year is going to be a very big jump. I am warning you again
and again, and again and again. And you have to work very hard to develop yourself ver-
tically, in balance with your horizontal growth. It is not My lecture for entertainment or
anything, but it should go to your heart, to your brain, to your being, as this is very impor-
tant and you are not going to waste it. All the time you have to think that you are a Sahaja
Yogi and you have to know what you have to do in Sahaja Yoga and how to achieve it. You
should not be satisfied unless and until you have achieved that excellence... If you try just
to exploit Sahaja Yoga, you will be exploited, too. But it is for the exploitation of joy. But
that is only possible if you grow, you touch your depth. If you are not deep enough, you
will hang in the air, as I said, and that has to be worked out. That has to be found out,
how best you can do it, how much you can reach people, how many people you can give
Realization, how many people you are going to help improve their health, their mental
conditions and then how much you are going to talk about Sahaja Yoga. So that is going
to work out what I call the collective ascent of human beings.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 The puja in Calcutta was the first
puja to the Adi Shakti. All the
shaktis arise from the Adi Shakti and
absorbed back into Her. Only
get
the Adi Shakti can do this work
because She has supremacy over
all
the chakras. She knows the subtlest
of subtle. The Adi Shakti is of the
CC
nature of Mahamaya, "otherwise
you
o cannot approach Me." Shri Mataji
said we should understand that
we are "tied by a subtle and strong
thread" and there is nothing greater
than love for one another. The
feeling of "mine" takes away from
CC
the spirit.
that is a thing where they worship Gauri. That is
Only one gentleman from Delhi went down to
Jaipur to organize. And the Jaipur people said,
the biggest festival where the queen, maharani has
to worship the Gangauri. It is a statue which goes
round the whole of Jaipur state and everybody
"It's very difficult, you see, here." He said, “No,
I'll have the program in Govinjis Mandir, where
celebrates it. It is regarded as the biggest festival.
nobody can have a program. I'll go and see the
maharani." So the maharani would not meet him.
So in the morning she came and touched My feet
and she said, “Mother, can I worship You?" I said,
He was insisting. He was sitting there, waiting
"Why?" “Because You are my Gangaur, really.
for her. Ultimately he got a chance. He went and
talked to her. He showed her My photograph.
That is just a statue." She made me stand the
Immediately she took to Me. She asked about
same way. She did everything. She made Me eat
Sahaja Yoga, "What is Sahaja Yoga?" Then she
betel. I don't eat all that, but she said, "You have
said, "Give me Realization." She
CC
Realization.
to. You are Gangaur, so You have to eat it." And
got
The maharaja got Realization. They said, "Yes,
she worshipped Me and her whole rituals she did
for about forty-five minutes and then she said,
כ
you can have the program here." She said, “Ill
and worship that statue." Nobody is
"Now I'll
come to the program." She came down herself.
go
She fell at My feet in the public, sitting there all
allowed to go there. She took Me there. She made
the time, her husband sitting there and somebody
Me sit in a very nice place, like this, decorated.
How much she respected Me! Among all the
offered them some water to drink. They said,
"How can I? She is the Goddess. I can't drink
maharajas, Jaipur is the highest and that maharani
before Her." She sat there. Imagine, she just got
is the highest lady.... Just from Realization only,
her Realization – what a depth! But that's not
she completely got drenched into Sahaja Yoga.
enough. They have one festival called Gangaur
SHRI MATAJI, APRIL 21ST
15
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 mahayogis
пош
MAY 1: Mosco MEDICAL CONFERENCE
MAY 5: FIUGGI ITALY – SAHAJA YOGA AND MEDICINE
Fiuggi Italy: Sahasrara Puja
may
years, I have been waiting, for this day. We have now the twenty-first Sahasrara,
All these
so it is a very important turning point.... A new change has to come. And you can see the
SO
announcement, a new understanding, an awareness of a very new dimension. We have
been so far dealing with collective consciousness. We are collectively conscious. We have
the idea that we are collectively conscious. Also we know we are part and parcel of the
whole and that we all are Sahaja Yogis. We know about our chakras and our nadis very
clearly. But perhaps we do not know about our powers. How many powers have developed
in those twenty-one years within yourself? [A roar of thunder is heard.] So far we had kept
Sahaja Yoga at a low ebb because I wanted you, first of all, to develop into really very beau-
tiful Sahaja Yogis, so that from your life, from
your behaviour, from
your lifestyle, from
your understanding, from your thoughts, people will realize that these people are very
unique and a very different type of people. Now that assumption has to be there. You have
to understand that all these powers are bubbling in you and just out of formality or maybe
out of shyness or maybe a little cowardice, you are hiding them.... This is the new era we
are starting from today. And this is the day I was waiting for all of you to realize that
you
are not Sahaja Yogis for only your selfish ends, nor for your families, nor for your commu-
who is
nities, nor for your country, but for the whole world. Expand yourself.... Any person
a king and does not belong to his kingdom is a failure, is useless. If he thinks about himself,
about his own comfort, about his own fame, about his own achievements, then he is a fail-
ure. He has to think about the country on which he is ruling. In the same way, you
have to
also turn your mind away from all these petty things that you have been dealing with.... So
let us see what you have decided for yourself and what you have decided for Sahaja Yoga. If
ve decided to opt for Sahaja Yoga, then just know that this is the main thing which
have
you
you have to do. The whole attention should be on that.... Today we have here people from
all over the world. And you go and tell this message to all the rest of the people whom I
have not met, that "Mother has already announced – through the Vishnumaya also – that
you all have become now mahayogis." And try to express that. Manifest that with full con-
fidence in yourself. And with this power of love, I am sure you will all win over.
MAY 7 AND 8: ROME PUBLIC PROGRAMS
MAY 9: PERUGIA ITALY PUBLIC PROGRAM
MAY 10: MAGLIANO SABINA ITALY
MAY 12 & 13: MoscoW PROGRAMS AND MEDICAL CONFERENCE (DATES APPROXIMATE)
MAY 14: LENINGRAD – SHRI BUDDHA PUJA
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 In Russia people were just waiting for a Mother to come, that's all. They are Mother worshippers to begin
with and they were wanting somebody just to love them, every one of them, to tell them about love because
they felt they were never loved by their mother.... The pattern of the government there and the pattern of
the people are two different types. The government people are very – you can call them very dominating,
extremely strict and exploiting type. But the people are the exploited ones.
SHRI MATAJI, MAY 28TH
Leningrad
to SAN DIEGO
Moscow
Eastbourne
Perugia
from CALCUTTA
Rome
Everywhere you go, they know Me
and they know about Sahaja Yoga. Just imagine
I was surprised at Russians, who have never
I
very well
known the name of God. They were not supposed
to know anything about God, Christ or anyone,
these people, who have been all the time cursed
no conditioning of any religion whatsoever. But
will be amazed in My first meeting only, there
by communism, as they say, had no freedom of
choice, nothing, but they are not materialistic
you
were two thousand in the hall and two thousand
people. They are not materialistic because the
waiting outside. The whole of Leningrad was
matter, whatever was available was available,
there. I was amazed at them, surprised. Look at
whatever was not available was not available. Like
on the ship, if something is available on the ship,
these people. They have never known of God or
it is there. Otherwise it is not. So they have no
anything and how am I to talk to them about
God? And I did talk and you will be surprised that
problems and no solutions, that's why. If there
are no solutions, how can there be problems?
Moscow was even worse. We had to arrange a big,
So they had to deal with whatever was available.
huge, open place for them and it was impossible
to control these people because they were so many.
And this is the reason why they are very, very,
And now the government has taken over and they
centrally placed people.
have publicized Sahaja Yoga on the television.
SHRI MATAJI, JUNE 3RD
17
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-19.txt 
 all there, so beautiful
28
San Diego: national puja – Divine Discretion
may
It is another great pleasure to come to America to meet all you people here. This one is
a very important country in the field of spirituality. Not because it is a large country or
because it is very prosperous, but because it is the Vishuddhi in the plan of the Virata. The
Vishuddhi is such an important chakra. It has a very great manifestation also. For example,
it has another subsidiary chakra, which we call as the Hamsa chakra. And the star which
is increasing this centre – we say the star that resides on which this centre is working – is
Saturn. And as you know with Saturn, there is another small little Saturn moving. In the
same way, with this Vishuddhi chakra, there is another one which is a very important
chakra, which we call as the Hamsa chakra.. So we are really on a warpath in America, I
you – for Sahaja Yogis, really on a warpath. Unless and until
must tell
up Sahaja
you take
Yoga as your only concern, it is not going to work out.... The first thing that the Sahaja
Yogis must have is collectivity in America because America stands for the Vishuddhi chakra,
which is manifesting collectivity within us. And if people cannot be collective, then how
can you have Sahaja Yoga manifesting here? Impossible – because that is the greatest qual-
ity you have. That is the basic power you have in this country. It is the collectivity within
A Sahaja Yogi is the one who is completely connected with this Paramachaitanya...
you....
Understand that to be in Sahaja Yoga is only possible if we are having that depth because a
new jump is needed in Sahaja Yoga, which will work out, which is working out and many
will be thrown out. You have to jump. And for that jumping, you really need people who
are honest and deep and serious. Do not get lost into frivolous things and worldly things.
Just seek your depth. It is all there, so beautiful.
MAY 30 AND 31: SAN DIEGO PUBLIC PROGRAMS
JUNE 3 AND 4: MIAMI PUBLIC PROGRAMS
JUNE 5: NEw YORK – TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
JUNE 6: NEW YORK – NEWSPAPER INTERVIEWS AND UNITED NATIONS PROGRAM
JUNE 7: NEW YORK RADIO INTERVIEW
JUNE 7 AND 8: NEW YOORK PUBLIC PROGRAMS
JUNE 11 AND 12: MILAN PUBLIC PROGRAM
JUNE 14: MADRID PUBLIC PROGRAM
JUNE 15 AND 17: BARCELONA PUBLIC PROGRAMS
Four hundred people awaited the awakening of their gift from God. They were
white, Chinese, Indian, Hispanic, young and old. They smiled proudly as Mother
praised their diversity and the creativity of God. They listened to Her wisdom,
willingly received their Realization, then eagerly swarmed to Her Feet. This
time, even New York – usually bold and defiantly diffident – was prepared to
participate, glorify and behold the Mother.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Shri Mataji arrived in San Diego on Saturday
May 26th in the evening. Yogis from all over the
Puja was offered to Shri Mataji, who sat in great
country had gathered to greet Mother's plane and
there was a feeling of anticipation and hope that
beauty and splendour. The talk addressed the
Vishuddhi chakra, but there was a tremendous
many seekers might get their Realization and take
feeling of heart, of fear being removed and
confidence restored. We worshipped Shri Mataji
to Sahaja Yoga. The children, who seemed to have
sprung up overnight, ran to Mother with flowers
in their hands and She exclaimed, "I must take
as the Devi. Much to our amazement, it was
announced that Shri Mataji had brought gifts
flowers from the children first."
for all the yogis. Mother showed concern for
our Vishuddhis by giving the men watches and
ties and the ladies perfume, scarves, earrings and
Shri Mataji explained that we are ardent seekers
necklaces. There was such warmth and love in this
and that, through our frantic seeking for truth,
exchange, a feeling that “Yes, there is a great deal
into trouble, gone down
us have
many of
gotten
to be accomplished here, but we have the power
the wrong path. She said that Americans are the
within us to do it. Our Mother has told us so and
greatest seekers, but we do not have the wisdom
She has given us such love." There was a clear
and the discrimination that the Russians have.
understanding that we must rise higher.
She posed the question, "If the Russians are
so sensitive, why not the Americans?" She also
spoke about racism and the ignorance that causes
No one left the hall without feeling that a
racism. We are all universal beings, just made a
profound thing had occurred. Later in private,
little differently to allow for variety in the beauty
Shri Mataji said that this is a land blessed by
of creation. When all the questions were done,
God. Last year it was a gate to hell. It is humbling
She gave Realization. Shri Mataji met all those
indeed to see that the Feet of the Divine can
o who came on stage and worked on all of them.
change a place from hell to heaven.
often punctuated by applause, especially when She
Shri Mataji graced the world famous Apollo Theater
o with Her divine presence. The occasion was a fifteen
said Sahaja Yogis hit lots of "jackpots." Her divine
minute live radio interview before a studio audience.
blend of love, wit and wisdom melted the hearts
and thoughts of the audience. Fifteen minutes came
Arriving just five minutes before showtime, Shri
Mataji listened as the hurried host ran down a list
all too soon and the show was over. The host said
of questions he would ask. "Remember," he said,
a reluctant goodbye. As he escorted Shri Mataji
from the stage, he hugged Her and thanked Her for
CC
"you're my guest and I'll treat you as my guest.
Shri Mataji smiled, thanked him and took Her
coming to his show. He concluded by extending
Her "carte blanche" for future appearances. As She
CC
seat on stage. Shri Mataji explained Kundalini and
Sahaja Yoga. The repartee between Her and the host
left the Apollo Theater, the usual lacklustre veneer
that reflects Harlem's poverty seemed beautifully
sounded beautifully rehearsed, belying the three
minute backstage introduction. Her comments were
transformed.
19
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 (16
Barcelona: Shri Mahavira Puja
june
Today we are going to do puja of Mahavira and we never had this puja before. The reason
for this was that Mahavira's life was an ascetic's life, just like Buddha.... Unless and until
you touch your depth, you will become like any other religion because you won't be actu-
ally Sahaja Yogis, just nominal. So we have to work in such a manner that we understand
ourselves and we understand our attention and we try to ascend. I do not have to tel
you.
You yourself have to work it out in such a manner that you touch your depth and you
become an ascetic within yourself. Then only you will be really doing the divine work
properly with proper understanding. Sahaja Yoga is the integration of all these great proph-
ets and these incarnations. So I have to tell you that, whatever were your conditionings
and all that, to get rid of them. You must get out of this ocean of illusion. So this is the
only thing I can just now say about Mahavira... I hope My lecture goes into your head and
settles into your heart and you understand what you have to do about yourself, about your
ascent. You have to be genuine people. Then only it is going to show results in the whole
world. I hope you will pass this tape to all the people, so they should know why I did not
have Mahavira's puja all these years.
JUNE 17 AND 18: BARCELONA – TALKS TO SAHAJA YOGIS
JUNE 18: VIENNA PUBLIC PROGRAM
19
Tun
Moedling Austria: Shri Kundalini Puja
e
If you really want to achieve the full results of your ascent and if you want to really trans-
form the world, then you must know you have to be ideal people. You cannot be prob-
lematic people.... You have to have full determination and understanding that this is a
tremendous work and a tremendous task. And all your powers to be awakened within
yourself,
Divine. Unless and until you have that readiness, that "I don't want anything. I don't want.
have to be first of all fully equipped with readiness, readiness to serve the
you
I just want to serve the Divine"
- as long as you are striving for it and asking for it with a
full heart, with full sincerity, then I am sure this Kundalini will be strengthened and She
will cleanse you completely.
JUNE 19: VIENNA PUBLIC PROGRAM
JUNE 20: VIENNA AIRPORT DEPARTURE TALK
JUNE 22 AND 23: ATHENS PUBLIC PROGRAMS (DATES APPROXIMATE)
JUNE 23-24: HYDRA GREECE – SHRI MAHALAKSHMI PUJA
JUNE 24: ATHENS – TALK TO LADIES
JUNE 25: Moscow PUBLIC PROGRAM
JUNE 26: Moscow PRESS CONFERENCE AND PUBLIC PROGRAM
JUNE 28: LENINGRAD PUBLIC PROGRAM
JUNE 28: LENINGRAD
TALK TO SCIENTISTS
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Imagine, in Greece, Sahaja Yoga is
only two years old. Only two years
old, Greece, but that is a traditional
and
country. It is an ancient country
the Greeks have really fallen
the
way
into Sahaja Yoga is beyond.
SHRI MATAJI, MARCH 12TH
Leningrad (St. Petersberg)
Moscow
London
Kiev
Vienna
from NEW YORK
Milan
Barcelona
Madrid
Athens
After Austria, Shri Mataji went to Greece, where She blessed this country with
two public programs, which were attended by approximately thirteen hundred
seekers. A puja to Mahalakshmi was performed in a huge house on the island of
o Hydra surrounded by the Aegean Sea. The whole time Mother was in Greece,
She worked intensely on the Nabhi and gave a lot of speeches on Lakshmi
Tattwa. She went shopping almost every day and gave Realization to shop
owners in the well-known shopping region of Plaka in Athens. She bought
lots of presents, showing us always how to save money, although buying high
quality. Looking at everything which She had bought, we experienced the joy
that matter can emit if vibrations are put inside.
21
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-23.txt 
 quru within
JUNE 29: MOSCOW MEDICAL CONFERENCE
JUNE 29: KIEV UKRAINE PUBLIC PROGRAM
JUNE 29: KIEV MEDIA INTERVIEW
JULY 1: MOSCOW PUBLIC PROGRAM
8
Avignon France: Guru Puja
july
In Sahaja Yoga, the Guru Puja has a very different significance from any other guru puja.
This is not
When you worship your guru, you are also worshipping the
guru within
you.
any other guru-disciple system because, in you, the guru, the master has been awakened.
in
And so, when you are worshipping your guru, then this master within you is also wor-
shipped. You respect it, you glorify it, you awaken it and you manifest it. This we have to
realize.... All of us are now sitting like in a big vimana, like an airplane, and we all have to
land into the beautiful area. But first of all, we have to develop that humility in your heart.
Complete humility and surrender, that is very important. Unless and until you have that
humility and surrender in your heart, the guru principle cannot be awakened. First, you
have to be the disciple and then the guru. So you have to develop that humility. And that
humility comes very easily if you love Me, respect Me. It is not only love, but respect. That
respect has to be there and then people will respect you.
JULY 9: LONDON – SIR CP RECEIVES KNIGHTHOOD
JULY 13 AND 14: WARSAW PUBLIC PROGRAMS
JULY 16: BERLIN PUBLIC PROGRAM
JULY 17: BERLIN – TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
JULY 17: DRESDEN PUBLIC PROGRAM
JULY 19: PRAGUE PUBLIC PROGRAMS
JULY 21: VIENNA MUSIC EVENING
JULY 22: BUDAPEST PUBLIC PROGRAM
JULY 23: BUDAPEST PUBLIC PROGRAM
JULY 24: SOFIA BULGARIA PUBLIC PROGRAM
JULY 25: SOFIA PRESS CONFERENCE AND PUBLIC PROGRAM
JULY 27: VIENNA – ARRIVAL TALK AND MUSIC EVENING
Thirty journalists from leading papers and magazines met for a
conference at the hotel. Shri Mataji talked and answered
press
questions for more than two hours. She said that yes, She was able
to read thoughts and perceive deities and other beings present,
but Her sole interest was to give Realization. After all, Christ had
promised a Comforter, a Counselor and a Redeemer.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-24.txt 
 The divine discretion that manifests through your Hamsa
chakra first started in Germany. And now you see how
East Germany is entering into the German territory, West
Germany, and how they are welcoming them, looking
after them.... In those countries where there has been a
tremendous war problem and they had czars and they
had to go through hell, even Germans had to suffer a lot
because of Hitler's misguidance. They have known hard-
ships. They have known sacrifices. They have known all
kinds of ordeals they had to go through.... Hardships have
been in all these countries which we call as the Eastern
Bloc. And Sahaja Yoga is spreading like wildfire in all
these Eastern Bloc countries, where they have been com-
pletely under the rule of Russians, we can say, or under
the rule of terror. And the same terror has acted in Russia,
throughout. In that terror, in that fear, it is surprising how
this wisdom has grown in all these people much more
than in countries where we have the greatest affluence, the
greatest comfort of life. The hardship has taught them.
The fear has taught them to be wise. And the best
is
part
the discretion.
SHRI MATAJI, MAY 28TH
At the airport, Shri Mataji expressed
Her concern that the hall we had
Berlin
Warsaw
rented, with its capacity of 2800,
London
might not be large enough. When we
arrived at the hall, half the people in
Dresden
Prague
the tram got off with us and stood
to LOS ANGELES
Vienna
outside. It was impossible to be in
• Budapest
o Sofia and not know about the
program. People had even come from
Sofia
Plovdiv and Varna, hundreds of miles
Avignon
away. Well before the program started,
the hall was full, with people crammed
into the aisles and surrounding the
stage. The excitement and pressure
of the crowd entering the hall was so
great that a large glass panel outside
was broken. Fortunately a stadium had
been booked for the next evening.
23
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-25.txt 
 my promise to you
Los Angeles: Raksha Bandhan Puja
august
You have got, of course, Realization. You have got great qualities. You are not even aware
as to what you have got so easily. You have got the knowledge also so easily and did not
have to go to college or anything and you are capable of so many things. But remember
that the power that is within you is cleverer than you and anything you try to do which
is not correct, which is not righteous, which is not holy, it will try to correct you. So try
to be a deeper person. Try to understand what is behind this person, what is the spiritual
quality of this person and then only you will know that pure relationships are so fragrant
and so beautiful. I really enjoy you people because you have such pure relationships among
yourselves and such understanding.
AUGUST 10: VANCOUVER PUBLIC PROGRAM
11
Vancouver: Shri Saraswati Puja
august
When they asked Me what puja we should have in Vancouver, I had heard about this
ashram, that it is placed in very beautiful surroundings of nature and, as nature is being
created by the power of Saraswati, I thought best would be to have the puja of Saraswati
here. Another thing is that when people live in nature, they become extremely creative.
Their delicate feelings are preserved and they are never in a rush or they are not what we
can call too much modernized because nature soothes them down. So also the creativity
of Saraswati adds to the artist and I knew that there must have been many artists in this
country created since long. Canada as such, I feel is the Hamsa Chakra of the Vishuddhi.
AUGUST 13: TORONTO CANADA
AUGUST 17: IPSWICH UNITED KINGDOM – TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
19
eugus
Ipswich UK: Shri Krishna Puja
One thing you must ask in your prayer in the evening when you are sleeping, "What have
I done for Sahaja Yoga?" One sentence – all of you just ask this question: "What have I
CC
done for Sahaja Yoga?" Persons like Me or Shri Krishna or anyone, we do not even feel we
are doing anything. So what can we ask? If I want to ask Myself, I will fall into an ocean I
think. I don't know. I will be lost. If I want to analyze Myself, I get lost. If I want to think
about Myself, I get lost. It is beyond Me. Then let it be. It does not matter. I do not want to
know Myself. But you better know yourself. You can't be Me. So
as far as I am concerned,
I only think that, as long as I live – I don't know, I may live forever, I am living forever
maybe, you might say that – but whatever it is, as long as I am on this Earth, I will see that
Sahaja Yoga is fully established. This is My promise to you.
AUGUST 23: LONDON – TALK To INDIANS
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Shri Mataji said we should offer this
puja as a Shri Ganesha Puja because
o the essence of the raksha bandhan,
the brother-sister relationship, is
innocence and purity, which are the
aspects of Shri Ganesha. As we said
Shri Ganesha's names, Shri Mataji
took the mantra book and started
reading the names and explaining
them to us. After the puja, Shri
Mataji said that during the puja, in
meditation, She saw Shri Ganesha
and that the Muladharas of all the
yogis were shining.
Just before sunset a big thunder-
storm developed right over us.
The cloudy sky was bright orange,
reddish and violet. It became dark
quickly and soon the first lightning
and thunder came down from
the sky. It was raining heavily.
Mother asked everyone to watch
Late at night the puja commenced. The stage was redone
the thunderstorm because She said
according to Shri Mataji's directions. To one side, Shri Krishna
stood in the chariot explaining the truth to Arjuna. On the
that She was orchestrating it. So we
all stood in front of the windows
other side, Shri Krishna was depicted lifting Mount Govardhan
beholding big lightning bolts that
with one finger. The puja was very powerful, the rain cascading,
shot down right in front of us,
blowing around the tent. Shri Mataji was offered a pair of dandia
right into the ocean. Every two to
sticks, which She took up and played victoriously. Dandia sticks,
three seconds the lightning struck
hand-painted in America, were distributed to all. The sticks were
in different parts of the sky and it
gleefully taken up by the crowd. Many stood up and danced to
went on for hours. Mother described
keep time to the music. A wonderful array of musical instruments
it as a real fireworks. The next day
was presented to Shri Mataji. She explained that the instruments,
local newspapers reported that the
which were slowly going out of circulation, would be revived now.
lightning had struck sixteen hundred
times. Later in the evening, the
She especially loved a rare antique organ and a tiny guitar-like
instrument. They were all played for Her or by Her. The puja
lights in the ashram went out. There
ended at nearly 3 am. We felt Shri Krishna had been roused from
was no electricity in the area due to
His great slumber and we were grateful to Shri Mataji for being
the lightning storm. A lantern and
able to reach Him through the Heart of the Universe.
two party candles were brought in
and the bhajans continued.
25
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-27.txt 
 (26
august
Today we are celebrating the birthday of Shri Ganesha. You all know the story of His birth
and I need not repeat it. But as He was created by the Mother only, by Adi Shakti, in the
same way you are all created after Him. So you are on the path of Shri Ganesha already.
Your eyes sparkle the same way His eyes sparkle. You all have the beautiful glow on your
face as He had. Whether you are small, big or old makes no difference. All the beauty
comes to us through the glow of Shri Ganesha. If He is satisfied, then we do not have to
other Deities because the
of all the Deities is Shri Ganesha. He
worry about
any
power
is like a vice-chancellor sitting on every chakra. Unless and until He signs, the Kundalini
cannot cross through because Kundalini is the Gauri and is the Virgin Mother of Shri
Ganesh.... So let us try to be innocent within ourself. Be proud that we are innocent. We
need not be smart people. Smartness is your mental attitude and innocence is your innate
quality, which is connected with this all-pervading power.
31
Shri Hanuman Duia
Schwetzingen Cermany:
We have come here to do Hanumana's Puja. Shri Hanumana is a great character in our
being and He runs all the way from the Swadisthana to your brain. And He supplies all the
necessary guidance we need in our futuristic planning or in our mental activities. He gives
us guidance and protection... I wish sometimes you could get His photograph also, as you
have got the photographs of Shri Ganesha. Then you will really fall in love with Him. He
is such a sweet thing. And although He is so huge and so big and though He has nails, but
when He caresses My Feet, He pulls back His nails. He is so gentle, extremely gentle, and
very beautifully He caresses My Feet. And I have seen Him, the way He handles every-
thing. It is extremely gentle ways. So that is what I feel, that now Germans are becoming
very gentle in handling things, in handling people. This change is coming and I think it is
the blessing of Hanumana on them.
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-28.txt 
 London
from VANCOUVER
Paris
Frankfurt
Bucharest
Geneva
Chioggia
Turin
Rome
to ISTANBUL
27
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-29.txt 
 dancing in
StFTEmBEr 142: LoyN PUBLIC PRAM
jay
Jaaer
es
SEPTEMBER 14?: LONDON PUBLIC PROGRAM
SEPTEMBER 18 AND 19: GENEVA PUBLIC PROGRAMS
SEPTEMBER 21: ARZIER SWITZERLAND
- TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
Geneva: Navaratri Puja
september
Yesterday, when the last song started, it did penetrate into many souls, to many hearts, that
unique joy which we call as nirananda. I did feel it yesterday. But keep it up. It is to be kept
very safely into your kumbhas. That is the Kundalini and She is the one who has come up.
So My idea was that today, it is not only the worship of the kumbha where the kundalini
resides, but the kumbha becomes like a flowerpot. It is like that. That has happened ..
the kumbha becoming flowers and flowers becoming light and the lights with fragrance.
I hope you will understand My vision and you will stand by Me and
will come up to
you
up to
that. I depend on you entirely for My vision. We have to change this whole world into a
beautiful place and, for that, not much sacrifice is needed. You are already blessed. You do
not have to do much. The only thing is keep your attention on the source of power.
OCTOBER 5: ROME – TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
OCTOBER 16: BUCHAREST PUBLIC PROGRAM
OCTOBER 17: BUCHAREST PRESS CONFERENCE
Chioggia Italy: Diwali Puja
october
It was such a surprise to see you all in that procession. Actually, I was waiting and waiting
and I thought, “Why these people are not coming to call Me for puja?" It was a beautiful
surprise. It's very joy-giving. The joy was dancing in your eyes. I could see the lights in your
and this is the real Diwali. The Diwali word comes from two words: dipa and awali.
eyes
Dipa means lights. And awali means rows – rows and rows of lights. It seems it is a very,
very ancient idea and, all over in the world, whenever they have to celebrate something,
then they put lights and lights because light gives joy, gives happiness. So to overcome the
darkness of ignorance, also we have to enlighten ourselves. And that is why it is important
Self Realization to feel the light within themselves. And
that everybody should
get
you
must have noticed that after Realization the eyes also sparkle. There is light in the eyes of
every Sahaja Yogi.
OCTOBER 22: TURIN ITALY PUBLIC PROGRAM
OCTOBER 30: ISTANBUL TURKEY
NOVEMBER 1 AND 2: KUALA LUMPUR MALAYSIA PUBLIC PROGRAMS
NOVEMBER 3 AND 4: KUALA LUMPUR – TALKS TO SAHAJA YOGIS
NOVEMBER 5 AND 6: BANGKOK PUBLIC PROGRAMS (DATES APPROXIMATE)
NOVEMBER 8 AND 9: TAIPEI TAIWAN PUBLIC PROGRAMS AND RADIO INTERVIEW
NOVEMBER l1: HONG KONG (DATE APPROXIMATE)
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-30.txt 
 On Thursday evening, Shri Mataji very kindly cooked a
wonderful mutton biryani for us at the Givrins ashram.
In Her address, Shri Mataji seemed
And on Friday, She again cooked lunch and dinner. The
to cover the whole of Sahaja Yoga and
Friday evening experience was particularly intense, as
what we all have to do as Sahaja Yogis.
Shri Mataji was sitting in the kitchen stirring
and
the
pot
Addressing Herself to the women, She
giving instructions to the ladies around Her. The rest of
commented on how the woman is
very
us sat just outside in the living room and watched.
much the background force and they
should let the men manifest more. "I am
The look of surprise and delight on our Divine Mother's
not God," She said. "Sadashiva is God.
face was so joyful to see as She beheld this small sample
But I am God also. Without Me what is
He? I am His Power. He is powerless. But
of India transported to Italy – hundreds of Sahaja Yogis
let Him be God, good. Because if you
in Indian costume were dancing and singing. Slowly the
procession advanced towards the hall, Shri Mataji's car
have to blame someone,
blame Him.
you
He is God. But I have to work hard to
behind us. Mother made Her way to the throne, which
had been prepared for Her on the stage under a huge
keep Him pleased."
decorated cloth awning. We resumed our places and Shri
Mother began to talk to us.
Taipei
Hong Kong
to PUNE
Bangkok
from ISTANBUL
and BOMBAY
Kuala Lumpur
Singapore
Shri Mataji stayed four days in Thailand in a little house near the river and She showered Her infinite motherly
olove on us all. The first night She asked some Sahaja Yogis to massage Her feet and Her arms. This cleared a lot
of Thailand's negativity and Shri Mataji said that by this massage, the public program would be successful. "This
body is only compassion," She explained. "I will bless this country with morality and prosperity. Ask for this."
CC
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-31.txt 
 afestival of ascent
at
NoyEMBER 22: PUNE INDIA
DOCTORS CONFERENCE
Pune India: puja
december
This tour is a festival for us. Of course, I say it is a pilgrimage, but there are no signs of
pilgrimage because, if you see the pilgrims, horrible they look, while you are looking like
roses, all of
you. So it is a festival for us and you have to feel that festivity within your
heart, that joy within your heart and small, small things you should not worry because
these things cannot be provided in all the places. Gradually we will be building ashrams
in all the places wherever you have been visiting, but you know how difficult it is in those
OW
days where India is passing through such a bad phase for so many years, where everything
is delayed. So the attitude should be that "We have come here for our ascent." We have to
work out everything with that attitude, that we have come here for our ascent, and
every
moment of our ascent is a festive occasion. Everything is a festival. If you understand that,
I am sure you will see the beauty in everything, you will enjoy everything, whatever may
be the rustic style. Maybe you may not like the colour of these lights because you may not
enjoy it so much. You might get much better things in your own country. But whatever it
is, it is not your conditioning that should stop you from enjoying. So please remember that
you are now the member of the universal society and we cannot have our conditionings to
mar our happiness and joy. I want you to enjoy this trip fully, absolutely, in a way that
you
have never enjoyed anything before.
DECEMBER 5: PUNE PUBLIC PROGRAM ·
DECEMBER 6: PUNE – NEW ENGLISH SCHOOL PROGRAM
DECEMBER 9 AND 10: SHRIRAMPUR PUBLIC PROGRAMS
desember) Shrirampur India: puja
In these modern times, we are so many. We have so many Sahaja Yogis all over the world.
So first of all, we are collectively very strong. And secondly, the Brahmachaitanya itself has
become active. It is a very great thing. We must realize it within ourselves, that no amount of
cruelty, planning against us, any kind of violence of other people can harm us.... You have to
know that your Mother is with you and you should have no fear at all. To boast of your fear
is nonsensical. Once you realize how powerful you are and how much you are connected
to that power which is so powerful and all-pervading, which does all the living work, you
will never get any one of these funny ideas which are to be left behind. You have to cross
the threshold of these conditionings that you have had. Just open your heart and see for
yourself where are you sitting, where have you reached, under what blessings you are here.
DECEMBER 13: SANGAMNER INDIA PUBLIC PROGRAM
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-32.txt 
 In Alibag we had bhajans at night with
the local villagers, singing together
with western Sahaja Yogis. Mother
came unexpectedly, since the puja had
been cancelled. She was glowing with
motherly love and said how much She
enjoyed seeing and hearing us all singing
together, dropping our artificiality
and superficiality and just praising the
Mother with one heart. It is in this spirit
that one day the whole world will be
united. After Shri Mataji left the stage
and went up to Her room, the Sahaja
Yogis gathered below Her balcony and
continued singing and dancing.
Shri Mataji gave very long talks, but the Realization
was extremely quick. She just asked them to raise
their hands and ask, "Is this Brahmachaitanya?
Is this the cool breeze of God?" They all felt it and
raised their hands. The time in Pune made us feel
we had left the West far behind.
At dusk there was a truly beautiful procession with Shri Mataji,
under a sky suffused with pink and blue light. There were lots
On the glittering stage, decorated with
of people in the procession, all gaily dancing through the streets.
The local boys leapt and jumped around with an energy and
the most beautiful silk saris, Shri Mataji
appeared to be sitting in a celestial
rhythm that was incredible to see. Other villagers, the local
throne adorned with flowers and lights.
Sahaja Yogis, and all the westerners were copying the dance
The gold thread of the saris glittered
steps and movements of their Indian brothers and sisters. Shri
behind Her like stars in the firmament.
Mataji smiled down at all of us from a cart adorned with
young
At the close of the puja, crowned with
banana trees. The cart moved slowly through the crowd behind
fresh flowers and with a beautiful smile
a very loud band which could be heard all over. The procession
on Her face, She received the long
was followed by a wonderful public program in Shrirampur.
line of Sahaja Yogis who offered Her
It was one of the fullest and most joyful programs of the whole
garlands.
tour.
31
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-33.txt 
 DECEMBER 14: PRATISHTHAN PUNE – TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
DECEMBER 15: WAI PUBLIC PROGRAM
DECEMBER 16: SATARA PUBLIC PROGRAM
17
Brahmapuri: Shri Chakra and Shri Lalita Puja
december
The materialistic life, unless and until there is the foundation of the spiritual life, takes you
to a very partial development. But to get a full development, you must have your founda-
tion on spirituality. That is why spirituality, being the foundation, has to be deep, has to be
fully equipped, has to be absolutely perfect. Then the whole building can be built ... and
will be surprised how you will become really solid people.. I think I should sit
then
you
down and write all about it and it will be a nice, handy thing for you to read. But you must
know that beyond thought, when you go, these chakras become extremely efficient because
the thought puts a pressure on them and, because of the pressure, the movement of these
chakras is very slow and ineffective. But once you can get out of your thoughts and go into
thoughtless awareness, then these chakras start working it out and you start moving much
deeper into your own being.
DECEMBER 21: KOLHAPUR – MAHALAKSHMI PUJA
DECEMBER 24: GANAPATIPULE – TALK ABOUT SHRI JESUS
december Ganapatipule: Christmas Puja
Without Him you cannot go to the Sahasrara. In the whole play He is like the sutradhara.
He is the one who is the conductor, the one who moves the strings in a puppet show. And
so it is very important to pray to Shri Ganesha every time we have puja. We have to pray
to Him and that is how we are praying to Lord Jesus Christ every time. Without His auspi-
ciousness, without His help, we cannot do Sahaja Yoga. He is the manager. See I am sitting
here and He is the manager. Supposing there is no management, how will I speak here?
Nothing can happen. But He is so efficient and you never see Him working out everything.
DECEMBER 26: GANAPATIPULE – ENTERTAINMENT AND TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
27
Ganapatipule: talk to Sahaja Yogis
december
After Realization you will know which is real, which is unreal. Once you know that, then it
is different. But when you do not know, you will fall into anything, like any stone you will
worship.... But today it is not so. Today you all have become the saints, you have become
walis,
have become realized souls. Now you know what is real, what is not real. So
you
to understand these things deeply we have to know that we must have our vibrations to
understand what is right and what is wrong.
DECEMBER 28: GANAPATIPULE – GAURI PUJA AND MARRIAGES
DECEMBER 31: KALWE – NEW YEAR PUJA
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-34.txt 
 1990
As we arrived in
Pratishthan, Shri Mataji
and Sir C.P. Srivastava
were waiting for us.
We were greeted with a
gracious gift of a shawl
every Sahaja Yogi from
Sir C.P. He welcomed
for
us to Pratishthan, saying
that it is our home and
we should feel at home
there. We were told that
we are their children and
they are our parents and
we were together with
our real family there.
That afternoon we went
into an open courtyard
for a delious, completely
satisfying biryani lunch.
As we ate, Shri Mataji
and Sir C.P. sat with
the children from the
Dharamsala school,
enjoying their company.
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE www.divinecoolbreeze.org
There are sure to be errors and omissions in this compilation of events from 1990. It is not comprehensive, nor com-
plete. The sources drawn upon are The Divine Cool Breeze magazines of 1990, the Sahaja Yoga Media Project website
and the International Book Project's transcriptions of Shri Mataji's talks. Sometimes these sources do not agree in the
sequencing and dating of events. In these cases, priority has been given to The Divine Cool Breeze reports, as they were
written shortly after each event by people who were there. Additionally, some unverified events have not been included
so that we do not repeat and perpetuate an error. In the end, we hope that the truth of Shri Mataji's travels does not
lie so much in the details, but in the scope, range and love She gave every day of 1990 – and every day since.
PHOTOGRAPHS
Colin Heinsen:
Cover, pages 5, 15,
23, 25, 31 and 33
Toni Grabmayer:
pages 21 and 27
BACK COVER WORDS:
SUBSCRIPTIONS: Contact@divinecoolbreeze.org
CcONTENT: editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
Birthday Puja 1990
PRINTED BY King Printing Company Inc. Lowell Massachusetts USA and Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. Pune Maharashtra India
 2011_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-35.txt 
 Thope this will happen this year
ODe
and people will try to make it a point that we have a large heart.
A large heart does not mean stupidity. It doesn't mean that.
A large heart means the heart in which you can put Me.
It is quite a big person, Myself,
so you have to have a very large heart that I can reside....
If that happens, then everything will work out very well.
