a r t i June 2011

 OuPes RuAd In My lifetime, if I see so many of you so much transformed, looking so beautiful, so nice, creating such a good atmosphere, it's more than satisfaction for Me. And sometimes I think there is nothing to be done now anymore - finished. But then they invite Me here and they invite Me there, so I'm just doing, but to be very frank, I am over satisfied. Guru Puja, 1996

 It is beyond Me to control Myself from loving all of you. Bija (seed) Mantras - Part II ....4 Shri Chakra ...8 Eyes are the ones ...10 Vishnumaya Powers ...12 The Goddess is working through you ...14 हर सहजयोगी कम से कम सौ आदमियों को पार करें...18 चक्रों में दोष एवं उनका शुद्धीकरण ...20

 Bija (seed) Mantras Part II Devi Bija :Aim Hrim Klim Chamundayai vichche. This is given in the Devi Atharva Sheersha and the Kuñjikā Stotram. These are Bījas of great power..... If we are taking A-U-M as the Three Worlds Bhūr, Bhuvah and Swar, governed respectively by Shri Brahmā, Vişhņu and Śhiva, then Aim, Hrīm and Klīm have the same associations. Each of these Bījas denotes Shiva and Shakti and their combination in different ways, producing different results. There are some associations with the names- Hrīm=Hari (Vishnu- central path) Klīm=Kālī (Left Side) Aim=Aindrī (Right Side Power) The Bīja- śhodasha-stotram describes Aim as the Bīja of Speech (Brahma/ Saraswati), Klīm as the Bija of desire (Kālī) and Hrīm as the Bija of Modesty (Mahālakshmī) The Kuñjikā Stotram 'Preservation'and Klīm 'Destruction', the same correspondence. calls Aim 'Creation', Hrīm Aim : pronounced 'ayeem'- seems to activate the Mūlādhāra Chakra and awaken the Kundalinī. Attention in the Bhūr-'Earth' Realm (lower three chakras). Hrīm : (as Shri Mataji explains) is the Energy rising up the Sushumna Nadi into the Sahasrāra. It is sometimes called the 'Om of the Tantras' as it is used for the worship of the Goddess. Ha is Lord Śhiva, Ra- the Kundalini Śhakti, ī- rising up the Sushumna Nadi and m- the Union in Sahasrāra. (Gñyāna Śhakti- 'Power of Knowledge', Shri Mahā-lakshmī) Attention on Sūrya-'Sun' Realm- (central channel- Nābhi to Sahasrāra.) "To make it a mantra, any mantra you want to do, you must know first the Bīja Mantra. Supposing you want to raise your Kundalinī, then the Bīja Mantra is 'Hreem' and from 'Hreem' you should go on to 'Om Twameva sākshāt Shrī Hreem'. Then you should go on saying the mantras of all the deities that are there. 'Eee' is the Primordial Mother and 'Ra' is the energy that is Kundalinī. So the 4

 'Hreem' means that you have the energy passing through the Mahālakshmī tattwa which is Ra. You see the energy is passing through the thing towards the Primordial Being. So Hreem.' th H.S.H. Shri Mataji's comments on the Devi Atharva Shīrsha. Pune, 17"Oct.1988 Klīm : is Bliss in the Sahasrāra. The Illusions of Worldly Life fall away and the Nature of the Supreme Goddess is realised. It is the quality of Lord Shiva-'ānanda-bliss' (Lalitā Devi). Attention in Chandra-'Moon'Realm (Sahasrāra and above) Chāmundāyai : Chāmundā is the Aspect of the Goddess who destroys the Demons Chanda- 'Anger' and Munda-bald head', signifying the removal of Ego in the devotee. This name clears the head. Vichche : seems to mean 'Victory to..' The Kunjikā Stotram describes it as conferring Fearlessness. Śhrīm : is the Bīja of the Supreme Goddess (Shrī Mataji's name starts with it!) in the Heart and Sahasrāra. It denotes splendour, light and glory. Sauh : In the Shrī Chakra, 'Aim Klīm Sauh'is used for worship in the outer levels, and the 15/16 syllabled mantra at the centre (Bindu) Phat: pronounced 'P'hut'- has a connection with the Heart. How Bijas work: The consonants have qualities and are manifestations of Lord Śhiva. The vowels have energy and power and come from the Adi Shakti. The Anuswāra-'nasal sound' -'m'- is a combination of Bindu-'dot' and Ardhachandra-'crescent', which is the Union of the Ātmā and the Kundalini in the Sahasrāra, conferring Bliss and a state of non-duality. There are subtle powers in the Anuswāra which manifest silently after saying it. The visarga : 'aspirated ending' -ḥ is associated with Lord Shiva (Hara) and is the Destructive/Dissolution Power connected to the Heart.

 The Vowels : a, ā is the Left Side power activating the Pure Desire of the Kundalini, i,ī is the Mahālakshmī giving ascent through the Sushumna and Bliss in the Sahasrāra (Spiritual Knowledge), u, ū is the Right Side Power of the Sun, centred in the Heart. ai is the principle of Expansion. au is the principle of Contraction. e is the Kundalini (The letter e in Devanāgari is a triangle) The Consonants : From the Kuñjikā Stotram, other sources and through experimentation we can say that certain Bijas have correspondence with aspects of the Subtle System. The following are suggestions only for you to try out and see. Bhra : Shri Bhairavi- Fierce Form of the Goddess destroying negativity. This works powerfully on the Heart. Dha : Wife of Shri Shiva with matted locks- a more ascetic, meditative aspect. seems to work on the Void- Dharma? : Left Mūlādhāra/ Left Swādhishthān. Gla : Super-ego (Back Āgñyā) ham-' На : Hanumān- many praises of Shri Hanuman use Bija Mantras, the most common being Hra Hrām, Hrīm, Hrūm, Hraim, Hraum, Hrah. : Bhāla-nādinī-'reverberating on forehead' This works on the Agñya Chakra and Jra Ekādaśha Rudras. : Ka is the sound of Desire (Kāma)/Creation. Associated with Shri Mahākālī. Ka : Shri Kartikeya- War-like Destroyer of negativity. Right Mūlādhāra. Kha : Kuñjikā- an aspect of Shri Chandī- Protectress against demons. Like Klīm, Krīm is Kra associated with Shri Mahākālī. Kşha : Ego–kshama is 'forgiveness'. 'I forgive' calms the ego. : Mother Earth/ Mūlādhāra La Śhri Lakshmī- Void and Nābhī Chakra. Ma : : Mūla-'root' connected with Mülādhāra Chakra and Shri Ganesha. Mla : Shri Pārvatī- A sweeter Form of the Goddess as Mother. A more gentle working on Pa the Heart. Śhra : Sahasrāra- Auspiciousness. Shrīm is the bīja of the Supreme Goddess. To be contd. in next issue ... 6.

 Meri Mata Ka karam When I took the name of Nirmala, all my problems were resolved in that very moment. This is the benevolence of my Mother, the love of my Mother.... My Mother is different and Her grandeur is unparalleled. Her heart is shining with light and Her face is innocent like a child's. In every gesture She is like Allah and it is my privilege to follow Her footsteps.... While still living on this Earth, She gave me a tour of the heavens. Yes, oh Sahajis, I have inherited the Kingdom of God.... Though it may seem trivial, but this is the truth : Even though I am just a grain of sand, still I am connected to the ocean. Before I could be corrupted in the marketplace of this world, You pulled me to the Court of Nirmala.... Dedication to Nirmala has become a way of life to me And the moment I saw Nirmala Mata, I bowed down my head in surrender Why should I not be proud of my destiny? This is translation from the song Meri Mata Ka Karam

 CHAKRA n this day I would request you to think of love all the time. Love is all knowledge. Knowledge is all love. There is nothing beyond. If you have knowledge, it has to pass the test of love. If you know a person, it makes no record on you because you know him from outside. But if you love a person then you know the person out and out. You know him so well, you know him... everything, the way it is. It is this knowledge that is what we call is the para [beyond] knowledge. That is the knowledge we have to seek. All these books are only signaling towards that. They are the milestones, which are telling us, 'Go ahead, go ahead.' They do not solve the problem of entering into the kingdom of God. I request you that you all should come to the stage of understanding the Divine within you, the love of God that is within you, which is trying to overflow from you, and enjoy the sense of emitting and giving. Giving has the greatest joy and pleasure. There is no pleasure in taking. And when you receive it, you start giving. You have heard... [a yogi] talking about how he has done work in Rahuri [a town in Maharashtra]. In Rahuri, when I was going to Rahuri University, the people in the nearby village knew that our car will be going there. They are ordinary villagers. They have never read any yoga; they don't understand anything more about vibrations than these feelings that you get. It is a subjective knowledge. It has no work. It is a subjective experience, which you feel on your fingers, in your being - the bliss of God. And as I was going, I just felt a jerk in the car, because so many people were just lying on the road and some were standing on the road stopping the car, and they started shouting my jai. I was wonderstruck! I said, "How did you know that I was in this car?" | They said, "Mataji, you have given us vibrations. We knew this was the car, which was bringing us vibrations. So, now you have to get down here." I just got down; I embraced all of them, and our Sahaja yogis were waiting at the other end. I said, "Doesn't matter." This is what is Sahaja - such loving people! And at that time, I just thought of how once with Rama, how you felt those things with people, with very simple people, of very simple heart and shraddha [faith], how they had those feelings of receiving your love and feeling it. Everyone needs love in this world; you 8

 cannot exist without love. Your whole being is based on love. And I wish all of you in this country to understand that unless and unil there is love in your heart, don't try to do anything outside because, if you do it you will be found out in no time. Every human being understands what is love. There are lots of things that are happening within you. There are cosmic changes that are taking place today within you. I know that it is happening. The Shri Chakra itself has descended on this Earth and already the Satya Yuga has started. This is the reason, why you are feeling these vibrations on your fingers and none of these gurus and rishis and all those people have mentioned these things. Because this is only possible when the Shri Chakra is brought down. It is here. You have to feel it and understand. It is for all of you to accept, each with an open heart. I do not want anything from you. What can you give me? I do not want anything, but I want my children to be happy. I pray for their happiness. I live for them and all the time, whether I am asleep or awakened or in the middle state, when they call the sabhranta, I am just with you. Every moment you are in my thoughts. H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, extract from Birthday Celebrations 1977, Mumbai

 Eyes. are the ones which give you the play of Shri Krishna

 sI told you about eyes yesterday, it's very important that Deyes are the ones which give you the play of Shri Krishna, the power of Shri Krishna. Even a glance, a little glance of a person who has Krishna consciousness, as they call it, if he has Krishna consciousness, then should be able to awaken the Kundalini, should be able to redeem, should be able to comfort, should be able to cure anyone. Even a glance, a side glance can do it, if it has Krishna consciousness, but not self-certified ones who say, “We are Krishna consciousness," all the time taking the name of Shri Krishna or any mantra. So on the left hand side the escape is feeling guilty. When you feel guilty, they try to find out some method of expression. So they say they go to some guru and then the guru gives them some sort of a mantra, and they accept that mantra, they go on saying. As a result of that they catch more on the left Vishudhi. Because if you go on saying mantra without the connection, you get completely caught- up. So the left Vishuddhi is again gone and your mantras are absolutely useless, they're destroying them. Actually many people I've seen who get to heart attacks, who get anginas and also who get cancer are the people who have been doing mantras like this, without the connection with the Divine. If you're not connected, say for example this is not connected and I start using it too much, it will get spoilt. In the same way the centre on the left hand side gets spoilt when you start saying any mantra without being connected, without feeling the power of that mantra. So in Sahaja Yoga we've got mantras to neutralise these mantras on the left hand side. (extract from Shri Krishna Puja, USA, 1986-06-22) 11

 Vishnumaya's Powers his understanding about Vishnumaya's powers should be there with us. That if we try to continue with our mistakes and putting them here, then first thing we become vulnerable to all kinds of diseases. With that if you are smoking, you can become also very much vulnerable to cancer of the throat. Another thing which people do not know is the mantras. If you go on saying any mantra – I mean in India there are people who will every day, morning get up and say some mantra for about, say, hundred times, some say it at least three hundred times, five hundred times. They go on measuring, mantra, mantra, mantra, mantra, like that. Now She's the mantrika. She's the one who gives the power to the mantra. Now if you are not connected to this Divine Power, then there's a short-circuiting takes place and if you go on saying this mantra, you develop all the troubles of the throat, throat cancer. You can develop also stomach, in the stomach, problems because it is Krishna and Vishnu are the same. You might develop also the problem of Virata. Because you are reciting a mantra like this, you see – a telephone, if it is not connected, I go on using it, the telephone will go out of order. In the same way, if you are doing wrong mantras in the sense that the mantras which are said before you have connection with the Divine, then they can spoil your left Vishudhi. (extract from Shri Vishnumaya Puja, New York, 1992-09-19) 12

 She Dwells in the Vishuddhi Padma, The Lotus of the Vishuddhi. She is Dazzling Like Lightning. She Declares that an Avatar of Truth has come. She Gives Chastity, The Foundation of All Dharmas. She Cares for the spirituality of the Brother. She enters into all the Elements. (8.8.1980) 13

 Goddess is working through you IS N ow it was very spontaneously decided that we should have the Devi Puja in England. And this is the place where really Devi Puja should be, because it's the place of Sadashiva and where Adi Shakti should be worshipped. We have to today understand that why do we do Devi Puja? What is the reason for this Devi Puja? What do we get out of it? What are we supposed to achieve in our contents within ourselves? The first thing is that Kundalini is the Devi. She's the reflection of the Adi Shakti. So when you worship Devi, first you worship also your own Kundalini, by giving Her credit because She has given you this realization. It's much deeper understanding than normally people have about the Devi Puja, because they are not realized souls. Their Kundalini is not awakened. So normally when they do Devi Puja it's for the purpose of getting realization, so that the Devi should be pleased - prasanna - and should give them realization, or must give them a chance to get to somebody who will give them realization. But you are at a different level now. So it's more of a thanksgiving to your own Kundalini and to Adi Shakti, glorifying that whatever has happened so miraculously is because of the kundalini which was within you, which was reflected by the Adi Shakti. But one has to know that only we are realized souls is 14

 not the point, only that we can feel the vibrations is not the point, that we can give realizations to other is also not the point. Then what is it? Very important - it's the content within us. What do we have within us is the point. These are all the expressions of what we have within. Supposing somebody is generous, then know that he's a rich man, otherwise he cannot be. So the content within us we have to see. And when we start seeing the content, where do we find in the nature there is real content? We say the sea; sea is there you see, full of water. So much of water it sucks in from everywhere, and then it allows itself to be boiled by the sun and gives rain. But sea is the lowest level, stands at the lowest level and sucks in all the water from everywhere. In the same way a Sahaja yogi must know that to be really achieving more content, we have to be not at a higher level outside. It's said in the Bible, "You have to be meek," but I think it was not explained to people. Only the strong people can be meek, secured people can be meek, only the rich in essence can be meek; not the people who are insecured, because they are insecured, how can they be meek? And not the people whom we think are rich, so-called, because if they are rich they are not generous, they are not satisfied, they are not philanthropic, so they are not rich. They are still greedy beggars. So the content within us is to be seen. What is our content? You love me, I love you - it's very good. But when you love me, you have to know that there are certain qualities which are very loveable in a Sahaja yogi. Actually people get lost even after Sahaja Yoga. They think they can get over everything, they're perfectly all right, and they are thrown overboard. So when we say that we have to be meek, this is a content, the humility is a content. So try to do that, try to be humble with someone. You'll like yourself. You'll enjoy that quality within this that "You see, I'm humbler than another person. ... You have to care for your own quality, for your own inner capacity to suck in... So you have Adi Shakti with you, whose power is all this Divine. So you are at such an advantageous position. But first you must realize. So when we say we should have content, then the vessel has to be strong. Otherwise everything will break. And this strength is the 15

 one you should know, that you are completely protected. No one can harm you. They'll try - this has to be, otherwise how will you test whether you are absolutely safe or not? So somebody has to try some tricks just to see, and for you to watch how you are successful. Without doing anything you'll be amazed, everything will be cleared out. And you'll not know how things have cleared out, how things have worked out. So the strength comes... The negativity that is around you is not so dangerous as whatever is in you. Today it has become subtler. The negativity has become subtler. It's entered into your being, and be careful - it may anytime topple you. Even one step you do not put right when you are climbing up, you can down. So one has to be alert, without tension. You have to be alert without tension. And the go alertness grows. When the light goes within you start seeing it. Immediately you see, "Oh, that's it! So I, the so and so - that's it." And you know how to correct it and you know how to put it right. And immediately you take to it. Like a good sari now has something fallen on it, immediately you clean it. In the same way we have to be very, very alert - daksha is the word for that. ... So you have to kill your negativity, you've become as powerful as your Mother. No negativity can touch you. So you can give realization, you've got that power very well; and you can watch your defects more than that of others. And you try to put them out because they're not good, they're not for your benevolence, they're not for your ascent. By that nobody is going to gain. At the collective level it just works automatically. Now another quality that you have: to believe that the Goddess is working through you. In you She resides, you have got the powers, it's penetrated into you - is that you can comfort people, you can cure them, you can give them peace, you can give them bliss. But then what Goddess has done in you is that She has given you the bliss, you have become bliss. Like there's say a cool air-conditioner, you get the cool from there. In the same way if you are emitting bliss, you give bliss to others. But there is no bliss within yourself, but what bliss you can give to others? So a Sahaja yogi has to be a blissful like the Goddess. ... So to leave certain things into the hands of the Divine is what we call as surrender. And that much of is, if done, then most of your things will work out so miraculously. I mean, you'll be amazed, "How, Mother, how it is worked out? We never expected, how things we got it done?" There's a very, very big force working: the Force, the Energy which is the Source of all the 16

 energies, which has created this great universe, which has created this Mother Earth, created this sun, which has created you very delicately. This Force is working. And that Force is looking after you, so proud of you that you have come on the stage now. So as it is we are today praying to the Goddess that "Help us to fight our negativity within us. Give us Your tiger so that we fight, give us Your lion so we fight." Let us fight all these horrible animals that are within us, these horrible haunting things that are within us, these horrible conditionings we have - you have to get rid of it. Still, still if you watch yourself, lots of conditionings are there, lots don't things, you see. If you see, they are covered with very thin curtains and you see it, but they are there. But let the tiger enter into all these dens and find out. And you enjoy that, riding over the horse, riding over the lion, and riding over the tiger - like a Goddess, why not? After all, children get all the heritage of the mother, don't they? So you have all the heritage available to you. But you have to be worthy, in the sense that you have to know that you are worthy, that's all. You have to just know that you are worthy and that you can do it. So again today we are here to do this puja, which would have been in Perth but somehow or other it was not so, and is luck for you to have this puja. And it is something of a very deeper nature, very subtler nature. Like your blood it is, because on these seven days they say the Goddess has to wear the red all the time, because it's blood. And the first color you see in the womb of your mother is red - it's the security. One side is the red rag, another side it is the security. So for you it is the security around you. Every place you go, it is there - just feel it. You have entered I must say, entered the Kingdom of God, no doubt about it. You all have entered, so beautifully you are settled down. May God bless you. H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala, extracts from Navaratri Puja (1989-10-08) 17

 सहजयोगी आदमियों को पार करे कम से कम सा Bाट सत्य के बगैर मनुष्य का जीवन बिल्कुल व्यर्थ है, जैसे अन्धेरे में इन्सान टटोलता रहता है उसी तरह सत्य के बगैर मनुष्य भटक जाता है। उसमें उसका दोष मैं नहीं मानती, दोष है उस अन्धेरे का जो उसे घेरे हुए है। जैसे कहा है आपको और सबको सहजयोग बढ़ाना चाहिए। ये मेरी भी बड़ी इच्छा है कि सहजयोग आप लोग बढ़ा सकते हैं और फैलना चाहिए। सबको ये सोचना चाहिए यह हमने पाया है। हम भी दूसरों को दें और इसको बढ़ाएं। इससे सहजयोग बढ़ेगा ही लेकिन उससे एक शान्तिमय, सुन्दर सा ऐसा स्वर्ग इस संसार में आ जाएगा। यह आपके हाथ में है कि आप लोग इस कार्य को पूरी तरह से करें और हिन्दुस्तान में यह कार्य बहुत जोरों में हो रहा है, उसका कारण ये है कि भारतवर्ष एक योग-भूमि है, एक पुण्यभूमि है और पुण्यभूमि में इस तरह का कार्य होना था ही, लिखा ही था। विधि थी। किन्तु इतने जोरों में और इतना बढ़कर ये परिवार इतना परिपक्व होगा ऐसी कभी भी मूुझे उम्मीद नहीं थी। लेकिन यह घटित हो रहा है और होगा भी। इसका आनन्द जो आप उठा रहे है वो दूसरों को भी देना चाहिए। हिन्दुस्तान तो है ही मेरा देश और यहाँ आने में जो एक विशेष आनन्द होता है उसका वर्णन नहीं किया जा सकता और जब मैं आप लोगों को देखती हूँ, एयरपोर्ट पर, तब मुझे लगता है कि न जाने कितने हृदयों में ये आनन्द आड़ोलित हो रहा है और कितने ही लोग इस आनन्द से प्लावित हो रहे है। इसी से हमारे बच्चों की भी रक्षा होगी और हमारे युवा लोगों की भी रक्षा होगी। इतना ही नहीं , लेकिन हमारे देश में सुबुद्धता और असली मायने में स्वराज्य आएगा। स्व का मतलब है आत्मा और आत्मा का राज्य आना ही स्वराज्य है। स्वतन्त्र का मतलब है फिर वही आत्मा का तन्त्र माने आत्मा की एक रीत। ये दोनों आनी चाहिए और वो आ गई है। आप लोगों ने इसे स्वीकार किया है, अपने जीवन में उतारा है। लेकिन अब दुसरों को भी उबारने का, उनके भी उद्धार का यही समय है इसको करना चाहिए। अभी मैंने बहुत सी बातें देखीं तो मुझे बड़ा आश्चर्य हुआ कि मिलेनियम का असर कितने ज़ोरों में आ रहा है। जैसे कि हमारे बहुत से सहजयोगी विदेश से भी आए और जो गए थे उड़ीसा, वहाँ लोगों को सहजयोग सिखाया और वहाँ उन्होंने नौ सेन्टर स्थापित किये। जब साइक्लॉन आया, उड़ीसा में, उसका कारण है क्योंकि वहाँ बहुत अनाप शनाप बातें हो रही थीं, गलत बातें हो रही थीं। तो एक भी, एक भी सहजयोगी को कुछ क्षति नहीं हुई। उनके मकान नहीं गिरे, उनको कुछ नहीं हुआ। इसी प्रकार ट्की में, हालांकि वो लोग पहले मुसलमान थे और अब असली मुसलमान हो गए और जब ये सहजयोग में आ गए, करीबन दो हजार से ऊपर लोग वहाँ सहजयोग में हैं। तो वहाँ भी दो बार बहुत बुरी 18 ६

 तरह से भूकम्प में जरा सा भी कोई दुखी नहीं हुआ। किसी के रिश्तेदार तक नहीं मरे, वो लोग तो बच ही गए। ऐसी अनेक वारदात हुई इटली में भी और हर जगह मैं देखती हूँ सहजयोगी एकदम बिल्कुल पूरी तरह से जैसे संरक्षित है और इस संरक्षण में आप लोग पनप रहे हैं। इसका मतलब है जो हम कहते हैं कि ये 'लास्ट जजमेंट' है वो शुरु हो गया है और वो चल रहा है बड़े जोरों से। आप लोग सब ध्यान करते ही हैं और आपने सहज में उन्नति कर ली, लेकिन ये सब पाने पर दूसरों को भी देने की इच्छा होनी चाहिए। ये इच्छा होगी जरूर बहुत लेकिन किसी न किसी वजह से इसकी इच्छा पूर्ति नहीं होती। उसे आप लोगों को पूरी तरह से जोश से करना चाहिए। संसार के कार्य तो चलते ही रहते हैं, घरेलू बातें चलती ही रहती है और उसमें से निकलके और लोगों को जागरण देना उनको सँवारना उनका उद्धार करना ये आपका एक परम कर्तव्य है। और इसकी दारोमदार आप ही के ऊपर में है। आप ही लोग इसे कर सकते हैं और बहुत से कर भी रहे हैं लेकिन मेरे विचार से इससे भी ज्यादा सोच-विचार करके कि हमारा जो सुख है, हमारा जो आनन्द है, हमने जिसे प्राप्त किया वो और भी प्राप्त करें, इस विचार से गर आप उधर थोड़ी सी दृष्टि लगाएं तो बहुत कुछ हो सकता है इस भारत वर्ष में। और मैं तो सोचती हूँ कि ये कार्य कोई कठिन नहीं क्योंकि इसमें कोई झगड़ा नहीं, कोई आफ़त नहीं, कोई दवा नहीं, कोई दारु नहीं, कुछ नहीं, सिर्फ लोगों की कुण्डलिनी जागृत करना और उसकी शक्ति आपके अन्दर है उसको इस्तेमाल करना है। जब आपके अन्दर शक्ति है तो आप उसको इस्तेमाल नहीं करोगे तो उसका क्या फायदा? उस शक्ति को आप सब इस्तेमाल करें और निश्चय करें कि हर आदमी, हर सहजयोगी कम से कम सौ आदमियों को पार करे, सबसे बात करें और उसमें शर्माने की कोई बात नहीं है, घबराने की कोई बात नहीं है क्योंकि हम सत्य पर खड़े हैं। और आजकल जो तरह-तरह के गुरु घण्टाल निकले हुए है उनका यही इलाज है कि हम खुले आम ये बातें करें, सबसे बात करें और उनसे कहें कि इस चक्कर से बचो, नहीं तो वो लोग भी खत्म हो जाएंगे। ये हमारा कर्तव्य है कि जैसे संसार की नाव ड्ूब रही है और उसको बचाने वाले आप ही हैं। आपको किसी तरह से भी यही कोशिश करनी चाहिए कि हम कितने लोगों को पार कराएं। ये आनन्द अपने ही हृदय में कभी समा नहीं सकता, गर समा सकता तो हम क्यो अपना घर द्वार छोड़ करके और बाहर घूमते और लोगों को पार कराते। ये ऐसी स्थिति है कि उसमें लगता है कि दूसरों के साथ भी मिल-जुल करके इसका उपयोग लें। और इस स्थिति पर गर आप हैं तो उसका पूरा इस्तेमाल करना चाहिए और उस ओर अग्रसर होना चाहिए, उस तरफ बढ़ना चाहिए। और आशा है कि अगले वर्ष जब हम यहाँ फिर से हिन्दुस्तान आएं तो इससे कई गुना ज्यादा लोग सहजयोग में उतरे हुए नज़र आए। आपने सत्कार किया है वो मैं क्या कहूँ, कोई जरूरत नहीं थी पर आपकी इच्छा है तो मैं मान लेती हूँ भई चलो सत्कार करो। पर वो तो मुझे उसी दिन दिखाई दिया जब मैं यहाँ एयरपोर्ट पर आई थी और किस तरह से लोग बिल्कुल, प्यार से बिल्कुल दीवाने हो गए। तो ये प्यार की महिमा है और इस प्यार को बाँटना और देना ये भी बड़ी भारी बात है। आरै इस जन्म में गर ये होगा तो न जाने कितने ही पूण्यों का फल मिल जाएगा। परम पूज्य माताजी श्री निर्मलादेवी का प्रवचन (५.१२.१९९९) 19

 में दोष एवं उनका ch! शुद्धीकरण गु का क० ॐ 20

 जिस प्रकार पृथ्वी अपनी धुरी के चारों ओर घूमती है उसी प्रकार हमारे सूक्ष्म यंत्र के चक्र (शक्ति केंद्र) एक विशेष गति से समतल सतह पर दक्षिणावर्त दिशा में अपने-अपने स्थानों पर चक्कर लगाते हैं। ये चक्र स्थूल केंद्रों का निर्माण करते हैं जो अपने चारों ओर के अंगो पर नियंत्रण रखते हैं। जब ये चक्र सूचारू रूप से अपनी गति द्वारा अपने अंगों को आवश्यकतानुसार शक्ति प्रदान करते हैं तभी शरीर के सारे अंग अपने निध्धारित कार्य सही तरह से कर पाते हैं। इन चक्रों की शक्ति हमारे शारीरिक, मानसिक और भावनात्मक कार्यों में निरन्तर खर्च होती रहती है इसलिए चक्रों में शक्ति का सतत प्रवाह होना अत्यन्त आवश्यक है। किसी बाधा या रूकावट के कारण यदि शक्ति का प्रवाह कम हो जाता है तो ये चक्र अंगों पर नियंत्रण नहीं रख पाते। अंग भी शक्ति के अभाव के कारण क्षीण होने लगते हैं तो उनके निर्धारित कार्य रूक जाते हैं या ठीक प्रकार से नहीं हो पाते हैं जिसके परिणाम स्वरूप शारीरिक शोग एवं मानसिक, भावनात्मक समस्यायें पैदा हो जाती हैं। .....मानव की सभी समस्यायें उनके चक्रों के कारण हैं। किसी तरह से यदि आप अपने चक्रों को ठीक कर सकें तो आपकी सारी समस्याओं का समाधान हो जायेगा। यह इतना साधारण है। २५.३.९३ . जब चक्रों में दोष हो जाता है तभी आप बीमार पड़ जाते हैं। अब अगर आप बाहर से किसी पेड़ को, उसके फूलों को उसके पत्तों को दवा दें तो थोड़ी देर के लिये तो वे ठीक हो जायेंगे फिर सत्यानाश हो जाएगा, पर अगर उनकी जड़ में जो चक्र हैं उन चक्रों को अगर आप ठीक कर दें तो बीमार पड़ने की कोई बात ही नहीं । -प.पू.श्रीमाताजी .....ध्यान देने से आपको पता लगेगा कि आपके अन्दर कौन से चक्र की पकड़ है, उसे आपको साफ करना है। इसको प्रत्याहार कहते हैं, माने इसकी सफाई होनी चाहिये । -प.पू.श्रीमाताजी .....मध्य के पाँचों चक्र मूलत: भौतिक तत्वों के बने हैं तथा पाँचों तत्वों से इन चक्रों का शरीर बना है। हमें पूर्ण सावधानी से इन पाँचों चक्रों का संचालन करना चाहिये। जिन तत्वों से ये चक्र बने हैं उन्हीं में इनकी अशुद्धियों को निकाल कर इन चक्रों का शुद्धीकरण करना है। १८.१.१९८३ 21

 चक्र कुप्रभावित होने पर सम्बन्धित देवता वहाँ से स्थान त्याग कर देते हैं, अत: उस चक्र का मंत्र श्रीमाताजी के नाम की शक्ति से उक्त देवता का आवाहन किया जाता है। उच्चारण करके परमपूज्य उपचार के लिये विपरीत पाश्शर्व का हाथ प्रभावित चक्र पर रखें और प्रभावित पाश्र्व का हाथ फोटो की ओर फैलायें। - निर्मला योग, जुलाई १९८३ .ऐसा नहीं है कि सहजयोग में आने के बाद आपको कोई बीमारी ही नहीं होती, कारण यह है कि सहजयोग में आने के बाद जो ध्यान-धारणा और प्रगति आपने करनी होती है, वो आप नहीं करते। फिर भी आपके कष्ट घट जाते हैं। .सहजयोग में आने के बाद एक महीने में ही आप पूरी तरह से सहजयोग को समझ सकते हैं और उसमें उतर भी सकते हैं, पर जिस प्रकार रोज हम लोग स्नान करके अपने शरीर को साफ करते हैं, उसी प्रकार रोज अपने चक्रों को भी आपको साफ करना पड़ेगा । २.३.१९९१ .यदि आपकी विशुद्धि चक्र में कोई पकड़ है तो अपना दायाँ हाथ फोटो की ओर करें और बाँया हाथ बाहर की ओर कर दें। जब आपको लगे कि इसमें चैतन्य लहरियाँ आ रही हैं तब अपना बाँया हाथ फोटो की ओर कर ले और दाँया बाहर की ओर, आपका पूरा चक्र स्वच्छ हो जाएगा। 6. .....अपनी खुली आँखों से यदि आप मेरी फोटो को देखते हैं और अपने दोनों हाथ हथेलियाँ ऊपर की ओर करके फोटो की ओर फैलाते हैं या कभी - कभी आकाश की ओर उठाते हैं, तो आपकी दृष्टि में बहुत सुधार होगी। . पृथ्वी माँ भी, यदि आप अपना सिर पृथ्वी माँ पर रखे, केवल अपना माथा पृथ्वी पर टेक लें और कहें, "हे पृथ्वी माँ, मैं आपको अपने पैरों से छूता हूँ, इसके लिये मुझे क्षमा करें।" वो आपकी दादी माँ हैं, जो भी कुछ आप उनसे माँगेगें वो आपको मिल जायेगा। सब आपकी इच्छानुरूप आपको देने के लिये प्रतीक्षा कर रहे हैं। आप श्री हनुमान और श्री गणेश की सहायता भी माँग सकते हैं। २२.३.१९७७ 22

 She Integrates The Heart and Brain. She is the powerful one whose Electricity Brings Auspiciousness. She Controls Lightning, Earthquakes, Typhoons And Burning Forests. She Enlightens the Medium of Film. She Gives Pure Speech. She Empowers Mantras. She Gives Courage. She is the Destroyer of Myths. She is the support of Joy. She Gives Comprehension of the Subtle. She Clears The Path for Self Realization. She Brings us to the Virata. She speaks the Truth & Purifies The Ether. Published & Printed by Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. No. 8, Chandragupta Co-op Нousing Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune, Maharashtra, India - 411 038. © : 25286537, 25286032 email:sale@nitl.co.in website: www.nitl.co.in (For queries & sending articles contact on above address)

 The Sahaja Yogis will be the forests, the great trees which are moving, but which are bestowing blessings upon others, giving them what they want. Try to rise towards the sky as these trees have done.



----------------------

2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 a
r
t
i
June 2011
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 OuPes RuAd
In My lifetime,
if I see so many of you so much transformed,
looking so beautiful, so nice, creating such a good atmosphere,
it's more than satisfaction for Me.
And sometimes I think
there is nothing to be done now anymore - finished.
But then they invite Me here and they invite Me there,
so I'm just doing, but to be very frank,
I am over satisfied.
Guru Puja, 1996
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 It is beyond Me to control Myself from loving all of you.
Bija (seed) Mantras - Part II ....4
Shri Chakra ...8
Eyes are the ones ...10
Vishnumaya Powers ...12
The Goddess is working through you ...14
हर सहजयोगी कम से कम सौ आदमियों को पार करें...18
चक्रों में दोष एवं उनका शुद्धीकरण ...20
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Bija (seed) Mantras
Part II
Devi Bija :Aim Hrim Klim Chamundayai vichche.
This is given in the Devi Atharva Sheersha and the Kuñjikā Stotram. These
are Bījas of great power.....
If we are taking A-U-M as the Three Worlds Bhūr, Bhuvah and Swar,
governed respectively by Shri Brahmā, Vişhņu and Śhiva, then Aim, Hrīm
and Klīm have the same associations. Each of these Bījas denotes Shiva and
Shakti and their combination in different ways, producing different results.
There are some associations with the names- Hrīm=Hari (Vishnu- central
path) Klīm=Kālī (Left Side) Aim=Aindrī (Right Side Power) The Bīja-
śhodasha-stotram describes Aim as the Bīja of Speech (Brahma/
Saraswati), Klīm as the Bija of desire (Kālī) and Hrīm as the Bija of Modesty
(Mahālakshmī) The Kuñjikā Stotram
'Preservation'and Klīm 'Destruction', the same correspondence.
calls Aim 'Creation', Hrīm
Aim : pronounced 'ayeem'- seems to activate the Mūlādhāra Chakra and
awaken the Kundalinī. Attention in the Bhūr-'Earth' Realm (lower three
chakras).
Hrīm : (as Shri Mataji explains) is the Energy rising up the Sushumna Nadi
into the Sahasrāra. It is sometimes called the 'Om of the Tantras' as it is used
for the worship of the Goddess. Ha is Lord Śhiva, Ra- the Kundalini Śhakti, ī-
rising up the Sushumna Nadi and m- the Union in Sahasrāra. (Gñyāna Śhakti-
'Power of Knowledge', Shri Mahā-lakshmī) Attention on Sūrya-'Sun'
Realm- (central channel- Nābhi to Sahasrāra.)
"To make it a mantra, any mantra you want to do, you must know first the
Bīja Mantra. Supposing you want to raise your Kundalinī, then the Bīja
Mantra is 'Hreem' and from 'Hreem' you should go on to 'Om Twameva
sākshāt Shrī Hreem'. Then you should go on saying the mantras of all the
deities that are there.
'Eee' is the Primordial Mother and 'Ra' is the energy that is Kundalinī. So the
4
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 'Hreem' means that you have the energy passing through the Mahālakshmī tattwa which is Ra.
You see the energy is passing through the thing towards the Primordial Being. So Hreem.'
th
H.S.H. Shri Mataji's comments on the Devi Atharva Shīrsha. Pune, 17"Oct.1988
Klīm : is Bliss in the Sahasrāra. The Illusions of Worldly Life fall away and the Nature of the
Supreme Goddess is realised. It is the quality of Lord Shiva-'ānanda-bliss' (Lalitā Devi). Attention
in Chandra-'Moon'Realm (Sahasrāra and above)
Chāmundāyai : Chāmundā is the Aspect of the Goddess who destroys the Demons Chanda-
'Anger' and Munda-bald head', signifying the removal of Ego in the devotee. This name clears the
head.
Vichche : seems to mean 'Victory to..' The Kunjikā Stotram describes it as conferring Fearlessness.
Śhrīm : is the Bīja of the Supreme Goddess (Shrī Mataji's name starts with it!) in the Heart and
Sahasrāra. It denotes splendour, light and glory.
Sauh : In the Shrī Chakra, 'Aim Klīm Sauh'is used for worship in the outer levels, and the 15/16
syllabled mantra at the centre (Bindu)
Phat: pronounced 'P'hut'- has a connection with the Heart.
How Bijas work:
The consonants have qualities and are manifestations of Lord Śhiva. The vowels have
energy and power and come from the Adi Shakti. The Anuswāra-'nasal sound' -'m'-
is a combination of Bindu-'dot' and Ardhachandra-'crescent', which is the
Union of the Ātmā and the Kundalini in the Sahasrāra, conferring Bliss and
a state of non-duality. There are subtle powers in the Anuswāra which
manifest silently after saying it.
The visarga : 'aspirated ending' -ḥ is associated with Lord Shiva
(Hara) and is the Destructive/Dissolution Power connected to the
Heart.
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 The Vowels :
a, ā is the Left Side power activating the Pure Desire of the Kundalini,
i,ī is the Mahālakshmī giving ascent through the Sushumna and Bliss in the Sahasrāra (Spiritual
Knowledge),
u, ū is the Right Side Power of the Sun, centred in the Heart.
ai is the principle of Expansion.
au is the principle of Contraction.
e is the Kundalini (The letter e in Devanāgari is a triangle)
The Consonants :
From the Kuñjikā Stotram, other sources and through experimentation we can say that certain
Bijas have correspondence with aspects of the Subtle System. The following are suggestions
only for you to try out and see.
Bhra : Shri Bhairavi- Fierce Form of the Goddess destroying negativity. This works
powerfully on the Heart.
Dha : Wife of Shri Shiva with matted locks- a more ascetic, meditative aspect. seems to
work on the Void- Dharma?
: Left Mūlādhāra/ Left Swādhishthān.
Gla
: Super-ego (Back Āgñyā) ham-'
На
: Hanumān- many praises of Shri Hanuman use Bija Mantras, the most common being
Hra
Hrām, Hrīm, Hrūm, Hraim, Hraum, Hrah.
: Bhāla-nādinī-'reverberating on forehead' This works on the Agñya Chakra and
Jra
Ekādaśha Rudras.
: Ka is the sound of Desire (Kāma)/Creation. Associated with Shri Mahākālī.
Ka
: Shri Kartikeya- War-like Destroyer of negativity. Right Mūlādhāra.
Kha
: Kuñjikā- an aspect of Shri Chandī- Protectress against demons. Like Klīm, Krīm is
Kra
associated with Shri Mahākālī.
Kşha : Ego–kshama is 'forgiveness'. 'I forgive' calms the ego.
: Mother Earth/ Mūlādhāra
La
Śhri Lakshmī- Void and Nābhī Chakra.
Ma
:
: Mūla-'root' connected with Mülādhāra Chakra and Shri Ganesha.
Mla
: Shri Pārvatī- A sweeter Form of the Goddess as Mother. A more gentle working on
Pa
the Heart.
Śhra : Sahasrāra- Auspiciousness. Shrīm is the bīja of the Supreme Goddess.
To be contd. in next issue
...
6.
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Meri Mata Ka karam
When I took the name of Nirmala, all my problems were resolved in that very moment.
This is the benevolence of my Mother, the love of my Mother....
My Mother is different and Her grandeur is unparalleled.
Her heart is shining with light and Her face is innocent like a child's.
In every gesture She is like Allah and it is my privilege to follow Her footsteps....
While still living on this Earth, She gave me a tour of the heavens.
Yes, oh Sahajis, I have inherited the Kingdom of God....
Though it may seem trivial, but this is the truth :
Even though I am just a grain of sand, still I am connected to the ocean.
Before I could be corrupted in the marketplace of this world,
You pulled me to the Court of Nirmala....
Dedication to Nirmala has become a way of life to me
And the moment I saw Nirmala Mata, I bowed down my head in surrender
Why should I not be proud of my destiny?
This is translation from the song Meri Mata Ka Karam
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 CHAKRA
n this day I would request you to think of love all the time. Love is all knowledge.
Knowledge is all love. There is nothing beyond. If you have knowledge, it has to pass the
test of love. If you know a person, it makes no record on you because you know him from
outside. But if you love a person then you know the person out and out. You know him so well,
you know him... everything, the way it is. It is this knowledge that is what we call is the para
[beyond] knowledge. That is the knowledge we have to seek. All these books are only signaling
towards that. They are the milestones, which are telling us, 'Go ahead, go ahead.' They do not
solve the problem of entering into the kingdom of God. I request you that you all should come to
the stage of understanding the Divine within you, the love of God that is within you, which is
trying to overflow from you, and enjoy the sense of emitting and giving. Giving has the greatest
joy and pleasure. There is no pleasure in taking. And when you receive it, you start giving. You
have heard... [a yogi] talking about how he has done work in Rahuri [a town in Maharashtra].
In Rahuri, when I was going to Rahuri University, the people in the nearby village knew that our
car will be going there. They are ordinary villagers. They have never read any yoga; they don't
understand anything more about vibrations than these feelings that you get. It is a subjective
knowledge. It has no work. It is a subjective experience, which you feel on your fingers, in your
being - the bliss of God. And as I was going, I just felt a jerk in the car, because so many people
were just lying on the road and some were standing on the road stopping the car, and they
started shouting my jai. I was wonderstruck! I said, "How did you know that I was in this car?"
|
They said, "Mataji, you have given us vibrations. We knew this was the car, which was bringing
us vibrations. So, now you have to get down here." I just got down; I embraced all of them, and
our Sahaja yogis were waiting at the other end. I said, "Doesn't matter." This is what is Sahaja -
such loving people! And at that time, I just thought of how once with Rama, how you felt those
things with people, with very simple people, of very simple heart and shraddha [faith], how they
had those feelings of receiving your love and feeling it. Everyone needs love in this world; you
8
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 cannot exist without love. Your whole being is
based on love. And I wish all of you in this
country to understand that unless and unil
there is love in your heart, don't try to do
anything outside because, if you do it you will
be found out in no time. Every human being
understands what is love. There are lots of
things that are happening within you. There are
cosmic changes that are taking place today
within you. I know that it is happening.
The Shri Chakra itself has descended on this
Earth and already the Satya Yuga has started.
This is the reason, why you are feeling these
vibrations on your fingers and none of these
gurus and rishis and all those people have
mentioned these things. Because this is only
possible when the Shri Chakra is brought
down. It is here. You have to feel it and
understand. It is for all of you to accept, each
with an open heart. I do not want anything from
you. What can you give me? I do not want
anything, but I want my children to be happy. I
pray for their happiness. I live for them and all
the time, whether I am asleep or awakened or
in the middle state, when they call the
sabhranta, I am just with you. Every moment
you are in my thoughts.
H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, extract from
Birthday Celebrations 1977, Mumbai
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Eyes.
are the ones which give you the play of Shri Krishna
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 sI told you about eyes yesterday, it's very important that
Deyes are the ones which give you the play of Shri Krishna,
the power of Shri Krishna. Even a glance, a little glance of a person
who has Krishna consciousness, as they call it, if he has Krishna
consciousness, then should be able to awaken the Kundalini, should
be able to redeem, should be able to comfort, should be able to cure
anyone. Even a glance, a side glance can do it, if it has Krishna
consciousness, but not self-certified ones who say, “We are Krishna
consciousness," all the time taking the name of Shri Krishna or any
mantra.
So on the left hand side the escape is feeling guilty. When you
feel guilty, they try to find out some method of expression. So they
say they go to some guru and then the guru gives them some sort of a
mantra, and they accept that mantra, they go on saying. As a result of
that they catch more on the left Vishudhi. Because if you go on
saying mantra without the connection, you get completely caught-
up. So the left Vishuddhi is again gone and your mantras are
absolutely useless, they're destroying them. Actually many people
I've seen who get to heart attacks, who get anginas and also who get
cancer are the people who have been doing mantras like this,
without the connection with the Divine. If you're not connected, say
for example this is not connected and I start using it too much, it will
get spoilt. In the same way the centre on the left hand side gets spoilt
when you start saying any mantra without being connected, without
feeling the power of that mantra. So in Sahaja Yoga we've got
mantras to neutralise these mantras on the left hand side.
(extract from Shri Krishna Puja, USA, 1986-06-22)
11
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Vishnumaya's Powers
his understanding about Vishnumaya's powers should be
there with us. That if we try to continue with our mistakes and
putting them here, then first thing we become vulnerable to all
kinds of diseases. With that if you are smoking, you can become
also very much vulnerable to cancer of the throat. Another thing
which people do not know is the mantras. If you go on saying any
mantra – I mean in India there are people who will every day,
morning get up and say some mantra for about, say, hundred times,
some say it at least three hundred times, five hundred times. They
go on measuring, mantra, mantra, mantra, mantra, like that. Now
She's the mantrika. She's the one who gives the power to the
mantra.
Now if you are not connected to this Divine Power, then there's a
short-circuiting takes place and if you go on saying this mantra,
you develop all the troubles of the throat, throat cancer. You can
develop also stomach, in the stomach, problems because it is
Krishna and Vishnu are the same. You might develop also the
problem of Virata. Because you are reciting a mantra like this, you
see – a telephone, if it is not connected, I go on using it, the
telephone will go out of order.
In the same way, if you are doing wrong mantras in the sense that
the mantras which are said before you have connection with the
Divine, then they can spoil your left Vishudhi.
(extract from Shri Vishnumaya Puja, New York, 1992-09-19)
12
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 She Dwells in the Vishuddhi Padma, The Lotus of the Vishuddhi.
She is Dazzling Like Lightning.
She Declares that an Avatar of Truth has come.
She Gives Chastity, The Foundation of All Dharmas.
She Cares for the spirituality of the Brother.
She enters into all the Elements.
(8.8.1980)
13
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Goddess
is working through you
IS
N
ow it was very spontaneously decided that we should have the Devi
Puja in England. And this is the place where really Devi Puja should be,
because it's the place of Sadashiva and where Adi Shakti should be worshipped. We
have to today understand that why do we do Devi Puja? What is the reason for this
Devi Puja? What do we get out of it? What are we supposed to achieve in our
contents within ourselves? The first thing is that Kundalini is the Devi. She's the
reflection of the Adi Shakti. So when you worship Devi, first you worship also your
own Kundalini, by giving Her credit because She has given you this realization. It's
much deeper understanding than normally people have about the Devi Puja,
because they are not realized souls. Their Kundalini is not awakened. So normally
when they do Devi Puja it's for the purpose of getting realization, so that the Devi
should be pleased - prasanna - and should give them realization, or must give them
a chance to get to somebody who will give them realization.
But you are at a different level now. So it's more of a thanksgiving to your own
Kundalini and to Adi Shakti, glorifying that whatever has happened so
miraculously is because of the kundalini which was within you, which was
reflected by the Adi Shakti. But one has to know that only we are realized souls is
14
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 not the point, only that we can feel the vibrations is not the point, that we can give
realizations to other is also not the point. Then what is it? Very important - it's the content
within us. What do we have within us is the point. These are all the expressions of what we
have within. Supposing somebody is generous, then know that he's a rich man, otherwise he
cannot be. So the content within us we have to see. And when we start seeing the content,
where do we find in the nature there is real content? We say the sea; sea is there you see, full
of water. So much of water it sucks in from everywhere, and then it allows itself to be boiled
by the sun and gives rain. But sea is the lowest level, stands at the lowest level and sucks in
all the water from everywhere.
In the same way a Sahaja yogi must know that to be really achieving more content, we
have to be not at a higher level outside. It's said in the Bible, "You have to be meek," but I
think it was not explained to people. Only the strong people can be meek, secured people
can be meek, only the rich in essence can be meek; not the people who are insecured,
because they are insecured, how can they be meek? And not the people whom we think are
rich, so-called, because if they are rich they are not generous, they are not satisfied, they are
not philanthropic, so they are not rich. They are still greedy beggars.
So the content within us is to be seen. What is our content? You love me, I love you - it's
very good. But when you love me, you have to know that there are certain qualities which
are very loveable in a Sahaja yogi. Actually people get lost even after Sahaja Yoga. They
think they can get over everything, they're perfectly all right, and they are thrown
overboard. So when we say that we have to be meek, this is a content, the humility is a
content. So try to do that, try to be humble with someone. You'll like yourself. You'll enjoy
that quality within this that "You see, I'm humbler than another person. ... You have to care
for your own quality, for your own inner capacity to suck in...
So you have Adi Shakti with you, whose power is all this Divine. So you are at such an
advantageous position. But first you must realize. So when we say we should have content,
then the vessel has to be strong. Otherwise everything will break. And this strength is the
15
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 one you should know, that you are completely protected. No one can harm you. They'll try - this
has to be, otherwise how will you test whether you are absolutely safe or not? So somebody has
to try some tricks just to see, and for you to watch how you are successful. Without doing
anything you'll be amazed, everything will be cleared out. And you'll not know how things have
cleared out, how things have worked out. So the strength comes...
The negativity that is around you is not so dangerous as whatever is in you. Today it has
become subtler. The negativity has become subtler. It's entered into your being, and be careful -
it may anytime topple you. Even one step you do not put right when you are climbing up, you can
down. So one has to be alert, without tension. You have to be alert without tension. And the
go
alertness grows. When the light goes within you start seeing it. Immediately you see, "Oh, that's
it! So I, the so and so - that's it." And you know how to correct it and you know how to put it right.
And immediately you take to it. Like a good sari now has something fallen on it, immediately
you clean it. In the same way we have to be very, very alert - daksha is the word for that. ...
So you have to kill your negativity, you've become as powerful as your Mother. No
negativity can touch you. So you can give realization, you've got that power very well; and you
can watch your defects more than that of others. And you try to put them out because they're not
good, they're not for your benevolence, they're not for your ascent. By that nobody is going to
gain. At the collective level it just works automatically.
Now another quality that you have: to believe that the Goddess is working through you. In
you She resides, you have got the powers, it's penetrated into you - is that you can comfort
people, you can cure them, you can give them peace, you can give them bliss. But then what
Goddess has done in you is that She has given you the bliss, you have become bliss. Like there's
say a cool air-conditioner, you get the cool from there. In the same way if you are emitting bliss,
you give bliss to others. But there is no bliss within yourself, but what bliss you can give to
others? So a Sahaja yogi has to be a blissful like the Goddess. ...
So to leave certain things into the hands of the Divine is what we call as surrender. And that
much of is, if done, then most of your things will work out so miraculously. I mean, you'll be
amazed, "How, Mother, how it is worked out? We never expected, how things we got it done?"
There's a very, very big force working: the Force, the Energy which is the Source of all the
16
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 energies, which has created this great universe, which has created this Mother
Earth, created this sun, which has created you very delicately. This Force is
working. And that Force is looking after you, so proud of you that you have come
on the stage now.
So as it is we are today praying to the Goddess that "Help us to fight our
negativity within us. Give us Your tiger so that we fight, give us Your lion so we
fight." Let us fight all these horrible animals that are within us, these horrible
haunting things that are within us, these horrible conditionings we have - you have
to get rid of it. Still, still if you watch yourself, lots of conditionings are there, lots
don't
things, you see. If you see, they are covered with very thin curtains and
you
see it, but they are there. But let the tiger enter into all these dens and find out. And
you enjoy that, riding over the horse, riding over the lion, and riding over the tiger -
like a Goddess, why not? After all, children get all the heritage of the mother, don't
they? So you have all the heritage available to you. But you have to be worthy, in the
sense that you have to know that you are worthy, that's all. You have to just know
that you are worthy and that you can do it.
So again today we are here to do this puja, which would have been in Perth but
somehow or other it was not so, and is luck for you to have this puja. And it is
something of a very deeper nature, very subtler nature. Like your blood it is,
because on these seven days they say the Goddess has to wear the red all the time,
because it's blood. And the first color you see in the womb of your mother is red - it's
the security. One side is the red rag, another side it is the security. So for you it is the
security around you. Every place you go, it is there - just feel it. You have entered I
must say, entered the Kingdom of God, no doubt about it. You all have entered, so
beautifully you are settled down.
May God bless you.
H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala, extracts from Navaratri Puja (1989-10-08)
17
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 सहजयोगी
आदमियों को पार करे
कम से कम
सा Bाट
सत्य के बगैर मनुष्य का जीवन बिल्कुल व्यर्थ है, जैसे अन्धेरे में इन्सान टटोलता रहता है उसी तरह
सत्य के बगैर मनुष्य भटक जाता है। उसमें उसका दोष मैं नहीं मानती, दोष है उस अन्धेरे का जो उसे घेरे हुए
है। जैसे कहा है आपको और सबको सहजयोग बढ़ाना चाहिए। ये मेरी भी बड़ी इच्छा है कि सहजयोग आप
लोग बढ़ा सकते हैं और फैलना चाहिए। सबको ये सोचना चाहिए यह हमने पाया है। हम भी दूसरों को दें और
इसको बढ़ाएं। इससे सहजयोग बढ़ेगा ही लेकिन उससे एक शान्तिमय, सुन्दर सा ऐसा स्वर्ग इस संसार में आ
जाएगा। यह आपके हाथ में है कि आप लोग इस कार्य को पूरी तरह से करें और हिन्दुस्तान में यह कार्य बहुत
जोरों में हो रहा है, उसका कारण ये है कि भारतवर्ष एक योग-भूमि है, एक पुण्यभूमि है और पुण्यभूमि में इस
तरह का कार्य होना था ही, लिखा ही था। विधि थी। किन्तु इतने जोरों में और इतना बढ़कर ये परिवार इतना
परिपक्व होगा ऐसी कभी भी मूुझे उम्मीद नहीं थी। लेकिन यह घटित हो रहा है और होगा भी। इसका आनन्द
जो आप उठा रहे है वो दूसरों को भी देना चाहिए।
हिन्दुस्तान तो है ही मेरा देश और यहाँ आने में जो एक विशेष आनन्द होता है उसका वर्णन नहीं किया
जा सकता और जब मैं आप लोगों को देखती हूँ, एयरपोर्ट पर, तब मुझे लगता है कि न जाने कितने हृदयों में
ये आनन्द आड़ोलित हो रहा है और कितने ही लोग इस आनन्द से प्लावित हो रहे है। इसी से हमारे बच्चों की
भी रक्षा होगी और हमारे युवा लोगों की भी रक्षा होगी। इतना ही नहीं , लेकिन हमारे देश में सुबुद्धता और
असली मायने में स्वराज्य आएगा। स्व का मतलब है आत्मा और आत्मा का राज्य आना ही स्वराज्य है।
स्वतन्त्र का मतलब है फिर वही आत्मा का तन्त्र माने आत्मा की एक रीत। ये दोनों आनी चाहिए और वो आ
गई है। आप लोगों ने इसे स्वीकार किया है, अपने जीवन में उतारा है। लेकिन अब दुसरों को भी उबारने का,
उनके भी उद्धार का यही समय है इसको करना चाहिए। अभी मैंने बहुत सी बातें देखीं तो मुझे बड़ा आश्चर्य
हुआ कि मिलेनियम का असर कितने ज़ोरों में आ रहा है। जैसे कि हमारे बहुत से सहजयोगी विदेश से भी आए
और जो गए थे उड़ीसा, वहाँ लोगों को सहजयोग सिखाया और वहाँ उन्होंने नौ सेन्टर स्थापित किये। जब
साइक्लॉन आया, उड़ीसा में, उसका कारण है क्योंकि वहाँ बहुत अनाप शनाप बातें हो रही थीं, गलत बातें
हो रही थीं। तो एक भी, एक भी सहजयोगी को कुछ क्षति नहीं हुई। उनके मकान नहीं गिरे, उनको कुछ नहीं
हुआ। इसी प्रकार ट्की में, हालांकि वो लोग पहले मुसलमान थे और अब असली मुसलमान हो गए और जब
ये सहजयोग में आ गए, करीबन दो हजार से ऊपर लोग वहाँ सहजयोग में हैं। तो वहाँ भी दो बार बहुत बुरी
18
६
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 तरह से भूकम्प में जरा सा भी कोई दुखी नहीं हुआ। किसी के रिश्तेदार तक नहीं मरे, वो लोग तो बच ही गए।
ऐसी अनेक वारदात हुई इटली में भी और हर जगह मैं देखती हूँ सहजयोगी एकदम बिल्कुल पूरी तरह से जैसे
संरक्षित है और इस संरक्षण में आप लोग पनप रहे हैं। इसका मतलब है जो हम कहते हैं कि ये 'लास्ट जजमेंट'
है वो शुरु हो गया है और वो चल रहा है बड़े जोरों से। आप लोग सब ध्यान करते ही हैं और आपने सहज में
उन्नति कर ली, लेकिन ये सब पाने पर दूसरों को भी देने की इच्छा होनी चाहिए। ये इच्छा होगी जरूर
बहुत
लेकिन किसी न किसी वजह से इसकी इच्छा पूर्ति नहीं होती। उसे आप लोगों को पूरी तरह से जोश से करना
चाहिए। संसार के कार्य तो चलते ही रहते हैं, घरेलू बातें चलती ही रहती है और उसमें से निकलके और लोगों
को जागरण देना उनको सँवारना उनका उद्धार करना ये आपका एक परम कर्तव्य है। और इसकी दारोमदार
आप ही के ऊपर में है। आप ही लोग इसे कर सकते हैं और बहुत से कर भी रहे हैं लेकिन मेरे विचार से इससे
भी ज्यादा सोच-विचार करके कि हमारा जो सुख है, हमारा जो आनन्द है, हमने जिसे प्राप्त किया वो और भी
प्राप्त करें, इस विचार से गर आप उधर थोड़ी सी दृष्टि लगाएं तो बहुत कुछ हो सकता है इस भारत वर्ष में। और
मैं तो सोचती हूँ कि ये कार्य कोई कठिन नहीं क्योंकि इसमें कोई झगड़ा नहीं, कोई आफ़त नहीं, कोई दवा नहीं,
कोई दारु नहीं, कुछ नहीं, सिर्फ लोगों की कुण्डलिनी जागृत करना और उसकी शक्ति आपके अन्दर है उसको
इस्तेमाल करना है। जब आपके अन्दर शक्ति है तो आप उसको इस्तेमाल नहीं करोगे तो उसका क्या फायदा?
उस शक्ति को आप सब इस्तेमाल करें और निश्चय करें कि हर आदमी, हर सहजयोगी कम से कम सौ
आदमियों को पार करे, सबसे बात करें और उसमें शर्माने की कोई बात नहीं है, घबराने की कोई बात नहीं है
क्योंकि हम सत्य पर खड़े हैं। और आजकल जो तरह-तरह के गुरु घण्टाल निकले हुए है उनका यही इलाज है
कि हम खुले आम ये बातें करें, सबसे बात करें और उनसे कहें कि इस चक्कर से बचो, नहीं तो वो लोग भी
खत्म हो जाएंगे। ये हमारा कर्तव्य है कि जैसे संसार की नाव ड्ूब रही है और उसको बचाने वाले आप ही हैं।
आपको किसी तरह से भी यही कोशिश करनी चाहिए कि हम कितने लोगों को पार कराएं। ये आनन्द अपने ही
हृदय में कभी समा नहीं सकता, गर समा सकता तो हम क्यो अपना घर द्वार छोड़ करके और बाहर घूमते और
लोगों को पार कराते। ये ऐसी स्थिति है कि उसमें लगता है कि दूसरों के साथ भी मिल-जुल करके इसका
उपयोग लें। और इस स्थिति पर गर आप हैं तो उसका पूरा इस्तेमाल करना चाहिए और उस ओर अग्रसर होना
चाहिए, उस तरफ बढ़ना चाहिए। और आशा है कि अगले वर्ष जब हम यहाँ फिर से हिन्दुस्तान आएं तो इससे
कई गुना ज्यादा लोग सहजयोग में उतरे हुए नज़र आए। आपने सत्कार किया है वो मैं क्या कहूँ, कोई जरूरत
नहीं थी पर आपकी इच्छा है तो मैं मान लेती हूँ भई चलो सत्कार करो। पर वो तो मुझे उसी दिन दिखाई दिया
जब मैं यहाँ एयरपोर्ट पर आई थी और किस तरह से लोग बिल्कुल, प्यार से बिल्कुल दीवाने हो गए। तो ये प्यार
की महिमा है और इस प्यार को बाँटना और देना ये भी बड़ी भारी बात है। आरै इस जन्म में गर ये होगा तो न
जाने कितने ही पूण्यों का फल मिल जाएगा।
परम पूज्य माताजी श्री निर्मलादेवी का प्रवचन (५.१२.१९९९)
19
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 में दोष एवं उनका
ch!
शुद्धीकरण
गु
का
क०
ॐ
20
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 जिस प्रकार पृथ्वी अपनी धुरी के चारों ओर घूमती है उसी प्रकार हमारे सूक्ष्म यंत्र के चक्र
(शक्ति केंद्र) एक विशेष गति से समतल सतह पर दक्षिणावर्त दिशा में अपने-अपने स्थानों पर
चक्कर लगाते हैं। ये चक्र स्थूल केंद्रों का निर्माण करते हैं जो अपने चारों ओर के अंगो पर
नियंत्रण रखते हैं। जब ये चक्र सूचारू रूप से अपनी गति द्वारा अपने अंगों को
आवश्यकतानुसार शक्ति प्रदान करते हैं तभी शरीर के सारे अंग अपने निध्धारित कार्य सही तरह
से कर पाते हैं। इन चक्रों की शक्ति हमारे शारीरिक, मानसिक और भावनात्मक कार्यों में
निरन्तर खर्च होती रहती है इसलिए चक्रों में शक्ति का सतत प्रवाह होना अत्यन्त आवश्यक है।
किसी बाधा या रूकावट के कारण यदि शक्ति का प्रवाह कम हो जाता है तो ये चक्र अंगों पर
नियंत्रण नहीं रख पाते। अंग भी शक्ति के अभाव के कारण क्षीण होने लगते हैं तो उनके निर्धारित
कार्य रूक जाते हैं या ठीक प्रकार से नहीं हो पाते हैं जिसके परिणाम स्वरूप शारीरिक शोग एवं
मानसिक, भावनात्मक समस्यायें पैदा हो जाती हैं।
.....मानव की सभी समस्यायें उनके चक्रों के कारण हैं। किसी तरह से यदि आप अपने चक्रों
को ठीक कर सकें तो आपकी सारी समस्याओं का समाधान हो जायेगा। यह इतना साधारण है।
२५.३.९३
. जब चक्रों में दोष हो जाता है तभी आप बीमार पड़ जाते हैं। अब अगर आप बाहर से
किसी पेड़ को, उसके फूलों को उसके पत्तों को दवा दें तो थोड़ी देर के लिये तो वे ठीक हो जायेंगे
फिर सत्यानाश हो जाएगा, पर अगर उनकी जड़ में जो चक्र हैं उन चक्रों को अगर आप ठीक कर दें
तो बीमार पड़ने की कोई बात ही नहीं ।
-प.पू.श्रीमाताजी
.....ध्यान देने से आपको पता लगेगा कि आपके अन्दर कौन से चक्र की पकड़ है, उसे
आपको साफ करना है। इसको प्रत्याहार कहते हैं, माने इसकी सफाई होनी चाहिये ।
-प.पू.श्रीमाताजी
.....मध्य के पाँचों चक्र मूलत: भौतिक तत्वों के बने हैं तथा पाँचों तत्वों से इन चक्रों का शरीर
बना है। हमें पूर्ण सावधानी से इन पाँचों चक्रों का संचालन करना चाहिये। जिन तत्वों से ये चक्र बने
हैं उन्हीं में इनकी अशुद्धियों को निकाल कर इन चक्रों का शुद्धीकरण करना है।
१८.१.१९८३
21
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 चक्र कुप्रभावित होने पर सम्बन्धित देवता वहाँ से स्थान त्याग कर देते हैं, अत: उस चक्र का मंत्र
श्रीमाताजी के नाम की शक्ति से उक्त देवता का आवाहन किया जाता है।
उच्चारण करके
परमपूज्य
उपचार के लिये विपरीत पाश्शर्व का हाथ प्रभावित चक्र पर रखें और प्रभावित पाश्र्व का हाथ फोटो की
ओर फैलायें।
- निर्मला योग, जुलाई १९८३
.ऐसा नहीं है कि सहजयोग में आने के बाद आपको कोई बीमारी ही नहीं होती, कारण यह है
कि सहजयोग में आने के बाद जो ध्यान-धारणा और प्रगति आपने करनी होती है, वो आप नहीं करते।
फिर भी आपके कष्ट घट जाते हैं।
.सहजयोग में आने के बाद एक महीने में ही आप पूरी तरह से सहजयोग को समझ सकते हैं
और उसमें उतर भी सकते हैं, पर जिस प्रकार रोज हम लोग स्नान करके अपने शरीर को साफ करते हैं,
उसी प्रकार रोज अपने चक्रों को भी आपको साफ करना पड़ेगा ।
२.३.१९९१
.यदि आपकी विशुद्धि चक्र में कोई पकड़ है तो अपना दायाँ हाथ फोटो की ओर करें और
बाँया हाथ बाहर की ओर कर दें। जब आपको लगे कि इसमें चैतन्य लहरियाँ आ रही हैं तब अपना बाँया
हाथ फोटो की ओर कर ले और दाँया बाहर की ओर, आपका पूरा चक्र स्वच्छ हो जाएगा।
6.
.....अपनी खुली आँखों से यदि आप मेरी फोटो को देखते हैं और अपने दोनों हाथ हथेलियाँ ऊपर
की ओर करके फोटो की ओर फैलाते हैं या कभी - कभी आकाश की ओर उठाते हैं, तो आपकी दृष्टि में
बहुत सुधार होगी।
. पृथ्वी माँ भी, यदि आप अपना सिर पृथ्वी माँ पर रखे, केवल अपना माथा पृथ्वी पर टेक लें
और कहें, "हे पृथ्वी माँ, मैं आपको अपने पैरों से छूता हूँ, इसके लिये मुझे क्षमा करें।" वो आपकी
दादी माँ हैं, जो भी कुछ आप उनसे माँगेगें वो आपको मिल जायेगा। सब आपकी इच्छानुरूप आपको
देने के लिये प्रतीक्षा कर रहे हैं।
आप श्री हनुमान और श्री गणेश की सहायता भी माँग सकते हैं।
२२.३.१९७७
22
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 She Integrates
The Heart and Brain.
She is the powerful one
whose Electricity
Brings Auspiciousness.
She Controls Lightning,
Earthquakes, Typhoons
And Burning Forests.
She Enlightens the
Medium of Film.
She Gives Pure Speech.
She Empowers Mantras.
She Gives Courage.
She is the Destroyer of Myths.
She is the support of Joy.
She Gives Comprehension
of the Subtle.
She Clears The Path
for Self Realization.
She Brings us to the Virata.
She speaks the Truth
& Purifies The Ether.
Published & Printed by
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
No. 8, Chandragupta Co-op Нousing Society, Paud Road,
Kothrud, Pune, Maharashtra, India - 411 038. © : 25286537, 25286032 email:sale@nitl.co.in
website: www.nitl.co.in (For queries & sending articles contact on above address)
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 The Sahaja Yogis
will be the forests,
the great trees
which are moving,
but which are bestowing
blessings upon others,
giving them what they want.
Try to rise
towards the sky
as these trees have done.
