V a r t i March 2011

 I am your Mother and My children are very sweet and may you all Live and may you Emancipate the whole World. noh Birthday Puja, 1991 Every year we have birthdays of various people and every year we make a vow that this year I will not do this or I will not do that. This is a very good way of seeing how far we have come in life. Many people who really have achieved a very great height in their spiritual life did not need a birthday, but every day they felt it's a birthday to start, to go ahead, to understand, to learn. Every day is a new year for them. 21 March 94 happy Birthday to Shri Mataji पाम

 Inside this issue.. Bija (seed) Mantras ....4 Badges ....7 The Goddess ....8 Mother's life ....10 What you want joy or happiness ....14 Will Power ....16 Faith and sincerity ....17 श्री हनुमान ....१८

 Bija (seed) Mantras. "Bīja mantra means the Vaikhari. Vaikhari is the power of speaking. This power of speaking is made into mantras by the people who have the power of Realisation. So, for them to improve, supposing they want to improve their centre, or they want to improve left , then the bīja has to sprout and has to grow. So the first step is to say the bīja mantra and then to say the different mantras of the different chakras. So first is the bīja and then is the tree. So you can implant a bīja into yourselfby saying that, and then you start saying all other. So, that's how you make it grow.' H.H. Shri Mataji's comments on the Devi Atharva Shīrsha. Pune, 17"Oct.1988 or right. They have to say the bīja mantras.., The Science of Bīja-'seed' Mantras was developed mostly in the later writings of Indian philosophy, particularly in the *Tantras, although their roots go back to the earliest philosophical writings of India. Bija Mantras are sounds which have power but not specific meaning as words. The basic Bijas are the letters of the alphabet, 50 in number, which correspond with the petals of the Chakras from Mūlādhāra to Āgñyā. The qualities of the Chakras also have Bija Mantras, and there are Bija Mantras of the Deities. We still have much to learn about these, and the following can be taken as a mere introduction to what is potentially a vast subject. All this knowledge should be verified by personal experience of the practitioner, and the following are suggestions only. Om The Primordial Bija Mantra of the Universe is Om (to rhyme with 'home'). It is the Seed of Creation, the sound which emerged when the Brahmānda-'Egg of Brahman' broke open giving birth to this Universe. Shri Ganeśha is Omkār Swarūpa-'Embodiment of the Om'. The Om embodies the three Shaktis- Mahākālī, Mahāsaraswatī and Mahālakshmī- and the Kundalinī uniting with the Paramātmā in the Sahasrāra. It may be meditated on for all Divine Knowledge. The Om may be said with different intonations and on different notes, and has different effects accordingly. It is beyond the scope of this chapter to go into the details.]

 'These Three Primordial Syllables AA, O0 and MA represent the three powers of the Primordial Mother: AA represents the Existence and Destructive Power of Mahākālī. 00 represents the Creative Power of Mahāsaraswatī. MA represents the Sustenance or Evolutionary Power of Mahālakshmī. These Three Primordial Syllables later on form the Primordial Words -Bīja Mantras- Aim, Hrīm and Klīm. All together these comprise the phonetic words of the Devanāgari script (Sanskrit)." H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. 'The Creation'. Bija Mantras of the petals of the Chakras. 'The word Sanskrit has come out of Kuņd alinī's movement, when She makes a sound, all was recorded by the great saints and like that every chakra has got vowels and consonants according to the number of sub-plexuses they have- you can say petals they have- and all of them make all the alphabets of Sanskrit language." th H.H. Shri Mataji's comments on the Devi Atharva Shīrsha. Pune, 17"Oct.1988 Starting at the Vishuddhi Chakra, the letters in alphabetical order correspond with the petals. The basic letters are usually said with an ending, either visarga-'aspirated ending' –ḥ, or more commonly asuswāra-'nasal sound'–m. The letters start at the highest or front petals and go clockwise viewed from the front or above. The letters of the Devanāgari alphabet, including the vowels, are arranged in the order of the parts of the mouth where they are produced, starting at the back ie. gutturals, palatals, cerebrals, dentals and then labials. You may notice an alternating 'in' and 'out' quality of the short and long vowels, and the un- aspirated and aspirated consonants. The nasal sounds have an upward quality. Om adds auspiciousness and may be taken before each Bija Mantra ie. 'Om am, Om ām...'.etc. Viśhuddhi- (16 petals- viz.14 vowels + anuswāra-'nasal sound' and visarga- 'aspirated ending') Am, ām, im, īm, um, ūm, rm, rrm, lrm, lrym, em, aim, om, aum, am, aḥ . (note: am is pronounced 'um'and um is 'oom' but short: e and o are always long: Aim and aum are diphthongs- 'ayeem'and 'a-oom')

 Anahata (Heart) (12 petals- 5 guttural and 5 palatal consonants + first two cerebral) Note: Cerebrals (letters with dots under) are said with the tongue curled back, touching the palate. Kam, kham, gam, gham, ñgam, cham, chham, jam, jham, ñam, tam, tham. Manipura (Nābhī) (10 petals- last 3 cerebrals+5 dentals+ first 2 labials) Dam, dham, ņam, tam, tham, dam, dham, nam, pam, pham. Swādhishthāna (6 petals- last 3 labials +3 semivowels) Bam, bham, mam, yam, ram, lam. Mūlādhāra (4 petals- last semivowel +3 sibilants) Vam, śham, şham, sam. Āgīyā (2 petals) Ham, kşham. In the Sahasrāra all the sounds combine to produce Om. The Chakras themselves also have Bīja Mantras. (These are the semi-vowels, ie consonant equivalents of vowel sounds):- Corresponding Name of Deity Hari (Vishnu/ Krishna) Yama (God of Death) vowel. Part of mouth. Ham Viśhuddhi- guttural a, ā i, ī Yam Anahata- palatal ri, ri Ramā/Rāma (Shri Lakshmī/Vishnu) Ram Manipura- cerebral Vāmā (Shri Saraswati) Lambodara (Shri Ganesha) Swadhishthāna- Vam labial и, й Ir, llr - with the middle 'o' sound extended. Mūlādhāra- Lam dental Āgñyā- Om - with the final 'm' sound extended. Om Sahasrāra- Gaņeśha Bīja. Gam This is described in the Ganesha Atharva Sheersha. G is Mūlādhāra Chakra, A is the Central Channel, M is the Union of the Kundalinī Shakti with the Ātmā in the Sahasrāra, conferring Bliss on the devotee. 'Gam' may be said alone or 'Om Gam' or 'Om Gam Ganapataye namaḥ' *The Tantras are discourses where Lord Shiva explains to Shri Parvati the Nature of the Divine and the technique to achieve first hand knowledge of It. There are about 24 main Tantras, mostly of Pure Knowledge, but some of them veering towards the Kaula Path- the worship of the Goddess in the lower Chakras. .... To be contd. in next issue

 Badges Something with my photo.... A badge.... you can wear it..... and people ask you, 'who is this person?" You can start talking. You have to talk. That is the only way we can spread Sahajyoga. Of course you can have your programs..... you can get people, you can give them Realisation, this that, but to talk about it is important.... so the atmosphere is created...... in the atmosphere it will be.... and this is going to help us a lot...... if it is in the atmosphere, people will know that there is something like this coming up. (880221) What I have seen..... that we are very shy, shy about Sahajyoga...... we are little shy to talk about Sahajyoga- you have to do it..... you should start talking openly about it..... If I was shy like you, Sahajyoga would not have spread. One should not feel shy about Sahajyoga, otherwise what happens..... that it just melt away with you..... don't feel shy, you should talk about it.... wear the badge... with the badge people will ask you questions.... 'who is this one' then you talk to them. Any way you like, you should expose yourself...... and that will work out better. (000507)

 THE GODDESS

 The Goddess is always as a Mother (830821) ....the Devi, the Adishakti; She can be extremely cruel and harsh, yet also can be extremely gentle and mild (891008.1); If you are living in the Kingdom of God, and when the Goddess of that Kingdom arrives... you have to be there (850629) This Havan is a very good thing for reciting the names of the Goddess.... her eyes are given by fire... and in that light.... in that fire... in the name of the Goddess we awaken our Deities within us... and burn away all that is wrong in these particular chakras which invoke those powers..... So with devotion and understanding you have to do it... because you are really privileged people today... be proud of that, and do with that devotion all these things.... we should do it in full devotion. I think very few people can put into the fire... but you can all do symbolically... and how many names do you want to say... do 108... it's better.(801019) In the olden days when the Goddess had to fight the Rakshasas, the Rakshasas were not involved in human beings as such... they didn't beome Gurus or anything. And so now we find, in Kaliyuga they have gone into the brains of the Sadhakas... of their devotees. It's very difficult to remove them... and once they go into the brains of the Sadhakas... then the Sadhakas become of course possessed... they suffer... they have all kinds of problems - but despite that they stick on to that person, because they are mesmerised. Main thing is that in this Kaliyuga there are so many Sadhakas... they are running helter and skelter... they are running all over, trying to find out some way of finding the truth (911209) Once I went to meet a real guru... he was a very horrid fellow otherwise... but for me, he has tremendous regard.... so he started talking to me as you would talk to a Goddess. He said...'you are God... with your power, why don't you change these worldly people a little bit'... I said 'that is what is the problem.... Thave given them freedom... I've said.... alright this freedom is given to you... you can choose to get transformed or not... I cannot force.' He said, 'but God Almighty you are. You can do anything.' I said, 'I can do everything, but I do not want to do certain things.... and one of them is to take away the freedom... from them... that is their freedom to choose.' So he was quarreling with me about this. I said, 'your concern is alright, and I understand, because you are a guru... but when lam God supposing... then my style is different...I can't be like you.' He said, 'that's true... you can't be like me.'(920719) He was talking to me only, as if I am God standing before him. And then he told all the disciples... you see... you praise... you praise the Lord... you praise Her.. because God is fond of praise.' I said, 'really.' He said, 'yes, if you praise the Lord, then he gives you everything. I have seen that...I always praise him.. whenever I want something to be done, I just praise him... and he does it for me.' So I said, 'it's true... I must accept... you cannot get to Mother, unless and until you have really bhakti from your heart...it's already sort of.... a built in.... restriction.. what can you do... if you don't have bhakti, you cannot get to Mother.... no you cannot... you cannot get to God... but if you have bhakti, then you can get to Mother....it is written... Bhakti Gamya.' (920719) As you know.... I am the Goddess... and the Goddess is supposed to wear, I don't know how many ornaments, just to adorn her chakras. I have lots of ornaments myself, of my own... but only for Puja, Iwear ornaments. I don't wear.... thoughtlam supposed to wear lots... why? Because it may not be that alright... it may be dignified, but may not be that alright to wear all those things all the time... butIam supposed to wear.... like I am supposed to wear many more things on the hand here, rings... and on the Feet... everything... all the time....gold... thoughIdon't do it .(860504)

 er's re

 So far human beings received the Blessings of God...individually, as Grace...and they received their Self Realization individually, one by one. The method for individual realization was just the opposite of the collective.... First they had to establish their dharma.... cleanse themselves fully.... desiring all the time for their Salvation.... as we call it Ishwara Pranidana...... thinking of God.... asking for his grace and acting in scrupulously dharmic way, to keep themselves pure....controlling their minds, their desires and their actions.... and then only, the Grace of mother gave them realization( 800505). This pattern was on for some time.....and those who got Realization did lots of wonderful things to prepare for Sahaja Yoga. They were in every field of life..... but very few and unique..... for example in India, and in many other places in ancient times.... they discovered the unique gifts of the Mother Earth..... what you call as Swayambhus...... those stones or stone images, which were thrown out by the Mother Earth, and discovered by these Saints. They put Shrines there... and they worshipped them.... and by this they made the images vibrate more ......and also to vibrate that area. All over the world, there are such stones.... but only the Saints could discover them (800505). Then they established the importance of virtue in life.... And how it can give you health, wealth and prosperity... which is glorified...and not which is degrading. They established schools and Universities....especially in India, where even today the families.... carry the name of that University as their Ghotra.... and the families belonging to one Ghotra cannot marry. They prepared young children, educated them....that they led a very dharmic life....enjoyed their married life fully... and matured in such a manner that they got their Realization and live a life of complete enjoyment. And thus they, by their example, distracted the attention of the people which was outside, to inner deeper values (800505) All this permeated a kind of confidence in God, Religion and a very balanced life- they have really done a great job of building the scaffolding...of the huge, great building of Sahaja Yoga.... Which is going to come now. Their desire to establish Dharma was so great, that the complete Divine force of Mahakali was working through them...and they put it to action with such understanding and such wisdom. Great scriptures were written by them... and for thousands of years, they were the guiding light for people (800505). Only in the modern times....we should say about one thousand years or so...people started doubting them. Before that people used to doubt themselves... that we are not 11

 good enough – but there was no doubting about the Incarnations. All this started toppling down, with the ego developing....And the superego challenging - influenced by many Satanic forces around, and played into their hands... and they started doubting those great Realised People, and all these great Scriptures. So on one side we have the doubting people ...... and on the other side the fanatics - those who try to adhere more and more, to the teachings, had to become fanatics. The 'real' Religion in man collapsed ....Religion is a continuous living process within, which is our sustenance..... it's like a ladder, on which we climb, step by step.... But not leaving the ladder. So .... These two types... one doubting .... another fanatic ... and ..... because both of them did not know what truth was they criticized each other (800505) I took my birth at a point where this confusion had started showing it's results even on a physical plane. When I started looking at around, I was amazed how ignorance had made people naive – though formerly people had this much understanding, this much sensitivity to know, what is right and what is wrong – in this confused situation, I was born. Iknew I was to open the Sahastrara .... So I started my work , after my first shocks (800505) I decided not to talk about it to anyone.... and to lead a very normal life... of a very normal life.... Of a very ordinary person..... not to be very striking..... because like Christ, when he was born, a star came up .... that's how the king Herod came to know about him.... and you know the story, what happened. If you are born with any striking signs, the negativity immediately finds you out. As it is, it found me out .... And just after the fifteenth day of my birth there was a very big accident as you know (800505) I had to really work very very hard to enter into your being.... to find out ....first of all... your basic problems .... And then the different permutations and combinations .. and then these were also capped by other identifications.... Like the society in which you were born.... Like the nation in which you were born....like the ideas that were there. All these things became much more important than the original universal being within you.... And every individual had taken a very odd funny awkward type of a shape, which I didn't know how to reduce...by which they could start their growth ( 800505) It was a very hard work ....nights after nights I used to work .... While leading a very ordinary life of a very normal person. I used to behave like a very simple ordinary student.... And show all my ignorance about things... but sometimes you know, truth has an awkward habit of slipping out..... and it used to show itself. One of the biggest 12

 problems of human beings, I found was family life and that's why I married.... I wanted to study what are the problems of family life ....and so I started facing these problems as if they were my own... and then other problems like political, economic....and all these problems also .... because they became so important for human beings... but which are of absolutely artificial value. A sort of a human behaviour science I had to study for years (800505). And then ....as you reach a point where all the knots are opened out... and one knot is still left ... which is to be opened out.... and that was done on 5" May 1970. Then the collective phenomenon started working .... And the greatest of these was that the Shri th Chakra , being on this Earth, could be felt through your fingers..... this was never before so – nobody felt the vibrations on the fingers as such... but they felt it within themselves. Now, because the Sahastrara of the Universe was opened out, everybody started feeling the vibrations around them with their own hands.... now the fingers..... could feel the vibrations.... That means the sensitivity of the Divine which was in the chakras spread out to the periphery to such an extent that a human being could feel it on the fingers... this was fantastic ( 800505) my job was to move from the centre to the periphery.... And whatever are the So obstacles I met, I had to clear them out, one after another. But then, I must say that, Sahaja Yoga when it started working out..... I was given very great workers, tools of Sahaja Yoga ... who took it upon themselves, as their own responsibility.... And they really worked very hard with me... very few .... but they did. The rest of them.... can be divided into many categories..... some came for their own treatments, or something like that, of a very low level..... or some , when they got their Realisation, they brought all their sick relations to me.... Then some came for their financial and all sorts of mental problems.... And some came for their family and spiritual problems....but the ones who took it up as their won responsibility, that this is what they have to do, this is their life, this is what their complete meaning is... they put entirely their attention to it.... They worked it out, whatever was possible on their own level ( 800505) So today we have to understand ......that we really need those brave people ....and those people who feel responsible. It is a very important virtue of Sahaja Yogis. The main thing is ... what are you doing for Sahaja Yoga.... What you can do ... how far you can go..... how you are going to work it out. In every walk of life... those who really work it out as a great responsibility upon themselves are the ones who will be given more and more powers, and chances (800505) 13

 What you want

 W: hat I want, that my children should be beautiful people, when they enter into the 'Kingdom of God'. They should be respected as great saints, sages. More than anybody else, they are special people. That's how they are to be educated. May be, I am very ambitiouS, you might say. But my ambitions are based on reality. I am sure I can achieve these. But you must develop that humility and understanding within yourself that we all have to improve, we have to be in the attention ofthe Mother. If she has to say something to us, we are not ,to feel hurt. If you feel hurt, then know that it is yourego. Beat yourselfwith shoes. Take it out, because it is not good. I cannot go on pampering your ego all the time till you are completely blasted off and then you come and tellme"Motherwhy didn't you tell me?" For example, somebody asked me, he is in love with somebody and wants to marry her. I knew that the person was horrible and he should not marry that personandlsaidthat, in a way, it's alright. I mean, I first was in a shock and I kept quite. I said, now how to say that, not to pamper his ego either, but to say. How to saythat, no or yes. It was very difficult. | So, I said, all right as long as she makes you happy, it's alright. Now the word happy, has double meaning. Happy means only your ego can be happy, notthe spirit. It'sjoy. Idid not usethe word joy, I said happy. See I have to be clever about it. Now, if you had thought of it, why would Mother say happy, she should have said if it gives you joy. If Isayjoy then it's correct. But lsaid happy. Isaid itthree or fourtimesto him that, does it make you happy. He said, "Yes". If it makes you happy then you can marry. Now see, if he is very intelligent, and he should have thought of it. But he never thought of it that I was meaning that it is not going to give youjoy, if it gives you happiness, you marry. Happiness means your ego pampering, it's simple. Also you have to educate yourself to understand your Mother. This is the third thing, that you ought to know, isto understandyour Mother. Seelhave to be clever. Because if I am not, if I am very blunt, you get blasted. IfI am not, you are lost. So I have to be clever. And when I am clever, they call me Mahamaya. So at least, let me keep to one style, let me be a "Mahamaya". Alright, accepted. Butthen you tryto understand that ifltellyou something, you just get absolutely annoyed and angry. And the people get lost. You see, they get lost. If you tell them don't do it, they getlost. Ifyou say, do it, then they get lost, in any case, because they are doing awrong thing. H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Birthday puja 21.03. 1982, Chelsham Road, London, UK 15

 JP ith your 'Will' you can generate Sahaja Yoga to go further (801116); Your 'Will' Is very important in Sahaja Yoga. It does not mean Desire. Will' means desire put into action. 'Will' means 'desire put into action'. So you desire ...... and then put it into action - you can do it. In Sahaja Yoga, first you receive the light, and then you generate the light. You are the light givers...... And it is going to work through your will. So how powerful our will should be..... how dedicated; It is left to 'Our' Will not to our Mother's Will to work it out. (801116) See how much we have willed that Sahaja Yoga should be SUccessful. And to make it success what should we do..... first we must understand the basics of Sahaja Yoga..... second do we have the qualities by which we sustain those basics....(801116) Try to become the 'will of God' and not one's 'own' will - then Joy will flow (811103)....'yes let my Spirit act' (830204).

 I have given you the statue of Shivaji Maharaj. He was another great soul. A great soul who had such principles, and such beautifying life in his language, in his attitude and everything. With all that, he was a very brave person. Once you have this you will not deter from doing anything that is important. You will have no fear of anyone. You will not go round and round but will know how to find the solution and you how to work it out. This will happen to you if you really know yourself. You will have such powers of courage. You will not be a dare devil but with wisdom. Courage and with wisdom you will have and that is what is your Self, which will give you lots of wisdom and lots of courage. It's not a fighting spirit, it's not a violent nature, it's not a rude nature. But it is a very silent, beautiful, courageous attitude. H.H.Shri Mataji Birthday Puja, 21.03.2001, Nirmal Dham Faith andl sincerity Today my feelings are really full of joy, full of joy, because now I can see how things are happening, how one person can produce thousands and thousands of Sahaja Yogis. I saw one miracle, I told once that one seed has all the thousand trees it is going to produce and when I saw a new technique of tissue culture, I was amazed that on one little seed there were so many little, little primules who had come out. In the same way, you are all capable, and you all can do it, but what is needed is faith in yourselfand also complete sincerity about Sahaja Yoga. If that happens today, you have really celebrated My Birthday. If you think that My Birthday's important, that for me very important is that everybody gets their spiritual birthday. May God bless you. H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Birthday Puja 21.03.1994, Kolkata Shivaji Maharaj a great soul

 श्री हनुमान ५ र] पाट

 उनके समर्पण के फलस्वरूप ही शारीरिक रूप से विकसित होने के पूर्व ही उन्हें नवधी सिद्धियाँ प्राप्त हो गईं] इन सिद्धियों के फलस्वरूप उन्हें सूक्ष्म या पर्वतसम विशालकाय शरीर धारण करने की क्षमती प्राप्त हो गई । मानव अस्तित्व में श्री हनुमान जी की महत्वपूर्ण भूमिका है। निरन्तर हमारे स्वाधिष्ठान से मस्तिष्क (पिंगला नाड़ी) तक चलते हुए वे हमारी भविष्य की योजनाओं या मानसिक गतिविधियों के लिये आवश्यक मार्गदर्शन तथा सुरक्षा प्रदान करते हैं। श्री हनुमान जी जैसे देवता का, जो कि बन्दर सम उन्नत शिशु हैं, निरन्तर मानव के दायें पक्ष में .. ..... दौड़ते रहना अत्यन्त आश्चर्यजनक है। मानव के अंत:स्थित सूर्यतत्व को शान्त तथा कोमल बनाए रखने के लिए उनसे कहा गया। जन्म के समय ही उनसे सूर्य को नियंत्रित करने के लिये कहा गया, अतः शिशु सुलभ स्वभाव से उन्होंने सोचा कि सूर्य को खा ही क्यों न लिया जाय। यह सोचते हुए कि पेट के अन्दर सूर्य को अधिक नियंत्रित किया जा सकता है उन्होंने विराट रूप धारण करके सूर्य को निगल लिया मानव की दायी तरफ को नियंत्रित रखने के लिये उनका बालसुलभ आचरण उनके चरित्र की सुन्दरता है। ......मर्यादापुरुषोत्तम श्री राम को अपनी सहायता के लिए किसी सचिव की आवश्यकता थी और इस कार्य के लिए श्री हनुमान का सृजन हुआ। श्री हनुमान जी श्री राम के ऐसे सहायक और दास थे और उनके प्रति इतने समर्पित थे कि कोई अन्य सेवक अपने स्वामी के प्रति इतना समर्पित नहीं हो सकता। उनके समर्पण के फलस्वरूप ही शारीरिक रूप से विकसित होने के पूर्व ही उन्हें नवधा सिद्धियाँ प्राप्त हो गईं। इन सिद्धियों के फलस्वरूप उन्हें सूक्ष्म या पर्वतसम विशालकाय शरीर धारण करने की क्षमता प्राप्त हो गई। अत्यन्त उग्र स्वभाव के व्यक्तियों को श्री हनुमान इन सिद्धियों से नियन्त्रित करते हैं। अपनी पूँछ को किसी भी हद तक बढ़ा कर लोगों को नियन्त्रित करना उनकी एक और सिद्धि है। वे हवा में उड़ सकते है----हवा में उड़ने की सामर्थ्य के कारण वे संदेश को एक व्यक्ति से दूसरे व्यक्ति तक पहुँचा सकते हैं। आकाश की सूक्ष्मता श्री हनुमान के नियन्त्रण में है। वे इस सूक्ष्मता के स्वामी हैं और इसी के माध्यम से वे संदेश भेजते हैं। दूरदर्शन, आकाशवाणी तथा ध्वनिवर्धन उनकी इसी शक्ति की देन हैं। बिना किसी संयोजक के आकाशमार्ग से वायवीय (Ethnic) सम्बन्ध स्थापित करना इस महान अभियन्ता का ही कार्य है। यह कार्य इतना पूर्ण है कि आप इसमें कोई त्रुटि नहीं निकाल सकते। आपके यन्त्रों में त्रटि हो सकती है, श्री हनुमान जी की कार्य कुशलता में नहीं- नस-नाड़ियों पर, हमारे रोम-रोम पर अनुभव होना भी श्री हनुमान जी की कृपा से है। .- यहाँ तक कि हमारे अन्दर की सूक्ष्म लहरियों का हमारी श्री हनुमान को 'अणिमा' नामक एक अन्य सिद्धि भी प्राप्त है जो उन्हें अणुओं तथा परमाणुओं में प्रवेश करने की शक्ति प्रदान करती है। विद्युत-चुम्बकीय शक्तियों का गतिशील होना श्री हनुमान जी की कृपा से ही होता है। श्री गणेश ने उनके अन्दर चुम्बकीय शक्ति भर दी है। वे स्वयं चुम्बक हैं। भौतिक सतह पर विद्युतचुम्बकीय शक्ति श्री हनुमान 19

 श्री गणेश जी हमें विवेक देते हैं तो श्री हनुमान जी सदू-सद्-विवेक) सद्-सद्-विवेक उनकी दी गई सूक्ष्म शक्ति है और यह हमें सेत्य असत्य में भेद जानने का विवेक प्रदान करती है। जी की शक्ति है परन्तु भौतिकता से वे मस्तिष्क तक जाते हैं, स्वाधिष्ठान से उठ कर मस्तिष्क तक जाते हैं। मस्तिष्क के अन्दर वे इसके भिन्न पक्षों के सह -सम्बन्धों का सजन करते हैं। यदि श्री गणेश हमें विवेक प्रदान करते हैं तो श्री हनुमान हमें सोचने की शक्ति देते हैं बुरे विचारों से बचाने के लिए वे हमारी रक्षा करते हैं। श्री गणेश जी हमें विवेक देते हैं तो श्री हनुमान जी सद्-सद्-विवेक। सद् -सद्-विवेक उनकी दी गई सूक्ष्म शक्ति है और यह हमें सत्य असत्य में भेद जानने का विवेक प्रदान करती है। सहजयोग में हम कहते हैं कि श्री गणेश अध्यक्ष हैं या इस विश्वविद्यालय के कुलपति हैं। वे हमें उपाधियाँ देते हैं और हमें अपनी अवस्था की गहराई जानने में सहायता करते हैं। वे हमें निर्विचार तथा निर्विकल्प समाधि और आनन्द प्रदान करते हैं। बौद्धिक सूझ-बूझ जैसे यह अच्छा है यह हमारे हित में है, श्री हनुमान जी 20 WAN

 हनुमान जी वैसे ही करते हैं सभी देवताओं की रक्षा श्री जैसे वे आपकी रक्षा करते हैं। श्री गणेश जी शक्ति प्रदान करते हैं पर रक्षा श्री हनुमान जी करते हैं। की देन है और बुद्धिवादी होने के कारण वे पाश्चात्य लोगों के लिए बहुत महत्वपूर्ण हैं ----मार्गदर्शन तथा सुरक्षा हमें श्री हनुमान जी की देन है। श्री राम का कार्य करने के लिए श्री हनुमान सदैव उत्सुक रहते हैं। विवेक यह है कि जो कुछ भी श्री राम कहते हैं हनुमान उसे कर देते हैं- बताते हैं कि सर्वशक्तिमान परमात्मा या श्री राम जैसे गुरु के अतिरिक्त आपको किसी के प्रति समर्पित नहीं होना। तब आप एक स्वतन्त्र पक्षी होते हैं और पूरी नौ शक्तियाँ आपमें जागृत हो जाती हैं। श्री राम की सहायता जब आप लेते हैं तो श्री हनुमान जी ही आपको आपके अहं के साथ-साथ बहुत सी अन्य बुराइयों का भी श्री हनुमान प्रतिकार करते हैं। यह तथ्य लंकादहन कर रावण की खिल्ली उड़ाने में अत्यन्त मधुरता से प्रकट हो जाता है। अहंकारी लोगों से आपकी रक्षा करना---श्री हनुमान का कार्य है। श्री हनुमान का एक अन्य गुण यह है कि वे लोगों को स्वेच्छाचारी बना देते हैं। दो अहंकारी व्यक्तियों को मिलाकर वे उनसे ऐसे हालात पैदा करवा देते हैं कि दोनों नम्र होकर मित्र बन जाते हैं। हमारे अन्तस का हनुमान तत्व हमारे अहं का ध्यान रखने तथा हमें बाल सुलभ, विनोदशील और प्रसन्न बनाने में कार्यरत है। वे सदा नृत्य-भाव में होते हैं। यदि श्री गणेश मेरे पीछे बैठते हैं तो श्री हनुमान मेरे चरणों में श्री हनुमान जी अहंकारी लोगों तक को समर्पण करना सिखाते हैं, समर्पण के लिए विवश करते हैं, भिन्न प्रकार की बाधाओं, चमत्कारों या विधियों द्वारा वे शिष्य का गुरु के प्रति समर्पण करवाते हैं। गुरु के प्रति व्यक्ति के समर्पण की शक्ति श्री हनुमान जी की है। किस प्रकार से आप गुरु को प्रसन्न कर सकते हैं और उसका सामीप्य प्राप्त कर सकते हैं? सामीप्य का अर्थ शारीरिक सामीप्य नहीं । इसका अर्थ है एक प्रकार का तदात्म्य, एक प्रकार की समझ। मुझसे दूर रहकर भी सहजयोगी अपने हृदय में मेरा अनुभव कर सकते हैं। यह शक्ति हमें श्री हनुमान जी से प्राप्त करनी है। सभी देवताओं की रक्षा श्री हनुमान जी वैसे ही करते हैं जैसे वे आपकी रक्षा करते हैं। श्री गणेश जी शक्ति प्रदान करते हैं पर रक्षा श्री हनुमान जी करते हैं। श्री हनुमान (देवदूत 'गैब्रील ') रक्षक थे। संदेशवाहक गैब्रील और उन्होंने 'इमैक्यूलेट साल्वे' अर्थात 'निर्मल साल्वे' शब्द का प्रयोग किया जो कि मेरा नाम है। जीवन पर्यन्त मारिया को श्री हनुमान की सेवा स्वीकार करनी पड़ी। मारिया महालक्ष्मी हैं। जो भी योजना मेरे मस्तिष्क में बनती है श्री हनुमान जी उसे कर डालते हैं क्योंकि पूरी संस्था भली-भाँति संयोजित है-----कई घटनायें जिन्हें आप चमत्कार कहते हैं श्री हनुमान जी द्वारा की हुई 21

 उनके शरीर की अंग-अंग उसी से (शक्ति और भक्ति से) भरा रहता है | उनकी इसी विशेषता के कारण आज हम बजरंग बली की देश-विदेश में भी अर्चना करते हैं। होती हैं। चमत्कार करने वाले वे ही हैं। श्री हनुमान जी हमारी उतावली, जल्दबाजी तथा आक्रमणशीलता को ठीक करते हैं। श्री हनुमान मूसलाधार बारिश और वेगवान तूफान की तरह जाकर विनाश कर देते हैं। अपनी विद्युत चुम्बकीय शक्ति द्वारा वे ये सारे कार्य करते हैं। भौतिक तत्व उनके नियन्त्रण में हैं, वे वर्षा, धूप और हवा की सृजन आपके लिए करते हैं। पूजा या मिलन के लिए वे उचित प्रबन्ध करते हैं। बिना किसी के जाने वे सारे कार्य कर डालते हैं। हमें हर समय उनके प्रति कृतज्ञ होना चाहिए। श्री हनुमान एक तेजस्वी देवदूत हैं, वे सन्यासी या त्यागी नहीं हैं। सुन्दरता तथा सज्जा उन्हें बहुत प्रिय है । .......वे एक सनातन शिशू है और वो भी एक बन्दर बालक। प.पू.श्री माताजी, फ्रैंकफर्ट, जर्मनी, ३१.८.१९९० श्री हनुमान जी के बारे में क्या कहें, वे जितने शक्तिवान थे, जितने गुणवान थे उतने ही वे श्रद्धामय और भक्तिमय थे। एक विशेष देवता हैं, एक विशेष गुणधारी देवता, जितने वे बलवान थे उतना ही उनकी शक्ति भक्ति थी। ये सन्तुलन उन्होंने किस प्रकार पाया और उसमें कैसे रहे, एक यही समझने की बात है। श्री जी हनुमान उनके अन्दर नवधा दैवी शक्तियाँ थीं। गरिमा- चाहे जितने बडे हो सकते थे, अणिमा-छोटे बिल्कुल सूक्ष्म हो सकते थे । उनके शरीर का अंग-अंग उसी से (शक्ति और भक्ति से) भरा रहता है। उनकी इसी विशेषता के कारण आज हम बजरंग बली की देश-विदेश में भी अर्चना करते हैं। भक्ति और शक्ति दो अलग चीजे नहीं हैं। एक ही हैं। हम ये कहेंगे कि गर Right Hand में शक्ति है तो Left Hand में भक्ति। ये शक्ति-भक्ति का संगम, ये हनुमान जी में बहुत है। दूसरी उनकी विशेष बात ये है कि वे अर्ध-मनुष्य थे, अर्ध-बन्दर, माने पशु और मानव का बड़ा अच्छा मिश्रण था। तो हमारे अन्दर जो कुछ भी हमने अपनी उत्क्रान्ति में अपने Evolution में पीछे छोड़ा है उसमें भी जो प्रेम और उसमें जो भी आसक्ति थी वो उन्होंने अपने साथ ले ली थी। श्री हनुमान जी प्रेम के सागर हैं और उसी वक्त जो दुष्ट हो, जो दूसरों को सताता है, जो दूसरों को नष्ट करता हो, उसका वध करने में उनको बिल्कुल किसी तरह का संकोच नहीं होता था। श्री हनुमान पूजा - १९९९ 22

 To overcome the inertia setting by the cold weather and also to liberate the body's strength to the sun, people take to all these ways of treating you by which they give you something that is heat creating in the body. But it has another very subtle expression, which I find is when they give you these they say now you take til and gul and you say things, which are sweet. Because when you are taking til and gul, your body gets heated and you become right sided. When you become right-sided person you seldom speaks sweetly. So it is a contrast that they give you a thing to heat you up so that your body gets heated up but you must be sweet. So there is a warning that you are eating all these things but that doesn't mean now you ride on a big horse of ego and start splashing every one. It's a very subtle thing to understand that when we become temperamentally right sided, we are so much covered by our ego that we do not feel that we are hurting others by what we say. 1985-01-14: Makar Sankranti Puja in Suryavanshi hall Published & Printed by Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. No. 8, Chandragupta Co-op Нousing Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune, Maharashtra, India - 411 038. © : 25286537, 25286032 email:sale@nitl.co.in website: www.nitl.co.in (For queries & sending articles contact on above address)

 Нарру Holi OUAN Holi Но PPJ On Holi we should burn all those things which spoil our attention and damage the Agnya (the 6th - Third Eye Chakra). Then this attention will clear out and we will celebrate Holi with joy and understanding. ...When your attention goes to Vishudhi then you see the Shakti of Shri Krishna, Shri Radha, who is Allahad Dayini, the Giver of Joy.



----------------------

2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-0.txt 
 V
a
r
t
i
March 2011
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-1.txt 
 I am your Mother and My children are very sweet and may
you all Live and may you Emancipate the whole World.
noh
Birthday Puja, 1991
Every year we have birthdays of various people and every year
we make a vow that this year I will not do this or I will not do
that. This is a very good way of seeing how far we have come in
life. Many people who really have achieved a very great height
in their spiritual life did not need a birthday, but every day they
felt it's a birthday to start, to go ahead, to understand, to learn.
Every day is a new year for them.
21 March 94
happy Birthday
to
Shri Mataji
पाम
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Inside this issue..
Bija (seed) Mantras ....4
Badges ....7
The Goddess ....8
Mother's life ....10
What you want joy or happiness ....14
Will Power ....16
Faith and sincerity ....17
श्री
हनुमान ....१८
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Bija (seed) Mantras.
"Bīja mantra means the Vaikhari. Vaikhari is the power of speaking. This power of
speaking is made into mantras by the people who have the power of Realisation. So, for
them to improve, supposing they want to improve their centre, or they want to improve left
, then the bīja has to sprout and has to grow.
So the first step is to say the bīja mantra and then to say the different mantras of the
different chakras. So first is the bīja and then is the tree. So you can implant a bīja into
yourselfby saying that, and then you start saying all other. So, that's how you make it grow.'
H.H. Shri Mataji's comments on the Devi Atharva Shīrsha. Pune, 17"Oct.1988
or right. They have to say the bīja mantras..,
The Science of Bīja-'seed' Mantras was developed mostly in the later writings of
Indian philosophy, particularly in the *Tantras, although their roots go back to the earliest
philosophical writings of India.
Bija Mantras are sounds which have power but not specific meaning as words. The
basic Bijas are the letters of the alphabet, 50 in number, which correspond with the petals of
the Chakras from Mūlādhāra to Āgñyā. The qualities of the Chakras also have Bija
Mantras, and there are Bija Mantras of the Deities. We still have much to learn about
these, and the following can be taken as a mere introduction to what is potentially a vast
subject. All this knowledge should be verified by personal experience of the practitioner,
and the following are suggestions only.
Om
The Primordial Bija Mantra of the Universe is Om (to rhyme with 'home'). It is the
Seed of Creation, the sound which emerged when the Brahmānda-'Egg of Brahman'
broke open giving birth to this Universe.
Shri Ganeśha is Omkār Swarūpa-'Embodiment of the Om'.
The Om embodies the three Shaktis- Mahākālī, Mahāsaraswatī and
Mahālakshmī- and the Kundalinī uniting with the Paramātmā in the Sahasrāra. It
may be meditated on for all Divine Knowledge. The Om may be said with different
intonations and on different notes, and has different effects accordingly. It is beyond the
scope of this chapter to go into the details.]
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-4.txt 
 'These Three Primordial Syllables AA, O0 and MA represent the three powers of the Primordial
Mother: AA represents the Existence and Destructive Power of Mahākālī. 00 represents the Creative
Power of Mahāsaraswatī. MA represents the Sustenance or Evolutionary Power of Mahālakshmī. These
Three Primordial Syllables later on form the Primordial Words -Bīja Mantras- Aim, Hrīm and Klīm. All
together these comprise the phonetic words of the Devanāgari script (Sanskrit)."
H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. 'The Creation'.
Bija Mantras of the petals of the Chakras.
'The word Sanskrit has come out of Kuņd alinī's movement, when She makes a sound, all was
recorded by the great saints and like that every chakra has got vowels and consonants according to the
number of sub-plexuses they have- you can say petals they have- and all of them make all the alphabets of
Sanskrit language."
th
H.H. Shri Mataji's comments on the Devi Atharva Shīrsha. Pune, 17"Oct.1988
Starting at the Vishuddhi Chakra, the letters in alphabetical order correspond with the petals. The
basic letters are usually said with an ending, either visarga-'aspirated ending' –ḥ, or more commonly
asuswāra-'nasal sound'–m. The letters start at the highest or front petals and go clockwise viewed from
the front or above.
The letters of the Devanāgari alphabet, including the vowels, are arranged in the order of the parts of
the mouth where they are produced, starting at the back ie. gutturals, palatals, cerebrals, dentals and then
labials. You may notice an alternating 'in' and 'out' quality of the short and long vowels, and the un-
aspirated and aspirated consonants. The nasal sounds have an upward quality. Om adds
auspiciousness and may be taken before each Bija Mantra ie. 'Om am, Om ām...'.etc.
Viśhuddhi- (16 petals- viz.14 vowels + anuswāra-'nasal sound' and visarga-
'aspirated ending')
Am, ām, im, īm, um, ūm, rm, rrm, lrm, lrym, em, aim, om, aum, am,
aḥ .
(note: am is pronounced 'um'and um is 'oom' but short: e and o are
always long: Aim and aum are diphthongs- 'ayeem'and 'a-oom')
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Anahata (Heart) (12 petals- 5 guttural and 5 palatal consonants + first two cerebral)
Note: Cerebrals (letters with dots under) are said with the tongue curled back, touching the palate.
Kam, kham, gam, gham, ñgam, cham, chham, jam, jham, ñam, tam, tham.
Manipura (Nābhī) (10 petals- last 3 cerebrals+5 dentals+ first 2 labials)
Dam, dham, ņam, tam, tham, dam, dham, nam, pam, pham.
Swādhishthāna (6 petals- last 3 labials +3 semivowels)
Bam, bham, mam, yam, ram, lam.
Mūlādhāra (4 petals- last semivowel +3 sibilants)
Vam, śham, şham, sam.
Āgīyā (2 petals)
Ham, kşham.
In the Sahasrāra all the sounds combine to produce Om.
The Chakras themselves also have Bīja Mantras.
(These are the semi-vowels, ie consonant equivalents of vowel sounds):-
Corresponding
Name of Deity
Hari (Vishnu/ Krishna)
Yama (God of Death)
vowel.
Part of mouth.
Ham
Viśhuddhi-
guttural
a, ā
i, ī
Yam
Anahata-
palatal
ri, ri
Ramā/Rāma (Shri Lakshmī/Vishnu)
Ram
Manipura-
cerebral
Vāmā (Shri Saraswati)
Lambodara (Shri Ganesha)
Swadhishthāna-
Vam
labial
и, й
Ir, llr
- with the middle 'o' sound extended.
Mūlādhāra-
Lam
dental
Āgñyā-
Om
- with the final 'm' sound extended.
Om
Sahasrāra-
Gaņeśha Bīja. Gam
This is described in the Ganesha Atharva Sheersha.
G is Mūlādhāra Chakra, A is the Central Channel, M is the Union of the Kundalinī Shakti with the Ātmā in
the Sahasrāra, conferring Bliss on the devotee.
'Gam' may be said alone or 'Om Gam' or 'Om Gam Ganapataye namaḥ'
*The Tantras are discourses where Lord Shiva explains to Shri Parvati the Nature of the
Divine and the technique to achieve first hand knowledge of It. There are about 24 main Tantras,
mostly of Pure Knowledge, but some of them veering towards the Kaula Path- the worship of the
Goddess in the lower Chakras. ....
To be contd. in next issue
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Badges
Something with my photo.... A badge.... you can
wear it..... and people ask you, 'who is this person?"
You can start talking. You have to talk. That is the only
way we can spread Sahajyoga. Of course you can have
your programs..... you can get people, you can give them
Realisation, this that, but to talk about it is important....
so the atmosphere is created...... in the atmosphere it
will be.... and this is going to help us a lot...... if it is in the
atmosphere, people will know that there is something
like this coming up. (880221)
What I have seen..... that we are very shy, shy about
Sahajyoga...... we are little shy to talk about Sahajyoga-
you have to do it..... you should start talking openly
about it..... If I was shy like you, Sahajyoga would not
have spread. One should not feel shy about Sahajyoga,
otherwise what happens..... that it just melt away with
you..... don't feel shy, you should talk about it.... wear
the badge... with the badge people will ask you
questions.... 'who is this one' then you talk to them. Any
way you like, you should expose yourself...... and that
will work out better. (000507)
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-7.txt 
 THE
GODDESS
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-8.txt 
 The Goddess is always as a Mother (830821) ....the Devi, the Adishakti; She can be extremely
cruel and harsh, yet also can be extremely gentle and mild (891008.1); If you are living in the
Kingdom of God, and when the Goddess of that Kingdom arrives... you have to be there (850629)
This Havan is a very good thing for reciting the names of the Goddess.... her eyes are given by
fire... and in that light.... in that fire... in the name of the Goddess we awaken our Deities within us...
and burn away all that is wrong in these particular chakras which invoke those powers..... So with
devotion and understanding you have to do it... because you are really privileged people today...
be proud of that, and do with that devotion all these things.... we should do it in full devotion. I think
very few people can put into the fire... but you can all do symbolically... and how many names do
you want to say... do 108... it's better.(801019)
In the olden days when the Goddess had to fight the Rakshasas, the Rakshasas were not
involved in human beings as such... they didn't beome Gurus or anything. And so now we find, in
Kaliyuga they have gone into the brains of the Sadhakas... of their devotees. It's very difficult to
remove them... and once they go into the brains of the Sadhakas... then the Sadhakas become of
course possessed... they suffer... they have all kinds of problems - but despite that they stick on to that
person, because they are mesmerised. Main thing is that in this Kaliyuga there are so many
Sadhakas... they are running helter and skelter... they are running all over, trying to find out some way
of finding the truth (911209)
Once I went to meet a real guru... he was a very horrid fellow otherwise... but for me, he has
tremendous regard.... so he started talking to me as you would talk to a Goddess. He said...'you are
God... with your power, why don't you change these worldly people a little bit'... I said 'that is what is
the problem.... Thave given them freedom... I've said.... alright this freedom is given to you... you can
choose to get transformed or not... I cannot force.' He said, 'but God Almighty you are. You can do
anything.' I said, 'I can do everything, but I do not want to do certain things.... and one of them is to
take away the freedom... from them... that is their freedom to choose.' So he was quarreling with me
about this. I said, 'your concern is alright, and I understand, because you are a guru... but when lam
God supposing... then my style is different...I can't be like you.' He said, 'that's true... you can't be like
me.'(920719)
He was talking to me only, as if I am God standing before him. And then he told all the disciples...
you see... you praise... you praise the Lord... you praise Her.. because God is fond of praise.' I said,
'really.' He said, 'yes, if you praise the Lord, then he gives you everything. I have seen that...I always
praise him.. whenever I want something to be done, I just praise him... and he does it for me.' So I
said, 'it's true... I must accept... you cannot get to Mother, unless and until you have really bhakti from
your heart...it's already sort of.... a built in.... restriction.. what can you do... if you don't have bhakti,
you cannot get to Mother.... no you cannot... you cannot get to God... but if you have bhakti, then
you can get to Mother....it is written... Bhakti Gamya.' (920719)
As you know.... I am the Goddess... and the Goddess is supposed to wear, I don't know how
many ornaments, just to adorn her chakras. I have lots of ornaments myself, of my own... but only for
Puja, Iwear ornaments. I don't wear.... thoughtlam supposed to wear lots... why? Because it may not
be that alright... it may be dignified, but may not be that alright to wear all those things all the time...
butIam supposed to wear.... like I am supposed to wear many more things on the hand here, rings...
and on the Feet... everything... all the time....gold... thoughIdon't do it .(860504)
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-9.txt 
 er's
re
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-10.txt 
 So far human beings received the Blessings of God...individually, as
Grace...and they received their Self Realization individually, one by one. The method
for individual realization was just the opposite of the collective.... First they had to
establish their dharma.... cleanse themselves fully.... desiring all the time for their
Salvation.... as we call it Ishwara Pranidana...... thinking of God.... asking for his
grace and acting in scrupulously dharmic way, to keep themselves pure....controlling
their minds, their desires and their actions.... and then only, the Grace of mother gave
them realization( 800505).
This pattern was on for some time.....and those who got Realization did lots of
wonderful things to prepare for Sahaja Yoga. They were in every field of life..... but very
few and unique..... for example in India, and in many other places in ancient times....
they discovered the unique gifts of the Mother Earth..... what you call as
Swayambhus...... those stones or stone images, which were thrown out by the Mother
Earth, and discovered by these Saints. They put Shrines there... and they worshipped
them.... and by this they made the images vibrate more
......and also to vibrate that area.
All over the world, there are such stones.... but only the Saints could discover them
(800505).
Then they established the importance of virtue in life.... And how it can give you
health, wealth and prosperity... which is glorified...and not which is degrading.
They established schools and Universities....especially in India, where even today the
families.... carry the name of that University as their Ghotra.... and the families
belonging to one Ghotra cannot marry. They prepared young children, educated
them....that they led a very dharmic life....enjoyed their married life fully... and
matured in such a manner that they got their Realization and live a life of complete
enjoyment. And thus they, by their example, distracted the attention of the people which
was outside, to inner deeper values (800505)
All this permeated a kind of confidence in God, Religion and a very balanced life-
they have really done a great job of building the scaffolding...of the huge, great
building of Sahaja Yoga.... Which is going to come now. Their desire to establish
Dharma was so great, that the complete Divine force of Mahakali was working through
them...and they put it to action with such understanding and such wisdom. Great
scriptures were written by them... and for thousands of years, they were the guiding
light for people (800505).
Only in the modern times....we should say about one thousand years or so...people
started doubting them. Before that people used to doubt themselves... that we are not
11
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-11.txt 
 good enough – but there was no doubting about the Incarnations. All this started toppling
down, with the ego developing....And the superego challenging - influenced by many
Satanic forces around, and played into their hands... and they started doubting those
great Realised People, and all these great Scriptures.
So on one side we have the doubting people ...... and on the other side the fanatics
- those who try to adhere more and more, to the teachings, had to become fanatics. The
'real' Religion in man collapsed ....Religion is a continuous living process within, which
is our sustenance..... it's like a ladder, on which we climb, step by step.... But not
leaving the ladder. So .... These two types... one doubting .... another fanatic ... and
..... because both of them did not know what truth was
they criticized each other
(800505)
I took my birth at a point where this confusion had started showing it's results even
on a physical plane. When I started looking at around, I was amazed how ignorance had
made people naive – though formerly people had this much understanding, this much
sensitivity to know, what is right and what is wrong – in this confused situation, I was
born. Iknew I was to open the Sahastrara .... So I started my work , after my first shocks
(800505)
I decided not to talk about it to anyone.... and to lead a very normal life... of a
very normal life.... Of a very ordinary person..... not to be very striking..... because
like Christ, when he was born, a star came up .... that's how the king Herod came to
know about him.... and you know the story, what happened. If you are born with any
striking signs, the negativity immediately finds you out. As it is, it found me out .... And
just after the fifteenth day of my birth there was a very big accident as you know (800505)
I had to really work very very hard to enter into your being.... to find out ....first of
all... your basic problems .... And then the different permutations and combinations
.. and then these were also capped by other identifications.... Like the society in which
you were born.... Like the nation in which you were born....like the ideas that were
there. All these things became much more important than the original universal being
within you.... And every individual had taken a very odd funny awkward type of a shape,
which I didn't know how to reduce...by which they could start their growth ( 800505)
It was a very hard work ....nights after nights I used to work .... While leading a
very ordinary life of a very normal person. I used to behave like a very simple ordinary
student.... And show all my ignorance about things... but sometimes you know, truth
has an awkward habit of slipping out..... and it used to show itself. One of the biggest
12
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-12.txt 
 problems of human beings, I found was family life and that's why I married.... I wanted
to study what are the problems of family life ....and so I started facing these problems as
if they were my own... and then other problems like political, economic....and all these
problems also .... because they became so important for human beings... but which
are of absolutely artificial value. A sort of a human behaviour science I had to study for
years (800505).
And then ....as you reach a point where all the knots are opened out... and one knot
is still left ... which is to be opened out.... and that was done on 5" May 1970. Then the
collective phenomenon started working .... And the greatest of these was that the Shri
th
Chakra , being on this Earth, could be felt through your fingers..... this was never
before so – nobody felt the vibrations on the fingers as such... but they felt it within
themselves. Now, because the Sahastrara of the Universe was opened out, everybody
started feeling the vibrations around them with their own hands.... now the fingers.....
could feel the vibrations.... That means the sensitivity of the Divine which was in the
chakras spread out to the periphery to such an extent that a human being could feel it on
the fingers... this was fantastic ( 800505)
my job was to move from the centre to the periphery.... And whatever are the
So
obstacles I met, I had to clear them out, one after another. But then, I must say that,
Sahaja Yoga when it started working out..... I was given very great workers, tools of
Sahaja Yoga ... who took it upon themselves, as their own responsibility.... And they
really worked very hard with me... very few .... but they did. The rest of them.... can be
divided into many categories..... some came for their own treatments, or something like
that, of a very low level..... or some , when they got their Realisation, they brought all
their sick relations to me.... Then some came for their financial and all sorts of mental
problems.... And some came for their family and spiritual problems....but the ones who
took it up as their won responsibility, that this is what they have to do, this is their life, this
is what their complete meaning is... they put entirely their attention to it.... They
worked it out, whatever was possible on their own level ( 800505)
So today we have to understand ......that we really need those brave people
....and those people who feel responsible. It is a very important virtue of Sahaja
Yogis. The main thing is ... what are you doing for Sahaja Yoga.... What you can do
... how far you can go..... how you are going to work it out. In every walk of life...
those who really work it out as a great responsibility upon themselves are the ones who
will be given more and more powers, and chances (800505)
13
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-13.txt 
 What you want
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-14.txt 
 W:
hat I want, that my children should be beautiful people, when they enter into the
'Kingdom of God'. They should be respected as great saints, sages. More than
anybody else, they are special people.
That's how they are to be educated. May be, I am very ambitiouS, you might say. But my
ambitions are based on reality. I am sure I can achieve these. But you must develop that
humility and understanding within yourself that we all have to improve, we have to be in the
attention ofthe Mother. If she has to say something to us, we are not ,to feel hurt. If you feel
hurt, then know that it is yourego. Beat yourselfwith shoes. Take it out, because it is not good.
I cannot go on pampering your ego all the time till you are completely blasted off and then you
come and tellme"Motherwhy didn't you tell me?"
For example, somebody asked me, he is in love with somebody and wants to marry her. I
knew that the person was horrible and he should not marry that personandlsaidthat, in a way,
it's alright. I mean, I first was in a shock and I kept quite. I said, now how to say that, not to
pamper his ego either, but to say. How to saythat, no or yes. It was very difficult.
|
So, I said, all right as long as she makes you happy, it's alright. Now the word happy, has
double meaning. Happy means only your ego can be happy, notthe spirit. It'sjoy. Idid not usethe
word joy, I said happy. See I have to be clever about it. Now, if you had thought of it, why would
Mother say happy, she should have said if it gives you joy. If Isayjoy then it's correct. But lsaid
happy. Isaid itthree or fourtimesto him that, does it make you happy.
He said, "Yes". If it makes you happy then you can marry. Now see, if he is very intelligent,
and he should have thought of it. But he never thought of it that I was meaning that it is not
going to give youjoy, if it gives you happiness, you marry. Happiness means your ego pampering,
it's simple. Also you have to educate yourself to understand your Mother. This is the third
thing, that you ought to know, isto understandyour Mother. Seelhave to be clever. Because if I
am not, if I am very blunt, you get blasted. IfI am not, you are lost. So I have to be clever. And
when I am clever, they call me Mahamaya. So at least, let me keep to one style, let me be a
"Mahamaya".
Alright, accepted. Butthen you tryto understand that ifltellyou something, you just get
absolutely annoyed and angry. And the people get lost. You see, they get lost. If you tell them
don't do it, they getlost. Ifyou say, do it, then they get lost, in any case, because they are doing
awrong thing.
H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
Birthday puja 21.03. 1982, Chelsham Road, London, UK
15
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-15.txt 
 JP
ith your 'Will' you can generate Sahaja Yoga to go further (801116);
Your 'Will' Is very important in Sahaja Yoga. It does not mean Desire.
Will' means desire put into action. 'Will' means 'desire put into action'.
So you desire ...... and then put it into action - you can do it. In Sahaja Yoga, first you
receive the light, and then you generate the light. You are the light givers...... And it is
going to work through your will. So how powerful our will should be..... how dedicated;
It is left to 'Our' Will not to our Mother's Will to work it out. (801116)
See how much we have willed that Sahaja Yoga should be SUccessful. And to
make it success what should we do..... first we must understand the basics of Sahaja
Yoga..... second do we have the qualities by which we sustain those
basics....(801116) Try to become the 'will of God' and not one's 'own' will - then Joy
will flow (811103)....'yes let my Spirit act' (830204).
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-16.txt 
 I have given you the statue of Shivaji
Maharaj. He was another great soul. A great soul
who had such principles, and such beautifying life
in his language, in his attitude and everything.
With all that, he was a very brave person.
Once you have this you will not deter from
doing anything that is important. You will have no
fear of anyone. You will not go round and round
but
will know how to find the solution and
you
how to work it out.
This will happen to you if you really know
yourself. You will have such powers of courage.
You will not be a dare devil but with wisdom.
Courage and with wisdom you will have and that
is what is your Self, which will give you lots of
wisdom and lots of courage. It's not a fighting
spirit, it's not a violent nature, it's not a rude
nature. But it is a very silent, beautiful, courageous
attitude.
H.H.Shri Mataji
Birthday Puja, 21.03.2001, Nirmal Dham
Faith andl sincerity
Today my feelings are really full of joy, full of joy, because now I can see how things are
happening, how one person can produce thousands and thousands of Sahaja Yogis.
I saw one miracle, I told once that one seed has all the thousand trees it is going to produce and
when I saw a new technique of tissue culture, I was amazed that on one little seed there were so many
little, little primules who had come out.
In the same way, you are all capable, and you all can do it, but what is needed is faith in yourselfand
also complete sincerity about Sahaja Yoga. If that happens today, you have really celebrated My
Birthday. If you think that My Birthday's important, that for me very important is that everybody gets
their spiritual birthday.
May God bless you.
H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi,
Birthday Puja 21.03.1994, Kolkata
Shivaji Maharaj a great soul
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-17.txt 
 श्री हनुमान
५
र]
पाट
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-18.txt 
 उनके समर्पण के फलस्वरूप ही शारीरिक रूप से विकसित होने के पूर्व ही उन्हें
नवधी सिद्धियाँ प्राप्त हो गईं] इन सिद्धियों के फलस्वरूप उन्हें सूक्ष्म या पर्वतसम
विशालकाय शरीर धारण करने की क्षमती प्राप्त हो गई ।
मानव अस्तित्व में श्री हनुमान जी की महत्वपूर्ण भूमिका है। निरन्तर हमारे स्वाधिष्ठान से मस्तिष्क
(पिंगला नाड़ी) तक चलते हुए वे हमारी भविष्य की योजनाओं या मानसिक गतिविधियों के लिये आवश्यक
मार्गदर्शन तथा सुरक्षा प्रदान करते हैं।
श्री हनुमान जी जैसे देवता का, जो कि बन्दर सम उन्नत शिशु हैं, निरन्तर मानव के दायें पक्ष में
.. .....
दौड़ते रहना अत्यन्त आश्चर्यजनक है। मानव के अंत:स्थित सूर्यतत्व को शान्त तथा कोमल बनाए रखने के
लिए उनसे कहा गया। जन्म के समय ही उनसे सूर्य को नियंत्रित करने के लिये कहा गया, अतः शिशु सुलभ
स्वभाव से उन्होंने सोचा कि सूर्य को खा ही क्यों न लिया जाय। यह सोचते हुए कि पेट के अन्दर सूर्य को अधिक
नियंत्रित किया जा सकता है उन्होंने विराट रूप धारण करके सूर्य को निगल लिया
मानव की दायी तरफ
को नियंत्रित रखने के लिये उनका बालसुलभ आचरण उनके चरित्र की सुन्दरता है।
......मर्यादापुरुषोत्तम श्री राम को अपनी सहायता के लिए किसी सचिव की आवश्यकता थी और इस
कार्य के लिए श्री हनुमान का सृजन हुआ। श्री हनुमान जी श्री राम के ऐसे सहायक और दास थे और उनके प्रति
इतने समर्पित थे कि कोई अन्य सेवक अपने स्वामी के प्रति इतना समर्पित नहीं हो सकता। उनके समर्पण के
फलस्वरूप ही शारीरिक रूप से विकसित होने के पूर्व ही उन्हें नवधा सिद्धियाँ प्राप्त हो गईं। इन सिद्धियों के
फलस्वरूप उन्हें सूक्ष्म या पर्वतसम विशालकाय शरीर धारण करने की क्षमता प्राप्त हो गई। अत्यन्त उग्र
स्वभाव के व्यक्तियों को श्री हनुमान इन सिद्धियों से नियन्त्रित करते हैं।
अपनी पूँछ को किसी भी हद तक बढ़ा कर लोगों को नियन्त्रित करना उनकी एक और सिद्धि है।
वे हवा में उड़ सकते है----हवा में उड़ने की सामर्थ्य के कारण वे संदेश को एक व्यक्ति से दूसरे व्यक्ति तक
पहुँचा सकते हैं।
आकाश की सूक्ष्मता श्री हनुमान के नियन्त्रण में है। वे इस सूक्ष्मता के स्वामी हैं और इसी के
माध्यम से वे संदेश भेजते हैं। दूरदर्शन, आकाशवाणी तथा ध्वनिवर्धन उनकी इसी शक्ति की देन हैं। बिना
किसी संयोजक के आकाशमार्ग से वायवीय (Ethnic) सम्बन्ध स्थापित करना इस महान अभियन्ता का ही
कार्य है। यह कार्य इतना पूर्ण है कि आप इसमें कोई त्रुटि नहीं निकाल सकते। आपके यन्त्रों में त्रटि हो सकती है,
श्री हनुमान जी की कार्य कुशलता में नहीं-
नस-नाड़ियों पर, हमारे रोम-रोम पर अनुभव होना भी श्री हनुमान जी की कृपा से है।
.- यहाँ तक कि हमारे अन्दर की सूक्ष्म लहरियों का हमारी
श्री हनुमान को 'अणिमा' नामक एक अन्य सिद्धि भी प्राप्त है जो उन्हें अणुओं तथा परमाणुओं में प्रवेश
करने की शक्ति प्रदान करती है।
विद्युत-चुम्बकीय शक्तियों का गतिशील होना श्री हनुमान जी की कृपा से ही होता है। श्री गणेश ने
उनके अन्दर चुम्बकीय शक्ति भर दी है। वे स्वयं चुम्बक हैं। भौतिक सतह पर विद्युतचुम्बकीय शक्ति श्री हनुमान
19
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-19.txt 
 श्री गणेश जी हमें विवेक देते हैं तो श्री हनुमान जी सदू-सद्-विवेक)
सद्-सद्-विवेक उनकी दी गई सूक्ष्म शक्ति है और यह हमें
सेत्य असत्य में भेद जानने का विवेक प्रदान करती है।
जी की शक्ति है परन्तु भौतिकता से वे मस्तिष्क तक जाते हैं, स्वाधिष्ठान से उठ कर मस्तिष्क तक जाते हैं।
मस्तिष्क के अन्दर वे इसके भिन्न पक्षों के सह -सम्बन्धों का सजन करते हैं। यदि श्री गणेश हमें विवेक प्रदान
करते हैं तो श्री हनुमान हमें सोचने की शक्ति देते हैं
बुरे विचारों से बचाने के लिए वे हमारी रक्षा करते हैं। श्री गणेश जी हमें विवेक देते हैं तो श्री हनुमान जी
सद्-सद्-विवेक। सद् -सद्-विवेक उनकी दी गई सूक्ष्म शक्ति है और यह हमें सत्य असत्य में भेद जानने
का विवेक प्रदान करती है।
सहजयोग में हम कहते हैं कि श्री गणेश अध्यक्ष हैं या इस विश्वविद्यालय के कुलपति हैं। वे हमें
उपाधियाँ देते हैं और हमें अपनी अवस्था की गहराई जानने में सहायता करते हैं। वे हमें निर्विचार तथा निर्विकल्प
समाधि और आनन्द प्रदान करते हैं। बौद्धिक सूझ-बूझ जैसे यह अच्छा है यह हमारे हित में है, श्री हनुमान जी
20
WAN
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-20.txt 
 हनुमान जी वैसे ही करते हैं
सभी देवताओं की रक्षा श्री
जैसे वे आपकी रक्षा करते हैं।
श्री गणेश जी शक्ति प्रदान करते हैं पर रक्षा श्री हनुमान जी करते हैं।
की देन है और बुद्धिवादी होने के कारण वे पाश्चात्य लोगों के लिए बहुत महत्वपूर्ण हैं ----मार्गदर्शन तथा
सुरक्षा हमें श्री हनुमान जी की देन है।
श्री राम का कार्य करने के लिए श्री हनुमान सदैव उत्सुक रहते हैं। विवेक यह है कि जो कुछ भी श्री राम
कहते हैं हनुमान उसे कर देते हैं-
बताते हैं कि सर्वशक्तिमान परमात्मा या श्री राम जैसे गुरु के अतिरिक्त आपको किसी के प्रति समर्पित नहीं होना।
तब आप एक स्वतन्त्र पक्षी होते हैं और पूरी नौ शक्तियाँ आपमें जागृत हो जाती हैं।
श्री राम की सहायता जब आप लेते हैं तो श्री हनुमान जी ही आपको
आपके अहं के साथ-साथ बहुत सी अन्य बुराइयों का भी श्री हनुमान प्रतिकार करते हैं। यह तथ्य
लंकादहन कर रावण की खिल्ली उड़ाने में अत्यन्त मधुरता से प्रकट हो जाता है।
अहंकारी लोगों से आपकी रक्षा करना---श्री हनुमान का कार्य है।
श्री हनुमान का एक अन्य गुण यह है कि वे लोगों को स्वेच्छाचारी बना देते हैं। दो अहंकारी व्यक्तियों को
मिलाकर वे उनसे ऐसे हालात पैदा करवा देते हैं कि दोनों नम्र होकर मित्र बन जाते हैं।
हमारे अन्तस का हनुमान तत्व हमारे अहं का ध्यान रखने तथा हमें बाल सुलभ, विनोदशील और प्रसन्न
बनाने में कार्यरत है। वे सदा नृत्य-भाव में होते हैं।
यदि श्री गणेश मेरे पीछे बैठते हैं तो श्री हनुमान मेरे चरणों में
श्री
हनुमान जी अहंकारी लोगों तक को समर्पण करना सिखाते हैं, समर्पण के लिए विवश करते हैं, भिन्न
प्रकार की बाधाओं, चमत्कारों या विधियों द्वारा वे शिष्य का गुरु के प्रति समर्पण करवाते हैं।
गुरु के प्रति व्यक्ति के समर्पण की शक्ति श्री हनुमान जी की है। किस प्रकार से आप गुरु को प्रसन्न
कर सकते हैं और उसका सामीप्य प्राप्त कर सकते हैं? सामीप्य का अर्थ शारीरिक सामीप्य नहीं । इसका अर्थ है
एक प्रकार का तदात्म्य, एक प्रकार की समझ। मुझसे दूर रहकर भी सहजयोगी अपने हृदय में मेरा अनुभव कर
सकते हैं। यह शक्ति हमें श्री हनुमान जी से प्राप्त करनी है।
सभी देवताओं की रक्षा श्री हनुमान जी वैसे ही करते हैं जैसे वे आपकी रक्षा करते हैं। श्री गणेश जी शक्ति
प्रदान करते हैं पर रक्षा श्री हनुमान जी करते हैं।
श्री हनुमान (देवदूत 'गैब्रील ') रक्षक थे। संदेशवाहक गैब्रील और उन्होंने 'इमैक्यूलेट साल्वे' अर्थात
'निर्मल साल्वे' शब्द का प्रयोग किया जो कि मेरा नाम है। जीवन पर्यन्त मारिया को श्री हनुमान की सेवा
स्वीकार करनी पड़ी। मारिया महालक्ष्मी हैं।
जो भी योजना मेरे मस्तिष्क में बनती है श्री हनुमान जी उसे कर डालते हैं क्योंकि पूरी संस्था
भली-भाँति संयोजित है-----कई घटनायें जिन्हें आप चमत्कार कहते हैं श्री
हनुमान जी द्वारा की हुई
21
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-21.txt 
 उनके शरीर की अंग-अंग उसी से (शक्ति और भक्ति से) भरा रहता है |
उनकी इसी विशेषता के कारण आज हम बजरंग बली की
देश-विदेश में भी अर्चना करते हैं।
होती हैं। चमत्कार करने वाले वे ही हैं।
श्री हनुमान जी हमारी उतावली, जल्दबाजी तथा आक्रमणशीलता को ठीक करते हैं।
श्री
हनुमान मूसलाधार बारिश और वेगवान तूफान की तरह जाकर विनाश कर देते हैं। अपनी
विद्युत चुम्बकीय शक्ति द्वारा वे ये सारे कार्य करते हैं। भौतिक तत्व उनके नियन्त्रण में हैं, वे वर्षा, धूप और
हवा की सृजन आपके लिए करते हैं। पूजा या मिलन के लिए वे उचित प्रबन्ध करते हैं। बिना किसी के जाने वे
सारे कार्य कर डालते हैं। हमें हर समय उनके प्रति कृतज्ञ होना चाहिए।
श्री हनुमान एक तेजस्वी देवदूत हैं, वे सन्यासी या त्यागी नहीं हैं। सुन्दरता तथा सज्जा उन्हें बहुत
प्रिय है ।
.......वे एक सनातन शिशू है और वो भी एक बन्दर बालक।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, फ्रैंकफर्ट, जर्मनी, ३१.८.१९९०
श्री हनुमान जी के बारे में क्या कहें, वे जितने शक्तिवान थे, जितने गुणवान थे उतने ही वे श्रद्धामय
और भक्तिमय थे।
एक विशेष देवता हैं, एक विशेष गुणधारी देवता, जितने वे बलवान थे उतना ही
उनकी शक्ति भक्ति थी। ये सन्तुलन उन्होंने किस प्रकार पाया और उसमें कैसे रहे, एक यही समझने की बात है।
श्री
जी
हनुमान
उनके अन्दर नवधा दैवी शक्तियाँ थीं। गरिमा- चाहे जितने बडे हो सकते थे, अणिमा-छोटे बिल्कुल
सूक्ष्म हो सकते थे ।
उनके शरीर का अंग-अंग उसी से (शक्ति और भक्ति से) भरा रहता है। उनकी इसी विशेषता के कारण
आज हम बजरंग बली की देश-विदेश में भी अर्चना करते हैं।
भक्ति और शक्ति दो अलग चीजे नहीं हैं। एक ही हैं। हम ये कहेंगे कि गर Right Hand में शक्ति है तो
Left Hand में भक्ति। ये शक्ति-भक्ति का संगम, ये हनुमान जी में बहुत है।
दूसरी उनकी विशेष बात ये है कि वे अर्ध-मनुष्य थे, अर्ध-बन्दर, माने पशु और मानव का बड़ा अच्छा
मिश्रण था। तो हमारे अन्दर जो कुछ भी हमने अपनी उत्क्रान्ति में अपने Evolution में पीछे छोड़ा है उसमें भी
जो प्रेम और उसमें जो भी आसक्ति थी वो उन्होंने अपने साथ ले ली थी।
श्री हनुमान जी प्रेम के सागर हैं और उसी वक्त जो दुष्ट हो, जो दूसरों को सताता है, जो दूसरों को नष्ट
करता हो, उसका वध करने में उनको बिल्कुल किसी तरह का संकोच नहीं होता था।
श्री हनुमान पूजा
- १९९९
22
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-22.txt 
 To overcome the inertia setting by the cold weather and also to liberate the body's
strength to the sun, people take to all these ways of treating you by which they give
you something that is heat creating in the body. But it has another very subtle
expression, which I find is when they give you these they say now you take til and
gul and you say things, which are sweet. Because when you are taking til and gul,
your body gets heated and you become right sided. When you become right-sided
person you seldom speaks sweetly. So it is a contrast that they give you a thing to
heat you up so that your body gets heated up but you must be sweet. So there is a
warning that you are eating all these things but that doesn't mean now you ride on
a big horse of ego and start splashing every one. It's a very subtle thing to
understand that when we become temperamentally right sided, we are so much
covered by our ego that we do not feel that we are hurting others by what we say.
1985-01-14: Makar Sankranti Puja in Suryavanshi hall
Published & Printed by
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
No. 8, Chandragupta Co-op Нousing Society, Paud Road,
Kothrud, Pune, Maharashtra, India - 411 038. © : 25286537, 25286032 email:sale@nitl.co.in
website: www.nitl.co.in (For queries & sending articles contact on above address)
 2011_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Нарру Holi
OUAN
Holi
Но
PPJ
On Holi we should burn all those things which spoil our attention
and damage the Agnya (the 6th - Third Eye Chakra). Then this
attention will clear out and we will celebrate Holi with joy and
understanding. ...When your attention goes to Vishudhi then you
see the Shakti of Shri Krishna, Shri Radha, who is Allahad Dayini,
the Giver of Joy.
