The Divine Cool Breeze 2012 issue 3 – volume twenty-five number three CL

 The process of creation is eternal. It cannot have a starting point. It cannot have an ending point. It is not the past. It is not the future. I am telling you about the present moment. PR34

 50 EGO 502

 We have decided to talk about It is a very difficult subject. And I will try to make it intel- ligent for you, but I would request you to pay full attention for such a difficult subject like creation.... The greatest blessing today is that many of you can feel the vibrations. And not only that, but you also know and realize that they can think and they can love. It is a very big blessing. Of course, some of you have not got it, but those who have got it know that these vibrations organize because they raise the Kundalini. They go to the place where it is needed out of compassion, to that portion where there is deficiency. They understand. They organize their universal nature and they love. They answer your questions. When you ask them some questions, you receive answers from them. They are living vibrations. These vibrations are from the Divine. This Divine is called as Brahma – Brahma Tattwa, the principle of the Divine. We can say that the process of creation is an eternal process. This means the seed becomes a tree and the tree becomes a seed and the seed becomes a tree. It goes on and on. It is eternal so it cannot have a starting point and it cannot have an ending point. It goes on and on and on. That is why it can have different states of existence – you can say states of being.

 THE WORD OF BRA HMA The first is just the being. It is Brahma where nothing exists. We say “nothing." When we say nothing, it is a relative word because we do not exist, so we say nothing exists. It is a relative word. When we are not existing, for us everything is “not." There is something, but that is not ourselves. And that is why, relatively, we say "it is nothing." It is only the word Brahma. You can think of an energy, an energy form that exists. The energy accumulates at a point and forms a nucleus. The energy thinks. The energy that is distributed accumulates at a point, concentrates on a point. And this point is the point we call as Sadashiva. This happens because that energy desires, thinks, organizes, loves. When it wants to create, when the desire is felt in that energy to create, at that time God will go on a nucleus is created. This nucleus we call as Sadashiva. This nucleus does not disappear. You can think of a nebula. It is something which changing His form, is all relative. You can think, but you cannot think of something in absolute form. So with thinking, you cannot conceptualize the whole thing. But but He cannot change if you can think of a state where it is just an energy and no creation - but not the energy of electricity, magnetism, all this – it is the com- His eternal nature. bination, the synthesis of all the things which goes into laya, which becomes that. It is all synthesized. It coagulates at a point which we can call as a nucleus. This point we call as Sadashiva. This Sadashiva is the Ishwara. It is the God Almighty. We call it now God because now it has a limitation in the sense that we can call it something, but if it is just an energy we just call it a Brahma. You can say like this: when the water becomes ice, a fol- licle of ice is formed, you can differentiate between the water and the ice. But still, it is relative, a relative understanding. At this state, God Almighty, Parameshwara, takes form as an identity. That is why we laya: to dissolve or can say that it is not Brahma, but an identity. Identity has its aura – synthesize, to become one you can say its light. This light is the divine love. It goes into various forms, but Sadashiva remains as He is. Ishwara: God Almighty, Now the desire to create is transferred to the aura. The aura is the the ideal being power of God, the Shakti. Ishwara has certain things beyond Him

 also and before Him. God Almighty has something beyond Him that He cannot control. One, He cannot control His eternal nature. It is His nature to be eternal. He cannot stop it. He will go on changing His form.... He cannot change His eternal nature. He will be, eter- nally. Eternity is His temperament, His nature. He cannot overcome that. For example, God cannot take away your freedom to choose the truth. He cannot. Once He has granted, He is not going to take it away. You have to choose it in all your freedom. He will not force you to take it. Many people have hopes like that. They are sadly mis- taken. At this juncture only lies the problem of complete destruction or complete resurrection. It is left into the hands of human beings to decide whether they want to accept the truth or if they want to follow the falsehood. THE SHIVA AND THE SHAKTI You have been given complete freedom to choose. I won't into Like the meaning go the details about God Almighty because it is a very subtler subject and requires much more attention ... but He is the witness. He is the and the word, Sakshi, in the form of a Sakshi. What is He witnessing? He is witness- ing the creation. And the power that creates the creation is the Shakti. Shiva and Shakti It is His power. It is His consort. Now for us human beings, we do not understand that a wife and a husband could be that one. For example, you can understand a sun are one. and a sunlight, a moon and a moonlight and these two things are one and the same – or the meaning and the word. In the same way, Shiva and Shakti are one together.... You can be a father, you can be a brother, you can be a son. Three self things you are doing together. In the same way, you can be your and your power. You know you and your self and your power are dif- ferent, but you are one. You have a power to write, but you are not your power. Neither your power is your self. In the same way, Shiva and Shakti are two persons to be identified, but they are part and parcel of one unique form. They are known as Brahma.... 5

 THIS LIGHT IS THE DIVINE LOVE. IT GOES INTO VARIOUS FORMS, BUT SADASHIVA REMAINS AS HE IS.

 Α PLAΥ ΤΟ PLEASE ΤHE ALMIGHTY Forming into a nucleus like this, this is the remains of the nucleus, which forms its power here into a valaya. How does it form? He moves, supposing, backwards. Then what happens when he moves backwards...? All of these masses form a shell around it and the waves cross over and settle onto the shell. Now this is the situation: when all inside forms another nucleus by concentration, this is the Shakti. And this is the Sadashiva. This is the Mahashakti, the Adi Shakti and this is the Sadashiva. Once the Shakti forms Her personality, or we can say Her ego is established. She is a different identity from Shiva because the whole process is to create the play for the witness to see. He is the one who is going to watch the play. She is the one who is going to create, so He is the one who is She accumulates Her ego onto a point and becomes the Shakti. She assumes Her position there and the first thing She does as a Shakti is going to watch the play. to go around in a parabola around Her Lord. This point one must understand. She is a Shakti. She is the power She is the.one who is of God and the whole creation is only meant to be seen by God Almighty. He is the only spectator of the play of the Shakti. And if He does not like the play – for example if He does not like the it way going to create. is or the way people are who are created – He can immediately stop the play by closing His eyes, by denying the play, by showing His annoyance or by His stop. He can just stop it. That is why He is also called as a destroyer. But the whole thing is meant for His amuse- ment. And if it does not give Him pleasure, He can stop it. That is why the first one who must be pleased is the one who is the spectator. Because of this, Shiva is garlanded by Her. It is a parabola and that is why the parabola is the symbol of the Adi Shakti. This is sort of a cer- valaya: the last stage of tificate to Her, a sort of a granting to Her of the varadan, as we call ascent, the completion it in the Sanskrit language. It is the varadan that is "go ahead with your work." This is a sanction given to Him. When She completes varadan: permission this parabola, the sanction has been granted and that is why She is a to proceed parabola.

 Here the question of the men dominating the women and the women dominating the men does not come because this is predomi- nantly in our heads. When we think of it, we think of men and women. It is nothing of the kind. It is just complete oneness. Can we think of one couple who are absolutely united with each other? We cannot because we are all incomplete people. But stretch your imagination to such a point that both of them are meant for each other only and the one who is active, who is the Adi Shakti, is only active to please God Almighty who is the only spectator of Her play and He is to be pleased first. So She surrenders Herself before Him, takes the sanc- tion through the parabola. A PARABOLA AND A LIVING PROCESS The parabola is a very important thing. You know that everything travels through a parabola, never in a straight line. For example, if you love someone, our love goes around that person and comes back to us as love. But if you hate that person, then our hatred goes around that person and comes back to us as a terrible hatred. So the parabola is taken, but you might say why a parabola? The question can be "Why should there be a parabola and not a circle?" The reason is a parabola is the shortest distance to go around another point. It is the shortest. And that is why it is a parabola. It is even in our ordinary life. You will find this happening: what- ever you do to others, it comes back to you in a sound form, whether do good or bad. And that is why our karmic ideas and that of you our doing punyas are all there because whatever we emit through us, They are as They are as will come back to us. In the same way, if you bless the whole world, the blessings of the whole world will come to us. The process is not as buman as we are. simple as it can be drawn because it is a living process of a big dimen- sion, but I am just trying to make it simpler for you to understand. They are a thousand When She goes into the motion of a parabola and Shiva sanctions Her, it is a living process. Again you must understand it is a living pro- times more human, cess. It is as human as we are. Both of them are as human as we are. We should say they are a thousand times more human than we are.

 THE CREATION OF THE UNIVERSE The wife, who is the consort, says, "I am very happy just like this. I won’t go any further with it." Because creation is not an easy thing won’t for Her, She does not want to depart from Him. Creation is a child and She says, "I would not like to have children now because I will lose you." So She pushes Herself towards Him and He pushes Her back and disappears, opening out from here. Now She is in this form, so the beginning of the Aum starts. The parabola, first of all, gets converted into the Aum. Then She pushes Herself down and settles down for a while to meditate and to find out how She is going to work it out.... It is Her desire which must be aroused. If Her desire is not aroused, She will not conceive the creation. So a kalpa is spent in that. Quite a Many universes lot of time is spent in Her own thinking which way She should do it. She has created many universes. It is not one universe She has created. bave been created She has created universes after universes and I will show you how She has created so many universes. And some of them are still lingering by the Adi Shakti. on, some of them are destroyed. But today, before us, this universe, this Earth, on this Earth – India, and in India – Delhi, you are sitting attending this place. It is like that. So at this moment, whatever is the thing, is not the past, it is not the future, but I am telling you about the present moment we are here. Many universes have been created by the Adi Shakti even before us and She has tried many other things also. Ultimately, She has tried this. She has created the Earth and then created us. Now how She has done that we will see later on. Just now, let us see how She assumes Her three powers. THE TΓHREE POWERS When She decides to create, She is endowed with three powers. She has the three powers of God which are granted to Her. By one power, first of all, is the existence, the desire to exist. She desires to exist with God. The second power is to create.... And the third is the evolving kalpa: an eon or age power or sustenance power by which gradually you sustain something of immense length and you become something. These are the three powers She assumes.

 In short, we can say that She forms the three powers of Mahakali, Mahasaraswati and Mahalakshmi. These are the three powers She assumes within Herself. Now She uses again Her parabola systems. You are supposing I have come to this house by this way. I know this way, then I take that way. I know that way. I know the very way, everything. Now I know this way and I know all about it. With that knowledge, I can do something else. So She again uses Her parabolic movements – actu- ally Her three movements of Mahakali, Mahalakshmi and Mahasara- swati. They are all the time being one with the Adi Shakti. She can separate them and put them into three different channels. She can combine them and synthesize them and use it as a parabola. Do you understand this? That is why when we put a bandhan to you, we say put a parabola. It is a parabola because the vibrations are all in. All the three powers are flowing in this. So we have got three powers. By the Mahakali power, She desires. It is the emotional side of God, you can say. She represents the emotional side of God. She desires. The desire is that of God. God Almighty, who is the spectator, He is the Sakshi. And She puts that Sakshi into your heart. She reflects that into your heart which is kept all the time burning to watch what you are doing, to see your play after your creation. Her Mahasaraswati power, now moves in a parabola. She can move at any angle. Three hundred and sixty angles, She can go from one point. Sometimes She goes around and around at a point. When She goes around and around at a point, Her Mahasaraswati power can get consolidated. You can say it becomes dense – that is the trou- ble with English languaget becomes dense. It becomes so very dense She puts the Sakshi that it cracks out. These cracks all go into the momentum of the movement of the Mahasaraswati Power because it is moving in an in your heart to see around and around fashion. They also get into the momentum of that movement. They start moving. For example, this part starts moving, your play after this part starts moving, this part starts moving. And when they start moving they become rounds. They lose their angularities and then your creation. they become round. I am telling you very much in short.... These 11

 ww. Forget about other universes where other styles were also created, but about this one we can say it was created.

 rounds again are put into friction with each other and that is how we can say – now forget about other universes where other styles were also created – but about this one we can say it was created. Now you must all the time remember that this power thinks, understands, organizes, loves and it is an identity. LIFE ON THIS EARTH So She creates the Earth. The Earth is not created so easily. Part of the sun is removed just like this, with the hand you can say. We must understand why the sun became so cold. From the sun it is removed very much far away first, to the farthest point so that it freezes com- pletely. Also like the moon, it was taken very far away. It just freezes completely and is then brought near the sun again like a pendulum. It The Adi Shakti brings is moved again towards the cold side. Again it is brought to the hot side. It is brought to a point, to the medium point where the Earth this Earth to a point is made. It is not a chance of nature. It is made deliberately habit- able for human beings. The temperature was brought in. It has been done by the Adi Shakti, the Mother. She has done it deliberately. It is where life can begin. not easy to conceive of such a Mother, but She has done it. And She brings this Earth to a point where life can begin. So the combination of the moon and the combination of the sun gives you hydrogen from the moon, oxygen from the sun, gives you water, the freezing and heating. The freezing and heating gives you the water. In the water, when the Earth is made, spirally, to move upwards, again the heating and cooling starts. By heating and cool- ing, life comes into being as amino acids. NOT BY CHANCE It is done deliberately. What I am saying is it is not something done by chance. On this also one has to think once, “How is it it is not chance...?" One of the greatest biologists has really gone into the calculations of how much time it should take for a simple amoeba to be created out of matter. He has calculated that it should take much more time than even what we have had so far. Billions of billions of years are needed just by chance.

 The law of chance is there., which I do not know if I should tell you elaborately, but the law of chance is that if you have one tube of fifty red pebbles and of fifty white pebbles and if you start shaking them and make them absolutely in a chaotic order, it takes so much, so many times shaking to make it again the same, as it ought to be, to bring it into order. So even to create an orderly living protoplasm, a cell, would have taken much more time than it has taken so far – much more, many times more, billions of billions. And it has taken only five billion years for Earth to secede from the moon and only two billion years for it to cool down. So he says it is beyond any understanding. The only thing that can explain it, what we can say, is that there is a jug- gler behind it. And there is a juggler, about which our great rishis and munis know that that juggler is nobody else but the Adi Shakti, the Primordial Mother. The Primordial Father is Sadashiva and the rishi: a poet-author to Primordial Mother is Adi Shakti.... whom the Vedas were We have to understand that it is a very, very solemn subject we are discussing here, the sanctum sanctorium of the love of our primordial revealed parents. It is a very, very holy thing. We are not holy people. We are yet full of lots of greed and lust, but they are above everything. So muni: a holy person when we are discussing them, we have to know. We have to do it with similar to a rishi great shraddha and with our head bowed before them. That it is our shraddha: faith with luck and we are very fortunate that we have been able to learn some- thing about these two primordial parents who have brought forth devotion this creation, their child. SYSTEM AND ORDER So one of these then again cracks and becomes a Surya Mandala a very solemn and a Surya Mandala has got, as you know, the Earth and the moon It is and all these things. And I have told you how the Earth is created. subject we are After the creation of the Earth, first, you know that amino acids were formed, the vegetation started and then the human being started. Now the matter also is a very systematic thing. Matter is not discussing. unsystematic. It is systematic, but it is not organized. There is a dif- ference between them. The systematic things are dead, can be dead. 15

 You can put five stones here in a systematic manner, but they are not organized because they are not living things. There is a difference between the two. So first, the systematic things were laid down. Perhaps, if you know about the eight different types of elements, they were created. These were created and were put into proper places through Shri Ganesha.... The whole matter has been organized. To organize the matter, some Deity was to be created for that and the first Deity that was created was that of Shri Ganesha. Let us see now how She created. THE CREATION OF EXISTENCE You have seen that one part of Her, which is the Mahasaraswati, has created the matter. Now Mahakali has to give them existence. How In the heart of the do you get an existence? It is through your sustenance or, you can say, through your quality, whatever you are. So Mahakali gives that exis- Virata is the complete tence to those material things – not human beings or living things, but matter – through a Deity known as Shri Ganesha.. In the heart of the Virata ... is the complete Primordial Being. The Primordial Being. Mahakali is settled down. What She does, She goes three and a half from the heart – one up, one down, like that, three and a half times – and comes to the end of the three and a half, downwards three and a half. Now She comes to the end of it. And if you put three and a half like that and if you cut it straight, you get seven centres cut in. She comes down here and from here She penetrates. You see, She cuts that seven points here. At this point, She creates the first Deity, a little below – Shri Ganesha. I mean this is not done in one day. It is not done in one year, not done in one yuga. It is done in many kalpas. The first step is to create Shri Ganesha. This is Her abode and She puts Shri Ganesha. Now He is emitting His vibrations through all this. He passes through all this, whatever She has created. On this picture is settled the work of the Mahasaraswati, you can say. She comes down with all Her programs like this and She makes yuga: an era or age of it. And She gets joined here again. So Shri Ganesha emits His vibra- divine significance tions through Her.

 First Shri Mahakali creates Shri Ganesha and then Mahasaraswati comes down. She creates all these things and gets connected to Shri Ganesha. So the vibrations of Shri Ganesha start flowing through all the creation of Mahasaraswati. THE VISI ON OF THE ADI SHAKTI Before creating all this, the complete thought of what is going to happen in the future comes in a clear-cut vision of the Adi Shakti. And She puts Her plans through. First of all, the Mahalakshmi power comes down and creates the Shri Ganesha. You can understand now how important it is that we have to be holy people. First, She created the holiness on this Earth. First thing, Her relationship with the child was established because the creation is going to be created in the image of a child. That is why Shri Ganesha was created first. The other power is Mahasaraswati. On Her way, She comes down The creation was and gets connected with Shri Ganesha. And that is how Shri Gane- sha establishes the relationship and emits His vibrations through this because of His vibrations passing through the matter that She has created in the image created – for example, our Mother Earth. Through this passes the of a child. axis. Nobody has seen the axis, but they say there is an axis from the way it moves. There is a kind of an axis. Now this is the power of Mahakali passing through the power of Shri Ganesha, passing through the axis of the Mother Earth, which has got a magnetic power in it. And that is how, through that, it controls its speed and its movement. And also it looks after us. Why don't we think that when we put a little seed in the soil it sprouts automatically? THE MOTHER EARTH The Mother Earth is actually the Mother of the Adi Shakti, you can say. She is the Mother, they say, because She is made in such a way that She takes all the weight of the world into Herself. She controls all the weight of the world and She can consume all your weights.... 17

 The Mother Earth takes all the weight of the world into Herself.

 Now, weight means everything. Your weight is what you are weighing, but that is not the thing. Weight means also your sins, also your punyas. It means everything. If you have too many sins in you, then the Mother Earth is hurt. Wherever there is too much of sin, then the Mother Earth has to ask for help. And then some other Deity, like Vishnu Himself, has to come on this Earth to save Her from this too much of overloading of sins on this Earth. It is a fact. It is not that I am telling you a mythical story. It is a fact which you have to verify after getting vibrations. Before getting vibrations, you cannot find out from the Mother Earth. If you want to find out after some time – if you are realized – you just stand on the Mother Earth and ask Her, “Will you take away my sins, O Mother Earth? Will you take away my karmas? I've been realized." Imme- By Her desire diately She starts drawing in. You will be surprised. You will feel so much lighter. You have to use Her. That is how Mother Earth has the universe been created, but also the Adi Shakti, through Her Mahasaraswati power, has created the five elements before everything else. was created. BY HER DESIRE go too much into details, it will be too much for you, but first of If I all, the causal essences have been created by Her. But if I say like this, there won't be anything false. Just by seeing ... She has created this light. Just by Her breathing, She has created air because Her desire is the last. Because She desired there should be air, She created air. Like that, She has Her smell, She has created the causal gandha, which has created this Mother Earth. And it has started from Her only, from Her desires. By Her desiring it, it was created for Her and that is how it was created in the whole universe, which was later on made into the Earth, Moon, Sun and all these things. Actually, it was Her mere gandha: fragrances desire which brought forth these things. For us, it is impossible to understand someone like that, who, just For by mere desire, can create. But when we think of somebody who is above all the powers of the world, the one we know is the highest of all, She can do anything She feels like. Can't we think like that? We cannot think of someone like that. We think of God the Almighty, as

 we call Him, but when we talk of His might, we start laughing. How can it be? But She can do anything She wants. It is only Her mere desire that has brought forth all these creations and all these things that you see in this world, which are created only by Her desire. She created akasha. She created all these five elements which you know. And then She started Her other form, which we call as the Mahalakshmi form. THE SUBTLE POWERS OF SHRI GANESHA I think I should tell you about Shri Ganesha's existence in the matter. He acts in the matter as vibrations, as Mahasaraswati vibrations. They are electromagnetic vibrations. We can say electromagnetic. And also there is sound and all these five elements are expressed in Shri Ganesha that. You can record them because if you take sulphur dioxide, for example – sulphur dioxide, two oxygen and one sulphur – and if you watch them properly under a very highly developed microscope ... acts in matter they are vibrating. There is a vibration going between these balls. They can be asymmetric also, they can be symmetric, they can be as vibrations. even, uneven and they can be expanding, by closing like that. So there are three types of vibrations we find. And the fourth side is nothing but Shri Ganesha Himself who is controlling. So this we can see with our naked eyes, if you want to see, whether you are realized or not. From where do these vibrations come in the minutest paramanu, as they call it, in the molecules? In a molecule, how do you get these vibrations? Can you explain? It is so much sukshma, parasukshma... The powers of Ganesha are very, very subtle and they enter into the matter and create this kind of vibration, which you can even see and record, electromagnetic vibrations, even in one small, little mol- ecule. In the periodic laws of elements, you can find out that all the ele- akasha: the ether ments are divided into eight types. Let's see, how can all the elements be divided into eight parts without somebody being there? Can you paramanu: the ultimate atom do something without organizing a proper chart of these elements? Just think about it. You see, when we challenge God, we have to sukshma: the subtle state 21

 understand that in this world everything is so well organized. There are eight elements spread out so well, placed so well and it has a par- ticular style of behaviour and every element is different in numbers and protons and these numbers are very well calculated in such a manner that the end of it, that the last circle of all the protons should be eight. If it is not eight, if it is less than eight, then it creates a va- lency problem. It is so well organized that even if you study this, if there is anybody who knows a little bit of chemistry, it is such a won- derful thing. We take it for granted. We take it as our right to have the matter is so well organized for us. But the valencies are all depending on such a nice organization of these eight protons.... There is a vibrating force done through the Mahasaraswati power. She creates. Now in the vibrating force He exists. Matter also exists. Three identities – It must exist. If it does not exist, nothing can exist. So the existence force is given through the Mahalakshmi force, Mahakali force, which God Almighty, , is acting through Shri Ganesha, who is sitting at the nucleus. Can you imagine how much it must be – every molecule and every atom.... Take one element like gold. How many molecules has it...? You the Adi Shakti just cannot calculate. And then how many Ganesha pictures must be there? How is it achieved? and the universe. THE INFINITE REFLECTION There is another thing which I will tell you if I am coming this way, how infinite reflections are caught and why there are two things like Shiva and Adi Shakti. The reason is it has to create an infinite reflec- tion. How will you create an infinite reflection? Do you know that, anybody who knows physics? If you place in the centre of two mirrors something, then the reflec- tions are infinite. So the first mirror is the Adi Shakti and the second mirror is this creation. And that is how you can get infinite reflections on this Earth. This is the reason why you can get infinite reflections. And that is why you had to create another one who reflects it. And - one the God Almighty, valencies: the bonds that is why there has to be three identities or qualities found in then the Adi Shakti and then the whole universe. It had to be that an atom or a human way, otherwise you cannot create infinite reflections.

 THE CREATION OF MAN bodhi: enlightenment Now somebody who has done this job must be a very clever man, no doubt. When human beings think that they can know God through their bodhi, they must know how can you reach this bodhi. It is supreme. How much labour He has taken to create us? After creating say His power as Mahalakshmi the matter, then He – or I should descends on this Earth. Mahalakshmi helps in sustenance. Sustenance means all the scanning of all these elements. When they create the matter, the matter is differently created, cre- ated for different purposes. Now what is the ultimate? The creation has as its ultimate aim to create human beings – this creation, just imagine. You people are so great that for you all these troubles have been taken. Such an important thing is a human being that all these trou- bles are taken. All matter, all, everything is used just to create you. This is the ultimate aim. A sort of a stage has to be laid down and you, the Sahaja Yogis, come on the scene, you can say. Just the instru- ment of man is to be created. Now why has God wanted to create an instrument of man? Because He wanted to create an instrument which could feel Him, which could understand Him... He just wanted to play through our instruments His power. But He did not want to do it through the dead instruments, but through the living instruments. The creation has as Supposing, if this [microphone] can understand, can love, has a human mind and, if My voice is passing through it like a hollow per- sonality, then we can say that this is a realized personality. But this its ultimate aim to is not a living being. You are a living being. You are made specially with all these difficulties for Me and you have been worked out so create human beings. carefully, so delicately, one after another. 25

 A stage has to be laid down and you come come on the scene. 36

 EVOLUTI ON AND THE VIRATA Now we have to come to the most important part which is evolution, which we should understand because we know evolution through science. When these three forces came into being, before creating any Earth or before creating this universe or anything, first they had to draw out a proper picture about it and a proper understanding of it. Before doing anything, we have to plan out things. We have a plan- ning commission first of all. We sit down in a planning commission. In the same way, first they had to form a stage where they just plan out the things. This stage we can call it as the vaikuntha state.... At this stage they created all the incarnations. Incarnations were not created after the Earth had been created, which is a very wrong idea. They created all the incarnations at the vaikuntha state, where your own eye never existed at that time. This Earth never existed and naked nothing existed that you see with eyes now. But a state of your existence, the first one, known as the vaikuntha state, existed. In that vaikuntha: the heavenly vaikuntha state, the planning of the whole universe and the whole or divine realm cosmos and all that was decided. So the first person who had to come on this was Shiva because without Him nothing can exist. But where to settle Him down because He is to be reflected onto someone? If Shiva has to be reflected onto someone, you have to create a reflector. So they had to first think of the one Primordial Being or one huge identity, you can call it, known as the Virat. They created the Virat. This will be the Virata. This will be the complete form of the Primor- dial Being. This is the one I am telling you about, this reflector, the first one. The God Almighty has to be reflected, so first, let us create The planning of the Primordial Being, the Virat. In the Virat they created different incarnations. Incarnations are the whole universe, not created from human beings. I do not know why people think like that. They cannot be created by human beings. But they were first the whole cosmos created. You see, evolution is all right from amoeba to human beings, but there is no evolution for incarnations. They are made like that was decided. from the very beginning.

 INCARNATIONS AT EACH CHAKRA you have seen in the Virata – I have shown you the picture of Virat As – the three powers of Mahakali, Mahalakshmi and Mahasaraswati met at the Agnya Chakra. And there they produced two children each – it is not a story, it is a fact again – as brothers and sisters. And these brothers and sisters mean the relationship is of a tempo- rary nature, but of a subtler temperament. And then they were mar- ried. Inter-communication took place. Mahalakshmi, Mahasaraswati and Mahakali created all together six children, who were married. Inter-marriage took place. By that inter-marriage, they got an entity We are which is a kinetic ... personality and a potential energy within it such a combination. And they placed those incarnations on different the reflection chakras. They brought from these, from the top, all of them were brought from the Agnya downwards and placed onto all the chakras. of the reflector. These incarnations, as you know, are placed on different chakras of the Virata. Many people won't understand this and won’t like to hear this also because human beings are so egoistical that they cannot understand that there is a God who is almighty, who is going to do everything. He has His own ways of doing it.... All these Incarnations were placed in the Virata state to create the reflection on the other side. Shiva was removed from the Shakti, as it was removed in the beginning. And it was placed on top of the Virata's head as a Sadashiva peetha. In the same way, we too have a Sadashiva peetha on our head. You see, we are the reflection of the reflector. So we too have the same style.... But when the Kundalini enters into the being, when He is in the womb of the mother, at that time this ... Sadashiva, from this peetha, descends into the heart. And that is how you hear the first throb in the heart. It is just the same as it happened in the Virata. But at the vaikuntha state this was not created. The second reflector here was not created, only the first one. So only the Virata was created and in His being, in the planning stage, first of all, these officers in charge of peetha: seat these chakras were created by the Adi Shakti. God is the witness and She is doing the play and She creates those chakras. In the chakras She places all these Deities to govern. 27

 THE BHAVASAGARA Now there is the existence. There is the creation, creative force and there is the evolutionary force – all inside the Virata state. This is at the vaikuntha state, we say, because this state is on the first reflection. It is not in us or we cannot feel it, the vaikuntha state, because it is in the first. Then another state was created. Then the third was created. Then the fourth one is the Bhavasagara. It is the state at which all of us were born.... Can you think of a four strata personality which is facing a mirror? Now which is the first one which shows? It is the topmost. And that is why the topmost shows. It is the Bhavasagara. But if you can go deep down into your state, you can feel all the other three. But first of Down deep, you can all, the one which you can see and feel, it is the Bhavasagara. So you are born in the Bhavasagara. At this state you are at the Bhavasagara feel the other states. state. At this Bhavasagara state, now you are created and you have to evolve. EVOLUTION At this time, the Mahalakshmi power acts to evolve you. You already know how evolutionary things have taken place, but I will tell you how evolution has taken place according to our puranas and which is a fact. The evolution of man started, first, from the amoeba, you can First the puranas: the holy texts say, because the life came into being in water, as I told you. and stories of the Divine water was created. In the water amino acids were formed, amoebae were formed, fish were formed. And fish, when they were formed, the Matsya Avatar: the first smaller fishes found it difficult to exist because the bigger fish were incarnation of Vishna trying to eat them. It comes as a reciprocal. They were absolutely in the form of a fish fed up with this destruction that was going on. At this time, Shri Vishnu Himself, the one who is the evolutionary force, descended on Bhavasagara: this Earth as the Matsya Avatar. He helped some of the fish to cross the ocean of illusion, across the shores.... They had that courage. She was the leader. And the state in which we then others started crossing across. This was the first evolutionary all are born stage which we know.

 These fish became reptiles later on, as you know. In the evolu- tionary stages, they became reptiles. But how did they become rep- tiles? There must be someone who must have given them the lead. It was again Shri Vishnu, who came on this Earth as a Kurma and lots of things were done at this time in the vaikuntha stage before He came on this Earth as a Kurma Avatara at the vaikuntha stage. When they created this Earth, they planned this whole Virata and wanted to create on this side of the reflector – the whole planning and the whole thinking and all that process got formed – some sort of a waste matter. It brought forth the waste matter. This waste matter got contaminated or, we can say, got stagnated on one side which was neglected somehow. And through it started coming out some satanic forces and there was a big fight between the satanic forces and the good forces. It actually happened in the third stage, not at the vaikuntha stage, but at the third stage. Because when the planning started, the working out started, these satanic forces started. Now people may say, “Why has God created satanic forces?" He did not, but eventually they turned out to be. Because at this second stage, when some of the devas who were created – again, they were not evolved people – they were created, they were in charge of all these elements and all the working. You have to also create officers or people who have to go in the field and work it out. All these devas and devatas, out of their working, what happened? They got lost, Kurma: the second incarnation of some of them, and became satanic forces. A sort of a waste product Vishnu in the form of a tortoise came in. And with that waste product, satanic forces started and they acted in such a way that there was a war during the Kurma Avatara Amruta Manvantara: between the rakshasas and the Asuras, as they call it. So the good the eternal age of Manu, people who were in charge of the elements, all working in the office the first man of God, started fighting with the satanic forces. At that time, He Himself worked this out and know what you happened in the Amruta Manvantara, which took place. People do not understand how can the Amruta Manvanatara take place in the Bhavasagara. It did not. It took place at a stage which is not Bhav- asagara. At the Bhavasagara it did not take place. 29

 You should ask us. for more and more and more. And it will be granted because you are created for this purpose.

 BEYOND THE BHAVASAGARA Now we are at the Bhavasagara state. At the Bhavasagara state the same Kurma, the same one took birth and came on this Earth and gave us an understanding how to become a proper reptile.... Ulti- mately, a human being was created. All this is done by the Mahalak- which has acted through Vishnu, which I have told shmi power, you how evolution has taken place, how you are made. Now what is going to happen? You reach this point. Up to this point until Christ came in – Christ was also an incarnation and His Mother was nobody else but Radhaji Herself, the Mahalakshmi and they brought forth up to this stage the human beings. After this, now what does man have to become? It is to enter into a state where he becomes Nirvichara. That means there is no more You dive into a the consciousness of the Bhavasagara, but you go a little beyond it. From this stage you dive into a state of universal unconscious, as they call it. It is nothing but the same power which exists here, which state of universal is a synthesis of all the three powers. It is a synthesis of all the three unconscious. powers. That is the Adi Shakti's power. The Adi Shakti's power is all-pervading. It exists everywhere, but we never feel it otherwise because we are very grossly placed. We can say that it is a tube, which has got four layers, out of which it can only use the outer tube because the inner tubes are all closed. When the innermost tube is opened out, you become absolutely self- realized, but when even the second tube is opened out, you can feel the all-pervading force of God Almighty.... But it is no more achitta for you because you are conscious of it. YOUR DIALOGUE WITH GOD That is how you start your dialogue with God. What happens is that ... from here you ascend ... and this area is filled with the all-pervad- ing power of the Adi Shakti. Until you reach to this stage, you have to go up to this stage of an incarnation, which, of course, is a big gap. But I can say that Mahavira and Buddha, both of them rose to that achitta: without attention height....

 As I told you, it is a very, very difficult subject and I have tried to In many ages, handle it in English.... In many ages, I have been living now for thousands of years and I have been I have been working it out on so many human beings and so many things and, at long last, I have been able to find out most of the per- mutations and combinations of most of the human beings and that is living now for how it has been worked out in such a large mass scale. It would not thousands of years. have been possible if I had not worked it out in that way.... It is already very late for all of you and such a difficult subject to be brought to you in such a short time. It is very difficult.... Try not to bother too much about this thing. This is not so impor- tant as your own Realization and your own ascent. The whole knowledge will be dawned upon you. You do not have to bother. Every word now you read, you will have a meaning about it and you will understand. The first thing is that you must get your Realization. The second thing is you must ascend. You must ascend much more and give more time to this. Do not take it for granted. It is a very important thing which you should do. After all, there are other things. They are important, but this is the most important thing THE DIVINE which has to be done. COOL BREEZE By God's grace, if it works out, I will be very happy. As it is, I am www.divinecoolbreeze.org extremely happy because in none of My lives have I been able to give SUBSCRIPTIONS: contact@divinecoolbreeze.org Realization to so many people. So as it is, I am over-satisfied with CONTENT: Myself. editor@divinecoolbreeze.org PRINTED BY But as far as you are concerned, you should not be satisfied. You King Printing Company Inc. Lowell Massachusetts USA and should ask for more and more and more. And it will be granted Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. because you are the people who are on the stage. You are created for Pune Maharashtra India this purpose. WORDS Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi 20 February 1977 Delhi One has to do it. God has to do it. If He does not do it, He cannot fulfill His own desires. PHOTOS And His Creation, He is not going to destroy. all nature photos: Micea Albutiu May God bless you.

 The whole knowledge will be dawned upon you.



----------------------

2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
2012 issue 3 – volume twenty-five number three
CL
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-1.txt 
 The process of creation is eternal.
It cannot have a starting point.
It cannot have an ending point.
It is not the past.
It is not the future.
I am telling you about
the present moment.
PR34
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-2.txt 
 50
EGO
502
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-3.txt 
 We have decided to talk about
It is a very difficult subject. And I will try to make it intel-
ligent for you, but I would request you to pay full attention
for such a difficult subject like creation....
The greatest blessing today is that many of you can feel
the vibrations. And not only that, but you also know and
realize that they can think and they can love. It is a very big
blessing. Of course, some of you have not got it, but those
who have got it know that these vibrations organize because
they raise the Kundalini. They go to the place where it is
needed out of compassion, to that portion where there is
deficiency. They understand. They organize their universal
nature and they love. They answer your questions. When
you ask them some questions, you receive answers from
them. They are living vibrations.
These vibrations are from the Divine. This Divine is
called as Brahma – Brahma Tattwa, the principle of the
Divine.
We can say that the process of creation is an eternal
process. This means the seed becomes a tree and the tree
becomes a seed and the seed becomes a tree. It goes on
and on. It is eternal so it cannot have a starting point and
it cannot have an ending point. It goes on and on and on.
That is why it can have different states of existence – you
can say states of being.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-5.txt 
 THE WORD OF BRA
HMA
The first is just the being. It is Brahma where nothing exists. We say
“nothing." When we say nothing, it is a relative word because we do
not exist, so we say nothing exists. It is a relative word. When we are
not existing, for us everything is “not." There is something, but that
is not ourselves. And that is why, relatively, we say "it is nothing." It
is only the word Brahma.
You can think of an energy, an energy form that exists. The energy
accumulates at a point and forms a nucleus. The energy thinks. The
energy that is distributed accumulates at a point, concentrates on a
point. And this point is the point we call as Sadashiva. This happens
because that energy desires, thinks, organizes, loves. When it wants
to create, when the desire is felt in that energy to create, at that time
God will go on
a nucleus is created. This nucleus we call as Sadashiva. This nucleus
does not disappear. You can think of a nebula. It is something which
changing His form,
is all relative. You can think, but you cannot think of something in
absolute form.
So with thinking, you cannot conceptualize the whole thing. But
but He cannot change
if
you can think of a state where it is just an energy and no creation
- but not the energy of electricity, magnetism, all this – it is the com-
His eternal nature.
bination, the synthesis of all the things which goes into laya, which
becomes that. It is all synthesized. It coagulates at a point which we
can call as a nucleus. This point we call as Sadashiva. This Sadashiva
is the Ishwara. It is the God Almighty.
We call it now God because now it has a limitation in the sense
that we can call it something, but if it is just an energy we just call it
a Brahma. You can say like this: when the water becomes ice, a fol-
licle of ice is formed, you can differentiate between the water and the
ice. But still, it is relative, a relative understanding. At this state, God
Almighty, Parameshwara, takes form as an identity. That is why we
laya: to dissolve or
can say that it is not Brahma, but an identity. Identity has its aura –
synthesize, to become one
you can say its light. This light is the divine love. It goes into various
forms, but Sadashiva remains as He is.
Ishwara: God Almighty,
Now the desire to create is transferred to the aura. The aura is the
the ideal being power of God, the Shakti. Ishwara has certain things beyond Him
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-6.txt 
 also and before Him. God Almighty has something beyond Him that
He cannot control. One, He cannot control His eternal nature. It is
His nature to be eternal. He cannot stop it. He will go on changing
His form.... He cannot change His eternal nature. He will be, eter-
nally. Eternity is His temperament, His nature. He cannot overcome
that.
For example, God cannot take away your freedom to choose the
truth. He cannot. Once He has granted, He is not going to take it
away. You have to choose it in all your freedom. He will not force
you to take it. Many people have hopes like that. They are sadly mis-
taken. At this juncture only lies the problem of complete destruction
or complete resurrection. It is left into the hands of human beings to
decide whether they want to accept the truth or if they want to follow
the falsehood.
THE SHIVA AND THE SHAKTI
You have been given complete freedom to choose. I won't
into
Like the meaning
go
the details about God Almighty because it is a very subtler subject
and
requires much more attention ... but He is the witness. He is the
and the word,
Sakshi, in the form of a Sakshi. What is He witnessing? He is witness-
ing the creation. And the power that creates the creation is the Shakti.
Shiva and Shakti
It is His power. It is His consort.
Now for us human beings, we do not understand that a wife and
a husband could be that one. For example, you can understand a sun
are one.
and a sunlight, a moon and a moonlight and these two things are one
and the same – or the meaning and the word. In the same way, Shiva
and Shakti are one together....
You can be a father, you can be a brother, you can be a son. Three
self
things you are doing together. In the same way, you can be
your
and your power. You know you and your self and your power are dif-
ferent, but you are one. You have a power to write, but you are not
your power. Neither your power is your self. In the same way, Shiva
and Shakti are two persons to be identified, but they are part and
parcel of one unique form. They are known as Brahma....
5
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-7.txt 
 THIS LIGHT IS THE DIVINE LOVE.
IT GOES INTO VARIOUS FORMS,
BUT SADASHIVA REMAINS AS HE IS.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Α PLAΥ ΤΟ PLEASE ΤHE ALMIGHTY
Forming into a nucleus like this, this is the remains of the nucleus,
which forms its power here into a valaya. How does it form? He
moves, supposing, backwards. Then what happens when he moves
backwards...? All of these masses form a shell around it and the
waves cross over and settle onto the shell. Now this is the situation:
when all inside forms another nucleus by concentration, this is the
Shakti. And this is the Sadashiva. This is the Mahashakti, the Adi
Shakti and this is the Sadashiva.
Once the Shakti forms Her personality, or we can say Her ego is
established. She is a different identity from Shiva because the whole
process is to create the play for the witness to see. He is the one who
is going to watch the play. She is the one who is going to create, so
He is the one who is She accumulates Her ego onto a point and becomes the Shakti. She
assumes Her position there and the first thing She does as a Shakti is
going to watch the play.
to go around in a parabola around Her Lord.
This point one must understand. She is a Shakti. She is the
power
She is the.one who is of God and the whole creation is only meant to be seen by God
Almighty. He is the only spectator of the play of the Shakti. And if
He does not like the play – for example if He does not like the
it
way
going to create.
is or the way people are who are created – He can immediately stop
the play by closing His eyes, by denying the play, by showing His
annoyance or by His stop. He can just stop it. That is why He is also
called as a destroyer. But the whole thing is meant for His amuse-
ment. And if it does not give Him pleasure, He can stop it. That is
why the first one who must be pleased is the one who is the spectator.
Because of this, Shiva is garlanded by Her. It is a parabola and that is
why the parabola is the symbol of the Adi Shakti. This is sort of a cer-
valaya: the last stage of tificate to Her, a sort of a granting to Her of the varadan, as we call
ascent, the completion it in the Sanskrit language. It is the varadan that is "go ahead with
your work." This is a sanction given to Him. When She completes
varadan: permission this parabola, the sanction has been granted and that is why She is a
to proceed parabola.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Here the question of the men dominating the women and the
women dominating the men does not come because this is predomi-
nantly in our heads. When we think of it, we think of men and women.
It is nothing of the kind. It is just complete oneness. Can we think
of one couple who are absolutely united with each other? We cannot
because we are all incomplete people. But stretch your imagination
to such a point that both of them are meant for each other only and
the one who is active, who is the Adi Shakti, is only active to please
God Almighty who is the only spectator of Her play and He is to be
pleased first. So She surrenders Herself before Him, takes the sanc-
tion through the parabola.
A PARABOLA AND A LIVING PROCESS
The parabola is a very important thing. You know that everything
travels through a parabola, never in a straight line. For example, if
you love someone, our love goes around that person and comes back
to us as love. But if you hate that person, then our hatred goes around
that person and comes back to us as a terrible hatred. So the parabola
is taken, but you might say why a parabola? The question can be
"Why should there be a parabola and not a circle?" The reason is a
parabola is the shortest distance to go around another point. It is the
shortest. And that is why it is a parabola.
It is even in our ordinary life. You will find this happening: what-
ever you do to others, it comes back to you in a sound form, whether
do good or bad. And that is why our karmic ideas and that of
you
our doing punyas are all there because whatever we emit through us,
They are as
They are as
will come back to us. In the same way, if you bless the whole world,
the blessings of the whole world will come to us. The process is not as
buman as we are.
simple as it can be drawn because it is a living process of a big dimen-
sion, but I am just trying to make it simpler for you to understand.
They are a thousand
When She goes into the motion of a parabola and Shiva sanctions
Her, it is a living process. Again you must understand it is a living pro-
times more human,
cess. It is as human as we are. Both of them are as human as we are.
We should say they are a thousand times more human than we are.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-11.txt 
 THE CREATION OF THE UNIVERSE
The wife, who is the consort, says, "I am very happy just like this. I
won’t go any further with it." Because creation is not an easy thing
won’t
for Her, She does not want to depart from Him. Creation is a child
and She says, "I would not like to have children now because I will
lose you." So She pushes Herself towards Him and He pushes Her
back and disappears, opening out from here.
Now She is in this form, so the beginning of the Aum starts. The
parabola, first of all, gets converted into the Aum. Then She pushes
Herself down and settles down for a while to meditate and to find out
how She is going to work it out....
It is Her desire which must be aroused. If Her desire is not aroused,
She will not conceive the creation. So a kalpa is spent in that. Quite a
Many universes
lot of time is spent in Her own thinking which way She should do it.
She has created many universes. It is not one universe She has created.
bave been created
She has created universes after universes and I will show you how She
has created so many universes. And some of them are still lingering
by the Adi Shakti. on, some of them are destroyed. But today, before us, this universe,
this Earth, on this Earth – India, and in India – Delhi, you are sitting
attending this place. It is like that. So at this moment, whatever is the
thing, is not the past, it is not the future, but I am telling you about
the
present moment we are here.
Many universes have been created by the Adi Shakti even before
us and She has tried many other things also. Ultimately, She has tried
this. She has created the Earth and then created us. Now how She has
done that we will see later on. Just now, let us see how She assumes
Her three powers.
THE TΓHREE POWERS
When She decides to create, She is endowed with three powers. She
has the three powers of God which are granted to Her. By one power,
first of all, is the existence, the desire to exist. She desires to exist with
God. The second power is to create.... And the third is the evolving
kalpa: an eon or age
power or sustenance power by which gradually you sustain something
of immense length and you become something. These are the three
powers She assumes.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-12.txt 
 In short, we can say that She forms the three powers of Mahakali,
Mahasaraswati and Mahalakshmi. These are the three powers She
assumes within Herself.
Now She uses again Her parabola systems. You are supposing
I have come to this house by this way. I know this way, then I take
that way. I know that way. I know the very way, everything. Now I
know this way and I know all about it. With that knowledge, I can do
something else. So She again uses Her parabolic movements – actu-
ally Her three movements of Mahakali, Mahalakshmi and Mahasara-
swati. They are all the time being one with the Adi Shakti. She can
separate them and put them into three different channels. She can
combine them and synthesize them and use it as a parabola. Do you
understand this? That is why when we put a bandhan to you, we say
put a parabola. It is a parabola because the vibrations are all in. All
the three powers are flowing in this.
So we have got three powers. By the Mahakali power, She desires.
It is the emotional side of God, you can say. She represents the
emotional side of God. She desires. The desire is that of God. God
Almighty, who is the spectator, He is the Sakshi. And She puts that
Sakshi into your heart. She reflects that into your heart which is kept
all the time burning to watch what you are doing, to see your play
after your creation.
Her Mahasaraswati power, now moves in a parabola. She can
move at any angle. Three hundred and sixty angles, She can go from
one point. Sometimes She goes around and around at a point. When
She goes around and around at a point, Her Mahasaraswati power
can get consolidated. You can say it becomes dense – that is the trou-
ble with English languaget becomes dense. It becomes so very dense
She puts the Sakshi
that it cracks out. These cracks all go into the momentum of the
movement of the Mahasaraswati Power because it is moving in an
in your heart to see
around and around fashion. They also get into the momentum of that
movement. They start moving. For example, this part starts moving,
your play after
this part starts moving, this part starts moving. And when they start
moving they become rounds. They lose their angularities and then
your creation.
they become round. I am telling you very much in short.... These
11
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-13.txt 
 ww.
Forget about other universes where other styles were also created,
but about this one we can say it was created.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-15.txt 
 rounds again are put into friction with each other and that is how we
can say – now forget about other universes where other styles were
also created – but about this one we can say it was created.
Now you must all the time remember that this power thinks,
understands, organizes, loves and it is an identity.
LIFE ON THIS EARTH
So She creates the Earth. The Earth is not created so easily. Part of
the sun is removed just like this, with the hand you can say. We must
understand why the sun became so cold. From the sun it is removed
very much far away first, to the farthest point so that it freezes com-
pletely. Also like the moon, it was taken very far away. It just freezes
completely and is then brought near the sun again like a pendulum. It
The Adi Shakti brings is moved again towards the cold side. Again it is brought to the hot
side. It is brought to a point, to the medium point where the Earth
this Earth to a point is made. It is not a chance of nature. It is made deliberately habit-
able for human beings. The temperature was brought in. It has been
done by the Adi Shakti, the Mother. She has done it deliberately. It is
where life can begin.
not easy to conceive of such a Mother, but She has done it. And She
brings this Earth to a point where life can begin.
So the combination of the moon and the combination of the sun
gives you hydrogen from the moon, oxygen from the sun, gives you
water, the freezing and heating. The freezing and heating gives you
the water. In the water, when the Earth is made, spirally, to move
upwards, again the heating and cooling starts. By heating and cool-
ing, life comes into being as amino acids.
NOT BY CHANCE
It is done deliberately. What I am saying is it is not something done
by chance. On this also one has to think once, “How is it it is not
chance...?" One of the greatest biologists has really gone into the
calculations of how much time it should take for a simple amoeba to
be created out of matter. He has calculated that it should take much
more time than even what we have had so far. Billions of billions of
years are needed just by chance.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-16.txt 
 The law of chance is there., which I do not know if I should tell
you elaborately, but the law of chance is that if you have one tube of
fifty red pebbles and of fifty white pebbles and if you start shaking
them and make them absolutely in a chaotic order, it takes so much,
so many times shaking to make it again the same, as it ought to be,
to bring it into order.
So even to create an orderly living protoplasm, a cell, would have
taken much more time than it has taken so far – much more, many
times more, billions of billions. And it has taken only five billion
years for Earth to secede from the moon and only two billion years
for it to cool down. So he says it is beyond any understanding. The
only thing that can explain it, what we can say, is that there is a jug-
gler behind it. And there is a juggler, about which our great rishis
and munis know that that juggler is nobody else but the Adi Shakti,
the Primordial Mother. The Primordial Father is Sadashiva and the
rishi: a poet-author to
Primordial Mother is Adi Shakti....
whom the Vedas were
We have to understand that it is a very, very solemn subject we are
discussing here, the sanctum sanctorium of the love of our primordial
revealed
parents. It is a very, very holy thing. We are not holy people. We are
yet full of lots of greed and lust, but they are above everything. So muni: a holy person
when we are discussing them, we have to know. We have to do it with
similar to a rishi
great shraddha and with our head bowed before them. That it is our
shraddha: faith with
luck and we are very fortunate that we have been able to learn some-
thing about these two primordial parents who have brought forth devotion
this creation, their child.
SYSTEM AND ORDER
So one of these then again cracks and becomes a Surya Mandala
a very solemn
and a Surya Mandala has got, as you know, the Earth and the moon It is
and all these things. And I have told you how the Earth is created.
subject we are
After the creation of the Earth, first, you know that amino acids were
formed, the vegetation started and then the human being started.
Now the matter also is a very systematic thing. Matter is not
discussing.
unsystematic. It is systematic, but it is not organized. There is a dif-
ference between them. The systematic things are dead, can be dead.
15
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-17.txt 
 You can put five stones here in a systematic manner, but they are not
organized because they are not living things. There is a difference
between the two.
So first, the systematic things were laid down. Perhaps, if you
know about the eight different types of elements, they were created.
These were created and were put into proper places through Shri
Ganesha.... The whole matter has been organized. To organize the
matter, some Deity was to be created for that and the first Deity that
was created was that of Shri Ganesha. Let us see now how She created.
THE CREATION OF EXISTENCE
You have seen that one part of Her, which is the Mahasaraswati, has
created the matter. Now Mahakali has to give them existence. How
In the heart of the
do you get an existence? It is through your sustenance or, you can say,
through your quality, whatever you are. So Mahakali gives that exis-
Virata is the complete
tence to those material things – not human beings or living things,
but matter – through a Deity known as Shri Ganesha..
In the heart of the Virata ... is the complete Primordial Being. The
Primordial Being.
Mahakali is settled down. What She does, She goes three and a half
from the heart – one up, one down, like that, three and a half times –
and comes to the end of the three and a half, downwards three and a
half. Now She comes to the end of it. And if you put three and a half
like that and if you cut it straight, you get seven centres cut in.
She comes down here and from here She penetrates. You see, She
cuts that seven points here. At this point, She creates the first Deity,
a little below – Shri Ganesha. I mean this is not done in one day. It is
not done in one year, not done in one yuga. It is done in many kalpas.
The first step is to create Shri Ganesha. This is Her abode and She
puts Shri Ganesha. Now He is emitting His vibrations through all
this. He passes through all this, whatever She has created.
On this picture is settled the work of the Mahasaraswati, you can
say. She comes down with all Her programs like this and She makes
yuga: an era or age of it. And She gets joined here again. So Shri Ganesha emits His vibra-
divine significance
tions through Her.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-18.txt 
 First Shri Mahakali creates Shri Ganesha and then Mahasaraswati
comes down. She creates all these things and gets connected to Shri
Ganesha. So the vibrations of Shri Ganesha start flowing through all
the creation of Mahasaraswati.
THE VISI
ON OF THE ADI SHAKTI
Before creating all this, the complete thought of what is going to
happen in the future comes in a clear-cut vision of the Adi Shakti.
And She puts Her plans through. First of all, the Mahalakshmi power
comes down and creates the Shri Ganesha. You can understand now
how important it is that we have to be holy people. First, She created
the holiness on this Earth. First thing, Her relationship with the child
was established because the creation is going to be created in the
image of a child. That is why Shri Ganesha was created first.
The other power is Mahasaraswati. On Her way, She comes down
The creation was
and gets connected with Shri Ganesha. And that is how Shri Gane-
sha establishes the relationship and emits His vibrations through this
because of His vibrations passing through the matter that She has created in the image
created – for example, our Mother Earth. Through this passes the
of a child.
axis. Nobody has seen the axis, but they say there is an axis from the
way it moves. There is a kind of an axis.
Now this is the power of Mahakali passing through the power of
Shri Ganesha, passing through the axis of the Mother Earth, which
has got a magnetic power in it. And that is how, through that, it
controls its speed and its movement. And also it looks after us. Why
don't we think that when we put a little seed in the soil it sprouts
automatically?
THE MOTHER EARTH
The Mother Earth is actually the Mother of the Adi Shakti, you can
say. She is the Mother, they say, because She is made in such a way
that She takes all the weight of the world into Herself. She controls
all the weight of the world and She can consume all your weights....
17
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-19.txt 
 The Mother Earth takes all the weight of the world into Herself.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Now, weight means everything. Your weight is what you are
weighing, but that is not the thing. Weight means also your sins,
also your punyas. It means everything. If you have too many sins in
you, then the Mother Earth is hurt. Wherever there is too much of
sin, then the Mother Earth has to ask for help. And then some other
Deity, like Vishnu Himself, has to come on this Earth to save Her
from this too much of overloading of sins on this Earth.
It is a fact. It is not that I am telling you a mythical story. It is a
fact which you have to verify after getting vibrations. Before getting
vibrations, you cannot find out from the Mother Earth. If you want
to find out after some time – if you are realized – you just stand on the
Mother Earth and ask Her, “Will
you take away my sins, O Mother
Earth? Will you take away my karmas? I've been realized." Imme-
By Her desire
diately She starts drawing in. You will be surprised. You will feel so
much lighter. You have to use Her. That is how Mother Earth has
the universe been created, but also the Adi Shakti, through Her Mahasaraswati
power, has created the five elements before everything else.
was created.
BY HER DESIRE
go too much into details, it will be too much for you, but first of
If I
all, the causal essences have been created by Her. But if I say like this,
there won't be anything false. Just by seeing ... She has created this
light. Just by Her breathing, She has created air because Her desire is
the last. Because She desired there should be air, She created air. Like
that, She has Her smell, She has created the causal gandha, which has
created this Mother Earth. And it has started from Her only, from
Her desires. By Her desiring it, it was created for Her and that is how
it was created in the whole universe, which was later on made into
the Earth, Moon, Sun and all these things. Actually, it was Her mere
gandha: fragrances
desire which brought forth these things.
For us,
it is impossible to understand someone like that, who, just
For
by mere desire, can create. But when we think of somebody who is
above all the powers of the world, the one we know is the highest of
all, She can do anything She feels like. Can't we think like that? We
cannot think of someone like that. We think of God the Almighty, as
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-22.txt 
 we call Him, but when we talk of His might, we start laughing. How
can it be?
But She can do anything She wants. It is only Her mere desire
that has brought forth all these creations and all these things that
you
see in this world, which are created only by Her desire. She created
akasha. She created all these five elements which you know. And then
She started Her other form, which we call as the Mahalakshmi form.
THE SUBTLE POWERS OF SHRI GANESHA
I think I should tell you about Shri Ganesha's existence in the matter.
He acts in the matter as vibrations, as Mahasaraswati vibrations.
They are electromagnetic vibrations. We can say electromagnetic.
And also there is sound and all these five elements are expressed in
Shri Ganesha
that. You can record them because if you take sulphur dioxide, for
example – sulphur dioxide, two oxygen and one sulphur – and if you
watch them properly under a very highly developed microscope ... acts in matter
they are vibrating. There is a vibration going between these balls.
They can be asymmetric also, they can be symmetric, they can be as vibrations.
even, uneven and they can be expanding, by closing like that.
So there are three types of vibrations we find. And the fourth
side is nothing but Shri Ganesha Himself who is controlling. So this
we can see with our naked eyes, if you want to see, whether you are
realized or not. From where do these vibrations come in the minutest
paramanu, as they call it, in the molecules? In a molecule, how do
you get these vibrations? Can you explain? It is so much sukshma,
parasukshma...
The powers of Ganesha are very, very subtle and they enter into
the matter and create this kind of vibration, which you can even see
and record, electromagnetic vibrations, even in one small, little mol-
ecule.
In the periodic laws of elements, you can find out that all the ele- akasha: the ether
ments are divided into eight types. Let's see, how can all the elements
be divided into eight parts without somebody being there? Can you paramanu: the ultimate atom
do something without organizing a proper chart of these elements?
Just think about it. You see, when we challenge God, we have to sukshma: the subtle state
21
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-23.txt 
 understand that in this world everything is so well organized. There
are eight elements spread out so well, placed so well and it has a par-
ticular style of behaviour and every element is different in numbers
and protons and these numbers are very well calculated in such a
manner that the end of it, that the last circle of all the protons should
be eight. If it is not eight, if it is less than eight, then it creates a va-
lency problem. It is so well organized that even if you study this, if
there is anybody who knows a little bit of chemistry, it is such a won-
derful thing. We take it for granted. We take it as our right to have the
matter is so well organized for us. But the valencies are all depending
on such a nice organization of these eight protons....
There is a vibrating force done through the Mahasaraswati power.
She creates. Now in the vibrating force He exists. Matter also exists.
Three identities – It must exist. If it does not exist, nothing can exist. So the existence
force is given through the Mahalakshmi force, Mahakali force, which
God Almighty,
, is acting through Shri Ganesha, who is sitting at the nucleus. Can you
imagine how much it must be – every molecule and every atom....
Take one element like gold. How many molecules has it...? You
the Adi Shakti
just cannot calculate. And then how many Ganesha pictures must be
there? How is it achieved?
and the universe.
THE INFINITE REFLECTION
There is another thing which I will tell you if I am coming this way,
how infinite reflections are caught and why there are two things like
Shiva and Adi Shakti. The reason is it has to create an infinite reflec-
tion. How will you create an infinite reflection? Do you know that,
anybody who knows physics?
If you place in the centre of two mirrors something, then the reflec-
tions are infinite. So the first mirror is the Adi Shakti and the second
mirror is this creation. And that is how you can get infinite reflections
on this Earth. This is the reason why you can get infinite reflections.
And that is why you had to create another one who reflects it. And
- one the God Almighty,
valencies: the bonds that is why there has to be three identities
or qualities found in then the Adi Shakti and then the whole universe. It had to be that
an atom or a human
way, otherwise you cannot create infinite reflections.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-24.txt 
 THE CREATION OF MAN
bodhi: enlightenment
Now somebody who has done this job must be a very clever man, no
doubt. When human beings think that they can know God through
their bodhi, they must know how can you reach this bodhi. It is
supreme.
How much labour He has taken to create us? After creating
say His power as Mahalakshmi
the matter, then He – or I should
descends on this Earth. Mahalakshmi helps in sustenance. Sustenance
means all the scanning of all these elements.
When they create the matter, the matter is differently created, cre-
ated for different purposes. Now what is the ultimate? The creation
has as its ultimate aim to create human beings – this creation, just
imagine.
You people are so great that for you all these troubles have been
taken. Such an important thing is a human being that all these trou-
bles are taken. All matter, all, everything is used just to create you.
This is the ultimate aim. A sort of a stage has to be laid down and
you, the Sahaja Yogis, come on the scene, you can say. Just the instru-
ment of man is to be created.
Now why has God wanted to create an instrument of man?
Because He wanted to create an instrument which could feel Him,
which could understand Him... He just wanted to play through our
instruments His power. But He did not want to do it through the
dead instruments, but through the living instruments.
The creation has as
Supposing, if this [microphone] can understand, can love, has a
human mind and, if My voice is passing through it like a hollow
per-
sonality, then we can say that this is a realized personality. But this its ultimate aim to
is not a living being. You are a living being. You are made specially
with all these difficulties for Me and you have been worked out so create human beings.
carefully, so delicately, one after another.
25
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-25.txt 
 A stage has to be laid down and you come come on the scene.
36
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-27.txt 
 EVOLUTI
ON AND THE VIRATA
Now we have to come to the most important part which is evolution,
which we should understand because we know evolution through
science.
When these three forces came into being, before creating any
Earth or before creating this universe or anything, first they had to
draw out a proper picture about it and a proper understanding of it.
Before doing anything, we have to plan out things. We have a plan-
ning commission first of all. We sit down in a planning commission.
In the same way, first they had to form a stage where they just plan
out the things. This stage we can call it as the vaikuntha state....
At this stage they created all the incarnations. Incarnations were
not created after the Earth had been created, which is a very wrong
idea. They created all the incarnations at the vaikuntha state, where
your own eye never existed at that time. This Earth never existed and
naked
nothing existed that you see with
eyes now. But a state of
your
existence, the first one, known as the vaikuntha state, existed. In that
vaikuntha: the heavenly vaikuntha state, the planning of the whole universe and the whole
or divine realm
cosmos and all that was decided.
So the first person who had to come on this was Shiva because
without Him nothing can exist. But where to settle Him down because
He is to be reflected onto someone? If Shiva has to be reflected onto
someone, you have to create a reflector.
So they had to first think of the one Primordial Being or one huge
identity, you can call it, known as the Virat. They created the Virat.
This will be the Virata. This will be the complete form of the Primor-
dial Being. This is the one I am telling you about, this reflector, the
first one. The God Almighty has to be reflected, so first, let us create
The planning of
the Primordial Being, the Virat.
In the Virat they created different incarnations. Incarnations are
the whole universe,
not created from human beings. I do not know why people think like
that. They cannot be created by human beings. But they were first
the whole cosmos
created. You see, evolution is all right from amoeba to human beings,
but there is no evolution for incarnations. They are made like that
was decided.
from the very beginning.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-28.txt 
 INCARNATIONS AT EACH CHAKRA
you have seen in the Virata – I have shown you the picture of Virat
As
– the three powers of Mahakali, Mahalakshmi and Mahasaraswati
met at the Agnya Chakra. And there they produced two children
each – it is not a story, it is a fact again – as brothers and sisters.
And these brothers and sisters mean the relationship is of a tempo-
rary nature, but of a subtler temperament. And then they were mar-
ried. Inter-communication took place. Mahalakshmi, Mahasaraswati
and Mahakali created all together six children, who were married.
Inter-marriage took place. By that inter-marriage, they got an entity
We are
which is a kinetic ... personality and a potential energy within it
such a combination. And they placed those incarnations on different
the reflection
chakras. They brought from these, from the top, all of them were
brought from the Agnya downwards and placed onto all the chakras.
of the reflector.
These incarnations, as you know, are placed on different chakras of
the Virata.
Many people won't understand this and won’t like to hear this also
because human beings are so egoistical that they cannot understand
that there is a God who is almighty, who is going to do everything. He
has His own ways of doing it.... All these Incarnations were placed
in the Virata state to create the reflection on the other side. Shiva was
removed from the Shakti, as it was removed in the beginning. And it
was placed on top of the Virata's head as a Sadashiva peetha. In the
same way, we too have a Sadashiva peetha on our head. You see, we
are the reflection of the reflector. So we too have the same style....
But when the Kundalini enters into the being, when He is in the
womb of the mother, at that time this ... Sadashiva, from this peetha,
descends into the heart. And that is how you hear the first throb in
the heart. It is just the same as it happened in the Virata. But at the
vaikuntha state this was not created. The second reflector here was
not created, only the first one. So only the Virata was created and in
His being, in the planning stage, first of all, these officers in charge of peetha: seat
these chakras were created by the Adi Shakti.
God is the witness and She is doing the play and She creates those
chakras. In the chakras She places all these Deities to govern.
27
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-29.txt 
 THE BHAVASAGARA
Now there is the existence. There is the creation, creative force and
there is the evolutionary force – all inside the Virata state. This is at
the vaikuntha state, we say, because this state is on the first reflection.
It is not in us or we cannot feel it, the vaikuntha state, because it is
in the first.
Then another state was created. Then the third was created. Then
the fourth one is the Bhavasagara. It is the state at which all of us
were born....
Can you think of a four strata personality which is facing a mirror?
Now which is the first one which shows? It is the topmost. And that
is why the topmost shows. It is the Bhavasagara. But if you can go
deep down into your state, you can feel all the other three. But first of
Down deep, you can
all, the one which you can see and feel, it is the Bhavasagara.
So
you
are born in the Bhavasagara. At this state you are at the Bhavasagara
feel the other states. state. At this Bhavasagara state, now you are created and you have
to evolve.
EVOLUTION
At this time, the Mahalakshmi power acts to evolve you. You already
know how evolutionary things have taken place, but I will tell
you
how evolution has taken place according to our puranas and which
is a fact.
The evolution of man started, first, from the amoeba, you can
First the
puranas: the holy texts say, because the life came into being in water, as I told
you.
and stories of the Divine water was created. In the water amino acids were formed, amoebae
were formed, fish were formed. And fish, when they were formed, the
Matsya Avatar: the first smaller fishes found it difficult to exist because the bigger fish were
incarnation of Vishna trying to eat them. It comes as a reciprocal. They were absolutely
in the form of a fish fed up with this destruction that was going on. At this time, Shri
Vishnu Himself, the one who is the evolutionary force, descended on
Bhavasagara: this Earth as the Matsya Avatar. He helped some of the fish to cross
the ocean of illusion, across the shores.... They had that courage. She was the leader. And
the state in which we then others started crossing across. This was the first evolutionary
all are born stage which we know.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-30.txt 
 These fish became reptiles later on, as you know. In the evolu-
tionary stages, they became reptiles. But how did they become rep-
tiles? There must be someone who must have given them the lead.
It was again Shri Vishnu, who came on this Earth as a Kurma and
lots of things were done at this time in the vaikuntha stage before He
came on this Earth as a Kurma Avatara at the vaikuntha stage. When
they created this Earth, they planned this whole Virata and wanted
to create on this side of the reflector – the whole planning and the
whole thinking and all that process got formed – some sort of a waste
matter. It brought forth the waste matter.
This waste matter got contaminated or, we can say, got stagnated
on one side which was neglected somehow. And through it started
coming out some satanic forces and there was a big fight between the
satanic forces and the good forces. It actually happened in the third
stage, not at the vaikuntha stage, but at the third stage. Because when
the planning started, the working out started, these satanic forces
started.
Now people may say, “Why has God created satanic forces?" He
did not, but eventually they turned out to be. Because at this second
stage, when some of the devas who were created – again, they were
not evolved people – they were created, they were in charge of all
these elements and all the working. You have to also create officers
or people who have to go in the field and work it out. All these devas
and devatas, out of their working, what happened? They got lost, Kurma: the second incarnation of
some of them, and became satanic forces. A sort of a waste product Vishnu in the form of a tortoise
came in. And with that waste product, satanic forces started and they
acted in such a way that there was a war during the Kurma Avatara Amruta Manvantara:
between the rakshasas and the Asuras, as they call it. So the good the eternal age of Manu,
people who were in charge of the elements, all working in the office the first man
of God, started fighting with the satanic forces.
At that time, He Himself worked this out and
know what
you
happened in the Amruta Manvantara, which took place. People do
not understand how can the Amruta Manvanatara take place in the
Bhavasagara. It did not. It took place at a stage which is not Bhav-
asagara. At the Bhavasagara it did not take place.
29
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-31.txt 
 You should ask
us.
for more and more and more.
And it will be granted because
you are created for this purpose.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-33.txt 
 BEYOND THE BHAVASAGARA
Now we are at the Bhavasagara state. At the Bhavasagara state the
same Kurma, the same one took birth and came on this Earth and
gave us an understanding how to become a proper reptile.... Ulti-
mately, a human being was created. All this is done by the Mahalak-
which has acted through Vishnu, which I have told
shmi
power,
you
how evolution has taken place, how you are made.
Now what is going to happen? You reach this point. Up to this
point until Christ came in – Christ was also an incarnation and His
Mother was nobody else but Radhaji Herself, the Mahalakshmi
and they brought forth up to this stage the human beings.
After this, now what does man have to become? It is to enter into
a state where he becomes Nirvichara. That means there is no more
You dive into a the consciousness of the Bhavasagara, but you go a little beyond it.
From this stage you dive into a state of universal unconscious, as
they call it. It is nothing but the same power which exists here, which
state of universal
is a synthesis of all the three powers. It is a synthesis of all the three
unconscious. powers. That is the Adi Shakti's power.
The Adi Shakti's power is all-pervading. It exists everywhere, but
we never feel it otherwise because we are very grossly placed. We
can say that it is a tube, which has got four layers, out of which it
can only use the outer tube because the inner tubes are all closed.
When the innermost tube is opened out, you become absolutely self-
realized, but when even the second tube is opened out, you can feel
the all-pervading force of God Almighty.... But it is no more achitta
for
you because you are conscious of it.
YOUR DIALOGUE WITH GOD
That is how you start your dialogue with God. What happens is that
... from here you ascend ... and this area is filled with the all-pervad-
ing power of the Adi Shakti. Until you reach to this stage, you have
to go up to this stage of an incarnation, which, of course, is a big gap.
But I can say that Mahavira and Buddha, both of them rose to that
achitta: without attention height....
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-34.txt 
 As I told you, it is a very, very difficult subject and I have tried to
In
many ages,
handle it in English....
In many ages, I have been living now for thousands of years and
I have been
I have been working it out on so many human beings and so many
things and, at long last, I have been able to find out most of the per-
mutations and combinations of most of the human beings and that is living now for
how it has been worked out in such a large mass scale. It would not
thousands of years.
have been possible if I had not worked it out in that way....
It is already very late for all of you and such a difficult subject to
be brought to you in such a short time. It is very difficult....
Try not to bother too much about this thing. This is not so impor-
tant as your own Realization and your own ascent.
The whole knowledge will be dawned upon you. You do not have
to bother. Every word now you read, you will have a meaning about
it and you will understand.
The first thing is that you must get your Realization.
The second thing is you must ascend. You must ascend much
more and give more time to this. Do not take it for granted. It is a
very important thing which you should do. After all, there are other
things. They are important, but this is the most important thing
THE DIVINE
which has to be done.
COOL BREEZE
By God's grace, if it works out, I will be very happy. As it is, I am
www.divinecoolbreeze.org
extremely happy because in none of My lives have I been able to give
SUBSCRIPTIONS:
contact@divinecoolbreeze.org
Realization to so many people. So as it is, I am over-satisfied with
CONTENT:
Myself.
editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
PRINTED BY
But as far as you are concerned, you should not be satisfied. You
King Printing Company Inc.
Lowell Massachusetts USA and
should ask for more and more and more. And it will be granted
Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd.
because you are the people who are on the stage. You are created for
Pune Maharashtra India
this purpose.
WORDS
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
20 February 1977 Delhi
One has to do it. God has to do it. If He does not do it, He cannot
fulfill His own desires.
PHOTOS
And His Creation, He is not going to destroy.
all nature photos: Micea Albutiu
May God bless you.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-35.txt 
 The whole knowledge will be dawned upon you.
