1994.m Aahaja Yog The Divine Cool Breeze in year 2012 issue 2 – volume twenty-five number two

 BANGALORE IT BEGINS IN INDIA. IT ENDS IN INDIA. ONE YEAR. A VISION OF BEAUTY. CHENAI HYDERABAD PUNE GOA BOMBAY DELHI CALCUTTA PERTH MELBOURNE SYDNEY AUCKLAND BRISBANE TOKYO TAIPEI HONG KONG KUALA LUMPUR BANGKOK CABELLA LIGURE LONDON VIENNA GHENT GENEVA BASEL PARIS COLOGNE HAMBURG BERLIN VIENNA AMSTERDAM WARSAW PRAGUE BUCHAREST MOSCOW SAINT PETERSBURG TOGLIATTI CHICAGO TORONTO VANCOUVER LOS ANGELES NEW YORK BARCELONA RIO DE JANEIRO SAO PAULO BRASILIA BUENOS AIRES BOGOTA ISTANBUL TUNIS ATHENS FARIDABAD NOIDA GHAZIABAD CHANDIGARH YAMUNANAGAR VISION OF BEAUTY DEHRADUN JAIPUR GANAPATIPULE If you want the vision of beauty, you should not mind the size of the train. KALWE

 Every year we have birthdays.. Every year we make a vow that this year Уear I will not do this or I will not do that. This is a very good way of seeing how far we have come in life. Many people who really have achieved a very great height in their spiritual life did not need a birthday, but every day they felt it is a birthday to start, to go ahead, to understand, to learn. Every day is a new year for them. VISION OF NOW REMEMBER THAT WE ARE ONE, PART AND PARCEL OF ONE BEING

 48

 15 JANUARY BANGALORE PUBLIC PROGRAM 17 JANUARY CHENNAI TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS 18 JANUARY CHENNAI PUBLIC PROGRAM 21 JANUARY HYDERABAD PUJA 27 JANUARY PUNE PUBLIC PROGRAM 28 JANUARY PUNE MUSIC PROGRAM 16 FEBRUARY GOA TALK TO BUSINESS EXECUTIVES 22 FEBRUARY HYDERABAD SHRI RAJARAJESHWARI PUJA 22 FEBRUARY HYDERABAD PUBLIC PROGRAM 23 24 FEBRUARY BOMBAY 14 MARCH DELHI INDIA SHRI SADASHIVA PUJA There are lots of things which we have to learn. When we worship Shiva, we praise Him. "You extend the light are this. You are that. You are that." When you worship Me, also you praise Me. "You are this' the thousand names of Shiva, thousand names of the Goddess, thousand names of Vishnu. •.. These are their names you are worshipping. What about you people? How many names can you have? Actually in the puja, when you take the names of these Shaktis, they also get awakened within, no doubt. After the puja you do feel that way, but you do not utilize them. So many people I have seen have come in the puja and they have got that power within themselves, the same powers. But by the time they are out it's finished. It is gone. So surren- dering has another side – assumption, assumption that "I am a Sahaja Yogi and I can absorb all these powers within myself." So one side is surrendering. Why to surrender? To absorb - automatically when you are surrendered, you absorb. But once you have absorbed, then you should retain and assume within yourself, know that you have these powers... Surren- dering is important to reach the state of your spirit, of Shiva and Sadashiva. But the second state is that you have to now think of others. First it is, as they say in Sanskrit, vyashti. That means individual gain. You get the individual gain and then it becomes samashti. That means the collective. You have to work it out on the collective.. It is important that you should now extend this light to others. I am a Sahaja Yogi and I can absorb all these powers within myself.

 A Tour of South India each a quarter of a mile long, of people doing namaskar along both sides of the road as Shri Mataji left by car. Late the next evening, on the courtyard of the lawns of Pratishthan, Shri Mataji's home in Pune, there was a PUNE - The city of Pune wore a festive look on January 27th as our beloved Mother Shri Mataji was scheduled to address a public program in the evening on the grounds of the New English High School on Tilak Road. Shri Mataji's beaming face flashed at every bus on banners across the roads and flags hoisted atop lamp posts. Thousands of people sat, impatiently awaiting Her arrival. The Yuva Shakti of Pune with orange turbans were the outriders on motorcycles in front of our Holy Mother as She travelled by car to the program of qawwali music composed by the Sufi Qawals of Hyderabad. A small compact gathering listened to the praises extolling our beloved Mother. stop, Shri Mataji was very pleased with the growth of Sahaja Yoga in Bangalore. About fifteen hundred people attended the public program which had BANGALORE - program. Shri Mataji held the audience spellbound by Her presence and spoke for over an hour. It was a great experience to see all the hands raised to show the en masse awakening of all the Kundalinis. There were twenty-five thousand people attending the program and Shri Mataji said that on that night one hundred thousand people in Pune got their Realization. It took two hours for Shri Mataji to leave the program site because of the huge crowds. There were two lines, beautiful vibrations. In Madras, Shri Mataji explained that when Madras works out all of India will work out. The program attracted at least twenty-five hundred people, crammed into the hall and foyer. At the Hyderabad public program there was in the region of ten to twelve thousand people. Shri Mataji said, “All of Hyderabad is here." CC

 20 MARCH CALCUTTA DANCE PROGRAM 21 MARCH CALCUTTA INDIA BIRTHDAY PUJA In our own life, we see that our surroundings change very slowly. Sometimes it is shocking. a lush Sometimes you are surprised how the surroundings are not changing. But in a subtle way, there is a tremendous change that is happening within us and without. The whole atmo- garden sphere today is governed by human beings. I do not know how far Paramachaitanya works it out, but it is for us to open ourselves to new dimensions in our lives.. On the tree of Sahaj Yoga very few – very, very few – leaves fall off and you sometimes face a lush garden of beautiful people. To Me, it is like miraculous fireworks. It starts like a small line and then opens up into several beautiful patterns. It is impossible to envisage or to visualize what will happen to us, to Sahaj Yoga and to all of you. I have never learned to imagine things, really remarkable. It is very remarkable thatI see all Sahaja but the vision that you see is Yogis drenched in divine love and expressing themselves in a very beautiful and very deep manner. This, when it comes in, really makes your attention absolutely enwrapped in such divine bliss that you forget that moment. One of those moments is when you celebrate My birthday.. This reality of the vision is something beyond even My thinking and imagination. I cannot, even now sometimes, believe that there are so many Sahaja Yogis who have got this subtle knowledge. I never knew that there are so many seekers to begin with. I never knew that there are such subtle people on this Earth.. Today My feelings are really full of joy – full of joy because now I can see how things are happening, how one person can produce thou- sands and thousands of Sahaja Yogis. You are all capable and you all can do it, but what is needed is faith in yourself and also complete sincerity about Sahaja Yoga. If that happens today, you have really celebrated My birthday. If you think that My birthday is important, for Me very important is that everybody gets their spiritual birthday. 21 MARCH CALCUTTA BIRTHDAY FELICITATIONS 22 MARCH CALCUTTA TELEVISION INTERVIEW DELHI - For many years, the Sahaja Yoga leader in Delhi had been trying to have Shri Mataji on Doordarshan, the Indian public television network. In a rare offer, a TV crew met Shri Mataji at the Delhi Sahaja Yoga temple. The director told Her that the whole country wanted to know what She had to say. She could speak without censorship or conditions for as as She liked. They filmed for more than two and a half hours. Three topics were discussed: Sahaja Yoga, what it can do for individual person and what Sahaja Yoga can achieve at an international level with the integration of dharma. From these tapes, a series of weekly half programs were televized nationally, with Self Realization given in the final episode. Almost the entire television production team have become Sahaja Yogis. long any

 Nothing to Worry, Nothing to Bother CALCUTTA - On the day after Her seventy-first birthday, Shri Mataji spoke of Rabindranath Tagore, collectivity and the Sahaja Yogis of Bengal. She said: This was a song composed by Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore so many years back when He had a vision of our Ganapatipule seminars, where He describes that people from all the world will come. From different countries, they will come. Also the Hindus, the Muslims, Christians, Sikhs and all kinds of communities will get their awakening on the bank of the sea. "Sagar" is the sea. So beautifully every detail he has described. He was a seer and he could see the future where many people who are seekers will become mahamanav. They will come. Of course, so many things have been said about Me. It is quite embarrassing. I do not know what I do. I do not think I do anything. It is all working out. It is all the grace of this all-pervading power which is working out everything so well.. As Sahaja Yogis, when you are awakened in knowledge and you know what knowledge is, then you have to really understand that we are all on the same path of spirituality. CC There is no difference at all. The collectivity of the Bengali people and Marwaris and all types of people who are here from every part of our country, is so remarkable. There is no quarrelling, no discussion, no argument. It is done so beautifully. It is unbelievable how they have worked it out. So we have to remember that we are one, part and And it is very surprising how these seers have seen the future – like, as you know, C.S. Lewis is there and also we have got William Blake, so many others. And I feel today in Bengal, when I have come here in Calcutta, that his dreams are fulfilled. His spirit would be so happy to know. parcel of one being. And once we really realize that, we will enjoy each other's company very much. All Sahaja So as you know, we get all kinds of people, all races, all religions together in Ganapatipule, where the bliss of God, where you feel that there is an awakening. Also He says that the great Mother has now risen and She is awakened and She is going to awaken you. So clearly, he has seen the whole thing. It is remarkable how these all enjoy Yogis enjoy each other's company. And also, all of you you from the whole world who have come here have seen how marvelously they have organized everything. I am thankful to you for coming here to celebrate My birthday.... This birthday was really remarkable for all its organization and the way it was worked out so smoothly. I wish we all learn from this.... In the kingdom of God, there is nothing to worry, nothing to bother about future or past, but to enjoy the present. And that is what they are doing and you were doing too. I enjoyed the rapport that existed between you. seers can see things and reveal to our amazement.... It is remarkable how in the collectivity the thought works in a very different manner, that we all want to say the same thing. For everyone that is the truth and you all feel so joyous about it and so happy about it. It is something, a kind of a rapport between one realized soul and another realized soul. Only a realized soul can understand the bliss and the joy of this expression. Thank you very much. May God bless you. Make haste and come to Mother's coronation. The vessel auspicious is yet to be filled With the sacred water sanctified by the touch of all By the shore of the sea of Bharata's Great Humanity! Rabindranath Tagore

 22 MARCH CALCUTTA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS 26 MARCH PERTH AUSTRALIA PUBLIC PROGRAM Whatever I am going to tell you today, you need not accept it blindfolded. We have had | boW enough of trouble with blind faiths, but you must keep your mind open like a scientist. And if it proves to be all right, if it proves what I am saying, as honest people you must accept it TO You because it is for the benevolence of your being, for the benevolence of your city, of your | to country, of the whole world.. It is very good. Imagine. Perth, I bow to you all. Really -I bow to you. You have received your And now the only thing is you have to grow. connection, no doubt. I am getting cool breeze from you. 28 29 MARCH MELBOURNE TALKS TO SAHAJA YOGIS 30 MARCH MELBOURNE AUSTRALIA PUBLIC PROGRAM The truth is that there is the all-pervading power of divine love which does all the living who work. Now you see beautiful flowers all over. Since I have come to Australia, I have been seeing all kinds of flowers, beautiful flowers. Who does this miracle? They are different, of does it? a different shape, different colour. Who does that? Who runs our heart? We never ask this question to ourselves. We take all living work for granted. We never bother to find out who does that. 31 MARCH MELBOURNE TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS MELBOURNE - A picnic was held in a beautiful nature reserve. When Shri Mataji arrived to join us, She sat amongst us, the sunlight shining in Her hair and illuminating Her face. She called us closer and, like small children, we rushed forward to sit at Her Feet. She began to talk to us and we felt She had the keys to our souls, which She opened and filled with the wisdom of the Divine. Shri Mataji began by saying that nature and spirituality go together very well, that one encourages the other. She asked us to see what a unique time we have been born into and what special people we must be to be in Sahaja Yoga. We must have been special people and have done something great, otherwise we would not be here. We did not come here to gain materially. We came for our ascent, so now is the time to make the best of it. After the talk, Shri Mataji went into a deep meditation. For a moment, it seemed as if the power of Mahamaya was reduced and we looked upon and felt the presence of the Adi Shakti. 1 APRIL MELBOURNE TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS 2 APRIL SYDNEY AUSTRALIA MUSIC PROGRAM I would like to know more about what you think of doing Sahaja Yoga, how you would like to how to go, how you would like to proceed, what is the best way of doing it. I never get a chance to talk to Sahaja Yogis in this way. When it is a puja time, it is so auspicious that you do not want proceed say anything that will make people a little unhappy. So I have a feeling of a mother who loves her children very much and who wants her children to enjoy life fully in the kingdom of God. 8.

 Flowing Through Us Strongly an entertainment evening, she found the vibrations were very much Then she knew where Shri Mataji really was. The public program in Perth was a great success with more than six hundred people attending. A real warmth and acceptance could be felt from the audience. When Shri Mataji began, the seekers were both receptive and respectful. Many had felt the cool breeze during the preceding bhajans. The next day, one gentleman was waiting on the ashram doorstep. He could not wait for the advertised follow-up meetings. He wanted to get started. Another man rang and said he smelled the perfume of the flowers around Shri Mataji as She had worked on him. He woke the next morning and immediately got up PERTH - Shri Mataji arrived in the early hours of Friday the 25th of March from India and the recent celebrations stronger. of the great day of Her birth. The plane arrived at about one in the morning with about one hundred yogis from Perth and the east coast, as well as some from southeast Asia, there to greet Her. She made Her way from the airport to the Sahaj property at Gidgegannup. The Perth collective has purchased an aircraft hangar and is converting it into an ashram and multi-purpose centre. The yogis have also constructed a house for Shri Mataji by the edge of the lake. The house appears like a small castle, reflected in the calm waters. Shri Mataji was full of praise for the project and suggested property and huge ashram could serve as an artists’ colony. Painters, writers, poets, anyone involved with the arts could find inspiration in such a setting. Although we did not have Shri Mataji with us in person very long, She was flowing through us strongly. When a Sahaja Yogini was waiting outside the place where Shri Mataji was resting, she enjoyed the vibrations. But when she later walked up the hill to where we were enjoying the to try to be in meditation. When he put his attention on Shri Mataji and tried to remember what She had shown him, the perfume of the flowers filled the room. for He called his wife, who had not attended the and she smelled it too. program,

 3 APRIL SYDNEY AUSTRALIA EASTER PUJA I am happy to know so many of you have come here and I feel this is a very important puja, a simple path not only for Australia but for the whole world because it has the greatest message, which we have actualized now in Sahaja Yoga. We have to understand the message of Christ. We are now newly-born chicks and we have to now follow a new path. It is a very simple path, but still we are conditioned, so we are afraid maybe or we have an ego, whatever it is. So drop out all these things. Just humble down and just start walking on this path of Sahaj and one day Australia should be able to cover the whole world. I cannot see why not. After all, you are the Muladhara and the Muladhara must play its own role as the wisest people. Wisdom is the power that you get from Shri Ganesh, so you have to be wise, absolutely wise and know that you have been seekers. You did not get it because I asked you or we paid you or anything, but you were seekers struggling to know the truth and that is how you got it. And once you have got it, you should establish it fully in your life and also in the lives of others. Let others also feel "this gentleman is very unique" or "this lady is very unique, she is very different, she is not selfish, she is not cunning, she does not manipulate, but somehow, by her character, by her nature, she is trying to create light for us and enlighten our path, enlighten the path of others." Shri Mataji's car arrived and She alighted, making Her way across the field of green grass. The sunlight heightened Her countenance divine. Her every step seemed like a petal falling to the ground. We sat on the grass beside Her, treasuring every word. 5 APRIL SYDNEY AUSTRALIA PICNIC LANE COVE RIVER PARK This picnicking has helped you to make your collectivity better. That is how they started Sanaja having picnics and in the picnics they develop the collectivity, which is very beautiful to be sahaja one with the nature. See the bounty of the nature and the variety that they have. It is an yoga first innate feeling inside always that you should be one with the nature, that you should enjoy the nature.. You may be a family man, you might be a father, mother, anything, but the first and foremost thing is you are a Sahaja Yogi. I will tell you about Myself also. You know I have a family. I have My husband and all that. And whenever it was needed, I always said, "Sahaja Yoga first." Even money-wise, I would say that if you have to spend any money, then spend on Sahaj Yoga. So the first thing was Sahaja Yoga. All these are secondary: all your art, all | your business, all your music or whatever line of life you take is a second. The first and fore- most thing is Sahaja Yoga and you get in that everything. But you should do it very sincerely, respectfully.. You have to be fully into it, so either you are in the sea or you are outside. It is like that. And this will give you the greatest pleasure, the greatest fulfillment of life. I can see that is happening now.. I bless you that you all should really become great Sahaja Yogis – very, very great Sahaja Yogis. And you will be all known all over the world. 6 APRIL SYDNEY PUBLIC PROGRAM 10

 ONE WORLD ONE SHRI MATAJI'S TRAVELS IN 1994 O January to March o December SYDNEY - The public program was held on April 6th in the Sydney Town Hall where 2300 people had gathered. Shri Mataji entered, walking up the central aisle, the audience standing in silent acknowledgement. Shri Mataji was welcomed by the Deputy Lord Mayor of Sydney. He spoke of Shri Mataji's life, Her tireless work for the seekers of the world and Her message Shri Mataji then spoke and gave Realization to the assembled seekers. Nearly all two thousand new people raised their hands to confirm that they had felt the divine cool breeze. The musicians played a few bhajans. Shri Mataji clapped to the rhythm of the music, asking us all to clap with Her. She said that listening to this music would help to establish our Realization. of spirituality. He spoke of Buddhism and how one seeks a connection with nature and that Sahaja Yoga offers this connection. He said that meditation had come from the Shri Mataji then left the stage and walked down the central aisle leading out of the hall. The crowd again rose to their feet and watched as She left. As She reached the doorway, She paused, turned to the crowd and raised Her arm as She looked around at all the newly-realized souls. west. Then he corrected himself and said that it comes from the East. Then he corrected himself again and said, "No, it has all come from the Mother."

 7 APRIL SYDNEY AUSTRALIA FAREWELL It is your faith. Faith is not blind in Sahaja Yoga. You know for definite what Sahaja Yoga is. faith You have seen miraculous photographs. You have seen all the miracles happening. So now faith should be completely, entirely in it. And it will work out. I promise you. If your IS NOT faith is deep enough to reach Me, you do not have to see My face, even not to have My your CO photograph, nothing. Wherever you are, you will find Me. That is why I always say develop blind your faith. Develop your faith. 8 APRIL CANBERRA PUBLIC PROGRAM 9 APRIL AUCKLAND TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS AUCKLAND NEW ZEALAND MAHAMAYA PUJA You start telling Me that there is a miracle that has happened. Nothing is a miracle because of it dll Ol Tl if you are all in My body and if My body is divine, then what is a miracle? It is all the com- munication. As this hand can communicate with this hand, I communicate with you... If you is there IS are with Me, if you are in Sahaja Yoga, you are protected, you are looked after. But you any problem, it gets solved... Just enjoy that you are in that maya and you are enjoying it. It is the best way to enjoy this Mahamaya. And today, for the first time, we have this puja of Mahamaya. Because of Gudi have to stick on, you have to have faith and, even if there is Padwa, I thought something unique must be done which encompasses everything of Sahaja Yoga – everything of Sahaja Yoga. It is not one incarnation, it is not one nadi, it is not one Goddess, but all of it is there. It is sometimes, I say, like a film is audio, visual, everything is there - drama, music, also acting. Everything is there in a film now. I mean that far, everything integrated. In the same way, I think Mahamaya has everything in it, every part that you tell Me, everything that you enjoy, everything that you discover. Everything is in that vision of Mahamaya, which has been created for you. 11 APRIL AUCKLAND PUBLIC PROGRAM BRISBANE AUSTRALIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS You must have purity. Especially love, when it is pure, it is so joy-giving. So now, you can open open Open your heart. May God bless you. Everywhere I have seen people say there is a tree here or some sort of a plant is there which is not being watered. And some people will immediately your Your go and water it, but more than that is the nourishment of others. It is your love which does good, which, if you don't do, then you are a miserable creature, absolutely good for noth- heart ing. As Sahaja Yogis, you have to be extremely lovable and filled with pure love – filled. 15 APRIL BRISBANE PUBLIC PROGRAM 12

 Of Flowers, Laughter, Vibrations On April 9th, Sahaja Yogis from New Zealand, as well as Australia and South Africa, welcomed Shri Mataji after Her flight from Sydney. It was a time of flowers and laughter and vibrations. Through a gentle, cleansing rain, Shri Mataji travelled to the ashram, where She stayed for the four days of the great visit. During Her stay, Shri Mataji spoke on many topics, but often Her comments returned to three particular areas: the arts, BRISBANE - The public program was a great success. As with all the programs on the tour, the hall was packed to overflowing. Each city attracted their largest crowds AUCKLAND - ever. When Shri Mataji left Brisbane, She walked to the airport departure gate, followed by a large number of Sahaja Yogis bidding Her farewell. Before leaving, She turned to us, did namaskar. "Remember, always meditate," She said. agriculture and the power of vibrations. Russian Academy Lauds Shri Mataji Shri Mataji was honoured by membership in the Saint Petersburg Academy of Arts and Sciences (now known as the Russian Academy of Science), a network of scientific research institutes from across the Russian Federation. The Academy was founded in the 18th century by Czar Peter the Great. This letter of recommendation was read aloud to Shri Mataji and the Sahaja Yogis in Sydney on April 5th. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi was born in 1923 on the 21st of March in Chhindwara, in the central part of India, in a noble Christian family. Having revealed her extraordinary abilities already in childhood, later she got a higher medical education and took an active part in the struggle for the national independence of India. In 1947, She married Mr. Srivastava and now they have two daughters... Mrs. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi and Mr. C.P. Srivastava, Mrs. Nirmala Srivastava, Doctor of Philosophy and Medicine, a distinguished authority on the fields of religion, philosophy and science, by her noble activity, does very much to promote the happiness and friendship of the Indian and Russian peoples (and all the nations of the world); she was always regarding our land as a centre of world spirituality and morality, centre of rapprochement for the peoples of the West and the Orient, centre of the revival of sublime ideals, which have been put forward by Russians and many other nations of Russia. Being the founder of the elevated teaching of Sahaja Yoga, Mrs. Nirmala Devi Srivastava absolutely, reliably connects the physical and psychic health of a man with the mode of his life and morality. considering the Russian people to be spiritual and pure, see in our Motherland the centre of the spiritual revival of the world. Being absolutely sincere, from the bottom of my heart, I recommend to the Presidium of Peter's Academy of Arts and Sciences to elect Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi to be an Honourary Member of our Academy. Y.A. Vornov, Vice-President Peter's Academy of Arts and Sciences This was approved and supported by the Academy. Only twelve people have received this honour. Albert Einstein was one of them. Everything is in that vision of Mahamaya, which has been created for you.

 18 APRIL TOKYO PUBLIC PROGRAM 19 APRIL TAIPEI TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS 20 APRIL TAIPEI PUBLIC PROGRAM 21 APRIL TAIPEI TAIWAN TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS The people who were there were quite a serious type. I felt they were listening to Me with oir was at first very hot. Later on it subsided and it became great concentration. And it very cool when they got their Realization. I could feel their coolness even sitting down there. in the That shows that these people have problems because of their fast life they have here, the speedy life they have. And they have a kind of a stress and strain. And they have taken to this centre modern life, modern culture, which is not suitable for Chinese or Indians. It is not suitable for anyone whatsoever. So in the Sahaj culture, we take it in a very balanced way. I find on the whole, Chinese are the same culture as Indians. So you see, it is easier for Chinese to take to Sahaj culture and the Sahaj attitude of witnessing everything, keeping in the centre. 22 APRIL H ONG KONG PUBLIC PROGRAM 24 APRIL TAIPEI TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS 26 APRIL KUALA LUMPUR MALAYSIA PUBLIC PROGRAM | am seventy-one years of age. I will be seventy-two now. And I am travelling practically every third day. How do I manage? Because I never think I travel. I never think I travel. I be that have to be honest about am just enjoying every part of it... I am here to tell you you honest yourself, that's all, and it will all work out.. The only thing about Sahaja Yoga is that it is not an individual growth. You cannot grow in your house. You have to come to the collective. Out You have to be in the collective. Like if My one nail is cut out, it won't grow. Whatever is the about place, whatever is the area where you have to go, you have to go there, all of you. And you yourself have to grow. It would be something like sprouting the seed, but the seed has to grow and it should not be that a sprouted seed is wasted. You must have respect for yourself, for Self Realization, for yourself – and you must grow into it. Then you will understand whatever reli- gion you are following. Then you will understand the greatness of all these prophets, gurus, satgurus and the incarnations. Without that, you cannot understand the unity that exists within them.. To understand all these great people who have created beautiful religions for us, we have to use Sahaja Yoga. 'sn 27 APRIL BANGKOK PUBLIC PROGRAM 28 APRIL BANGKOK MEDIA INTERVIEW 28 APRIL BANGKOK ENTERTAINMENT PROGRAM 14

 NAYT

 8 MAY CABELLA LIGURE ITALY SAHASRARA PUJA In the world of this nonsense that we are living, we have to be something like the lotuses have who cannot be tarnished, who cannot be affected by all the ills that are going on. This is what is the test, is the pariksha, that at this difficult time we can blossom and create fragrance and faith get so many others to this beautiful atmosphere. It is a kind of a beautiful, playful war against what is supposed to be negative. What is the power of this negativity? What is the power IN Il of these conditionings? What is the power of this stupidity that anybody can see? So you in develop the sight, the vision. So clearly – you understand so clearly that you are the ones who are responsible. You are the cells of this Sahasrara, of this brain and you all have to act. I was yesterday enamoured when you said that these lights have to enlighten many lights. This was really a great promise to Me. So coming to Sahaja Yoga is not just for your personal, limited personalities and their problems, but it is you – on one side you have to grow and, on the other side, everyone has to grow through you.. Today, of course, I am very happy that in My lifetime I could see the manifestation of Mahamaya. It is such a beautiful that one, through this door that is opened, you are now just able to enter into the kingdom of God and to enjoy the heavenly bliss and the protection. But have faith in it. Have faith in it. Do not get disturbed by small things and I am sure it will work out in a very great way. If you get that complete faith and a complete surrendering, I am sure it will work out very well. 5 JUNE LONDON PUBLIC PROGRAM 18 JUNE VIENNA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS 23 JUNE GHENT 25 JUNE CABELLA ENTERTAINMENT PROGRAM 26 JUNE CABELLA LIGURE ITALY SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA To understand your own powers of Kundalini and your powers that are available to you in OWETS the working of Paramchaitanya is very important. That will give you confidence. That will give powers you compassion. That will give you a vision. And that will make you a very great personal- are with ity – a very great personality. What was George Washington? They said he was great. was Abraham Lincoln? He was great. But you are all having your Self Realization. You have to What you YOU think of the whole universe, the whole expanse. Unless and until that brain develops in you, I am very sure that the progress of Sahaja Yoga within and without will be less. So understand these powers are with you. You have to utilize them – with humility. 16

 New Doors Open with Puja L. CABELLA - On the evening after the Sahasrara Puja, Shri Mataji talked to us about memory. She said that She has a perfect and vivid memory of Her birth, as well as Her previous incarnations. Shri Mataji explained that the reason She has a perfect memory is that She does not think. She said that if we do not think, our memories will improve a lot and that, after all, there is nothing to worry about. Whatever that thing is that we are worried about has not happened yet. And if it hasn't happened, it does not exist. It is only in our mind. We should just enjoy the present and, when we need it, a memory will come at the right time, without any effort. For Shri Mataji, a situation presents itself and, if She wants to draw something from Her experience, it is just there – without thinking and without effort. And that is the it should be. way Shri Mataji also said that all the other incarnations talked about the future, but She is not talking of the future. They all talked about which incarnation will come next and what they will teach us. But now we have only the eternal present. For us, the future and the exist. They are myths. They have no meaning. Shri Mataji has opened doors that were closed and all the powers are past do not there. All we have to do is take them. So this Sahasrara Puja opened new doors for us that were not opened before and it is up to us to take advantage of that.

 8 JULY GENEVA PUBLIC PROGRAM 9 JULY BASEL PUBLIC PROGRAM 12 JULY PARIS PUBLIC PROGRAM 13 JULY PARIS FRANCE SHRI VISHNU PUJA It is such a great day today that the French got their liberation on this day. But what is this lib- real eration for? I don't know. In no country where they had freedom and liberation I have seen, it has not worked something very much that was expected.. Liberation through anger, when it comes, hatred is the basis of these revolutions and these so-called achieved liberations. If liberation the liberation takes place within yourself so that you are no more a slave of any one of these horrible destructive forces and negative forces, then it is a real liberation. 14 JULY COLOGNE PUBLIC PROGRAM 15 JULY HAMBURG PUBLIC PROGRAM 17 JULY BERLIN PUBLIC PROGRAM 18 JULY VIENNA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS 18 JULY VIENNA AUSTRIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS As you are giving your flowers, also give your hearts to Me, as I will give My heart to you. 19 JULY VIENNA PUBLIC PROGRAM 22 JULY CABELLA ENTERTAINMENT PROGRAM 23 JULY CABELLA ENTERTAINMENT PROGRAM 24 JULY CABELLA LIGURE ITALY GURU PUJA Today you all have gathered here to worship Me as your guru. I must say that I lack many qualities that a guru should have in the sense I cannot be strict with you, I cannot be stern | you and I really do not know how to punish you for doing wrong things. This may be because normally I think the gurus have problems with their disciples, who are mostly not with yourself realized souls. As they are not realized souls, the find it difficult to communicate or gurus talk to them about the subtle problems that they have.. I always bow to you people who have Realization because I think so many saints were never here on this Earth. But the got saintliness has to be complete. Without that, you cannot help even your family, leave alone your country and no question of the whole world. So what is needed now is to raise your awakening, to raise your spirituality, to go into a realm of complete support and surrender to the movement of this spontaneous movement of Sahaja Yoga. May God bless you all. In short, you must worship yourself. 18

 The Guru Was Telling Us S explained that the Guru Tattwa was very strong and that the negativity would have no effect. The full moon of that night was spectacular. Shri Mataji later explained. It was the most auspicious full moon in fifteen hundred years. CABELLA - There is a contrast between the constant activity – there were probably up to two thousand people - and the over-riding air of calm that pervades the entire village. Information about the weekend program seems to arrive so gently as to be unnoticeable. Somewhere, as if on the wings of collective consciousness, you know that the evening music program will begin at "about eight or nine o’clock" and you adjust your rhythm accordingly. Somehow, no matter where you are, you know that dinner is being served up at the pendal. There are no signs, no meetings, no orders, just calm. We enter Cabella and we enter a timeless bubble. In the early hours of the morning, after an all-night entertainment program, Shri Mataji spoke to us. She explained that the planet Jupiter represents the Void and that the impacts of the Shoemaker-Levy comet represent a sort of a cosmic conflict which is very significant for Sahaja Yoga and for the world – dharma will triumph over adharma. The impacts symbolize the conversion of negativity into a positive force in the universe. She The puja day dawns– as little talkas possible, just a serene sense of ceremony guiding us through the preparations, including a bath and meditation in the river. In Cabella many make their pilgrimage to the river, now only three feet deep in the middle. Mountain water clear and cool, she feeds us physically and spiritually. At the evening puja, Shri Mataji's speech left us completely and utterly silent with attention. The Guru spoke to Her children with such power and authority that CC we were unable to move a muscle. The dharma of a Sahaja Yogi, the generosity of a yogi, how we should become the witness and combine concern with detachment – these are all topics that have been covered before. But this time we had the feeling that something extra was happening. The Guru was telling us something. Could we hear it?

 30 31 JULY AMSTERDAM PUBLIC PROGRAMS 27 AUGUST CABELLA ENTERTAINMENT PROGRAM 28 AUGUST CABELLA LIGURE ITALY SHRI KRISHNA PUJA You are a new race, blessed by the Divine and you have Shri Krishna within yourself awak- to be ened. In His own glory, in His own light, you should know what is to be done. One must com- municate. That you have to do.. You have to communicate with complete humility the way complete Shri Krishna did.. Your duty is to build up yourself and to communicate with others with all the sweetness, madhuri of Shri Krishna, all the beauty of Shri Krishna, with full understand- ing as to what stupid things are going around and around. Once you understand that, you will not take to it because you will become wise enough not to take to all these nonsensical things that are going on. It is so much, in this lecture I cannot tell you, but now if you become the witness of the whole thing you will see what is happening. Today is the puja of Shri Krishna. I need not tell you how many qualities He has, but the greatest quality He has is that He is the doctor of doctors. Now, in His name, you will know how many qualities He has and will understand. Try to understand that we have to have these qualities within you us also. Whatever qualities are described or said, try to see how many we have. That is the way the introspection will start. Once you start introspecting yourself and understanding yourself, the wisdom will grow – not by seeing faults in others, putting blames on others, but on yourself. That is how the things will work out, although Krishna did not have to do that because He was sampurna. He was complete. But we have to do all this to see that we also become complete. 3 SEPTEMBER WARSAW PUBLIC PROGRAM 4 SEPTEMBER PRAGUE PUBLIC PROGRAM 7 SEPTEMBER BUCHAREST ROMANIA PUBLIC PROGRAM I am very happy that the collective of Romania is so great. They have transformed their lives. to feel They are very beautiful. I have gone to Russia when there was a putsch and I asked the Rus- sian Sahaja Yogis, "Aren't you afraid of these problems?" They said, "Mother, why? We are in secure the kingdom of God. Why should we be afraid of these petty politics here?" That's what it is. We have to feel secure with our spirit being awakened. And we feel absolutely protected. 10 SEPTEMBER MOSCOW ENTERTAINMENT PROGRAM 20

 W.d You Will Get It All At the first of two public programs, WARSAW - A sixteen-year-old Polish boy composed a beautiful poetic song to welcome Shri Mataji to Poland. He went to a library and searched for the words in a dictionary and so translated the entire song into Hindi. He then went to the Indian embassy to check that he had written all the words correctly and they told him he had made only two mistakes. Accompanied by two children of five and six of AMSTERDAM - Shri Mataji spoke about women in the West. They have a disadvantage compared to women in India, She said. They are less appreciated and less respected. This might stem from Christianity. Shri Mataji also told the audience that the Koran suffers distortion due to the work of its editor. In fact, all religions are either power or money- oriented. Christ did not understand people in the sense that He did not visualize how they would use His work for their own goals. Gyaneshwara in the twelfth century was the first saint who revealed in script the benevolent and divine work of the Kundalini. Still, only one or two received their moksha. "You here will get it all," Shri Mataji said. "It is your birthright and you deserve it." years he sang his song to Shri Mataji in perfect Hindi. Shri age, Mataji was very touched and with Her eyes filled with tears, She expressed Her total love and appreciation of their devotion to Her through this small and extremely sweet song they had offered.

 11 SEPTEMBER MOSCOW RUSSIA SHRI GANESHA PUJA Without Shri Ganesha it is not possible. As you know, He is the symbol of innocence within you have become us. This innocence never gets destroyed because it is eternal. But it may happen that it will get covered with some clouds by our mistakes that we commit. But once you get your Real- ization, your innocence is re-established, manifests and you become innocent. Your atten- tion becomes innocent.. I do not know how many of you know that all of you have become saints saints. As Ganesha was created, you are also created as innocent saints. Try to respect your innocence. That will make you feel young and happy. The innocence is very powerful. Any- body who tries to molest or tries to destroy somebody's innocence is ultimately very badly punished by Shri Ganesha .. so one should never try to challenge a person who is innocent, who has the blessings of Shri Ganesha. Only through enlightenment can you awaken Shri Ganesha within yourself. 12 SEPTEMBER MOSCOW PUBLIC PROGRAM ONFERENCE 14 SEPTEMBER MOSCOW RUSSIA SCIENCE C In this short lecture I am sorry I cannot tell you everything about Sahaja Yoga. In the English iNiS IS language alone, I must have given at least five thousand lectures. But a lecture is just a mental this is acrobat. You have to go beyond it and achieve a state of enlightenment. Enlightenment does your not mean any brand like "born again" or anything. It is an actualization and the becoming. It is not just talk, talk, talk. It is also not blind faith. This is an actual happening... The other day capacity somebody asked Me, "Why am I on this Earth?" I said, "To become divine and to enter into the kingdom of God." So he said, "What? Will that help me?" I told him, "First you enter. It will not only help you physically, mentally, emotionally, spiritually, but it will help others.." וו Because who is the other? You have become collective now. That means the microcosm has become the macrocosm or the drop has become the sea. This is your capacity. This is your glory. This is what you have to have as your own. No obligation – it is all love and compas- sion, the power is of love, of divine love, of pure love without any lust or greed. We have never used the power of love. Now the time has come. 15 SEPTEMBER SAINT PETERSBURG AWARD CEREMONY 15 SEPTEMBER SAINT PETERSBURG PUBLIC PROGRAM 16 SEPTEMBER TOGLIATTI MUSIC PROGRAM 17 SEPTEMBER TOGLIATTI TALK AT SAHAJA YOGA SCHOOL 22

 22 SEPTEMBER CHICAGO PUBLIC PROGRAM 25 SEPTEMBER TORONTO PUBLIC PROGRAM 26 SEPTEMBER VANCOUVER PUBLIC PROGRAM 27 SEPTEMBER LOS ANGELES MUSIC PROGRAM 27 28 29 SEPTEMBER LOS ANGELES PUBLIC PROGRAMS 29 SEPTEMBER LOS ANGELES TELEVISION INTERVIEW 1 OCTOBER NEW YORK PUBLIC PROGRAM 2 OCTOBER NEW JERSEY USA SHRI YOGESHWAR PUJA Supposing I had started Sahaja Yoga even a hundred years back, I would not have even one talk | Can talK single disciple, one single Sahaja Yogi. The reason is the people were all right. They were on a value system, all right. Their life was very much satisfying. They were very peaceful. They to you were just interested in some horses or something like that. But now, you find people are so much disturbed, so much in trouble, so much in chaos in this Kali Yuga. It is the height of Kali Yuga now, so much of immorality, so much of dissatisfaction in life that they have to now think where to Like a shock, the future is waiting for them. And now what should go. they achieve? So the whole of this bhranti, illusion of life starts staring at them and then they start thinking, "What is this? What am I doing? What have I done? Why is it so? Why is everything in a chaos? Why is it happening?" Then the seeking starts and, with their seek- ing, now you know what has happened, that you all have got your Realization. Without the seeking, it would not have been even possible for Me to talk to you at all about Sahaja Yoga. It is because you are seekers I can talk to you.. Tonight we are praising Shri Krishna who is Yogeshwara. He eats, but He does not eat. He sleeps, but He does not sleep. He has wives, but He has no wife. Like this is the Yogeshwara. And that is what you are - yogis. And He is your Ishwara. So you have to try to be like Him. Let your brain be enlightened by His blessings and you will become that great personality that encompasses everything, that sees everything, that gives you discretion, that makes you understand what is wrong. And you will feel enthusiastic about changing this America with all your effort, with all your mind. That is the most important thing you have to do. As it is, He is a Kubera, He is the Lord of wealth and He has given you such a lot of wealth all around.. In every way you are blessed. You have money. You have everything. You have brains. Everything is there. What is lacking is wisdom, with everything, with you. Supposing you have a car. You have everything – car, you have got keys, you have got the engine, you have got the brakes, everything, but you don't know how to drive. So what will happen? This is what it is. So as Sahaja Yogis from America, you have a very, very, very special responsibility. 3 OCTOBER NEW YORK PUBLIC PROGRAM 24

 LOS ANGELES - The audience at the Los Angeles public NEW YORK - Shri Mataji was still shopping even as seekers were being entertained and prepared for Her arrival in the Ethical Cultural Society auditorium in program in Santa Monica was a large cross-section of many types of people, but one person stood out. He was an African prince in traditional dress, including a large disk in his lower lip and a bone through his nose. He carried a large wooden staff. After the program, he called out to Shri Mataji, “Kali Ma! Kali Ma!" Shri Mataji stopped, turned and asked, "Who is calling My name?" Directly from the program, Shri Mataji went to the airport to catch a midnight flight to New York. We all raced to the airport, but most of us were too late to offer Manhattan on October 1st. While She was preparing to leave a store, a Pakistani Muslim man, a security guard in the shop, recognized Shri Mataji as the Adi Shakti. He had never before heard of Sahaja Yoga nor seen Shri Mataji's picture, but he came up to Her grandchildren, apologized for interrupting and told them that there is a rare tree that only grows after many thousands of years. He said that the person they were talking to, Shri Mataji, was rarer than that tree. He went on to say that he could feel Her power within himself. Calling to everyone in the store, he told them to stop shopping, that they were wasting an opportunity to behold Shri Mataji. Shri Mataji blessed the man, as he began to weep flowers to Shri Mataji. We asked the airline staff if we could offer the flowers even though the airplane door was closed and it was about to taxi away. An employee of the airline took several bouquets and headed for the departing plane. The collapsible walkway began to pull away from the sealed door, but, as we watched with glee, the walkway was pushed back towards the aircraft and the door was re-opened with the power of our collective love and gratitude. The employee returned and reported that Shri Mataji was now surrounded by flowers. with tears of joy. Later She commented as to what a sensitive man he was, what recognition he had and if there were more like him there would be no problem in working out America.

 8 OCTOBER CABELLA ENTERTAINMENT PROGRAM 9 OCTOBER CABELLA LIGURE ITALY NAVARATRI PUJA The quality is of compassion and love, fearlessness and courage and the complete empti- it will ness. In this emptiness, you are not worried about what you have to achieve, how many people you have to gather, how many must come to Sahaja Yoga – not bothered about that. out Automatically it will work out, but you would not desire for it and you will not hanker, "Oh work because where my God, there is not many people, what to do?" It is good for us in a way is the place in heaven for so many stupid people? So we should not run after people who are negative and useless. But we must definitely take the people who are genuinely goo... In Sanskrit they call it cheyen. That means "selection." This is a natural selection that takes place. And how people go away and how they come back to Sahaja Yoga, it's very interest- ing. This is a common happening in Sahaja Yoga, you know. You should not get upset.. As long as they are Sahaja Yogis, we should be happy... As many as there are is sufficient and we shouldn't worry about those things, the number. The new age people talk of is here, no doubt. This is the new age and the new consciousness is also here. But what is the "new" now is the new collectivity and that collectivity acts, that you want to spread it. It acts like your hunger. It is another kind of hunger, that you want to create more Sahaja Yogis. You want to have more brothers and sisters and you want to help them so that they could come to the pujas and all that and become good Sahaja Yogis. Now this kind of an ambition or a joy or whatever you may call it is the whole plan. It shows that in your heart the collectivity is prospering. And that is why you cannot enjoy Sahaja Yoga alone, sitting in the Himalayas - no. You want to have other people. This is now the sign of how the Mother's love has taken root in your hearts and how you are all going to spread Sahaja Yoga. You just become great lights of your Mother. That is what I have to request of you tonight. You have all the power flowing in you, you have the light which is enlightened, but you must expand. Expand it more and more and more and you will be surprised what Tukarama has said, that "I am like a small little particle of dust and also I am the whole sky." This is what is your personality. 11 OCTOBER BARCELONA MUSIC PROGRAM 12 OCTOBER BARCELONA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS ain an ambassador told Shri Mataji that the Spanish people cannot BARCELONA - In understand spirituality at all. Shri Mataji replied, "I must give everyone a chance, otherwise they will say they didn't know." 15 OCTOBER RIO DE JANEIRO PUBLIC PROGRAM 16 OCTOBER SAO PAULO PUBLIC PROGRAM 18 OCTOBER BRASILIA PUBLIC PROGRAM 19 OCTOBER BUENOS AIRES PUBLIC PROGRAM 20 OCTOBER BOGOTA PUBLIC PROGRAM 26

 *: BUENOS AIRES - We went to the countryside, to a house where the Sahaja Yogis often gather for seminars. After Her lunch, Shri Mataji Herself cooked for those lucky yogis who had not yet eaten. What a joy for their Nabhis, as the food was absolutely exquisite. In the evening, She again insisted on cooking – for everyone this time. She went in the back garden where two big fires had been set and started overseeing the cooking. Shri Mataji waited until it was all ready before She had Her own dinner. The yogis then gathered outside to enjoy a divine meal. It was a moment which will stay forever in our memories. Everyone was silent and our faces were shining in the light of the fire, feeling the tremendous blessing. BOGOTA - Many times in Brazil and Argentina, Sahaja Yogis noticed that Shri Mataji corrected parts of the translations of Her talks that were made in Spanish or Portuguese. One day She was asked how She knew the translation was not accurate. She explained that the energy starts at the Nabhi level. Then at the Heart level this energy becomes an abstract thought. Only at the Vishuddhi does it become words and language. So by putting Her attention on the first or second level, She can know what we are saying, even though it is in another language. She added that this is not the same thing as reading the mind, which is not a good thing to try to do.

 BRAZIL - When asked about the vibrations of matter, Shri Mataji said that matter usually has an electromagnetic vibration, but not spiritual vibrations. However, matter can be spiritually vibrated by Her or by a realized soul. Everything She touches becomes vibrated. Great artists give their works of art spiritual vibrations, which can be felt by a realized soul. She specifically mentioned some great cathedrals. Shri Mataji said that each piece of matter has a certain "coefficient of linear expansion" which determines both the quality and the intensity of the vibrations emitted. She said that the best thing that can be done with matter is to give it as a CC present. Shri Mataji also told the Sahaja Yogis about the carbon atom, which depending upon the perspective from which it is viewed can reveal the Omkara, the Alpha or the Omega. She said that this is a proof that Lord Jesus was an incarnation of Shri Ganesha. 4 NOVEMBER ISTANBUL ENTERTAINMENT PROGRAM 5 NOVEMBER ISTANBUL TURKEY DIWALI PUJA Kundalini is not working out well because there are problems in your When chakras, your what you have to say is "You are, you are!" You say that. "You are sakshat this. You are sakshat that." Sakshat means "in reality..." That is how you cleanse all the dirt or all the problems of of ligh your chakras. By this, you also correct your conditionings and your ego. Then you do not take the credit for anything. You do not feel you are doing something. And the whole personal- ity changes into a complete instrument like the flute in the hands of Shri Krishna. Then you see your work, everything as the work of the Divine. That is how you become enlightened. That is how you become the light of joy and of peace. A lot has been said about what you are. That is how whatever is described, you become that. If there is a light, you do not have to say that it is a light. It is. It is not a stamp that you have to use. So today we are celebrating a Diwali of the lights of Sahaja Yoga. I do not know what to say, in what state of bliss I am. All the ripples you have created of joy are overwhelming for Me. No words can describe. I cannot compose poetry. Keep this light burning beautifully through meditation and you can become very strong beacons of light. 6 NOVEMBER ISTANBUL MARRIAGES 11 NOVEMBER TUNIS TELEVISION INTERVIEW 11 12 NOVEMBER TUNIS PUBLIC PROGRAMS 13 NOVEMBER TUNIS TALK TO TUNISIAN WOMEN 15 17 NOVEMBER ATHENS TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS 28 NOVEMBER FARIDABAD PUBLIC PROGRAM 29 NOVEMBER DELHI PUBLIC PROGRAM 30 NOVEMBER NOIDA PUBLIC PROGRAM 1 DECEMBER GHAZIABAD PUBLIC PROGRAM 5 DECEMBER DELHI BO OK LAUNCH 28

 Keep Your Traditions On the last day, Shri Mataji only wanted to speak to the women. It was difficult to keep the men out, but they were not allowed in the hall. Shri Mataji spoke to the women wearing a white sari. She looked very impressive, very dark. She spoke to them, mainly saying that they should not follow the French culture. She said they should keep to their traditions because, if they do not keep to their traditions, then the fundamentalism comes in. "So don't run after Western ideas." She really emphasized that. TUNIS - Shri Mataji gave two public talks, one in the evening and then on the last day, a Sunday morning, She talked to the women. The women were very fascinated by Shri Mataji. They were very open. The ladies in the front row rushed on the stage and took Mother around the waist. There were six or seven of them and they were all around Mother and they wanted to have a photograph. They were kissing Shri Mataji's hands and Mother was very loving with them. CC

 4 DECEMBER DELHI INDIA SHRI RAJA LAKSHMI PUJA have entered into the kingdom of God. You are now sitting in the court of God Now you not NOl Almighty. Here, of course, as courtiers you have to dress up well, sit properly, take up your seats. You have to be systematic and above board because you are Sahaja Yogis. You are not ordinary people. You are special people. How many people in this world are going to be Sahaja Yogis? You are special people, so try to make yourself such beautiful instruments of people Raja Lakshmi that people, when they will see you, they will vote for you.. You have to first get the blessings of Raja Lakshmi and then only you should understand what is wrong with your country, what we have to do, what is the purpose.. We have to have plans. What is your project? On all these things now put your attention from yourself to outside.. When the war of independence started in India we gave up our studies, gave up our parents, gave have to up everything. We were very young people. So now you have to know that if you really take to politics, you have to have the blessings of Raja Lakshmi and for that you have to build up yourself with that dignity, with that sense. I bless you from My heart that in every country such people will come up. 5 DECEMBER CHANDIGARH PUBLIC PROGRAM 6 DECEMBER YAMUNANAGAR PUBLIC PROGRAM YAMUNANAGAR - At the end of the public program, a young girl shouted to get Shri Mataji's attention. She made her way to the front and Shri Mataji beckoned for her to come on the For more than half an hour Shri Mataji worked on this girl with a candle flame. Finally, stage. the girl spoke to the audience in Hindi, saying she was blind and Shri Mataji had enabled her to see – first Shri Mataji's bangles, then Her bindi and then Her sari. She ended up by saying, "Shri Mataji is God." The whole atmosphere was full of enthusiasm and joy, with people clapping, singing and dancing. CC 7 DECEMBER YAMUNANAGAR PUJA 7 DECEMBER YAMUNANAGAR MUSIC PROGRAM 8 DECEMBER DEHRAD UN PUBLIC PROGRAM 10 DECEMBER JAIPUR PUBLIC PROGRAM 11 DECEMBER JAIPUR SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA JAIPUR - At the puja Shri Mataji spoke in Hindi. She told us that we are worshippers of Shri Adi Shakti and follow the dharma of the Shakti. The Adi Shakti is especially worshipped by royalty and is known by many different names. Rajasthan is blessed because the Adi Shakti once incarnated there as Sati Devi. The blessings She bestowed are still present in Rajasthani culture. Shri Mataji's family has ties to Rajasthan that go back to ancient times. Shri Mataji described the powers of the Goddess, but She said Shri Adi Shakti is beyond all these powers and to describe Her is a difficult task. It is left to the Sahaja Yogis to describe Shri Adi Shakti. 30

 India Tour Teaches Rhythm YAMUNANAGAR - On December 6th a message came DELHI - The first public program of the tour was on November 28th in Faridabad, a small town southeast of Delhi. About five thousand people were in attendance. We saw Shri Mataji there for the first time on the tour. Shri spoke in Hindi, but we could feel Her divine attention was also on us. At the end of the program, we joined in the singing of Sitting in the Heart of the Universe. We that Shri Mataji was waiting for us at VIP called the Pintail Resort. We made our way to a quiet guest house garden high above the river and we all sat on the around Her as She spoke to us as our mother. She asked us to remove our hats and scarves to take advantage of the morning sun, which is good for the growth of hair, and that wearing hats causes baldness. Shri Mataji spoke about dholaks and the importance of rhythm in music and in our lives. Shiva's dholak gives the rhythm and the heartbeat, the beat of life which pulsates and sends vibrations through the nerves of the entire body. The rhythm of the drum in music puts us in tune with our inner rhythm. One aspect of discipline consists of getting tuned into the rhythm of the Divine, being in step with life. This means we must get up very early in the morning because this time corresponds to the Indian rhythm which is directly controlled by the Kundalini. Shri Mataji apologized for having to tell us the truth about getting up very early in the morning, but She said there is no way around it. In Sahaja Yoga there are no obligations, but we should know that this is the best time to have a deep grass sang CC out the line "Shri Mataji, we love You" from deep down in our universal hearts. On the following evening, expectations were high for the main Delhi public program. More than sixty thousand and 150 billboards advertising the program had posters been placed around the city. A huge, magnificent pendal supported by 144 poles covered the equivalent of two large playing fields. There were about eighteen thousand people – a sea of humanity. One Shastri Remembered About two thousand people gathered on DELHI December 5th for the inauguration of a new book about former Indian prime minister Lal Bahadur Shastri. The book was written by Sir CP Srivastava, who made the point of calling it "our book," making us all feel its relevance for our own growth and, in some way, for the spread of Sahaja Yoga. Shri Mataji explained that Shastri was a man of tremendous depth. When She met him She was happy meditation. We must have pure attention and learn to control our attention, called chitta nirodh. We have to learn to put the attention inside, on the present moment when there is no past or future, where there is no thought. She went on to say that we have all come a long way, but this is the next step. When we see something beautiful, we should go thoughtless. If you sit in meditation and think about shopping, there is no spiritual growth. Of course, we have to shop, but if our attention is inside, it and efficiently. When our attention is on the Divine everything works out. Meditation is not a mental process. We cannot grow CC because She had found a realized soul who had the desire to go into politics. She said most realized souls shun politics. In Shastri She saw a man who the Divine could use to do work for India in the move away from materialism and self-interest and towards a society focused on morality and the greater good of man. From the beginning, Shri Mataji said, Shastri knew She was a divine personality and always showed Her tremendous respect. It was Her desire that Sir CP work with Shastri and to be of help in his great work. Shri Mataji explained that it was fate that Shastriji's time in office was so short and that India always suffered from such bad fate. great done very quickly gets mentally. We have to go into thoughtless awareness and we have to practise this. Also we should constantly ask ourselves, “Where is your attention?" See where it is going. What makes us happy? What do we love? JAIPUR - Shri Mataji's last words to us in the early morning hours before leaving the Jaipur train station were, "It is a very small train, but it is the only one going through those beautiful places. If you want the vision of beauty, you should not mind the size of the train."

 20 DECEMBER PRATISHTHAN TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS 20 DECEMBER PUNE PUBLIC PROGRAM PUNE - On December 20th there was a very large public program in Pune. As we entered the grounds of the New Medical College, we could not fathom the number of people there – at least thousand. Shri Mataji spoke for more than an hour. The vibrations were very strong twenty and one felt very privileged to be at a program where so many received their Realization. 23 DECEMBER GANAPATIPULE ENTERTAINMENT PROGRAM 27 DECEMBER GANAPATIPULE INDIA CHRISTMAS PUJA It is very simple to understand about your own country, where the problem is, why people to please are poor and we cannot help them. We have to take to this. Unless and until your light shines in the society, we are doing nothing. We are just enjoying our own Sahaja Yoga, Ganapatipule divine and all that, But what about others? So sensitivity to art, sensitivity to music, sensitivity to al the creative things that are there and what can we do with these creative things for others – the attention should be more towards these things than about useless things. About politics you should not worry so much. It will be all exposed and finished and it will be all right. Let them fight. Let them do what they like. They are stupid people. Your attention should be on how you can be creative, how you can help people, what you can do. In everything there is one thing. It is love, what you call as compassion, anukampa, just out of love and affection and that should be a real innate expression of every Sahaja Yogi in every field of life.. What are we doing to please others? You should be a pleasing personality instead of thinking about how you should be pleased.. To please the Divine, our character, our behaviour should be absolutely clean. I know Sahaja Yogis have done wonders and they are doing very wellI, but they can do much, much, much more than what they are doing. So on this day of Christ's birthday, I have to tell you that it is not possible to follow His life. I agree – very difficult. But at least, one has to learn from Him that He is before us and let us try to go forward towards There are sure to be errors and omissions in this 1994 Him, in His simplicity, in His honesty and the sacrifices He could make. almanac. It is not com- prehensive, nor complete. 28 DECEMBER GANAPATIPULE ENTERTAINMENT PROGRAM Sources include "The Divine a 29 DECEMBER GANAPATIPULE TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS Cool Breeze," the Sahaja Yoga Media Project and the 29 DECEMBER GANAPATIPULE MARRIAGES International Book Project transcriptions. Sometimes 31 DECEMBER KALWE SHRI GANESHA PUJA these sources do not agree. In those cases, priority has been given to reports written at the time by people who were there. Unverified events NEWS REPORTS in this issue are from the pages of The Divine Cool Breeze magazines published in 1994 and 1995, except the report from Tunis, which is from Eternally Inspiring Recollections of Our Holy Mother. ALL PHOTOGRAPHS are from 1994 except page 5. Cover and page 9: Guru Puja seminar weekend. Page 1 and 29: Tunisia. Page 3: Prague. Page 15: Sahasrara Puja. Page 17: Shri Adi Shakti Puja seminar weekend. Page 19: Cabella Ligure Italy. Page 21: Shri Krishna Puja seminar weekend. Page 23: Shri Ganesha Puja seminar weekend. Page 25: Saint Petersburg Russia, Page 27: near Buenos Aires Argentina. Page 33: India, place and date unknown. Back cover: Diwali Puja seminar. have not been included. We hope that the truth of Shri Mataji's travels can be found in the scope, range and love THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE www.divinecoolbreeze.org She gave every day of 1994 SUBSCRIPTIONS: contact@divinecoolbreeze.org CONTENT: editor@divinecoolbreeze.org - and every day since. PRINTED BY King Printing Co. Inc. Lowell Massachusetts USA & Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. Pune Maharashtra India

 Starlit Grooms Advised for Life Marriages are serious affairs, not frivolous. It does not take long to perform the marriage, but it lasts for a lifetime. If the wife starts dominating, you can tell her how we expect her to behave, but there should be no domination in this. If in small matters she does not do GANAPATIPULE - This is a synopsis of the advice given by Shri Mataji to the 104 grooms entering into marriage on December 29th. Marriages in Sahaja Yoga are marriages of collectivity. Shri Mataji has made matches which will make us enjoy each other completely. Sahaj marriages have been 98 percent successful, but even the two percent that go as you expect, then it is all right and should tolerate that and should show tenderness and care for you your you wrong cause Her concern. Some people come afterwards and say that the atmosphere in Ganapatipule was a certain way and so they agreed to marry. Later they think that the marriage will not work out. This thinking is the enemy of enjoyment. wife. Shri Mataji wished all the grooms a very enjoyable married life and also a very happy new year. It was a very beautiful moment in the lives of the bright- eyed grooms sitting on the starlit shores of Ganapatipule. New Year's Eve Farewell Puja KALWE - The last official day of the 1994 India tour was graced by a puja. The venue was the Mukund Steel plant, which is also the site of a Shri Ganesha swayambhu. There were about five thousand Sahaja Yogis in attendance. This is a synopsis of the talk given by Shri Mataji at the Shri Ganesha Puja on New Year's Eve. "Now we will be parting. You will be going back to your own country. And I must congratulate you, you have come up to the expectations of Shri Ganesha. I am very happy with you people." Even though you do not have the tradition of Shri Ganesha established in your countries, somehow you try to bring forth this dimension in other people of your nationality." Sahaja Yogis see where they are going and are worried about it. Something must be done about it so that people in your countries take to a very dharmic, truly righteous life – not just talking and giving big sermons about it. The way foreign Sahaja Yogis have controlled their children has brought the children to proper lives. “Your children will thank much for this. I would like the way you very to thank for others and for your country. And I am sure we will be very successful in a very short time and it will become a global understanding of Sahaja Yoga." At the conclusion of the puja, we bowed down to Shri Mataji and thanked Her for allowing us to come to India. We asked for a fearless heart, for dedication to meditation and to the work of Sahaja Yoga. all for doing this good work for yourself, you have come up to such a level. Indians are going to the western life, western style, western expression, the filth. First you used to come and learn here about Sahaja Yoga, about respect for others and respect for yourself. But this tolerated all kinds of inconveniences and you time you saw to the comfort of your spirit, not your body. "The way you have been behaving, I am over-satisfied. I hope you really grow into your spiritual dimensions and We asked that some time soon we would be reunited with Shri Mataji in India, the place of our spiritual growth and transformation.

 WHO IS CALLING MY NAME JAI SHRI MATAJI



----------------------

2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 1994.m Aahaja Yog
The Divine Cool Breeze
in
year
2012 issue 2 – volume twenty-five number two
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 BANGALORE IT BEGINS IN INDIA. IT ENDS IN INDIA. ONE YEAR. A VISION OF BEAUTY.
CHENAI
HYDERABAD
PUNE
GOA
BOMBAY
DELHI
CALCUTTA
PERTH
MELBOURNE
SYDNEY
AUCKLAND
BRISBANE
TOKYO
TAIPEI
HONG KONG
KUALA LUMPUR
BANGKOK
CABELLA LIGURE
LONDON
VIENNA
GHENT
GENEVA
BASEL
PARIS
COLOGNE
HAMBURG
BERLIN
VIENNA
AMSTERDAM
WARSAW
PRAGUE
BUCHAREST
MOSCOW
SAINT PETERSBURG
TOGLIATTI
CHICAGO
TORONTO
VANCOUVER
LOS ANGELES
NEW YORK
BARCELONA
RIO DE JANEIRO
SAO PAULO
BRASILIA
BUENOS AIRES
BOGOTA
ISTANBUL
TUNIS
ATHENS
FARIDABAD
NOIDA
GHAZIABAD
CHANDIGARH
YAMUNANAGAR
VISION OF BEAUTY
DEHRADUN
JAIPUR
GANAPATIPULE
If you want the vision of beauty, you should not mind the size of the train.
KALWE
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Every year we have birthdays..
Every year we make a vow that this year
Уear
I will not do this or I will not do that.
This is a very good way of seeing
how far we have come in life.
Many people who really have achieved
a very great height in their spiritual life
did not need a birthday, but every day
they felt it is a birthday to start,
to go ahead, to understand, to learn.
Every day is a new year for them.
VISION OF NOW
REMEMBER THAT WE ARE ONE, PART AND PARCEL OF ONE BEING
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 48
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 15 JANUARY BANGALORE PUBLIC PROGRAM
17 JANUARY CHENNAI TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
18 JANUARY CHENNAI PUBLIC PROGRAM
21 JANUARY HYDERABAD PUJA
27 JANUARY PUNE PUBLIC PROGRAM
28 JANUARY PUNE MUSIC PROGRAM
16 FEBRUARY GOA TALK TO BUSINESS EXECUTIVES
22 FEBRUARY HYDERABAD SHRI RAJARAJESHWARI PUJA
22 FEBRUARY HYDERABAD PUBLIC PROGRAM
23 24 FEBRUARY BOMBAY
14 MARCH DELHI INDIA SHRI SADASHIVA PUJA
There are lots of things which we have to learn. When we worship Shiva, we praise Him. "You
extend
the light
are this. You are that. You are that." When you worship Me, also you praise Me. "You are this'
the thousand names of Shiva, thousand names of the Goddess, thousand names of Vishnu.
•..
These are their names you are worshipping. What about you people? How many names
can you have? Actually in the puja, when you take the names of these Shaktis, they also get
awakened within, no doubt. After the puja you do feel that way, but you do not utilize them.
So many people I have seen have come in the puja and they have got that power within
themselves, the same powers. But by the time they are out it's finished. It is gone. So surren-
dering has another side – assumption, assumption that "I am a Sahaja Yogi and I can absorb
all these powers within myself." So one side is surrendering. Why to surrender? To absorb
- automatically when
you are surrendered, you absorb. But once you have absorbed, then
you should retain and assume within yourself, know that you have these powers... Surren-
dering is important to reach the state of your spirit, of Shiva and Sadashiva. But the second
state is that you have to now think of others. First it is, as they say in Sanskrit, vyashti. That
means individual gain. You get the individual gain and then it becomes samashti. That means
the collective. You have to work it out on the collective.. It is important that you should now
extend this light to others.
I am a Sahaja Yogi and I can absorb
all these powers within myself.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 A Tour of South India
each a quarter of a mile long, of people doing namaskar
along both sides of the road as Shri Mataji left by car.
Late the next evening, on the courtyard of the lawns
of Pratishthan, Shri Mataji's home in Pune, there was a
PUNE - The city of Pune wore a festive look on January
27th as our beloved Mother Shri Mataji was scheduled to
address a public program in the evening on the grounds
of the New English High School on Tilak Road.
Shri Mataji's beaming face flashed at every bus
on banners across the roads and flags hoisted atop lamp
posts. Thousands of people sat, impatiently awaiting Her
arrival. The Yuva Shakti of Pune with orange turbans
were the outriders on motorcycles in front of our Holy
Mother as She travelled by car to the
program of qawwali music composed by the Sufi Qawals
of Hyderabad. A small compact gathering listened to the
praises extolling our beloved Mother.
stop,
Shri Mataji was very pleased with
the growth of Sahaja Yoga in Bangalore. About fifteen
hundred people attended the public program which had
BANGALORE -
program.
Shri Mataji held the audience spellbound by Her
presence and spoke for over an hour. It was a great
experience to see all the hands raised to show the en masse
awakening of all the Kundalinis. There were twenty-five
thousand people attending the program and Shri Mataji
said that on that night one hundred thousand people in
Pune got their Realization.
It took two hours for Shri Mataji to leave the program
site because of the huge crowds. There were two lines,
beautiful vibrations.
In Madras, Shri Mataji explained that when Madras
works out all of India will work out. The program
attracted at least twenty-five hundred people, crammed
into the hall and foyer.
At the Hyderabad public program there was in the
region of ten to twelve thousand people. Shri Mataji said,
“All of Hyderabad is here."
CC
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 20 MARCH CALCUTTA DANCE PROGRAM
21 MARCH CALCUTTA INDIA BIRTHDAY PUJA
In our own life, we see that our surroundings change very slowly. Sometimes it is shocking.
a lush
Sometimes you are surprised how the surroundings are not changing. But in a subtle way,
there is a tremendous change that is happening within us and without. The whole atmo-
garden
sphere today is governed by human beings. I do not know how far Paramachaitanya works
it out, but it is for us to open ourselves to new dimensions in our lives.. On the tree of
Sahaj Yoga very few – very, very few – leaves fall off and you sometimes face a lush garden
of beautiful people. To Me, it is like miraculous fireworks. It starts like a small line and then
opens up into several beautiful patterns. It is impossible to envisage or to visualize what
will happen to us, to Sahaj Yoga and to all of you. I have never learned to imagine things,
really remarkable. It is very remarkable thatI see all Sahaja
but the vision that you see is
Yogis drenched in divine love and expressing themselves in a very beautiful and very deep
manner. This, when it comes in, really makes your attention absolutely enwrapped in such
divine bliss that you forget that moment. One of those moments is when you celebrate My
birthday.. This reality of the vision is something beyond even My thinking and imagination.
I cannot, even now sometimes, believe that there are so many Sahaja Yogis who have got this
subtle knowledge. I never knew that there are so many seekers to begin with. I never knew
that there are such subtle people on this Earth.. Today My feelings are really full of joy – full
of joy because now I can see how things are happening, how one person can produce thou-
sands and thousands of Sahaja Yogis. You are all capable and you all can do it, but what is
needed is faith in yourself and also complete sincerity about Sahaja Yoga. If that happens
today, you have really celebrated My birthday. If you think that My birthday is important, for
Me very important is that everybody gets their spiritual birthday.
21 MARCH CALCUTTA BIRTHDAY FELICITATIONS
22 MARCH CALCUTTA TELEVISION INTERVIEW
DELHI - For many years, the Sahaja Yoga leader in Delhi had been trying to have Shri Mataji
on Doordarshan, the Indian public television network. In a rare offer, a TV crew met Shri
Mataji at the Delhi Sahaja Yoga temple. The director told Her that the whole country wanted
to know what She had to say. She could speak without censorship or conditions for as
as She liked. They filmed for more than two and a half hours. Three topics were discussed:
Sahaja Yoga, what it can do for individual person and what Sahaja Yoga can achieve at an
international level with the integration of dharma. From these tapes, a series of weekly half
programs were televized nationally, with Self Realization given in the final episode. Almost the
entire television production team have become Sahaja Yogis.
long
any
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Nothing to Worry, Nothing to Bother
CALCUTTA - On the day after Her seventy-first birthday, Shri Mataji spoke of Rabindranath
Tagore, collectivity and the Sahaja Yogis of Bengal. She said:
This was a song composed by Gurudev Rabindranath
Tagore so many years back when He had a vision of
our Ganapatipule seminars, where He describes that
people from all the world will come. From different
countries, they will come. Also the Hindus, the Muslims,
Christians, Sikhs and all kinds of communities will get
their awakening on the bank of the sea. "Sagar" is the
sea. So beautifully every detail he has described. He was a
seer and he could see the future where many people who
are seekers will become mahamanav. They will come.
Of course, so many things have been said about Me.
It is quite embarrassing. I do not know what I do. I do
not think I do anything. It is all working out. It is all the
grace of this all-pervading power which is working out
everything so well..
As Sahaja Yogis, when you are awakened in knowledge
and you know what knowledge is, then you have to really
understand that we are all on the same path of spirituality.
CC
There is no difference at all.
The collectivity of the Bengali people and Marwaris
and all types of people who are here from every part of
our country, is so remarkable. There is no quarrelling, no
discussion, no argument. It is done so beautifully. It is
unbelievable how they have worked it out.
So we have to remember that we are one, part and
And it is very surprising how these seers have seen the
future – like, as you know, C.S. Lewis is there and also
we have got William Blake, so many others. And I feel
today in Bengal, when I have come here in Calcutta, that
his dreams are fulfilled. His spirit would be so happy to
know.
parcel of one being. And once we really realize that, we
will enjoy each other's company very much. All Sahaja
So as you know, we get all kinds of people, all races, all
religions together in Ganapatipule, where
the bliss of God, where you feel that there is an awakening.
Also He says that the great Mother has now risen and She
is awakened and She is going to awaken you. So clearly,
he has seen the whole thing. It is remarkable how these
all enjoy
Yogis enjoy each other's company. And also, all of
you
you
from the whole world who have come here have seen
how marvelously they have organized everything. I
am thankful to you for coming here to celebrate My
birthday.... This birthday was really remarkable for all its
organization and the way it was worked out so smoothly.
I wish we all learn from this.... In the kingdom of God,
there is nothing to worry, nothing to bother about future
or past, but to enjoy the present. And that is what they
are doing and you were doing too. I enjoyed the rapport
that existed between you.
seers can see things and reveal to our amazement....
It is remarkable how in the collectivity the thought
works in a very different manner, that we all want to
say the same thing. For everyone that is the truth and
you all feel so joyous about it and so happy about it. It
is something, a kind of a rapport between one realized
soul and another realized soul. Only a realized soul can
understand the bliss and the joy of this expression.
Thank you very much.
May God bless you.
Make haste and come to Mother's coronation.
The vessel auspicious is yet to be filled
With the sacred water sanctified by the touch of all
By the shore of the sea of Bharata's Great Humanity!
Rabindranath Tagore
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 22 MARCH CALCUTTA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
26 MARCH PERTH AUSTRALIA PUBLIC PROGRAM
Whatever I am going to tell you today, you need not accept it blindfolded. We have had
| boW enough of trouble with blind faiths, but you must keep your mind open like a scientist. And
if it proves to be all right, if it proves what I am saying, as honest people you must accept it
TO You because it is for the benevolence of your being, for the benevolence of your city, of your
|
to
country, of the whole world.. It is very good. Imagine. Perth, I bow to you all. Really -I bow
to you. You have received your
And now the only thing is you have to grow.
connection, no doubt. I am getting cool breeze from you.
28 29 MARCH MELBOURNE TALKS TO SAHAJA YOGIS
30 MARCH MELBOURNE AUSTRALIA PUBLIC PROGRAM
The truth is that there is the all-pervading power of divine love which does all the living
who
work. Now you see beautiful flowers all over. Since I have come to Australia, I have been
seeing all kinds of flowers, beautiful flowers. Who does this miracle? They are different, of
does it?
a different shape, different colour. Who does that? Who runs our heart? We never ask this
question to ourselves. We take all living work for granted. We never bother to find out who
does that.
31 MARCH MELBOURNE TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
MELBOURNE - A picnic was held in a beautiful nature reserve. When Shri Mataji arrived to
join us, She sat amongst us, the sunlight shining in Her hair and illuminating Her face. She
called us closer and, like small children, we rushed forward to sit at Her Feet. She began to talk
to us and we felt She had the keys to our souls, which She opened and filled with the wisdom
of the Divine. Shri Mataji began by saying that nature and spirituality go together very well,
that one encourages the other. She asked us to see what a unique time we have been born into
and what special people we must be to be in Sahaja Yoga. We must have been special people
and have done something great, otherwise we would not be here. We did not come here to gain
materially. We came for our ascent, so now is the time to make the best of it. After the talk, Shri
Mataji went into a deep meditation. For a moment, it seemed as if the power of Mahamaya was
reduced and we looked upon and felt the presence of the Adi Shakti.
1 APRIL MELBOURNE TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
2 APRIL SYDNEY AUSTRALIA MUSIC PROGRAM
I would like to know more about what you think of doing Sahaja Yoga, how you would like to
how to
go, how you would like to proceed, what is the best way of doing it. I never get a chance to
talk to Sahaja Yogis in this way. When it is a puja time, it is so auspicious that you do not want
proceed
say anything that will make people a little unhappy. So I have a feeling of a mother who
loves her children very much and who wants her children to enjoy life fully in the kingdom
of God.
8.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Flowing Through Us Strongly
an entertainment evening, she found the vibrations were
very much Then she knew where Shri Mataji
really was.
The public program in Perth was a great success with
more than six hundred people attending. A real warmth
and acceptance could be felt from the audience. When
Shri Mataji began, the seekers were both receptive and
respectful. Many had felt the cool breeze during the
preceding bhajans.
The next day, one gentleman was waiting on the ashram
doorstep. He could not wait for the advertised follow-up
meetings. He wanted to get started.
Another man rang and said he smelled the perfume of
the flowers around Shri Mataji as She had worked on
him. He woke the next morning and immediately got up
PERTH - Shri Mataji arrived in the early hours of Friday
the 25th of March from India and the recent celebrations
stronger.
of the great day of Her birth.
The plane arrived at about one in the morning with
about one hundred yogis from Perth and the east coast,
as well as some from southeast Asia, there to greet Her.
She made Her way from the airport to the Sahaj property
at Gidgegannup. The Perth collective has purchased an
aircraft hangar and is converting it into an ashram and
multi-purpose centre. The yogis have also constructed a
house for Shri Mataji by the edge of the lake. The house
appears like a small castle, reflected in the calm waters.
Shri Mataji was full of praise for the project and suggested
property and huge ashram could serve as an artists’
colony. Painters, writers, poets, anyone involved with the
arts could find inspiration in such a setting.
Although we did not have Shri Mataji with us in person
very long, She was flowing through us strongly. When
a Sahaja Yogini was waiting outside the place where Shri
Mataji was resting, she enjoyed the vibrations. But when
she later walked up the hill to where we were enjoying
the
to try to be in meditation.
When he put his attention on Shri Mataji and tried to
remember what She had shown him, the perfume of the
flowers filled the room.
for
He called his wife, who had not attended the
and she smelled it too.
program,
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 3 APRIL SYDNEY AUSTRALIA EASTER PUJA
I am happy to know so many of you have come here and I feel this is a very important puja,
a simple
path
not only for Australia but for the whole world because it has the greatest message, which we
have actualized now in Sahaja Yoga. We have to understand the message of Christ. We are
now newly-born chicks and we have to now follow a new path. It is a very simple path, but
still we are conditioned, so we are afraid maybe or we have an ego, whatever it is. So drop
out all these things. Just humble down and just start walking on this path of Sahaj and one
day Australia should be able to cover the whole world. I cannot see why not. After all, you
are the Muladhara and the Muladhara must play its own role as the wisest people. Wisdom
is the power that you get from Shri Ganesh, so you have to be wise, absolutely wise and
know that you have been seekers. You did not get it because I asked you or we paid you or
anything, but you were seekers struggling to know the truth and that is how you got it. And
once you have got it, you should establish it fully in your life and also in the lives of others.
Let others also feel "this gentleman is very unique" or "this lady is very unique, she is very
different, she is not selfish, she is not cunning, she does not manipulate, but somehow, by her
character, by her nature, she is trying to create light for us and enlighten our path, enlighten
the path of others."
Shri Mataji's car arrived and She alighted, making Her way across the field of green grass. The
sunlight heightened Her countenance divine. Her every step seemed like a petal falling to the
ground. We sat on the grass beside Her, treasuring every word.
5 APRIL SYDNEY AUSTRALIA PICNIC LANE COVE RIVER PARK
This picnicking has helped you to make your collectivity better. That is how they started
Sanaja having picnics and in the picnics they develop the collectivity, which is very beautiful to be
sahaja
one with the nature. See the bounty of the nature and the variety that they have. It is an
yoga
first
innate feeling inside always that you should be one with the nature, that you should enjoy
the nature.. You may be a family man, you might be a father, mother, anything, but the first
and foremost thing is you are a Sahaja Yogi. I will tell you about Myself also. You know I have
a family. I have My husband and all that. And whenever it was needed, I always said, "Sahaja
Yoga first." Even money-wise, I would say that if you have to spend any money, then spend
on Sahaj Yoga. So the first thing was Sahaja Yoga. All these are secondary: all your art, all
|
your business, all your music or whatever line of life you take is a second. The first and fore-
most thing is Sahaja Yoga and you get in that everything. But you should do it very sincerely,
respectfully.. You have to be fully into it, so either you are in the sea or you are outside. It is
like that. And this will give you the greatest pleasure, the greatest fulfillment of life. I can see
that is happening now.. I bless you that you all should really become great Sahaja Yogis –
very, very great Sahaja Yogis. And you will be all known all over the world.
6 APRIL SYDNEY PUBLIC PROGRAM
10
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 ONE WORLD
ONE
SHRI MATAJI'S TRAVELS IN 1994
O January to March
o December
SYDNEY - The public program was held on April 6th in
the Sydney Town Hall where 2300 people had gathered.
Shri Mataji entered, walking up the central aisle, the
audience standing in silent acknowledgement.
Shri Mataji was welcomed by the Deputy Lord Mayor
of Sydney. He spoke of Shri Mataji's life, Her tireless
work for the seekers of the world and Her message
Shri Mataji then spoke and gave Realization to the
assembled seekers. Nearly all two thousand new people
raised their hands to confirm that they had felt the divine
cool breeze. The musicians played a few bhajans. Shri
Mataji clapped to the rhythm of the music, asking us
all to clap with Her. She said that listening to this music
would help to establish our Realization.
of
spirituality. He spoke of Buddhism and how one seeks a
connection with nature and that Sahaja Yoga offers this
connection. He said that meditation had come from the
Shri Mataji then left the stage and walked down the
central aisle leading out of the hall. The crowd again rose
to their feet and watched as She left. As She reached the
doorway, She paused, turned to the crowd and raised Her
arm as She looked around at all the newly-realized souls.
west. Then he corrected himself and said that it comes
from the East. Then he corrected himself again and said,
"No, it has all come from the Mother."
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 7 APRIL SYDNEY AUSTRALIA FAREWELL
It is your faith. Faith is not blind in Sahaja Yoga. You know for definite what Sahaja Yoga is.
faith
You have seen miraculous photographs. You have seen all the miracles happening. So now
faith should be completely, entirely in it. And it will work out. I promise you. If your
IS NOT faith is deep enough to reach Me, you do not have to see My face, even not to have My
your
CO
photograph, nothing. Wherever you are, you will find Me. That is why I always say develop
blind
your faith. Develop your faith.
8 APRIL CANBERRA PUBLIC PROGRAM
9 APRIL AUCKLAND TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
AUCKLAND NEW ZEALAND MAHAMAYA PUJA
You start telling Me that there is a miracle that has happened. Nothing is a miracle because
of it
dll
Ol Tl if you are all in My body and if My body is divine, then what is a miracle? It is all the com-
munication. As this hand can communicate with this hand, I communicate with you... If you
is there
IS
are with Me, if you are in Sahaja Yoga, you are protected, you are looked after. But you
any problem, it gets solved...
Just enjoy that you are in that maya and you are enjoying it. It is the best way to enjoy this
Mahamaya. And today, for the first time, we have this puja of Mahamaya. Because of Gudi
have to stick on, you have to have faith and, even if there is
Padwa, I thought something unique must be done which encompasses everything of Sahaja
Yoga – everything of Sahaja Yoga. It is not one incarnation, it is not one nadi, it is not one
Goddess, but all of it is there. It is sometimes, I say, like a film is audio, visual, everything is
there - drama, music, also acting. Everything is there in a film now. I mean that far, everything
integrated. In the same way, I think Mahamaya has everything in it, every part that you tell
Me, everything that you enjoy, everything that you discover. Everything is in that vision of
Mahamaya, which has been created for you.
11 APRIL AUCKLAND PUBLIC PROGRAM
BRISBANE AUSTRALIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
You must have purity. Especially love, when it is pure, it is so joy-giving. So now, you can open
open
Open your heart. May God bless you. Everywhere I have seen people say there is a tree here or
some sort of a plant is there which is not being watered. And some people will immediately
your
Your go and water it, but more than that is the nourishment of others. It is your love which does
good, which, if you don't do, then you are a miserable creature, absolutely good for noth-
heart
ing. As Sahaja Yogis, you have to be extremely lovable and filled with pure love – filled.
15 APRIL BRISBANE PUBLIC PROGRAM
12
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Of Flowers, Laughter, Vibrations
On April 9th, Sahaja Yogis from New
Zealand, as well as Australia and South Africa, welcomed
Shri Mataji after Her flight from Sydney. It was a time of
flowers and laughter and vibrations. Through a gentle,
cleansing rain, Shri Mataji travelled to the ashram, where
She stayed for the four days of the great visit. During Her
stay, Shri Mataji spoke on many topics, but often Her
comments returned to three particular areas: the arts,
BRISBANE - The public program was a great success. As
with all the programs on the tour, the hall was packed
to overflowing. Each city attracted their largest crowds
AUCKLAND -
ever.
When Shri Mataji left Brisbane, She walked to the
airport departure gate, followed by a large number
of Sahaja Yogis bidding Her farewell. Before leaving,
She turned to us, did namaskar. "Remember, always
meditate," She said.
agriculture and the power of vibrations.
Russian Academy Lauds Shri Mataji
Shri Mataji was honoured by membership in the Saint
Petersburg Academy of Arts and Sciences (now known as the
Russian Academy of Science), a network of scientific research
institutes from across the Russian Federation. The Academy
was founded in the 18th century by Czar Peter the Great.
This letter of recommendation was read aloud to Shri Mataji
and the Sahaja Yogis in Sydney on April 5th.
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi was born in 1923 on the
21st of March in Chhindwara, in the central part of
India, in a noble Christian family. Having revealed her
extraordinary abilities already in childhood, later she got
a higher medical education and took an active part in
the struggle for the national independence of India. In
1947, She married Mr. Srivastava and now they have two
daughters...
Mrs. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi and Mr. C.P. Srivastava,
Mrs. Nirmala Srivastava, Doctor of Philosophy and
Medicine, a distinguished authority on the fields of
religion, philosophy and science, by her noble activity,
does very much to promote the happiness and friendship
of the Indian and Russian peoples (and all the nations of
the world); she was always regarding our land as a centre of
world spirituality and morality, centre of rapprochement
for the peoples of the West and the Orient, centre of the
revival of sublime ideals, which have been put forward by
Russians and many other nations of Russia.
Being the founder of the elevated teaching of Sahaja
Yoga, Mrs. Nirmala Devi Srivastava absolutely, reliably
connects the physical and psychic health of a man with
the mode of his life and morality.
considering the Russian people to be spiritual and pure,
see in our Motherland the centre of the spiritual revival
of the world.
Being absolutely sincere, from the bottom of my heart,
I recommend to the Presidium of Peter's Academy of Arts
and Sciences to elect Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi to be an
Honourary Member of our Academy.
Y.A. Vornov, Vice-President
Peter's Academy of Arts and Sciences
This was approved and supported by the Academy. Only
twelve people have received this honour. Albert Einstein was
one of them.
Everything is in that vision of Mahamaya,
which has been created for you.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 18 APRIL TOKYO PUBLIC PROGRAM
19 APRIL TAIPEI TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
20 APRIL TAIPEI PUBLIC PROGRAM
21 APRIL TAIPEI TAIWAN TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
The people who were there were quite a serious type. I felt they were listening to Me with
oir
was at first very hot. Later on it subsided and it became
great concentration. And it
very
cool when they got their Realization. I could feel their coolness even sitting down there.
in the
That shows that these people have problems because of their fast life they have here, the
speedy life they have. And they have a kind of a stress and strain. And they have taken to this
centre
modern life, modern culture, which is not suitable for Chinese or Indians. It is not suitable for
anyone whatsoever. So in the Sahaj culture, we take it in a very balanced way. I find on the
whole, Chinese are the same culture as Indians. So you see, it is easier for Chinese to take to
Sahaj culture and the Sahaj attitude of witnessing everything, keeping in the centre.
22 APRIL H
ONG KONG PUBLIC PROGRAM
24 APRIL TAIPEI TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
26 APRIL KUALA LUMPUR MALAYSIA PUBLIC PROGRAM
| am seventy-one years of age. I will be seventy-two now. And I am travelling practically
every third day. How do I manage? Because I never think I travel. I never think I travel. I
be
that
have to be honest about
am just enjoying every part of it... I am here to tell
you
you
honest
yourself, that's all, and it will all work out.. The only thing about Sahaja Yoga is that it is not
an individual growth. You cannot grow in your house. You have to come to the collective.
Out You have to be in the collective. Like if My one nail is cut out, it won't grow. Whatever is the
about
place, whatever is the area where you have to go, you have to go there, all of you. And
you
yourself
have to grow. It would be something like sprouting the seed, but the seed has to grow and
it should not be that a sprouted seed is wasted. You must have respect for yourself, for Self
Realization, for yourself – and you must grow into it. Then you will understand whatever reli-
gion you are following. Then you will understand the greatness of all these prophets, gurus,
satgurus and the incarnations. Without that, you cannot understand the unity that exists
within them.. To understand all these great people who have created beautiful religions for
us, we have to use Sahaja Yoga.
'sn
27 APRIL BANGKOK PUBLIC PROGRAM
28 APRIL BANGKOK MEDIA INTERVIEW
28 APRIL BANGKOK ENTERTAINMENT PROGRAM
14
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 NAYT
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 8 MAY CABELLA LIGURE ITALY SAHASRARA PUJA
In the world of this nonsense that we are living, we have to be something like the lotuses
have
who cannot be tarnished, who cannot be affected by all the ills that are going on. This is what
is the test, is the pariksha, that at this difficult time we can blossom and create fragrance and
faith
get so many others to this beautiful atmosphere. It is a kind of a beautiful, playful war against
what is supposed to be negative. What is the power of this negativity? What is the power
IN Il of these conditionings? What is the power of this stupidity that anybody can see? So you
in
develop the sight, the vision. So clearly – you understand so clearly that you are the ones
who are responsible. You are the cells of this Sahasrara, of this brain and you all have to act.
I was yesterday enamoured when you said that these lights have to enlighten many lights.
This was really a great promise to Me. So coming to Sahaja Yoga is not just for your personal,
limited personalities and their problems, but it is you – on one side you have to grow and,
on the other side, everyone has to grow through you.. Today, of course, I am very happy
that in My lifetime I could see the manifestation of Mahamaya. It is such a beautiful
that
one,
through this door that is opened, you are now just able to enter into the kingdom of God
and to enjoy the heavenly bliss and the protection. But have faith in it. Have faith in it. Do not
get disturbed by small things and I am sure it will work out in a very great way. If you get that
complete faith and a complete surrendering, I am sure it will work out very well.
5 JUNE LONDON PUBLIC PROGRAM
18 JUNE VIENNA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
23 JUNE GHENT
25 JUNE CABELLA ENTERTAINMENT PROGRAM
26 JUNE CABELLA LIGURE ITALY SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA
To understand your own powers of Kundalini and your powers that are available to you in
OWETS the working of Paramchaitanya is very important. That will give you confidence. That will give
powers
you compassion. That will give you a vision. And that will make you a very great personal-
are with
ity – a very great personality. What was George Washington? They said he was great.
was Abraham Lincoln? He was great. But you are all having your Self Realization. You have to
What
you
YOU think of the whole universe, the whole expanse. Unless and until that brain develops in you, I
am very sure that the progress of Sahaja Yoga within and without will be less. So understand
these powers are with you. You have to utilize them – with humility.
16
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 New Doors Open with Puja
L.
CABELLA - On the evening after the Sahasrara Puja,
Shri Mataji talked to us about memory. She said that She
has a perfect and vivid memory of Her birth, as well as
Her previous incarnations. Shri Mataji explained that the
reason She has a perfect memory is that She does not
think. She said that if we do not think, our memories will
improve a lot and that, after all, there is nothing to worry
about. Whatever that thing is that we are worried about
has not happened yet. And if it hasn't happened, it does
not exist. It is only in our mind. We should just enjoy the
present and, when we need it, a memory will come at the
right time, without any effort. For Shri Mataji, a situation
presents itself and, if She wants to draw something from
Her experience, it is just there – without thinking and
without effort. And that is the it should be.
way
Shri Mataji also said that all the other incarnations
talked about the future, but She is not talking of the
future. They all talked about which incarnation will come
next and what they will teach us. But now we have only
the eternal present. For us, the future and the
exist. They are myths. They have no meaning. Shri Mataji
has opened doors that were closed and all the powers are
past do not
there. All we have to do is take them.
So this Sahasrara Puja opened new doors for us that
were not opened before and it is up to us to take advantage
of that.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 8 JULY GENEVA PUBLIC PROGRAM
9 JULY BASEL PUBLIC PROGRAM
12 JULY PARIS PUBLIC PROGRAM
13 JULY PARIS FRANCE SHRI VISHNU PUJA
It is such a great day today that the French got their liberation on this day. But what is this lib-
real
eration for? I don't know. In no country where they had freedom and liberation I have seen,
it has not worked something very much that was expected.. Liberation through anger, when
it comes, hatred is the basis of these revolutions and these so-called achieved liberations. If
liberation
the liberation takes place within yourself so that you are no more a slave of any one of these
horrible destructive forces and negative forces, then it is a real liberation.
14 JULY COLOGNE PUBLIC PROGRAM
15 JULY HAMBURG PUBLIC PROGRAM
17 JULY BERLIN PUBLIC PROGRAM
18 JULY VIENNA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
18 JULY VIENNA AUSTRIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
As you are giving your flowers, also give your hearts to Me, as I will give My heart to you.
19 JULY VIENNA PUBLIC PROGRAM
22 JULY
CABELLA ENTERTAINMENT PROGRAM
23 JULY CABELLA ENTERTAINMENT PROGRAM
24 JULY CABELLA LIGURE ITALY GURU PUJA
Today you all have gathered here to worship Me as your guru. I must say that I lack many
qualities that a guru should have in the sense I cannot be strict with you, I cannot be stern
|
you and I really do not know how to punish you for doing wrong things. This may be
because normally I think the gurus have problems with their disciples, who are mostly not
with
yourself
realized souls. As they are not realized souls, the
find it difficult to communicate or
gurus
talk to them about the subtle problems that they have.. I always bow to you people who
have
Realization because I think so many saints were never here on this Earth. But the
got
saintliness has to be complete. Without that, you cannot help even your family, leave alone
your country and no question of the whole world. So what is needed now is to raise your
awakening, to raise your spirituality, to go into a realm of complete support and surrender
to the movement of this spontaneous movement of Sahaja Yoga. May God bless you all. In
short, you must worship yourself.
18
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 The Guru Was Telling Us
S
explained that the Guru Tattwa was very strong and that
the negativity would have no effect.
The full moon of that night was spectacular. Shri Mataji
later explained. It was the most auspicious full moon in
fifteen hundred years.
CABELLA - There is a contrast between the constant
activity – there were probably up to two thousand people
- and the over-riding air of calm that pervades the entire
village.
Information about the weekend program seems to
arrive so gently as to be unnoticeable. Somewhere, as if
on the wings of collective consciousness, you know that
the evening music program will begin at "about eight or
nine o’clock" and you adjust your rhythm accordingly.
Somehow, no matter where you are, you know that dinner
is being served up at the pendal. There are no signs, no
meetings, no orders, just calm. We enter Cabella and we
enter a timeless bubble.
In the early hours of the morning, after an all-night
entertainment program, Shri Mataji spoke to us. She
explained that the planet Jupiter represents the Void and
that the impacts of the Shoemaker-Levy comet represent
a sort of a cosmic conflict which is very significant for
Sahaja Yoga and for the world – dharma will triumph
over adharma. The impacts symbolize the conversion
of negativity into a positive force in the universe. She
The puja day dawns– as little talkas possible, just a serene
sense of ceremony guiding us through the preparations,
including a bath and meditation in the river.
In Cabella many make their pilgrimage to the river,
now only three feet deep in the middle. Mountain water
clear and cool, she feeds us physically and spiritually.
At the evening puja, Shri Mataji's speech left us
completely and utterly silent with attention. The Guru
spoke to Her children with such power and authority that
CC
we were unable to move a muscle. The dharma of a Sahaja
Yogi, the generosity of a yogi, how we should become the
witness and combine concern with detachment – these
are all topics that have been covered before.
But this time we had the feeling that something extra
was happening. The Guru was telling us something.
Could we hear it?
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 30 31 JULY AMSTERDAM PUBLIC PROGRAMS
27 AUGUST CABELLA ENTERTAINMENT PROGRAM
28 AUGUST CABELLA LIGURE ITALY SHRI KRISHNA PUJA
You are a new race, blessed by the Divine and you have Shri Krishna within yourself awak-
to be
ened. In His own glory, in His own light, you should know what is to be done. One must com-
municate. That you have to do.. You have to communicate with complete humility the way
complete
Shri Krishna did.. Your duty is to build up yourself and to communicate with others with all
the sweetness, madhuri of Shri Krishna, all the beauty of Shri Krishna, with full understand-
ing as to what stupid things are going around and around. Once you understand that, you
will not take to it because you will become wise enough not to take to all these nonsensical
things that are going on. It is so much, in this lecture I cannot tell you, but now if you become
the witness of the whole thing you will see what is happening. Today is the puja of Shri
Krishna. I need not tell you how many qualities He has, but the greatest quality He has is
that He is the doctor of doctors. Now, in His name, you will know how many qualities He
has and
will understand. Try to understand that we have to have these qualities within
you
us also. Whatever qualities are described or said, try to see how many we have. That is the
way the introspection will start. Once you start introspecting yourself and understanding
yourself, the wisdom will grow – not by seeing faults in others, putting blames on others, but
on yourself. That is how the things will work out, although Krishna did not have to do that
because He was sampurna. He was complete. But we have to do all this to see that we also
become complete.
3 SEPTEMBER WARSAW PUBLIC PROGRAM
4 SEPTEMBER PRAGUE PUBLIC PROGRAM
7 SEPTEMBER BUCHAREST ROMANIA PUBLIC PROGRAM
I am very happy that the collective of Romania is so great. They have transformed their lives.
to feel
They are very beautiful. I have gone to Russia when there was a putsch and I asked the Rus-
sian Sahaja Yogis, "Aren't you afraid of these problems?" They said, "Mother, why? We are in
secure the kingdom of God. Why should we be afraid of these petty politics here?" That's what it is.
We have to feel secure with our spirit being awakened. And we feel absolutely protected.
10 SEPTEMBER MOSCOW ENTERTAINMENT PROGRAM
20
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 W.d
You Will Get It All
At the first of two public programs,
WARSAW - A sixteen-year-old Polish boy composed a
beautiful poetic song to welcome Shri Mataji to Poland.
He went to a library and searched for the words in a
dictionary and so translated the entire song into Hindi.
He then went to the Indian embassy to check that he had
written all the words correctly and they told him he had
made only two mistakes.
Accompanied by two children of five and six of
AMSTERDAM -
Shri Mataji spoke about women in the West. They have
a disadvantage compared to women in India, She said.
They are less appreciated and less respected. This might
stem from Christianity. Shri Mataji also told the audience
that the Koran suffers distortion due to the work of its
editor. In fact, all religions are either power or money-
oriented. Christ did not understand people in the sense
that He did not visualize how they would use His work
for their own goals. Gyaneshwara in the twelfth century
was the first saint who revealed in script the benevolent
and divine work of the Kundalini. Still, only one or two
received their moksha. "You here will get it all," Shri
Mataji said. "It is your birthright and you deserve it."
years
he sang his song to Shri Mataji in perfect Hindi. Shri
age,
Mataji was very touched and with Her eyes filled with
tears, She expressed Her total love and appreciation of
their devotion to Her through this small and extremely
sweet song they had offered.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 11 SEPTEMBER MOSCOW RUSSIA SHRI GANESHA PUJA
Without Shri Ganesha it is not possible. As you know, He is the symbol of innocence within
you have
become
us. This innocence never gets destroyed because it is eternal. But it may happen that it will
get covered with some clouds by our mistakes that we commit. But once you get your Real-
ization, your innocence is re-established, manifests and you become innocent. Your atten-
tion becomes innocent.. I do not know how many of you know that all of you have become
saints saints. As Ganesha was created, you are also created as innocent saints. Try to respect your
innocence. That will make you feel young and happy. The innocence is very powerful. Any-
body who tries to molest or tries to destroy somebody's innocence is ultimately very badly
punished by Shri Ganesha .. so one should never try to challenge a person who is innocent,
who has the blessings of Shri Ganesha. Only through enlightenment can you awaken Shri
Ganesha within yourself.
12 SEPTEMBER MOSCOW PUBLIC PROGRAM
ONFERENCE
14 SEPTEMBER MOSCOW RUSSIA SCIENCE C
In this short lecture I am sorry I cannot tell you everything about Sahaja Yoga. In the English
iNiS IS language alone, I must have given at least five thousand lectures. But a lecture is just a mental
this is
acrobat. You have to go beyond it and achieve a state of enlightenment. Enlightenment does
your
not mean any brand like "born again" or anything. It is an actualization and the becoming. It
is not just talk, talk, talk. It is also not blind faith. This is an actual happening... The other day
capacity somebody asked Me, "Why am I on this Earth?" I said, "To become divine and to enter into
the kingdom of God." So he said, "What? Will that help me?" I told him, "First you enter. It
will not only help you physically, mentally, emotionally, spiritually, but it will help others.."
וו
Because who is the other? You have become collective now. That means the microcosm has
become the macrocosm or the drop has become the sea. This is your capacity. This is
your
glory. This is what you have to have as your own. No obligation – it is all love and
compas-
sion, the power is of love, of divine love, of pure love without any lust or greed. We have
never used the power of love. Now the time has come.
15 SEPTEMBER SAINT PETERSBURG AWARD CEREMONY
15 SEPTEMBER SAINT PETERSBURG PUBLIC PROGRAM
16 SEPTEMBER TOGLIATTI MUSIC PROGRAM
17 SEPTEMBER TOGLIATTI TALK AT SAHAJA YOGA SCHOOL
22
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-25.txt 
 22 SEPTEMBER CHICAGO PUBLIC PROGRAM
25 SEPTEMBER TORONTO PUBLIC PROGRAM
26 SEPTEMBER VANCOUVER PUBLIC PROGRAM
27 SEPTEMBER LOS ANGELES MUSIC PROGRAM
27 28 29 SEPTEMBER LOS ANGELES PUBLIC PROGRAMS
29 SEPTEMBER LOS ANGELES TELEVISION INTERVIEW
1 OCTOBER NEW YORK PUBLIC PROGRAM
2 OCTOBER NEW JERSEY USA SHRI YOGESHWAR PUJA
Supposing I had started Sahaja Yoga even a hundred years back, I would not have even one
talk
| Can talK single disciple, one single Sahaja Yogi. The reason is the people were all right. They were on
a value system, all right. Their life was very much satisfying. They were very peaceful. They
to you
were just interested in some horses or something like that. But now, you find people are
so much disturbed, so much in trouble, so much in chaos in this Kali Yuga. It is the height
of Kali Yuga now, so much of immorality, so much of dissatisfaction in life that they have to
now think where to
Like a shock, the future is waiting for them. And now what should
go.
they achieve? So the whole of this bhranti, illusion of life starts staring at them and then
they start thinking, "What is this? What am I doing? What have I done? Why is it so? Why
is everything in a chaos? Why is it happening?" Then the seeking starts and, with their seek-
ing, now you know what has happened, that you all have got your Realization. Without
the seeking, it would not have been even possible for Me to talk to you at all about Sahaja
Yoga. It is because you are seekers I can talk to you.. Tonight we are praising Shri Krishna
who is Yogeshwara. He eats, but He does not eat. He sleeps, but He does not sleep. He has
wives, but He has no wife. Like this is the Yogeshwara. And that is what you are - yogis. And
He is your Ishwara. So you have to try to be like Him. Let your brain be enlightened by His
blessings and you will become that great personality that encompasses everything, that sees
everything, that gives you discretion, that makes you understand what is wrong.
And
you
will feel enthusiastic about changing this America with all your effort, with all your mind.
That is the most important thing you have to do. As it is, He is a Kubera, He is the Lord of
wealth and He has given you such a lot of wealth all around.. In every way you are blessed.
You have money. You have everything. You have brains. Everything is there. What is lacking is
wisdom, with everything, with you. Supposing you have a car. You have everything – car, you
have got keys, you have got the engine, you have got the brakes, everything, but
you don't
know how to drive. So what will happen? This is what it is. So as Sahaja Yogis from America,
you have a very, very, very special responsibility.
3 OCTOBER NEW YORK PUBLIC PROGRAM
24
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-26.txt 
 LOS ANGELES - The audience at the Los Angeles public
NEW YORK - Shri Mataji was still shopping even as
seekers were being entertained and prepared for Her
arrival in the Ethical Cultural Society auditorium in
program in Santa Monica was a large cross-section of
many types of people, but one person stood out. He was
an African prince in traditional dress, including a large
disk in his lower lip and a bone through his nose. He
carried a large wooden staff. After the program, he called
out to Shri Mataji, “Kali Ma! Kali Ma!" Shri Mataji
stopped, turned and asked, "Who is calling My name?"
Directly from the program, Shri Mataji went to the
airport to catch a midnight flight to New York. We all
raced to the airport, but most of us were too late to offer
Manhattan on October 1st.
While She was preparing to leave a store, a Pakistani
Muslim man, a security guard in the shop, recognized
Shri Mataji as the Adi Shakti. He had never before heard
of Sahaja Yoga nor seen Shri Mataji's picture, but he came
up to Her grandchildren, apologized for interrupting and
told them that there is a rare tree that only grows after
many thousands of years. He said that the person they
were talking to, Shri Mataji, was rarer than that tree.
He went on to say that he could feel Her power within
himself. Calling to everyone in the store, he told them to
stop shopping, that they were wasting an opportunity to
behold Shri Mataji.
Shri Mataji blessed the man, as he began to weep
flowers to Shri Mataji. We asked the airline staff if we
could offer the flowers even though the airplane door
was closed and it was about to taxi away. An employee
of the airline took several bouquets and headed for the
departing plane. The collapsible walkway began to pull
away from the sealed door, but, as we watched with glee,
the walkway was pushed back towards the aircraft and
the door was re-opened with the power of our collective
love and gratitude. The employee returned and reported
that Shri Mataji was now surrounded by flowers.
with
tears of joy.
Later She commented as to what a sensitive man he was,
what recognition he had and if there were more like him
there would be no problem in working out America.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-27.txt 
 8 OCTOBER CABELLA ENTERTAINMENT PROGRAM
9 OCTOBER CABELLA LIGURE ITALY NAVARATRI PUJA
The quality is of compassion and love, fearlessness and courage and the complete empti-
it will
ness. In this emptiness, you are not worried about what you have to achieve, how many
people you have to gather, how many must come to Sahaja Yoga – not bothered about that.
out Automatically it will work out, but you would not desire for it and you will not hanker, "Oh
work
because where
my God, there is not many people, what to do?" It is good for us in a way
is the place in heaven for so many stupid people? So we should not run after people who
are negative and useless. But we must definitely take the people who are genuinely goo...
In Sanskrit they call it cheyen. That means "selection." This is a natural selection that takes
place. And how people go away and how they come back to Sahaja Yoga, it's very interest-
ing. This is a common happening in Sahaja Yoga, you know. You should not get upset.. As
long as they are Sahaja Yogis, we should be happy... As many as there are is sufficient and
we shouldn't worry about those things, the number. The new age people talk of is here, no
doubt. This is the new age and the new consciousness is also here. But what is the "new"
now is the new collectivity and that collectivity acts, that you want to spread it. It acts like
your hunger. It is another kind of hunger, that you want to create more Sahaja Yogis. You
want to have more brothers and sisters and you want to help them so that they could come
to the pujas and all that and become good Sahaja Yogis. Now this kind of an ambition or a
joy or whatever you may call it is the whole plan. It shows that in your heart the collectivity
is prospering. And that is why you cannot enjoy Sahaja Yoga alone, sitting in the Himalayas
- no. You want to have other people. This is now the sign of how the Mother's love has taken
root in your hearts and how you are all going to spread Sahaja Yoga. You just become great
lights of your Mother. That is what I have to request of you tonight. You have all the
power
flowing in you, you have the light which is enlightened, but you must expand. Expand it more
and more and more and you will be surprised what Tukarama has said, that "I am like a small
little particle of dust and also I am the whole sky." This is what is your personality.
11 OCTOBER BARCELONA MUSIC PROGRAM
12 OCTOBER BARCELONA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
ain an ambassador told Shri Mataji that the Spanish people cannot
BARCELONA - In
understand spirituality at all. Shri Mataji replied, "I must give everyone a chance, otherwise
they will say they didn't know."
15 OCTOBER RIO DE JANEIRO PUBLIC PROGRAM
16 OCTOBER SAO PAULO PUBLIC PROGRAM
18 OCTOBER BRASILIA PUBLIC PROGRAM
19 OCTOBER BUENOS AIRES PUBLIC PROGRAM
20 OCTOBER BOGOTA PUBLIC PROGRAM
26
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-28.txt 
 *:
BUENOS AIRES - We went to the countryside, to a house
where the Sahaja Yogis often gather for seminars. After
Her lunch, Shri Mataji Herself cooked for those lucky
yogis who had not yet eaten. What a joy for their Nabhis,
as the food was absolutely exquisite. In the evening, She
again insisted on cooking – for everyone this time. She
went in the back garden where two big fires had been set
and started overseeing the cooking. Shri Mataji waited
until it was all ready before She had Her own dinner.
The yogis then gathered outside to enjoy a divine meal. It
was a moment which will stay forever in our memories.
Everyone was silent and our faces were shining in the
light of the fire, feeling the tremendous blessing.
BOGOTA - Many times in Brazil and Argentina, Sahaja
Yogis noticed that Shri Mataji corrected parts of the
translations of Her talks that were made in Spanish or
Portuguese.
One day She was asked how She knew the translation
was not accurate. She explained that the energy starts
at the Nabhi level. Then at the Heart level this energy
becomes an abstract thought. Only at the Vishuddhi
does it become words and language. So by putting Her
attention on the first or second level, She can know what
we are saying, even though it is in another language.
She added that this is not the same thing as reading the
mind, which is not a good thing to try to do.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-29.txt 
 BRAZIL - When asked about the vibrations of matter, Shri Mataji said that matter usually has
an electromagnetic vibration, but not spiritual vibrations. However, matter can be spiritually
vibrated by Her or by a realized soul. Everything She touches becomes vibrated. Great artists
give their works of art spiritual vibrations, which can be felt by a realized soul. She specifically
mentioned some great cathedrals. Shri Mataji said that each piece of matter has a certain
"coefficient of linear expansion" which determines both the quality and the intensity of the
vibrations emitted. She said that the best thing that can be done with matter is to give it as a
CC
present. Shri Mataji also told the Sahaja Yogis about the carbon atom, which depending upon
the perspective from which it is viewed can reveal the Omkara, the Alpha or the Omega. She
said that this is a proof that Lord Jesus was an incarnation of Shri Ganesha.
4 NOVEMBER ISTANBUL ENTERTAINMENT PROGRAM
5 NOVEMBER ISTANBUL TURKEY DIWALI PUJA
Kundalini is not working out well because there are problems in your
When
chakras,
your
what you have to say is "You are, you are!" You say that. "You are sakshat this. You are sakshat
that." Sakshat means "in reality..." That is how you cleanse all the dirt or all the problems of
of ligh
your chakras. By this, you also correct your conditionings and your ego. Then you do not take
the credit for anything. You do not feel you are doing something. And the whole personal-
ity changes into a complete instrument like the flute in the hands of Shri Krishna. Then you
see your work, everything as the work of the Divine. That is how you become enlightened.
That is how you become the light of joy and of peace. A lot has been said about what you
are. That is how whatever is described, you become that. If there is a light, you do not have
to say that it is a light. It is. It is not a stamp that you have to use. So today we are celebrating
a Diwali of the lights of Sahaja Yoga. I do not know what to say, in what state of bliss I am.
All the ripples you have created of joy are overwhelming for Me. No words can describe. I
cannot compose poetry. Keep this light burning beautifully through meditation and you can
become very strong beacons of light.
6 NOVEMBER ISTANBUL MARRIAGES
11 NOVEMBER TUNIS TELEVISION INTERVIEW
11 12 NOVEMBER TUNIS PUBLIC PROGRAMS
13 NOVEMBER TUNIS TALK TO TUNISIAN WOMEN
15 17 NOVEMBER ATHENS TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
28 NOVEMBER FARIDABAD PUBLIC PROGRAM
29 NOVEMBER DELHI PUBLIC PROGRAM
30 NOVEMBER NOIDA PUBLIC PROGRAM
1 DECEMBER GHAZIABAD PUBLIC PROGRAM
5 DECEMBER DELHI BO
OK LAUNCH
28
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Keep Your Traditions
On the last day, Shri Mataji only wanted to speak to the
women. It was difficult to keep the men out, but they were
not allowed in the hall. Shri Mataji spoke to the women
wearing a white sari. She looked very impressive, very
dark. She spoke to them, mainly saying that they should
not follow the French culture. She said they should keep
to their traditions because, if they do not keep to their
traditions, then the fundamentalism comes in. "So don't
run after Western ideas." She really emphasized that.
TUNIS - Shri Mataji gave two public talks, one in the
evening and then on the last day, a Sunday morning, She
talked to the women. The women were very fascinated by
Shri Mataji. They were very open. The ladies in the front
row rushed on the stage and took Mother around the
waist. There were six or seven of them and they were all
around Mother and they wanted to have a photograph.
They were kissing Shri Mataji's hands and Mother was
very loving with them.
CC
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-31.txt 
 4 DECEMBER DELHI INDIA SHRI RAJA LAKSHMI PUJA
have entered into the kingdom of God. You are now sitting in the court of God
Now
you
not
NOl Almighty. Here, of course, as courtiers you have to dress up well, sit properly, take up your
seats. You have to be systematic and above board because you are Sahaja Yogis. You are not
ordinary people. You are special people. How many people in this world are going to be
Sahaja Yogis? You are special people, so try to make yourself such beautiful instruments of
people
Raja Lakshmi that people, when they will see you, they will vote for you.. You have to first
get the blessings of Raja Lakshmi and then only you should understand what is wrong with
your country, what we have to do, what is the purpose.. We have to have plans. What is
your project? On all these things now put your attention from yourself to outside.. When
the war of independence started in India we gave up our studies, gave up our parents, gave
have to
up everything. We were very young people. So now you have to know that if
you
really take to politics, you have to have the blessings of Raja Lakshmi and for that you have
to build up yourself with that dignity, with that sense. I bless you from My heart that in every
country such people will come up.
5 DECEMBER CHANDIGARH PUBLIC PROGRAM
6 DECEMBER YAMUNANAGAR PUBLIC PROGRAM
YAMUNANAGAR - At the end of the public program, a young girl shouted to get Shri Mataji's
attention. She made her way to the front and Shri Mataji beckoned for her to come on the
For more than half an hour Shri Mataji worked on this girl with a candle flame. Finally,
stage.
the girl spoke to the audience in Hindi, saying she was blind and Shri Mataji had enabled her
to see – first Shri Mataji's bangles, then Her bindi and then Her sari. She ended up by saying,
"Shri Mataji is God." The whole atmosphere was full of enthusiasm and joy, with people
clapping, singing and dancing.
CC
7 DECEMBER YAMUNANAGAR PUJA
7 DECEMBER YAMUNANAGAR MUSIC PROGRAM
8 DECEMBER DEHRAD
UN PUBLIC PROGRAM
10 DECEMBER JAIPUR PUBLIC PROGRAM
11 DECEMBER JAIPUR SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA
JAIPUR - At the puja Shri Mataji spoke in Hindi. She told us that we are worshippers of Shri
Adi Shakti and follow the dharma of the Shakti. The Adi Shakti is especially worshipped by
royalty and is known by many different names. Rajasthan is blessed because the Adi Shakti
once incarnated there as Sati Devi. The blessings She bestowed are still present in Rajasthani
culture. Shri Mataji's family has ties to Rajasthan that go back to ancient times. Shri Mataji
described the powers of the Goddess, but She said Shri Adi Shakti is beyond all these powers
and to describe Her is a difficult task. It is left to the Sahaja Yogis to describe Shri Adi Shakti.
30
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-32.txt 
 India Tour Teaches Rhythm
YAMUNANAGAR - On December 6th a message came
DELHI - The first public program of the tour was on
November 28th in Faridabad, a small town southeast of
Delhi. About five thousand people were in attendance. We
saw Shri Mataji there for the first time on the tour. Shri
spoke in Hindi, but we could feel Her divine attention
was also on us. At the end of the program, we joined in
the singing of Sitting in the Heart of the Universe. We
that Shri Mataji was waiting for us at VIP
called the Pintail Resort. We made our way to a quiet
guest house
garden high above the river and we all sat on the
around Her as She spoke to us as our mother. She asked
us to remove our hats and scarves to take advantage of
the morning sun, which is good for the growth of hair,
and that wearing hats causes baldness.
Shri Mataji spoke about dholaks and the importance of
rhythm in music and in our lives. Shiva's dholak gives the
rhythm and the heartbeat, the beat of life which pulsates
and sends vibrations through the nerves of the entire
body. The rhythm of the drum in music puts us in tune
with our inner rhythm.
One aspect of discipline consists of getting tuned
into the rhythm of the Divine, being in step with life.
This means we must get up very early in the morning
because this time corresponds to the Indian rhythm
which is directly controlled by the Kundalini. Shri Mataji
apologized for having to tell us the truth about getting up
very early in the morning, but She said there is no way
around it. In Sahaja Yoga there are no obligations, but
we should know that this is the best time to have a deep
grass
sang
CC
out the line "Shri Mataji, we love You" from deep down
in our universal hearts.
On the following evening, expectations were high for
the main Delhi public program. More than sixty thousand
and 150 billboards advertising the program had
posters
been placed around the city. A huge, magnificent pendal
supported by 144 poles covered the equivalent of two
large playing fields. There were about eighteen thousand
people – a sea of humanity.
One
Shastri Remembered
About two thousand people gathered on
DELHI
December 5th for the inauguration of a new book about
former Indian prime minister Lal Bahadur Shastri. The
book was written by Sir CP Srivastava, who made the
point of calling it "our book," making us all feel its
relevance for our own growth and, in some way, for the
spread of Sahaja Yoga.
Shri Mataji explained that Shastri was a man of
tremendous depth. When She met him She was happy
meditation.
We must have pure attention and learn to control our
attention, called chitta nirodh. We have to learn to put
the attention inside, on the present moment when there
is no past or future, where there is no thought. She went
on to say that we have all come a long way, but this is the
next step. When we see something beautiful, we should
go thoughtless.
If you sit in meditation and think about shopping,
there is no spiritual growth. Of course, we have to shop,
but if our attention is inside, it
and efficiently. When our attention is on the Divine
everything works out.
Meditation is not a mental process. We cannot grow
CC
because She had found a realized soul who had the
desire to go into politics. She said most realized souls
shun politics. In Shastri She saw a man who the Divine
could use to do work for India in the move away
from materialism and self-interest and towards a society
focused on morality and the greater good of man.
From the beginning, Shri Mataji said, Shastri knew
She was a divine personality and always showed Her
tremendous respect. It was Her desire that Sir CP work
with Shastri and to be of help in his great work. Shri Mataji
explained that it was fate that Shastriji's time in office was
so short and that India always suffered from such bad fate.
great
done
very quickly
gets
mentally. We have to go into thoughtless awareness and
we have to practise this. Also we should constantly ask
ourselves, “Where is your attention?" See where it is
going. What makes us happy? What do we love?
JAIPUR - Shri Mataji's last words to us in the early morning hours before leaving the Jaipur train station were, "It is
a very small train, but it is the only one going through those beautiful places. If you want the vision of beauty, you
should not mind the size of the train."
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-33.txt 
 20 DECEMBER PRATISHTHAN TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
20 DECEMBER PUNE PUBLIC PROGRAM
PUNE - On December 20th there was a very large public program in Pune. As we entered the
grounds of the New Medical College, we could not fathom the number of people there – at
least thousand. Shri Mataji spoke for more than an hour. The vibrations were very strong
twenty
and one felt very privileged to be at a program where so many received their Realization.
23 DECEMBER GANAPATIPULE ENTERTAINMENT PROGRAM
27 DECEMBER GANAPATIPULE INDIA CHRISTMAS PUJA
It is very simple to understand about your own country, where the problem is, why people
to please
are poor and we cannot help them. We have to take to this. Unless and until your light shines
in the society, we are doing nothing. We are just enjoying our own Sahaja Yoga, Ganapatipule
divine and all that, But what about others? So sensitivity to art, sensitivity to music, sensitivity to al
the
creative things that are there and what can we do with these creative things for others – the
attention should be more towards these things than about useless things. About politics you
should not worry so much. It will be all exposed and finished and it will be all right. Let them
fight. Let them do what they like. They are stupid people. Your attention should be on how
you can be creative, how you can help people, what you can do. In everything there is one
thing. It is love, what you call as compassion, anukampa, just out of love and affection and
that should be a real innate expression of every Sahaja Yogi in every field of life.. What are
we doing to please others? You should be a pleasing personality instead of thinking about
how you
should be pleased.. To please the Divine, our character, our behaviour should be
absolutely clean. I know Sahaja Yogis have done wonders and they are doing very wellI, but
they can do much, much, much more than what they are doing. So on this day of Christ's
birthday, I have to tell you that it is not possible to follow His life. I agree – very difficult. But
at least, one has to learn from Him that He is before us and let us try to go forward towards
There are sure to be errors
and omissions in this 1994 Him, in His simplicity, in His honesty and the sacrifices He could make.
almanac. It is not com-
prehensive, nor complete. 28 DECEMBER GANAPATIPULE ENTERTAINMENT PROGRAM
Sources include "The Divine
a 29 DECEMBER GANAPATIPULE TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
Cool Breeze," the Sahaja
Yoga Media Project and the 29 DECEMBER GANAPATIPULE MARRIAGES
International Book Project
transcriptions. Sometimes 31 DECEMBER KALWE SHRI GANESHA PUJA
these sources do not agree.
In those cases, priority has
been given to reports written
at the time by people who
were there. Unverified events
NEWS REPORTS in this issue are from the pages of The Divine Cool Breeze magazines published in 1994 and 1995, except
the report from Tunis, which is from Eternally Inspiring Recollections of Our Holy Mother.
ALL PHOTOGRAPHS are from 1994 except page 5. Cover and page 9: Guru Puja seminar weekend. Page 1 and 29:
Tunisia. Page 3: Prague. Page 15: Sahasrara Puja. Page 17: Shri Adi Shakti Puja seminar weekend. Page 19: Cabella Ligure
Italy. Page 21: Shri Krishna Puja seminar weekend. Page 23: Shri Ganesha Puja seminar weekend. Page 25: Saint Petersburg
Russia, Page 27: near Buenos Aires Argentina. Page 33: India, place and date unknown. Back cover: Diwali Puja seminar.
have not been included. We
hope that the truth of Shri
Mataji's travels can be found
in the scope, range and love THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE www.divinecoolbreeze.org
She gave every day of 1994 SUBSCRIPTIONS: contact@divinecoolbreeze.org CONTENT: editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
- and every day since.
PRINTED BY King Printing Co. Inc. Lowell Massachusetts USA & Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. Pune Maharashtra India
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Starlit Grooms Advised for Life
Marriages are serious affairs, not frivolous. It does
not take long to perform the marriage, but it lasts for a
lifetime. If the wife starts dominating, you can tell her
how we expect her to behave, but there should be no
domination in this. If in small matters she does not do
GANAPATIPULE - This is a synopsis of the advice given by
Shri Mataji to the 104 grooms entering into marriage on
December 29th.
Marriages in Sahaja Yoga are marriages of collectivity.
Shri Mataji has made matches which will make us enjoy
each other completely. Sahaj marriages have been 98
percent successful, but even the two percent that go
as you expect, then it is all right and should tolerate
that and should show tenderness and care for
you
your
you
wrong cause Her concern. Some people come afterwards
and say that the atmosphere in Ganapatipule was a
certain way and so they agreed to marry. Later they think
that the marriage will not work out. This thinking is the
enemy of enjoyment.
wife.
Shri Mataji wished all the grooms a very enjoyable
married life and also a very happy new year.
It was a very beautiful moment in the lives of the bright-
eyed grooms sitting on the starlit shores of Ganapatipule.
New Year's Eve Farewell Puja
KALWE - The last official day of the 1994 India tour was
graced by a puja. The venue was the Mukund Steel plant,
which is also the site of a Shri Ganesha swayambhu. There
were about five thousand Sahaja Yogis in attendance. This
is a synopsis of the talk given by Shri Mataji at the Shri
Ganesha Puja on New Year's Eve.
"Now we will be parting. You will be going back to
your own country. And I must congratulate you,
you have come up to the expectations of Shri Ganesha. I
am very happy with you people."
Even though you do not have the tradition of Shri
Ganesha established in your countries, somehow you
try to bring forth this dimension in other people of your
nationality."
Sahaja Yogis see where they are going and are worried
about it. Something must be done about it so that people
in your countries take to a very dharmic, truly righteous
life – not just talking and giving big sermons about it.
The way foreign Sahaja Yogis have controlled their
children has brought the children to proper lives. “Your
children will thank much for this. I would like
the
way
you very
to thank
for others and for your country. And I am sure we will be
very successful in a very short time and it will become a
global understanding of Sahaja Yoga."
At the conclusion of the puja, we bowed down to Shri
Mataji and thanked Her for allowing us to come to India.
We asked for a fearless heart, for dedication to meditation
and to the work of Sahaja Yoga.
all for doing this good work for yourself,
you
have come up to such a level. Indians are going to the
western life, western style, western expression, the filth.
First you used to come and learn here about Sahaja Yoga,
about respect for others and respect for yourself. But this
tolerated all kinds of inconveniences and you
time
you
saw to the comfort of your spirit, not your body.
"The way you have been behaving, I am over-satisfied. I
hope you really grow into your spiritual dimensions and
We asked that some time soon we would be reunited with
Shri Mataji in India, the place of our spiritual growth and
transformation.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-35.txt 
 WHO IS CALLING MY NAME
JAI
SHRI MATAJI
