Yuvadrishti June 2012

 When the Kundalini rises it makes sounds. And the sounds that are heard in the different chakras can be pronounced in the following way pronunciations are being used in the phonetic language of Devanagari, which means 'the language spoken by the Devas'. these At the Mooladhara, where there are four petals, the sounds are: [vum, shum, sshum, sum]. Out of which the last, sshum and sum sounds are very close, but the difference is - when the snake hisses it makes this sshum - the third sound. So, vum, shum,sshum, sum. At the Swadishthana, where there are six petals - it makes sounds, six sounds. [Bum, bhum, mum, yum, rum, lum.] Manipur it has ten petals. It makes the sounds dum, dhum, num, tum, thum, dum, dhum, nnum, pum, phum. At Anahata there are twelve petals. It makes the sounds km, kum, gum, ghum, chum, chum, jum, jhum, tum, thum. At the Vishuddhi, where there are sixteen petals, it makes the sounds of all the vowels - a, aa, i, ii, u, uu, r, rr,Ir, Irr, e, ai, 0,ou,um,ahm. At the Agnya chakra it makes ha, ksha. At the Sahasrara one becomes thoughtless and no sound is made, but the pure Anahata, meaning the throbbing in the purest form as in the heart is all. When all these sounds are sounded together and pass through the spiral of the body, if the body is like a conch, the sound that comes out of the synthesis is AUM. Like the seven colors of the sun ultimately become white rays, or you can say the golden colored rays. H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, extract from Talk given in Hampstead, London, 14 October 1978

 INSIDE THIS ISSUE Sahasrara Chakra ...4 Kundalini ...6 Give a smile to ...8 ego Peace ...9 Collective Condition ..10 Radio Interview ...11 Miracles of God ...12 4th Dimension ...14 Attachments ...16 'निर्मल धर्म' से ही विश्व का कल्याण संभव ...18

 Sahasrara Chakra .the last milestone of the evolution of human awareness %23 4

 Without opening the Sahasrara, God itself was a myth 'he seventh center (Sahasrara) is the chakra which integrates all the I chakras with their respective qualities. It is the last milestone of the evolution of human awareness. Nowadays, we are at a level which corresponds to this chakra, and our consciousness is able to easily enter into this new realm of perception, which is beyond our limited mind and concepts, and which becomes absolute at the level of the Sahasrara. It is the direct. absolute perception of Reality on our central nervous system. "Lastly, the seventh centre, the most important centre is the Sahasrara which has got, according to Sahaja Yoga, a thousand petals. Actually there are a thousand nerves and if you cut the transverse section of the brain you can see that all these petal-like structures of the brain are forming a lotus of the thousand petals. This centre of a thousand petals covers the limbic area of the brain before Realization like the closed bud of a lotus. Above this covering is the balloon-like structure of ego and superego. As the brain is covered completely when these two institutions join and calcification takes place on top of the head; that is how we become a closed personality. At the time of our awakening, of our second birth, this egg-like personality breaks at the top of the head." "Without opening the Sahasrara, God itself was a myth, religion itself was a myth, all talk about divinity was a myth. People believed in it but it was just a belief. Now if the will of God is so important, it has to be proved. Now through Sahaja Yoga, after the breaking of the Sahasrara, you have now, for the first time, felt the will of God, which is such an important thing. Now the will of you are feeling on your finger tips. After realisation, you have discovered the absolute science which is the will of God." God

 Kundalini will rise & always cleanse the chakras he Sahasrara Chakra encompasses the crown of the head where all Chakras of the subtle system are integrated. When Kundalini passes through the top of the head, at the fontanel area, your Realization is manifested. Sahasrara is the Promised Land where absolute freedom and Truth is granted. The beginner of Sahaja Yoga receives self-realization at the start with the raising of the Kundalini. Usually only a few strands rise at first and the Chakras will only open slightly. Meditation and other simple techniques provide daily opportunities to gradually cleanse and clear the Chakras, enabling more strands of the Kundalini to rise. Your ability to feel vibrations will increase. Vibrations will play a daily role to determine right decisions; to feel conditions of others; to ascertain the Truth; to develop a wise discretion; feel Nature; heal oneself and other beings; solve problems and more. "Wisdom doesn't mean that know how to argue things or you fight with people. No, it doesn't you mean that. Wisdom means how you take to the good side of everything to enjoy it. This is Wisdom and that you avoid all destructive things and take to something constructive." The opening of the Sahasrara is the very special gift of Shri Mataji to humankind. Through years of selfless service and very hard work She has ceaselessly circled the globe to bestow on humankind the most benevolent spiritual power ever known. QUALITY At the point of the Sahasrara we go beyond the relative to the Absolute, and into the Absolute realization of Heaven on Earth. This is a country far beyond our wildest imaginings, so much more than our words can even seek to imply. This is our ultimate destination, stretching out forever. Our progress towards this goal is a living process. When the seed matures it naturally sprouts. When the Kundalini reaches the Sahasrara, the lotus petals open and enlightenment takes place. You may feel a pulsation in the crown of the head, followed by a melting sensation and a flow of cool vibrations from the fontanel areas. This is Sydney, Australia, March 31, 1991 the baptism by which you know that you are truly born again. Vibratory awareness begins at this point. As the Kundalini unites our

 individual consciousness with the Universal Consciousness (the atma to the Paramatma), we are suddenly tuned in to the Universal Wavelength of Vibrations. These vibrations pervade the cosmos but before Self-Realization, while we are still in the ego form, we know nothing of them. When the Kundalini breaks the shell of the egg, we emerge in His Kingdom, the Collective Unconscious. Very ancient and great realized souls, liberated from the physical body ages ago, are now able to reach this Kingdom of God within effortlessly. By taking birth again on this Earth they are living proof to the human race that they are pure spirit within, and all capable of attaining eternal life. "But the man who is ignorant, who has no faith, who is of a doubting nature, perishes. For the doubting soul there is neither this world nor the world beyond nor any happiness" (BG 4:40). We must have a positive basis for life, an unwavering faith to discover the Truth which stands the test of life. "Kill therefore with the sword of wisdom the doubt born of ignorance that lies in thy heart. Be one in self-harmony, in Yoga, and arise, great warrior, arise!" (BG 4:42). As human awareness is united to the Divine, we move into the subtlest of communication, that is, into Collective Consciousness. We begin to feel the presence and guidance of His Spirit within us and in others as well. We learn to appreciate the real depth and beauty of another person through vibrations. The beauty of Nature now manifests itself as vibrations. Just ask the question and a positive answer comes as a flow of vibrations. It is conversation with the Universe at its most sublime. TRADITION The presiding Deity of the Sahasrara Chakra is Shri Lalita Devi. Her first ever complete manifestation on Earth is in the human form of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. Through Her Grace our kundalini is awakened, our spirit is enlightened, and we feel the Paramchaitanya also. Because of Her we can awaken the Kundalini of others after our own awakening. We can give self-transcendence to others, we can heal and cure sickness, and we can share the message of Divine Love with the entire world. Lord Jesus promised that He will send a comforter, a counselor, a redeemer teach all things that He was unable to tell. the Holy Spirit – who will GENERAL ADVICE FROM SHRI MATAJI The most effective way to clear or heal chakra problems ('catch" or obstruction) is to put attention on the affected chakra during meditation and allow the Mother Kundalini to heal. Remain in the thoughtless state while you work on the affected chakra.

 simile to ego Give The hank you very much for all this celebration, for all these beautiful balloons. But looking at these balloons, we have to see, some of them who have lost their air completely. This is another problem we face in the west because, to have ego, according to the western culture, is a very great achievement when we start living with our ego, I know, how one looks like. He really looks like a stupid fellow. When he talks, when he describes himself, you don't know where to look because we just feel like laughing at his stupidity. Ego is the outcome of stupidity. I don't know what to say, how to give a simile to ego because it is just bloated and makes you float in the air. When it bursts, you are down on the earth. But you are not down on the earth, the way a Sahaja Yogi should be down to earth, but completely finished. All your arrogance goes to waste. You can never understand Sahaja Yoga, if you have this ego in your head. I have known people who have this ego. They have come to Sahaja Yoga and still they think they know more than anybody else. To know about yourself, you have to go deep down and to go deep down you have to give up all this idea which makes you float in the air. Imagine if you have big balloon attached to how can you go deep down into the sea? You cannot. That kind of you, air which makes you float in the air, absolutely in an area of stupidity. Then you may think whatever you like about yourself, you can behave the way you like but what do you achieve? You achieve nothing out of it. Whatever you achieve, people are jealous of you, they want to harm you, you have no friends. Nobody cares for you and in Sahaja Yoga, people know who has got this problem. H.H. Shri Mataji Niramala Devi 21.03.1997 8

 феасе eacé he first and foremost thing is we have no peace within our hearts. We talk of peace. I know of people who have got awards in peace, have no peace within their hearts, no peace at all. Unless and until we human beings have peace, there cannot be peace in the whole world. It is we who create wars. It is we who do all kinds of violence.... We ruin the possibility of people getting into the kingdom of God. So peace can be only achieved by establishing peace in the hearts of the people. And that is only possible, if you achieve the state of thoughtless awareness. You remain in the present and there, where you'll be amazed, you will be standing like a rock because you will have reality in your hand. You can work out the way you like. Actually, I don't work out anything whatsoever – really. You may say," You do this and you do that." I don't. It's the param chaitanya which works it. In the same way, it will work for you also. But you must have faith in yourself and absolute faith in Sahaja Yoga- absolute. That's the only way we can achieve this, that many, many, many people, most of the people of the whole world – I wouldn't say all of them rather difficult to say that, but may be possible – should enter into the kingdom of God with us. That's the most important thing, more than all these worldly things and more than all these nonsensical things.... 99 That will take its own course. You don't have to worry. That works out automatically. Only thing where you really need your own diversion or your own focusing is Sahaja Yoga, in and out. If we really want peace on this Earth, if we want really progress for ourselves, if we want all kinds of physical, mental and emotional problem being solved, all for our good, why not we come to Sahaja Yoga, where we don't have to do anything except for raising our kundalini, except for meditating for it for very little time and to achieve that state of joy? H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi 21. 03. 1994

 Collective Conditionings T: 'he last is the Virat. That is the state you have to reach is the Virat, I is here, in front (forehead) as you know. And I was surprised when I went to Nepal, which is a temple of Shiva there. Despite they were worshiping Shiva, they were putting all the kumkum here. So I thought they don't know why they are putting because even if worship Shiva you must also worship here, the Virata. They don't put it here, here, because they're absolutely hundred percent only Shiva worshipers. So why should they put it here? Because somebody who knows, who was gnostic has told them this is the place of Virat. you Once you get into Virat, then all your ideas of separating or differentiating goes away. You do not have any more ideas of races left, of nationality, of your city, of your village or anything. At that stage, you don't belong to any place. You belong to every place and you don't belong to any pla don't hanker after any particular food, you don't like any particular type of people, you can adjust yourself into any circumstance, into any families, into any kind of people. You can live with drunkards. I mean, I have lived with drunkards. Lived means I have shaken hands at least with so many of them. You can be with any kind of person. Nothing bothers you because you are in the Virata state because everything is absorbed by the Virat and you do not feel anything. Whatever sort a person may be, you do not feel it. The Virata has to suffer, not you and that is what is the best state where I want all of you to reach and to become absolutely free. Nothing can impress you, nothing can influence you, nothing can dissuade you, but you stand on your self-esteem and understanding about yourself that you are a Sahaja Yogi and that you are connected with this Power and you are a citizen of Kingdom of God. ce. Such a situation comes in. When you H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi August 16, 1992 10

 Radio IntervieW Interviewer :What does it mean to open the last center (the Sahasrara chakra)? Shri Mataji : The Sahasrara. Last center is the center which is the limbic area where is the seat of all the seven centers. It's all integration there. So far, everybody who has come – like, Christ has come on this center what you call the Agnya Chakra. Or, Krishna has come on this center which is the Vishuddhi Chakra. Like that, they have been appearing on every center giving us a new dimension to our awareness. And, that's how our awareness has of ours improved to this extent and now the time is for you to get your Absolute; to get your Spirit– that your Spirit must shine into your attention, that you should have your Self-Realization, that you should have your second birth. That's the time! And, that is only possible if baptism, the real baptism works out - real. Not artificial - somebody coming and putting the hand on your head and saying, "Now, you are baptized." That's not the way. But it is a real thing that happens that you start feeling the Cool Breeze of the Holy Ghost coming out. Interviewer: What are the ways and means to raise the Kundalini and what are the symptoms? Shri Mataji : The first one is I'll do it now, so you will see it's nothing so special, but the second one is that when you get your Realization first thing that happens to you that you become thoughtlessly aware to begin with when it crosses over Agnya chakra and when it pierces through this one you can feel the cool breeze coming out of your head, you can feel the cool breeze around yourself. Now all these fingers are shown there you can see. They denote your centers. Only you have to understand the decoding of it. Now supposing you take ten children who are realized souls and you tie their eyes and ask them: "What's the matter with this gentleman?" Immediately, they will all raise the same finger, supposing they raise this finger and you ask that person: “Are you suffering from bronchitis?" They'll say: "Yes, how do you know?" So, all these centers are decoded and once they are decoded if you know the decoding, if you know how to decode it, then it's so easy, very easy you find out 66 So this is the only thing we have to know about the decoding part of it, what is the center we are catching, what is the center others are catching? Now if you know how to correct the centers, you are all right. And the others are all right. It's very simple it's either left side or right side. Only two problems, basically. H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 1983 Oct 01 11

 Miracles of God 29th February 1984 I: n these modern times, a place which is supposed to be a holy place becomes the most Lunholy place. It's such a topsy-turvy condition these days. And when we are trying to establish something very fundamental that's like a little seedling that has to come out of the stones, it has to fight lots of things; so we have to keep our brains intact and be sensible about every thing, and try to see what we can achieve through our patience and understanding. It's very important. Today I think is a very great day, for all of us, because this place is the place of Virata, of Shri Vitthala. It is the place where Shri Vitthala appeared to a devoted son and when he asked Him that, "You better stand on a brick", He stood there. And they say that He stood there, waiting. Some people say that the statue that we see came out of the Mother Earth on this sand and that's what Pundarikaksh carried saying that, "These are the ones who came to see me and my parents when I was busy with them, so they are standing on the same brick which I threw". Now the whole story has to be taken in a very sensible way, with the common-sense in it. That God Himselfis capable of all kinds of miracles. We, who are created by God, are doing some things which look miraculous say, if you take about 100 year old situation of this world. We can say that today we are seeing many things which could be miraculous. 100 years back no one could have thought that we could have all these arrangements done here in such far-fetched places. But, all these miracles come from the power of God. So we are the creator of that 'wee' bit--very wee bit of that miracle. So all the miracles of God cannot be explained and should not be explained. They are beyond our minds, and, to make people feel the presence of God, God can do anything! He can move into all of the 3 dimensions and also in the 4th dimension and can do whatever He feels like. That's what you have seen now in your every day-to-day life, how many miracles take place-to all of you and you can't understand how it works out; even it works out on things which are not living, and people are quite amazed at how these things happen. So we have to believe, now, after seeing all this ourselves, that He is God ! And He can do anything that He feels like, and we are nothing ! We are nothing. There 12

 should be no rationality about it--of understanding God's miracles. "How can it be? How could it be ?" You can't explain. Only when you achieve that state of mind where you believe through your experiences that God is all-powerful. It's very difficult, this concept. It's very difficult; because we are limited people. We have limited powers. We cannot understand how God could be all-powerful, because we haven't got the capacity. So this God who is our creator, who is our preserver, the one who desired that we should exist-who is our existence itself, is all-powerful God. All powerful. He can do whatever He likes with you. He can create another world, he can destroy this world. It's only if lie has to 'desire'. My idea of coming to Pandharpur for Shiva Puja was this-that Shiva represents the Spirit. And the Spirit is residing in all of you in your hearts. The seat of Sadashiva is on top of your head; but is reflected in your heart. Now, your brain is the Vitthala. So to bring Spirit to your brain means enlightenment of your brain. "Enlightenment of your brain" means : The limited capacity of your brain has to become unlimited in it's capacity to realize God. I will not use the word 'understand.' "To 'realize' God". How powerful He is, how miraculous He is, how great He is! Another is that the brain of man can create-of course, out of the dead- but, When the Spirit comes into brain, then you create Living things, Living work of Kundalini. Even the dead start behaving like living, because 'you touch the Spirit in the dead'. Like the nucleus inside every atom or a molecule, has the Spirit of that molecule. And if you become your Spirit-we can say the 'brain' of a molecule and an atom is like the nucleus; body of the nucleus. But the one that controls the nucleus is the Spirit that resides within the nucleus. So now you have got the attention or the body-the whole body of the atom, then the nucleus, and 'inside' the nucleus is the Spirit. In the same way-we have this body, the attention of the body. And then we have the nucleus that is the brain. And the Spirit is in the heart. So the brain is controlled through the Spirit. How?-That around the heart there are seven auras-which can be multiplied into any number. Seven raised to power 16 thousand which are the ones which watch the seven chakras- raised to power 16 thousand. Now this Spirit is watching through this aura-watching, I am again saying 'watching' through this aura .. This aura is watching the behaviour of your seven centres in your brain. Is also watching all the nerves that are working the brain. 'Watching'; again. But when you bring the Spirit into you., brain, then you go two' steps ahead. Because when your kundalini rises, She touches the Sadashiva and Sadashiva informs the Spirit. Informs in the sense- reflects, in the Spirit. So that's the first state where the watching auras start communicating to your different chakras in the brain and integrating it. But when you bring your "Spirit' to your brain-this is the second state-then you really become Self-realised, in the full way. In the full way. Because then your Self, that is the Spirit becomes your brain. Action is very dynamic. It opens then, the 5th dimension in the human being. 13

 4th Dimension 29th February 1984 F 'irst when you become realized, collectively conscious, and start raising the Kundalini, you cross the 4th dimension. But when your Spirit comes into your brain, then, you become the 5th dimension-means, you become the Doer. Our brain, now, for example says "Alright, lift this thing up". So you touch it with your hand, you lift it up. You are the doer. But when the brain 'becomes' the Spirit, the Spirit is the doer. And when Spirit is the doer, then you become a complete Shiva ; Self-realized. In that state, if you get angry, you are not attached, You are not an attached person to 'anything' whatsoever. If you possess anything-you are not attached. You cannot attach, because Spirit is detachment. Complete detachment. You don't bother about any attachments whatsoever. 'Even' for a second, you are not attached. Now I would say, to understand the detachment of Spirit we should study ourselves very well, clearly-"How are we attached ?" We are attached, firstly, by our brain. Mostly by our brain. Because all our conditionings are in our brain and all of our ego is also in our brain. So emotional attachments are through our brain and all our conditionings are in our brain and all of our ego is also in our brain. So emotional attachments are through our brain and all our egoistical attachments also are through our brain. That's why it is said that after Realization one must try to practice the Shiva-Tattwa by practicing detachment. Now how do you practice this detachment? Because we get attached to something-of course through our brain, but through our attention. So we try to do what we call "Chitta Nirodh", is to control your attention. "Where is it going?" In the practice of Sahaja Yoga, if you have to rise higher you have to improve your 'own' instrument and not the instrument of others. This is one thing one should know for definite. Now, you just watch your attention, where is it going. Watch yourself. As soon as you start watching your Self, your attention, you will become identified with your Spirit. Because if you have to watch your attention you will have to be your Spirit. Otherwise how will you watch it? So now see-where is your attention going? First, the attachment is, in all gross ways, to your body. So we see Shiva doesn't know attachment to His body! He sleeps anywhere. He goes to the cemeteries and sleeps there. Because, He's not attached, He can never be caught up by any bhoots or anything; nothing of the kind. He is detached. The detachment is to be watched and seen through 'your own' attachments. Now, because you are realized souls, not yet the Spirit, it has not yet come into course, but still you are realised souls. So what you can do is at least to watch your attention. You can do that. You can watch your attention very clearly; by seeing where your attention is brain of your 14

 going. And then, 'controlling' your attention, also, you can do. Very simple. To control your attention you have to just remove your attention from 'this,' to 'that.' Try to change your priorities, all this has to be done 'Now', after realization a complete detachment. So the body demands comfort. Try to make body uncomfortable a little bit, Try. What you think it to be comfortable , try to make it a little uncomfortable. That's why people went to Himalayas. You see, coming to this place itself has caused us lot of problems. So going to Himalayas, you can imagine. So after realization they used to take their body to Himalayas: "Alright, go through all this. Let's see how you act". So what you call the penance side starts now. In a way, it's a penance which you can do very easily because now you are realized souls. With enjoyment, little, try to make this body... For Shiva, it doesn't matter whether He's in a cemetery or in his own Kailasha or anywhere. Where is your attention? Is you see, that your human attention is hopelessly bad! Very entangled non-sense it is. "We did this because of this" there is an explanation or others have to give an explanation. 'No explanation' is needed to be given or to be accepted, or to be asked for. No explanation. To exist without explanation is the best way. In a simple Hindi language. (jaisé rakhahu taisé hi rahu ): Which ever way you keep me I'll remain in that state, 'and' I will enjoy". Further in this poem Kabira says "if you make me go on an elephant means the royal conveyances 'Ill reaction on that point, no reaction. First, No explanation, no reaction! go; if you make me walk, I'll walk", "Jaisé rakhahu taisé hi rahu" So no Now, second is about food. That's the first seeking human beings had as animals. No attention on food ! Whether you have salt or not, whether you have this or that, 'no attention' on food. Actually you should not remember what you ate this morning. But we think as to that we are going to eat tomorrow. We consume food not for running this body but for a sort of a more satisfaction to tongue pleasures. Once you start understanding that pleasure is a sign of gross attention; 'any' kind of pleasure is a 'very gross' sensationalization; sensation. 'Very gross' it is. But when I say "No pleasures," it doesn't mean that you should become serious people and people of sort of as if somebody is dead in your family! But you should be like Shiva. So detached. He came on a bull, which was running very fast, to get married. He was sitting on a bull with his two feet like this, you see. And the bull is running fast and He is holding the bull; the feet like this! And He's going for his wedding! And with Him are coming people with one eye, without noses, all kinds of funny people coming with Him; and His wife feeling quite embarrassed at the nonsensical things people are talking about Shiva. He's not bothered what his reputation would be, this thing... But that doesn't mean that you become hippies. You see this is the problem is, that once you start thinking like that, you become hippies. Many people believe that if you try to behave like Shiva, you become Shiva. Many believe, that way that if you take 'ganja' you become Shiva because Shiva used to take 'ganja. Because He was 'consuming' all that to finish off from this world. For him what does it matter whether its ganja, what does it matter, give him any thing, He'll never get drunk. No question. He's consuming' all that. Or they think, if they live like Shiva, the way He was detached about things. He was least bothered about His appearance. What appearance Shiva needs is, that whatever He appears as his beauty. He doesn't need any thing to be done. 15

 Attachments 29th February 1984 ttachment to 'anything' is ugliness. Is ugliness. Is nonsense. But you can dress up whatever way you like. Or, even if you are in the - most ordinary dress, you look the most magnificent person. But it's not that if you say that, 'Alright, so in these circumstances let us go about on a one sheet wrapped around.' The beauty that has "evolved" within you through Spirit, gives you that power that you can wear whatever you feel like; makes no difference to your beauty, your beauty is there 'all the time'. But have you achieved that state? And that state only you achieve when your Spirit enters into your brain. With ego oriented people it is more difficult. And that is why they cannot enjoy things. At the slightest pretext they topple down. And Spirit, which is the source of joy, just doesn't come, doesn't show. The joy is beauty. The joy itself is beauty. But, that is a state one has to 'achieve'. Attachments come by various methods. You go a little ahead with it, then have attachments of your family. What will happen to my child? What will happen to my husband? What will happen to my mother, to my wife, this, that nonsense. you Who is your father and who is your mother? Who is your husband and who is your wife ? For Shiva, He doesn't know all these things. To Him, He and His Power are 'inseparable' things. So He stands as singular personality. There is no 'duality'. When there is duality then only you say, 'my' wife. You go on saying 'my' nose, 'my' ears , 'my' hands , my, my, my, my, my,... go deep down. Till you say 'my'. there is some duality. But when I say "the nose" then there is no duality. Shiva the Shakti. Shakti the Shiva. There is no duality, But we live throughout on our duality and because of that there is an attachment. If there is no duality what is the attachment? If you are the light and you are the lamp, then where is the duality? If you are the moon and you are the moonlight then where is the duality? If you are the sun and you are the sunlight, you are the word and you are the meaning ; then where is the duality? But when there is this separation, there is duality. And because of this separation, you feel attached. Because if you are that, how will you be attached? Do you see that point? Because there is a difference and a distance between you and your's that's why you get attached to it. But it's 'me' who is the other? This whole universe is me. Who is the other? Everything is me, who is the other? 16

 It is not that it's a brain wave or a ego brain wave. So who is the other? Nobody! That's only possible when your Spirit comes into your brain and you become part and parcel of Virata itself. Virata is the brain, as I told you. Then 'everything' that you do : When you show your temper, when you show your affection, when you show your compassion, or anything, it is the Spirit that is expressing. Because brain has lost it's identity. The so- called "limited" brain-it has become the unlimited Spirit. I do not know, I 'really' do not know how to give an analogy to a thing like that. But what we can do is to understand it : That if a colour is dropped on the ocean, the ocean becomes colourful is not possible. But try to understand; if a little colour, limited colour, is dropped into the ocean, the colour loses its identity completely. Think of the other way round. It the ocean is coloured, and is poured into atmosphere or onto any part any little wee bit, or onto any spot, onto any atom or anything, it all becomes colourful. So the Spirit is like the ocean which has the light in it. And when this ocean pours into the little cup your brain, the cup loses its identity and everything becomes Spiritual! Everything! you can make everything Spiritual. Everything. You touch anything-it is Spiritual ! The sand becomes Spiritual, the land becomes Spiritual, atmosphere becomes Spiritual, celestial bodies becomes Spiritual. Everything becomes Spiritual ! So it is the ocean, that is the Spirit, while your brain is limited. So the detachment from your limited brain has to be brought in. All limitations of brain should be 'broken' so that when this ocean fills that brain; it should break that little cup and 'every bit' of that should become colourful. The whole atmosphere, everything, whatever you look at, should be colourful. Colour of the Spirit is the light of the Spirit and this light of the Spirit acts, works, thinks, co-ordinates, does everything. cup This is the reason today I decided to bring Shiva-Tattwa to the Brain. The first procedure is to take your brain towards the Shiva Tattwa by telling it : "See where are you going Mr. Brain? You are putting attention to this. You are putting attention to that getting involved! Now detach, become the brain yourself. Only the Brain. Detach, Detach."And then, take this 'detached' brain, 'completely' filled with the colour of the Spirit. It will automatically happen. As long as you'll have these limitations to your attention, it will not happen. So one has to 'really deliberately' do this tapasya. Every individual I'm with you ; so you don't need any puja that way. But that state has to be achieved, and for achieving that state, you need the puja. I hope so many of you will become the Shiva- tattwas in my lifetime. But don't think I'm asking you to suffer. There is no suffering in this kind of an ascent. If you understand that this is the complete joyous state. That is the time when you become Niranand. That's the joy named in the Sahasrara, the name of the joy is Niranand, and you know your Mother's name is Nira. So you become Niranand. May God Bless you. 17

 'निर्मल धर्म' से ही विश्व का कल्याण संभव ्र ं बैर 'ओ मेरे प्यारे बच्चों, वास्तव में आप मेरे सहस्रार से जन्में हैं। अपने हृदय से मैंने आपका गर्भ धारण किया और | ब्रह्मरन्ध्र से आपको पुनर्जन्म दिया। मेरे प्रेम की गंगा आपको सामूहिक चेतना के साम्राज्य में लाई है। यह प्रेम मेरे मानवीय शरीर से कही महान है। यह आपका पोषण करता है। आपको शान्त करता है और सुरक्षा प्रदान करता है।.....यह आपका पथप्रदर्शन करता है। दिशा-निर्देश देता है। सच्चे ज्ञान के रूप में यह प्रगट होता है। प.पू.श्री माताजी, चैतन्य लहरी २००६ 18

 .... सहजयोगी अति विवेकशील तथा ज्ञान के हर क्षेत्र के रहस्य को जानने वाले बन जाते हैं। उन्हें सब शास्त्रों, भूतकाल में हुए अवतरणों पैगम्बरों, ऋषियों एवं आत्मसाक्षात्कारी व्यक्तियों का ज्ञान होना चाहिये। आध्यात्मिकता का इतिहास किस प्रकार विकसित होकर यह सहजयोग के स्तर तक जहाँ अन्तिम भेदन घटित होना था पहुँचा-इसके पूरे ज्ञान से आपको अच्छी तरह लैस होना चाहिये। इस प्रकार के सभी, आत्मसाक्षात्कारी लोग विश्व निर्मल धर्म का अनुसरण करते हैं, जिसका अर्थ है हमारे अन्दर अन्तर्जात पावन धर्म। व्यक्ति को समझना है कि यह विश्व निर्मल धर्म सभी धर्मों का सार है। केवल यही धर्म वह वास्तविक अनुभव प्रदान करता है जो व्यक्ति को आध्यात्मिकता के प्रति संवेदन शील बनाता है। प.पू.श्री माताजी द्वारा लिखित 'सहजयोग' .......विकास प्रक्रिया में इन धर्मों को स्थापित करना गुरु का कार्य था और इनकी स्थापना से धर्म अन्त:निहित है। ... ... मानव को धार्मिक बनाया गया था। प.पू.श्री माताजी, १३.७.१९९४ ( आज) पैगम्बरों के अनुयायी ही धर्म के प्रतिरूप को बिगाड़ रहे हैं । ... ... ...... ईसाई कहलाने वाले लोगों ने ईसा पर बहुत कहर ढाये हैं, अहं ही इसका कारण था, ईसाई जहाँ भी हैं, अति आक्रामक और हिंसावादी हैं। प.पू.श्री माताजी, १४.४.१९९२ हिन्दू भी ऐसे कार्य कर रहे हैं जो कभी शास्त्र में नहीं लिखे गये।...हिन्दू धर्म में कर्मकाण्ड का बाहुल्य है। धर्माधिकारी ही धर्म का प्रतिरूप बिगाड़ रहे हं । प.पू.श्री माताजी, २२.३.२००० सभी धर्म असफल क्यों हो गये? क्योंकि आत्मसाक्षात्कार पाकर वे आत्मा नहीं बने। अत: आप में (सहजयोगी) और अन्य लोगों में बड़ा अन्तर है। वे ढकोसले हैं, वे इसे बौद्धिक बना देते हैं। ...... अब आप स्पष्ट देख सकते हैं कि उन्होंने आध्यात्मिकता को आत्मसात नहीं किया। बिना आत्मसाक्षात्कार के ऐसा कर पाना असम्भव है। प.पू.श्री माताजी, १.३.१९९२ (देखो) कोई भी धर्म गलत नहीं है, कोई भी अवतरण गलत नहीं, कोई भी संत-साधु-योगी गलत नहीं, गलत तो वे लोग हैं जो धर्म को अपने हाथ में ले लेते हैं और धर्म को बेच रहे हैं। .....जो लोग सहज में उतर आये हैं वे तो सभी धर्मों को मानने लगे हैं। नहीं मानते तो मानना पड़ेगा। सब अवतरणों की पूजा करनी पड़ेगी। क्योंकि हम तो 'विश्व निर्मल धर्म' में विश्वास करते हैं, उसमें सारे ही धर्म समाहित हैं। सबको जोड़ने की बात है, तोड़ने की नहीं। प.पू.श्री माताजी, २५.३.१९९२ सभी शास्त्रों में सहजयोग का वर्णन किया गया है, परन्तु हमें (सहजयोगियों को ) सभी धर्मों को उनके वास्तविक और शुद्ध रूप में लाना होगा। यही कार्य है जिसे व्यक्ति ने करना है-सभी धर्मों को शुद्ध रूप में लाना मानव सृजित-धर्म के रूप के अनुसार आँखे बन्द करके चलते जाना नहीं। 19

 इन धर्मों का सृजन अवतरणों ने किया था, मनुष्यों ने नहीं। मानव ने तो इसे बनावटी बना दिया है, सभी प्रकार की बेवकूफी धर्म के साथ की है। हमें याद रखना है कि धर्म के सच्चे और शुद्ध स्वरूप में हमें इसका सम्मान करना है क्योंकि सभी धर्म एक ही हैं। आप यदि धर्म के सच्चे स्वरूप को देखें तो फूल की भिन्न पंखुड़ियों की तरह से सभी धर्म एक हैं। देखने में चाहे वे एक समान न लगें परन्तु सभी पंखुड़ियों से मिलकर ही फूल बनता है। प.पू.श्री माताजी, नवरात्रि, पुणे, १४.१०.१९८८ तो सहजयोगियों को कुण्डलिनी जागृति की कार्य प्रणाली द्वारा पूर्ण धैर्य और प्रेम के साथ लोगों को आत्मसाक्षात्कार देना है क्योंकि दिव्य प्रेम एवं हितकारिता सहजयोग के आधार हैं। सत्य सदगुणों तथा अपने आदर्शों पर हमें स्थिर रहना है। सहजयोगी का बाह्य अस्तित्व उसकी आंतरिक शान्ति, दिव्य करुणा, सहजयोग के आदर्शों की प्रगल्भता तथा आनन्दमय जीवन की अभिव्यक्ति करता है। एक सहजयोगी के विशेष गुण स्वयं को दर्शायेंगे। लोग धीरे -धीरे आपकी अद्वितीय श्रेष्ठता को पहचानेंगे, उनके विचार बदलेंगे व अपने जीवन की तुलना आपके जीवन से करेंगे और दिव्य लहरियों की सुन्दरता का आनन्द लेने के लिये वे सहजयोग में आयेंगे। विश्व को बचाने का एकमात्र उपाय सहजयोग ही है।......यह आध्यात्मिक क्रान्ति है। प.पू.श्री माताजी, 'सहजयोग' आपका उत्तरदायित्व है, सम्पूर्ण विश्व का उद्धार आपको अपने पूर्व पुण्यों के कारण आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्राप्त हुआ है। ......आप बहुत ही विशेष लोग हैं, आपकी आत्मा ज्योतित हो गयी है। ......आपमें अपार शक्ति है। आप अपने देश, जाति, समाज तथा परिवार की समस्याओं का समाधान करेंगे। पूरे विश्व की समस्याओं का समाधान करेंगे। पूरे विश्व की समस्याओं का समाधान आप ही करेंगे। आप लोग ही पृथ्वी पर शान्ति लायेंगे। आप ही सुन्दर दिव्य मानवों से परिपूर्ण एक विश्व का सृजन करेंगे। प.पू.श्री माताजी, दिवाली पूजा, १२.११.१९९३ ....... हमें यह समझना है कि एक लक्ष्य के लिये हमारा पुनरूत्थान हुआ है और वह लक्ष्य है इस विश्व को एक सुन्दर स्थान में परिवर्तित करना और इसके लिये हम सब सहजयोगियों को अपना पूरा चित्त लगा देना चाहिये। प.पू.श्री माताजी, ३.४.१९९४ केवल सहजयोग द्वारा ही आप इस विश्व की रक्षा कर सकते हैं, कोई अन्य मार्ग नहीं है। ....यह तो बहुत बड़ा .... .. आन्दोलन है जिसे विस्फोटक होना होगा, यदि ऐसे महान कदम न उठाये गये तो मैं नहीं जानती प्रलय का दोष किस पर आयेगा। प.पू.श्री माताजी, कबैला, ३.६.२००१ अब आपका ब्रह्माण्डीय अस्तित्व है, अब आप बनावटी संबंधों से नहीं आध्यात्मिक संबंधों से जुड़़े हुये हैं। ... ... आत्मसाक्षात्कार आपको इसलिये प्राप्त हुआ है कि आप इसे पूरे विश्व मे फैलायें तथा विश्व का उद्धार करें-एक बार 20

 जब आप इस बात को समझ जायेंगे तो स्वत: ही आप उत्तरदायित्व ले लेंगे। प.पू.श्री माताजी, २१.६.१९९२ आपमें सभी शक्तियाँ हैं। इन शक्तियों को धारण करने का प्रयत्न करें। अब आप लोग परमात्मा के साम्राज्य में प्रवेश कर चुके हैं, विश्वास रखें आप सबमें विश्व को परिवर्तित कर सकने की शक्ति है। आप ही वे लोग हैं जिन्हें वास्तविकता में इस कार्य के लिये चुना गया है-अत: उत्तरदायित्व समझें। प.पू.श्री माताजी, २१.३.१९९४ अपने ज्योतिर्मय चित्त द्वारा शक्ति को क्रियान्वित करें कितने भयानक समय से हम गुज़र रहे हैं, इसका मुकाबला करना आवश्यक है। अब तक लड़े गये युद्धो से यह कार्य कहीं कठिन है, मानव द्वारा किये गये सभी संघर्षों से यह कहीं कठिन है। एक भयानक विश्व की सृष्टि हो चुकी है और हमने इसे परिवर्तित करना है। यह अति कठिन कार्य है। इसके लिये आपको अत्यन्त सच्चाई से कार्य करना होगा। एक मस्तिष्क तथा हृदय से सामूहिक रूप में आपने यह प्राप्त करना है। मैं क्या बलिदान करँ? मुझे क्या करना चाहिये? किस प्रकार मुझे सहायता करनी चाहिये? मेरा क्या योगदान है? काश मैं अपने जीवन काल में वे दिन देख पाती। अत: हमें अन्तर्दर्शन करना है। तो हम ध्यान करें। कृपया आँखें बन्द कीजिए। अपना बायां हाथ मेरी ओर करके शरीर के बायें भाग में आप सब कार्य करेंगे। १. पहले अपना दायां हाथ हृदय पर रखिये। हृदय में शिव का निवास है, आत्मा का स्थान है, इसने आपके चित्त को प्रकाशमय किया है, प्रार्थना कीजिये श्रीमाताजी परमात्मा के प्रति प्रेम का यह प्रकाश पूरे विश्व में फैले।' अपने प्रति पूरी सच्चाई समझदारी रखते हुये कि आप परमात्मा से जुड़े हैं और पूर्ण आत्मविश्वास के साथ आप जो इच्छा करेंगे पूरी होगी। २. अब अपना दायां हाथ अपने पेट के ऊपर हिस्से पर बायीं ओर रखें। यह आपके धर्म का केन्द्द्र है। प्रार्थना कीजिये - 'श्रीमाताजी, विश्व निर्मला धर्म पूरे विश्व में फैले, हमारा धार्मिक जीवन एवं धर्मपरायणता लोगों को प्रकाश दिखायें।' आपका जीवन धार्मिक होना चाहिये जिससे लोगों में उसे अपनाने की इच्छा जाग्रत हो। ३. अब अपना दायां हाथ अपने पेट के निचले हिस्से पर बायीं ओर रखें इसे थोड़ा दबायें। यह आपकी शुद्ध विद्या का केन्द्र है। परमात्मा की कार्य प्रणाली का पूर्ण ज्ञान हमें हमारी श्रीमाताजी ने प्रदान किया है। हमारी सूझ-बूझ तथा सहनशक्ति के अनुसार हमें श्रीमाताजी ने सारे मंत्र तथा शुद्ध विद्या दी है। हम सबको इसका पूर्ण ज्ञान होना चाहिए। आप कहें 'श्रीमाताजी, मुझे इस ज्ञान में निपुण कीजिये, ताकि मैं लोगों को आत्मसाक्षात्कार दे सकूँ तथा उन्हें दैवी कानून, कुण्डलिनी तथा चक्रों के विषय में समझा सकूं। श्रीमाताजी, कृपा कीजिये कि मेरा चित्त सांसारिक वस्तुओं की अपेक्षा सहजयोग में अधिक हो।' ४. अब दायां हाथ पेट के ऊपरी हिस्से में बायीं ओर रखें। आँखे बंद रखें। पेट को हाथ से थोड़ा दबा कर रखें। पूर्ण हृदय से कहें - 'श्रीमाताजी, मैं स्वयं का गुरू हूँ। मुझमें असंयम न हो। मेरे चरित्र में गरिमा और आचरण में उदारता हो। अन्य 21

 सहजयोगियों के लिए मुझमें करुणा तथा प्रेम हो । श्रीमाताजी मुझ में बनावटीपन न हो । परमात्मा के प्रेम तथा उसके कार्यों का गहन ज्ञान मुझे हो ताकि जब लोग मेरे पास आयें तो मैं उन्हें प्रेम तथा नम्रतापूर्वक सहजयोग के विषय में बता सकू और यह महान ज्ञान उन्हें दे सकूँ।' ५. अब अपना दायां हाथ पुन: अपने हृदय पर रखें । पूर्ण हृदय से कहें - श्रीमाताजी, आनन्द तथा क्षमा के सागर का अनुभव आपने हमें प्रदान किया। अपनी ही तरह अथवा क्षमाशीलता आप ने हमें दी। श्रीमाताजी आपको कोटि- कोटि प्रणाम । कृपा करके मेरे हृदय को इतना विशाल कीजिए कि पूरा ब्रह्माण्ड इसमें समा जाए। मेरा प्रेम आपके नाम का गुंजन करे। मेरा हर श्वास आपके प्रेम की सुन्दरता की अभिव्यक्ति करें।' ६. अब आप अपना दायां हाथ बाईं विशुद्धि की ओर से ले जाकर गर्दन के मध्य में पीछे की ओर मध्य विशुद्धि चक्र पर रखें । पूर्ण विश्वास के साथ कहें - | 'श्रीमाताजी, कपट तथा दोष से लिप्त नहीं रहूँगा। अपने दोषों को मैं छिपाऊँगा नहीं, उनका सामना करके उनसे | मुक्त होऊंगा। मैं दूसरों के दोष नही ढूँढूंगा। अपने सहजयोग के ज्ञान द्वारा उन्हें दोषमुक्त करुँगा । श्रीमाताजी, अपनी सामूहिकता को इतना महान बनाइए कि पूर्ण सहजयोग, मेरा परिवार, मेरे बच्चे मेरा सर्वस्व बन जायें क्योंकि हम सबकी एक ही माँ है। अत: मुझमें पूरी तरह से यह भाव जागृत हो जाए कि मैं पूर्ण का ही अंग प्रत्यंग हूँ। मुझे पूरे विश्व की समस्याओं को जानने की तथा अपनी शुद्ध इच्छा तथा शक्ति से उनका समाधान करने की चिंता हो । श्रीमाताजी, कृपा करके हमें अपने हृद्य में, अन्तर्गत रूप से पूरे विश्व की समस्याओं को जानने तथा उनके कारणों को जड़ तक पहुँचाइये ताकि मैं से समाप्त करने की भावना मुझे प्रदान कीजिए। मुझे इन समस्याओं के मूल अपनी सहजयोग तथा सन्त सुलभ शक्तियों द्वारा इन्हें दूर करने का प्रयास कूँ।" ७. अब अपने दायें हाथ से आप अपने कपाल (माथे) को पकड़िये। यहाँ आपको यह कहना होगा श्रीमाताजी, मैं सब को क्षमा करता हूँ। मैं स्वयं को क्षमा करता हूँ। मैं अभी बहुत तुच्छ हूँ। मुझे अभी बहुत दूर | जाना है। मुझे स्वयं को सुधारना है। श्रीमाताजी, मुझे नम्रता दीजिये। ये हृदय की नम्रता मेरे में क्षमा-भाव पैदा करे ताकि मैं वास्तविकता, परमात्मा तथा सहजयोग के प्रति नतमस्तक हो जाऊं।' ८. अब आप अपना दायां हाथ सिर के पीछे के भाग पर रखें । सिर को अपने हाथ पर पीछे की ओर झुका लें। यहाँ पर आप कहें - 'श्री माताजी, अभी तक आपके प्रति हमने जो भी अपराध किये हैं , हमारे मस्तिष्क में जो भी बुराई आती है, जो भी तुच्छता आपको दिखाई है, किसी भी प्रकार से आपको दुःख पहुँचाया है या आपको चुनौती दी है, तो कृपा करके हमें क्षमा कर दीजिए। 22

 God has created fourteen levels within us. If you simply count them, then know that there are seven chakras within us. Beside these, there you are two more chakras, about which you do not talk much. They are the Chakra of Moon (Lalita) and Chakra of Sun (Shri). Then there is Hamsa Chakra. Thus, there are three more. Seven plus three makes ten. Then there are four chakras above Sahasrara. And about these chakras also I have told you: Ardha-bindu, Bindu, Valaya and Pradakshina. These are the four. After coming to Sahaja Yoga and after your Sahasrara has opened, have to pass through these four Chakras, Ardha-bindu, Bindu, Valay, you and Pradakshina. After passing through these four chakras only you can say that you have become a Sahaja yogi. And if you see from another angle, we have to cross fourteen stages in reaching up to Sahasrara. If you divide them then there are seven chakras on the Pingala Nadi. situated on the Ida Nadi and seven This 'fourteen' is very important in Kundalini Sahasrara (science). Very important. It's a very important thing. We should fully understand that we become entitled to the blessings of Sahaja Yoga only after rising above these fourteen stages. H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Talk on Sahasrara Day 1983, Mumbai, India Published & Printed by Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. No. 8, Chandragupta Co-op Housing Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune, Maharashtra, India - 411 038. © : 25286537, 25286032 email:sale@nitl.co.in website: www.nitl.co.in (For queries & sending articles contact on above address)

 Today we are talking about our resurrection through these fourteen planes that are within us, one after another, and then we burst through all these and come out as beautiful lotuses. That's what is Easter for suggestive of eggs being offered and these eggs are offered so that these eqgs can become the birds. 19-04-1992



----------------------

2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Yuvadrishti
June 2012
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 When the Kundalini rises it makes sounds. And the sounds that are heard in
the different chakras can be pronounced in the following way
pronunciations are being used in the phonetic language of Devanagari, which
means 'the language spoken by the Devas'.
these
At the Mooladhara, where there are four petals, the sounds are: [vum,
shum, sshum, sum]. Out of which the last, sshum and sum sounds are very
close, but the difference is - when the snake hisses it makes this sshum -
the third sound. So, vum, shum,sshum, sum.
At the Swadishthana, where there are six petals - it makes sounds, six
sounds. [Bum, bhum, mum, yum, rum, lum.]
Manipur it has ten petals. It makes the sounds dum, dhum, num, tum, thum,
dum, dhum, nnum, pum, phum.
At Anahata there are twelve petals. It makes the sounds km, kum, gum,
ghum, chum, chum, jum, jhum, tum, thum.
At the Vishuddhi, where there are sixteen petals, it makes the sounds of all
the vowels - a, aa, i, ii, u, uu, r, rr,Ir, Irr, e, ai, 0,ou,um,ahm.
At the Agnya chakra it makes ha, ksha.
At the Sahasrara one becomes thoughtless and no sound is made, but the pure
Anahata, meaning the throbbing in the purest form as in the heart is all.
When all these sounds are sounded together and pass through the spiral of
the body, if the body is like a conch, the sound that comes out of the
synthesis is AUM. Like the seven colors of the sun ultimately become white
rays, or you can say the golden colored rays.
H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, extract from Talk given in
Hampstead, London, 14 October 1978
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 INSIDE
THIS ISSUE
Sahasrara Chakra ...4
Kundalini ...6
Give a smile to
...8
ego
Peace ...9
Collective Condition ..10
Radio Interview ...11
Miracles of God ...12
4th Dimension ...14
Attachments ...16
'निर्मल धर्म' से ही विश्व का कल्याण संभव ...18
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Sahasrara
Chakra
.the last milestone of the evolution
of human awareness
%23
4
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Without opening the Sahasrara,
God itself was a myth
'he seventh center (Sahasrara) is the chakra which integrates all the
I chakras with their respective qualities. It is the last milestone of the
evolution of human awareness. Nowadays, we are at a level which
corresponds to this chakra, and our consciousness is able to easily enter into
this new realm of perception, which is beyond our limited mind and concepts,
and which becomes absolute at the level of the Sahasrara. It is the direct.
absolute perception of Reality on our central nervous system.
"Lastly, the seventh centre, the most important centre is the Sahasrara which
has got, according to Sahaja Yoga, a thousand petals. Actually there are a
thousand nerves and if you cut the transverse section of the brain you can see
that all these petal-like structures of the brain are forming a lotus of the
thousand petals. This centre of a thousand petals covers the limbic area of the
brain before Realization like the closed bud of a lotus. Above this covering is
the balloon-like structure of ego and superego. As the brain is covered
completely when these two institutions join and calcification takes place on
top of the head; that is how we become a closed personality. At the time of our
awakening, of our second birth, this egg-like personality breaks at the top
of
the head."
"Without opening the Sahasrara, God itself was a myth, religion itself was a
myth, all talk about divinity was a myth. People believed in it but it was just a
belief. Now if the will of God is so important, it has to be proved. Now through
Sahaja Yoga, after the breaking of the Sahasrara, you have now, for the first
time, felt the will of God, which is such an important thing. Now the will of
you are feeling on your finger tips. After realisation, you have discovered
the absolute science which is the will of God."
God
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Kundalini will rise
& always cleanse the chakras
he Sahasrara Chakra encompasses the crown of the head where all
Chakras of the subtle system are integrated. When Kundalini
passes through the top of the head, at the fontanel area, your
Realization is manifested. Sahasrara is the Promised Land where
absolute freedom and Truth is granted.
The beginner of Sahaja Yoga receives self-realization at the start with
the raising of the Kundalini. Usually only a few strands rise at first and
the Chakras will only open slightly. Meditation and other simple
techniques provide daily opportunities to gradually cleanse and clear
the Chakras, enabling more strands of the Kundalini to rise. Your
ability to feel vibrations will increase. Vibrations will play a daily role
to determine right decisions; to feel conditions of others; to ascertain
the Truth; to develop a wise discretion; feel Nature; heal oneself and
other beings; solve problems and more. "Wisdom doesn't mean that
know how to argue things or you fight with people. No, it doesn't
you
mean that. Wisdom means how you take to the good side of everything
to enjoy it. This is Wisdom and that you avoid all destructive things and
take to something constructive."
The opening of the Sahasrara is the very special gift of Shri Mataji to
humankind. Through years of selfless service and very hard work She
has ceaselessly circled the globe to bestow on humankind the most
benevolent spiritual power ever known.
QUALITY
At the point of the Sahasrara we go beyond the relative to the Absolute,
and into the Absolute realization of Heaven on Earth. This is a country
far beyond our wildest imaginings, so much more than our words can
even seek to imply. This is our ultimate destination, stretching out
forever. Our progress towards this goal is a living process. When the
seed matures it naturally sprouts. When the Kundalini reaches the
Sahasrara, the lotus petals open and enlightenment takes place. You
may feel a pulsation in the crown of the head, followed by a melting
sensation and a flow of cool vibrations from the fontanel areas. This is
Sydney,
Australia,
March 31, 1991
the baptism by which you know that you are truly born again.
Vibratory awareness begins at this point. As the Kundalini unites our
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 individual consciousness with the Universal Consciousness (the
atma to the Paramatma), we are suddenly tuned in to the Universal
Wavelength of Vibrations. These vibrations pervade the cosmos but
before Self-Realization, while we are still in the ego form, we know
nothing of them. When the Kundalini breaks the shell of the egg, we
emerge in His Kingdom, the Collective Unconscious. Very ancient
and great realized souls, liberated from the physical body ages ago,
are now able to reach this Kingdom of God within effortlessly. By
taking birth again on this Earth they are living proof to the human
race that they are pure spirit within, and all capable of attaining
eternal life. "But the man who is ignorant, who has no faith, who is of
a doubting nature, perishes. For the doubting soul there is neither this
world nor the world beyond nor any happiness" (BG 4:40). We must
have a positive basis for life, an unwavering faith to discover the
Truth which stands the test of life. "Kill therefore with the sword of
wisdom the doubt born of ignorance that lies in thy heart. Be one in
self-harmony, in Yoga, and arise, great warrior, arise!" (BG 4:42).
As human awareness is united to the Divine, we move into the
subtlest of communication, that is, into Collective Consciousness.
We begin to feel the presence and guidance of His Spirit within us
and in others as well. We learn to appreciate the real depth and beauty
of another person through vibrations. The beauty of Nature now
manifests itself as vibrations. Just ask the question and a positive
answer comes as a flow of vibrations. It is conversation with the
Universe at its most sublime.
TRADITION
The presiding Deity of the Sahasrara Chakra is Shri Lalita Devi. Her
first ever complete manifestation on Earth is in the human form of
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi. Through Her Grace our kundalini is
awakened, our spirit is enlightened, and we feel the Paramchaitanya
also. Because of Her we can awaken the Kundalini of others after our
own awakening. We can give self-transcendence to others, we can
heal and cure sickness, and we can share the message of Divine Love
with the entire world. Lord Jesus promised that He will send a
comforter, a counselor, a redeemer
teach all things that He was unable to tell.
the Holy Spirit – who will
GENERAL ADVICE FROM SHRI MATAJI
The most effective way to clear or heal chakra problems ('catch" or
obstruction) is to put attention on the affected chakra during
meditation and allow the Mother Kundalini to heal. Remain in the
thoughtless state while you work on the affected chakra.
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 simile to ego
Give
The
hank
you very much for all this celebration, for all these beautiful
balloons.
But looking at these balloons, we have to see, some of them who have
lost their air completely. This is another problem we face in the west
because, to have ego, according to the western culture, is a very great
achievement when we start living with our ego, I know, how one looks
like. He really looks like a stupid fellow. When he talks, when he
describes himself, you don't know where to look because we just feel
like laughing at his stupidity. Ego is the outcome of stupidity. I don't
know what to say, how to give a simile to ego because it is just bloated
and makes you float in the air. When it bursts, you are down on the
earth. But you are not down on the earth, the way a Sahaja Yogi should
be down to earth, but completely finished.
All your arrogance goes to waste. You can never understand Sahaja
Yoga, if you have this ego in your head. I have known people who have
this ego. They have come to Sahaja Yoga and still they think they know
more than anybody else. To know about yourself, you have to go deep
down and to go deep down you have to give up all this idea which
makes you float in the air. Imagine if you have big balloon attached to
how can you go deep down into the sea? You cannot. That kind of
you,
air which makes you float in the air, absolutely in an area of stupidity.
Then you may think whatever you like about yourself, you can behave
the way you like but what do you achieve? You achieve nothing out of
it. Whatever you achieve, people are jealous of you, they want to harm
you, you have no friends. Nobody cares for you and in Sahaja Yoga,
people know who has got this problem.
H.H. Shri Mataji Niramala Devi
21.03.1997
8
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 феасе
eacé
he first and foremost thing is we have no peace within our hearts. We talk of
peace. I know of people who have got awards in peace, have no peace within
their hearts, no peace at all. Unless and until we human beings have peace, there
cannot be peace in the whole world. It is we who create wars. It is we who do all
kinds of violence.... We ruin the possibility of people getting into the kingdom of
God.
So peace can be only achieved by establishing peace in the hearts of the people. And
that is only possible, if you achieve the state of thoughtless awareness. You remain in
the present and there, where you'll be amazed, you will be standing like a rock
because you will have reality in your hand. You can work out the way you like.
Actually, I don't work out anything whatsoever – really. You may say," You do this
and you do that." I don't. It's the param chaitanya which works it. In the same way, it
will work for you also. But you must have faith in yourself and absolute faith in
Sahaja Yoga- absolute. That's the only way we can achieve this, that many, many,
many people, most of the people of the whole world – I wouldn't say all of them
rather difficult to say that, but may be possible – should enter into the kingdom of
God with us. That's the most important thing, more than all these worldly things and
more than all these nonsensical things....
99
That will take its own course. You don't have to worry. That works out automatically.
Only thing where you really need your own diversion or your own focusing is Sahaja
Yoga, in and out.
If we really want peace on this Earth, if we want really progress for ourselves, if we
want all kinds of physical, mental and emotional problem being solved, all for our
good, why not we come to Sahaja Yoga, where we don't have to do anything except
for raising our kundalini, except for meditating for it for very little time and to
achieve that state of joy?
H.H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
21. 03. 1994
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Collective
Conditionings
T:
'he last is the Virat. That is the state you have to reach is the Virat,
I is here, in front (forehead) as you know. And I was surprised
when I went to Nepal, which is a temple of Shiva there. Despite they
were worshiping Shiva, they were putting all the kumkum here. So I
thought they don't know why they are putting because even if
worship Shiva you must also worship here, the Virata. They don't put
it here, here, because they're absolutely hundred percent only Shiva
worshipers. So why should they put it here? Because somebody who
knows, who was gnostic has told them this is the place of Virat.
you
Once you get into Virat, then all your ideas of separating or
differentiating goes away. You do not have any more ideas of races
left, of nationality, of your city, of your village or anything. At that
stage, you don't belong to any place. You belong to every place and
you don't belong to any pla
don't hanker after any particular food, you don't like any particular
type of people, you can adjust yourself into any circumstance, into
any families, into any kind of people. You can live with drunkards. I
mean, I have lived with drunkards. Lived means I have shaken hands
at least with so many of them. You can be with any kind of person.
Nothing bothers you because you are in the Virata state because
everything is absorbed by the Virat and you do not feel anything.
Whatever sort a person may be, you do not feel it. The Virata has to
suffer, not you and that is what is the best state where I want all of you
to reach and to become absolutely free. Nothing can impress you,
nothing can influence you, nothing can dissuade you, but you stand
on your self-esteem and understanding about yourself that you are a
Sahaja Yogi and that you are connected with this Power and you are a
citizen of Kingdom of God.
ce. Such a situation comes in. When you
H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
August 16, 1992
10
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Radio
IntervieW
Interviewer :What does it mean to open the last center (the Sahasrara chakra)?
Shri Mataji : The Sahasrara. Last center is the center which is the limbic area where is the
seat of all the seven centers. It's all integration there. So far, everybody who has come – like,
Christ has come on this center what you call the Agnya Chakra. Or, Krishna has come on this
center which is the Vishuddhi Chakra. Like that, they have been appearing on every center
giving us a new dimension to our awareness. And, that's how our awareness has
of ours
improved to this extent and now the time is for you to get your Absolute; to get your Spirit–
that
your Spirit must shine into your attention, that you should have your Self-Realization,
that you should have your second birth. That's the time! And, that is only possible if baptism,
the real baptism works out - real. Not artificial - somebody coming and putting the hand on
your head and saying, "Now, you are baptized." That's not the way. But it is a real thing that
happens that you start feeling the Cool Breeze of the Holy Ghost coming out.
Interviewer: What are the ways and means to raise the Kundalini and what are the
symptoms?
Shri Mataji : The first one is I'll do it now, so you will see it's nothing so special, but the
second one is that when you get your Realization first thing that happens to you that you
become thoughtlessly aware to begin with when it crosses over Agnya chakra and when it
pierces through this one you can feel the cool breeze coming out of your head, you can feel
the cool breeze around yourself.
Now all these fingers are shown there you can see. They denote your centers. Only you have
to understand the decoding of it.
Now supposing you take ten children who are realized souls and you tie their eyes and ask
them: "What's the matter with this gentleman?" Immediately, they will all raise the same
finger, supposing they raise this finger and you ask that person: “Are you suffering from
bronchitis?" They'll say: "Yes, how do you know?" So, all these centers are decoded and
once they are decoded if you know the decoding, if you know how to decode it, then it's so
easy, very easy you find out
66
So this is the only thing we have to know about the decoding part of it, what is the center we
are catching, what is the center others are catching? Now if you know how to correct the
centers, you are all right. And the others are all right. It's very simple it's either left side or
right side. Only two problems, basically.
H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 1983 Oct 01
11
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Miracles of God
29th February 1984
I:
n these modern times, a place which is supposed to be a holy place becomes the most
Lunholy place. It's such a topsy-turvy condition these days. And when we are trying to
establish something very fundamental that's like a little seedling that has to come out of the
stones, it has to fight lots of things; so we have to keep our brains intact and be sensible about
every thing, and try to see what we can achieve through our patience and understanding. It's
very important.
Today I think is a very great day, for all of us, because this place is the place of Virata, of Shri
Vitthala. It is the place where Shri Vitthala appeared to a devoted son and when he asked
Him that, "You better stand on a brick", He stood there. And they say that He stood there,
waiting. Some people say that the statue that we see came out of the Mother Earth on this
sand and that's what Pundarikaksh carried saying that, "These are the ones who came to see
me and my parents when I was busy with them, so they are standing on the same brick which
I threw".
Now the whole story has to be taken in a very sensible way, with the common-sense in it.
That God Himselfis capable of all kinds of miracles. We, who are created by God, are doing
some things which look miraculous say, if you take about 100 year old situation of this
world. We can say that today we are seeing many things which could be miraculous. 100
years back no one could have thought that we could have all these arrangements done here in
such far-fetched places. But, all these miracles come from the power of God. So we are the
creator of that 'wee' bit--very wee bit of that miracle. So all the miracles of God cannot be
explained and should not be explained. They are beyond our minds, and, to make people
feel the presence of God, God can do anything!
He can move into all of the 3 dimensions and also in the 4th dimension and can do whatever
He feels like. That's what you have seen now in your every day-to-day life, how many
miracles take place-to all of you and you can't understand how it works out; even it works
out on things which are not living, and people are quite amazed at how these things happen.
So we have to believe, now, after seeing all this ourselves, that He is God !
And He can do anything that He feels like, and we are nothing ! We are nothing. There
12
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 should be no rationality about it--of understanding God's miracles. "How can it be? How
could it be ?" You can't explain. Only when you achieve that state of mind where you
believe through your experiences that God is all-powerful. It's very difficult, this concept.
It's very difficult; because we are limited people. We have limited powers. We cannot
understand how God could be all-powerful, because we haven't got the capacity. So this
God who is our creator, who is our preserver, the one who desired that we should exist-who
is our existence itself, is all-powerful God. All powerful. He can do whatever He likes with
you. He can create another world, he can destroy this world. It's only if lie has to 'desire'.
My idea of coming to Pandharpur for Shiva Puja was this-that Shiva represents the Spirit.
And the Spirit is residing in all of you in your hearts. The seat of Sadashiva is on top of your
head; but is reflected in your heart. Now, your brain is the Vitthala. So to bring Spirit to
your brain means enlightenment of your brain. "Enlightenment of your brain" means : The
limited capacity of your brain has to become unlimited in it's capacity to realize God. I will
not use the word 'understand.' "To 'realize' God". How powerful He is, how miraculous He
is, how great He is! Another is that the brain of man can create-of course, out of the dead-
but, When the Spirit comes into brain, then you create Living things, Living work of
Kundalini. Even the dead start behaving like living, because 'you touch the Spirit in the
dead'.
Like the nucleus inside every atom or a molecule, has the Spirit of that molecule. And if you
become your Spirit-we can say the 'brain' of a molecule and an atom is like the nucleus; body
of the nucleus. But the one that controls the nucleus is the Spirit that resides within the
nucleus.
So now you have got the attention or the body-the whole body of the atom, then the nucleus,
and 'inside' the nucleus is the Spirit.
In the same way-we have this body, the attention of the body. And then we have the nucleus
that is the brain. And the Spirit is in the heart. So the brain is controlled through the Spirit.
How?-That around the heart there are seven auras-which can be multiplied into any number.
Seven raised to power 16 thousand which are the ones which watch the seven chakras-
raised to power 16 thousand.
Now this Spirit is watching through this aura-watching, I am again saying 'watching'
through this aura .. This aura is watching the behaviour of your seven centres in your brain.
Is also watching all the nerves that are working the brain. 'Watching'; again. But when you
bring the Spirit into you., brain, then you go two' steps ahead. Because when your kundalini
rises, She touches the Sadashiva and Sadashiva informs the Spirit. Informs in the sense-
reflects, in the Spirit. So that's the first state where the watching auras start communicating
to your different chakras in the brain and integrating it.
But when you bring your "Spirit' to your brain-this is the second state-then you really
become Self-realised, in the full way. In the full way. Because then your Self, that is the
Spirit becomes your brain. Action is very dynamic. It opens then, the 5th dimension in the
human being.
13
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 4th Dimension
29th February 1984
F
'irst when you become realized, collectively conscious, and start raising the Kundalini,
you cross the 4th dimension. But when your Spirit comes into your brain, then, you
become the 5th dimension-means, you become the Doer. Our brain, now, for example says
"Alright, lift this thing up". So you touch it with your hand, you lift it up. You are the doer.
But when the brain 'becomes' the Spirit, the Spirit is the doer.
And when Spirit is the doer, then you become a complete Shiva ; Self-realized. In that state,
if you get angry, you are not attached, You are not an attached person to 'anything'
whatsoever. If you possess anything-you are not attached. You cannot attach, because Spirit
is detachment. Complete detachment. You don't bother about any attachments whatsoever.
'Even' for a second, you are not attached.
Now I would say, to understand the detachment of Spirit we should study ourselves very
well, clearly-"How are we attached ?" We are attached, firstly, by our brain. Mostly by our
brain. Because all our conditionings are in our brain and all of our ego is also in our brain.
So emotional attachments are through our brain and all our conditionings are in our brain
and all of our ego is also in our brain. So emotional attachments are through our brain and all
our egoistical attachments also are through our brain. That's why it is said that after
Realization one must try to practice the Shiva-Tattwa by practicing detachment.
Now how do you practice this detachment? Because we get attached to something-of course
through our brain, but through our attention. So we try to do what we call "Chitta Nirodh", is
to control your attention. "Where is it going?" In the practice of Sahaja Yoga, if you have to
rise higher you have to improve your 'own' instrument and not the instrument of others. This
is one thing one should know for definite.
Now, you just watch your attention, where is it going. Watch yourself. As soon as you start
watching your Self, your attention, you will become identified with your Spirit. Because if you
have to watch your attention you will have to be your Spirit. Otherwise how will you watch it?
So now see-where is your attention going? First, the attachment is, in all gross ways, to your
body. So we see Shiva doesn't know attachment to His body! He sleeps anywhere. He goes
to the cemeteries and sleeps there. Because, He's not attached, He can never be caught up by
any bhoots or anything; nothing of the kind. He is detached. The detachment is to be
watched and seen through 'your own' attachments.
Now, because you are realized souls, not yet the Spirit, it has not yet come into
course, but still you are realised souls. So what you can do is at least to watch your attention.
You can do that. You can watch your attention very clearly; by seeing where your attention is
brain of
your
14
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 going. And then, 'controlling' your attention, also, you can do. Very simple. To control your
attention you have to just remove your attention from 'this,' to 'that.' Try to change your
priorities, all this has to be done 'Now', after realization a complete detachment.
So the body demands comfort. Try to make body uncomfortable a little bit, Try. What you
think it to be comfortable , try to make it a little uncomfortable. That's why people went to
Himalayas. You see, coming to this place itself has caused us lot of problems. So going to
Himalayas, you can imagine. So after realization they used to take their body to Himalayas:
"Alright, go through all this. Let's see how you act". So what you call the penance side starts
now. In a way, it's a penance which you can do very easily because now you are realized
souls. With enjoyment, little, try to make this body... For Shiva, it doesn't matter whether
He's in a cemetery or in his own Kailasha or anywhere.
Where is your attention? Is you see, that your human attention is hopelessly bad! Very
entangled non-sense it is. "We did this because of this" there is an explanation or others have to
give an explanation. 'No explanation' is needed to be given or to be accepted, or to be asked for.
No explanation. To exist without explanation is the best way. In a simple Hindi language.
(jaisé rakhahu taisé hi rahu ): Which ever way you keep me I'll remain in that state, 'and' I will
enjoy". Further in this poem Kabira says "if you make me go on an elephant means the royal
conveyances 'Ill
reaction on that point, no reaction. First, No explanation, no reaction!
go; if
you make me walk, I'll walk", "Jaisé rakhahu taisé hi rahu" So no
Now, second is about food. That's the first seeking human beings had as animals. No
attention on food ! Whether you have salt or not, whether you have this or that, 'no attention'
on food. Actually you should not remember what you ate this morning. But we think as to
that we are going to eat tomorrow. We consume food not for running this body but for a sort
of a more satisfaction to tongue pleasures. Once you start understanding that pleasure is a
sign of gross attention; 'any' kind of pleasure is a 'very gross' sensationalization; sensation.
'Very gross' it is. But when I say "No pleasures," it doesn't mean that you should become
serious people and people of sort of as if somebody is dead in your family! But you should
be like Shiva. So detached.
He came on a bull, which was running very fast, to get married. He was sitting on a bull with
his two feet like this, you see. And the bull is running fast and He is holding the bull; the feet
like this! And He's going for his wedding! And with Him are coming people with one eye,
without noses, all kinds of funny people coming with Him; and His wife feeling quite
embarrassed at the nonsensical things people are talking about Shiva. He's not bothered
what his reputation would be, this thing... But that doesn't mean that you become hippies.
You see this is the problem is, that once you start thinking like that, you become hippies.
Many people believe that if you try to behave like Shiva, you become Shiva. Many believe,
that way that if you take 'ganja' you become Shiva because Shiva used to take 'ganja.
Because He was 'consuming' all that to finish off from this world. For him what does it
matter whether its ganja, what does it matter, give him any thing, He'll never get drunk. No
question. He's consuming' all that. Or they think, if they live like Shiva, the way He was
detached about things. He was least bothered about His appearance. What appearance Shiva
needs is, that whatever He appears as his beauty. He doesn't need any thing to be done.
15
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Attachments
29th February 1984
ttachment to 'anything' is ugliness. Is ugliness. Is nonsense. But you can dress up
whatever way you like. Or, even if you are in the - most ordinary dress, you look the
most magnificent person. But it's not that if you say that, 'Alright, so in these circumstances
let us go about on a one sheet wrapped around.'
The beauty that has "evolved" within you through Spirit, gives you that power that you can
wear whatever you feel like; makes no difference to your beauty, your beauty is there 'all the
time'.
But have you achieved that state? And that state only you achieve when your Spirit enters
into your brain. With ego oriented people it is more difficult. And that is why they cannot
enjoy things. At the slightest pretext they topple down. And Spirit, which is the source of joy,
just doesn't come, doesn't show. The joy is beauty. The joy itself is beauty. But, that is a state
one has to 'achieve'.
Attachments come by various methods. You go a little ahead with it, then have
attachments of your family. What will happen to my child? What will happen to my
husband? What will happen to my mother, to my wife, this, that nonsense.
you
Who is your father and who is your mother? Who is your husband and who is your wife ?
For Shiva, He doesn't know all these things. To Him, He and His Power are 'inseparable'
things. So He stands as singular personality. There is no 'duality'. When there is duality then
only you say, 'my' wife. You go on saying 'my' nose, 'my' ears , 'my' hands , my, my, my, my,
my,... go deep down.
Till you say 'my'. there is some duality. But when I say "the nose" then there is no duality.
Shiva the Shakti. Shakti the Shiva. There is no duality, But we live throughout on our duality
and because of that there is an attachment. If there is no duality what is the attachment? If
you are the light and you are the lamp, then where is the duality? If you are the moon and you
are the moonlight then where is the duality? If you are the sun and you are the sunlight, you
are the word and you are the meaning ; then where is the duality?
But when there is this separation, there is duality. And because of this separation, you feel
attached. Because if you are that, how will you be attached? Do you see that point? Because
there is a difference and a distance between you and your's that's why you get attached to it.
But it's 'me' who is the other? This whole universe is me. Who is the other? Everything is me,
who is the other?
16
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 It is not that it's a brain wave or a ego brain wave. So who is the other? Nobody! That's
only possible when your Spirit comes into your brain and you become part and parcel of
Virata itself. Virata is the brain, as I told you. Then 'everything' that you do : When you
show your temper, when you show your affection, when you show your compassion, or
anything, it is the Spirit that is expressing. Because brain has lost it's identity. The so-
called "limited" brain-it has become the unlimited Spirit.
I do not know, I 'really' do not know how to give an analogy to a thing like that. But what
we can do is to understand it : That if a colour is dropped on the ocean, the ocean becomes
colourful is not possible. But try to understand; if a little colour, limited colour, is dropped
into the ocean, the colour loses its identity completely. Think of the other way round. It
the ocean is coloured, and is poured into atmosphere or onto any part any little wee bit, or
onto any spot, onto any atom or anything, it all becomes colourful.
So the Spirit is like the ocean which has the light in it. And when this ocean pours into the
little cup
your brain, the cup loses its identity and everything becomes Spiritual!
Everything! you can make everything Spiritual. Everything. You touch anything-it is
Spiritual ! The sand becomes Spiritual, the land becomes Spiritual, atmosphere becomes
Spiritual, celestial bodies becomes Spiritual. Everything becomes Spiritual !
So it is the ocean, that is the Spirit, while your brain is limited. So the detachment from
your limited brain has to be brought in. All limitations of brain should be 'broken' so that
when this ocean fills that brain; it should break that little cup and 'every bit' of that
should become colourful. The whole atmosphere, everything, whatever you look at,
should be colourful. Colour of the Spirit is the light of the Spirit and this light of the Spirit
acts, works, thinks, co-ordinates, does everything.
cup
This is the reason today I decided to bring Shiva-Tattwa to the Brain. The first procedure
is to take your brain towards the Shiva Tattwa by telling it : "See where are you going Mr.
Brain? You are putting attention to this. You are putting attention to that getting involved!
Now detach, become the brain yourself. Only the Brain. Detach, Detach."And then, take
this 'detached' brain, 'completely' filled with the colour of the Spirit. It will automatically
happen. As long as you'll have these limitations to your attention, it will not happen. So
one has to 'really deliberately' do this tapasya. Every individual
I'm with you ; so you don't need any puja that way. But that state has to be achieved, and
for achieving that state, you need the puja. I hope so many of you will become the Shiva-
tattwas in my lifetime. But don't think I'm asking you to suffer. There is no suffering in
this kind of an ascent. If you understand that this is the complete joyous state. That is the
time when you become Niranand. That's the joy named in the Sahasrara, the name of the
joy is Niranand, and you know your Mother's name is Nira. So you become Niranand.
May God Bless you.
17
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 'निर्मल धर्म' से ही विश्व का कल्याण संभव
्र
ं
बैर
'ओ मेरे प्यारे बच्चों, वास्तव में आप मेरे सहस्रार से जन्में हैं। अपने हृदय से मैंने आपका गर्भ धारण किया और
|
ब्रह्मरन्ध्र से आपको पुनर्जन्म दिया। मेरे प्रेम की गंगा आपको सामूहिक चेतना के साम्राज्य में लाई है। यह प्रेम मेरे मानवीय
शरीर से कही महान है। यह आपका पोषण करता है। आपको शान्त करता है और सुरक्षा प्रदान करता है।.....यह आपका
पथप्रदर्शन करता है। दिशा-निर्देश देता है। सच्चे ज्ञान के रूप में यह प्रगट होता है।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, चैतन्य लहरी २००६
18
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 .... सहजयोगी अति विवेकशील तथा ज्ञान के हर क्षेत्र के रहस्य को जानने वाले बन जाते हैं। उन्हें सब शास्त्रों, भूतकाल में
हुए अवतरणों पैगम्बरों, ऋषियों एवं आत्मसाक्षात्कारी व्यक्तियों का ज्ञान होना चाहिये। आध्यात्मिकता का इतिहास किस प्रकार
विकसित होकर यह सहजयोग के स्तर तक जहाँ अन्तिम भेदन घटित होना था पहुँचा-इसके पूरे ज्ञान से आपको अच्छी तरह लैस
होना चाहिये।
इस प्रकार के सभी, आत्मसाक्षात्कारी लोग विश्व निर्मल धर्म का अनुसरण करते हैं, जिसका अर्थ है हमारे अन्दर
अन्तर्जात पावन धर्म।
व्यक्ति को समझना है कि यह विश्व निर्मल धर्म सभी धर्मों का सार है। केवल यही धर्म वह वास्तविक अनुभव प्रदान
करता है जो व्यक्ति को आध्यात्मिकता के प्रति संवेदन शील बनाता है।
प.पू.श्री माताजी द्वारा लिखित 'सहजयोग'
.......विकास प्रक्रिया में इन धर्मों को स्थापित करना गुरु का कार्य था और इनकी स्थापना से
धर्म अन्त:निहित है।
...
...
मानव को धार्मिक बनाया गया था।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, १३.७.१९९४
( आज) पैगम्बरों के अनुयायी ही धर्म के प्रतिरूप को बिगाड़ रहे हैं ।
... ...
...... ईसाई कहलाने वाले लोगों ने ईसा पर बहुत कहर ढाये हैं, अहं ही इसका कारण था, ईसाई जहाँ भी हैं, अति आक्रामक
और हिंसावादी हैं।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, १४.४.१९९२
हिन्दू भी ऐसे कार्य कर रहे हैं जो कभी शास्त्र में नहीं लिखे गये।...हिन्दू धर्म में कर्मकाण्ड का बाहुल्य है।
धर्माधिकारी ही धर्म का प्रतिरूप बिगाड़ रहे हं ।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, २२.३.२०००
सभी धर्म असफल क्यों हो गये? क्योंकि आत्मसाक्षात्कार पाकर वे आत्मा नहीं बने। अत: आप में (सहजयोगी) और
अन्य लोगों में बड़ा अन्तर है। वे ढकोसले हैं, वे इसे बौद्धिक बना देते हैं। ...... अब आप स्पष्ट देख सकते हैं कि उन्होंने
आध्यात्मिकता को आत्मसात नहीं किया। बिना आत्मसाक्षात्कार के ऐसा कर पाना असम्भव है।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, १.३.१९९२
(देखो) कोई भी धर्म गलत नहीं है, कोई भी अवतरण गलत नहीं, कोई भी संत-साधु-योगी गलत नहीं, गलत तो वे
लोग हैं जो धर्म को अपने हाथ में ले लेते हैं और धर्म को बेच रहे हैं। .....जो लोग सहज में उतर आये हैं वे तो सभी धर्मों को मानने
लगे हैं। नहीं मानते तो मानना पड़ेगा। सब अवतरणों की पूजा करनी पड़ेगी। क्योंकि हम तो 'विश्व निर्मल धर्म' में विश्वास
करते हैं, उसमें सारे ही धर्म समाहित हैं। सबको जोड़ने की बात है, तोड़ने की नहीं।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, २५.३.१९९२
सभी शास्त्रों में सहजयोग का वर्णन किया गया है, परन्तु हमें (सहजयोगियों को ) सभी धर्मों को उनके वास्तविक और
शुद्ध रूप में लाना होगा। यही कार्य है जिसे व्यक्ति ने करना है-सभी धर्मों को शुद्ध रूप में लाना मानव सृजित-धर्म के रूप के
अनुसार आँखे बन्द करके चलते जाना नहीं।
19
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 इन धर्मों का सृजन अवतरणों ने किया था, मनुष्यों ने नहीं। मानव ने तो इसे बनावटी बना दिया है, सभी प्रकार की
बेवकूफी धर्म के साथ की है। हमें याद रखना है कि धर्म के सच्चे और शुद्ध स्वरूप में हमें इसका सम्मान करना है क्योंकि
सभी धर्म एक ही हैं। आप यदि धर्म के सच्चे स्वरूप को देखें तो फूल की भिन्न पंखुड़ियों की तरह से सभी धर्म एक हैं। देखने
में चाहे वे एक समान न लगें परन्तु सभी पंखुड़ियों से मिलकर ही फूल बनता है।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, नवरात्रि, पुणे, १४.१०.१९८८
तो सहजयोगियों को कुण्डलिनी जागृति की कार्य प्रणाली द्वारा पूर्ण धैर्य और प्रेम के साथ लोगों को
आत्मसाक्षात्कार देना है क्योंकि दिव्य प्रेम एवं हितकारिता सहजयोग के आधार हैं।
सत्य सदगुणों तथा अपने आदर्शों पर हमें स्थिर रहना है।
सहजयोगी का बाह्य अस्तित्व उसकी आंतरिक शान्ति, दिव्य करुणा, सहजयोग के आदर्शों की प्रगल्भता
तथा आनन्दमय जीवन की अभिव्यक्ति करता है।
एक सहजयोगी के विशेष गुण स्वयं को दर्शायेंगे। लोग धीरे -धीरे आपकी अद्वितीय श्रेष्ठता को पहचानेंगे, उनके
विचार बदलेंगे व अपने जीवन की तुलना आपके जीवन से करेंगे और दिव्य लहरियों की सुन्दरता का आनन्द लेने के लिये वे
सहजयोग में आयेंगे।
विश्व को बचाने का एकमात्र उपाय सहजयोग ही है।......यह आध्यात्मिक क्रान्ति है।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, 'सहजयोग'
आपका उत्तरदायित्व है, सम्पूर्ण विश्व का उद्धार
आपको अपने पूर्व पुण्यों के कारण आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्राप्त हुआ है। ......आप बहुत ही विशेष लोग हैं, आपकी
आत्मा ज्योतित हो गयी है। ......आपमें अपार शक्ति है। आप अपने देश, जाति, समाज तथा परिवार की समस्याओं का
समाधान करेंगे। पूरे विश्व की समस्याओं का समाधान करेंगे। पूरे विश्व की समस्याओं का समाधान आप ही करेंगे। आप
लोग ही पृथ्वी पर शान्ति लायेंगे। आप ही सुन्दर दिव्य मानवों से परिपूर्ण एक विश्व का सृजन करेंगे।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, दिवाली पूजा, १२.११.१९९३
....... हमें यह समझना है कि एक लक्ष्य के लिये हमारा पुनरूत्थान हुआ है और वह लक्ष्य है इस विश्व को एक सुन्दर
स्थान में परिवर्तित करना और इसके लिये हम सब सहजयोगियों को अपना पूरा चित्त लगा देना चाहिये।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, ३.४.१९९४
केवल सहजयोग द्वारा ही आप इस विश्व की रक्षा कर सकते हैं, कोई अन्य मार्ग नहीं है। ....यह तो
बहुत बड़ा
.... ..
आन्दोलन है जिसे विस्फोटक होना होगा, यदि ऐसे महान कदम न उठाये गये तो मैं नहीं जानती प्रलय का दोष किस
पर आयेगा।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, कबैला, ३.६.२००१
अब आपका ब्रह्माण्डीय अस्तित्व है, अब आप बनावटी संबंधों से नहीं आध्यात्मिक संबंधों से जुड़़े हुये हैं।
... ...
आत्मसाक्षात्कार आपको इसलिये प्राप्त हुआ है कि आप इसे पूरे विश्व मे फैलायें तथा विश्व का उद्धार करें-एक बार
20
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 जब आप इस बात को समझ जायेंगे तो स्वत: ही आप उत्तरदायित्व ले लेंगे।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, २१.६.१९९२
आपमें सभी शक्तियाँ हैं। इन शक्तियों को धारण करने का प्रयत्न करें। अब आप लोग परमात्मा के साम्राज्य में प्रवेश कर
चुके हैं, विश्वास रखें आप सबमें विश्व को परिवर्तित कर सकने की शक्ति है। आप ही वे लोग हैं जिन्हें वास्तविकता में इस कार्य के
लिये चुना गया है-अत: उत्तरदायित्व समझें।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, २१.३.१९९४
अपने ज्योतिर्मय चित्त द्वारा शक्ति को क्रियान्वित करें
कितने भयानक समय से हम गुज़र रहे हैं, इसका मुकाबला करना आवश्यक है। अब तक लड़े गये युद्धो से यह कार्य
कहीं कठिन है, मानव द्वारा किये गये सभी संघर्षों से यह कहीं कठिन है। एक भयानक विश्व की सृष्टि हो चुकी है और हमने इसे
परिवर्तित करना है। यह अति कठिन कार्य है। इसके लिये आपको अत्यन्त सच्चाई से कार्य करना होगा। एक मस्तिष्क तथा हृदय
से सामूहिक रूप में आपने यह प्राप्त करना है। मैं क्या बलिदान करँ? मुझे क्या करना चाहिये? किस प्रकार मुझे सहायता करनी
चाहिये? मेरा क्या योगदान है? काश मैं अपने जीवन काल में वे दिन देख पाती। अत: हमें अन्तर्दर्शन करना है। तो हम ध्यान करें।
कृपया आँखें बन्द कीजिए। अपना बायां हाथ मेरी ओर करके शरीर के बायें भाग में आप सब कार्य करेंगे।
१. पहले अपना दायां हाथ हृदय पर रखिये। हृदय में शिव का निवास है, आत्मा का स्थान है, इसने आपके चित्त को
प्रकाशमय किया है, प्रार्थना कीजिये
श्रीमाताजी परमात्मा के प्रति प्रेम का यह प्रकाश पूरे विश्व में फैले।'
अपने प्रति पूरी सच्चाई समझदारी रखते हुये कि आप परमात्मा से जुड़े हैं और पूर्ण आत्मविश्वास के साथ आप जो इच्छा
करेंगे पूरी होगी।
२. अब अपना दायां हाथ अपने पेट के ऊपर हिस्से पर बायीं ओर रखें। यह आपके धर्म का केन्द्द्र है। प्रार्थना कीजिये -
'श्रीमाताजी, विश्व निर्मला धर्म पूरे विश्व में फैले, हमारा धार्मिक जीवन एवं धर्मपरायणता लोगों को प्रकाश दिखायें।'
आपका जीवन धार्मिक होना चाहिये जिससे लोगों में उसे अपनाने की इच्छा जाग्रत हो।
३. अब अपना दायां हाथ अपने पेट के निचले हिस्से पर बायीं ओर रखें इसे थोड़ा दबायें। यह आपकी शुद्ध विद्या का केन्द्र है।
परमात्मा की कार्य प्रणाली का पूर्ण ज्ञान हमें हमारी श्रीमाताजी ने प्रदान किया है। हमारी सूझ-बूझ तथा सहनशक्ति के अनुसार हमें
श्रीमाताजी ने सारे मंत्र तथा शुद्ध विद्या दी है। हम सबको इसका पूर्ण ज्ञान होना चाहिए। आप कहें
'श्रीमाताजी, मुझे इस ज्ञान में निपुण कीजिये, ताकि मैं लोगों को आत्मसाक्षात्कार दे सकूँ तथा उन्हें दैवी कानून,
कुण्डलिनी तथा चक्रों के विषय में समझा सकूं। श्रीमाताजी, कृपा कीजिये कि मेरा चित्त सांसारिक वस्तुओं की अपेक्षा
सहजयोग में अधिक हो।'
४. अब दायां हाथ पेट के ऊपरी हिस्से में बायीं ओर रखें। आँखे बंद रखें। पेट को हाथ से थोड़ा दबा कर रखें। पूर्ण हृदय से कहें -
'श्रीमाताजी, मैं स्वयं का गुरू हूँ। मुझमें असंयम न हो। मेरे चरित्र में गरिमा और आचरण में उदारता हो। अन्य
21
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 सहजयोगियों के लिए मुझमें करुणा तथा प्रेम हो । श्रीमाताजी मुझ में बनावटीपन न हो । परमात्मा के प्रेम तथा उसके
कार्यों का गहन ज्ञान मुझे हो ताकि जब लोग मेरे पास आयें तो मैं उन्हें प्रेम तथा नम्रतापूर्वक सहजयोग के विषय में बता
सकू और यह महान ज्ञान उन्हें दे सकूँ।'
५. अब अपना दायां हाथ पुन: अपने हृदय पर रखें । पूर्ण हृदय से कहें -
श्रीमाताजी, आनन्द तथा क्षमा के सागर का अनुभव आपने हमें प्रदान किया। अपनी ही तरह अथवा
क्षमाशीलता आप ने हमें दी। श्रीमाताजी आपको कोटि- कोटि प्रणाम । कृपा करके मेरे हृदय को इतना विशाल
कीजिए कि पूरा ब्रह्माण्ड इसमें समा जाए। मेरा प्रेम आपके नाम का गुंजन करे। मेरा हर श्वास आपके प्रेम की
सुन्दरता की अभिव्यक्ति करें।'
६. अब आप अपना दायां हाथ बाईं विशुद्धि की ओर से ले जाकर गर्दन के मध्य में पीछे की ओर मध्य विशुद्धि चक्र पर
रखें । पूर्ण विश्वास के साथ कहें -
|
'श्रीमाताजी, कपट तथा दोष से लिप्त नहीं रहूँगा। अपने दोषों को मैं छिपाऊँगा नहीं, उनका सामना करके उनसे
|
मुक्त होऊंगा। मैं दूसरों के दोष नही ढूँढूंगा। अपने सहजयोग के ज्ञान द्वारा उन्हें दोषमुक्त करुँगा ।
श्रीमाताजी, अपनी सामूहिकता को इतना महान बनाइए कि पूर्ण सहजयोग, मेरा परिवार, मेरे बच्चे मेरा सर्वस्व
बन जायें क्योंकि हम सबकी एक ही माँ है। अत: मुझमें पूरी तरह से यह भाव जागृत हो जाए कि मैं पूर्ण का ही अंग
प्रत्यंग हूँ। मुझे पूरे विश्व की समस्याओं को जानने की तथा अपनी शुद्ध इच्छा तथा शक्ति से उनका समाधान करने की
चिंता हो ।
श्रीमाताजी, कृपा करके हमें अपने हृद्य में, अन्तर्गत रूप से पूरे विश्व की समस्याओं को जानने तथा उनके
कारणों को जड़ तक पहुँचाइये ताकि मैं
से समाप्त करने की भावना मुझे प्रदान कीजिए। मुझे इन समस्याओं के
मूल
अपनी सहजयोग तथा सन्त सुलभ शक्तियों द्वारा इन्हें दूर करने का प्रयास कूँ।"
७. अब अपने दायें हाथ से आप अपने कपाल (माथे) को पकड़िये। यहाँ आपको यह कहना होगा
श्रीमाताजी, मैं सब को क्षमा करता हूँ। मैं स्वयं को क्षमा करता हूँ। मैं अभी बहुत तुच्छ हूँ। मुझे अभी बहुत दूर
|
जाना है। मुझे स्वयं को सुधारना है। श्रीमाताजी, मुझे नम्रता दीजिये। ये हृदय की नम्रता मेरे में क्षमा-भाव पैदा करे
ताकि मैं वास्तविकता, परमात्मा तथा सहजयोग के प्रति नतमस्तक हो जाऊं।'
८. अब आप अपना दायां हाथ सिर के पीछे के भाग पर रखें । सिर को अपने हाथ पर पीछे की ओर झुका लें। यहाँ पर आप
कहें -
'श्री माताजी, अभी तक आपके प्रति हमने जो भी अपराध किये हैं , हमारे मस्तिष्क में जो भी बुराई आती है, जो
भी तुच्छता आपको दिखाई है, किसी भी प्रकार से आपको दुःख पहुँचाया है या आपको चुनौती दी है, तो कृपा करके
हमें क्षमा कर दीजिए।
22
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 God has created fourteen levels within us. If you simply count them,
then
know that there are seven chakras within us. Beside these, there
you
are two more chakras, about which you do not talk much. They are the
Chakra of Moon (Lalita) and Chakra of Sun (Shri). Then there is Hamsa
Chakra. Thus, there are three more. Seven plus three makes ten. Then
there are four chakras above Sahasrara. And about these chakras also I
have told you: Ardha-bindu, Bindu, Valaya and Pradakshina. These are the
four. After coming to Sahaja Yoga and after your Sahasrara has opened,
have to pass through these four Chakras, Ardha-bindu, Bindu, Valay,
you
and Pradakshina. After passing through these four chakras only you can say
that you have become a Sahaja yogi.
And if you see from another angle, we have to cross fourteen stages in
reaching up to Sahasrara. If you divide them then there are seven chakras
on the Pingala Nadi.
situated on the Ida Nadi and seven
This 'fourteen' is very important in Kundalini Sahasrara (science). Very
important. It's a very important thing. We should fully understand that we
become entitled to the blessings of Sahaja Yoga only after rising above
these fourteen stages.
H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Talk on Sahasrara Day 1983,
Mumbai, India
Published & Printed by
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
No. 8, Chandragupta Co-op Housing Society, Paud Road,
Kothrud, Pune, Maharashtra, India - 411 038. © : 25286537, 25286032 email:sale@nitl.co.in
website: www.nitl.co.in (For queries & sending articles contact on above address)
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Today we are talking about our resurrection
through these fourteen planes that are within
us, one after another, and then we burst
through all these and come out as beautiful
lotuses. That's what is Easter for suggestive
of eggs being offered and these eggs are
offered so that these eqgs can become the
birds.
19-04-1992
