The Divine Cool Breeze 2012 issue 6 – volume twenty-five number six

 The Divine Cool Breeze volume 25 number 6

 2 IT IS MUSICAL 14 CHASTITY 23 LEFT SIDE RIGHT SIDE 27 THE AUTHOR 29 LOVE IS KNOWLEDGE | cannot force you 32 REMEMBER to know this knowledge. So you have to say, "Mother, may I have?"

 You have come here to learn something, to go deep into your experiences of the knowledge of your roots. It is musical Shri Krishna has said that this is a tree which is upside down. The You have come here roots are upwards and the leaves are outwards. In the same way, know that the Kundalini really, when it rises to the Sahasr- you for a training ara or above the Sahasrara, then you start getting the feeling of Kundalini. So one has to understand that when we are now getting subtler and subtler and trying to feel the Kundalini, we should try to get out of the materialistic attitude and the materialistic viewpoint and materialistic sticking point. I had met one guru before – because you know I went to all of them – and I asked one of them, I said, “Why do you take money, so much money from these people who are western people? So much, why do you take and just they become beggars? Absolutely like beggars they become because you charge them so much and so heavily?" And he told me that unless and until you make them beggars they will never take to God. They are too rich to be near God. I mean this explanation I just could not understand. It was absurd. I could not understand how can this explanation have any proper meaning that you should make people beggars and then will they be nearer to God. I said, "In India we have many beggars. CC Do you think those beggars are nearer to God?" So he said, "No, otherwise, you see, they get stuck up with CC their money and you must just make them absolutely without any money, moneyless." So I mean, of course, to such a stupid person what can you say? What can you convince? I couldn't say to him, “Then why are CC you taking the money?" Then he would have said, "Because I'm 7 January 1983 Rahuri India detached." You see, anything one can say like that, if you start like י that, you cannot just stop it.

 It is smooth and quick, rhythmic. It is musical. Neither is it awkward nor lethargic, but it is musical. It is as a rhythm about it. It is very gracious. The whole movement of dissolution can happen to you very easily. 3.

 But one has to understand that materialism has gone into our of roots and, if we have to clear out our roots, we must get out materialism. That is important, but that does not in any way mean you torture your body or anything. I do not mean that. But what I am saying is your attention. that When we are dealing with our roots, we have to be in the centre, in the core. In the core means we are taking in, sucking in the feel- ing or, you can say, the feeling and awareness put together.... You can say the experience, into your awareness and feeling. You have to get the experience into your awareness and feeling. In Marathi it is a very simple word. Zaaniiv comes from the word ja. Ja comes from the word "spontaneous." Also ja has two meanings. Ja means also dnyana, awareness, and also it means The latest ism CC zaaniiv. So you start sucking that within yourself spontaneous – could be when you are not entangled into other things. If your attention is entangled outside, you cannot enjoy. So to be lost into that which is samadhi is the one where your attention is completely drowned into the experience. That is what we have to achieve. Sahaja Yoga-ism Sahaja Yoga-isms It is not only materialism. It is also emotionalism, all kinds of isms. We are attacked by all kinds of isms since the history of words started in this world and now the unholy thing is that the latest ism could be Sahaja Yoga-ism. It also could be the because now there has to be an attack on Sahaja Yoga also... Sahaja Yoga does not mean lethargy or slowness, not at all, but it is a quick and a fast stepping into the dissolution – very quick. And once you very quickly dissolve into it, the whole movement of your body is quick, but not jerky. It is smooth and quick, rhyth- mic. It is musical. Neither is it awkward nor lethargic, but it is musical. It has a rhythm about it. It is very gracious. The whole movement of dissolution can happen to you very easily if you do not allow your attention to be attacked by all these isms. There is no end to it. I mean if I have to write all of them, I greatest word think we will have to need at least one book to write all the isms of the world. There is no end to it, that which we have created. Then the worst of all is now, I think, Sahaja Yoga-ism in which, first of all, is the feeling of lethargy. "It will happen sahaja. Sit down. Mother will do everything for you. Another is a Sahaja Yoga-egoism in which tantrums, try to show off that they are great Sahaja Yogis, they have reached the third stage or the seventh stage or whatever... כ people get into

 You have to get the experience into your awareness and feeling.

 It is complete materialism.... Those who have been doing veg- etarianism are materialists in India. We have seen the cases like you see the Jains and the Marvari and the Gujaratis. They are all vegetarians, supposed to be compassionate people. They build some temples also and sometimes they give to poor people also and sometimes to people like Hare-Rama-Hare-Krishna who are begging in India. They give money to them. They are supposed to be very compassionate. They are more compassionate to chickens than to human beings. We have that kind. At the same time, I have seen in the West also such materialistic people. I mean they have no shame. So when you just turn and see should abhor that. Abhor – it is shameful. How could that, you be like that even in Sahaja Yoga? So as I have told you, there are some people who are materialis- tic, some people who are emotionalistic and some people who are egoistic. Now leave all these things on the sides, then you come in the centre. Now you are in the centre. you Now you are in the centre. Who is your Mother? In the centre, people enjoy just the love of their Mother, like Shri Ganesha does. Just think how finished. your Mother loves you Can you – this very sweet feeling? And who is your Mother? If you really believe in Her, in Sahaja Yoga, these two things should solve the problem. No more think- ing – just think how much your Mother loves you are jumping onto My Kundalini and when you jump onto My Kundalini, then there is no thought. You cannot think. When think how much your Mother loves you, you are jumping onto My Kundalini and at that time there is no thought. you. That means you It is very simple to meditate in Sahaja Yoga because somebody in person. They never had somebody in person, so I can understand their problems. There was nobody in person. They had to do it in the air. But here is a sure shot thing: you can feel have you your vibrations, you can feel My love and you can feel your own qual- ity. It is very simple. But it is not the love that is selfish. It is not the love where you say, "Oh Mother loves me, so She'll look after me, She'll do everything for me, She's going to do everything." It is the love that “Mother loves me so much, what can I do for Her? Which is the best flower I can give to my Mother? What does She need? She needs nothing. She doesn't need money. She doesn't need anything. What can I give Her? Which is the best flower?" CC CC

 Who is your Mother? If you really believe in Her, in Sahaja Yoga, these two things should solve the problem.

 Shri Hanuman was given a gold necklace by Shri Sitaji and He saw that and He was sitting on a tree and He was breaking one by one all of those big gold balls of His necklace. So Sitaji said, "What are you doing?" He said, "I'm trying to see in these balls where is Ram." He said, "None of them has, so I'm just breaking them to find out, otherwise why should I wear it?" And then She said, "Really? Where is Ram?" He opened His chest. He said, "See in My chest. He exists there." CC CC Feel your roots So it is never a one-sided sort of a thing. It is a thing that exists within you and you feel that and then it has to be reciprocal. In the water, if there is a ripple, it goes to the shores and then it returns back. So with this force only, I tell you, you can conquer your ego and Complete superego. There is no way out. And for these Indians, it is very easy to do because they know their Mother's love. When silence will exist you see something just put yourself to it, to feel your and then you see the enjoyment. The Mother Earth Herself is sucking you now. She is sucking you down. That is how you meditate now. This is how you have to meditate and it is such a security-giving thing. It will change your expressions, faces, everything. And that enamoured expression that roots. These are your roots once you come on My Kundalini. find in these people will be on your face. you And complete silence will exist once you come on My Kundal- ini, but not through your mental projections, but through your meditative, spontaneous experience. It is very joy-giving. Just feel the joy of that. You are all with Me here and the joy of that feeling will really enlarge your hearts and then you can give it to others. You do not have to be crazy about these things, but just to feel it within yourself. To become Gurus you are transformed. Now you have become saints, no doubt of it. Now from an egg you have become a bird, but now what should happen to you? Your Kundalini is still in the sacrum. How it has happened that now you have got all the Ganesha Shakti? I have made you like Ganesha. In the same pattern as I had made Ganesha, you are made. Now you have become a Ganesha and from this Ganesha stage, in which you think you are a Ganesha now, if I offer you a throne of Shri Ganesha, if you have to sit on that throne as a king, then what should happen? Now

 You are all with Me here and the joy of that feeling will really enlarge your hearts. 9.

 Actually, now your Kundalini should not be any more in the sacrum bone, but in stomach because Ganesha's Kundalini is in the stom- ach. In the stomach means in the Nabhi chakra. That means all your your seeking has been so far in materialism, has been in other things like in money or in power or in love or whatever it was. But now your ini itself is in the Nabhi chakra. That means your seeking is nothing but Kundal- itself has become the Kundalini. Your seeking has become the Kundalini means that you are the giver. Now you are the Guru. You have now become the Guru. When the Kundalini starts from the Nabhi, that means now you are the Guru. Now you have to give all the blessings, everything, as a Guru does. Now you all have become Gurus. But that is only possible when the Kundalini has risen, has lifted Her abode from the sacrum to the stomach and this unless and until You do not stage, it has arrived, you are not a confirmed Guru. Once that has happened, you become a Guru and then you can really impress people and work it out. It has to be done very fast. It has to work out very fast and for that, first of all, please get rid of your entanglements which are stupid. If you really believe that you have to progress in your seeking, that you have to have please, please hurry up. Please try to work it out, otherwise you are very few who have been given also the privilege of doing My puja – very few. And those who have been given have a chance to develop to that stage. And once become that, all of you who have achieved that stage can become the Gurus. And for that, have to have only wisdom. Wisdom – keep to your wisdom like Shri Ganesha has His wisdom. And in that wisdom, He knew one thing, that His Mother was all powerful and that He does not have to worship anybody else but His Mother. And He has to have all the powers which are granted by Her. His powers, no one even Brahma, Vishnu, Mahesha Ganesha. They cannot reach His stage because They are one-sided. But Shri Ganesha has all the powers. All the chaitanya powers He has. So to become like that, to be like that, He should be ideal, how He behaved and how He would sacrifice anything for the sake of Mother. Here there are people who do not even want to pay for something like a puja.... You may just spend away somewhere in nonsensical things because your attention has to be brought around completely. It has to be completely severed from all these nonsensical entanglements and there should be less talking and more experiencing. Then only is it going to have to be crazy about Cldzy your Kundalini coming up your Nabhi, then these things, you but just to you feel it within yourself. do not have. They cannot reach your work out.... 11

 The bliss within Try to feel the peace within yourself, that is within every human being and, after that, you have to know that this peace that you are achieving has to be given to others. In Sahaja Yoga, perhaps you have realized, whatever you have from the nature, you can release it back. For example, if you give got vibrations to a plant, you can make it grow. If you give vibrations to a flower, you can make it sustain its life. For the first time, you are giving something to the nature, but as soon as you grow up to that state of a Guru, then can give the peace that is in the nature. You can give the feeling of bliss that is in the nature. you But first achieve it within yourself. Make this go inside you and see that bliss settle down within You do not see other nonsensical things which you. are very disturbing sometimes to your western mind. For example, if a tele- phone is not working or the road is not all right ... these nonsensical things have no meaning, but feel the peace, try to establish that peace within because this peace you have to give to others. The whole development plan that I have is very fast and I am sure you will keep pace with it. So God bless may you. The working-out capacity When you sit down just feel the peace and try to achieve that peace within yourself. Do not pay attention to nonsensical things and with this your little brain trying to criticize. But try to achieve the peace within yourself so that My you can give peace to others. Compassion is not a mental projection I told you – the compassion that works, that flows. It is all mental. You see, for us compassion is mental. Every idea – peace is mental, bliss is mental, God is mental, everything is mental for us. He is not. He is the one that resides in the heart as spirit. He is the one who works through the compassion. And now you know My compassion is that it flows, it works, it acts. It is not mental. So do not try to be mentally concerned with people and try to be compassionate. I hope you understand that the compassion is not a mental idea that “We are compassionate, we are working for the unity of the world" and all that. compassion flows, it works, it acts. Even unity and all those ideas, even the idea of collective understanding is in the heart. It should work. In Sanskrit it is kaaryanvit. In English there is no word. Kaaryanvit is embodied with the working capacity, embodied with the working-out capacity, actually. "Working-out capacity" – you can translate like that. It should work. If it does not work out, then what is the use of looking after somebody who is sick? “All right, come along..." This is CC nonsense, this is very mental. Just do not waste your energy. You have not come here to look after the sick.

 I hope you understand this idea of looking after the sick and being all ego-oriented. "See, we are trying to help the sick, we are trying to help this, that" – all ego-oriented. Another superego-oriented is that we are sacrificing this and that and we are becoming beggars in India like the Hare-Rama- Hare-Krishna. Beggars, parasites – both are just the same. CC You have You are here for training You have to individually ascend faster and collectively pull out everyone, but not those who are heavily laden with problems and who are creating problems and objecting to your progress. That does not mean that not compassionate. You know how much compassion that I have, but My compassion does not make stories, "I'm so compassionate and this and that.' Up to a point it is all right, but do not do so to much bother about people who are dragging you behind. You have come here for a training, a training into the understanding of awareness which is compassion. You all have to. Even when you go to the school, you are not bothered about a person who is lacking in the class, are you? You want to study fast so that you come up. In the same way, I would request you not to bother your heads too much about people who are trying to pull you down because I do not want you to be pulled down. That is My compassion for them and for you. Let Me look after them and you just do not worry your heads about them. It will be all right. See – may God bless come here you are for training. 13 you.

 chastity Shri Ganesha Puja Brighton 4 August 1985 the essense of our/existence Today we have gathered here on the right occasion and very auspicious day to worship Shri Ganesha. Shri Ganesha is the first Deity who was created so that the whole uni- verse is filled with auspiciousness, with peace, bliss and spirituality. He is the source. He is the source of spirituality. As a result of that, all other things follow – like when it rains and is windy you feel the coolness in the atmo- sphere. In the same way when Shri Ganesha emits His power, we feel all these three things within and without. But it has been so unfortunate, especially in the West, that the most important, fundamental Deity has been completely not only neglected, but insulted and crucified. A thorough cleansing Today, although I did not want to say anything to upset you people, but I must tell you that worshipping Shri Ganesha means there has to be a thor- ough cleansing within you. When you worship Shri Ganesha, keep your mind clean, keep your heart clean, keep your being clean. No thoughts of lust and greed should come up. Actually when the Kundalini rises, Ganesha has to be awakened within us. The innocence has to come up, which obliterates all such degrading ideas within us. If ascent is to be achieved, we have to understand that we have to mature. People are sick now. All over the western life one feels they are sick – sick because they have never recognized Shri Ganesha....

 So today we are faced with our power of ascent and the power of condition- ings we have had. When Freud talked of conditioning he did not know he was putting another type of horrid conditioning on you – terrible. Sex is not important for human beings at all. It is not at all important. It is you want to have children actually, that a human being who is of the only when highest level will be indulging in sex. The lure, the romance, this nonsense and all that does not exist in a pure mind. It is all a human creation and with this servility one has to do it. It is so much surprising. It comes from a very low grade within us. It comes from the low-graded human beings that one becomes servile to it. You should be the master of that. To mature ourselves When I see around Myself in the West, which is also a part and parcel of the same creation, so much of sickness that has come, I am really aghast – how to turn your attention now to the maturity of sex. When the sex matures, you become a father, a mother and the pure personality.... We have to mature ourselves. That does not mean I am saying austerity at a young age. It does not mean that. Another absur- for that. dity is that. But of course, you must mature. You need a tapasya An unimportant thing then becomes important and such an unimportant thing is that, just like anything that we have, like we have hair. Even if you lose hair it means something. But if you lose sex, what is wrong with that? It is very good. Good riddance to bad rubbish – such a waste of energy. So much interest, so much of a precious attention, so much of auspiciousness is spent in this kind of a nonsensical thing. So to worship Ganesha, one has to understand we have to mature. Maturity has to come within us. We have to go deeper within ourselves. Our attention has to go deeper within ourselves spontaneously. How do we achieve the depth if we are still like worms? Otherwise it is a great sort of a sacrifice or a pressure on people. These tugs and these pressures have been very costly for you people – very costly. You have paid through so much. You have gone through so much for what? 15

 Worshipping the innocence The priorities have to change if Shri Ganesha is to be worshipped. What are we worshipping today is the innocence within us. We are worshipping that which is auspicious, which is innocent. Innocence, which is deep down within us, that is our character, that is our nature, that is what we are born with. It is the basis of this whole creation. It is the essence of this creation. So when matter becomes active, reproduction starts. The animal stage comes in. Then comes the stage of human beings who are primitive. Then comes the stage where human beings are developed – not the way that we understand of the "developed world." Horrible – I will never call them developed by any chance at all. What is development? It is not outside. What is within development one has to see. What have we grown inside? What have we got inside ourselves? – anything that gross, big, is plastic, of that kind, the one which has not got any inner power.... What is our substance within ourselves? This is what Christ preached – a morality point. So important for Him it was because after dharma, which was a balance – where of course morality is very important – it was necessary for Christ to talk of the innate, deeper morality, which is a part and parcel of a being. It is not just thought or told or frightened because there is a fear of God and a wrathful God, but is should be your own innate light. That is why Christ talked about it. CC is What is your power? The vehicle ne venicie In the West the priorities are absolutely upside down. What is your power? Just think of it. Think within yourself. Is it mental power that is important? I have we have IS told you mental power has nothing to do because it is just linear. It moves in one direction, falls off, comes back to you. It has no substance in it. It is just a mind projection, plastic. What is your emotional power? Emotions that you have take you where? Se what our chastity. have emotions for, even good emotions that you have. Say you love you your wife very much. Where does it take you...? To frustration, to unhappiness, to our destruction. The mental power gives you a horrible thing called destroys others. And the emotional power gives you nothing but crying, weeping and always feeling unhappy.... So it is not absolute. It is relative. Mentally you are zero if you cannot destroy others. Emotionally you are zero because you cannot ego, which overpower people with So what is your power? Where does your power lie? It lies in the spirit. But even before the spirit is achieved, what is your power? Is it Kundalini? She is sleep- ing. Then what is your power? It is your chastity. If a man is chaste, chaste tem- perament he has and he stands up in his chastity. It acts. It works. But first of all chastity pays a dividend in your good health. From the face of a person you can say that this person is a chaste man. Like in our shastras, it used to say a saint or a brahmachari, the one who has never had sex in life, is always shining on his face. And as we say that the brahmachari was Shri Krishna, who has so many wives because no wastes of energy, no wastage of attention is on that. So the whole emotions. your greatest energy is inside. I will say today, as I was coming by car, it was raining, it was windy, it was cold, but we were in the car. Nothing affected us because we were quite warm inside the car ourselves. We passed through everything. Nothing touched us. Nothing bothered us. We came away from everything fine. How? Because we kept to our own vehicle. And the vehicle we have is our chastity. very

 You are the storehouse of chastity which is your power. The culture of the Divine We are so particular that others must respect us, others must give us homage, otherwise we get into tempers. Did you respect yourself? Do you respect yourself? It sounds sometimes to people in the West that Mother is very much trying to preach about Indian culture. Many people think that way. But I say that one has to learn science from the West. One has to learn other things from the West – aesthetics of course, paint- ings and art, maybe colour schemes. But culture you better learn from Indians. There is dirt of culture, no culture at all, I find. What is this culture where a woman is supposed to expose her body? It is a prostitute's culture, as simple as that. Face it up – where a woman is not supposed to respect her private parts is no culture whatsoever in the aesthetics of the Divine.... To an Indian it gives a shock. How can you talk because, once you give up your chas- tity, you cannot understand that there can be someone who is absolutely chaste. For a thief everybody is a thief. Because you do not have that respect for your chastity, you cannot imagine what Christ could have been. You cannot imagine. You cannot accept. Unbear- able things are said about Christ.... I have faced His crucifixion, which was unbearable as it was, but this kind of a thing you say about somebody – to an Indian woman if you pass such a remark, to an Indian ordinary woman, she would commit suicide. The magnet of chastity The is Shri Ganesha. Many people know that I have a great sense within magnet of direction. That comes through this magnet which is perfect. This magnet is the one which keeps you sticking or adjusted or all the time pointed towards the spirit. If you do not have the sense of chastity, you will dangle this way, that way. Suddenly you become a very good Sahaja Yogi. Tomorrow you become a devil because there is nothing that keeps you binding to the great idea of the spirit. Let us face it Now the time has come for all of us, all the Sahaja Yogis, to know that the greatest thing within us is not sex, but is chastity. And that is how we will be matured.... you up. Whatever is wrong is wrong for the Divine. Whatever is right is right for the Divine. What is the essence of your personality? It is your chastity and in Sahaja Yoga you can re-establish everything – whatever you have lost, you can. That is why the depth is lacking. And this is the reason there is no consistency in the temperament of people, no twelve hundred people for My lecture and next day not will consistence. Now get you even one. All are lost because there is no base, like a loose connection. There is no con- nection. The connection point is your chastity. So there is no consistence... If you tell them, “You have to get up in the morning, have a bath, do some puja," it is too much for them. But if you tell, say an Indian lady for Me, if you say that "You wear such and such dress" – "I just can't, I just can't, no, not possible. It is not possible. I can keep the whole night awake, but that thing I cannot do, just cannot do it." So the priorities are changed because where is your attention. You have everything you. You are the storehouse of chastity, which is your power. Everything is within you. Nothing has gone out. It is all there. All that fragrance is within It is all served. Do not condemn yourself. כי within pre- you. 17

 Once we get the inkling of that joy which is eternal, we start moving towards that. Changing the chart You are so fortunate I am here to tell you all about it. You are so fortunate I am with you. understand that point? You do not have to go to the Himalayas. You do not have Do you to stand on your heads. You do not have to do anything like that. You see, formerly these saints used to sit – you won't believe – in the cold frozen water or on the Himalayas in the open they used to sit for hours together to freeze their nonsensical ideas. Now that is not necessary. It is all made very easy. But change your priorities now. The whole attention, once it goes to your own spirit, you will be surprised, the whole chart will change. What is the most important thing? To meditate every day. I have seen people who want to do some course.... Every day they will go for that course and join that class and they will work it out and they will pass that course and do it up and finish it. But medita- tion they cannot do regularly. But now there is a little gap you should understand, that once we get the inkling of that joy which is eternal, we start moving towards that more and more, more and more and establishing ourselves in the ocean of that joy.... When somebody wants you to swim, you are frightened. You do not want to do it. You are very happy on the gross shore. You do not want to swim. Somebody pushes you. Again you are back. "No, baba, I cannot do it." But once you learn to swim, you enjoy that swimming. And when you like it, then you want to do it every day, regularly, religiously. So there is a little gap, which has to be achieved. The second point is that, as I have been always saying, you are lotuses, but under a maya. And you know what maya is. While India is the ocean, so it is very easy the lotuses to come out of the water. But to come out of the maya is very difficult. Say somebody falls in the maya, if you kick it, you go deeper [into the maya]. If you try to do anything you go deeper. The best thing is to keep watching it and be still. And that is the best way. It is to witness yourself. But your attention is not all right. How will you witness? Attention is somebody going that side and that person you will for see.... You must see every person, you do not see the flowers. You do not see the trees. You do not see the Mother Earth. You do not see anything. What you see is something hopelessly bad, worse than you. but

 Seeing the Mother Earth Today is the day they say one should not see the moon. If you see the moon it becomes of no auspiciousness and you get a bad name.... The reason why it is said is that today we have to see Shri Ganesh, who is the Mother Earth, who acts through the Mother Earth. Most of the things that we have are from the Mother Earth, so at this time you must see the Mother Earth, the Kundalini and Shri Ganesha today. The Mother Earth has created Shri Ganesha, so you do not see anything outside, you do not even see the moon. Just see the Mother Earth because it is the Mother Earth in Her love and compassion who has done so much for us. Your Kundalini has done so much for us. And Her son, who is the innocence within us, is to be worshipped today because He has done the maximum. Despite all the insults we have put on Him, all the ridicule, all the filth, all kinds of nonsense, still He stands up like a little child to amuse us. If Shri Ganesha is within, you become like a child with childlike innocence. You do not get angry ... but you become like a child who is very sweet, who always tries to amuse, who always tries to say nice things, always tries to make you feel happy, the source of such joy. And that is how you become a source of joy, a source of happiness, a source of fulfillment, all the time bubbling with laughter and happiness, bubbling with beautiful things. How the children amuse you – just see and watch how they come around with little, little hands, how they work it out, how they know what is the right thing. A child who is a realized soul is much more sensible than a grown-up person. I have seen that.... That sensitivity comes from the depth of your chastity. You listen to the children and you will be amazed how they talk and what they say, how they behave, how they try to amuse you.... If the father and mother do not have chastity, the children do not feel all right. They do not feel peaceful. They will become restless and then they develop the same restlessness within themselves.... You might be very intelligent, you might be anything, you might be a great writer, but you can get possessed. But a chaste man, an ordinary chaste person can never get possessed. Bhoots are afraid of chaste people. If one chaste person is going on the road, all the bhoots run away... 19

 The snake in our life The negative within us disappears with the light of Shri Ganesha. We can see it so clearly in another person. If you do not have chastity, you can never see who is unchaste or chaste. You cannot. Everybody is just the same. There is no light. Even if you get your Realization, even if your spirit is working out your are giving Self Realization to others, you are nowhere if you have no chastity. That is like a broken glass, which is trying to reflect something. It can never give the right picture. It is so important. And I have to tell you this now. The time has come for Me to tell collective consciousness, even if you you. This is the snake in our life. The first thing people will ask is “Whom am I going to marry?" What is such a hurry? Of course, marriage, I call it an auspicious thing. Marriage should be there. There should YOU are be a collective sanction, everything, but for what? To adore the chastity within us. Then they have married, then they have children. Then they want to have a house. Then they want to have this. There is all such an insular business that goes on and on and on and You nave No the light of your life does not spread. But I have known people who were just in the hell nowhere if and have come out and have spread light. Beautiful meteoric heights they have achieved. chastity. Thave seen people like that. Worshipping Shri Ganesha in the West You have come to worship Shri Ganesha within yourself. What is in Me to worship as Ganesha I do not understand because I am that. When you are worshipping Me, you want to have that Shri Ganesha within you awakened. Let that be awakened within you. Let what I say become the mantra to awaken that within you so that, as My children, you enjoy the bliss of chastity as I have enjoyed all My human life and all My Divine lives. You enjoy the same quantity, that is what I want. At least you should have the taste of it. I am telling you about something which you may not have heard before, but you never heard about Kundalini also. You never heard about Self Realization like this. But today I think, by chance, absolutely in a Sahaj way, this puja was arranged. I was to have this puja in Bombay. It was all organized. People were all willing to come there to do this puja. I mean a Ganesha Puja in England or in the West is so important that I thought better have one without the right time in Rome, which is the one of the basic things, which has ruined the chastity of human beings. Romans started it and others carried on. But it was to be here in Brighton at the Lotus Feet of Sadashiva. The English must know that they have got such a golden land and they do not deserve it. They have to deserve it. Imagine, you are living in the land of Sadashiva where even water is also the snow. It means like distilled water, clean, clear white, where Shri Ganesha is the one who washes the Feet of His Father, where the chastity itself resides as your Mother and you have to deserve that coveted position... All unchaste people are arrogant, otherwise how can they forgive themselves...? Arro- gance is a sign of an unchaste personality. And such a person also becomes insular because he is ashamed, ashamed to face others. But a chaste personality is open. Why should he be afraid of anyone? He talks to everyone nicely, is kind to everyone in all innocence and simplicity without falling in love with every third person he comes across. And that one has to realize, that this country is given to you with a purpose and if you do not come up to that level, you will be thrown away.

 The consolidation of faith Respecting your chastity is really respecting Me because I reside within you as chastity. If Shri Ganesha is the auspiciousness, I reside within you as chastity. Chastity is never aggressive. It is never harsh because there is no need.... You are so powerful that there is no need to aggress anyone. Why should you aggress? You are not frightened of anyone. It is so generous. It is so kind. It is so beautiful, always fresh and young, yet so sublime and so dignified... Chastity is the consolidation of your faith. When you have faith in God, you are chaste. When you have faith in yourself, you are chaste. you have faith in your wife? With your faith in your wife, you are chaste. Why should Because you are a chaste person, how can she be unchaste? Your faith in your child is chastity. Because you are chaste, how can your child be anything else..? The crystalline form of faith is chastity and that you can have even before Realization. Many have it. Actually like the camphor, which you see is volatile and evaporates into the fragrance. In the same way, we can say chastity acts into faith. If you do not have chastity, | reside you cannot have faith in anything because either you are dealing with your emotions, that you are emotionally attached to Me or maybe you are mentally attached to Me. But if you have a sense of chastity, a faith will be apparent. Within yourself, you do not have to have faith. "Now Mother I will have faith within myself." You cannot. Faith is something which is volatile and the volatile fragrance comes from chastity. within you chastity. chastityY ds The essence of our existence From today we are not going to look at the stars or the moon, but are going to look at the Mother Earth. In the universe She represents the Kundalini. She is nothing but chastity. She is just chastity. Can you believe it? What a power, Motherhood. Everything is chastity. Fatherhood, any relationship is chastity. Purity is again the fragrance of chastity. Goodness, compassion, everything comes from chastity, a sense of chastity which is not mental. If you are mentally chaste, you can be horrid like some of the nuns are or some of those people who are austere – not that. The chastity is an innate built-in Kundalini within which acts because it under- you, stands Me. She understands Me. She knows Me. She is part and parcel of Me. She is My reflection. So make your Kundalini strong by being chaste. People try to do things to look very attractive and this and that. Do not waste your like this. You are saints. Live like saints. Traditionally as we live, we have to live And evolve out of the tradition. Do not do something new, something absurd, energy that way. nonsensical. We do not have to attract anyone. Chastity is the fragrance in the flower which attracts the bees. It is the honey of the flower. It is the essence of our existence. 21

 s of Sahaja Yoga Basics lar TEFT SIDE 20 May 1982 We have two powers – left and right powers. Brighton The left power is the power that gives us conditioning. Left-sided, the subconscious, the collective subconscious – that gives us the conditioning. Now if The left side is the tamasic side. | you try to deny all that, then the right side is even worse. It gives us It is the side where darkness is affecting action, but with action we can become very ego-oriented. So both people. Those people who live in too much darkness or in the past or in a ways it can be troublesome. slyly hidden way, who are introverts .. who spend their life mostly in a very Supposing you say that “All right, I have no conditioning of any type, what´s wrong in doing this, what's wrong in doing that?" quarters or live with people closed who are extremely cautious and afraid And if you just move with that idea, with that freedom, it will be of others or people who do not talk abandonment. It may not be freedom because freedom must have much or who avoid meeting people, who shun people – all such people are wisdom behind it.... left-sided, are tamas. Such people, in their spiritual awareness or spiritual ascent, try to take to bhakti. They take lems, emotional upheavals, emotional insecurities. Any kind to bhakti more. They worship God of insecurity can take you to the left side.. It is very painful to from their heart, from their emotions. Left-sided activities are emotional traumas, emotional prob- have left-sided problems. It is very, very painful. The pain cannot They work through emotions. There are twenty-four types of relations they be explained. No one can understand. Nobody can cure it. You establish with God. That is called as a bhakti relationship and they dwell upon it and all the time weep and and cannot tell anyone and people think that you are fussing. They give you psychological treatments. You just do not understand say, “Oh God, when will I why this pain is within you. And this pain comes to you from the CC cry meet You?" Such people are the ones left side, the subconscious. who take domination from others, suffer, sacrifice and lead a life of great suffering. But in their expression, in collective subconscious is the one where whatever is created from their achieving God, they start doing the beginning up to today in the creation is within you. And once bhakti and they think through bhakti they will come to God. But with you go to the subconscious you just get lost there. You are so over- bhakti, God comes to them. Because of powered by this power of the subconscious that it is beyond you their bhakti, God comes to them and He incarnates for the bhaktas, the ones Beyond the subconscious is the collective subconscious. This to understand it, beyond you to get out of it and beyond you to for God. 9 February 1983 | not to succumb to it. And it goes on increasing.... continued page 24 who cry

 RICHT SIDE The second side, on the right-hand side, is the power by which we 14 May 1982 Brighton is act. First we desire and then we act. Now this right side power expressed within us as the right sympathetic nervous system. Sci- ence has come from the same. Science is in the gross. These are all subtle things that are within us. Now this right side power which exists within us gives us the for our mental and physical capacity to act. Now this action power takes place when we desire something. We want to implement that desire. Then we into action. One has to understand what sort of go a power this is. This power is called as prana shakti in Sanskrit. The other one, the left one known as mana shakti, is the power of the emotions or we can say of the mind, but you see the English lan- guage is not so clear-cut about it. So I would say the mana shakti and the prana shakti, these are the two powers that exist within us and we start using them as left and right, we can say like a brake and an accelerator. And then we become the master of driving. But while becoming that, we make mistakes.... Now this action within us acts for our mental and physical capacities on the right-hand side now the planning will start, this planning, "Now we must do this like we think of the future, CC tomorrow or day after tomorrow we have to do it." And we start CC setting, "Now, I'll go there and I'll find this and then I'll take a ticket and then I'll there." I mean our mind is working for the go future so much so we become absolutely futuristic.... SO The future-seeing is imaginary stuff. It is absolutely imaginary because what you think of the future does not exist. What exists is continued page 25 the present. You have to be in the present.... 23

 LEFT SIDE CONTINUED: Feeling guilty is the biggest blockade. It is the biggest blockade because once you start feeling guilty, this centre on the left blocked and it is very difficult. And you do not know why you are feeling guilty. All the time you are feeling guilty, but you do not know why you are feeling guilty, why these ideas of guilt are coming to you. This feeling of guilt keeps you away from joy, from enjoying anything, from being spontaneous. This explains why we sometimes are miserable for nothing at all. Actually, God has not created us to be miserable. He has made us so beautifully, so carefully. He has created us with such love and compassion, not to make us feel miserable for anything. He does not give us any diseases or problems, but we have done these things gets I am talking of the left side, then the right side and then the centre and then also, of course, about the spirit – definitely a hundred times. That is what I have to do. Gradually I have to build you up. to ourselves by going to extremes. I will As I am today talking about only about the left, I would say that to feel miserable for and it doesn't end. Every nothing at all is also wrong. It is being unjust to yourself. The people who are left-sided must know that they are the spirit, that they are that beauty which has to come, which spoke, they said, “Mother, has to express itself, that they are not the people who have to suffer all the time and to themselves, dimension You talked bear so much upon themselves, they become like that. And to avoid that bearing up, they about." 13 May 1982 | may take to some other habits. Many people take to alcohol also for a reason because they cannot bear the pangs of life. They cannot bear it. That is why they take to it. But once the spirit is awakened within you, you become so strong, you become so joyous, so spontaneous that all these things drop out. All those things, so-called diseases, so-called definitely. You won't believe time they say – last time I it was absolutely a new live like miserable people. They are not. But because they take so much upon habits, just drop out and you become a new blooming personality. Now the basics of having this centre within you, you can blame God for that. "Why did He give us these centres on the left-hand side? What was the need? He should not have given us these left-sided ones so we would have been just in the centre to go." But the trouble is the human beings have to know in their own freedom how to deal with them- selves. They have to learn a little the hard way the wisdom. They have to know that, by going to extremes, we have suffered. They have to realize it because if they have to become truly, absolutely free, they have to rise in their wisdom. If they are not wise people, then they cannot enter into the Kingdom of God because they will be abandoned people.

 RIGHT SIDE CONTINUED: People will say you have to be in the present, but how? We cannot. Either we are in the past or in the future because when the thought wave rises, it comes up and wave which comes up, we go with it but we do not see it is going down. Another thought wave that rises, we see that but do not see where it goes out. And so we are jumping on the cusp of these thoughts and we do not know, perhaps we are with the past or perhaps with the future. But in the centre of these two thoughts there is the present and we do not know how to take our attention there, which is a very difficult thing. And just to say that you should be in the centre is not possible. All these things, "You should do this, you should do that," are not going to work out unless and until there is light. For example, there is no light in this room and say, "Walk straight." You cannot walk because you cannot see where is the passage, how to walk. Even if you order, do whatever you please, you cannot just walk straight without touch- ing any The right side movement is for the people who are very meticulous, who you can call the people who are very particular about the time and who are very firm about things, who are very dry people and who are very straight and they will not tolerate any nonsense.... That sort of people become a headache and they are very boring. You just cannot bear their company. They can be very boring people and they give you big lectures about how to be straightforward and how to walk straight absolutely. In nature nothing is straight. It all moves so beautifully is trvina because the nature is created out of varieties and variety brings the beauty. They do not think of beauty. They do not think of love, of compassion, nothing. For them, it is a very meticulous world and that is how they live. Such people are developing a big ego within themselves... By the action of the left side, the emotional side, we develop a superego, but by the action of the right side we develop an ego. Now this ego is not easy to see because, if you have a superego, you have pains in the body, you are a miserable person, you have wrinkles on the face and you look absolutely worn out, but if you have ego then you look US to the of ego is stupidity. Such people indulge into all kinds of stupid things and they say, "What's wrong...?" The people who have superego are troublesome to themselves, but those are egois- tical are troublesome to others. They are all the time correcting others, torturing others, put- ting their ideas on to other people.... See how cleverly nature is trying to guide us to the centre: do not go to the extremes, keep to the centre, keep to the centre and then, when you are absolutely in the centre, evolution very quickly. So this is the right side that we have, the futuristic side – and, as you know, we are all very are not related to the plans of the Divine... One has to know that there is a divine power. You like it or not. All this living work that is done – millions and millions of flowers which are becoming fruits, a seed becoming a tree, a particular seed becomes a particular tree, all the choices that are made, the whole orga- nized way the chemical acts, the way the chemistry is made of periodic laws – everything you see in this world is all so well organized, there has to be somebody doing it... Unless and until human beings are evolved, none of the problems of the world are going to be solved, none of the problems – take it from Me. Whatever they have done by their thinking – say they have created democracy, they have created communism, this, that – all this nonsense has no meaning at all in reality.... The detachment takes place because you become one with the spirit, which is not attached, which gives you that light, that detachment from where can see the whole thing just as a drama going on. And you work it out very well. You become so dynamic that you are amazed at your own dynamism. Apart from that, one has to realize if there is a power which is an all-pervading power, that power itself thinks, organizes and looks after you. down. Another thought wave rises, goes up and comes down. Now, this thought goes you of these chairs because there is no light, you cannot see.... Nature to guide so dynamic.... The end centre. then you get your futuristic by temperament.... All these plans fail because these plans may you 25

 Some say that I am the author of Sahaja Yoga. Now how am I to tell what is My aim? you I have lived for thousands of years doing Sahaja Yoga. In all My lives I have been doing Sahaja Yoga with all these great people. Sahaja Yoga, we have tried in all lives, in all nations and countries and people. Today is the day. Now is the time to achieve results of all the work and the effort and the of all the speakers. prayers Today is the day to receive the blessings of the Divine, which is represented by these great incarnations, these great gurus on this Earth. It is. This is going to happen to many of you. But there are very few who come to this. Please understand I am not a purposeless personality. Gradually you will learn how I fulfill the purpose - yours, Mine and that of Sahaja Yoga together. How I work it out beautifully, you will understand. And I hope one day you also develop all those beautiful ways and methods of discretion by which you just do the right thing and never the wrong thing. March 1975 Delhi and Hamsa Puja 1988 (Germany) 27

 Love is If you have I am filled with great joy and happiness and My vibra- tions are flowing from My eyes as tears to see that, in this Kali Yuga also, there are people who are grateful knowledge, to a Mother who just gives an abstract thing known OV as vibration. Actually, I do not give to you.... I cannot give or it has to pass take. You will be surprised. It is just emitted through Me. It is My swabhava [innate nature]. It has to be that I cannot help it. It is a being that is being. way. the test of love. You cannot make it something else. It acts on its own. It goes on working. It is beyond Me to control Myself from loving all of you. I do not know how people learn to hate. I have not sufficient time even to love people. I find twenty- got four hours much less. I do not know how people sit down and manipulate and think in an ice-cold manner how to be hateful. Hatred has no power but of destruction - of yourself and others. On this day, I would request you to think of love all the time. Love is all knowledge. Knowledge is all love. There is nothing beyond. If you have knowledge, the test of love. If you know a person, it it has to pass makes no record on you because you know him from outside. But if you love a person, then you know the person out and out. You know him so well. You know him ... everything the way it is. It is this knowledge that is what we call as the para- Birthday Celebration 21 March 1977 knowledge. That is the knowledge we have to seek. Mumbai

 Knowledge All these books are only signalling towards that. They are the milestones which are telling us, "Go ahead, go ahead." They do not solve the problem of entering into the kingdom of God. I request CC all should come to the stage of understanding the that you you the love of God that is within Divine within which is you, you, trying to overflow from you and enjoy the sense of emitting and giving. Giving has the greatest joy and pleasure. There is no plea- sure in taking. And when you receive it, you start giving... When I was going to Rahuri University, the people in the nearby This is what is village knew that our car would be going there. They were ordinary villagers. They had never read any yoga. They did not understand anything more about vibrations than these feelings that you get. It is a subjective knowledge. It has no work. It is a subjective experi- Sahaja: such feel on your fingers, in your being – the bliss of ence, which you God. And as I was going, I just felt a jerk in the car because so many people were just lying on the road and some were standing TOving people on the road stopping the car and they started shouting My "jai." CC • I was wonderstruck. I said, “How did know that I was in this you car?" They said, “Mataji, you have given us vibrations. We knew CC this was the car, which was bringing us vibrations. So now you have to get down here." I just got down. I embraced all of them and our Sahaja Yogis CC were waiting at the other end. I said, "It doesn't matter." This is what is Sahaja: such loving people. And at that time, I just thought of how once with Rama, how felt those things with people, with very simple people, of very you simple heart and shraddha, how they had those feelings of receiv- ing your love and feeling it. 29

 Oh, Man, please awaken yourself to this great occasion of understanding, The need for love Everyone needs love in this world. You cannot exist without love. Your whole being is based on love. And I wish all of you in this country to understand that unless and until there is love in heart, do not try to do anything outside because, if you do it, you will be found out in no time. Every human being understands your what is love. There There are lots of things that are happening within are cosmic changes that are taking place today within you. I know that it is happening. The Shri Chakra itself has descended on this Earth and already the Satya Yuga has started. This is the reason why you are feeling these vibrations on your fingers and none of these and all those people have mentioned these things. This is only pos- sible when the Shri Chakra is brought down. It is here. You have to feel it and understand. It is for all of you to accept, you. and rishis gurus each with an open heart. I do not want anything from you. What can you give Me? I do not want anything. But I want My children to be happy. I pray for their happiness. I live for them and all the time, whether I am asleep or awakened or in the middle state ... am just with you. Every moment you are in My thoughts. I Do not be driven away Please try to humble down yourself. First of all, get this eternal truth within yourself. Let your being be that subjective instrument to understand what is what. Do not be driven away by a few read- ings here and a few readings there. Do not be driven away by the small-hearted ideas and the egoistical tomfoolery that is going on. It is to make fun of everyone. Oh, Man, please awaken yourself to this great occasion of understanding. This dynamic force is dying to bubble out of you. We have to change this world and transform it into a beautiful creation because the Creator will not allow His creation to be destroyed. If you do not accept the truth, you will be destroyed.

 So please, please – again as a Mother, I ask divine truth, the divine love and to be one. I wish all of you, all the Sahaja Yogis and all the people who are seeking the greatest, highest of highest achievement in the awareness of God and with love. you to accept the greatest of That is what it is, otherwise the rest of it is all useless. Those who have sought other kind of satwik [pertaining to the central channel] or tamasik [pertaining to left channel] things in life have gone to waste. They have gone to hell and they are completely destroyed. You do not want to do that. You are simple people, ordinary people and that is why you are the best people – because you do not suffer from any extremes. You have a very simple heart. You are leading a very religious life and a sanctified married life. This place is for the people who are in the middle path of Lord Buddha. Sahaja Yoga is the integration of all the truths of life... I request you not to be so small-minded. You have not known the truth so far, so try to understand it, to be subjective, to feel it, to understand it. All the books are saying the same thing as I Farth am saying. The only thing is I can do it. I am not doing it. It is just happening. I have come on this Earth just for this ignition. This is the last point of ignition. This has to happen. And this will happen. Let us see, in this country, in this beautiful Yogabhumi, how many people accept it. | came on this I just for this ignition. The ocean of My love It is not the understanding through your hearing, but it is the understanding through your heart and through your feeling of vibrations only that you can judge the Kundalini.. You do not need too much of brains. What need is a heart, is a shraddha- van heart. And if you have that, it will work out. you The time has come for flowers to be fruits. The time is many there. I thank you again and again for showing this great love to Me. It is like when I feel the ocean of My love, when it flows to the shores of all your hearts, the shore gives it back as a reaction. It is a parabolic movement. When My love passes through you and comes back to Me as love, I enjoy it. It is such a beautiful experi- ence. I mean it is a different experience perhaps that cannot be coined or put into these mortal words.... May God bless you with all His prosperity, with all His good- ness, kindness and the eternal. The Paramchaitanya should descend 31 on you and on your awareness.

 em e mb r r a message from your MOTHER Remember how many years you have spent doing Sahaja Yoga You must understand all the nice times you had .. also in understanding how you have grown into it, how you changed it and how you enjoyed and how you have imbibed all the qualities of Sahaja Yoga. m.

 Forget all the bad things because there is no use remembering bad things, no use thinking of them. Because of forgiveness, you can always forget the bad things. And if you remember the good things, your joy becomes multiplied. If you try to remember something bad, WORDS CONTENTS PAGES: then your joy goes down. 21 May 1985 Rome OPPOSITE PAGE: Birthday Puja 2001 Delhi THIS PAGE: Sankranti Puja 1987 BACK COVER: Diwali Puja 1988 Every time you see a person, PHOTOS FRONT COVER TO PAGE 13: Shri Mataji in India 1982-83 (Matthew Fogarty) try to remember what good that person has done to you, BACK COVER: Mircea Albutiu photographer what good that person has. PRINTED BY King Printing Company Inc. Lowell Massachusetts USA and If you have a memory for good things, Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. Pune Maharashtra India www.divinecoolbreeze.org contact@divinecoolbreeze.org editor@divinecoolbreeze.org you will have a very nice time. volume 25 number 6

 The lamp is not aware that there is a light within itself.



----------------------

2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
2012 issue 6 – volume twenty-five number six
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-1.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze volume 25 number 6
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-2.txt 
 2 IT IS MUSICAL
14 CHASTITY
23 LEFT SIDE RIGHT SIDE
27 THE AUTHOR
29 LOVE IS KNOWLEDGE
| cannot force you
32 REMEMBER
to know this knowledge.
So you have to say,
"Mother, may I have?"
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-3.txt 
 You have come here to learn something, to go deep
into your experiences of the knowledge of your roots.
It is musical
Shri Krishna has said that this is a tree which is upside down. The
You have come here
roots are upwards and the leaves are outwards. In the same way,
know that the Kundalini really, when it rises to the Sahasr-
you
for a training
ara or above the Sahasrara, then you start getting the feeling of
Kundalini.
So one has to understand that when we are now getting subtler
and subtler and trying to feel the Kundalini, we should try to get
out of the materialistic attitude and the materialistic viewpoint
and materialistic sticking point.
I had met one guru before – because you know I went to all of
them – and I asked one of them, I said, “Why do you take money,
so much money from these people who are western people? So
much, why do you take and just they become beggars? Absolutely
like beggars they become because you charge them so much and
so heavily?" And he told me that unless and until you make them
beggars they will never take to God. They are too rich to be near
God.
I mean this explanation I just could not understand. It was
absurd. I could not understand how can this explanation have any
proper meaning that you should make people beggars and then
will they be nearer to God. I said, "In India we have many beggars.
CC
Do you
think those beggars are nearer to God?"
So he said, "No, otherwise, you see, they get stuck up with
CC
their money and
you must just make them absolutely without
any
money, moneyless."
So I mean, of course, to such a stupid person what can you
say? What can you convince? I couldn't say to him, “Then why are
CC
you taking the money?" Then he would have said, "Because I'm
7 January 1983
Rahuri India
detached." You see, anything one can say like that, if you start like
י
that, you cannot just stop it.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-4.txt 
 It is smooth and quick, rhythmic. It is musical.
Neither is it awkward nor lethargic, but it is musical.
It is as a rhythm about it. It is very gracious.
The whole movement of dissolution
can happen to you very easily.
3.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-5.txt 
 But one has to understand that materialism has gone into our
of
roots and, if we have to clear out our roots, we must get out
materialism. That is important, but that does not in any way mean
you torture your body or anything. I do not mean that. But
what I am saying is your attention.
that
When we are dealing with our roots, we have to be in the centre,
in the core. In the core means we are taking in, sucking in the feel-
ing or, you can say, the feeling and awareness put together.... You
can say the experience, into your awareness and feeling. You have
to get the experience into your awareness and feeling.
In Marathi it is a very simple word. Zaaniiv comes from the
word ja. Ja comes from the word "spontaneous." Also ja has two
meanings. Ja means also dnyana, awareness, and also it means
The latest ism
CC
zaaniiv. So you start sucking that within yourself
spontaneous –
could
be when you are not entangled into other things. If your attention is
entangled outside, you cannot enjoy. So to be lost into that which
is samadhi is the one where your attention is completely drowned
into the experience. That is what we have to achieve.
Sahaja Yoga-ism
Sahaja Yoga-isms
It is not only materialism. It is also emotionalism, all kinds of isms.
We are attacked by all kinds of isms since the history of words
started in this world and now the unholy thing is that the latest
ism could be Sahaja Yoga-ism. It also could be the
because now there has to be an attack on Sahaja Yoga also...
Sahaja Yoga does not mean lethargy or slowness, not at all, but
it is a quick and a fast stepping into the dissolution – very quick.
And once you very quickly dissolve into it, the whole movement
of your body is quick, but not jerky. It is smooth and quick, rhyth-
mic. It is musical. Neither is it awkward nor lethargic, but it is
musical. It has a rhythm about it. It is very gracious. The whole
movement of dissolution can happen to you very easily if you do
not allow your attention to be attacked by all these isms.
There is no end to it. I mean if I have to write all of them, I
greatest word
think we will have to need at least one book to write all the isms of
the world. There is no end to it, that which we have created.
Then the worst of all is now, I think, Sahaja Yoga-ism in which,
first of all, is the feeling of lethargy. "It will happen sahaja. Sit
down. Mother will do everything for you.
Another is a Sahaja Yoga-egoism in which
tantrums, try to show off that they are great Sahaja Yogis, they
have reached the third stage or the seventh stage or whatever...
כ
people get into
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-6.txt 
 You have to get the experience
into your awareness and feeling.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-7.txt 
 It is complete materialism.... Those who have been doing veg-
etarianism are materialists in India. We have seen the cases like
you see the Jains and the Marvari and the Gujaratis. They are all
vegetarians, supposed to be compassionate people. They build
some temples also and sometimes they give to poor people also
and sometimes to people like Hare-Rama-Hare-Krishna who are
begging in India. They give money to them. They are supposed to
be
very compassionate. They are more compassionate to chickens
than to human beings. We have that kind.
At the same time, I have seen in the West also such materialistic
people. I mean they have no shame. So when you just turn and see
should abhor that. Abhor – it is shameful. How could
that,
you
be like that even in Sahaja Yoga?
So as I have told you, there are some people who are materialis-
tic, some people who are emotionalistic and some people who are
egoistic. Now leave all these things on the sides, then you come in
the centre. Now you are in the centre.
you
Now you are
in the centre.
Who is your Mother?
In the centre, people enjoy just the love of their Mother, like Shri
Ganesha does. Just think how
finished.
your Mother loves
you
Can you – this very sweet feeling?
And who is your Mother? If you really believe in Her, in Sahaja
Yoga, these two things should solve the problem. No more think-
ing – just think how much your Mother loves
you are jumping onto My Kundalini and when you jump onto My
Kundalini, then there is no thought. You cannot think. When
think how much your Mother loves you, you are jumping onto
My Kundalini and at that time there is no thought.
you. That means
you
It is very simple to meditate in Sahaja Yoga because
somebody in person. They never had somebody in person, so I can
understand their problems. There was nobody in person. They had
to do it in the air. But here is a sure shot thing: you can feel
have
you
your
vibrations, you can feel My love and you can feel your own qual-
ity. It is very simple. But it is not the love that is selfish. It is not
the love where you say, "Oh Mother loves me, so She'll look after
me, She'll do everything for me, She's going to do everything." It
is the love that “Mother loves me so much, what can I do for Her?
Which is the best flower I can give to my Mother? What does
She need? She needs nothing. She doesn't need money. She doesn't
need anything. What can I give Her? Which is the best flower?"
CC
CC
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Who is your Mother?
If you really believe in Her, in Sahaja Yoga,
these two things should solve the problem.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Shri Hanuman was given a gold necklace by Shri Sitaji and He
saw that and He was sitting on a tree and He was breaking one by
one all of those big gold balls of His necklace. So Sitaji said, "What
are you doing?"
He said, "I'm trying to see in these balls where is Ram." He
said, "None of them has, so I'm just breaking them to find out,
otherwise why should I wear it?"
And then She said, "Really? Where is Ram?" He opened His
chest. He said, "See in My chest. He exists there."
CC
CC
Feel
your roots
So it is never a one-sided sort of a thing. It is a thing that exists
within you and you feel that and then it has to be reciprocal. In the
water, if there is a ripple, it goes to the shores and then it returns
back. So with this force only, I tell you, you can conquer your ego
and
Complete
superego. There is no way out. And for these Indians, it is very
easy to do because they know their Mother's love.
When
silence will exist
you see something just put yourself to it, to feel
your
and then you see the enjoyment.
The Mother Earth Herself is sucking you now. She is sucking you
down. That is how you meditate now. This is how you have to
meditate and it is such a security-giving thing. It will change your
expressions, faces, everything. And that enamoured expression that
roots. These are your roots
once you come
on My Kundalini.
find in these people will be on your face.
you
And complete silence will exist once you come on My Kundal-
ini, but not through your mental projections, but through your
meditative, spontaneous experience. It is very joy-giving. Just feel
the joy of that. You are all with Me here and the joy of that feeling
will really enlarge your hearts and then you can give it to others.
You do not have to be crazy about these things, but just to feel it
within yourself.
To become Gurus
you are transformed. Now you have become saints, no doubt
of it. Now from an egg you have become a bird, but now what
should happen to you? Your Kundalini is still in the sacrum. How
it has happened that now you have got all the Ganesha Shakti? I
have made you like Ganesha. In the same pattern as I had made
Ganesha, you are made. Now you have become a Ganesha and
from this Ganesha stage, in which you think you are a Ganesha
now, if I offer you a throne of Shri Ganesha, if you have to sit on
that throne as a king, then what should happen?
Now
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-10.txt 
 You are all with Me here
and the joy of that feeling
will really enlarge your
hearts.
9.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Actually, now your Kundalini should not be any more in the sacrum
bone, but in stomach because Ganesha's Kundalini is in the stom-
ach. In the stomach means in the Nabhi chakra. That means all
your
your
seeking has been so far in materialism, has been in other things like in
money or in power or in love or whatever it was. But now your
ini itself is in the Nabhi chakra. That means your seeking is nothing but
Kundal-
itself has become the Kundalini.
Your seeking has become the Kundalini means that you are the giver.
Now you are the Guru. You have now become the Guru. When the
Kundalini starts from the Nabhi, that means now you are the Guru.
Now you have to give all the blessings, everything, as a Guru does. Now
you all have become Gurus.
But that is only possible when the Kundalini has risen, has lifted Her
abode from the sacrum to the stomach and this unless and until
You do not
stage,
it has arrived, you are not a confirmed Guru. Once that has happened,
you become a Guru and then you can really impress people and work it
out. It has to be done very fast. It has to work out very fast and for that,
first of all, please get rid of your entanglements which are stupid.
If you really believe that you have to progress in your seeking, that
you have to have
please, please hurry up.
Please try to work it out, otherwise you are very few who have been
given also the privilege of doing My puja – very few. And those who
have been given have a chance to develop to that stage. And once
become that, all of you who have achieved that stage can become the
Gurus. And for that, have to have only wisdom. Wisdom – keep to
your wisdom like Shri Ganesha has His wisdom. And in that wisdom,
He knew one thing, that His Mother was all powerful and that He
does not have to worship anybody else but His Mother. And He has
to have all the powers which are granted by Her. His powers, no one
even Brahma, Vishnu, Mahesha
Ganesha. They cannot reach His stage because They are one-sided. But
Shri Ganesha has all the powers. All the chaitanya powers He has. So
to become like that, to be like that, He should be ideal, how He
behaved and how He would sacrifice anything for the sake of Mother.
Here there are people who do not even want to pay for something
like a puja.... You may just spend away somewhere in nonsensical things
because your attention has to be brought around completely. It has to be
completely severed from all these nonsensical entanglements and there
should be less talking and more experiencing. Then only is it going to
have to be
crazy
about
Cldzy
your Kundalini coming up
your Nabhi, then
these things,
you but just to
you
feel it within
yourself.
do not have. They cannot reach
your
work out....
11
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-13.txt 
 The bliss within
Try to feel the peace within yourself, that is within every human being and,
after that, you have to know that this peace that you are achieving has to
be given to others. In Sahaja Yoga, perhaps you have realized, whatever you
have
from the nature, you can release it back. For example, if you give
got
vibrations to a plant, you can make it grow. If you give vibrations to a flower,
you can make it sustain its life. For the first time, you are giving something
to the nature, but as soon as you grow up to that state of a Guru, then
can give the peace that is in the nature. You can give the feeling of bliss that
is in the nature.
you
But first achieve it within yourself. Make this go inside you and see that
bliss settle down within You do not see other nonsensical things which
you.
are very disturbing sometimes to your western mind. For example, if a tele-
phone is not working or the road is not all right ... these nonsensical things
have no meaning, but feel the peace, try to establish that peace within because
this peace you have to give to others.
The whole development plan that I have is very fast and I am sure you
will keep pace with it. So
God bless
may
you.
The working-out capacity
When you sit down just feel the peace and try to achieve that peace within
yourself. Do not pay attention to nonsensical things and with this your little
brain trying to criticize. But try to achieve the peace within yourself so that
My
you can give peace to others.
Compassion is not a mental projection I told you – the compassion that
works, that flows. It is all mental. You see, for us compassion is mental. Every
idea – peace is mental, bliss is mental, God is mental, everything is mental
for us. He is not. He is the one that resides in the heart as spirit. He is the
one who works through the compassion.
And now you know My compassion is that it flows, it works, it acts. It is
not mental. So do not try to be mentally concerned with people and try to be
compassionate. I hope you understand that the compassion is not a mental
idea that “We are compassionate, we are working for the unity of the world"
and all that.
compassion
flows,
it works,
it acts.
Even unity and all those ideas, even the idea of collective understanding
is in the heart. It should work. In Sanskrit it is kaaryanvit. In English there
is no word. Kaaryanvit is embodied with the working capacity, embodied
with the working-out capacity, actually. "Working-out capacity" – you can
translate like that. It should work. If it does not work out, then what is the
use of looking after somebody who is sick? “All right, come along..." This is
CC
nonsense, this is very mental. Just do not waste your energy. You have not
come here to look after the sick.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-14.txt 
 I hope you understand this idea of looking after the sick and being all
ego-oriented. "See, we are trying to help the sick, we are trying to help this,
that" – all ego-oriented. Another superego-oriented is that we are sacrificing
this and that and we are becoming beggars in India like the Hare-Rama-
Hare-Krishna. Beggars, parasites – both are just the same.
CC
You have
You are here for training
You have to individually ascend faster and collectively pull out everyone,
but not those who are heavily laden with problems and who are creating
problems and objecting to your progress. That does not mean that
not compassionate. You know how much compassion that I have, but My
compassion does not make stories, "I'm so compassionate and this and that.'
Up to a point it is all right, but do not do so to much bother about people
who are dragging you behind.
You have come here for a training, a training into the understanding of
awareness which is compassion. You all have to. Even when you go to the
school, you are not bothered about a person who is lacking in the class, are
you? You want to study fast so that you come up. In the same way, I would
request you not to bother your heads too much about people who are trying
to pull you down because I do not want you to be pulled down. That is My
compassion for them and for you.
Let Me look after them and you just do not worry your heads about
them. It will be all right. See – may God bless
come here
you are
for training.
13
you.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-15.txt 
 chastity
Shri Ganesha Puja
Brighton 4 August 1985
the essense of our/existence
Today we have gathered here on the right occasion and very auspicious day
to worship Shri Ganesha.
Shri Ganesha is the first Deity who was created so that the whole uni-
verse is filled with auspiciousness, with peace, bliss and spirituality. He is the
source. He is the source of spirituality. As a result of that, all other things
follow – like when it rains and is windy you feel the coolness in the atmo-
sphere. In the same way when Shri Ganesha emits His power, we feel all these
three things within and without. But it has been so unfortunate, especially in
the West, that the most important, fundamental Deity has been completely
not only neglected, but insulted and crucified.
A thorough cleansing
Today, although I did not want to say anything to upset you people, but I
must tell you that worshipping Shri Ganesha means there has to be a thor-
ough cleansing within you. When you worship Shri Ganesha, keep your
mind clean, keep your heart clean, keep your being clean. No thoughts of
lust and greed should come up.
Actually when the Kundalini rises, Ganesha has to be awakened within
us. The innocence has to come up, which obliterates all such degrading ideas
within us. If ascent is to be achieved, we have to understand that we have to
mature. People are sick now. All over the western life one feels they are sick
– sick because they have never recognized Shri Ganesha....
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-16.txt 
 So today we are faced with our power of ascent and the power of condition-
ings we have had. When Freud talked of conditioning he did not know he was
putting another type of horrid conditioning on you – terrible.
Sex is not important for human beings at all. It is not at all important. It is
you want to have children actually, that a human being who is of the
only when
highest level will be indulging in sex. The lure, the romance, this nonsense and all
that does not exist in a pure mind. It is all a human creation and with this servility
one has to do it. It is so much surprising. It comes from a very low grade within
us. It comes from the low-graded human beings that one becomes servile to it.
You should be the master of that.
To mature ourselves
When I see around Myself in the West, which is also a part and parcel of the same
creation, so much of sickness that has come, I am really aghast – how to turn your
attention now to the maturity of sex. When the sex matures, you become a father,
a mother and the pure personality.... We have to mature ourselves. That does not
mean I am saying austerity at a young age. It does not mean that. Another absur-
for that.
dity is that. But of course, you must mature. You need a tapasya
An unimportant thing then becomes important and such an unimportant
thing is that, just like anything that we have, like we have hair. Even if you lose
hair it means something. But if you lose sex, what is wrong with that? It is very
good. Good riddance to bad rubbish – such a waste of energy. So much interest,
so much of a precious attention, so much of auspiciousness is spent in this kind
of a nonsensical thing.
So to worship Ganesha, one has to understand we have to mature. Maturity
has to come within us. We have to go deeper within ourselves. Our attention has
to go deeper within ourselves spontaneously. How do we achieve the depth if
we are still like worms? Otherwise it is a great sort of a sacrifice or a pressure on
people.
These tugs and these pressures have been very costly for you people – very
costly. You have paid through so much. You have gone through so much for what?
15
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Worshipping the innocence
The priorities have to change if Shri Ganesha is to be worshipped. What are we
worshipping today is the innocence within us. We are worshipping that which is
auspicious, which is innocent. Innocence, which is deep down within us, that is
our character, that is our nature, that is what we are born with. It is the basis of this
whole creation. It is the essence of this creation.
So when matter becomes active, reproduction starts. The animal stage comes
in. Then comes the stage of human beings who are primitive. Then comes the
stage where human beings are developed – not the way that we understand of the
"developed world." Horrible – I will never call them developed by any chance at
all. What is development? It is not outside. What is within development one has to
see. What have we grown inside? What have we got inside ourselves? – anything that
gross, big, is plastic, of that kind, the one which has not got any inner power....
What is our substance within ourselves? This is what Christ preached – a
morality point. So important for Him it was because after dharma, which was a
balance – where of course morality is very important – it was necessary for Christ
to talk of the innate, deeper morality, which is a part and parcel of a being. It is
not just thought or told or frightened because there is a fear of God and a wrathful
God, but is should be your own innate light. That is why Christ talked about it.
CC
is
What is your power?
The vehicle
ne venicie In the West the priorities are absolutely upside down. What is your power? Just
think of it. Think within yourself. Is it mental power that is important? I have
we have IS told you mental power has nothing to do because it is just linear. It moves in one
direction, falls off, comes back to you. It has no substance in it. It is just a mind
projection, plastic.
What is your emotional power? Emotions that you have take you where? Se
what
our chastity.
have emotions for, even good emotions that you have. Say you love
you
your wife very much. Where does it take you...? To frustration, to unhappiness,
to our destruction. The mental power gives you a horrible thing called
destroys others. And the emotional power gives you nothing but crying, weeping
and always feeling unhappy.... So it is not absolute. It is relative. Mentally you are
zero if you cannot destroy others. Emotionally you are zero because you cannot
ego, which
overpower people with
So what is your power? Where does your power lie? It lies in the spirit. But
even before the spirit is achieved, what is your power? Is it Kundalini? She is sleep-
ing. Then what is your power? It is your chastity. If a man is chaste, chaste tem-
perament he has and he stands up in his chastity. It acts. It works. But first of all
chastity pays a dividend in your good health. From the face of a person you can
say that this person is a chaste man. Like in our shastras, it used to say a saint or a
brahmachari, the one who has never had sex in life, is always shining on his face.
And as we say that the brahmachari was Shri Krishna, who has so many
wives because no wastes of energy, no wastage of attention is on that. So the whole
emotions.
your
greatest
energy is inside.
I will say today, as I was coming by car, it was raining, it was windy, it was
cold, but we were in the car. Nothing affected us because we were quite warm
inside the car ourselves. We passed through everything. Nothing touched us.
Nothing bothered us. We came away from everything fine. How? Because we kept
to our own vehicle. And the vehicle we have is our chastity.
very
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-18.txt 
 You are the storehouse of chastity which is your power.
The culture of the Divine
We are so particular that others must respect us, others must give us homage, otherwise
we get into tempers. Did you respect yourself? Do you respect yourself?
It sounds sometimes to people in the West that Mother is very much trying to preach
about Indian culture. Many people think that way. But I say that one has to learn science
from the West. One has to learn other things from the West – aesthetics of course, paint-
ings and art, maybe colour schemes. But culture you better learn from Indians.
There is dirt of culture, no culture at all, I find. What is this culture where a woman
is supposed to expose her body? It is a prostitute's culture, as simple as that. Face it up –
where a woman is not supposed to respect her private parts is no culture whatsoever in
the aesthetics of the Divine....
To an Indian it gives a shock. How can you talk because, once you give up your chas-
tity, you cannot understand that there can be someone who is absolutely chaste. For a thief
everybody is a thief. Because you do not have that respect for your chastity, you cannot
imagine what Christ could have been. You cannot imagine. You cannot accept. Unbear-
able things are said about Christ.... I have faced His crucifixion, which was unbearable as
it was, but this kind of a thing you say about somebody – to an Indian woman if you pass
such a remark, to an Indian ordinary woman, she would commit suicide.
The magnet of chastity
The
is Shri Ganesha. Many people know that I have a great sense
within
magnet
of direction. That comes through this magnet which is perfect. This magnet is the one
which keeps you sticking or adjusted or all the time pointed towards the spirit. If you do
not have the sense of chastity, you will dangle this way, that way. Suddenly you become a
very good Sahaja Yogi. Tomorrow you become a devil because there is nothing that keeps
you binding to the great idea of the spirit.
Let us face it Now the time has come for all of us, all the Sahaja Yogis, to know
that the greatest thing within us is not sex, but is chastity. And that is how we will be
matured....
you
up.
Whatever is wrong is wrong for the Divine. Whatever is right is right for the Divine.
What is the essence of your personality? It is your chastity and in Sahaja Yoga you
can re-establish everything – whatever you have lost, you can. That is why the depth is
lacking. And this is the reason there is no consistency in the temperament of people, no
twelve hundred people for My lecture and next day not
will
consistence. Now
get
you
even one. All are lost because there is no base, like a loose connection. There is no con-
nection. The connection point is your chastity. So there is no consistence... If you tell
them, “You have to get up in the morning, have a bath, do some puja," it is too much for
them. But if you tell, say an Indian lady for Me, if you say that "You wear such and such
dress" – "I just can't, I just can't, no, not possible. It is not possible. I can keep the whole
night awake, but that thing I cannot do, just cannot do it."
So the priorities are changed because where is your attention. You have everything
you. You are the storehouse of chastity, which is your power. Everything is within
you. Nothing has gone out. It is all there. All that fragrance is within It is all
served. Do not condemn yourself.
כי
within
pre-
you.
17
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Once we get the inkling
of that joy which is eternal,
we start moving towards that.
Changing the chart
You are so fortunate I am here to tell you all about it. You are so fortunate I am with you.
understand that point? You do not have to go to the Himalayas. You do not have
Do
you
to stand on your heads. You do not have to do anything like that. You see, formerly these
saints used to sit – you won't believe – in the cold frozen water or on the Himalayas in the
open they used to sit for hours together to freeze their nonsensical ideas. Now that is not
necessary. It is all made very easy. But change your priorities now. The whole attention,
once it goes to your own spirit, you will be surprised, the whole chart will change.
What is the most important thing? To meditate every day. I have seen people who
want to do some course.... Every day they will go for that course and join that class and
they will work it out and they will pass that course and do it up and finish it. But medita-
tion they cannot do regularly.
But now there is a little gap you should understand, that once we get the inkling of
that joy which is eternal, we start moving towards that more and more, more and more
and establishing ourselves in the ocean of that joy.... When somebody wants you to swim,
you are frightened. You do not want to do it. You are very happy on the gross shore. You
do not want to swim. Somebody pushes you. Again you are back. "No, baba, I cannot do
it." But once you learn to swim, you enjoy that swimming. And when you like it, then
you want to do it every day, regularly, religiously. So there is a little gap, which has to be
achieved.
The second point is that, as I have been always saying, you are lotuses, but under
a maya. And you know what maya is. While India is the ocean, so it is very easy
the lotuses to come out of the water. But to come out of the maya is very difficult. Say
somebody falls in the maya, if you kick it, you go deeper [into the maya]. If you try to
do anything you go deeper. The best thing is to keep watching it and be still. And that
is the best way. It is to witness yourself. But your attention is not all right. How will you
witness? Attention is somebody going that side and that person you will
for
see.... You must
see every person, you do not see the flowers. You do not see the trees. You do not see
the Mother Earth. You do not see anything. What you see is something hopelessly bad,
worse than you.
but
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Seeing the Mother Earth
Today is the day they say one should not see the moon. If you see the moon it becomes
of no auspiciousness and you get a bad name.... The reason why it is said is that today we
have to see Shri Ganesh, who is the Mother Earth, who acts through the Mother Earth.
Most of the things that we have are from the Mother Earth, so at this time you must see
the Mother Earth, the Kundalini and Shri Ganesha today.
The Mother Earth has created Shri Ganesha, so you do not see anything outside,
you do not even see the moon. Just see the Mother Earth because it is the Mother Earth
in Her love and compassion who has done so much for us. Your Kundalini has done so
much for us. And Her son, who is the innocence within us, is to be worshipped today
because He has done the maximum. Despite all the insults we have put on Him, all the
ridicule, all the filth, all kinds of nonsense, still He stands up like a little child to amuse us.
If Shri Ganesha is within, you become like a child with childlike innocence. You
do not get angry ... but you become like a child who is very sweet, who always tries to
amuse, who always tries to say nice things, always tries to make you feel happy, the source
of such joy. And that is how you become a source of joy, a source of happiness, a source
of fulfillment, all the time bubbling with laughter and happiness, bubbling with beautiful
things. How the children amuse you – just see and watch how they come around with
little, little hands, how they work it out, how they know what is the right thing. A child
who is a realized soul is much more sensible than a grown-up person. I have seen that....
That sensitivity comes from the depth of your chastity. You listen to the children and
you will be amazed how they talk and what they say, how they behave, how they try to
amuse you....
If the father and mother do not have chastity, the children do not feel all right. They
do not feel peaceful. They will become restless and then they develop the same restlessness
within themselves.... You might be very intelligent, you might be anything, you might be
a great writer, but you can get possessed. But a chaste man, an ordinary chaste person can
never get possessed. Bhoots are afraid of chaste people. If one chaste person is going on
the road, all the bhoots run away...
19
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-21.txt 
 The snake in our life
The negative within us disappears with the light of Shri Ganesha. We can see it so clearly
in another person. If you do not have chastity, you can never see who is unchaste or
chaste. You cannot. Everybody is just the same. There is no light. Even if you get your
Realization, even if your spirit is working out your
are giving Self Realization to others, you are nowhere if you have no chastity. That is like
a broken glass, which is trying to reflect something. It can never give the right picture. It
is so important. And I have to tell you this now. The time has come for Me to tell
collective consciousness, even if
you
you.
This is the snake in our life.
The first thing people will ask is “Whom am I going to marry?" What is such a hurry?
Of course, marriage, I call it an auspicious thing. Marriage should be there. There should
YOU are
be a collective sanction, everything, but for what? To adore the chastity within us. Then
they have married, then they have children. Then they want to have a house. Then they
want to have this. There is all such an insular business that goes on and on and on and
You nave No the light of your life does not spread. But I have known people who were just in the hell
nowhere if
and have come out and have spread light. Beautiful meteoric heights they have achieved.
chastity. Thave seen people like that.
Worshipping Shri Ganesha in the West
You have come to worship Shri Ganesha within yourself. What is in Me to worship as
Ganesha I do not understand because I am that. When you are worshipping Me,
you
want to have that Shri Ganesha within you awakened. Let that be awakened within
you.
Let what I say become the mantra to awaken that within you so that, as My children, you
enjoy the bliss of chastity as I have enjoyed all My human life and all My Divine lives.
You enjoy the same quantity, that is what I want. At least you should have the taste of it.
I am telling you about something which you may not have heard before, but you
never heard about Kundalini also. You never heard about Self Realization like this. But
today I think, by chance, absolutely in a Sahaj way, this puja was arranged. I was to have
this puja in Bombay. It was all organized. People were all willing to come there to do this
puja. I mean a Ganesha Puja in England or in the West is so important that I thought
better have one without the right time in Rome, which is the one of the basic things,
which has ruined the chastity of human beings. Romans started it and others carried on.
But it was to be here in Brighton at the Lotus Feet of Sadashiva.
The English must know that they have got such a golden land and they do not
deserve it. They have to deserve it. Imagine, you are living in the land of Sadashiva where
even water is also the snow. It means like distilled water, clean, clear white, where Shri
Ganesha is the one who washes the Feet of His Father, where the chastity itself resides as
your Mother and you have to deserve that coveted position...
All unchaste people are arrogant, otherwise how can they forgive themselves...? Arro-
gance is a sign of an unchaste personality. And such a person also becomes insular because
he is ashamed, ashamed to face others. But a chaste personality is open. Why should he
be afraid of anyone? He talks to everyone nicely, is kind to everyone in all innocence and
simplicity without falling in love with every third person he comes across. And that one
has to realize, that this country is given to you with a purpose and if you do not come up
to that level, you will be thrown away.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-22.txt 
 The consolidation of faith
Respecting your chastity is really respecting Me because I reside within you as chastity.
If Shri Ganesha is the auspiciousness, I reside within you as chastity. Chastity is never
aggressive. It is never harsh because there is no need.... You are so powerful that there is
no need to aggress anyone. Why should you aggress? You are not frightened of anyone.
It is so generous. It is so kind. It is so beautiful, always fresh and young, yet so sublime
and so dignified...
Chastity is the consolidation of your faith.
When you have faith in God, you are chaste.
When you have faith in yourself, you are chaste.
you have faith in your wife?
With
your faith in your wife, you are chaste. Why should
Because you are a chaste person, how can she be unchaste?
Your faith in your child is chastity. Because you are chaste, how can your child be
anything else..?
The crystalline form of faith is chastity and that you can have even before Realization.
Many have it. Actually like the camphor, which you see is volatile and evaporates into the
fragrance. In the same way, we can say chastity acts into faith. If you do not have chastity,
| reside
you cannot have faith in anything because either you are dealing with your emotions, that
you are emotionally attached to Me or maybe you are mentally attached to Me. But if you
have a sense of chastity, a faith will be apparent.
Within yourself, you do not have to have faith. "Now Mother I will have faith within
myself." You cannot. Faith is something which is volatile and the volatile fragrance comes
from chastity.
within you
chastity.
chastityY
ds
The essence of our existence
From today we are not going to look at the stars or the moon, but are going to look at the
Mother Earth. In the universe She represents the Kundalini. She is nothing but chastity.
She is just chastity. Can you believe it?
What a power, Motherhood. Everything is chastity.
Fatherhood, any relationship is chastity.
Purity is again the fragrance of chastity.
Goodness, compassion, everything comes from chastity, a sense of chastity which is
not mental. If you are mentally chaste, you can be horrid like some of the nuns are or
some of those people who are austere – not that.
The chastity is an innate built-in Kundalini within which acts because it under-
you,
stands Me.
She understands Me.
She knows Me.
She is part and parcel of Me.
She is My reflection.
So make your Kundalini strong by being chaste.
People try to do things to look very attractive and this and that. Do not waste your
like this. You are saints. Live like saints. Traditionally as we live, we have to live
And evolve out of the tradition. Do not do something new, something absurd,
energy
that
way.
nonsensical. We do not have to attract anyone.
Chastity is the fragrance in the flower which attracts the bees. It is the honey of the
flower.
It is the essence of our existence.
21
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-23.txt 
 s of Sahaja Yoga
Basics
lar
TEFT SIDE
20 May 1982 We have two powers – left and right powers.
Brighton
The left power is the
power that gives us conditioning. Left-sided, the subconscious, the
collective subconscious – that gives us the conditioning. Now if
The left side is the tamasic side. | you try to deny all that, then the right side is even worse. It gives us
It is the side where darkness is affecting action, but with action we can become very ego-oriented. So both
people. Those people who live in too
much darkness or in the past or in a ways it can be troublesome.
slyly hidden way, who are introverts ..
who spend their life mostly in a very
Supposing you say that “All right, I have no conditioning of
any type, what´s wrong in doing this, what's wrong in doing that?"
quarters or live with people
closed
who are extremely cautious and afraid And if you just move with that idea, with that freedom, it will be
of others or people who do not talk abandonment. It may not be freedom because freedom must have
much or who avoid meeting people,
who shun people – all such people are wisdom behind it....
left-sided, are tamas. Such people, in
their spiritual awareness or spiritual
ascent, try to take to bhakti. They take lems, emotional upheavals, emotional insecurities. Any kind
to bhakti more. They worship God of insecurity can take you to the left side.. It is very painful to
from their heart, from their emotions.
Left-sided activities are emotional traumas, emotional prob-
have left-sided problems. It is very, very painful. The pain cannot
They work through emotions. There
are twenty-four types of relations they be explained. No one can understand. Nobody can cure it. You
establish with God. That is called as
a bhakti relationship and they dwell
upon it and all the time weep and
and
cannot tell anyone and people think that you are fussing. They
give you psychological treatments. You just do not understand
say, “Oh God, when will I why this pain is within you. And this pain comes to you from the
CC
cry
meet You?" Such people are the ones left side, the subconscious.
who take domination from others,
suffer, sacrifice and lead a life of great
suffering. But in their expression, in collective subconscious is the one where whatever is created from
their achieving God, they start doing the beginning up to today in the creation is within you. And once
bhakti and they think through bhakti
they will come to God. But with you go to the subconscious you just get lost there. You are so over-
bhakti, God comes to them. Because of powered by this power of the subconscious that it is beyond you
their bhakti, God comes to them and
He incarnates for the bhaktas, the ones
Beyond the subconscious is the collective subconscious. This
to understand it, beyond you to get out of it and beyond you to
for God. 9 February 1983 | not to succumb to it. And it goes on increasing.... continued page 24
who
cry
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-24.txt 
 RICHT SIDE
The second side, on the right-hand side, is the power by which we 14 May 1982
Brighton
is
act. First we desire and then we act. Now this right side
power
expressed within us as the right sympathetic nervous system. Sci-
ence has come from the same. Science is in the gross. These are all
subtle things that are within us.
Now this right side power which exists within us gives us the
for our mental and physical capacity to act. Now this action
power
takes place when we desire something. We want to implement that
desire. Then we
into action. One has to understand what sort of
go
a power this is. This power is called as prana shakti in Sanskrit. The
other one, the left one known as mana shakti, is the power of the
emotions or we can say of the mind, but you see the English lan-
guage is not so clear-cut about it. So I would say the mana shakti
and the prana shakti, these are the two powers that exist within us
and we start using them as left and right, we can say like a brake
and an accelerator. And then we become the master of driving. But
while becoming that, we make mistakes....
Now this action within us acts for our mental and physical
capacities on the right-hand side
now the planning will start, this planning, "Now we must do this
like we think of the future,
CC
tomorrow or day after tomorrow we have to do it." And we start
CC
setting, "Now, I'll go there and I'll find this and then I'll take a
ticket and then I'll
there." I mean our mind is working for the
go
future so much so we become absolutely futuristic....
SO
The future-seeing is imaginary stuff. It is absolutely imaginary
because what you think of the future does not exist. What exists is
continued page 25
the present. You have to be in the present....
23
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-25.txt 
 LEFT SIDE CONTINUED: Feeling guilty is the biggest blockade. It is the biggest
blockade because once you start feeling guilty, this centre on the left blocked and it
is very difficult. And you do not know why you are feeling guilty. All the time you are
feeling guilty, but you do not know why you are feeling guilty, why these ideas of guilt are
coming to you. This feeling of guilt keeps you away from joy, from enjoying anything,
from being spontaneous. This explains why we sometimes are miserable for nothing at
all. Actually, God has not created us to be miserable. He has made us so beautifully, so
carefully. He has created us with such love and compassion, not to make us feel miserable
for anything. He does not give us any diseases or problems, but we have done these things
gets
I am talking of the left
side, then the right side and
then the centre and then
also, of course, about the
spirit – definitely a hundred
times. That is what I have
to do. Gradually I have
to build you up.
to ourselves by going to extremes.
I will
As I am today talking about only about the left, I would say that to feel miserable for
and it doesn't end. Every nothing at all is also wrong. It is being unjust to yourself. The people who are left-sided
must know that they are the spirit, that they are that beauty which has to come, which
spoke, they said, “Mother, has to express itself, that they are not the people who have to suffer all the time and to
themselves,
dimension You talked bear so much upon themselves, they become like that. And to avoid that bearing up, they
about." 13 May 1982 | may take to some other habits. Many people take to alcohol also for a reason because
they cannot bear the pangs of life. They cannot bear it. That is why they take to it. But
once the spirit is awakened within you, you become so strong, you become so joyous, so
spontaneous that all these things drop out. All those things, so-called diseases, so-called
definitely. You won't believe
time they say – last time I
it was absolutely a new
live like miserable people. They are not. But because they take so much
upon
habits, just drop out and you become a new blooming personality.
Now the basics of having this centre within you, you can blame God for that. "Why
did He give us these centres on the left-hand side? What was the need? He should not
have given us these left-sided ones so we would have been just in the centre to go." But the
trouble is the human beings have to know in their own freedom how to deal with them-
selves. They have to learn a little the hard way the wisdom. They have to know that, by
going to extremes, we have suffered. They have to realize it because if they have to become
truly, absolutely free, they have to rise in their wisdom. If they are not wise people, then
they cannot enter into the Kingdom of God because they will be abandoned people.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-26.txt 
 RIGHT SIDE CONTINUED: People will say you have to be in the present, but how? We
cannot. Either we are in the past or in the future because when the thought wave rises, it comes
up and
wave which comes up, we go with it but we do not see it is going down. Another thought wave
that rises, we see that but do not see where it goes out. And so we are jumping on the cusp of
these thoughts and we do not know, perhaps we are with the past or perhaps with the future.
But in the centre of these two thoughts there is the present and we do not know how to take
our attention there, which is a very difficult thing. And just to say that you should be in the
centre is not possible. All these things, "You should do this, you should do that," are not going
to work out unless and until there is light. For example, there is no light in this room and
say, "Walk straight." You cannot walk because you cannot see where is the passage, how to
walk. Even if you order, do whatever you please, you cannot just walk straight without touch-
ing any
The right side movement is for the people who are very meticulous, who you can call the
people who are very particular about the time and who are very firm about things, who are
very dry people and who are very straight and they will not tolerate any nonsense.... That sort
of people become a headache and they are very boring. You just cannot bear their company.
They can be very boring people and they give you big lectures about how to be straightforward
and how to walk straight absolutely. In nature nothing is straight. It all moves so beautifully is trvina
because the nature is created out of varieties and variety brings the beauty. They do not think
of beauty. They do not think of love, of compassion, nothing. For them, it is a very meticulous
world and that is how they live. Such people are developing a big ego within themselves...
By the action of the left side, the emotional side, we develop a superego, but by the action
of the right side we develop an ego. Now this ego is not easy to see because, if you have a
superego, you have pains in the body, you are a miserable person, you have wrinkles on the face
and you look absolutely worn out, but if you have ego then you look US to the
of ego is stupidity. Such people indulge into all kinds of stupid things and they say, "What's
wrong...?" The people who have superego are troublesome to themselves, but those are egois-
tical are troublesome to others. They are all the time correcting others, torturing others, put-
ting their ideas on to other people....
See how cleverly nature is trying to guide us to the centre: do not go to the extremes, keep
to the centre, keep to the centre and then, when you are absolutely in the centre,
evolution very quickly. So this is the right side that we have, the futuristic side – and, as
you know, we are all very
are not related to the plans of the Divine...
One has to know that there is a divine power. You like it or not. All this living work
that is done – millions and millions of flowers which are becoming fruits, a seed becoming a
tree, a particular seed becomes a particular tree, all the choices that are made, the whole orga-
nized way the chemical acts, the way the chemistry is made of periodic laws – everything you
see in this world is all so well organized, there has to be somebody doing it...
Unless and until human beings are evolved, none of the problems of the world are going to
be solved, none of the problems – take it from Me. Whatever they have done by their thinking
– say they have created democracy, they have created communism, this, that – all this nonsense
has no meaning at all in reality.... The detachment takes place because you become one with
the spirit, which is not attached, which gives you that light, that detachment from where
can see the whole thing just as a drama going on. And you work it out very well. You become
so dynamic that you are amazed at your own dynamism. Apart from that, one has to realize if
there is a power which is an all-pervading power, that power itself thinks, organizes and looks
after you.
down. Another thought wave rises, goes up and comes down. Now, this thought
goes
you
of these chairs because there is no light, you cannot see....
Nature
to guide
so dynamic.... The end
centre.
then
you get
your
futuristic by temperament.... All these plans fail because these plans
may
you
25
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Some say that I am the author of Sahaja Yoga.
Now how am I to tell
what is My aim?
you
I have lived for thousands of years doing Sahaja Yoga.
In all My lives I have been doing Sahaja Yoga with all these great people.
Sahaja Yoga, we have tried in all lives, in all nations and countries and people.
Today is the day.
Now is the time to achieve results of all the work and the effort and the
of all the speakers.
prayers
Today is the day to receive the blessings of the Divine,
which is represented by these great incarnations, these great gurus on this Earth.
It is.
This is going to happen to many of you.
But there are very few who come to this.
Please understand I am not a purposeless personality.
Gradually you will learn how I fulfill the purpose - yours, Mine and that of Sahaja Yoga together.
How I work it out beautifully, you will understand.
And I hope one day you also develop all those beautiful ways and methods of discretion
by which you just do the right thing and never the wrong thing.
March 1975 Delhi and Hamsa Puja 1988 (Germany)
27
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-29.txt 
 Love is
If you have
I am filled with great joy and happiness and My vibra-
tions are flowing from My eyes as tears to see that, in
this Kali Yuga also, there are people who are grateful
knowledge,
to a Mother who just gives an abstract thing known
OV
as vibration.
Actually, I do not give to you.... I cannot give or
it has to pass
take. You will be surprised. It is just emitted through
Me. It is My swabhava [innate nature]. It has to be
that
I cannot help it. It is a being that is being.
way.
the test of love.
You cannot make it something else. It acts on its own.
It goes on working. It is beyond Me to control Myself
from loving all of you.
I do not know how people learn to hate. I have not
sufficient time even to love people. I find twenty-
got
four hours much less. I do not know how people
sit down and manipulate and think in an ice-cold
manner how to be hateful. Hatred has no power but
of destruction - of yourself and others.
On this day, I would request you to think of love
all the time. Love is all knowledge. Knowledge is all
love. There is nothing beyond. If you have knowledge,
the test of love. If you know a person, it
it has to
pass
makes no record on you because you know him from
outside. But if you love a person, then
you know the
person out and out. You know him so well. You know
him ... everything the way it is.
It is this knowledge that is what we call as the para-
Birthday Celebration
21 March 1977
knowledge. That is the knowledge we have to seek.
Mumbai
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Knowledge
All these books are only signalling towards that. They are the
milestones which are telling us, "Go ahead, go ahead." They do not
solve the problem of entering into the kingdom of God. I request
CC
all should come to the stage of understanding the
that
you
you
the love of God that is within
Divine within
which is
you,
you,
trying to overflow from you and enjoy the sense of emitting and
giving. Giving has the greatest joy and pleasure. There is no plea-
sure in taking. And when you receive it, you start giving...
When I was going to Rahuri University, the people in the nearby This is what is
village knew that our car would be going there. They were ordinary
villagers. They had never read any yoga. They did not understand
anything more about vibrations than these feelings that you get. It
is a subjective knowledge. It has no work. It is a subjective experi- Sahaja: such
feel on your fingers, in your being – the bliss of
ence, which
you
God. And as I was going, I just felt a jerk in the car because so
many people were just lying on the road and some were standing TOving people
on the road stopping the car and they started shouting My "jai."
CC •
I was wonderstruck. I said, “How did
know that I was in this
you
car?" They said, “Mataji, you have given us vibrations. We knew
CC
this was the car, which was bringing us vibrations. So now you
have to get down here."
I just got down. I embraced all of them and our Sahaja Yogis
CC
were waiting at the other end. I said, "It doesn't matter." This is
what is Sahaja: such loving people.
And at that time, I just thought of how once with Rama, how
felt those things with people, with very simple people, of very
you
simple heart and shraddha, how they had those feelings of receiv-
ing your love and feeling it.
29
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-31.txt 
 Oh, Man, please awaken yourself
to this great occasion of understanding,
The need for love
Everyone needs love in this world. You cannot exist without love.
Your whole being is based on love. And I wish all of you in this
country to understand that unless and until there is love in
heart, do not try to do anything outside because, if you do it, you
will be found out in no time. Every human being understands
your
what is love.
There
There are lots of things that are happening within
are cosmic changes that are taking place today within you. I know
that it is happening.
The Shri Chakra itself has descended on this Earth and already
the Satya Yuga has started. This is the reason why you are feeling
these vibrations on your fingers and none of these
and all those people have mentioned these things. This is only pos-
sible when the Shri Chakra is brought down. It is here.
You have to feel it and understand. It is for all of you to accept,
you.
and rishis
gurus
each with an open heart. I do not want anything from
you. What
can you give Me? I do not want anything. But I want My children
to be happy. I pray for their happiness. I live for them and all the
time, whether I am asleep or awakened or in the middle state ...
am just with you. Every moment you are in My thoughts.
I
Do not be driven away
Please try to humble down yourself. First of all, get this eternal
truth within yourself. Let your being be that subjective instrument
to understand what is what. Do not be driven away by a few read-
ings here and a few readings there. Do not be driven away by the
small-hearted ideas and the egoistical tomfoolery that is going on.
It is to make fun of everyone.
Oh, Man, please awaken yourself to this great occasion of
understanding. This dynamic force is dying to bubble out of you.
We have to change this world and transform it into a beautiful
creation because the Creator will not allow His creation to be
destroyed. If you do not accept the truth, you will be destroyed.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-32.txt 
 So please, please – again as a Mother, I ask
divine truth, the divine love and to be one. I wish all of you, all
the Sahaja Yogis and all the people who are seeking the
greatest, highest of highest achievement in the awareness of God
and with love.
you to accept the
greatest of
That is what it is, otherwise the rest of it is all useless. Those
who have sought other kind of satwik [pertaining to the central
channel] or tamasik [pertaining to left channel] things in life have
gone to waste. They have gone to hell and they are completely
destroyed. You do not want to do that. You are simple people,
ordinary people and that is why you are the best people – because
you do not suffer from any extremes. You have a very simple heart.
You are leading a very religious life and a sanctified married life.
This place is for the people who are in the middle path of Lord
Buddha. Sahaja Yoga is the integration of all the truths of life...
I request you not to be so small-minded. You have not known
the truth so far, so try to understand it, to be subjective, to feel
it, to understand it. All the books are saying the same thing as I Farth
am saying. The only thing is I can do it. I am not doing it. It is
just happening. I have come on this Earth just for this ignition.
This is the last point of ignition. This has to happen. And this will
happen. Let us see, in this country, in this beautiful Yogabhumi,
how many people accept it.
| came on this
I
just for
this ignition.
The ocean of My love
It is not the understanding through your hearing, but it is the
understanding through your heart and through your feeling of
vibrations only that you can judge the Kundalini.. You do not
need too much of brains. What need is a heart, is a shraddha-
van heart. And if you have that, it will work out.
you
The time has come for
flowers to be fruits. The time is
many
there.
I thank you again and again for showing this great love to Me.
It is like when I feel the ocean of My love, when it flows to the
shores of all your hearts, the shore gives it back as a reaction. It
is a parabolic movement. When My love passes through you and
comes back to Me as love, I enjoy it. It is such a beautiful experi-
ence. I mean it is a different experience perhaps that cannot be
coined or put into these mortal words....
May God bless you with all His prosperity, with all His good-
ness, kindness and the eternal. The Paramchaitanya should descend
31
on you and on your awareness.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-33.txt 
 em e mb
r
r
a message from your
MOTHER
Remember how many years you have spent doing Sahaja Yoga
You must understand all the nice times you had ..
also in understanding how you have grown into it,
how
you changed it and how you enjoyed and
how you have imbibed all the qualities of Sahaja Yoga.
m.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-34.txt 
 Forget all the bad things
because there is no use remembering bad things,
no use thinking of them.
Because of forgiveness, you can always forget the bad things.
And if you remember the good things,
your joy becomes multiplied.
If you try to remember something bad,
WORDS
CONTENTS PAGES:
then your joy goes down.
21 May 1985 Rome
OPPOSITE PAGE:
Birthday Puja 2001 Delhi
THIS PAGE:
Sankranti Puja 1987
BACK COVER: Diwali Puja 1988
Every time you see a person,
PHOTOS
FRONT COVER TO PAGE 13:
Shri Mataji in India 1982-83
(Matthew Fogarty)
try to remember what good that person has done to you,
BACK COVER:
Mircea Albutiu photographer
what good that person has.
PRINTED BY
King Printing Company Inc.
Lowell Massachusetts USA and
If you have a memory for good things,
Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd.
Pune Maharashtra India
www.divinecoolbreeze.org
contact@divinecoolbreeze.org
editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
you will have a very nice time.
volume 25 number 6
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-35.txt 
 The lamp is not aware that there is a light within itself.
