1985im Sadhaja Yoga. ardin your The Divine Cool Breeze 2012 issue 4 – volume twenty-five number four

 Today is a day when we should decide, what we want to do for our future, for Sahaja Yoga, for the building of our lives. 988 1 JANUARY GANAPATIPULE MUSIC PROGRAM 1 JANUARY GANAPATIPULE INDIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS Happy New Year to you all. May God bless you this year with all His divine powers. May all the choicest flowers of joy and happiness be showered upon you. May God give you we are bere wisdom to become great Sahaja Yogis so that a new world can be created beautifully out of you... It is important that you all are here, that you should meet each other, talk to each other about Sahaja Yoga. Try to understand what is going on in the other parts of the world.. Today is a day when we should decide, take some vows in our hearts, what we want to do for our future, for Sahaja Yoga, for the building of our lives.. Today I do not want to say much. They say whatever you do on the first day, it happens to you all the year around and I don't want to speak like this all the time because I have been speaking too much. So the best way to enjoy the new year is to decide as to what we are going to do further. What are we going to achieve next year so that we can look back and now, that in one year we have done this job? So forget the past and think of today which is say an important date. We are here. We have to decide about ourselves. Let us decide that we will have a sinless life. We will have a sinless life and complete obedience to Sahaja Yoga. Forget the past and past conditionings. 2 JANUARY GANAPATIPULE TALKS TO SAHAJA YOGIS

 forget the past THINK OF TODAY N'K here here are We GANAPATIPULE – It was 11:59 pm and then the magic began. GANAPATIPULE - It was 11:59 pm and then the magic began. In those last few seconds of 1987 the vibrations began to pour down around us. All present came to their feet and held out their hands to where Shri Mataji would sit and at the stroke of midnight began to sing the aarti. With our deepest joy those words, "Saba ko dua dena Ma," filled the air. All desire for sleep melted. Mother's three great mantras CC with devotion born of the excitement for Sahaja Yoga that had been building in us over the past few weeks. were sung Brothers and sisters greeted each other in the new year. The men came together and began singing Auld Lang Syne, dancing and hugging. Then came a great treat. An Indian Sahaja Yogi had his drums with him and began to keep a rhythm. Singing and dancing started, the men on the inside and the ladies on the outside, with line dancers weaving in and out. The most joyful aspect of all this was that there was no sense of Indians or Americans or Swiss or Italians. It was just Mother's children dancing in the first few hours of 1988. You could see Sahaja Yoga as it is to be – all one culture and in the great dance of vibrations.

 3 JANUARY GANAPATIPULE INDIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS This tour was arranged, as you know, like a journey through your Sushumna Nadi – at to enjoy life different different points, different different chakras. In the same way, we have passed through various places and now we have reached Ganapatipule where we have to get our Sahasrara fully drenched with the blessings of Shri Ganesh. As you know, Sahaja Yoga is a very subtler happening within us. It is a very subtler happening and this subtler happening gives you sensitivity to divine joy.. I have seen many people saying that they can decide things on vibrations. And they have decided certain things on vibrations, but they commit mistakes. That means they have not yet grown up to that state where they can decide on vibrations. So nobody should arbitrarily decide, but consult the collec- tive, especially your leaders to find out if whatever decision you have taken, whatever you have thought of, is it all right or not. And one may commit lots of mistakes if you start behaving arbitrarily. The greatest law of Sahaja Yoga is that it is a collective happening.. Start deciding that we are going to be great Sahaja Yogis. We are here to be the Nir- malites, to fight all that is wrong, to stand for right and to emancipate the whole human- ity. If you understand the tremendous work we have to do, then you will create your own personalities in such way that you will be able to shoulder this great responsibility. So let us see, today is the beginning of this understanding between us that we are not going to grow by demanding, by asking, by getting worried about ourselves. But just be in joy. Just be in joy. This is what is lacking in some people and that is why they cannot enjoy. They are all the time worried how will they reach there, how will they come here, what is the arrangement, what is this, what is that. Just take it easy and things will work out for you. That is how you are going to enjoy life. 4 JANUARY GANAPATIPULE INDIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS We have started another subsidiary you can call it, or whichever way you may say, y shakti Yuva another parallel movement, called as "Yuva Shakti" which is meant for the young people in Sahaja Yoga – for their guidance, for their expression and for their dedication. And this is spreading so fast now that I am told we have got Yuva Shakti even in Pune. And maybe it might spread to other places, to other countries, so that they can correspond, have a rapport, try to understand each other. So this is a new movement... No doubt, we must care for our young people and look after them and give them their due respect and they must know their due duties towards Sahaja Yoga. I found them to be excellent workers, very dedicated innocent hands that I have got. I am very proud of them. 5 JANUARY GANAPATIPULE TALKS TO SAHAJA YOGIS

 GANAPATIPULE - On the first of January 1988, I saw Shri Mataji for the first time. They It was announced She was not coming that day, but would come the next day. I was disappointed because New Year's Day was special. But then like moonlight they announced that Shri Mataji was coming and then She came. And I saw Her for the first time. At that time, the Ganapatipule program watching Her was in Malgund, in the village there, and I saw Her coming out of the car and then I saw Her on the stage. It was like moonlight, watching Nirmal Gupta Her.

 6 JANUARY GANAPATIPULE INDIA MAHAGANESHA PUJA Today I am happy to say that I can tell you all these things openly, so clearly. But can the sky of joy you believe that twenty years back even in India nobody could talk about it because it was something agamya, not to be known, not to be understood. Your attention has become enlightened. With your enlightened attention you are listening to Me. That is why you are understanding what I am saying. Your attention itself has become active now and it baffles you sometimes when you see how many powers you have got. Joy has no double meaning. It is absolute. You reach to that subtlety. You start enjoying that tasting of joy – not vibrations, but joy, beyond your central nervous system where it can not be expressed in words. It expresses in your eyes, in your faces, in the atmosphere, in the nature, everywhere, to see the whole thing is blossoming around. This is what you all have to achieve and for that we have to know that we are not going to bow down to anything that puts our attention into shackles. "Mother has freed us, let us spread our wings. We are not little, small little birdies, but now we have become birds and let us spread our wings and fly in the sky of joy." There is no need for birds to fly. They can sit at a place, of course. They cannot hire a bus, but they need not. They spread their wings and fly because they enjoy. Like swimming in the sky of joy, use the beauty of this joyous happening to nourish yourself. Be happy. Make everyone happy and emancipate this world from ignorance. 8 JANUARY GANAPATIPULE MARRIAGES 8 JANUARY GANAPATIPULE INDIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS Today is the parting day. With all the joy and enjoyment of our personalities, it has I bless become a beautiful painting in My memory. But for a mother, it is very difficult to under- stand that every day I have to think of leaving some of My children somewhere and you all going to another place. I wish a day should come when we all of us should live together all the time. In your love for Me, you have lived in this Spartan conditions and have never complained about it. As a Mother, I think you are not supposed to thank anyone. Only the sadness, which is something like an ocean, sometimes covers Me up. I cannot express it in words, but it is a kind of a sadness that makes Me feel that now, from next year, when | am I going meet all of them again? I am sure next year again you will be able to come down here. Also I will be coming to your various countries. I hope all our plans will work out as far as travelling is concerned. I try My level best to travel as much as possible, but still it is your cooperation, it is your understanding of this very, very subtle state of this subtle personality which is so important. I can only say I bless you all from My heart very and bless all the artists, everyone here for understanding this great work I have taken over, for helping Me out and out to carry out this extremely subtle work for the human over, mind.

 GANAPATIPULE - We were married in January 1988 Brahmapuri in Ganapatipule. During the ceremony, when the white cloth was between the men and the brides, Shri Mataji said that the brides should look at the ground and walk very slowly towards the bridegrooms. I did so, as well as I could. When the cloth went down, Henno put a garland neck and then I put one around his neck and around my at that moment I felt, “He is so sweet." During the next part of the ceremony, when we lit the fires, there was as usual a lot of smoke and most of us were crying because of that smoke. Also there was confusion as to know what to do, how and when, but this was part of the game. It gave a charm to the whole thing and there was not much place for thoughts and worries, as things seemed to go quite fast. At the end of the ceremony, we were able to go and receive from Shri Mataji the wedding present, which was a beautiful silver with some silver items like a statue tray GANAPATIPULE - We went back from Ganapatipule of Shri Ganesha, an incense holder and a rose water on the boat with Mother, from Jaigad to Mumbai. Jaigad sprinkler. was a little place near Ganapatipule with a tiny quay After the marriage ceremony, in the night, Henno and and one little building on it and there was only about I went walking on the beach to the hill where there is the swayambhu of Shri Ganesha. We walked around it twenty of us. There were tiny jellyfish clustered around the quay. Mother was sitting there drinking Limcas, as pilgrims do, stopping at the top to meditate on the waiting for the boat to come. We were all sitting around swayambhu stone in the shape of Shri Ganesha's face. Her and I think the harbour master got his Realization. We arrived back at the camp just in time to pack our I remember the feeling of the utter peace of being there luggage, as we were all to leave the camp at seven o'clock with Mother at that little port, a fishing village, and all in the morning. In the bus, I sat beside Henno and those little wooden buildings. Later that night, we were suddenly felt that something had really happened during up on the deck singing bhajans to Mother and it was a the wedding. It was like magic because we had already really beautiful calm night. The greatest memory of those been engaged for a year, but suddenly our relationship had really changed. I felt much closer to him. Shri Mataji knew She was the Goddess, but She times was that you had tied us together. was so comforting and so normal. Auriol Purdie Trupta de Graaf

 10 JANUARY BOMBAY INDIA SANKRANTI SURYA PUJA If the axis of adhyatma in any country where a person achieves his spiritual ascent is, there will becomes the most important thing and is achieved, then any amount of development, any amount of all these things cannot destroy that country, cannot create wars. There be peace will be peace everywhere, there will be enjoyment everywhere. So on this day of Makar Sankrant, let us say now the Sankrant is over and we have to look forward to the new age adhyatma: of a new moon blessing us and the great sun coming over to give us all the energy we knowledge of the Self need, to celebrate the advent of the golden age of Sahaja Yoga. 14 FEBRUARY BOMBAY INDIA MAHASHIVARATRI PUJA Today we are talking about our heart and about the Shiva Tattwa that is residing in our talking about heart. Every one of you should put your attention towards your heart and find out with your heart, not in others, within yourself, within your inner being. You have to ask, you have to find out, "What shortcomings exist within me and how far do I have to go?" After that, whatever you achieve, that you will continue to achieve and enjoy. You will our heart our continue to taste it. It has been described as "dumb man's jaggery." If a dumb man eats then how will he describe the taste? Such is the joy of Shiva Tattwa. jaggery, (translated from Hindi) 21 MARCH BOMBAY INDIA BIRTHDAY PUJA When we try to play games with ourselves, we miss the point because it is the Self which worship YOur Slf going to bestow all the blessings of divine love and all the securities and all the help is going to emit. It is the Self that is going to give you your glory. It is the Self which is that are deserved by So we have to put our life fixed for something that is noble, you... enlightening and higher. Hypocrisy will keep you always out of it. So I have to request you to all face yourself, love yourself, respect yourself, understand yourself and stand on your self-respect and see for yourself that you are the king of kings, that you are the one who is to be worshipped. You are the one who is the emblem of God's love. Such a beau- tiful thing it is. So many of you are enlightened and settled down so well in Sahaja Yoga, enjoying the blessings all the time. But still, we have to progress far more. For that, what you have to do is to just meditate and meditate every day, regularly, religiously, like it is the puja of yourself. You are worshipping your own Self. With humility, with surrender of your ego, you are worshipping your Self. You are not degrading it, you are not analyz- ing it, but you are absorbing the beautiful power and the light of your Atma into your attention. May God bless you all. May God bless you this day when you all will be full of light and full of understanding of Sahaja Yoga and may you be in the bliss of complete understanding and love of God.

 EUROPE July and August 1988 SHRI MATAJI TRAVELS O January to March O September to December INDIA EUROPE April to July MUMBAI - I went to the Sankranti Puja in Mumbai "People sitting here are thinking that they want to come to Me," She said. "Why are they thinking like this? I am and was sitting towards the back and thinking, "I want to כ with them?" I was indeed thinking like that. I was amazed go to Shri Mataji." In the beginning the desire was very and thought, "She knows everything" because I was CC strong. Shri Mataji gave Her lecture and afterwards they CC thinking, "I want to go to Her" and then She announced were going to start the puja and, once they started the this. I pulled my ears and that was it. Nirmal Gupta mantras, Shri Mataji stopped them.

 2 APRIL SHUDY CAMPS UK MUSIC PROGRAM The whole thing is full of frolics and beautiful entertainment and everything is a drama. y not alone OU dre We are passing through that. But all this is just to make every event a memorable event, a respectable event. Above all, all these events have a protocol and all these protocols ONe are looked after by the Deities, who are sitting just there. Here also They are sitting. You cannot see Them, but I can see Them. All of Them are sitting on top of us here, looking | after us, all of us. And They are watching you all and they are wondering what gifts they are going to give you next time when you come out with all these beautiful things.. We have to understand that every step that we take, every movement we do, there is the divine help, that we are surrounded by the ocean of bliss, the ocean of forgiveness, the ocean of compassion and love. Please, remember that you are not alone. 3 APRIL SHUDY CAMPS UK EASTER & BIRTHDAY PUJAS You must come up and work out everything as far as possible, thinking that we all have certain to stand up. Now the children are coming up. They are also going to stand up. They are all looking younger to Me. Every day I see you, you look younger. Sometimes I do not promises even recognize you, the way you look younger. And I think, "Is he the son or is he the father?" Now the situation is that you are all blessed. You got jobs, you got everything and everybody tells Me, "Mother, this is what has happened, that has happened, every- thing." Now so what? These are temptations. Be careful. This is not what wanted. you do not What you wanted is the state of that complete faith within yourself where you have to ask – nothing. Everything will work out. Everything will work. It works. That is the point. So I hope next time when we meet I see even younger people than what I see today and I will be able to recognize you. Christ died at a very, very young age... Nobody could have achieved that much in that small age as He has done. It is remark- able. It is really remarkable. That is what I expect of you, to follow His footsteps in doing remarkable things. And let Me see all of you – every one of you has to do something great. And today is the day of certain promises. May God bless you for that. EASTER PUJA - Shri Mataji's car entered the courtyard in the same cloudy English atmo- sphere that had prevailed all day long. When the car's door finally opened in the middle of space, right by the sun, as if to salute the meeting of the smiling Mother with Her devotees. It was the the crowd who were waiting, the cloud cover opened and gently allowed a little very first time I saw Shri Mataji. As She slowly made Her way through the crowd, stopping at every step to receive flowers and give a little of Her attention to all and laughing with the little ones, I could fill my eyes with the reality of Her incarnation. And then, too soon, She Devarshi Abalain was in the house.

 easter BEYOND WORDS SHUDY CAMPS - The earth was waterlogged from weeks of continuous rain. The weather was cold and grey, but that did not deter the English Sahaja Yogis, who pitched giant tents, put down waterproof flooring, brought in huge heaters and laid down paths of wood shavings in order to accommodate all their brothers and sisters visiting from near and far. The inside of the great house looked both cozy and majestic. Shri Mataji's room was hung with beautiful drapes and there were fragrant flowers everywhere. Excitement tingled the air. She arrived on Saturday after lunch and immediately addressed us all. Seated on a chair in the yet unfurnished entrance hall, She spoke kindly and encouragingly. She spoke of our potential and how even what the Sahaja Yogis had achieved so far had exceeded Her expectations. To be sitting once again in the presence of the Devi Herself was beyond all words, Being Aware of Our Selves BARCELONA - After hearing some Spanish songs on why you are attached. With detachment, the love starts May 21st, Shri Mataji spoke to us. to flow. "As soon as you get your light, the sunlight," She CC said, “the fog disappears." CC "We can feel the rhythms and the emotion of the people who have made these songs." She said that Spain has a lot "When you are the spirit, you are like a brilliant dia- mond which is giving light by itself. So it is important to of emotions and that the emotions move inside of us. People in Spain often ask Shri Mataji if She is Spanish. understand what you are and what others are not. And "I think the love in My heart is expressed on My face this awareness should be an innate part of your being. CC Then only it will act and permeate into the atmosphere perhaps. I hope the women of Spain will become loving back to your and into other people. I hope when and affectionate towards others." you go will give My message to them, that we all Shri Mataji went on to explain that we have to realize countries you that Sahaja is love. "It is not attachment. It is not posses- have to be aware of our Selves.... "Everyone wants reality. The only thing is that they sion. But it is a giving love. It is not love of the flesh. It is not love of any material thing. Nor is it the love of your should see the reality in you or you should manifest your reality outside. The first one is not in our hands, to make fame. But it is the love of the Divine." The key to achieving this transformation is being able them understand reality. The second one, to manifest to witness everything in its reality, seeing both how and reality, is in our hands."

 7 MAY ROME TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS ROME ITALY SAHASRARA PUJA 8 MAY Be aware. Where is your attention? What are we worried about? Where are we spend- De aware ing our time? Leave your children to Me. Leave your families to Me. You can only keep your purse, but the rest of it, you can leave all your headaches to Me. But do not play out tricks with Me. Mahamaya knows all your tricks, everything, in and out. If I want to know, clear I can know each and every thing about you. I do not want to know. Under these circum- stances we are supported, looked after, managed, taken to reality so easily, so much with care.. You are assisted. Here these prime ministers have only five or six bodyguards. You have millions and millions, each one of you, with you. Nobody can touch for except you You can harm yourself, that's all. Nobody can harm.. Our ascent is the only concern. you. It is the only ideal – nothing else. And it will work out. All the rest will be taken care of. We have all the mechanics to do that. But first, give it to the mechanics to work out. All will work in a reflex action. Clear out your chakras. Do not say, "I have this, I have that." Just clear out. "How dare I have all these problems? How dare I have all these chakras still troubling me?" Clear out – morning, evening, clear out. I am sure it will work out. Next year, I hope I will have some good news. 8 MAY ROME MUSIC PROGRAM 9 MAY ROME TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS 17 & 18 MAY MADRID PUBLIC PROGRAMS 19 & 20 MAY BARCELONA PUBLIC PROGRAMS 21 MAY BARCELONA SPAIN PUJA I would like you to have your awareness of your powers. You are sitting on top of a nothing but mountain and you are sitting on top of evolution now. In knowledge, you are the great- est yogis. In power, you are the greatest yogis. You can become the greatest saints in righteousness and dharma. Where you lack is the dedication and devotion, the pure desire. These yogis used to go in the jungles, live there with the wild animals and used to blessings practise meditation to achieve Self Realization, year after year, lives after lives, because they had a pure desire so strong within them. But in Sahaja Yoga you move one step and you get blessings. You move another step, you get another blessing. It is nothing but blessings all the time. You are blessed every moment. But sometimes you also must know, because of the Mahamaya character of your Mother, these blessings are tempta- tions.. We have to be solid pillars of Sahaja Yoga, creating the roof for all the seekers of the world, for the emancipation of humanity. Of course, in pujas you know that you go deep. You go very deep into pujas. You touch very great depths. But that is My doing. What is your doing is to seek out that depth, keep up the enjoyment of that doing.

 LIGHT ON THEIR FACES You have seen whenever I Sahasrara Puja travel and arrange a program, there are thousands of people everywhere. In Italy they just saw My photograph and they came to My program. I do not proclaim anything. I do not promise anything, but they all came. The reason is they are sensitive and they can see that there is genuineness in this face. Whatever is inside is expressed outside. If you are not genuine, it shows outside. That is why the inside light should be made a big, big, brilliant light, so that we can make people see reality in so many lights. I am sure they can see that, the beauty on your face. In Rome the people were singing. One old man came and said I can see the light on their faces. There is a picture where there is light upon everybody's head. The other dayI saw one painting done by El Greco, Christ's disciples being blessed by the Holy Ghost and all of them had light coming out of their head. These were so few, but you are so many and all of you have got light on your head, which is guiding you, which is looking after you, which is loving you, which is showing you the path. You should never feel that you are alone. But try to keep yourself clean because this light can Shri Mataji May 21 disappear.

 21 MAY BARCELONA MUSIC PROGRAM 7 JUNE VIENNA AUSTRIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS It is very heartening to see how Sahaja Yoga is now spreading smoothly into the coun- a living tries which have different types of ideologies. Sahaja Yoga is a very pleasant beautiful blessing to all of us. You do not have to sacrifice anything. You do not have to become process a martyr. You do not have to go to jail or suffer at all. Slowly and steadily it works, works correcting you, helping you, making you sensitive to enjoy the joy of the spirit. But there must be something difficult in Sahaja Yoga because we do not get so many people as false gurus have got. And there is a drawback, one can say, that Sahaja Yoga cannot spread very fast. By its very nature, it cannot spread because it is a living process. has to become a Sahaja Yogi. One 8 JUNE VIENNA AUSTRIA INTERVIEW At seven years I gave a lecture when Gandhiji had fasted. For sixty-three days he fasted and all that for the untouchables. We have a funny thing, a caste system in India. So he marriage of the had fasted and My father took Me to a very mammoth meeting of, I think, twenty thou- sand people and he had to go back home because somebody got sick in the house. He was a very great speaker, so they would not allow him to go. He said, "All right, my daughter will speak for me." And I spoke. I said very sweet things. I said – you see, in India dolls we have marriages of the dolls – so I said, "See, in dolls there is no caste system. Why should we have a caste system?" And I said that "We have to now celebrate the wedding of dolls and all of us have to come and attend. And we all should forget our caste system and should sit together and enjoy the marriage of the dolls" in My own small way, you see, in a childish way, but they all enjoyed it. And I said, "We are human beings." At that we are reflections of one truth which we should take to... I met time also I did that say [Mahatma Gandhi] one day before he died.. I had one daughter at that time. He used to call Me as "Nepali" because I have high cheek bones. So he used to call Me Nepali – means "from Nepal" – just to tease Me. And immediately, after many years I met him... | Immediately he recognized. He called Me and he said, "Meet me after prayer." When I met him, he saw My daughter, very happy and he said, "Now take to constructive work, take to constructive work." And next day he was murdered. I was living just close to his place where he was living. The next day I did not go. But something was there. And I heard the shot.

 This incident taught me how the relationship with GRAZ AUSTRIA - In 1988 I translated several public Shri Mataji is always an internal one and not external. programs in Vienna and also one in Graz. Shri Mataji I had similar experiences at several other times, while never spoke to me directly or even looked at me. I really greeting Her and presenting a flower to Her in airports was hoping for some sort of acknowledgement or reas- surance from Her that I was doing the right thing. all over Europe. Every time when I felt a strong connec- On the last day in Graz, just before Shri Mataji was tion with Her, when I felt Her love inside me, She would leaving to go to the airport, we were waiting to say good- greet me, smile at me or ask me a question. bye to Her in the ashram. By that time my heart was so Being on the stage with Shri Mataji, as the transla- full of joy and I felt Her love so strongly inside me that it tor at Her public programs, was an amazing experience. did not matter that She went past me. I was just grateful Looking at the audience from the stage, it felt like Shri for everything I had experienced by Her grace and full of Mataji, with Her words and small gestures, was conduct- gratitude in my heart. But then, to my complete surprise, ing a huge orchestra of hearts and minds. Her talks were when She already was seated in the back of the car, She dramatically structured so they would touch all the issues saw me standing and called me up. So I went to the car necessary, answer all unspoken questions in the audi- and She spoke to me through the window and, to my ences, soothing emotions, preparing the people for the Sigrid Jones embarrassment, thanked me. So of course, I thanked Her. experience of Self Realization.

 8 JUNE MODLING AUSTRIA EKADESHA RUDRA PUJA The area of Sahaja Yoga where nobody can enter, you are perfectly happy there. Ekade- nobody shas are standing around you on your forehead to look after that area. They are watch- ing. They are guards and nobody can harm you. You are very nicely settled down there in the Sahasrara and nothing can touch you. Nothing can even bring a slur on you. They can harm are very alert and they have many facets. Each Deity has many facets and these facets are you YOu all the time throwing light in that area so that there is no intruder to enter in. This is what you have got within yourself. 8 JUNE VIENNA PUBLIC PROGRAM 9 JUNE VIENNA TALKS TO SAHAJA YOGIS 9 JUNE VIENNA INTERVIEW 9 JUNE VIENNA PUBLIC PROGRAM 10 JUNE VIENNA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS 10 JUNE GRAZ PUBLIC PROGRAM 11 JUNE GLEISSENFELD AUSTRIA TALKS TO SAHAJA YOGIS 11 JUNE VIENNA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS 13 JUNE LONDON PUBLIC PROGRAM 18 JUNE SHUDY CAMPS UK TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS The Divine wants us to change. Supposing I am going on a road and people say, "You a day to introspect have lost your way, Mother." That is all right. I am never lost because I am with Myself. But I had to go by that particular road is the point. I had to do it. And that is why .. I have •.. lost my way. If you have that kind of an understanding and if you have that satisfaction in your heart, then you will find life is worth much more than what you think it to be.. It is so obvious that it is a very precarious time we are passing through. It is very impor- tant we have to fight it out. It is much more than any wars you have fought. It is much more than any struggle human beings ever had. It is such a horrible world that has been created and we have to transform it. It is a tremendous task. For that, you have to work out in a very sincere and an innate manner. And I am sure one day will come that in the history of this world Sahaja Yogis will have their names written with golden letters. I am sure this will work out. I am sure this has to work out and that all have to achieve you it, collectively, with one mind, with one heart. "What should I sacrifice? What should I do? How should I help? What is my contribution?" I wish I could see those days in My lifetime. So today is the day when we have to introspect.

 Alibag VIENNA - Shri Mataji gave a very powerful talk before On Friday it was time to leave Vienna and head south the Ekadesha Rudra Puja. She pointed out that in past for Graz, near the Yugoslav border, where we had the times there had only been one rakshasa at a time to be privilege of lunching with Shri Mataji on the way in a beautiful farmhouse in a village where Shri Mataji was dealt with, but that in modern times "they are like mos- entertained by Viennese string players. She talked to quitoes," so many of them. them about classical music, particularly Mozart, and During the puja, one of the other musicians leaned over and hissed “Phil!" and gestured to me to accompany on then She talked about Indian music. the harmonium the mantras being sung. At first I wasn't We saw Shri Mataji at the airport before She left for convinced, but then I thought, "Why not?" and started England. She took a seat towards one end of the con- to play. At that moment our Divine Mother looked up to course and the two hundred or so Sahaja Yogis sat around Her on the floor. She spoke to us about the need to be see who it was and She blessed me with a big smile. diplomatic in our dealings with people coming to Sahaja There were public programs in Vienna. After the second Yoga for the first time, how we should speak to them program, attended by several hundred, Shri Mataji stayed on to talk to the new people, remaining on the stage until gently and not hurt them and how we should speak dis- creetly and sweetly and not use “the language of chakras" CC one in the morning. The bhajans group even went back too much to discuss whatever problems they might have. and sang. Shri Mataji really enjoyed this. onto the stage Then Shri Mataji listened to a few songs sung by some It was the first time that bhajans have been so much inte- Sahaja Yogis. Her name was taken for the last time with grated into a program. A team from Austrian television a loud “Ki Jai!" And the Divine Mother left for England. was also present and they filmed both Shri Mataji's talk and a few minutes of bhajans. Phil Ward

 19 JUNE SHUDY CAMPS UK TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS We have to understand that this is the greatest moment in history, while you are born, greatest and you are doing the highest work, that is of God – here. And you are specially chosen for it and you must know that you are a saint. moment 8 & 9 JULY PARIS TALKS TO SAHAJA YOGIS 9 JULY PARIS PUBLIC PROGRAM 10 JULY MUNICH SHRI HAMSA SWAMINI PUJA MUNICH - Before the puja, Shri Mataji spoke to us for about an hour about discrimina- tion and discretion. She touched every aspect, from the physical onwards. She told us how the name Hamsa comes from the bija mantras, “Ham" and “Sa," Ham meaning “I am" CC which brings under control the activity of the left side and “Sa," “You are," addressed to the Deity, which brings down the excesses of the right side. Phil Ward 10 JULY MUNICH MUSIC PROGRAM 11 & 12 JULY MUNICH PUBLIC PROGRAM 13 JULY FRANKFURT PUBLIC PROGRAM 14 JULY BRUSSELS PUBLIC PROGRAM 15 JULY AMSTERDAM PUBLIC PROGRAM 20 JULY BOGOTA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS 20 JULY BOGOTA COLOMBIA SAHASRARA PUJA It is such a great pleasure to be here in Colombia, which was My great desire long time back that somehow if I could come later to this country, I may be able to start Sahaja to be Yoga here because I did feel at that time that there were lots of seekers and very good people in Colombia. They are the seekers of truth and want to rise higher in their aware- here ness. And as it was desired by Me, it has worked out. I am very happy to be here among you people. And we have people from also other countries of South America, which is a very great thing. It started working out in European countries, which were developed countries we can say, but I always had a very earnest desire to come to the other side, that is the underdeveloped countries where there is culture. It has to spread to all the countries. No country should say that "it did not come to us," that "we did not know the truth," that "we missed the point." As you people are the first founders and the founda- tion stones of Sahaja Yoga, you have to be very careful. 20 JULY BOGOTA PUBLIC PROGRAM 22 & 23 JULY SAN DIEGO PUBLIC PROGRAMS

 A Day For A Young Girl PARIS - Shri Mataji asked for young girls to perform crowd shouting, “Jai, jai, jai!" We were so disappointed CC the puja and my sister and I went on the because we were missing all this and we could not say stage. We were 16 and 17. There were very few teenagers at that time, I goodbye to our Holy Mother. Then the most unexpected think not more than ten girls in France. Shri Mataji asked thing happened. A car came our way and, as it came nearer, we realized it could be Shri Mataji's car. When us to use our whole hand, not just one or two fingers, to apply kumkum under Her Feet. Then She told us to put the car reached us, yes, Shri Mataji was there in the car! She had a large smile and waved to us goodbye through this vibrated liquid kumkum all over our own palms. It was so light, we had no thoughts and only pure joy. the window. I was so extremely happy that I jumped in Just before the end of the puja, our drivers made the air and did a big wave back, while my sister bowed ges- tures in our direction to ask us to follow them so we could in namaskar. Our small simple wish was realized, We did not leave before the Adi Shakti. And She obviously knew go back home. We were very unhappy because Mother was still there on the stage. We thought it was inappropri- who we were and we received Her special attention once ate to leave before the Goddess. However we obeyed the more. We felt so happy. It was really like a miracle for us, which filled our life for weeks with light, happiness and ladies with a sad heart. When we were outside, we waited on the side of the road. We could hear the cheers and the tremendous vibrations. Indumati Patil A Day For A Continent BOGOTA - The Sahasrara Puja was the first puja with Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi." It was the first Sahaja Yoga Shri Mataji in South America. It was short and we were public program in South America. Shri Mataji arrived to the music of Mahalakshmi so few that it was difficult to believe we were in 1988. Shri Mataji called us to Her room after the puja and Namostute. She could hardly get through the crowd. It told us to look at the entrance to Her bathroom. After was the day celebrating Colombian independence from a while we could see vibrations like a gentle shower fall- Spain. “Today is your independence day," She said, "your CC real independence day. Colombia is the dove, the Holy ing. She said, “It must be Shri Ganesha. Now I feel you should start being able to see the things only I could see Ghost." She gave them their Self Realization and then before. I wish to make you see those things." shook hands with all of them. In the evening, we had a tremendous public program. An Incan legend says that spirituality will be awakened, The hall had a capacity of 350 people. Five to six hundred resurrected five hundred years after the destruction done were waiting for us when we arrived. They were impa- by the Spanish conquistadores. This year, on their inde- tient to see Her. We told them, “Today is a great day for pendence day, Shri Vishnu returned to Colombia on His the whole of South America to receive our Holy Mother, condor.

 23 JULY SAN DIEGO USA SHRI BUDDHA PUJA I assure you that I love you all very much. Whether you bring food for Me or flowers for Ove Me or anything, it does not matter. When I am leaving Bogota, My heart is wrenching out. I have seen the wrench of My heart. I've seen because l am leaving all the new babes you ll there, that's allI. Then I just do not want to face -I mean the thing I feel is "Oh God, please see l'm leaving them," but because I love them. So I see, because I love them, I am feeling So sorry. Even this pain is all right because love them. I enjoy that pain because I love them. And then I come here and see all of you standing at the airport. The whole thing is fulfilled again – just not because you have come – because I have come to love you. All this is such a beautiful rapport and such a beautiful feeling. I want you all to enjoy this and not petty things and small things which spoil your joy. These are all joy-killers and that is why the greatest joy-killer is the ego, nonsensical, which tells you, "Oh, why didn't Mother do this or do that?" It is the ego part of it. That is why we have to think of Buddha and celebrate His Jayanti within ourselves, to establish Him, to say that this ego cannot take away our joy. 25 JULY NEWW YORK INVITATIONAL PROGRAM 25 JULY NEW YORK TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS 26 JULY NEW YORK UNITED NATIONS PROGRAM After a disappointing first program at a small Manhattan art gallery, but heartened by Shri Mataji's confidence and patience, we gathered for a program at the United Nations on July 26th. Composed largely of UN employees, the audience seemed to be filled with hard- working, well-meaning people with a genuine interest in international, individual and spir- itual growth. We prayed that this was truly the case. Over fifty people attended the lunch hour lecture and, graciously, Shri Mataji provided a bountiful banquet of love, humour, compassion and vibrations. Between the laughter and loving advice, Mother emphasized the nature of truth and invited Her audience to receive it first-hand. Although lunch hour was over, most readily stayed for the experience. 27 JULY NEW YORK USA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS It is so very nice to come and meet you all here. It is very kind of you to have invited Me anything is possible to your ashram. So you must have realized from experience of these two days' program that we had, though it looks formidable in the beginning, it is not so difficult to achieve results and to get people realized. I find all of you have been very sensible and you worked it out very well. It was such a pleasure, such a joy for Me to see that you gave Realization to so many people and you managed to convince them about Sahaja Yoga. It is very difficult in these modern times.. We have people of that kind, of that level, of that variety. You can control everything because, after all, you have entered into the kingdom of God. Anything is possible. It is God. He is almighty. He can do anything. Even to feel that, you rise high. That settles it. May God bless you.

 Touching Us All Deeply SAN DIEG0 - It was a very emotional moment when our Mother arrived at the airport in Los Angeles on July 21st. She moved through the crowd, blessing us with Her smile and taking flowers from everyone. Unexpect- edly, She sat on a bench outside the airport, with taxis and buses honking. She spoke about the success of the programs in Bogota and said that the people there were simple and got their Realization easily. The next day in San Diego, Shri Mataji explained to us that it does not matter, even if a thousand people come to hear Her speak, She would only give us the number of seekers that we can manage. That evening Shri Mataji spoke at an outdoor organ pavilion in a park. There were one thousand seekers. After the program, She called the people onto the stage. Hun- dreds of them lined up. One by one, they knelt before Her and She talked to them, holding both their hands in Hers. To see how much She loves them and will take pains for them, touched us all very deeply. The following day was the Shri Buddha Puja. The Sahaja Yogis were camped on a beach near the Mexican border and the puja was held in a huge white tent. Shri Shri Buddha Puja arrived and took Her seat under a boddhi tree that had been constructed inside the tent. It was cool and peace- Everyone was beaming with joy by the end of the puja, ful. sitting on the white sand, miles away from the blasphemy of the everyday world and its maya. The torments of modern society were read aloud. After each, all the Sahaja Yogis said aloud, “Shri Mataji, please CC In the evening, Shri Mataji spoke to a second public undo the evil that man has done." At every moment, She program. Again their were hundreds of people and again lifted more of the weight from our hearts, showering She met with them individually. sweetness, assuaging the wounds and melting the ego. The following day, Shri Mataji returned to Los Angeles and departed for New York City. She has so many ways of pleasing Her children.

 30 JULY ANDORRA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS 31 JULY ANDORRA GURU PUJA Today we have all gathered here for worshipping your guru. As you know that the prin- gravity of the ciple of guru resides in the Void. This is the principle which gives you balance, which gives you the gravity. The gravity that we have in the Mother Earth is expressed through your guru principle. The first point of gravity is that you should have a personality, a character guru and a temperament that people would see that you are a personality who does not get dissolved into worldly things, a personality which does not get ruined by the skirmishes of life. It is the personality of a guru which sits down deep into his being and is not easily disturbed or dissolved by any solvent whatsoever. This is the first principle of the guru. It is the gravity.. We can develop that gravity within ourselves and that understanding within ourselves. When that peace resides within you, the joy of becoming Sahaja Yogis will be really felt, will be really understood and will be enjoyed by all of you. 1 AUGUST MILAN PUBLIC PROGRAM 6 AUGUST GARLATE ITALY SHRI KRISHNA PUJA In the witness state, we do not in any way express ourselves in a funny manner, but just to be look at ourselves because only we have created all the problems. And it is we only, detaching ourselves from ourselves, who can see these problems and can solve them. seaworthy By God's Grace, as I know, you all are going to grow very mi uch and this state is to be achieved. In every state, whether it is a blessing, whether it is a progress or whether it is just turmoil, you have to be seaworthy. Any ship which is a seaworthy is the one which can face all kinds of beautiful voyages or even turmoils and even the tempest. 14 AUGUST ST. GEORGES SWITZERLAND SHRI FATIMA PUJA need is pure intelligence. If the husband is a dullard, he will bring down his to be wife. If the wife is a dullard, she will bring down the husband. If a woman is very smart, What you talks well and she knows how to talk and impress people, it does not mean that she is intelligent very intelligent. I call that person the most intelligent who sees the benevolence, the ascent and the ultimate goal. That person is the most sensitive and is the most intelligent. All other intelligence is an avidya. It is useless. Now on this subject, I think I can write a book, so better leave it to the book and today let us have the puja. 17 AUGUST HELSINKI PUBLIC PROGRAM

 Guru Puja Summer of Pujas The ANDORRA ~ Guru Puja was celebrated in the tiny prin- GARLATE ITALY - In 1988 Shri Krishna Puja took cipality of Andorra, nestled in the heart of the Pyrenees place in the Garlate ashram garden near a lake. I think Mountains between France and Spain. it was in that year we were sleeping in a camping place Despite Her gruelling schedule, Shri Mataji looked some distance away. We had to share our morning medi- fresh and more radiant than the full moon in the night tation with sunbathers, just next to the swimming pool. sky above the Saturday evening program. Then we were called onto a bus to go to the ashram On Sunday, the Guru Puja was celebrated on a richly where Shri Mataji was staying. People were meditating decorated stage. The mood was deep and joyful – gravity in the garden and we joined them, happy to find a more and joy. Shri Mataji said that the blossomtime is over and suitable place. My eyes were closed as I deeply meditated the fruits must now mature. We felt profoundly blessed for a long time. When it was time to end the medita- to be present. The contrast between spontaneous fun and tion, I opened my eyes to say the three great mantras and just as I did, there was Shri Mataji at the window! I just gravity is one of those admirable contrasts to be found only in Sahaja Yogis – strength and mildness, compe- did namaste. She had appeared exactly at the time of the tence and humility, purposefulness and detachment. Sahasrara mantras. Devarshi Abalain

 20 AUGUST SHUDY CAMPS UK SHRI VISHNUMAYA PUJA is was least expected, that we will have a puja here or we will have any program of this kind. But I think something was left out of the whole program of such a fast one. As to be you know, I had to do – going from London to Frankfurt to America to Bogota – to be back, intelligent then Andorra and all these places. Still, I thought now it is finished. And I came here in London I learned that there was one puja that was not done. It is left Vishuddhi and that coincides with this Raksha Bandhan because it is the sister relationship and brother rela- tionship.. This rakhi relationship has to be nourishing, supporting, helping Sahaja Yoga. Other than that it does not exist. We are brothers and sisters in Sahaja Yoga. Anything that breaks it, there is no relationship at all, in any way. If you understand this simple thing, I think we have done a good job today. 18 SEPTEMBER BOMBAY SHRI GAURI-GANESHA PUJA 13 TO 19 OCTOBER PUNE NAVARATRI TALKS 16 OCTOBER PUNE INDIA NAVARATRI PUJA Today is the last day of Navaratri. This should be the culminating point for all of us. day of victory Within are seven chakras for your ascent and two above that. That should be us, there us, your destiny.. Now you have had nine pujas here. And out of these nine pujas, have we improved more? Have we got more? Did we fill ourselves more with greater love, with greater joy, with greater understanding and with greater satisfaction? This is the last day, so you have to think like that. Then tomorrow is the day of jubilation.. So today you should go and make a complete picture of yourself. "What have I got in these nine days? What have I got? Let us see, have I got this? Have I got that?" All these things, you should just within yourself see and then enjoy that you have got all these things. It is the victory. Tomorrow is the day of victory, that you have become victorious about yourself and about your ignorance. You have won yourself and you have won over the ignorance, the darkness of ignorance. This is what is tomorrow's message. 3 NOVEMBER VAITURNA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS 10 NOVEMBER BOMBAY DIWALI PUJA 12 & 13 NOVEMBER SHUDY CAMPS TALKS TO SAHAJA YOGIS

 1988 WAS A FANTASTIC YEAR IN EUROPE, with perhaps a record number of pujas. In mid-summer the “European Tour" took place, during which our Divine Mother maintained a breathtaking sched- ule of programs and interviews and voyages with a major puja each weekend for several weeks. It was as much as most of us could do just to keep up. After this extraordinary itinerary, our Divine Mother returned to Her home in India and pujas took place there in the presence of our Indian brothers and sisters. Only a Divine Being could keep up SHUDY CAMPS - It had not been one year since my Realization. I had a really bad pain in my left Swadis- such a schedule and still at all times than. A yogini said to me, "If you get the chance, ask radiate the vibrations of Her love. Shri Mataji what to do." I felt I would never dare ask Shri Mataji. The day after Diwali Puja in Shudy Camp, I did not know how to greet Shri Mataji and a few of us were sitting on the landing SHUDY CAMPS Mother, so I held my hand out to shake Mother's hand. outside the living room. Mother asked if of us had any She stood directly in front of me. She didn't smile. She any question. Most yogis asked for advice. I was trying held hand very firmly and looked into me. We stood to hide behind someone, as I felt shy. I heard Mother say, there together, Shri Mataji holding my right hand. She "You there, ask what you want to ask." Everyone turned just stood looking and looking at me intensely. I couldn't to me and I knew Mother was talking to me. She asked think anything. I do not know how long we stood there me to come closer. I explained what was wrong. Mother like that. It could have been five minutes or it could have asked me a few questions and told me what to do. A few been an hour, but I thought that was just my concept of it. days later Shri Mataji was leaving for India. We were all waiting for Her to arrive at the London airport. I remem- Afterwards, when we talked about it together, others also told me that they didn't know how long we had ber being in meditation with my attention on my heart. stood like that, Shri Mataji holding my hand. She was Mother arrived. She walked towards the where group raising my Kundalini in a very strong way and I went I was standing and stopped in front of me. She said, “Annie, are you better?" I looked behind me wondering, completely thoughtless, but the other yogis told me they also had gone thoughtless in a deep way. "Who is this Annie Mother is talking to," when I realize I will never forget it and I have held on to that experi- Mother was talking to me. All I could think of was "How Rosalyn Tildesley does Mother know name?" Annie Calvas-Blanchon ence ever since that day. my

 13 NOVEMBER SHUDY CAMPS UK NAVARATRI PUJA In the darkness of Kali Yuga, you find from every place confusion of the worst type, carry this light the darkness which cannot be penetrated and which looks like a solid mountain creating around us and which can never be covered. As we feel, by the of God – and even grace with the grace of God it would never melt – in that darkness, in that hopeless state, when the creation is on the verge of its destruction, the light of Sahaja Yoga has arrived. And you are the lights. You are the dipas. You are the little, little lights, which were waiting to be enlightened.. Now the light of Sahaja Yoga has kindled within you all these small, small lights, which are going to enlighten the path for humanity, for their emancipation. So the responsibility of Sahaja Yogis is great. They should get over all these limitations, like the light has got over all the limitations and spread all over. If you have a way of measuring how far this little light has gone, you cannot measure it with ordinary human instruments. But once it starts, it is spread to the last bit of it and comes back to it. In the same way, this light which is kindled within you spreads all over, is emitted all over and comes back to you. But, of course, that is just a material light. This is a spiritual light. The difference is this light has its own power of burning, that's all. Also it has a power of giving some light in the darkness. Also it has one more thing, that it can enlighten another light. But a Sahaja Yogi is not only the light himself, but also the one who can go to others. It cannot walk. When it walks, it is fire. It cannot walk in its own limitations. Somebody has to carry it. So the Sahaja Yogis are the ones who can carry this light within themselves, very well preserved, and very beautifully enlighten another person, without creating a fire, without burning anything. 3 DECEMBER VAITURNA INDIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS My own experience of you all is this: you people are growing very fast. And that is how Sahaja Yoga is manifesting even faster, sometimes through you people.. I hope this tour will bring forth deeper, sweeter qualities that are inside, hidden for so many years, ages fast growing Cowir and that will feel very much satisfied with yourself, that you are born as a human you being and now you are reborn as a Sahaja Yogi. I am sure it will happen in this tour for most of you, that you will feel your depth and that you will develop real respect for the glory that you are. Thank yourself that you are in Sahaja Yoga and that you can progress well. This is a new dimension into which we are moving. Here we do not have to very see what is our progress materially, physically or also intellectually. We have to see what is our progress spiritually because spiritual progress is complete knowledge. Absolute knowledge is complete joy, absolute joy and it is a complete power, absolute power. That is what we have to aim at.

 Shudy Camps VAITARNA - During the 1988 India tour, we expe- The source of this dynamic force, Shri Mataji Nir- rienced a tremendous dynamic force, always working mala Devi, dramatically established this new height in things out and keeping us in a deeper state of detach- our awareness right from the start of the tour. Conches ment. We were hardly bothered at all by early morning were blowing and “Jai Jai Kars" resounding as we gath- ered for the first time in our Divine Mother's presence for wake-ups, rushed packing and rough bus rides, numer- ous public programs, live music and dancing until dawn, an evening procession in Vaiturna. There was the God- dess mounted on Her chariot, a golden haze of light sur- cross-cultural communications and the continuous need rounding Her. For the first time, some of us were blessed to manage our own emotional and physical clear-outs. The harder we worked, the stronger we could feel the by a glimpse of Her vision for the new world. Shri Mataji force that was pulling us back to the centre. spoke to us gently that night. VAITARNA - The welcoming procession for Shri Mataji displayed at this procession, I began to understand Her words from the Vishnumaya Puja: "I would say we have put everyone in a state of ecstasy, knowing that we would be so close to Her from then on. Shri Mataji has said that to wait for one or two years more, at the most one year the that people shy away from processions in the more, and then we have to go ahead with demonstra- way West is a display of left Vishuddhi. Seeing the emotion tions, with telling people, announcing it, talking about it.

 5 DECEMBER NASIK PUJA 7 DECEMBER AURANGABAD INDIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS This tour has a big significance for all the Western people because there has been quite men of a big attack on your innocence. And that has to be re-established and we have to work it out. And it is a very serious attack. Now they are not only attacking the young people, god but even children are attacked. All the time the innocence is in danger. So you have to become very rich in your innocence and in your holiness and very powerful, so that you can emit this holiness everywhere. Now the second point is that we are an international religion. We do not belong to any country. None of us belong to any country. We are not Italians. We are not Indians. We are not Australians. What we are - we are in the kingdom of God. We are men of God, as described by William Blake. So we are men of God and we have no bondage to any of these ideas that we belong to this country or to that country. Once you understand this point in your collectivity, then you will expand. Not only expand, but that expansion will give you a kind of a confidence in yourself. 7 DECEMBER AURANGABAD PUBLIC PROGRAM 8 DECEMBER AURANGABAD TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS 11 DECEMBER RAHURI INDIA SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA You are all wonderful people. You are beautiful people. I love you. I adore you. Not only that, but l am very proud of you. I am extremely proud of you, but I have to tell you integrated people something sometimes. If I tell you even a wee bit, then if you get that upset, I don't know what I should do. So not to take things that seriously. There is nothing so much wrong. In general, I have to tell you things which you should understand. It is for our good, for our enjoyment, everything to increase your enjoyment. Even your ascent in Sahaja Yoga is to increase your enjoyment. For your sensitivity to joy, to increase it more and more, all this is done. Today have talked to you about little gross things that seem also important. Of course, I am always talking about subtler things and the subtlest, but gross things are also to be looked after. That is very important. We are integrated people, so we cannot allow the subtle to fly in the air. It has to stay in the gross and the light has to come to the gross. 11 DECEMBER RAHURI TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS 12 DECEMBER PUNE INDIA PUJA In the shastras, it is described as Punya Patanam, meaning the city of punyas. That is the city of reason I wanted to stay in Pune, thinking that people are very auspicious and full of punyas and I am sure I will find them very soon.. The understanding of doing things for punyas Sahaja Yoga, of doing things for others and enjoying, that is the greatest punya.

 Singing With One Voice AURANGABAD - Shri Mataji directed our attention to the purpose of the tour: to clear our vibrations in the land of Maharashtra where the Ganesha Principle is so strong. Unlike our own countries, the holiness and aus- piciousness of this special place has the capacity to clear us of the attack against our innocence. She advised us to put the right hand on the Mother Earth, the left hand to Her photograph or to the sun and to recite the Ganesha Atharva Sheersha. Our first opportunity to recognize the greater depth in our collectivity came at the first public program. Before Her talk, Shri Mataji had us sing to the Indian audience. Lo and behold, for the first time after many years of futile attempts, we achieved unity in our singing. The Swiss, the Australians, the Austrians, the Germans, the French – all of us from thirty countries – were singing together in Marathi, Hindi and Sanskrit. The Indians were delighted. We were filled with joy. The vibrations flowed and hearts were opened. We repeated this singing at all the public programs and nearly every night to the delight of our hearts and to the continued benefit of our Vishuddhis. RAHURI - At the puja in Rahuru, Shri Mataji pointed fall in love? You fall into some ditch or you may fall into out that we had come to India to achieve more height some river or something like that. I do not understand how fall in love. It's solid stuff. So this absurd idea in our detachment, that circumstances around us should you not make us unhappy. of falling in love has to be given up. If it means that you For example, She worked on our misconceptions in have felt the love or if it means that have the sensi- you marriage. "Whatever comes in our way, we should take tivity of feeling the love or something, I can understand. it," She said. "We should not sort of say, “I've fallen in I'm a little explanatory, but this falling in love business has been going on and on and on. Now I would request love." There is nobody who falls in love. He rises in love in Sahaja Yoga. that in Sahaja Yoga we cancel this terminology." ." She went on to explain, "How can you כי you

 15 & 16 DECEMBER PUNE PUBLIC PROGRAMS 17 DECEMBER PUNE INDIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS We have to understand that we have risen above our human awareness. And at that priorities level, we were different. And at this new awareness we are different people. And all our priorities must change. Our value system has to change. And if it has not changed auto- must matically, we have to a little bit deliberately work it out. Or else we have to see that we Must become really the spirit and no more should all the falsehood of human awareness be change attached to us or should we be bothered about it. 17 DECEMBER PUNE TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS 20 DECEMBER BRAHMAPURI INDIA PUJA A Sahaja Yogi is not a person who is just sort of lives without any connection with the Pdy society, with the politics, with all that is happening. He has to be seeing all those things that are happening. He must read the newspaper, if not in the morning, in the evening time. That means he must know what is happening. He must put his attention to all these attention things. Only putting attention to things, it works out. I have done that all the time.. So this is what is very important for all of us, to take the responsibility of Sahaja Yoga in your own country and to pay attention to all countries wherever there is a problem. I am doing this very much.. You also should pay attention. I read about eight newspapers every day. And I see to it that I pay attention to all the proper places where it is needed. I wish I could be just like without any problems before Me, but My incarnation is so many- folded that I have not only to give Realization, but also to give you responsibility that you have to do the job of transforming this world into a new world. 20 DECEMBER BRAHMAPURI TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS 21 DECEMBER SANGLI INDIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS People do not realize what tremendous work we are doing today in Sahaja Yoga.. you are swachanda Tomorrow you will be the foundation stones of this great image I have about the golden age of the whole world. You are not ordinary people and you should not behave like ordinary people. You are swachanda. Swa is your spirit and chanda is at the disposal of your atma. And when you are that, you become absolutely collective also. And these jealousies and this petty-mindedness is not necessary. You are all universal personalities. You have to be that great. You do not belong to any country. Just to make it convenient, I use the name of the countries, but if I say north, south, east, west, I don't know how will I | have to take to these countries as such, but for Me they do not exist. manage it.... So you Even the directions do not exist for Me. You are all My children and I just cannot think in that Even if you are away from Me, all My attention is there. way... 24 & 25 DECEMBER GANAPATIPULE TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS

 AURANGABAD - The campground was in a highland drifting by and jumped up right away. But already I was called Mhaismai, overlooking the city. We went to sleep trailing behind some other brothers and sisters. Shri Mataji spoke to us. The purpose of the India tour, She accompanied by the morning star. Nearby there was a lake where we went to bathe. Shri Mataji advised us not said, is to clear the left side and to absorb the vibrations. She said that Sahaja Yoga is beyond time. to swim into the middle, as there were many mires at the centre. She never failed to remind us of such details. For example, the auspicious time for a puja is chosen according to the position of the moon, not by the watch. Mother, you mean so much to us. I woke up in one early morning. While meditating in It is most important that we enjoy every moment and not the tent, I heard the sweet music of Shri Mataji's voice worry about what hour it is or what day it is. RAHURI - The public program at the small village was The three hundred Sahaja Yogis were invited to lunch proceeded by a procession. The program was very simple. at Mr. Dhumal Patil's house. He is one of the very first Sahaja Yogis. Shri Mataji gave a puja before the lunch. Shri Mataji only asked the people to raise both hands and Then, before bhajans, garlands presented to Shri Mataji. they felt the cool breeze in that split second. We were amazed by the beautiful sculptures, elegant PUNE - We were invited to Pratisthan, where we were fountains, ornate wooden doors, intricate molding and able to experience divine creativity in the form of the house designed by Shri Maha Saraswati Herself. As the delicate patterns everywhere as Shri Mataji took us – ll buses pulled up before Shri Mataji's house, we felt the 350 of us – on a personal tour of Her house. The day was like a day of eternity in heaven, which only ended after a magnetism. We could not look at the house without tremendous feast was prepared for us by Shri Mataji and becoming thoughtless, nor could we look away. If one tried to stray, the attention was immediately brought Her daughter. We left Pratishtan, “the holy place," more back. satisfied than we had ever been in our lives. of how all the incarnations and all the saints were in some BRAHMAPURI - We gathered on the rocks below Mother's bungalow to bathe in the sweet waters of the way associated with taking care of their countries. We Krishna River. As the waters washed over us, we felt were advised not to be people who hide away from soci- lightness, joy, hopefulness and a deep sense of being one ety, but to be alert as to what is happening around us, to desire for the genuine good of the people and to put with the whole. our enlightened attention to working out the problems During the puja at Brahmapuri, Shri Mataji focused on our responsibility to the world. She showed us examples of our areas, countries and the whole world. VAITARNA - I didn't know what the surroundings the dogs in the darkness echoed into the distant land and looked like, but the scents of the fresh country air took there were rustling noises from the treetops. Yet I felt per- me right back to my childhood, the howling sounds of fectly peaceful in this strange dreamland of India.

 25 DECEMBER GANAPATIPULE INDIA CHRISTMAS PUJA All Sahaja Yogis are standing on the brink of the ocean, the ocean of humanity, where it will we have to face the problems of human beings. Otherwise, in the nature, there are no problems. They are all already solved. So one has to understand that it is not just the Work out movement of a few people, chosen people, just to achieve Self Realization. But it is a big revolution, which has to bring forth the beauties of human beings, the glories of human beings, the proof of divinity, of divine power and of God Almighty.. It will work out for It will work out for politics. It will work out for economics. It will work out for poverty. every field of life. Sahaj Yoga is the only solution because, in this, human beings are trans- formed. It is something within that transforms you, makes you knowledgeable. So you are already sat-chit-anand because you know the truth. You are in joy and your attention is enlightened.. All the Sahaj Yogis have to take the responsibility for this great war we have started. It is not the war with swords or with atomic energies because they are all destructive. This is the war against all the destructive powers through the power of love, which is constructive, which constructs human beings, which constructs societies, which constructs countries and the whole world. That is your own and also this decision has to your own. Even if I give big lectures and say things, it may not have any effect what- be | soever on you. It might be just wasted if you have not got the capacity to imbibe what I am saying, so important, so imminent. Now give up all the worries you have about your small, small, little, little things of your family, of your work, your factories, of your busi- ness, of your official positions and just know that everything has to go through Sahaja Yoga. Even the cooking I do, I do it through Sahaj. If the fire is not working, just put your hands to the fire – it becomes all right. If the rice is not cooking, put your hands to the rice – it cooks. Anything going wrong anywhere, you can use your vibrations. But I do not know what to use to make you feel responsible for Sahaj Yoga, that now we have got such a great thing with us and what are we going to do about it. I am getting vibrations from That means you all have agreed to what I am saying. you. GANAPATIPULE - There are about three thousand people here and Indian people have come from all parts of the country. Music is the most important aspect of this seminar. There are not so many talks or meditation sessions, although Shri Mataji has instructed that we all meditate together every morning. But so much music – groups of musicians from every part of India and the West, instrumentalists and vocalists, every night until very late. We never sleep more than three or four hours in the night. On Christmas night, Shri Mataji explained that while the other incarnations were born in royal families, Christ, who was innocence and humility personified, took His birth in a very simple family. On the night of the puja we had bhajans until four in the morning and Babamama led the pro- with joy, enthusiasm, and jokes. Alessandra Pallini gram

 Diary of an India Tour AURANGABAD - At breakfast time, Shri Mataji came PUNE - We are all together in a multi-coloured pendal on the bank of the River Mutanwadi, waiting for Shri out of Her cottage and had a short talk with us. She asked us what was the value and significance of this journey Mataji to celebrate the third puja of the tour. There are about three hundred and fifty foreigners and many Indi- around Maharashtra for us westerners. She said that this land has been especially vibrated by all the incarnations – ans from Pune. There is a pleasant breeze which refreshes us because it is a bit hot at this hour. The puja is marvel- Shri Rama and Shri Sita even walked here without shoes lous and Shri Mataji says that Pune is the city of punyas - and there are so many swayambhus of Shri Ganesha and the other Deities in this area. Then She said that we - good deeds. While in Pune, Shri Mataji says that we gain good must meditate every day because to meditate on this land clears all the problems of the left side, from the Mulad- punyas on the Swadisthan chakra through loving and hara to the Agnya. She said that this land helps us to admiring nature and art. In our case, it is impossible not find to admire the ancient and changeless places we have vis- peace and silence within us, which is difficult to find in our countries where life is so frantic and where there ited and where the saints and incarnations have taken is always so much to do. Later someone said that the their births. As our procession of seven buses wends its way through the countryside and villages, it invites curi- point of this tour was to enjoy tapasya, but Shri Mataji pretended not to hear and replied, "How? Chapattis?" osity, surprise and admiration, according to Shri Mataji. Everyone laughed. Then She said that this tour is not BRAHMAPURI - There was a puja in the garden of a supposed to be tapasya. little house near where, four years ago, Shri Mataji had sat with Her Feet in the river. This year we again all bathed RAHURI - We arrived here last night, at this wonderful place which is Mr. Dhumal's farm. Today we had a puja, in the cool fresh water and felt the and silence. peace the second of the tour. Shri Mataji came from Her house at about midday. Her talk was beautiful and maternal and GANAPATIPULE - Shri Mataji was welcomed with a of flowers and Her entrance was preceded by two was mostly about marriage and its significance in Sahaja carpet Yoga, which is that it is an instrument for our ascent. lines of girls who went in front of Her, scattering flowers at Her Feet. On the night of the 26th there was a tre- At the end of the puja, every Sahaja Yogi could offer a garland of flowers to Shri Mataji's Feet and experience mendous concert by Debu Chaudhuri and Shri Mataji incredible joy. The music and Shri Mataji's words took began distributing an endless amount of gifts to people. us to the Sahasrara and it was like waves, drops of water She was there doing this until ten o'clock the following resounding to infinity, producing a joy which was inde- morning. They were given first to the foreigners and then scribable. to the Indians. Everyone thanked Her from their hearts. Alessandra Pallini

 27 DECEMBER GANAPATIPULE INDIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS If you see the principle of everything, as I see the principle of everything - rather human endeavour, whatever it is – it is based on gathering property. Whether it is communism, the e time or it is democracy or socialism or anything, it is all going around and around to the is coming point of property. may be thing. All economic activity surrounds that one point. It is property. So the democracy, Property – that may be land, that may be money, that any- although it is a political organization or political theory, actually is based on something very economic, an economical thing called property. Then, the same about communism: we can say it is the same thing, how to distribute the property, how to have the property equally, how to make everybody self-sufficient. But as soon as you become a realized soul, you have to know that your properties and your priorities are very different. Your property is your spirit and your priorities are where you can manifest your spirit and can feel the spirit of others. So the whole concept that was so far obstructing you and limiting your understanding changes into an unlimited area where you start thinking of the spirit.. have never contradicted Myself, but gradually I have opened you all to the truth because I did not want to blast you. But it is now you can see the future of this world so beautiful and I am sure in our lifetimes we will see that beautiful time coming in. 28 DECEMBER GANAPATIPULE MARRIAGES 29 DECEMBER GANAPATIPULE TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS 30 DECEMBER ALIBAG INTERVIEW 30 DECEMBER ALIBAG INDIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS We have come to the end of our tour and you all will be going to your countries in dif- I bless ferent directions. Now we have to look back and see what did we learn in this tour and what did we understand.. There was a tremendous dynamic force which was working you the movement, organization and the correction part of it. I do not know if you have felt that but should have. So many of you must have felt that within yourself, that way, you There are sure to be errors there is some sort of a dynamic happening.. Now you are quite capable. Now we have and omissions in this short reached a stage where nothing can harm you, nothing can catch you. You know how to record of the events of 1988. face life. One has to know that the nature of Sahaj itself is working out everything. But It is not comprehensive, nor complete. Sometimes sources if this does not work in the right time, then we will have to have another world, which is do not agree and when this another problem. So we have to think seriously about it and understand the essence of happens priority has been everything and understand yourself why you do such and such things. Once you start given to reports written at the time by people who were this method - "not this, not this, not this" – I will be not surprised that your growth will be there. Unverified events very much faster, very much faster and I will see you as very well established Nirvikalpas have not been included. We very soon. I bless you that you mature very much in your spirituality. hope that the truth of Shri Mataji's travels can be found in the scope, range and love She gave every day in 1988 THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE www.divinecoolbreeze.org SUBSCRIPTIONS: contact@divinecoolbreeze.org CONTENT:editor@divinecoolbreeze.org – and every day since. PRINTED BY King Printing Co. Inc. Lowell Massachusetts USA & Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. Pune Maharashtra India

 ALIBAG - At the tour's end, in this quiet fishing village, ALIBAG After the program was over, we, the yogis a few hours from Bombay and our re-entry into our west- from Mumbai, had dinner and went to the buses to take us back to Mumbai. Before the buses left, we got a mes- ern “battle stations," Shri Mataji told us that because we have this tremendous force working within us as Sahaja sage from Shri Mataji to come back to the program. Yogis, we should know that nothing can harm us. But When we arrived, She was at the entrance of the house. She cautioned us to be careful with our egos, which still She was upset with us, as we had all had our food before the foreigners. She asked us how we could eat before sometime obstruct. We now know that this tremendous force is working out all things, so we should not think or our visitors. "You should serve them the food first. You should be taking care of them." We realized our mistake argue with it. We must be extremely sweet and kind and and felt very ashamed. Then all the foreigners were asked wise and joy-giving. The silence within us is the most powerful. Our prayer should be "Let the dynamic force to sit in a row and everyone from the Mumbai collective was asked to serve them their food. Shri Mataji was walk- work through me." This dynamic force has no destruc- ing in between the rows, looking at each person to see tion in it, no heat, no anger, no frustration. If we find these negatives coming up, we need to say, “not this.' CC what was missing on his or her plate. She was calling us Whatever is left is Sahaj. to come and serve rice here, dal there. She not only told us our mistake, but made us face it and correct ourselves. NEWS REPORTS in this magazine are primarily from the pages of The Divine Cool Breeze magazines published in 1988 and 1989. Additional stories are from the series of books, Eternally Inspiring At that time, I was just a teenager and hardly knew any- thing about the Lakshmi Principle, but the example She Recollections of Our Holy Mother edited by Linda Williams. Back cover words are from the diary of Alessandra Pallini. PHOTOS are all from 1988, from the cameras of Colin Heinson, Gregoire de Kalbermatten, Alessandra Pallini and others. showed us will stay with me for the rest of my life. Manisha Shanbhag-Cruz

 Whether in the presence of Shri Mataji the Sangha at the pujas or whether for some reason I was in direct contact with Her on an interior level – for instance at Pune during the aarti or at the public program at Rahuri when I offered Her the garland or during the Gauri Puja at Ganapatipule when I was near Her throne to take a photo of the newlyweds of Sahaja Yogis and I was called, with great joy, to offer the saris, one from the West and the other from India and was able to also offer fruit on Shri Mataji's lap – in such moments, due to the profound presence of Shri Mataji, I felt only the desire to thank Her. It was a great sense of gratitude towards the Divine Mother, in the Sahasrara Sahasrara who has given me so many blessings, most of all this bliss, this joy of the Sahasrara, which overtakes and sweeps away every thought, every desire and gives total fulfilment and joy, the presence of God in our consciousness. All differences of sex, role in life are annulled in the true collectivity – culture, age, of Shri Mataji the Sangha of Sahaja Yogis in the Sahasrara of Shri Mataji, the heart of the universal being. This enables us to know who we really are, away from the illusion of corporal appearances, so we can permanently become one with this profound love, this deep sense of peace, which emanates from being close to Her.



----------------------

2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 1985im
Sadhaja Yoga.
ardin
your
The Divine Cool Breeze
2012 issue 4 – volume twenty-five number four
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Today is a day when we should decide, what we want to do
for our future, for Sahaja Yoga, for the building of our lives.
988
1 JANUARY GANAPATIPULE MUSIC PROGRAM
1 JANUARY GANAPATIPULE INDIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
Happy New Year to you all. May God bless you this year with all His divine powers. May
all the choicest flowers of joy and happiness be showered upon you. May God give you
we are
bere wisdom to become great Sahaja Yogis so that a new world can be created beautifully
out of you... It is important that you all are here, that you should meet each other, talk to
each other about Sahaja Yoga. Try to understand what is going on in the other parts of
the world.. Today is a day when we should decide, take some vows in our hearts, what
we want to do for our future, for Sahaja Yoga, for the building of our lives.. Today I do
not want to say much. They say whatever you do on the first day, it happens to you all the
year around and I don't want to speak like this all the time because I have been speaking
too much. So the best way to enjoy the new year is to decide as to what we are going to
do
further. What are we going to achieve next year so that we can look back and
now,
that in one year we have done this job? So forget the past and think of today which is
say
an important date. We are here. We have to decide about ourselves. Let us decide that
we will have a sinless life. We will have a sinless life and complete obedience to Sahaja
Yoga. Forget the past and past conditionings.
2 JANUARY GANAPATIPULE TALKS TO SAHAJA YOGIS
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 forget the past
THINK OF TODAY
N'K
here
here
are
We
GANAPATIPULE – It was 11:59 pm and then the magic began.
GANAPATIPULE - It was 11:59 pm and then the magic began.
In those last few seconds of 1987 the vibrations began to pour down around us. All present came to their feet and
held out their hands to where Shri Mataji would sit and at the stroke of midnight began to sing the aarti. With our
deepest joy those words, "Saba ko dua dena Ma," filled the air. All desire for sleep melted. Mother's three great mantras
CC
with devotion born of the excitement for Sahaja Yoga that had been building in us over the past few weeks.
were sung
Brothers and sisters greeted each other in the new year. The men came together and began singing Auld Lang Syne,
dancing and hugging.
Then came a great treat. An Indian Sahaja Yogi had his drums with him and began to keep a rhythm. Singing and
dancing started, the men on the inside and the ladies on the outside, with line dancers weaving in and out. The most
joyful aspect of all this was that there was no sense of Indians or Americans or Swiss or Italians. It was just Mother's
children dancing in the first few hours of 1988.
You could see Sahaja Yoga as it is to be – all one culture and in the great dance of vibrations.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 3 JANUARY GANAPATIPULE INDIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
This tour was arranged, as you know, like a journey through your Sushumna Nadi – at
to enjoy
life
different different points, different different chakras. In the same way, we have passed
through various places and now we have reached Ganapatipule where we have to get
our Sahasrara fully drenched with the blessings of Shri Ganesh. As you know, Sahaja
Yoga is a very subtler happening within us. It is a very subtler happening and this subtler
happening gives you sensitivity to divine joy.. I have seen many people saying that they
can decide things on vibrations. And they have decided certain things on vibrations, but
they commit mistakes. That means they have not yet grown up to that state where they
can decide on vibrations. So nobody should arbitrarily decide, but consult the collec-
tive, especially your leaders to find out if whatever decision you have taken, whatever
you have thought of, is it all right or not. And one may commit lots of mistakes if you start
behaving arbitrarily. The greatest law of Sahaja Yoga is that it is a collective happening..
Start deciding that we are going to be great Sahaja Yogis. We are here to be the Nir-
malites, to fight all that is wrong, to stand for right and to emancipate the whole human-
ity. If you understand the tremendous work we have to do, then you will create your own
personalities in such way that you will be able to shoulder this great responsibility. So let
us see, today is the beginning of this understanding between us that we are not going
to grow by demanding, by asking, by getting worried about ourselves. But just be in joy.
Just be in joy. This is what is lacking in some people and that is why they cannot enjoy.
They are all the time worried how will they reach there, how will they come here, what
is the arrangement, what is this, what is that. Just take it easy and things will work out for
you. That is how you are going to enjoy life.
4 JANUARY GANAPATIPULE INDIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
We have started another subsidiary you can call it, or whichever way you may say,
y
shakti
Yuva another parallel movement, called as "Yuva Shakti" which is meant for the young people
in Sahaja Yoga – for their guidance, for their expression and for their dedication. And
this is spreading so fast now that I am told we have got Yuva Shakti even in Pune. And
maybe it might spread to other places, to other countries, so that they can correspond,
have a rapport, try to understand each other. So this is a new movement... No doubt,
we must care for our young people and look after them and give them their due respect
and they must know their due duties towards Sahaja Yoga. I found them to be excellent
workers, very dedicated innocent hands that I have got. I am very proud of them.
5 JANUARY GANAPATIPULE TALKS TO SAHAJA YOGIS
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 GANAPATIPULE - On the first of January
1988, I saw Shri Mataji for the first time. They
It was
announced She was not coming that day, but
would come the next day. I was disappointed
because New Year's Day was special. But then
like moonlight
they announced that Shri Mataji was coming
and then She came. And I saw Her for the first
time. At that time, the Ganapatipule program
watching Her
was in Malgund, in the village there, and I saw
Her coming out of the car and then I saw Her
on the stage. It was like moonlight, watching
Nirmal Gupta
Her.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 6 JANUARY GANAPATIPULE INDIA MAHAGANESHA PUJA
Today I am happy to say that I can tell you all these things openly, so clearly. But can
the sky
of joy
you believe that twenty years back even in India nobody could talk about it because
it was something agamya, not to be known, not to be understood. Your attention has
become enlightened. With your enlightened attention you are listening to Me. That is
why you are understanding what I am saying. Your attention itself has become active
now and it baffles you sometimes when you see how many powers you have got. Joy
has no double meaning. It is absolute. You reach to that subtlety. You start enjoying that
tasting of joy – not vibrations, but joy, beyond your central nervous system where it can
not be expressed in words. It expresses in your eyes, in your faces, in the atmosphere, in
the nature, everywhere, to see the whole thing is blossoming around. This is what you
all have to achieve and for that we have to know that we are not going to bow down to
anything that puts our attention into shackles. "Mother has freed us, let us spread our
wings. We are not little, small little birdies, but now we have become birds and let us
spread our wings and fly in the sky of joy." There is no need for birds to fly. They can sit
at a place, of course. They cannot hire a bus, but they need not. They spread their wings
and fly because they enjoy. Like swimming in the sky of joy, use the beauty of this joyous
happening to nourish yourself. Be happy. Make everyone happy and emancipate this
world from ignorance.
8 JANUARY GANAPATIPULE MARRIAGES
8 JANUARY GANAPATIPULE INDIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
Today is the parting day. With all the joy and enjoyment of our personalities, it has
I bless
become a beautiful painting in My memory. But for a mother, it is very difficult to under-
stand that every day I have to think of leaving some of My children somewhere and
you all
going to another place. I wish a day should come when we all of us should live together
all the time. In your love for Me, you have lived in this Spartan conditions and have never
complained about it. As a Mother, I think you are not supposed to thank anyone. Only
the sadness, which is something like an ocean, sometimes covers Me up. I cannot express
it in words, but it is a kind of a sadness that makes Me feel that now, from next year, when
|
am I going meet all of them again? I am sure next year again you will be able to come
down here. Also I will be coming to your various countries. I hope all our plans will work
out as far as travelling is concerned. I try My level best to travel as much as possible, but
still it is your cooperation, it is your understanding of this very, very subtle state of this
subtle personality which is so important. I can only say I bless you all from My heart
very
and bless all the artists, everyone here for understanding this great work I have taken
over, for helping Me out and out to carry out this extremely subtle work for the human
over,
mind.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 GANAPATIPULE - We were married in January 1988
Brahmapuri
in Ganapatipule. During the ceremony, when the white
cloth was between the men and the brides, Shri Mataji
said that the brides should look at the ground and walk
very slowly towards the bridegrooms. I did so, as well as I
could. When the cloth went down, Henno put a garland
neck and then I put one around his neck and
around
my
at that moment I felt, “He is so sweet."
During the next part of the ceremony, when we lit the
fires, there was as usual a lot of smoke and most of us were
crying because of that smoke. Also there was confusion as
to know what to do, how and when, but this was part of
the game. It gave a charm to the whole thing and there
was not much place for thoughts and worries, as things
seemed to go quite fast.
At the end of the ceremony, we were able to go and
receive from Shri Mataji the wedding present, which was
a beautiful silver
with some silver items like a statue
tray
GANAPATIPULE - We went back from Ganapatipule
of Shri Ganesha, an incense holder and a rose water
on the boat with Mother, from Jaigad to Mumbai. Jaigad
sprinkler.
was a little place near Ganapatipule with a tiny quay
After the marriage ceremony, in the night, Henno and
and one little building on it and there was only about
I went walking on the beach to the hill where there is
the swayambhu of Shri Ganesha. We walked around it
twenty of us. There were tiny jellyfish clustered around
the quay. Mother was sitting there drinking Limcas,
as pilgrims do, stopping at the top to meditate on the
waiting for the boat to come. We were all sitting around
swayambhu stone in the shape of Shri Ganesha's face.
Her and I think the harbour master got his Realization.
We arrived back at the camp just in time to pack our
I remember the feeling of the utter peace of being there
luggage, as we were all to leave the camp at seven o'clock
with Mother at that little port, a fishing village, and all
in the morning. In the bus, I sat beside Henno and
those little wooden buildings. Later that night, we were
suddenly felt that something had really happened during
up on the deck singing bhajans to Mother and it was a
the wedding. It was like magic because we had already
really beautiful calm night. The greatest memory of those
been engaged for a year, but suddenly our relationship
had really changed. I felt much closer to him. Shri Mataji
knew She was the Goddess, but She
times was that you
had tied us together.
was so comforting and so normal.
Auriol Purdie
Trupta de Graaf
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 10 JANUARY BOMBAY INDIA SANKRANTI SURYA PUJA
If the axis of adhyatma in any country where a person achieves his spiritual ascent is,
there will
becomes the most important thing and is achieved, then any amount of development,
any amount of all these things cannot destroy that country, cannot create wars. There
be peace
will be peace everywhere, there will be enjoyment everywhere. So on this day of Makar
Sankrant, let us say now the Sankrant is over and we have to look forward to the new age
adhyatma: of a new moon blessing us and the great sun coming over to give us all the energy we
knowledge of the Self need, to celebrate the advent of the golden age of Sahaja Yoga.
14 FEBRUARY BOMBAY INDIA MAHASHIVARATRI PUJA
Today we are talking about our heart and about the Shiva Tattwa that is residing in our
talking
about
heart. Every one of you should put your attention towards your heart and find out with
your heart, not in others, within yourself, within your inner being. You have to ask, you
have to find out, "What shortcomings exist within me and how far do I have to go?"
After that, whatever you achieve, that you will continue to achieve and enjoy. You will
our heart
our
continue to taste it. It has been described as "dumb man's jaggery." If a dumb man eats
then how will he describe the taste? Such is the joy of Shiva Tattwa.
jaggery,
(translated from Hindi)
21 MARCH BOMBAY INDIA BIRTHDAY PUJA
When we try to play games with ourselves, we miss the point because it is the Self which
worship
YOur Slf going to bestow all the blessings of divine love and all the securities and all the help
is going to emit. It is the Self that is going to give you your glory. It is the Self which is
that are deserved by
So we have to put our life fixed for something that is noble,
you...
enlightening and higher. Hypocrisy will keep you always out of it. So I have to request
you to all face yourself, love yourself, respect yourself, understand yourself and stand on
your self-respect and see for yourself that you are the king of kings, that you are the one
who is to be worshipped. You are the one who is the emblem of God's love. Such a beau-
tiful thing it is. So many of you are enlightened and settled down so well in Sahaja Yoga,
enjoying the blessings all the time. But still, we have to progress far more. For that, what
you have to do is to just meditate and meditate every day, regularly, religiously, like it is
the puja of yourself. You are worshipping your own Self. With humility, with surrender
of your ego, you are worshipping your Self. You are not degrading it, you are not analyz-
ing it, but you are absorbing the beautiful power and the light of your Atma into your
attention. May God bless you all. May God bless you this day when you all will be full of
light and full of understanding of Sahaja Yoga and may you be in the bliss of complete
understanding and love of God.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 EUROPE July and August
1988
SHRI MATAJI TRAVELS
O January to March
O September to December
INDIA
EUROPE April to July
MUMBAI - I went to the Sankranti Puja in Mumbai
"People sitting here are thinking that they want to come
to Me," She said. "Why are they thinking like this? I am
and was sitting towards the back and thinking, "I want to
כ
with them?" I was indeed thinking like that. I was amazed
go to Shri Mataji." In the beginning the desire was very
and thought, "She knows everything" because I was
CC
strong. Shri Mataji gave Her lecture and afterwards they
CC
thinking, "I want to go to Her" and then She announced
were going to start the puja and, once they started the
this. I pulled my ears and that was it. Nirmal Gupta
mantras, Shri Mataji stopped them.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 2 APRIL SHUDY CAMPS UK MUSIC PROGRAM
The whole thing is full of frolics and beautiful entertainment and everything is a drama.
y
not alone
OU dre
We are passing through that. But all this is just to make every event a memorable event,
a respectable event. Above all, all these events have a protocol and all these protocols
ONe
are looked after by the Deities, who are sitting just there. Here also They are sitting. You
cannot see Them, but I can see Them. All of Them are sitting on top of us here, looking
|
after us, all of us. And They are watching you all and they are wondering what gifts they
are going to give you next time when you come out with all these beautiful things.. We
have to understand that every step that we take, every movement we do, there is the
divine help, that we are surrounded by the ocean of bliss, the ocean of forgiveness, the
ocean of compassion and love. Please, remember that you are not alone.
3 APRIL SHUDY CAMPS UK EASTER & BIRTHDAY PUJAS
You must come up and work out everything as far as possible, thinking that we all have
certain
to stand up. Now the children are coming up. They are also going to stand up. They are
all looking younger to Me. Every day I see you, you look younger. Sometimes I do not
promises
even recognize you, the way you look younger. And I think, "Is he the son or is he the
father?" Now the situation is that you are all blessed. You got jobs, you got everything
and everybody tells Me, "Mother, this is what has happened, that has happened, every-
thing." Now so what? These are temptations. Be careful. This is not what
wanted.
you
do not
What you wanted is the state of that complete faith within yourself where
you
have to ask – nothing. Everything will work out. Everything will work. It works. That is
the point. So I hope next time when we meet I see even younger people than what I
see today and I will be able to recognize you. Christ died at a very, very young age...
Nobody could have achieved that much in that small age as He has done. It is remark-
able. It is really remarkable. That is what I expect of you, to follow His footsteps in doing
remarkable things. And let Me see all of you – every one of you has to do something
great. And today is the day of certain promises. May God bless you for that.
EASTER PUJA - Shri Mataji's car entered the courtyard in the same cloudy English atmo-
sphere that had prevailed all day long. When the car's door finally opened in the middle of
space, right
by the sun, as if to salute the meeting of the smiling Mother with Her devotees. It was the
the crowd who were waiting, the cloud cover opened and gently allowed a little
very first time I saw Shri Mataji. As She slowly made Her way through the crowd, stopping
at every step to receive flowers and give a little of Her attention to all and laughing with the
little ones, I could fill my eyes with the reality of Her incarnation. And then, too soon, She
Devarshi Abalain
was in the house.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 easter
BEYOND WORDS
SHUDY CAMPS - The earth was waterlogged from weeks of continuous rain. The weather was cold and
grey, but
that did not deter the English Sahaja Yogis, who pitched giant tents, put down waterproof flooring, brought in huge
heaters and laid down paths of wood shavings in order to accommodate all their brothers and sisters visiting from near
and far.
The inside of the great house looked both cozy and majestic. Shri Mataji's room was hung with beautiful drapes and
there were fragrant flowers everywhere. Excitement tingled the air.
She arrived on Saturday after lunch and immediately addressed us all. Seated on a chair in the
yet unfurnished
entrance hall, She spoke kindly and encouragingly. She spoke of our potential and how even what the Sahaja Yogis had
achieved so far had exceeded Her expectations.
To be sitting once again in the presence of the Devi Herself was beyond all words,
Being Aware of Our Selves
BARCELONA - After hearing some Spanish songs on
why you are attached. With detachment, the love starts
May 21st, Shri Mataji spoke to us.
to flow. "As soon as you get your light, the sunlight," She
CC
said, “the fog disappears."
CC
"We can feel the rhythms and the emotion of the people
who have made these songs." She said that Spain has a lot
"When you are the spirit, you are like a brilliant dia-
mond which is giving light by itself. So it is important to
of emotions and that the emotions move inside of us.
People in Spain often ask Shri Mataji if She is Spanish.
understand what you are and what others are not. And
"I think the love in My heart is expressed on My face
this awareness should be an innate part of your being.
CC
Then only it will act and permeate into the atmosphere
perhaps. I hope the women of Spain will become loving
back to your
and into other people. I hope when
and affectionate towards others."
you go
will give My message to them, that we all
Shri Mataji went on to explain that we have to realize
countries
you
that Sahaja is love. "It is not attachment. It is not posses-
have to be aware of our Selves....
"Everyone wants reality. The only thing is that they
sion. But it is a giving love. It is not love of the flesh. It is
not love of any material thing. Nor is it the love of your
should see the reality in you or you should manifest your
reality outside. The first one is not in our hands, to make
fame. But it is the love of the Divine."
The key to achieving this transformation is being able
them understand reality. The second one, to manifest
to witness everything in its reality, seeing both how and
reality, is in our hands."
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 7 MAY ROME TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
ROME ITALY SAHASRARA PUJA
8 MAY
Be aware. Where is your attention? What are we worried about? Where are we spend-
De aware ing our time? Leave your children to Me. Leave your families to Me. You can only keep
your purse, but the rest of it, you can leave all your headaches to Me. But do not play
out tricks with Me. Mahamaya knows all your tricks, everything, in and out. If I want to know,
clear
I can know each and every thing about you. I do not want to know. Under these circum-
stances we are supported, looked after, managed, taken to reality so easily, so much with
care.. You are assisted. Here these prime ministers have only five or six bodyguards. You
have millions and millions, each one of you, with you. Nobody can touch
for
except
you
You can harm yourself, that's all. Nobody can harm.. Our ascent is the only concern.
you.
It is the only ideal – nothing else. And it will work out. All the rest will be taken care of.
We have all the mechanics to do that. But first, give it to the mechanics to work out. All
will work in a reflex action. Clear out your chakras. Do not say, "I have this, I have that."
Just clear out. "How dare I have all these problems? How dare I have all these chakras still
troubling me?" Clear out – morning, evening, clear out. I am sure it will work out. Next
year, I hope I will have some good news.
8 MAY ROME MUSIC PROGRAM
9 MAY ROME TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
17 & 18 MAY MADRID PUBLIC PROGRAMS
19 & 20 MAY BARCELONA PUBLIC PROGRAMS
21 MAY BARCELONA SPAIN PUJA
I would like you to have your awareness of your powers. You are sitting on top
of
a
nothing
but
mountain and you are sitting on top of evolution now. In knowledge, you are the great-
est yogis. In power, you are the greatest yogis. You can become the greatest saints in
righteousness and dharma. Where you lack is the dedication and devotion, the pure
desire. These yogis used to go in the jungles, live there with the wild animals and used to
blessings
practise meditation to achieve Self Realization, year after year, lives after lives, because
they had a pure desire so strong within them. But in Sahaja Yoga you move one step
and you get blessings. You move another step, you get another blessing. It is nothing
but blessings all the time. You are blessed every moment. But sometimes you also must
know, because of the Mahamaya character of your Mother, these blessings are tempta-
tions.. We have to be solid pillars of Sahaja Yoga, creating the roof for all the seekers of
the world, for the emancipation of humanity. Of course, in pujas you know that
you go
deep. You go very deep into pujas. You touch very great depths. But that is My doing.
What is your doing is to seek out that depth, keep up the enjoyment of that doing.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 LIGHT ON THEIR FACES
You have seen whenever I
Sahasrara Puja
travel and arrange a program,
there are thousands of people
everywhere. In Italy they just saw
My photograph and they came
to My program. I do not proclaim
anything. I do not promise
anything, but they all came. The
reason is they are sensitive and they
can see that there is genuineness
in this face. Whatever is inside is
expressed outside. If you are not
genuine, it shows outside. That
is why the inside light should be
made a big, big, brilliant light, so
that we can make people see reality
in so many lights. I am sure they can
see that, the beauty on your face.
In Rome the people were singing.
One old man came and said I can
see the light on their faces. There is
a picture where there is light upon
everybody's head. The other dayI
saw one painting done by El Greco,
Christ's disciples being blessed
by the Holy Ghost and all of them
had light coming out of their head.
These were so few, but you are so
many and all of you have got light
on your head, which is guiding you,
which is looking after you, which is
loving you, which is showing you
the path. You should never feel
that you are alone. But try to keep
yourself clean because this light can
Shri Mataji May 21
disappear.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 21 MAY BARCELONA MUSIC PROGRAM
7 JUNE VIENNA AUSTRIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
It is very heartening to see how Sahaja Yoga is now spreading smoothly into the coun-
a living
tries which have different types of ideologies. Sahaja Yoga is a very pleasant beautiful
blessing to all of us. You do not have to sacrifice anything. You do not have to become
process
a martyr. You do not have to go to jail or suffer at all. Slowly and steadily it works, works
correcting you, helping you, making you sensitive to enjoy the joy of the spirit. But there
must be something difficult in Sahaja Yoga because we do not get so many people as
false gurus have got. And there is a drawback, one can say, that Sahaja Yoga cannot
spread very fast. By its very nature, it cannot spread because it is a living process.
has to become a Sahaja Yogi.
One
8 JUNE VIENNA AUSTRIA INTERVIEW
At seven years I gave a lecture when Gandhiji had fasted. For sixty-three days he fasted
and all that for the untouchables. We have a funny thing, a caste system in India. So he
marriage
of the
had fasted and My father took Me to a very mammoth meeting of, I think, twenty thou-
sand people and he had to go back home because somebody got sick in the house.
He was a very great speaker, so they would not allow him to go. He said, "All right, my
daughter will speak for me." And I spoke. I said very sweet things. I said – you see, in India
dolls
we have marriages of the dolls – so I said, "See, in dolls there is no caste system. Why
should we have a caste system?" And I said that "We have to now celebrate the wedding
of dolls and all of us have to come and attend. And we all should forget our caste system
and should sit together and enjoy the marriage of the dolls" in My own small way, you
see, in a childish way, but they all enjoyed it. And I said, "We are human beings." At that
we are reflections of one truth which we should take to... I met
time also I did
that
say
[Mahatma Gandhi] one day before he died.. I had one daughter at that time. He used
to call Me as "Nepali" because I have high cheek bones. So he used to call Me Nepali –
means "from Nepal" – just to tease Me. And immediately, after many years I met him...
|
Immediately he recognized. He called Me and he said, "Meet me after prayer." When I
met him, he saw My daughter, very happy and he said, "Now take to constructive work,
take to constructive work." And next day he was murdered. I was living just close to his
place where he was living. The next day I did not go. But something was there. And I
heard the shot.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 This incident taught me how the relationship with
GRAZ AUSTRIA - In 1988 I translated several public
Shri Mataji is always an internal one and not external.
programs in Vienna and also one in Graz. Shri Mataji
I had similar experiences at several other times, while
never spoke to me directly or even looked at me. I really
greeting Her and presenting a flower to Her in airports
was hoping for some sort of acknowledgement or reas-
surance from Her that I was doing the right thing.
all over Europe. Every time when I felt a strong connec-
On the last day in Graz, just before Shri Mataji was
tion with Her, when I felt Her love inside me, She would
leaving to go to the airport, we were waiting to say good-
greet me, smile at me or ask me a question.
bye to Her in the ashram. By that time my heart was so
Being on the stage with Shri Mataji, as the transla-
full of joy and I felt Her love so strongly inside me that it
tor at Her public programs, was an amazing experience.
did not matter that She went past me. I was just grateful
Looking at the audience from the stage, it felt like Shri
for everything I had experienced by Her grace and full of
Mataji, with Her words and small gestures, was conduct-
gratitude in my heart. But then, to my complete surprise,
ing a huge orchestra of hearts and minds. Her talks were
when She already was seated in the back of the car, She
dramatically structured so they would touch all the issues
saw me standing and called me up. So I went to the car
necessary, answer all unspoken questions in the audi-
and She spoke to me through the window and, to my
ences, soothing emotions, preparing the people for the
Sigrid Jones
embarrassment, thanked me. So of course, I thanked Her.
experience of Self Realization.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 8 JUNE MODLING AUSTRIA EKADESHA RUDRA PUJA
The area of Sahaja Yoga where nobody can enter, you are perfectly happy there. Ekade-
nobody
shas are standing around you on your forehead to look after that area. They are watch-
ing. They are guards and nobody can harm you. You are very nicely settled down there
in the Sahasrara and nothing can touch you. Nothing can even bring a slur on you. They
can harm
are very alert and they have many facets. Each Deity has many facets and these facets are
you
YOu all the time throwing light in that area so that there is no intruder to enter in. This is what
you have got within yourself.
8 JUNE VIENNA PUBLIC PROGRAM
9 JUNE VIENNA TALKS TO SAHAJA YOGIS
9 JUNE VIENNA INTERVIEW
9 JUNE VIENNA PUBLIC PROGRAM
10 JUNE VIENNA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
10 JUNE GRAZ PUBLIC PROGRAM
11 JUNE GLEISSENFELD AUSTRIA TALKS TO SAHAJA YOGIS
11 JUNE VIENNA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
13 JUNE LONDON PUBLIC PROGRAM
18 JUNE SHUDY CAMPS UK TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
The Divine wants us to change. Supposing I am going on a road and people say, "You
a day to
introspect
have lost your way, Mother." That is all right. I am never lost because I am with Myself. But
I had to go by that particular road is the point. I had to do it. And that is why .. I have
•..
lost my way. If you have that kind of an understanding and if you have that satisfaction
in your heart, then you will find life is worth much more than what you think it to be..
It is so obvious that it is a very precarious time we are passing through. It is very impor-
tant we have to fight it out. It is much more than any wars you have fought. It is much
more than any struggle human beings ever had. It is such a horrible world that has been
created and we have to transform it. It is a tremendous task. For that, you have to work
out in a very sincere and an innate manner. And I am sure one day will come that in the
history of this world Sahaja Yogis will have their names written with golden letters. I am
sure this will work out. I am sure this has to work out and that
all have to achieve
you
it, collectively, with one mind, with one heart. "What should I sacrifice? What should I
do? How should I help? What is my contribution?" I wish I could see those days in My
lifetime. So today is the day when we have to introspect.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Alibag
VIENNA - Shri Mataji gave a very powerful talk before
On Friday it was time to leave Vienna and head south
the Ekadesha Rudra Puja. She pointed out that in past
for Graz, near the Yugoslav border, where we had the
times there had only been one rakshasa at a time to be
privilege of lunching with Shri Mataji on the way in a
beautiful farmhouse in a village where Shri Mataji was
dealt with, but that in modern times "they are like mos-
entertained by Viennese string players. She talked to
quitoes," so many of them.
them about classical music, particularly Mozart, and
During the puja, one of the other musicians leaned over
and hissed “Phil!" and gestured to me to accompany on
then She talked about Indian music.
the harmonium the mantras being sung. At first I wasn't
We saw Shri Mataji at the airport before She left for
convinced, but then I thought, "Why not?" and started
England. She took a seat towards one end of the con-
to play. At that moment our Divine Mother looked
up to
course and the two hundred or so Sahaja Yogis sat around
Her on the floor. She spoke to us about the need to be
see who it was and She blessed me with a big smile.
diplomatic in our dealings with people coming to Sahaja
There
were public programs in Vienna. After the second
Yoga for the first time, how we should speak to them
program, attended by several hundred, Shri Mataji stayed
on to talk to the new people, remaining on the stage until
gently and not hurt them and how we should speak dis-
creetly and sweetly and not use “the language of chakras"
CC
one in the morning. The bhajans group even went back
too much to discuss whatever problems they might have.
and
sang. Shri Mataji really enjoyed this.
onto the
stage
Then Shri Mataji listened to a few songs sung by some
It was the first time that bhajans have been so much inte-
Sahaja Yogis. Her name was taken for the last time with
grated into a program. A team from Austrian television
a loud “Ki Jai!" And the Divine Mother left for England.
was also present and they filmed both Shri Mataji's talk
and a few minutes of bhajans.
Phil Ward
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 19 JUNE SHUDY CAMPS UK TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
We have to understand that this is the greatest moment in history, while you are born,
greatest
and
you are doing the highest work, that is of God – here. And you are specially chosen
for it and you must know that you are a saint.
moment
8 & 9 JULY PARIS TALKS TO SAHAJA YOGIS
9 JULY PARIS PUBLIC PROGRAM
10 JULY MUNICH SHRI HAMSA SWAMINI PUJA
MUNICH - Before the puja, Shri Mataji spoke to us for about an hour about discrimina-
tion and discretion. She touched every aspect, from the physical onwards. She told us how
the name Hamsa comes from the bija mantras, “Ham" and “Sa," Ham meaning “I am"
CC
which brings under control the activity of the left side and “Sa," “You are," addressed to the
Deity, which brings down the excesses of the right side.
Phil Ward
10 JULY MUNICH MUSIC PROGRAM
11 & 12 JULY MUNICH PUBLIC PROGRAM
13 JULY FRANKFURT PUBLIC PROGRAM
14 JULY BRUSSELS PUBLIC PROGRAM
15 JULY AMSTERDAM PUBLIC PROGRAM
20 JULY BOGOTA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
20 JULY BOGOTA COLOMBIA SAHASRARA PUJA
It is such a great pleasure to be here in Colombia, which was My great desire long time
back that somehow if I could come later to this country, I may be able to start Sahaja
to be
Yoga here because I did feel at that time that there were lots of seekers and
very good
people in Colombia. They are the seekers of truth and want to rise higher in their aware-
here
ness. And as it was desired by Me, it has worked out. I am very happy to be here among
you people. And we have people from also other countries of South America, which is
a very great thing. It started working out in European countries, which were developed
countries we can say, but I always had a very earnest desire to come to the other side,
that is the underdeveloped countries where there is culture. It has to spread to all the
countries. No country should say that "it did not come to us," that "we did not know the
truth," that "we missed the point." As you people are the first founders and the founda-
tion stones of Sahaja Yoga, you have to be very careful.
20 JULY BOGOTA PUBLIC PROGRAM
22 & 23 JULY SAN DIEGO PUBLIC PROGRAMS
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 A Day For A Young Girl
PARIS - Shri Mataji asked for young girls to perform
crowd shouting, “Jai, jai, jai!" We were so disappointed
CC
the puja and my sister and I went on the
because we were missing all this and we could not say
stage. We were
16 and 17. There were very few teenagers at that time, I
goodbye to our Holy Mother. Then the most unexpected
think not more than ten girls in France. Shri Mataji asked
thing happened. A car came our way and, as it came
nearer, we realized it could be Shri Mataji's car. When
us to use our whole hand, not just one or two fingers, to
apply kumkum under Her Feet. Then She told us to put
the car reached us, yes, Shri Mataji was there in the car!
She had a large smile and waved to us goodbye through
this vibrated liquid kumkum all over our own palms. It
was so light, we had no thoughts and only pure joy.
the window. I was so extremely happy that I jumped in
Just before the end of the puja, our drivers made
the air and did a big wave back, while my sister bowed
ges-
tures in our direction to ask us to follow them so we could
in namaskar. Our small simple wish was realized, We did
not leave before the Adi Shakti. And She obviously knew
go back home. We were very unhappy because Mother
was still there on the stage. We thought it was inappropri-
who we were and we received Her special attention once
ate to leave before the Goddess. However we obeyed the
more. We felt so happy. It was really like a miracle for us,
which filled our life for weeks with light, happiness and
ladies with a sad heart. When we were outside, we waited
on the side of the road. We could hear the cheers and the
tremendous vibrations.
Indumati Patil
A Day For A Continent
BOGOTA - The Sahasrara Puja was the first puja with
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi." It was the first Sahaja Yoga
Shri Mataji in South America. It was short and we were
public program in South America.
Shri Mataji arrived to the music of Mahalakshmi
so few that it was difficult to believe we were in 1988.
Shri Mataji called us to Her room after the puja and
Namostute. She could hardly get through the crowd. It
told us to look at the entrance to Her bathroom. After
was the day celebrating Colombian independence from
a while we could see vibrations like a gentle shower fall-
Spain. “Today is your independence day," She said, "your
CC
real independence day. Colombia is the dove, the Holy
ing. She said, “It must be Shri Ganesha. Now I feel
you
should start being able to see the things only I could see
Ghost." She gave them their Self Realization and then
before. I wish to make you see those things."
shook hands with all of them.
In the evening, we had a tremendous public program.
An Incan legend says that spirituality will be awakened,
The hall had a capacity of 350 people. Five to six hundred
resurrected five hundred years after the destruction done
were waiting for us when we arrived. They were impa-
by the Spanish conquistadores. This year, on their inde-
tient to see Her. We told them, “Today is a great day for
pendence day, Shri Vishnu returned to Colombia on His
the whole of South America to receive our Holy Mother,
condor.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-19.txt 
 23 JULY SAN DIEGO USA SHRI BUDDHA PUJA
I assure you that I love you all very much. Whether you bring food for Me or flowers for
Ove
Me or anything, it does not matter. When I am leaving Bogota, My heart is wrenching
out. I have seen the wrench of My heart. I've seen because l am leaving all the new babes
you ll
there, that's allI. Then I just do not want to face -I mean the thing I feel is "Oh God, please
see l'm leaving them," but because I love them. So I see, because I love them, I am feeling
So sorry. Even this pain is all right because love them. I enjoy that pain because I love
them. And then I come here and see all of you standing at the airport. The whole thing
is fulfilled again – just not because you have come – because I have come to love you.
All this is such a beautiful rapport and such a beautiful feeling. I want you all to enjoy
this and not petty things and small things which spoil your joy. These are all joy-killers
and that is why the greatest joy-killer is the ego, nonsensical, which tells you, "Oh, why
didn't Mother do this or do that?" It is the ego part of it. That is why we have to think of
Buddha and celebrate His Jayanti within ourselves, to establish Him, to say that this ego
cannot take away our joy.
25 JULY NEWW YORK INVITATIONAL PROGRAM
25 JULY NEW YORK TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
26 JULY NEW YORK UNITED NATIONS PROGRAM
After a disappointing first program at a small Manhattan art gallery, but heartened by Shri
Mataji's confidence and patience, we gathered for a program at the United Nations on July
26th. Composed largely of UN employees, the audience seemed to be filled with hard-
working, well-meaning people with a genuine interest in international, individual and spir-
itual growth. We prayed that this was truly the case. Over fifty people attended the lunch
hour lecture and, graciously, Shri Mataji provided a bountiful banquet of love, humour,
compassion and vibrations. Between the laughter and loving advice, Mother emphasized
the nature of truth and invited Her audience to receive it first-hand. Although lunch hour
was over, most readily stayed for the experience.
27 JULY NEW YORK USA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
It is so very nice to come and meet you all here. It is very kind of you to have invited Me
anything
is possible
to your ashram. So you must have realized from experience of these two days' program
that we had, though it looks formidable in the beginning, it is not so difficult to achieve
results and to get people realized. I find all of you have been very sensible and you
worked it out very well. It was such a pleasure, such a joy for Me to see that you gave
Realization to so many people and you managed to convince them about Sahaja Yoga.
It is very difficult in these modern times.. We have people of that kind, of that level,
of that variety. You can control everything because, after all, you have entered into the
kingdom of God. Anything is possible. It is God. He is almighty. He can do anything. Even
to feel that, you rise high. That settles it. May God bless
you.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 Touching Us All Deeply
SAN DIEG0 - It was a very emotional moment when
our Mother arrived at the airport in Los Angeles on July
21st. She moved through the crowd, blessing us with
Her smile and taking flowers from everyone. Unexpect-
edly, She sat on a bench outside the airport, with taxis
and buses honking. She spoke about the success of the
programs in Bogota and said that the people there were
simple and got their Realization easily.
The next day in San Diego, Shri Mataji explained to us
that it does not matter, even if a thousand people come
to hear Her speak, She would only give us the number of
seekers that we can manage.
That evening Shri Mataji spoke at an outdoor organ
pavilion in a park. There were one thousand seekers. After
the
program, She called the people onto the stage. Hun-
dreds of them lined up. One by one, they knelt before
Her and She talked to them, holding both their hands
in Hers. To see how much She loves them and will take
pains for them, touched us all very deeply.
The following day was the Shri Buddha Puja. The
Sahaja Yogis were camped on a beach near the Mexican
border and the puja was held in a huge white tent. Shri
Shri Buddha Puja
arrived and took Her seat under a boddhi tree that had
been constructed inside the tent. It was cool and peace-
Everyone was beaming with joy by the end of the puja,
ful.
sitting on the white sand, miles away from the blasphemy
of the everyday world and its maya.
The torments of modern society were read aloud. After
each, all the Sahaja Yogis said aloud, “Shri Mataji, please
CC
In the evening, Shri Mataji spoke to a second public
undo the evil that man has done." At every moment, She
program. Again their were hundreds of people and again
lifted more of the weight from our hearts, showering
She met with them individually.
sweetness, assuaging the wounds and melting the ego.
The following day, Shri Mataji returned to Los Angeles
and departed for New York City.
She has so many ways of pleasing Her children.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 30 JULY ANDORRA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
31 JULY ANDORRA GURU PUJA
Today we have all gathered here for worshipping your guru. As you know that the prin-
gravity of
the
ciple of guru resides in the Void. This is the principle which gives you balance, which gives
you the gravity. The gravity that we have in the Mother Earth is expressed through your
guru principle. The first point of gravity is that you should have a personality, a character
guru
and a temperament that people would see that you are a personality who does not get
dissolved into worldly things, a personality which does not get ruined by the skirmishes
of life. It is the personality of a guru which sits down deep into his being and is not easily
disturbed or dissolved by any solvent whatsoever. This is the first principle of the
guru.
It is the gravity.. We can develop that gravity within ourselves and that understanding
within ourselves. When that peace resides within you, the joy of becoming Sahaja Yogis
will be really felt, will be really understood and will be enjoyed by all of you.
1 AUGUST MILAN PUBLIC PROGRAM
6 AUGUST GARLATE ITALY SHRI KRISHNA PUJA
In the witness state, we do not in any way express ourselves in a funny manner, but just
to be look at ourselves because only we have created all the problems. And it is we only,
detaching ourselves from ourselves, who can see these problems and can solve them.
seaworthy
By God's Grace, as I know, you all are going to grow very mi
uch and this state is to be
achieved. In every state, whether it is a blessing, whether it is a progress or whether it is
just turmoil, you have to be seaworthy. Any ship which is a seaworthy is the one which
can face all kinds of beautiful voyages or even turmoils and even the tempest.
14 AUGUST ST. GEORGES SWITZERLAND SHRI FATIMA PUJA
need is pure intelligence. If the husband is a dullard, he will bring down his
to be wife. If the wife is a dullard, she will bring down the husband. If a woman is very smart,
What
you
talks well and she knows how to talk and impress people, it does not mean that she is
intelligent
very intelligent. I call that person the most intelligent who sees the benevolence, the
ascent and the ultimate goal. That person is the most sensitive and is the most intelligent.
All other intelligence is an avidya. It is useless. Now on this subject, I think I can write a
book, so better leave it to the book and today let us have the puja.
17 AUGUST HELSINKI PUBLIC PROGRAM
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Guru Puja
Summer of Pujas
The
ANDORRA ~ Guru Puja was celebrated in the tiny prin-
GARLATE ITALY - In 1988 Shri Krishna Puja took
cipality of Andorra, nestled in the heart of the Pyrenees
place in the Garlate ashram garden near a lake. I think
Mountains between France and Spain.
it was in that year we were sleeping in a camping place
Despite Her gruelling schedule, Shri Mataji looked
some distance away. We had to share our morning medi-
fresh and more radiant than the full moon in the night
tation with sunbathers, just next to the swimming pool.
sky above the Saturday evening program.
Then we were called onto a bus to go to the ashram
On Sunday, the Guru Puja was celebrated on a richly
where Shri Mataji was staying. People were meditating
decorated stage. The mood was deep and joyful – gravity
in the garden and we joined them, happy to find a more
and joy. Shri Mataji said that the blossomtime is over and
suitable place. My eyes were closed as I deeply meditated
the fruits must now mature. We felt profoundly blessed
for a long time. When it was time to end the medita-
to be present. The contrast between spontaneous fun and
tion, I opened my eyes to say the three great mantras and
just as I did, there was Shri Mataji at the window! I just
gravity is one of those admirable contrasts to be found
only in Sahaja Yogis – strength and mildness, compe-
did namaste. She had appeared exactly at the time of the
tence and humility, purposefulness and detachment.
Sahasrara mantras.
Devarshi Abalain
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-23.txt 
 20 AUGUST SHUDY CAMPS UK SHRI VISHNUMAYA PUJA
is was least expected, that we will have a puja here or we will have any program of this
kind. But I think something was left out of the whole program of such a fast one. As
to be
you
know, I had to do – going from London to Frankfurt to America to Bogota – to be back,
intelligent
then Andorra and all these places. Still, I thought now it is finished. And I came here in
London I learned that there was one puja that was not done. It is left Vishuddhi and that
coincides with this Raksha Bandhan because it is the sister relationship and brother rela-
tionship.. This rakhi relationship has to be nourishing, supporting, helping Sahaja Yoga.
Other than that it does not exist. We are brothers and sisters in Sahaja Yoga. Anything
that breaks it, there is no relationship at all, in any way. If you understand this simple
thing, I think we have done a good job today.
18 SEPTEMBER BOMBAY SHRI GAURI-GANESHA PUJA
13 TO 19 OCTOBER PUNE NAVARATRI TALKS
16 OCTOBER PUNE INDIA NAVARATRI PUJA
Today is the last day of Navaratri. This should be the culminating point for all of us.
day of
victory
Within
are seven chakras for your ascent and two above that. That should be
us, there
us,
your destiny.. Now you have had nine pujas here. And out of these nine pujas, have
we improved more? Have we got more? Did we fill ourselves more with greater love,
with greater joy, with greater understanding and with greater satisfaction? This is the last
day, so you have to think like that. Then tomorrow is the day of jubilation.. So today
you should go and make a complete picture of yourself. "What have I got in these nine
days? What have I got? Let us see, have I got this? Have I got that?" All these things, you
should just within yourself see and then enjoy that you have got all these things. It is the
victory. Tomorrow is the day of victory, that you have become victorious about yourself
and about your ignorance. You have won yourself and you have won over the ignorance,
the darkness of ignorance. This is what is tomorrow's message.
3 NOVEMBER VAITURNA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
10 NOVEMBER BOMBAY DIWALI PUJA
12 & 13 NOVEMBER SHUDY CAMPS TALKS TO SAHAJA YOGIS
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-24.txt 
 1988 WAS A FANTASTIC YEAR IN EUROPE,
with perhaps a record number of pujas. In mid-summer the “European Tour"
took place, during which our Divine Mother maintained a breathtaking sched-
ule of programs and interviews and voyages with a major puja each weekend
for several weeks. It was as much as most of us could do just to keep up. After
this extraordinary itinerary, our Divine Mother returned to Her home in India
and pujas took place there in the presence of our Indian brothers and sisters.
Only a Divine Being could keep up
SHUDY CAMPS - It had not been one year since my
Realization. I had a really bad pain in my left Swadis-
such a schedule and still at all times
than. A yogini said to me, "If you get the chance, ask
radiate the vibrations of Her love.
Shri Mataji what to do." I felt I would never dare ask
Shri Mataji. The day after Diwali Puja in Shudy Camp,
I did not know how to greet
Shri Mataji and a few of us were sitting on the landing
SHUDY CAMPS
Mother, so I held my hand out to shake Mother's hand.
outside the living room. Mother asked if
of us had
any
She stood directly in front of me. She didn't smile. She
any question. Most yogis asked for advice. I was trying
held
hand very firmly and looked into me. We stood
to hide behind someone, as I felt shy. I heard Mother
say,
there together, Shri Mataji holding my right hand. She
"You there, ask what you want to ask." Everyone turned
just stood looking and looking at me intensely. I couldn't
to me and I knew Mother was talking to me. She asked
think anything. I do not know how long we stood there
me to come closer. I explained what was wrong. Mother
like that. It could have been five minutes or it could have
asked me a few questions and told me what to do. A few
been an hour, but I thought that was just my concept of it.
days later Shri Mataji was leaving for India. We were all
waiting for Her to arrive at the London airport. I remem-
Afterwards, when we talked about it together, others
also told me that they didn't know how long we had
ber being in meditation with my attention on my heart.
stood like that, Shri Mataji holding my hand. She was
Mother arrived. She walked towards the
where
group
raising my Kundalini in a very strong way and I went
I was standing and stopped in front of me. She said,
“Annie, are you
better?" I looked behind me wondering,
completely thoughtless, but the other yogis told me they
also had gone thoughtless in a deep way.
"Who is this Annie Mother is talking to," when I realize
I will never forget it and I have held on to that experi-
Mother was talking to me. All I could think of was "How
Rosalyn Tildesley
does Mother know
name?"
Annie Calvas-Blanchon
ence ever since that day.
my
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-25.txt 
 13 NOVEMBER SHUDY CAMPS UK NAVARATRI PUJA
In the darkness of Kali Yuga, you find from every place confusion of the worst type,
carry this
light
the darkness which cannot be penetrated and which looks like a solid mountain
creating
around us and which can never be covered. As we feel, by the
of God – and even
grace
with the grace of God it would never melt – in that darkness, in that hopeless state, when
the creation is on the verge of its destruction, the light of Sahaja Yoga has arrived. And
you are the lights. You are the dipas. You are the little, little lights, which were waiting
to be enlightened.. Now the light of Sahaja Yoga has kindled within you all these small,
small lights, which are going to enlighten the path for humanity, for their emancipation.
So the responsibility of Sahaja Yogis is great. They should get over all these limitations,
like the light has got over all the limitations and spread all over. If you have a way of
measuring how far this little light has gone, you cannot measure it with ordinary human
instruments. But once it starts, it is spread to the last bit of it and comes back to it. In
the same way, this light which is kindled within you spreads all over, is emitted all over
and comes back to you. But, of course, that is just a material light. This is a spiritual light.
The difference is this light has its own power of burning, that's all. Also it has a power
of giving some light in the darkness. Also it has one more thing, that it can enlighten
another light. But a Sahaja Yogi is not only the light himself, but also the one who can
go to others. It cannot walk. When it walks, it is fire. It cannot walk in its own limitations.
Somebody has to carry it. So the Sahaja Yogis are the ones who can carry this light within
themselves, very well preserved, and very beautifully enlighten another person, without
creating a fire, without burning anything.
3 DECEMBER VAITURNA INDIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
My own experience of you all is this: you people are growing very fast. And that is how
Sahaja Yoga is manifesting even faster, sometimes through you people.. I hope this tour
will bring forth deeper, sweeter qualities that are inside, hidden for so many years, ages
fast
growing
Cowir
and that
will feel very much satisfied with
yourself, that you are born as a human
you
being and now you are reborn as a Sahaja Yogi. I am sure it will happen in this tour for
most of you, that you will feel your depth and that you will develop real respect for the
glory that you are. Thank yourself that you are in Sahaja Yoga and that you can progress
well. This is a new dimension into which we are moving. Here we do not have to
very
see what is our progress materially, physically or also intellectually. We have to see what
is our progress spiritually because spiritual progress is complete knowledge. Absolute
knowledge is complete joy, absolute joy and it is a complete power, absolute power.
That is what we have to aim at.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-26.txt 
 Shudy Camps
VAITARNA - During the 1988 India tour, we expe-
The source of this dynamic force, Shri Mataji Nir-
rienced a tremendous dynamic force, always working
mala Devi, dramatically established this new height in
things out and keeping us in a deeper state of detach-
our awareness right from the start of the tour. Conches
ment. We were hardly bothered at all by early morning
were blowing and “Jai Jai Kars" resounding as we gath-
ered for the first time in our Divine Mother's presence for
wake-ups, rushed packing and rough bus rides, numer-
ous public programs, live music and dancing until dawn,
an evening procession in Vaiturna. There was the God-
dess mounted on Her chariot, a golden haze of light sur-
cross-cultural communications and the continuous need
rounding Her. For the first time, some of us were blessed
to manage our own emotional and physical clear-outs.
The harder we worked, the stronger we could feel the
by a glimpse of Her vision for the new world. Shri Mataji
force that was pulling us back to the centre.
spoke to us gently that night.
VAITARNA - The welcoming procession for Shri Mataji
displayed at this procession, I began to understand Her
words from the Vishnumaya Puja: "I would say we have
put everyone in a state of ecstasy, knowing that we would
be so close to Her from then on. Shri Mataji has said that
to wait for one or two years more, at the most one year
the
that people shy away from processions in the
more, and then we have to go ahead with demonstra-
way
West is a display of left Vishuddhi. Seeing the emotion
tions, with telling people, announcing it, talking about it.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-27.txt 
 5 DECEMBER NASIK PUJA
7 DECEMBER AURANGABAD INDIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
This tour has a big significance for all the Western people because there has been quite
men of
a big attack on your innocence. And that has to be re-established and we have to work
it out. And it is a very serious attack. Now they are not only attacking the young people,
god
but even children are attacked. All the time the innocence is in danger. So you have to
become very rich in your innocence and in your holiness and very powerful, so that you
can emit this holiness everywhere. Now the second point is that we are an international
religion. We do not belong to any country. None of us belong to any country. We are
not Italians. We are not Indians. We are not Australians. What we are - we are in the
kingdom of God. We are men of God, as described by William Blake. So we are men of
God and we have no bondage to any of these ideas that we belong to this country or to
that country. Once you understand this point in your collectivity, then you will expand.
Not only expand, but that expansion will give you a kind of a confidence in yourself.
7 DECEMBER AURANGABAD PUBLIC PROGRAM
8 DECEMBER AURANGABAD TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
11 DECEMBER RAHURI INDIA SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA
You are all wonderful people. You are beautiful people. I love you. I adore you. Not
only that, but l am very proud of you. I am extremely proud of you, but I have to tell you
integrated
people
something sometimes. If I tell you even a wee bit, then if you get that upset, I don't know
what I should do. So not to take things that seriously. There is nothing so much wrong. In
general, I have to tell you things which you should understand. It is for our good, for our
enjoyment, everything to increase your enjoyment. Even your ascent in Sahaja Yoga is to
increase your enjoyment. For your sensitivity to joy, to increase it more and more, all this
is done. Today have talked to you about little gross things that seem also important. Of
course, I am always talking about subtler things and the subtlest, but gross things are also
to be looked after. That is very important. We are integrated people, so we cannot allow
the subtle to fly in the air. It has to stay in the gross and the light has to come to the
gross.
11 DECEMBER RAHURI TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
12 DECEMBER PUNE INDIA PUJA
In the shastras, it is described as Punya Patanam, meaning the city of punyas. That is the
city of
reason I wanted to stay in Pune, thinking that people are very auspicious and full of
punyas and I am sure I will find them very soon.. The understanding of doing things for
punyas
Sahaja Yoga, of doing things for others and enjoying, that is the greatest punya.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-28.txt 
 Singing With One Voice
AURANGABAD - Shri Mataji directed our attention to
the purpose of the tour: to clear our vibrations in the
land of Maharashtra where the Ganesha Principle is so
strong. Unlike our own countries, the holiness and aus-
piciousness of this special place has the capacity to clear
us of the attack against our innocence. She advised us to
put the right hand on the Mother Earth, the left hand to
Her photograph or to the sun and to recite the Ganesha
Atharva Sheersha.
Our first opportunity to recognize the greater depth in
our collectivity came at the first public program. Before
Her talk, Shri Mataji had us sing to the Indian audience.
Lo and behold, for the first time after many years
of futile
attempts, we achieved unity in our singing. The Swiss,
the Australians, the Austrians, the Germans, the French –
all of us from thirty countries – were singing together in
Marathi, Hindi and Sanskrit. The Indians were delighted.
We were filled with joy. The vibrations flowed and hearts
were opened. We repeated this singing at all the public
programs and nearly every night to the delight of our
hearts and to the continued benefit of our Vishuddhis.
RAHURI - At the puja in Rahuru, Shri Mataji pointed
fall in love? You fall into some ditch or you may fall into
out that we had come to India to achieve more height
some river or something like that. I do not understand
how
fall in love. It's solid stuff. So this absurd idea
in our detachment, that circumstances around us should
you
not make us unhappy.
of falling in love has to be given up. If it means that you
For example, She worked on our misconceptions in
have felt the love or if it means that
have the sensi-
you
marriage. "Whatever comes in our way, we should take
tivity of feeling the love or something, I can understand.
it," She said. "We should not sort of say, “I've fallen in
I'm a little explanatory, but this falling in love business
has been going on and on and on. Now I would request
love." There is nobody who falls in love. He rises in love
in Sahaja Yoga.
that in Sahaja Yoga we cancel this terminology."
." She went on to explain, "How can you
כי
you
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-29.txt 
 15 & 16 DECEMBER PUNE PUBLIC PROGRAMS
17 DECEMBER PUNE INDIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
We have to understand that we have risen above our human awareness. And at that
priorities
level, we were different. And at this new awareness we are different people. And all our
priorities must change. Our value system has to change. And if it has not changed auto-
must matically, we have to a little bit deliberately work it out. Or else we have to see that we
Must
become really the spirit and no more should all the falsehood of human awareness be
change
attached to us or should we be bothered about it.
17 DECEMBER PUNE TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
20 DECEMBER BRAHMAPURI INDIA PUJA
A Sahaja Yogi is not a person who is just sort of lives without any connection with the
Pdy society, with the politics, with all that is happening. He has to be seeing all those things
that are happening. He must read the newspaper, if not in the morning, in the evening
time. That means he must know what is happening. He must put his attention to all these
attention
things. Only putting attention to things, it works out. I have done that all the time.. So
this is what is very important for all of us, to take the responsibility of Sahaja Yoga in
your own country and to pay attention to all countries wherever there is a problem. I
am doing this very much.. You also should pay attention. I read about eight newspapers
every day. And I see to it that I pay attention to all the proper places where it is needed. I
wish I could be just like without any problems before Me, but My incarnation is so many-
folded that I have not only to give Realization, but also to give you responsibility that
you have to do the job of transforming this world into a new world.
20 DECEMBER BRAHMAPURI TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
21 DECEMBER SANGLI INDIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
People do not realize what tremendous work we are doing today in Sahaja Yoga..
you are
swachanda
Tomorrow you will be the foundation stones of this great image I have about the golden
age of the whole world. You are not ordinary people and you should not behave like
ordinary people. You are swachanda. Swa is your spirit and chanda is at the disposal
of your atma. And when you are that, you become absolutely collective also. And these
jealousies and this petty-mindedness is not necessary. You are all universal personalities.
You have to be that great. You do not belong to any country. Just to make it convenient, I
use the name of the countries, but if I say north, south, east, west, I don't know how will I
|
have to take to these countries as such, but for Me they do not exist.
manage it.... So you
Even the directions do not exist for Me. You are all My children and I just cannot think in
that
Even if you are away from Me, all My attention is there.
way...
24 & 25 DECEMBER GANAPATIPULE TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-30.txt 
 AURANGABAD - The campground was in a highland
drifting by and jumped up right away. But already I was
called Mhaismai, overlooking the city. We went to sleep
trailing behind some other brothers and sisters. Shri
Mataji spoke to us. The purpose of the India tour, She
accompanied by the morning star. Nearby there was a
lake where we went to bathe. Shri Mataji advised us not
said, is to clear the left side and to absorb the vibrations.
She said that Sahaja Yoga is beyond time.
to swim into the middle, as there were many mires at
the centre. She never failed to remind us of such details.
For example, the auspicious time for a puja is chosen
according to the position of the moon, not by the watch.
Mother, you mean so much to us.
I woke up in one early morning. While meditating in
It is most important that we enjoy every moment and not
the tent, I heard the sweet music of Shri Mataji's voice
worry about what hour it is or what day it is.
RAHURI - The public program at the small village was
The three hundred Sahaja Yogis were invited to lunch
proceeded by a procession. The program was very simple.
at Mr. Dhumal Patil's house. He is one of the
very first
Sahaja Yogis. Shri Mataji gave a puja before the lunch.
Shri Mataji only asked the people to raise both hands and
Then, before bhajans, garlands presented to Shri Mataji.
they felt the cool breeze in that split second.
We were amazed by the beautiful sculptures, elegant
PUNE - We were invited to Pratisthan, where we were
fountains, ornate wooden doors, intricate molding and
able to experience divine creativity in the form of the
house designed by Shri Maha Saraswati Herself. As the
delicate
patterns everywhere as Shri Mataji took us – ll
buses pulled up before Shri Mataji's house, we felt the
350 of us – on a personal tour of Her house. The day was
like a day of eternity in heaven, which only ended after a
magnetism. We could not look at the house without
tremendous feast was prepared for us by Shri Mataji and
becoming thoughtless, nor could we look away. If one
tried to stray, the attention was immediately brought
Her daughter. We left Pratishtan, “the holy place," more
back.
satisfied than we had ever been in our lives.
of how all the incarnations and all the saints were in some
BRAHMAPURI -
We gathered on the rocks below
Mother's bungalow to bathe in the sweet waters of the
way associated with taking care of their countries. We
Krishna River. As the waters washed over us, we felt
were advised not to be people who hide away from soci-
lightness, joy, hopefulness and a deep sense of being one
ety, but to be alert as to what is happening around us,
to desire for the genuine good of the people and to put
with the whole.
our enlightened attention to working out the problems
During the puja at Brahmapuri, Shri Mataji focused on
our responsibility to the world. She showed us examples
of our areas, countries and the whole world.
VAITARNA - I didn't know what the surroundings
the dogs in the darkness echoed into the distant land and
looked like, but the scents of the fresh country air took
there were rustling noises from the treetops. Yet I felt
per-
me right back to my childhood, the howling sounds of
fectly peaceful in this strange dreamland of India.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-31.txt 
 25 DECEMBER GANAPATIPULE INDIA CHRISTMAS PUJA
All Sahaja Yogis are standing on the brink of the ocean, the ocean of humanity, where
it will
we have to face the problems of human beings. Otherwise, in the nature, there are no
problems. They are all already solved. So one has to understand that it is not just the
Work out
movement of a few people, chosen people, just to achieve Self Realization. But it is a big
revolution, which has to bring forth the beauties of human beings, the glories of human
beings, the proof of divinity, of divine power and of God Almighty.. It will work out for
It will work out for politics. It will work out for economics. It will work out for
poverty.
every field of life. Sahaj Yoga is the only solution because, in this, human beings are trans-
formed. It is something within that transforms you, makes you knowledgeable. So you
are already sat-chit-anand because you know the truth. You are in joy and your attention
is enlightened.. All the Sahaj Yogis have to take the responsibility for this great war we
have started. It is not the war with swords or with atomic energies because they are all
destructive. This is the war against all the destructive powers through the power of love,
which is constructive, which constructs human beings, which constructs societies, which
constructs countries and the whole world. That is your own and also this decision has to
your own. Even if I give big lectures and say things, it may not have any effect what-
be
|
soever on you. It might be just wasted if you have not got the capacity to imbibe what I
am saying, so important, so imminent. Now give up all the worries you have about your
small, small, little, little things of your family, of your work, your factories, of your busi-
ness, of your official positions and just know that everything has to go through Sahaja
Yoga. Even the cooking I do, I do it through Sahaj. If the fire is not working, just put your
hands to the fire – it becomes all right. If the rice is not cooking, put your hands to the
rice – it cooks. Anything going wrong anywhere, you can use your vibrations. But I do
not know what to use to make you feel responsible for Sahaj Yoga, that now we have got
such a great thing with us and what are we going to do about it. I am getting vibrations
from
That means you all have agreed to what I am saying.
you.
GANAPATIPULE - There are about three thousand people here and Indian people have
come from all parts of the country. Music is the most important aspect of this seminar.
There are not so many talks or meditation sessions, although Shri Mataji has instructed
that we all meditate together every morning. But so much music – groups of musicians
from every part of India and the West, instrumentalists and vocalists, every night until
very
late. We never sleep more than three or four hours in the night. On Christmas night, Shri
Mataji explained that while the other incarnations were born in royal families, Christ, who
was innocence and humility personified, took His birth in a very simple family. On the
night of the puja we had bhajans until four in the morning and Babamama led the
pro-
with joy, enthusiasm, and jokes.
Alessandra Pallini
gram
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-32.txt 
 Diary of an India Tour
AURANGABAD - At breakfast time, Shri Mataji came
PUNE - We are all together in a multi-coloured pendal
on the bank of the River Mutanwadi, waiting for Shri
out of Her cottage and had a short talk with us. She asked
us what was the value and significance of this journey
Mataji to celebrate the third puja of the tour. There are
about three hundred and fifty foreigners and many Indi-
around Maharashtra for us westerners. She said that this
land has been especially vibrated by all the incarnations –
ans from Pune. There is a pleasant breeze which refreshes
us because it is a bit hot at this hour. The puja is marvel-
Shri Rama and Shri Sita even walked here without shoes
lous and Shri Mataji says that Pune is the city of punyas
- and there are so many swayambhus of Shri Ganesha
and the other Deities in this area. Then She said that we
- good deeds.
While in Pune, Shri Mataji says that we gain good
must meditate every day because to meditate on this land
clears all the problems of the left side, from the Mulad-
punyas on the Swadisthan chakra through loving and
hara to the Agnya. She said that this land helps us to
admiring nature and art. In our case, it is impossible not
find
to admire the ancient and changeless places we have vis-
peace and silence within us, which is difficult to find
in our countries where life is so frantic and where there
ited and where the saints and incarnations have taken
is always so much to do. Later someone said that the
their births. As our procession of seven buses wends its
way through the countryside and villages, it invites curi-
point of this tour was to enjoy tapasya, but Shri Mataji
pretended not to hear and replied, "How? Chapattis?"
osity, surprise and admiration, according to Shri Mataji.
Everyone laughed. Then She said that this tour is not
BRAHMAPURI - There was a puja in the garden of a
supposed to be tapasya.
little house near where, four years ago, Shri Mataji had sat
with Her Feet in the river. This year we again all bathed
RAHURI - We arrived here last night, at this wonderful
place which is Mr. Dhumal's farm. Today we had a puja,
in the cool fresh water and felt the
and silence.
peace
the second of the tour. Shri Mataji came from Her house
at about midday. Her talk was beautiful and maternal and
GANAPATIPULE - Shri Mataji was welcomed with a
of flowers and Her entrance was preceded by two
was mostly about marriage and its significance in Sahaja
carpet
Yoga, which is that it is an instrument for our ascent.
lines of girls who went in front of Her, scattering flowers
at Her Feet. On the night of the 26th there was a tre-
At the end of the puja, every Sahaja Yogi could offer
a garland of flowers to Shri Mataji's Feet and experience
mendous concert by Debu Chaudhuri and Shri Mataji
incredible joy. The music and Shri Mataji's words took
began distributing an endless amount of gifts to people.
us to the Sahasrara and it was like waves, drops of water
She was there doing this until ten o'clock the following
resounding to infinity, producing a joy which was inde-
morning. They were given first to the foreigners and then
scribable.
to the Indians. Everyone thanked Her from their hearts.
Alessandra Pallini
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-33.txt 
 27 DECEMBER GANAPATIPULE INDIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
If you see the principle of everything, as I see the principle of everything - rather human
endeavour, whatever it is – it is based on gathering property. Whether it is communism,
the
e
time
or it is democracy or socialism or anything, it is all going around and around to the
is coming point of property.
may be
thing. All economic activity surrounds that one point. It is property. So the democracy,
Property – that may be land, that may be money, that
any-
although it is a political organization or political theory, actually is based on something
very economic, an economical thing called property. Then, the same about communism:
we can say it is the same thing, how to distribute the property, how to have the property
equally, how to make everybody self-sufficient. But as soon as you become a realized
soul, you have to know that your properties and your priorities are very different. Your
property is your spirit and your priorities are where you can manifest your spirit and
can feel the spirit of others. So the whole concept that was so far obstructing you and
limiting your understanding changes into an unlimited area where you start thinking
of the spirit.. have never contradicted Myself, but gradually I have opened you all to
the truth because I did not want to blast you. But it is now you can see the future of this
world so beautiful and I am sure in our lifetimes we will see that beautiful time coming in.
28 DECEMBER GANAPATIPULE MARRIAGES
29 DECEMBER GANAPATIPULE TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
30 DECEMBER ALIBAG INTERVIEW
30 DECEMBER ALIBAG INDIA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
We have come to the end of our tour and you all will be going to your countries in dif-
I bless
ferent directions. Now we have to look back and see what did we learn in this tour and
what did we understand.. There was a tremendous dynamic force which was working
you
the movement, organization and the correction part of it. I do not know if you have felt
that
but
should have. So many of you must have felt that within yourself, that
way,
you
There are sure to be errors there is some sort of a dynamic happening.. Now you are quite capable. Now we have
and omissions in this short reached a stage where nothing can harm you, nothing can catch you. You know how to
record of the events of 1988.
face life. One has to know that the nature of Sahaj itself is working out everything. But
It is not comprehensive, nor
complete. Sometimes sources if this does not work in the right time, then we will have to have another world, which is
do not agree and when this another problem. So we have to think seriously about it and understand the essence of
happens priority has been
everything and understand yourself why you do such and such things. Once you start
given to reports written at
the time by people who were this method - "not this, not this, not this" – I will be not surprised that your growth will be
there. Unverified events very much faster, very much faster and I will see you as very well established Nirvikalpas
have not been included. We
very soon. I bless you that you mature very much in your spirituality.
hope that the truth of Shri
Mataji's travels can be found
in the scope, range and love
She gave every day in 1988
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE www.divinecoolbreeze.org
SUBSCRIPTIONS: contact@divinecoolbreeze.org CONTENT:editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
– and every day since.
PRINTED BY King Printing Co. Inc. Lowell Massachusetts USA & Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. Pune Maharashtra India
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-34.txt 
 ALIBAG - At the tour's end, in this quiet fishing village,
ALIBAG
After the program was over, we, the yogis
a few hours from Bombay and our re-entry into our west-
from Mumbai, had dinner and went to the buses to take
us back to Mumbai. Before the buses left, we got a mes-
ern “battle stations," Shri Mataji told us that because we
have this tremendous force working within us as Sahaja
sage from Shri Mataji to come back to the program.
Yogis, we should know that nothing can harm us. But
When we arrived, She was at the entrance of the house.
She cautioned us to be careful with our egos, which still
She
was upset with us, as we had all had our food before
the foreigners. She asked us how we could eat before
sometime obstruct. We now know that this tremendous
force is working out all things, so we should not think or
our visitors. "You should serve them the food first. You
should be taking care of them." We realized our mistake
argue with it. We must be extremely sweet and kind and
and felt very ashamed. Then all the foreigners were asked
wise and joy-giving. The silence within us is the most
powerful. Our prayer should be "Let the dynamic force
to sit in a row and everyone from the Mumbai collective
was asked to serve them their food. Shri Mataji was walk-
work through me." This dynamic force has no destruc-
ing in between the rows, looking at each person to see
tion in it, no heat, no anger, no frustration. If we find
these negatives coming up, we need to say, “not this.'
CC
what was missing on his or her plate. She was calling us
Whatever is left is Sahaj.
to come and serve rice here, dal there. She not only told
us our mistake, but made us face it and correct ourselves.
NEWS REPORTS in this magazine are primarily from the pages
of The Divine Cool Breeze magazines published in 1988 and 1989.
Additional stories are from the series of books, Eternally Inspiring
At that time, I was just a teenager and hardly knew any-
thing about the Lakshmi Principle, but the example She
Recollections of Our Holy Mother edited by Linda Williams. Back
cover words are from the diary of Alessandra Pallini.
PHOTOS are all from 1988, from the cameras of Colin Heinson,
Gregoire de Kalbermatten, Alessandra Pallini and others.
showed us will stay with me for the rest of my life.
Manisha Shanbhag-Cruz
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-35.txt 
 Whether in the presence of Shri Mataji
the Sangha
at the pujas or whether for some reason I was in direct contact
with Her on an interior level – for instance at Pune during
the aarti or at the public program at Rahuri when I offered
Her the garland or during the Gauri Puja at Ganapatipule
when I was near Her throne to take a photo of the newlyweds
of Sahaja Yogis
and I was called, with great joy, to offer the saris, one from the
West and the other from India and was able to also offer fruit
on Shri Mataji's lap – in such moments, due to the profound
presence of Shri Mataji, I felt only the desire to thank Her.
It was a great sense of gratitude towards the Divine Mother,
in the Sahasrara
Sahasrara
who has given me so many
blessings, most of all this bliss,
this joy of the Sahasrara, which overtakes and sweeps away
every thought, every desire and gives total fulfilment and joy,
the presence of God in our consciousness. All differences of sex,
role in life are annulled in the true collectivity –
culture,
age,
of Shri Mataji
the Sangha of Sahaja Yogis in the Sahasrara of Shri Mataji,
the heart of the universal being. This enables us to know who
we really are, away from the illusion of corporal appearances,
so we can permanently become one with this profound love,
this deep sense of peace, which emanates from being close to Her.
