DIVINE C OOL BREEZE 2012 issue 1- volume twenty-five number one

 MY VISION You have to love people, spread your love. Gradually this love can go all over the world and then the vision of Mine I can see working out.. Love should have no fear. It should have just free love. Without any fear, without any aggression, pure love. And that is what is missing in the human beings today as it is. enjoy that When the day will come when human beings will be understanding the beauty of love, then from the heavens there will be flowers pouring on us. My vision is too great for one life. I want global Realization. I want people all over the world to have Realization.

 Is it not it our duty to make this world beautiful? Isn't it our duty to make this world rhythmic, rhyming with the spirit? It is not that you are all the time worried about yourself, but you are worried about others, what's happening in the world. That is love. It would be such a tremendous day when Mahadeva will be able to close His third eye and would be peaceful in His heart. It is My vision. It is the future for you, to see how peacefully you can talk to people, how sweetly you can love others, how much you can give to others. Everybody must love and a pure love will change your life. It will change the whole world.

 WISDOM Wisdom you have already within you. Shri Ganesha is already there, who gives you the wisdom. But you must take to Shri Ganesh.. Does your Ganesha gives you wisdom? wise things have you done so far? Now you must count how many Where did you take a very wise decision? been wise to do something or have you been just doing it Have you because you are identified with a particular type of life? Can you leave everything to Paramchaitanya in your wisdom? If you cannot, then yet you have not felt the real knowledge within you. That is the level of some people. With experience they learn. With meeting people, they learn. The pure wisdom is difficult for them because they do not rely entirely on the Paramchaitanya. Everything happens. Paramchaitanya knows. It understands. It organizes. It loves. It does everything. That is the energy it is. It does everything.

 WITHIN The wisdom is your glory. will be fair By wisdom you to yourself and fair to others. Wisdom is a thing that gives you, first of all, complete peace. If your wisdom is developed then you become very peaceful because whatever people may say, whatever they may do, whatever aggression they may do, whatever it is, you are peaceful. And you see the stupidity of the other person, of the other nations and you understand why they are doing it. This wisdom is such an important thing in human beings. Wisdom is not apparent outside. You cannot say somebody is wise by looking at that person. will know that that person is extremely wise. But in vibrations you He may speak, he may not speak. If he speaks he will speak about something so deep, so wise and so nice without hurting you. This kind of a temperament, if you develop, is to become wise for every question.

 Dedication should not give you any other ideas, but of a light which shines, which corrects others, guides the path of other people. You become dynamic. You become real power – not of destruction, but of construction.. And that power – sustained power, flowing power – has to be there. For that, dedication is needed. Holding on to your source of power, you have to stand firm, courageously, without any fear. That is the truth. That is the truth you have to achieve. That is very important. Try to fix your nails higher and higher and try to cling on to them and cling on to them because Sahaja Yoga is something so miraculous and so great. The whole thing is so great that it is not possible for human beings to conceive what they are achieving. You have really entered into the Kingdom of God. But you still cannot conceive this with your brain what you have got. So must know that the greatest of greatest has happened to you. And to keep it up you must try to achieve higher levels and higher levels of spirituality and forget all that, forget other things. Just try to go higher and higher with your dedication to yourself and to Sahaja Yoga.

 DEDICATION Dedication is actually turning back to yourself and looking forward towards the divine personality in you. Once there is divine personality in you, there is no problem of devotion. You will just become one with it. You will start enjoying it. I bless you again and again for a higher ascent in your being and a deeper enjoyment in life.

 A SPIRITUAL You will definitely enjoy the whole education of Sahaja Yoga... You have to be exceptional people. And for that you have to regulate your life, regulate yourself and grow in a proper way... We are talking of the roots. Sahaja Yogis are the roots of the whole universe. You are the roots and as roots you have to know how to journey through these deeper parts of spiritual life, to grow. When you grow deep, the tree grows up. It is through you only, the nourishment of this overgrown universe is going to be looked after. And the more it overgrows, you must grow deeper. But for that, you must have education. We have no enemies. We have no problems. We are all one together.

 EDUCATION We must understand that our education now is going to be sincerity, to speak from your own heart and not from outside. The spiritual education in Sahaja Yoga, under Mataji Nirmala Devi, is absolutely left to your own wisdom. There is no force. There is no compulsion. There is no organization. It is you who has to feel the joy of your spirit and it is you who has to share it with others. It is you who has to raise the Kundalini of others. It is important. All this education you have to get through your experiences and by all the time saying humbly, "I have to learn." That is very important, that we have to have that humility to educate ourselves because, with that education, you will embed this tremendous task into the minds of people, which is a very difficult thing. This joy that was expressed by you is like the waves that go to the shores, touch the shores and come back, creating beautiful patterns.

 KINGDOM Every individual has to work it out for himself so that the whole can be all right. Without any discretion of colour, without any discretion of nations, we all have to live as human beings. Sometimes you feel you have lost it, sometimes you feel you have gained it, but it is there as much as an expanse of a sea. dabelihel

 OF VIRAT You have entered into the Kingdom of God, into the Kingdom of Virat where you are a part and parcel of a collective being. You are not alone, you cannot be singled out, you cannot separate yourself. Now you are awakened in the body of Virata.. You have now become part and parcel of that collectivity and, in that collectivity, Virat is going to look after you, going to nourish you, going to do the everything that is necessary for your spiritual, physical, mental, emotional, even financial development. Be wise and stand firm. Every movement has a thousand directions. your rays spread in different directions. You will do the welfare to the whole world. Let Get over your inaction to act. You are to be captains. Let God's melodies be sounded from your flutes.

 THE BEAUTY The all-pervading power of divine love this is not love which is stupid. This is love that thinks, love that is truth, love that is joy. All this is built-in within you. If you have love, you can correct people without saying anything to them because love is a supreme intelligence.

 OF LOVE You are transmitters. Everywhere you are sitting in meditation you are transmitting vibrations, do you know that? At that time, if you are thinking of your jobs and your other things which you have been thinking before, the transmission is poorer. Think of love. Think of the whole country, think of the whole world at that time. You are transmitters of these waves of love, and love will flow from you. What do we have to achieve? Not your position, not your wealth, not all these outward things, but you have to achieve a loving heart.

 AS YOUR Please remember that you are worshipping Me as Paramchaitanya and so you have to just think that you are dealing with reality itself. When you are worshipping Me as the Guru, you must know that any amount of My talking, any amount of My giving you blessings or anything is not going to work out unless and until we really develop our own guru principle and the depth because a guru makes his disciple cross the Bhavasagara. He is like the boat that takes his disciples and crosses with love and with proper direction that has to be with all of you. As it is, you are all realized souls and as I have told you, you are all angels...

 GURU The character of a yogi is to worship your own purity and the purity of others. It is true that we have to face ourselves every day. It is true we have to correct ourselves every day. It is true that we have to separate ourselves from ourselves to see how far we have what are we doing, what have we done. gone, So be careful. It is easy to be an angel, but difficult to maintain it. It is difficult to be the Gods and Goddesses, but easy to maintain it... I am very happy to see that you have come to worship Me as your guru. And I would expect that My children are after My own image, that My image should be such that My children should feel that oneness with My image and I should be a proud Mother of so many children who have come from so many countries. Worship is not just out of sheer reading or some sort of chanting, but it is the deep attention of your heart.

 VIBRATIONS Without quietude you cannot enjoy the cool vibrations of the Divine. Vibrations are nothing but divine love.

 The Joy... is the stillness, the quietude within your Self, the peace of your being, of your spirit, that asserts itself into vibrations which you feel, that when you feel that peace, you feel like the light of the sun, the whole rays of that beauty spreading. You have to take to quietude and look at yourself. What is the awareness of a realized soul...? The awareness is such that you should now know what is happening in this world and how you can help it. How can you help people to get to this awareness? Unless you have this full knowledge about yourself, complete strength about yourself and the confidence, you cannot do it. Strengthen your bond with the Divine so that your consciousness becomes absolutely enlightened and you see the right point in everything.

 SURRENDER "Buddham Sharanam Gachhami." I surrender myself to the enlightened one, to the spirit. Then I surrender myself to the collectivity – 'Sangham Sharanam Gachhami." Then "Dharmam Sharanam Gachhami" – to dharma, I surrender myself to dharma. These are the three parts. These are the most important three chantings. Silence, as a form of discourse, occupies a space even more vast than does language.

 The message of Shri Krishna was to surrender. Now the surrendering that we think in the gross way is like an enemy surrenders to another enemy. So when the word "surrender" is spoken, we build up our barriers by thinking that now we have to surrender, leave something to the other party. But when Shri Krishna talked about surrender, He was saying, "Surrender your enemies to Me, so that I will get rid of them." Surrender is not that you should give up your family, give up your children or give up your houses and homes and your properties. Surrendering is here: give up your ego to begin with and then give up your conditionings. In surrendering, actually you develop a kind of a state where I would say you become a sanyasi from within. That means nothing can dominate you. A sanyasi is a person who is above everything else. Nothing can stick to him. He just looks at things and he knows what it is. He may not say. He knows everything and he does not do whatever is wrong. He is so detached, that in that detachment only he can see what is wrong.

 BE It talks and sings and tells about the born order, born power, the original, the Adi, the primordial. And this is the one responsible for creating this great universe. That is what we have to achieve – that oneness within ourselves. We are one personality and these are all the different hands of one personality, one God. To be one with the Divine is the greatest blessing for human beings.

 ONE More than you, the Divine wants this world to change, wants to transform this whole universe.

 REALITY We have to face reality. And reality is beauty. Reality is joy. It is knowledge. It is the thing you have to have. How long are you going to be satisfied with the artificial thing? You are not. The state of being one with the reality means that the whole of reality is at your feet. The whole of it works for you. And once you even get a glimpse of that state, I tell you, you become so much peaceful within yourself. If you say, "I am the king, I am the king," if you "I am the beggar, I am the beggar," what difference does it make to that state which is like a say, purest of pure gold which cannot be tarnished? Such a state of mind we have to develop. ETI Reality is only possible if you are in the realm of joy.

 IS As a mother would see her child, should see the whole world you as the beautiful place that God has created for you. It is more of a challenge to us. We are Sahaja Yogis, all right. We have got Realization, all right. We can sing very well, all right. We have achieved good positions, all right. We are nicely married, all right. We have got nice children. We have got everything.. Now suddenly, one negative force comes in to trouble you – so what. Otherwise how will you know what you are? If there is no darkness, how will you know you are the light?

 TO BE I have to tell you one thing – that you are all one. The oneness in the whole world of brotherhood is something to be really enjoyed, enjoyed so beautifully. They are ordinary villagers. They have never read any yoga. They do not understand anything more about vibrations than these feelings that you get... This is what is Sahaja, such loving people. And at that time, I just thought of how once with Rama, how you felt those things with people,

 ENJOYED The feeling is that the other is myself. Be kind and gentle. Try to improve and help in that manner. The greatest law of Sahaja Yoga is that it is a collective happening. with very simple people, of very simple heart and shraddha, how they had those feelings of receiving your love and feeling it. Everyone needs love in this world. You cannot exist without love. Your whole being is based on love.

 HAVE Your intellect will start working for the pursuit of the spirit. That is what faith means. If you have faith in Sahaja Yoga, then must know you are here you for a tremendous work of human emancipation. You have a very great responsibility. You represent that part of creation which is the most important, the most vital. And if you fail it, it is absolutely fatal also.

 FAITH As you have faith in a candle, have faith that the Divine will give you the light, will guide your path, will take you to the right place, to do the right thing. All this works out in such a manner that it builds up a tremendous sense of security within you, that you know you are standing on the truth. Hold it with both your hands. You will grow on it. You will enjoy yourself. Life will be so much better, much more beautiful. And it is only through you the whole world is going to be saved. So strengthen yourself, strengthen your arms and strengthen your feet. The faith is the strength of Sahaja Yoga, not the brainwaves that you have about it. Everyone has to search for the truth within. There is no other way.

 ASCENT POT ADHTAN CHAA Ascent is the aim of your life. Sarveati BearlaDev This is the best way to bring non-violence in violent places you go: stand steadily there, facing all the things that are happening . That witness state acts, acts and stops that kind of a violence that is going on. But the witness state is not a mental state. It is a state of a spiritual ascent where you become a witness. The best to practise the witness state is not to criticize way anyone. Your ascent is the point.

 IS THE AIM The travel may not be very comfortable. The roads are so very filled with speed-breakers and all kinds of obstructions. It is a journey like our ascent. Everybody must decide to reach a state where you can every day see the blessings of God manifesting. This is the kingdom of God, in which you are looked after, protected, guided and properly taken to the place of heavenly bliss. This state, all of you must achieve and then only the higher ascent works out.

 TO BE The beauty of Self Realization lies in secretly working out within you everything that is virtuous, that is beautiful, that is joyful.. It is made easy. It has to be, as it is the most vital force that has to take place in the realm of spirituality. Virtue is your ornament. It is not a noose round your neck. Only people who enjoy their virtues are great men. They do not suffer it. They do not feel unhappy, but they are proud of their virtues. So this is what it is for to understand. you Now whatever are your qualities for which it may appear that you suffer, it doesn't matter. The strength is your joy. Strength is your virtue. Strength is your pleasing personality. That is your strength...

 VIRTUOUS Our new race that is there of Sahaja Yogis has to understand that you have also a universal nature. But you are individually intelligent people and your insistence should be in inculcating all the qualities of peace and of justice within you. We should do justice to ourselves and to others and we should be peaceful to ourselves and to others. The first thing is compassion and love. When there is compassion and love, you cannot think of clubbing at all, never. You can never club with anyone. You will love each and every person and be kind and enjoy your compassion, the virtue of your compassion, the virtue of your love. And that shows on your faces. So you should be happy, joyous, pleasing.

 The truth is: everything is illusion, except for the divine love of God that is all-pervading, which you can feel through your spirit. to be sahaj is to be collective In the collective only the maturity starts. It is a living process. Supposing a tree is growing and you take out a leaf from there and the leaf will say, "I am going to grow by myself." It cannot grow. It will be left out. So that is what one has to remember, that it is a collective happening. We all have to meet and grow together. Those who are not collective will disappear one day into thin air, like a dead leaf. I think people do not understand the meaning of collective happening. It is just like a tree growing and with the tree everything else that belongs to the tree also grows. So for the growth of this tree, one has to remember that you have to stick onto the tree. But the tree is not going to run after you, "Stick on, stick on to me..." When you do not accept the principle of Sahaja Yoga, you put a barrier in between the sap and the leaf. Now when that happens, the leaf falls off. So you have to open out yourself, your heart, everything to suck in the sap, to nourish. You have to give up your ego and superego, your conditionings and have had from before. This is what is the surrender, is the Islam. And ideas you that is to be achieved. But that is not going to help the tree. It is going to help you.

 When you get the water of the Ganges to drink, why should you take water from dirty rivers?

 DIVINE I bow to all the Sahaja Yogis of the world | used to bow to all the seekers of the truth. And today all those seekers of truth have shown that truth is love and love is truth. They say love begets love. Iloved you, no doubt, but in so many faces, when you see the reflection of that divine love, it is multiplied beyond My expectation. I cannot describe My joy. You can sing, dance, jump, say | "Jai." I also feel like saying your "Jai" and singing.. This is the beginning of our collective effort. We have to go further and further with this. contact@divinecoolbreeze.org editor@divinecoolbreeze.org

 COOL BREEZE Continue to live a life of reality, of understanding. And in everything you will find there is truth. words from top to bottom of both pages combined MY VISION: Shivaratri Puja 2001, Birthday felicitations 2002, Christmas Puja 2000 WISDOM WITHIN: Navaratri Puja 1998 DEDICATION: 6 August 1982, 9 March 1983 A SPIRITUAL EDUCATION: 7 April 1982, Birthday Puja 1982, 23 November 1980, Birthday Puja 1982, Birthday Puja 2000 THE KINGDOM OF VIRAT: 16 January 1983, Shri Krishna Puja 1986, undated letter (translated from Marathi), Guru Puja 2004 THE BEAUTY OF LOVE: 15 October1979, Navaratri Puja 1977, Shivaratri Puja 2001, Birthday felicitations 2002 AS YOUR GURU: 8 July 2001, Paramchaitanya Puja 1989, Navaratri Puja 2002, Guru Puja 1989 VIBRATIONS: V3.15 May.83.p10, Diwali Puja 2000, 13 October 2007, Sahasrara Puja 2002, Shri Adi Shakti Puja 1993, SURRENDER: 4 September 1983, 18 March 1985, Shivaratri Puja 1994, Shri Ganesha 2004 TO BE ONE: Guru Puja 1994, Shri Adi Shakti Puja 2004, Diwali Puja 2001, Sahasrara Puja 2002 REALITY IS: 20 November 1980, Shri Adi Shakti Puja 2007, Navaratri Puja 1996, Shri Ganesha Puja 2002 TO BE ENJOYED: Shri Adi Shakti Puja 2004, 25 May 1997, Birthday Puja 2001, Birthday celebration 1977 HAVE FAITH: 18 June 1983, Diwali Puja 2002, 8 September 1980, 14 March 2003 ASCENT IS THE AIM: Shri Adi Shakti Puja 1995, 17 December 1989, Virata Puja 1991, Shri Krishna Puja 1998, 23 July 1983, 1 February 1983 TO BE VIRTUOUS: 12 May 1983, 21 September 1986, 7 April 1994 TO BE SAHAJ: 9 July 1989 IBOW TO ALL THE SAHAJA YOGIS left: Mahalakshmi Puja 1987 I BOW TO ALL THE SAHAJA YOGIS above: Sahasrara Puja 2004 photographs COVER top: Zermatt Switzerland 1984 (Colin Heinsen) COVER middle: India 1994 COVER bottom: Pratishthan India 1990 MY VISION top: Volterra Italy circa 1985 (Gregoire de Kalbermatten) MY VISION bottom: India circa 1980 (GK) WISDOM WITHIN lower right: India circa 1980 WISDOM WITHIN bottom left: (Gregoire de Kalbermatten) OF VIRAT top: Guru DEDICATION top and middle: India (GK) SPIRITUAL EDUCATION top: Prague KINGDOM Puja 1987 (Herbert Reininger) KINGDOM OF VIRAT left: Shri Mataji at Shri Krishna Puja 1986 (GK) KINGDOM OF VIRAT bottom: Elba Italy 2008 (Axinia Samoilova) BEAUTY OF LOVE top: (GK) BEAUTY OF LOVE middle right: Guru Puja 1983 BEAUTY OF LOVE bottom: near Capri Italy 1989 (Herbert Reininger) VIBRATIONS top: India 1983 (Colin Heinsen) VIBRATIONS middle left: (CH) VIBRATIONS bottom: India (Gregoire de Kalbermatten) SURRENDER bottom: Santa Monica USA (Jim Gallagher) TO BE ONE bottom: United Kingdom REALITY IS middle: Guru Puja 1982 London TO BE ENJOYED top: Lodge Hill seminar Sussex UK 1983 TO BE ENJOYED middle: Cowley Manor Cheltenham UK July 1982 (Mark Callaghan) HAVE FAITH middle: Brighton UK circa 1981 ASCENT IS THE AIM right: Cairns Australia 9 March 1990 (Sno Bonneau) ASCENT IS THE AIM bottom: Vienna airport 1984 (GK) TO BE SAHAJ middle: (GK) TO BE SAHAJ bottom: River Ganges India (Bjorn Kurt) BACK COVER: flower (Axinia Samoilova) www.divinecoolbreeze.org KING PRINTING Co. Inc. Lowell Massachusetts USA and NIRMAL TRANSFORMATION PVT LTD. Pune Maharashtra India

 LOOK AT THESE FLOWERS See one by one how beautiful they are. Every one is different. Even one leaf of one flower will not match with another. One petal won't match with another. They are all different, but so relaxed, creating beauty, giving us so much of joy. All different, placed in a different manner, moving in a different manner. Every one has a different angle. But there is unison. There is oneness in them that they all want to give us joy.



----------------------

2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-0.txt 
 DIVINE C OOL BREEZE
2012 issue 1- volume twenty-five number one
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-1.txt 
 MY VISION
You have to love people, spread your love.
Gradually this love can go all over the world and then the vision of Mine I can see working out..
Love should have no fear. It should have just free love. Without any fear, without any aggression,
pure love. And that is what is missing in the human beings today as it is.
enjoy that
When the day will come when human beings will be understanding the beauty of love,
then from the heavens there will be flowers pouring on us.
My vision is too great for one life.
I want global Realization.
I want people all over the world
to have Realization.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Is it not it our duty to make this world beautiful?
Isn't it our duty to make this world rhythmic, rhyming with the spirit?
It is not that you are all the time worried about yourself,
but you are worried about others, what's happening in the world.
That is love.
It would be such a tremendous day when Mahadeva will be able
to close His third eye and would be peaceful in His heart.
It is My vision. It is the future for you, to see how peacefully you can talk to people,
how sweetly you can love others, how much you can give to others.
Everybody must love and a pure love will change your life. It will change the whole world.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-3.txt 
 WISDOM
Wisdom you have already within
you.
Shri Ganesha is already there, who gives you the wisdom.
But you must take to Shri Ganesh.. Does your Ganesha gives you wisdom?
wise things have you done so far?
Now you must count how many
Where did you take a very wise decision?
been wise to do something or have you been just doing it
Have you
because you are identified with a particular type of life?
Can you leave everything to Paramchaitanya in your wisdom?
If you cannot, then yet you have not felt the real knowledge within you.
That is the level of some people. With experience they learn. With meeting people, they learn.
The pure
wisdom is difficult for them because they do not rely entirely on the Paramchaitanya.
Everything happens. Paramchaitanya knows. It understands. It organizes. It loves.
It does everything. That is the energy it is. It does everything.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-4.txt 
 WITHIN
The wisdom is your glory.
will be fair
By wisdom
you
to yourself and fair to others.
Wisdom is a thing that gives you, first of all, complete peace.
If your wisdom is developed then you become very peaceful
because whatever people may say, whatever they may do, whatever aggression they may do,
whatever it is, you are peaceful. And you see the stupidity of the other person,
of the other nations and you understand why they are doing it.
This wisdom is such an important thing in human beings.
Wisdom is not apparent outside.
You cannot say somebody is wise by looking at that
person.
will know that that person is extremely wise.
But in vibrations
you
He may speak, he may not speak. If he speaks he will speak about something
so deep, so wise and so nice without hurting you. This kind of a temperament,
if you develop, is to become wise for every question.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Dedication should not give you any other ideas,
but of a light which shines, which corrects others, guides the path of other people.
You become dynamic. You become real power – not of destruction, but of construction..
And that power – sustained power, flowing power – has to be there.
For that, dedication is needed. Holding on to your source of power,
you have to stand firm, courageously, without any fear. That is the truth.
That is the truth you have to achieve. That is very important.
Try to fix your nails higher and higher and try to cling on to them
and cling on to them because Sahaja Yoga is something so miraculous and so great.
The whole thing is so great that it is not possible for human beings
to conceive what they are achieving. You have really entered into the Kingdom of God.
But you still cannot conceive this with your brain what you have got.
So must know that the greatest of greatest has happened to you.
And to keep it up you must try to achieve higher levels and
higher levels of spirituality and forget all that, forget other things.
Just try to go higher and higher with your dedication to yourself and to Sahaja Yoga.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-6.txt 
 DEDICATION
Dedication is actually turning back to yourself and
looking forward towards the divine personality in you.
Once there is divine personality in you, there is no
problem of devotion. You will just become one with it.
You will start enjoying it.
I bless you again and again
for a higher ascent in your being
and a deeper enjoyment in life.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-7.txt 
 A SPIRITUAL
You will definitely enjoy
the whole education of Sahaja Yoga...
You have to be exceptional people.
And for that you have to regulate your life,
regulate yourself and grow in a proper way...
We are talking of the roots.
Sahaja Yogis are the roots of the whole universe.
You are the roots and as roots you have to know how to journey
through these deeper parts of spiritual life, to grow. When you grow deep, the tree grows up.
It is through you only, the nourishment of this overgrown universe is going to be looked after.
And the more it overgrows, you must grow deeper. But for that, you must have education.
We have no enemies. We have no problems. We are all one together.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-8.txt 
 EDUCATION
We must understand that our education
now is going to be sincerity,
to speak from your own heart
and not from outside.
The spiritual education in Sahaja Yoga,
under Mataji Nirmala Devi, is absolutely left to your own wisdom.
There is no force. There is no compulsion. There is no organization.
It is you who has to feel the joy of your spirit and it is you who has to share it with others.
It is you who has to raise the Kundalini of others.
It is important.
All this education you have to get through your experiences
and by all the time saying humbly, "I have to learn." That is very important,
that we have to have that humility to educate ourselves because, with that education,
you will embed this tremendous task into the minds of people, which is a very difficult thing.
This joy that was expressed by you
is like the waves that go to the shores,
touch the shores and come back,
creating beautiful patterns.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-9.txt 
 KINGDOM
Every individual has to
work it out for himself
so that the whole
can be all right.
Without any discretion of colour, without any discretion of nations, we all have to live as human beings.
Sometimes you feel you have lost it,
sometimes you feel you have gained it,
but it is there as much as an expanse of a sea.
dabelihel
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-10.txt 
 OF VIRAT
You have entered into the Kingdom of God, into the Kingdom of Virat where you are a part
and parcel of a collective being. You are not alone, you cannot be singled out, you cannot
separate yourself. Now you are awakened in the body of Virata.. You have now become part
and parcel of that collectivity and, in that collectivity, Virat is going to look after you, going to
nourish you, going to do the everything that is necessary for your spiritual, physical, mental,
emotional, even financial development.
Be wise and stand firm. Every movement has a thousand directions.
your
rays spread in different directions. You will do the welfare to the whole world.
Let
Get over your inaction to act. You are to be captains.
Let God's melodies be sounded from your flutes.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-11.txt 
 THE BEAUTY
The all-pervading power of divine love
this is not love which is stupid.
This is love that thinks, love that is truth, love that is joy.
All this is built-in within you.
If you have love, you can correct people
without saying anything to them
because love is a supreme intelligence.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-12.txt 
 OF LOVE
You are transmitters.
Everywhere you are sitting in meditation you are transmitting vibrations, do you know that?
At that time, if you are thinking of your jobs and your other things which you have been thinking
before, the transmission is poorer. Think of love. Think of the whole country, think of the whole
world at that time. You are transmitters of these waves of love, and love will flow from
you.
What do we have to achieve?
Not
your position, not your wealth, not all these outward things,
but you have to achieve a loving heart.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-13.txt 
 AS YOUR
Please remember
that you are worshipping Me as Paramchaitanya
and so you have to just think that you are dealing with reality itself.
When
you are worshipping Me as the Guru, you must know
that any amount of My talking, any amount of My giving you blessings or anything
is not going to work out unless and until we really develop our own guru principle
and the depth because a guru makes his disciple cross the Bhavasagara.
He is like the boat that takes his disciples and crosses with love
and with proper direction that has to be with all of you.
As it is, you are all realized souls and as I have told you, you are all angels...
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-14.txt 
 GURU
The character of a yogi is to worship your own purity and the purity of others.
It is true that we have to face ourselves every day.
It is true we have to correct ourselves every day.
It is true that we have to separate ourselves from ourselves
to see how far we have
what are we doing, what have we done.
gone,
So be careful. It is easy to be an angel, but difficult to maintain it.
It is difficult to be the Gods and Goddesses, but easy to maintain it...
I am very happy to see that you have come to worship Me as your guru.
And I would expect that My children are after My own image,
that My image should be such that My children should feel that oneness with My image
and I should be a proud Mother of so many children who have come from so many countries.
Worship is not just out of sheer reading
or some sort of chanting, but it is
the deep attention of your heart.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-15.txt 
 VIBRATIONS
Without quietude
you cannot enjoy
the cool vibrations
of the Divine.
Vibrations are
nothing but
divine love.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-16.txt 
 The Joy... is the stillness, the quietude within your Self,
the
peace of your being, of your spirit, that asserts itself into vibrations which you feel,
that when you feel that peace, you feel like the light of the sun,
the whole rays of that beauty spreading.
You have to take
to quietude and
look at yourself.
What is the awareness of a realized soul...? The awareness is such that
you
should now know
what is happening in this world and how you can help it. How can you help people to get
to this awareness? Unless you have this full knowledge about yourself, complete strength
about yourself and the confidence, you cannot do it. Strengthen your bond with the Divine
so that your consciousness becomes absolutely enlightened and you see the right point in
everything.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-17.txt 
 SURRENDER
"Buddham Sharanam Gachhami." I surrender myself to the enlightened one, to the spirit.
Then I surrender myself to the collectivity –
'Sangham Sharanam Gachhami."
Then "Dharmam Sharanam Gachhami" – to dharma, I surrender myself to dharma.
These are the three parts. These are the most important three chantings.
Silence, as a form of discourse, occupies a space even more vast than does language.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-18.txt 
 The message of Shri Krishna was to surrender.
Now the surrendering that we think in the gross way
is like an enemy surrenders to another enemy. So when the word "surrender" is spoken,
we build up our barriers by thinking that now we have to surrender,
leave something to the other party. But when Shri Krishna talked about surrender,
He was saying, "Surrender your enemies to Me, so that I will get rid of them."
Surrender is not that you should give up your family, give up your children or give up your
houses and homes and your properties. Surrendering is here: give up your ego to begin with and
then give up your conditionings. In surrendering, actually you develop a kind of a state where
I would say you become a sanyasi from within. That means nothing can dominate you. A sanyasi
is a person who is above everything else. Nothing can stick to him. He just looks at things and he
knows what it is. He may not say. He knows everything and he does not do whatever is
wrong.
He is so detached, that in that detachment only he can see what is wrong.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-19.txt 
 BE
It talks and sings and tells about the born order,
born power, the original, the Adi, the primordial.
And this is the one responsible for creating this great universe.
That is what we have to achieve – that oneness within ourselves.
We are one personality and these are all the different hands of one personality, one God.
To be one with the Divine is the greatest blessing for human beings.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-20.txt 
 ONE
More than you,
the Divine wants this world to change,
wants to transform this whole universe.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-21.txt 
 REALITY
We have to face reality.
And reality is beauty.
Reality is joy. It is knowledge.
It is the thing you have to have.
How long are you going to be satisfied with the artificial thing?
You are not.
The state of being one with the reality means that the whole of reality is at your feet.
The whole of it works for you. And once you even get a glimpse of that state, I tell
you,
you become so much peaceful within yourself. If you say, "I am the king, I am the king," if you
"I am the beggar, I am the beggar," what difference does it make to that state which is like a
say,
purest of pure gold which cannot be tarnished? Such a state of mind we have to develop.
ETI
Reality is only possible
if you are in the realm of joy.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-22.txt 
 IS
As a mother would see her child,
should see the whole world
you
as the beautiful place
that God has created for
you.
It is more of a challenge to us. We are Sahaja Yogis, all right. We have got Realization, all right.
We can sing very well, all right. We have achieved good positions, all right.
We are nicely married, all right. We have got nice children. We have got everything..
Now suddenly, one negative force comes in to trouble you – so what.
Otherwise how will you know what you are?
If there is no darkness, how will you know you are the light?
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-23.txt 
 TO BE
I have to tell you one thing – that you are all one.
The oneness
in the whole world
of brotherhood
is something to
be really enjoyed,
enjoyed
so beautifully.
They are ordinary villagers.
They have never read any yoga.
They do not understand anything more
about vibrations than these feelings that you get...
This is what is Sahaja, such loving people.
And at that time, I just thought of how
once with Rama, how you felt those things with people,
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-24.txt 
 ENJOYED
The feeling is that the other is myself.
Be kind and gentle.
Try to improve and help in that manner.
The greatest law of Sahaja Yoga is that it is a collective happening.
with very simple people,
of very simple heart and shraddha,
how they had those feelings
of receiving your love and feeling it.
Everyone needs love in this world.
You cannot exist without love.
Your whole being is based on love.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-25.txt 
 HAVE
Your intellect will start working
for the pursuit of the spirit.
That is what faith means.
If you have faith in Sahaja Yoga,
then
must know you are here
you
for a tremendous work of human emancipation.
You have a very great responsibility.
You represent that part of creation which is the most important, the most vital.
And if you fail it, it is absolutely fatal also.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-26.txt 
 FAITH
As you have faith in a candle,
have faith that the Divine will give you the light,
will guide your path,
will take you to the right place,
to do the right thing.
All this works out in such a manner that it builds up a tremendous sense of security within you,
that you know you are standing on the truth. Hold it with both your hands. You will grow on it.
You will enjoy yourself. Life will be so much better, much more beautiful.
And it is only through you the whole world is going to be saved.
So strengthen yourself, strengthen your arms and strengthen your feet.
The faith is the strength of Sahaja Yoga, not the brainwaves that you have about it.
Everyone has to search
for the truth within.
There is no other way.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-27.txt 
 ASCENT
POT
ADHTAN
CHAA
Ascent is the aim of your life.
Sarveati
BearlaDev
This is the best way to bring non-violence in violent places you go:
stand steadily there, facing all the things that are happening .
That witness state acts, acts and stops that kind of a violence that is going on.
But the witness state is not a mental state.
It is a state of a spiritual ascent where you become a witness.
The best
to practise the witness state is not to criticize
way
anyone.
Your ascent is the point.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-28.txt 
 IS THE AIM
The travel may not be very comfortable.
The roads are so very filled with speed-breakers
and all kinds of obstructions.
It is a journey like our ascent.
Everybody must decide to reach
a state where you can every day see the blessings of God manifesting.
This is the kingdom of God, in which you are looked after, protected,
guided and properly taken to the place of heavenly bliss.
This state, all of you must achieve
and then only the higher ascent works out.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-29.txt 
 TO BE
The beauty of Self Realization
lies in secretly working out within you everything that is virtuous,
that is beautiful, that is joyful..
It is made easy. It has to be, as it is the most vital force
that has to take place in the realm of spirituality.
Virtue is your ornament. It is not a noose round your neck.
Only people who enjoy their virtues are great men. They do not suffer it.
They do not feel unhappy, but they are proud of their virtues.
So this is what it is for
to understand.
you
Now whatever are your qualities for which it may appear that you suffer, it doesn't matter.
The strength is your joy.
Strength is your virtue.
Strength is your
pleasing personality.
That is your strength...
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-30.txt 
 VIRTUOUS
Our new race that is there of Sahaja Yogis
has to understand that you have also a universal nature.
But
you are individually intelligent people and your insistence should be
in inculcating all the qualities of peace and of justice within you. We should do justice
to ourselves and to others and we should be peaceful to ourselves and to others.
The first thing is compassion and love.
When there is compassion and love, you cannot think of clubbing at all, never.
You can never club with anyone. You will love each and every person and be kind
and enjoy your compassion, the virtue of your compassion, the virtue of your love.
And that shows on your faces.
So you should be happy, joyous, pleasing.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-31.txt 
 The truth is:
everything is illusion,
except for the divine love of God
that is all-pervading,
which you can feel through your spirit.
to be sahaj is to be collective
In the collective only the maturity starts. It is a living process. Supposing a tree
is growing and you take out a leaf from there and the leaf will say, "I am going
to grow by myself." It cannot grow. It will be left out. So that is what one has
to remember, that it is a collective happening. We all have to meet and grow
together. Those who are not collective will disappear one day into thin air, like a
dead leaf. I think people do not understand the meaning of collective happening.
It is just like a tree growing and with the tree everything else that belongs to the
tree also grows. So for the growth of this tree, one has to remember that
you
have to stick onto the tree. But the tree is not going to run after you, "Stick on,
stick on to me..." When you do not accept the principle of Sahaja Yoga, you put
a barrier in between the sap and the leaf. Now when that happens, the leaf falls
off. So you have to open out yourself, your heart, everything to suck in the sap,
to nourish. You have to give up your ego and superego, your conditionings and
have had from before. This is what is the surrender, is the Islam. And
ideas you
that is to be achieved. But that is not going to help the tree. It is going to help you.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-32.txt 
 When you get the water of the Ganges to drink, why should you take water from dirty rivers?
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-33.txt 
 DIVINE
I bow to all the Sahaja Yogis of the world
| used to bow to all the seekers of the truth. And today all those
seekers of truth have shown that truth is love and love is truth. They
say love begets love. Iloved you, no doubt, but in so many faces, when
you see the reflection of that divine love, it is multiplied beyond My
expectation. I cannot describe My joy. You can sing, dance, jump, say
|
"Jai." I also feel like saying your "Jai" and singing.. This is the beginning
of our collective effort. We have to go further and further with this.
contact@divinecoolbreeze.org editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-34.txt 
 COOL BREEZE
Continue to live a life of reality, of understanding. And in everything you will find there is truth.
words
from top to bottom of both pages combined MY VISION: Shivaratri Puja 2001, Birthday felicitations 2002, Christmas
Puja 2000 WISDOM WITHIN: Navaratri Puja 1998 DEDICATION: 6 August 1982, 9 March 1983 A SPIRITUAL
EDUCATION: 7 April 1982, Birthday Puja 1982, 23 November 1980, Birthday Puja 1982, Birthday Puja 2000 THE
KINGDOM OF VIRAT: 16 January 1983, Shri Krishna Puja 1986, undated letter (translated from Marathi), Guru Puja
2004 THE BEAUTY OF LOVE: 15 October1979, Navaratri Puja 1977, Shivaratri Puja 2001, Birthday felicitations 2002
AS YOUR GURU: 8 July 2001, Paramchaitanya Puja 1989, Navaratri Puja 2002, Guru Puja 1989 VIBRATIONS: V3.15
May.83.p10, Diwali Puja 2000, 13 October 2007, Sahasrara Puja 2002, Shri Adi Shakti Puja 1993, SURRENDER: 4
September 1983, 18 March 1985, Shivaratri Puja 1994, Shri Ganesha 2004 TO BE ONE: Guru Puja 1994, Shri Adi Shakti
Puja 2004, Diwali Puja 2001, Sahasrara Puja 2002 REALITY IS: 20 November 1980, Shri Adi Shakti Puja 2007, Navaratri
Puja 1996, Shri Ganesha Puja 2002 TO BE ENJOYED: Shri Adi Shakti Puja 2004, 25 May 1997, Birthday Puja 2001, Birthday
celebration 1977 HAVE FAITH: 18 June 1983, Diwali Puja 2002, 8 September 1980, 14 March 2003 ASCENT IS THE
AIM: Shri Adi Shakti Puja 1995, 17 December 1989, Virata Puja 1991, Shri Krishna Puja 1998, 23 July 1983, 1 February
1983 TO BE VIRTUOUS: 12 May 1983, 21 September 1986, 7 April 1994 TO BE SAHAJ: 9 July 1989 IBOW TO ALL
THE SAHAJA YOGIS left: Mahalakshmi Puja 1987 I BOW TO ALL THE SAHAJA YOGIS above: Sahasrara Puja 2004
photographs
COVER top: Zermatt Switzerland 1984 (Colin Heinsen) COVER middle: India 1994 COVER bottom: Pratishthan India
1990 MY VISION top: Volterra Italy circa 1985 (Gregoire de Kalbermatten) MY VISION bottom: India circa 1980
(GK) WISDOM WITHIN lower right: India circa 1980 WISDOM WITHIN bottom left: (Gregoire de Kalbermatten)
OF VIRAT top: Guru
DEDICATION top and middle: India (GK) SPIRITUAL EDUCATION top: Prague KINGDOM
Puja 1987 (Herbert Reininger) KINGDOM OF VIRAT left: Shri Mataji at Shri Krishna Puja 1986 (GK) KINGDOM
OF VIRAT bottom: Elba Italy 2008 (Axinia Samoilova) BEAUTY OF LOVE top: (GK) BEAUTY OF LOVE middle
right: Guru Puja 1983 BEAUTY OF LOVE bottom: near Capri Italy 1989 (Herbert Reininger) VIBRATIONS top:
India 1983 (Colin Heinsen) VIBRATIONS middle left: (CH) VIBRATIONS bottom: India (Gregoire de Kalbermatten)
SURRENDER bottom: Santa Monica USA (Jim Gallagher) TO BE ONE bottom: United Kingdom REALITY IS middle:
Guru Puja 1982 London TO BE ENJOYED top: Lodge Hill seminar Sussex UK 1983 TO BE ENJOYED middle: Cowley
Manor Cheltenham UK July 1982 (Mark Callaghan) HAVE FAITH middle: Brighton UK circa 1981 ASCENT IS THE AIM
right: Cairns Australia 9 March 1990 (Sno Bonneau) ASCENT IS THE AIM bottom: Vienna airport 1984 (GK) TO BE
SAHAJ middle: (GK) TO BE SAHAJ bottom: River Ganges India (Bjorn Kurt) BACK COVER: flower (Axinia Samoilova)
www.divinecoolbreeze.org
KING PRINTING Co. Inc. Lowell Massachusetts USA and NIRMAL TRANSFORMATION PVT LTD. Pune Maharashtra India
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-35.txt 
 LOOK AT THESE FLOWERS
See one by one how beautiful they are. Every one is different. Even one leaf of one
flower will not match with another. One petal won't match with another. They are
all different, but so relaxed, creating beauty, giving us so much of joy. All different,
placed in a different manner, moving in a different manner. Every one has a different
angle. But there is unison. There is oneness in them that they all want to give us joy.
