JOURNEYWITHIN THE FINAL STEPS TO SELF REALIZATION THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE 2012 ISSUE 5 VOLUME TWENTY-FIVE NUMBER FIVE

 JOURNEYWITHIN THE FINAL STEPS TO SELF REALIZATION THE WORDS OF SHRI MATAJI ARE SUBTLE. There is poetry Each change has been handled with care and scrutiny. and instruction. There is warning and assurance. There is The editing has been done with a scalpel, not with a sword. both humour and wisdom. Above all, there is love. Each word choice has been weighed. This book is a gentle movement of Shri Mataji's words from the stage to the These pages are a generous excerpt from a new book: Journey Within. The book is composed entirely of the page. It is a careful editing of Her message from across the words of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi – from more than fifty years. The intention and, we hope, the result of this distillation sources, over a span of thirty years. And there is more. In a departure from the usual style of is inspiration – and pure love. We have tried to present the best, the clearest, the strongest possible introduction to this magazine, the words are edited. Sentences are some- times reconstructed. Phrases are moved. Tenses are regu- Sahaja Yoga and, in that, an explanation of the meaning of larized. We jump at times, without indication, from one life as well – entirely using Her words to us. We hope that you will find here the beginning of a book talk to another. But the important words have not been changed. The message remains. that offers the essense of Her teachings and is also true to Shri Mataji once said that verbal language is different Her voice. than the written. What is understood clearly in person, can It is an introduction to Sahaja Yoga for those who are looking for truth. It is an introduction to Shri Mataji for be ambiguous when transcribed. This book is the result of a project approved by Shri those who never met Her. It is both a welcome and an invitation. Mataji in 2003. The methods used in its creation received Her approval and blessing. It is an invitation to journey within.

 IN Everyone has to search for the truth within. There is no other way. I BOW TO ALL THE SEEKERS OF TRUTH. There are in these modern times, many seekers of truth. They are a special cat- egory of people. Perhaps we are not aware that in every country a lot of people are born with this seeking. They are a special category who see beyond, trying to find something beyond what they can perceive through their senses. The truth is found through our sense organs. For example, if we see something as white, we call it white. If we feel it as cold, we call it cold. If it is hot, we call it hot. This means whatever we perceive through our sense organs and whatever is communicated to us through our central nervous system, we accept as the truth. We should accept only that which we feel to be the truth and not something that is told to us, not something that we have read in books, not something that we can project from our mind. There is no denial of any of the scriptures. There is no denial of anything that we have known so far in this world, but to begin with, let us start from scratch, as they say, from a clean slate. Let us see in this book what is the truth – the truth of your experience.

 JOURNEYWITHIN CHAPTER ONE TO FIND THE WAY

 MY FATHER FELT THAT I WOULD DO SOMETHING GREAT IN THIS LIFE. I don't know if he dreamed it or simply understood it, but all the time he used to say, “You have to find out the way of giving en masse Realization." By Realization, יי he was meaning the need for a deep, spiritual awakening in people. gave me a good education in different religions and also a good education about human beings: what are their problems, why do they act the way they do, why don't they take to God, why are they hypocritical. All kinds of things he told me. Не I knew all about it from my very childhood. I was a very aware person, but I did not know who to talk to because people did not have the same awareness then. You could not talk to anyone just like that. My mother was a very strict lady. She taught me so many things. Indeed all of my sisters and I are expert cooks and in each of our lives we are doing very well. We do not trouble anyone. All these things have come from our mother, who was a strict lady and she would not tolerate any nonsense. She would never tell a lie. If told her, “When this gentleman comes, you tell him that I am not in the house,’ you she would say, "Don't tell me to tell lies. I'll tell him that you told me to tell the lie." That is how she was and that is how she treated us. We lived with that, but we did not mind it because what she did was for our good. We knew that she was doing it for our good. Even President Roosevelt once said that an Indian woman is like a magnolia in a forest. Even one flower in the forest may be hidden. You cannot see it, but you can smell it. The whole forest is fragrant. You cannot see it anywhere. The fragrance is only in one flower, but yet you know this magnolia very well. It has the greatest qual- ity, that of love. Love is the most attractive thing in this world. My parents were great people, realized souls. My father was a person who knew why I was on this Earth. Even my mother knew about it. When I was small, I used father that it was my desire that, like the stars in the sky, many people on to tell my Earth should also shine and spread the light of God. So there was a special rapport between us and they could understand why I was busy meditating or finding out about how to give Realization to others. I was regarded as a very joyful person, at the same time very serious and deep. When I started my studies as a child, I was not very much interested, although I did

 them, but also I used to read about the lives of great people. At a very young age, I did not have any particular interest in reading textbooks. When I was about seven years of age, I happened to go with my father to see Mahatma Gandhi. He was about seventy miles from us. The first time he met me, he much. He said, “Leave this child here. liked me very " I was a little girl, but he understood that there was something about me. Surpris- ingly, he consulted me on very serious problems. One day he wanted to make a prayer book, so he asked me, “How should I put CC this series of prayers?" I told him to do it according to the different centres within us. I said, “You do this one, then this one." He said, "All right, it's a good idea." He changed the order. It was so smoothly and silently done that it was not made obvious to anyone that we had our rapport on these things. He never asked me about the spirit, nor did he ever meditate. Every year after that I would go back and visit Gandhiji. It was a time of emer- gency in India and in a small way I contributed. Gandhiji loved me very much. He used to call me Nepali because I have a broad face. Everybody used to call me Nepali at that time. Gandhi was a man born for an emergency, at a time when India wanted to be politically independent. A political leader need not worry about spirit and religion, but he considered our country to be a land of yoga. He always based his theories, philosophies and activities on the fibre of the people. We are a very religious people and he sought to create an atmosphere of satisfaction. He used to talk to me as if he was talking to his grandmother. He was a very sweet man, especially with children and he would try to learn from them. It was surprising how he understood that children often have more wisdom than do older people. Although he was a very kind person to children, he was an extremely strict man, with himself and with others. He was a big disciplinarian. He would make everyone get up at four o’clock in the morning, take their baths, with everything ready for morning prayers at five o'clock. He used to walk very fast and I also learned fast walking with him. Gandhi was an extremely loving, nice person and he would listen to me because I was a child. Supposing I had forced him to eat more, he would have laughed and accepted it. I would make some orange juice for him and he would discuss small things with me. I remember once I told him, “Why do you make everyone get up so early? If you CC want to get up, you can, but why do you make everyone else? It's all right for me, but why do you have to make everyone else?" TO FINDTHE WAY

 He said, "Everyone should be made to get up early, we are passing through a cri- sis, we have to fight the British and attain our independence. If people are lethargic, how are we going to succeed? We have to be disciplined." He said, “You are a little girl. You get up in the morning, why can't they get up?" I said, "I am little, that's why I get up. They are big, so they can't get up." Mine was a very free expression of a personality. People accepted it. I was very loving, compassionate and generous. I was a unique person as a child. Then I told him that we also needed to have inner discipline and so he knew that I was a wise person and he used to love me and respect me in a very fatherly manner. He would discuss things with me and he impressed me. He had a sense of integrity, was absolutely honest with himself – something I appreciated. He never cheated himself. This was the greatest thing about him. In all matters, including money, he was so integrated. What he said, he did. He criticized himself, but Gandhi did not talk of spiritual Self-Realization. For him, Realization was not the problem at that time. After independence, we should have taken to Realization. We had the problems of the partition of India and Paki- stan and everyone's attention was diverted to this problem and nobody thought of Realization at that time. Gandhi was a great soul, no doubt. He was an extremely great human being, but true Realization is very different. It is another realm altogether. His meditation was to ponder things and to guide himself, but not the kind of meditation of thoughtless awareness. That is a different dimension of awareness. Gandhi's main contribution was to establish balance in people and to make them more Indian, removing the slavish mentality that had trickled down into us. My family was a part and parcel of the freedom struggle, my parents were a part and parcel of it as well. My father burnt all his suits because they were stitched in England, my mother burnt all her saris. They would spin their own clothes and wear them. My father sacrificed everything – every paise (less than a penny) that he had – for the freedom struggle. So much was snatched away by the English. We had lived in beautiful houses and then we shifted to huts. The sacrifices were to the maximum and we were very happy about it and very proud. We had only two changes of clothes. We washed our clothes and lived like very poor people, sleeping on thin, rough floor mats. I remem- ber I never had a pillow. I never used shoes for years. I had only one sweater. I had only one coat throughout my college years. When I was in Lahore, which is terribly cold – sometimes it can be like London – that coat was worn out and finished. We never grudged and never grumbled and we never said that our father should have looked after us or done something different. Even today, when people from that JOURNEYWITHIN

 time see us, they know we are children of such a great man. They have tremendous for us because of him. My parents dedicated their lives to the cause of the respect freedom of India and I also felt it was very important because if we are not free we cannot do anything on a religious basis. Because of the resistance to the British occupation of India, my father went to jail twice, once for about two and a half years. He was the only supporting member of the family, so we had to leave our house and live in huts and we had all kinds of problems and hardships. When I was eighteen years old, I remember one day some people came and told us, “Your father is being transferred from one jail to another." כ My mother was worried because I was a young girl. The police used to torture me, they used to give me shocks and make my life very miserable. My mother was crying and she told an old gentleman, "I'm worried about my daughter. I don't want CC her to be tortured any more." This man told me to stop and he said that what I was doing in fighting the English wasn’t proper. My father took me aside. He said, "Don't listen to this old johnny. Forget him. I would like all my children to be sacrificed on the altar of freedom. If you are doing it, I am a proud father and I'll tell your mother to behave herself. I am so proud of you." The police were after my life. Such were the times I lived through. I had to give up my college, having abscond- ed for eight months. I know what the Indian people have gone through. The British were also after me because I helped many people. I had joined the independence movement and, in a very serious way, I became a leader among the young people. I thought unless and until I take a positive stand, it may not work out for India. In the end, all these problems work out with divine power, not with human pow ers. Divine power is there and it works things out in such a smooth manner that there is no need to use human powers. It is not gracious to say in detail how the British tortured me, what they did to me, but they did really torture me. I was a young girl. It is over now, so it is finished. My parents neglected us in a way because they gave their lives to the country, but that never deterred us from schoolwork and we came up very well. After studying science for two years at college, I went into medical school. I was studying in Lahore Medical College because I wanted to know about medicine. I knew about the com- plete nervous system, but I did not know the vocabulary attached to it, so I studied there for two years. I did not complete my studies because just at that time the 1947 riots broke out and the college was closed, but I felt I had learned what I needed, so I did not need to return and I soon married. TO FINDTHE WAY

 During all that time, my pastime and my full-time work was to find out about human beings. What are the problems they have? How do they avoid reality? How do they shun it? How do they run away from it? How are they seeking? What do they have to offer? What will they accept? How do you handle them? It was quite an intricate set of questions. Every person provided new problems and I had to find it out. In a way, it was a system which I knew because in order to enter into someone subtly, to understand the problems of the Kundalini, you go into the journey and find out about the person. In this way, I found out the permutations and combinations of their problems. It is like the Periodic Table of Elements. One has to divide them into three, then into seven, then into their permutations and combinations. So one can imagine – three into seven, raised to power of eternity – it was like that. But it doesn't matter. I knew it would work out. That is how my life continued. All the time, my inner being was still seeking for the and methods of giving en masse Realization. ways My father said, "Before you develop this technique, do not talk about religion. Let no one know that you know anything about it because they will not understand. First of all, you must give them Realization. If they get their Realization, then they will know that there is something about it in this human awareness." My father always used to give an analogy, "Supposing we are born on the tenth storey and everyone else is on the ground. You must at least make them climb two storeys so that they will know that there is something above. Otherwise there is no use talking about it. They have to enter into the medium," my father said. "So that is what you have to be – very careful that first of all you must give Realization to them." I was seeking a way of doing this, working it out inside myself through my own style of meditation. I was working out all the permutations and combinations. When I met a person, I would see what problems that person had, how they could over- come them. In that way, I would try to study that person internally. Somehow or other, I knew I must open the seventh chakra. I knew I wanted to do something, that is how I saw it. I wanted to find a proper time when I could discover a method by which an en masse happening could take place and everyone could achieve it. In May of 1970, I was sitting near the sea. I decided there and then that it should happen and so it worked out that the last centre was opened. saw the Kundalini, which is the primordial force within us, the Holy Ghost within us, rising like a telescope opening out and then I saw the whole thing open and a torrential rain of beams started flowing through my head and everywhere. JOURNEYWITHIN

 I felt that I was lost, I was no more. Only the grace was there. I saw it completely happening to me. In 1970, on the 5th of May, this happened. If it is a job, you can do it. But God's work is not just a job. The struggle began from the day I started giving Realization. I began with one lady, then twelve people achieved Realization. Over the first two years, only about fourteen people received their Self-Realiza- tion, then gradually many others followed and it became known as Sahaja Yoga. We have to understand that life should be enjoyable. Life should be a blessing. It should not be a misery. We create our own miseries by our false ideas, by our own conflicts. We have in our mind mental projections. It comes from our mind or from our obstinacy. All these things can be cured if you take to Sahaja Yoga because you become a balanced person, a level-headed, mild person and you become a witness. The whole thing becomes like a show, like a drama and you become fearless. This is what a hu- man being has to achieve. We talk of peace, we talk of the end of war, but all that is not going to work out. The only thing that is going to work out is the transformation of human beings because if human beings are transformed, things will work out perfectly. Not only that, but people will also enjoy the bliss of life. Human beings must ask themselves one thing: “What have I achieved out of all this?" Just for a minute stop and think about this. I was born in India and in a Christian family. If you are an enlightened person, you see the essence of everything. No matter into what religion you are born, you should not ignore any other religion. You should try to learn about other religions and you find that the essence is the same in every religion. What is there to fight about? By fighting, you belong to no religion, while in truth, you belong to every religion. My life, on the whole, has been very collective. I am by nature extremely collec- tive and I expressed this temperament from my very childhood. I was very friendly with all the people from the area in which we lived and my mother was known as Nirmala's mother, father was known as Nirmala's father. They said, "We have lost our identity because of our daughter." I never felt lonely. When I am with myself, I am never lonely at all. I enjoy myself very much. When I came to London in 1974 because of my husband's work, I had one Sahaja Yoga program. There were seven hippies who remained after that and so I had to TO FINDTHE WAY

 work with them. For four years I was working with them to give them Realization. They were difficult. At that time, I also used to visit India. In India too the work was done. We began working in the villages first, where we started moving in a very big way. Gradually people found that this was the way they could transform themselves. mad. They Many people were taking drugs or were alcoholics or were in some way soon felt better and were cured. Slowly, it was established that this Sahaja Yoga was something very important. You enjoy because you seek the comfort of your spirit. That gives you joy. You think you get joy by acquisition, but you do not. Through Kundalini awakening you get that joy and, in that joy, you do not want anything. You do not ask for anything. You just enjoy yourself. You are the property of enjoyment. In Sanskrit they say, "The spirit is satisfied by its own spirit. JOURNEYWITHIN

 JOURNEYWITHIN CHAPTER TWO TO SEEK

 THERE HAS BEEN, FROM AGES PAST, A SEEKING FOR THE TRUTH. When people discovered that there was no other way to find the truth, but to surrender to the Divine, they did not know how to do it. There have been seekers all over the world, but darkness existed around those people. I found, when I was a little girl that there was complete ignorance about how to find the truth. So many were lost in all kinds of so-called religions and rituals. Morning until evening, some sort of a ritual they were doing. Whether they were Hindus, Christians or Muslims, they all believed that by doing all these rituals, they would achieve something, that they would know the truth and get Self-Realization. All such seekers went to wrong people and in wrong directions, but they were really seeking from their heart. As a result, they were misled into such horrible black areas that they did not know what they were seeking and what they were supposed to see and what they had to have. It has been prophesied that when the Kali Yuga, this present age of confusion, will come, people will find themselves. Then all those people seeking the truth in the jungles, in the hills and dales, in the Himalayas will become ordinary household- ers. They will be householders. They will not be sanyasis going about. They will be householders and they will find the truth. Every religion has said one thing: “You must know yourself." Islam says it. Bud- dha said the same. Christians say the same. Hindus say the same. But still people go on doing all kinds of acrobatics, realizing, "We haven't found the truth." So it came to me. In my childhood I knew I had to do it, but when I saw the hu- man beings, how much in darkness they were about themselves, how aggressive and how sinful they were, how their style was so cruel, it was unbelievable. That was the time I saw Hitler coming up and our country of India also was in complete bondage. The first thing was to make our country free. It was very important and that is why I took a very active role in the movement for the freedom of our nation. My father and mother did the same. But when we got the freedom, somehow, af- ter some time, we got lost. People started taking to all kinds of modern things, which were wrong, which were so-called entertainment.

 With that, I found that all over the world there was a big seeking force and some false people took full advantage of it. They went out, made lots of money and, with their falsehood, they cursed those who were seeking. I do not know what they did to them. So many seekers were lost in that way. Despite that, I went to America and I was shocked how things were going on there, but I could not help because they were so mentally ill-equipped. They could not understand what they had to have. They did not know that you cannot pay for the truth. Once I met a lady and she told me that she was seeking God. I said, “What do you think of God? What are you seeking?" כל When we say we are seeking, do we know what we are supposed to seek and do we understand how we are going to feel when our seeking is complete and we have reached the destination? Everyone has to search for the truth within. There is way. Without searching for the truth that lies within, one goes on treading no other the path of untruth. When you are established in truth, no rules and regulations are required. Then all your deeds become divine. Therefore, everyone should seek the truth and this is the time when you can get it. Let us see now how the seeking comes to be within us and from uwhere it comes. SEEKING FOOD AND PRESERVATION Seeking is only possible when something is living. For example, what is the seeking of a chair? It cannot think. It cannot move. You can put it in the kitchen or you can put it on the street. You can smash it and throw it away. You can again use that kind. wood for some other purpose or make a stool out of it. It has no seeking of any Only when a thing becomes a living being does it start manifesting its seeking. A living thing is supposed to seek. It is not dead. So those who say "we are not seek- ing" are as good as dead. But those who say "we are seeking" are living beings – and they are living and also kicking. This desire to seek was created within a little animal, called as the amoeba, by giving him hunger. Just think of it. It has no brain. It has just a small nucleus, but it can feel it is hungry. It has to eat something to grow. It also knows it has to repro- duce. Then it starts seeking. It also knows how to take the food in, but it does not know how it digests. That part is not his job. Even for us, it is just the same. So the seeking starts in the little amoeba and the whole evolution is based on that seeking, gradually improving and improving the ways and means of seeking, while still the desire is only for food. There is also another desire or emotion in the amoeba. It is the sense of preserva- tion. It knows the dangers that can finish its existence. TOSEEK

 When this amoeba becomes a human being in thousands and thousands of years, then the seeking is changed. In the beginning, it starts with the seeking of food. That is the basis. You must have food to begin with. Of course, the methods are improved, changed, evolved for the seeking of food, but there is also a great understanding of how to preserve yourself and your clan. Clubbing starts from a very early age. Even ants understand that. Ants understand that they all have to club together, unite together, integrate if they are to protect themselves. This seeking of wholesomeness also develops gradu- ally in human beings and the expression of that is all our efforts to preserve ourselves and to be clubbed together. These efforts are expressed in our political and in our economic enterprises. Once as a child, I read a story about some birds. A net was cast and so many doves were caught in the net. They discovered they had been misled and misguided. They had been lured into the net by some grain. So to get out of the net was im- possible for them. It was an impossibility. If one tried to get out, they all got more entangled. So what to do? They all said, "Why don't we all fly out with the net itself and then with our beaks we'll cut this net and we'll be freed? But first we must get out from here. We will put our energy together, all of us and fly out." That's what they did. They spread their wings, all of them working together and they took off. Off they went and they were freed. Today that same kind of a trick is needed. One person cannot work it out. It is impossible. One has to become a whole group to lift the society up higher, so that we can really get rid of the shackles of our bondage. SEEKING POWER AND MONEY It is in the human being that a new seeking starts. It is the seeking to have power over others. Animals do not seek power. They have it. For example, a tiger is much more powerful than a poor rabbit. He is born like that. A rabbit does not want to become a tiger. He does not try like every Dick, Tom and Harry to become a prime minister. A rabbit would not try to be a tiger. He understands, "I am a rabbit and I must develop my means of defences and my means of offences by which I exist." In the same way, the tiger acts. He is aware of his powers and also he is aware of his limitations. Some animals also have a power of leadership in them. They become leaders. You must have seen some birds. They have a leader and whenever that lead- er changes the direction, all of them follow, as if they are like the tail of that leader. In the same way the leader goes, all of them follow. This also is expressed in human beings in a very big way. There are some born leaders who lead a group of people to a destination in which they fulfill the seeking of that group. JOURNEYWITHIN

 Now the seeking of the groups could be for money or status. Money, animals do not understand. This is a creation of human beings only. For them, money becomes very important because it is their own creation. We had barter systems, but then we thought it would be better to have some sort of a medium which would convert one item into another, so we started money. The focus of man's attention from food goes to power and from power it goes to money. Sometimes if somebody has a lot of money, then he wants to have power as well. It is natural. There is nothing wrong with it, as such. Fundamentally, it is natu- ral for human beings to run after money and then to run after power or vice versa. Many spiritual seekers have given up everything for the sake of their seeking. They have seen that the value of these material things will not take them anywhere. They have seen beyond. Their value system is different. But even if the value system of such people is different, they still can be exploited. This is not a world for you to seek money. You have come on this Earth to seek God, to seek your spirit, to be one with your Self, to be in that peaceful place which is the kingdom of God, which is the kingdom of heaven and not to jump into an il- lusion or maya, which looks very beautiful, but is not. It is agonizing. It is terrifying. People cannot sleep if they have too much money because they do not know what to do with it. The accumulation of all these nonsensical things causes us all tension within. If you have comfort, it makes you a slave. If you seek comfort, you are in for enslavement. You are seeking beyond money. You know that money is not going to give you joy. You know that very well. But those who have not yet known that, still they are climbing up the cusp. They have not seen the ditch below. Such people try to come up and try to give you some sort of a jargon and get a lot of money from you. It is a very shameful affair. SEEKING MEANING AND TRUTH Beyond the search for money starts another seeking. It is the seeking to know why we are here. What are we doing here? What is the purpose of our life? Why has God created us? To what purpose? To what end? Or is it all just a joke? Are we just foolishly being born, getting married, having children and dying like the amoeba? Have we any other purpose? Many human beings do not go beyond the knowledge of money or health. Animals do not take any exercise, but human beings want good health. They can go to any extent to preserve their health, but for what? You may be a wrestler, but for what purpose? Just to fight each other? You might be the healthiest person TOSEEK

 living on this Earth, but for what? It is just a waste. What is your use? You may be the wealthiest man going in the best cars with all the so-called luxuries of life and material well-being, but for what? When such a question comes into your mind, a new kind of seeking starts, which asks the question "Why are you here?" Are you here just to run in this rat race, morning to evening earning money and earning power and doing all useless activi- ties, pleasing others, to show off your money or extract some money from others? Is that the aim of your life? Now this is the beginning of the fourth inquiry or the fourth dimension in your awareness. This inquiry is the flowering of the same rudimentary thing called as hun- ger – the hunger for spirituality, the hunger for God, the hunger for higher things of life. It starts within us. That is the genuine happening. CONFUSION FEEDS SEEKING In this seeking you get confused because, by the time this seeking starts in you, you are already famished and finished because you are already conditioned by all kinds of nonsensical things. Groping in darkness, the seeker gets more confused and searches intensely. That is what is happening to so many right now. These times are known to be full of confusion. Only in confusion do we seek the truth. Unless and until there is confusion, there cannot be that seeking. And this confusion has reached such a stage. This age is very difficult, no doubt, but in difficulties only do we become intense seekers and that is what happened. People are following whatever they are follow- ing without discretion. They are not reaching any point of discovery. Like being in a cocoon, they are hitting their heads here and there. See the world today. It is full of strife. People are fighting for nothing at all. For land, they are killing human beings. Can land create human beings? They are fighting in a very collective manner, thinking they are doing a very great service to humanity. Today the thinking of human beings is not at all deep. It is very superficial and that is how you find this world full of turmoil. Every day, every minute you can find they are killing so many human beings. They are torturing on a very large scale. tortured by all kinds of In the past, of course, the saints were also tortured – different, stupid ideas of something being higher and something being lower, some- thing being good, something being bad. Under such ideas, their enemies combined together and worked out all kinds of aggression all over the world, as well as in the families, in the institutions, in the organizations. Thinking that they were very right, that they were very good, they tried to aggress others. JOURNEYWITHIN

 So many people thought, "It's better to fight back," and they started fighting it out collectively. That does not work out. This fighting does not work out because יכ fighting begets nothing but murders and killing. In this way, many people were killed. Buddha talked to people of non-resistance and there is a history to it. In one of the great universities in Bihar, India, when the aggressive people came in, they killed all the saints in the name of aggression. They all died. Maybe that might have achieved, on a very subtle level, some sort of punyas or spiritual merits, but in this age known as Kali Yuga, it is not going to work out. What is the resistance you can put up against such people? How can you fight them? It is an impossible situation to convince anybody that they are aggressive and they are nowhere near the truth because nobody wants to accept such a thing. So whatever they are trying, all over the world, to convince others of their follies, is completely failing. And thus, this struggle, this war mongering cannot be cured. We have to accept that human beings are not at that level to understand what is with them. They do not want to accept it. To them, aggression is the only way wrong they can propound their own goodness. Why is there such a need for people to become so restless, full of tensions? Any- where you go, you find confusion. It is terrible. The whole society seems to be boil- ing with a kind of a fear of destruction. What is the reason? There are so many religions – organized and disorganized. There are so many sadhus and saints. There are so many books written about what you should become. But one who is a seeker of truth should see one point. Why are there so many problems in this world and how can you help to solve them? Where is the problem? The problem is inside the human beings. We have come out of the animal stage to the human stage. We have a human awareness, no doubt. In that awareness, we start seeing all kinds of things that are not good, which are destructive, which are disturbing. If it does not disturb you, it means you are not at all a sensitive person. But you are sensitive as a human being. If you just turn on the television set, you will know that there are many pictures around, but there has to be a television set to catch them. That catching has to be done by our awareness, but the human awareness, as it is, is not subtle enough to catch the divine power. There are many people in this world who are seeking the truth because they can- not bear the nonsense of the modern world and those people are very sensitive. So what is the solution? The solution is that they should find the truth. They should get their Self-Realization and only then will things improve. If they are seeking the truth, they will be surprised that this world is one, all hu- man beings are one and that oneness is the destiny of human beings. TOSEEK

 You may be calling yourself British or an Indian or an Australian or all sorts of things people call themselves, but, in the eyes of God, you are just a human be- ing. You are only that. You do not have a tail and do not have your head bent you down. You have your head upright. Whether you are in Africa or India or England or America, it is just the same. As long as your head is up like that and you do not have a tail, you are definitely a human being. And if a human being has evolved through various experiences of life and realizes that none of those experiences have really given him fulfillment nor the answer to his question "why are we here?" then CC the turning point takes place in his life. He becomes a seeker. It does not happen before that. Those who go to a guru and say, "Will you please give a job to my son?" – it >כ should be said to such a person, "My child, you are not yet fit. You are not yet ma- ככ ture enough to come here and ask." If you go to someone to ask for a diamond ring or anyone says, "I give diamond rings in the name of God," and you are quite satisfied with such a statement, you are no good as a seeker. If somebody says, "I will cure" – all right, a person may cure you, but you are no good as a seeker. Why should God cure anyone who is not seeking God? I mean why should I re- pair a microphone if it is not going to carry my voice? You have to be genuine. You have to be wise to understand that you are seeking your fulfillment. You are not seeking money and diamond rings and all these tom- fooleries that are going on. Do not deceive yourself. Please try to understand. Self-deception will never be forgiven by God. The amoeba, does it deceive itself if it sees food? It understands what it is seeing. But human beings deceive themselves morning until evening. Understand this: You are going to witness the magic of God. Is this the destiny of human beings, to be destroyed by each other for land or for anything else? Think of the whole world as one, think what is happening all over. Every day read the newspaper. Every day there is some sort of horrible news about horrible you things people are doing to each other for no rhyme or reason. We have to think, "What is the destiny? Where are we going? What is our situa- tion? Can we improve it?" JOURNEYWITHIN

 JOURNEYWITHIN CHAPTER THREE TO SEEK AND NOT TO SEEK

 WE HAVE TWO CATEGORIES OF PEOPLE – the ones who are not seeking at all and the ones who want to find solutions to the problems. In every generation we have people who advocate revolution because they do not like a particular system or do not like a particular style of life. But now the revolu- tion has to come from within. We have to evolve from within because the destruction is also coming from within. We are destroying ourselves more from within than from without. Because we are so unhappy, so absolutely confused, quite a percentage of people are schizophrenic. We start seeking the solution and, in that seeking, we make mistakes. We make mistakes because we do not know what to seek and how to find. We do not know how to evolve to that state. Logically, we have to reach some con- clusions, to conclude that it has to be some evolutionary happening. This is logical. To transform ourselves, there has to be some evolution. You must have noticed that there are really very few true seekers in this world. Seekers also must realize that they cannot be happy with anything else but their spirit. This is the test of a seeker. And a non-seeker can never understand a seeker. It is very difficult to live with a man or woman who is not a seeker. If they are not seekers, then they will never be so and you cannot inject seeking into them. They may become materially well off, but they can never become seek- ers. This kind of person is very difficult to change, but they will realize one thing, lead a much better life than they do. You are much more peaceful, blissful, that you dharmic and sane, but still they will not accept your life. Even if they change mentally, they cannot have that urge because, to a seeker, nothing is as important as seeking. A DEVOTION TO SEEKING In seeking, the person should have a great devotion. There are untold miseries you have to go through. Seeking is when, within yourself, you are struggling and outside you find nothing satisfactory. This is how the seeking has a double edge. In that seek- ing, when you are trying to get to the truth, it seems it is a very difficult thing, but you cannot help it because you are not satisfied with what exists around you. Nonetheless, you are definitely seeking. Perhaps you do not know what you are seeking, but one thing is definite – you are not satisfied with whatever you are. You think there is something beyond, which you have to seek. There is something be-

 yond, no doubt, which has been told to you by all the prophets, by all the scriptures, by all the great incarnations that came on this Earth. It has been promised also that you will be judged one day. That judgment will first be your own, a judgment of yourself, as to whether you are seeking the Divine or some sort of a frivolous thing. We are born as seekers. We might have made mistakes in seeking, but we are definitely seekers. If you were not a seeker, you would be happy now reading some other book. But, no, there is something beyond, something beautiful beyond, which is being promised, which you feel is there. You are aware of the existence of that beauty. You are aware of it, but so far you have not reached the source. And that is why you are seeking. There has never before on this Earth been such an urge to seek. I do not know if you understand that it is really a different category of people who are seekers and they will go on seeking until they find the truth, but one has to know what to seek. It is said you have to become. You have to be. No matter what language you under- stand, God's language is of love and it is for everyone, for every person, for every case. It cannot be for one person or one type of people or for one category, but one category is there and they are the seekers. A seeker is of a special category, but the only trouble is they do not know what they are seeking. As seekers, what are we expecting? This is a very, very precarious and important time. The last judgment has started. That is how you are all here and you are seek- ing. A transformation must take place. When that transmutation starts, all these misidentifications drop away. You enjoy the best of health, the best of your heart. The best of your mind and your emotions come out. The best part of it is that this is what one has to achieve. The whole humanity has to achieve it, but the few who are the seekers have to do it first. They are the founda- tion. In every evolutionary stage, only a few fish come out, then many others follow. TRUE SEEKING Why is it some are seekers and some are not? One may say that if God has created all the human beings, all of them should have seeking. It is because in their own freedom they have lost their way. They are seeking something else and they think they are right. They have that right to think that they are right. Even a stupid fellow, even a mad person thinks he is right. If you tell him that “You are mad," he will say, “You are mad." This seeking, though it is put into them, they are not yet capable of expressing it. Yet so many are achieving it in the proper way because, for that, one has to sur- render. It is not a surrender of one's freedom, nor one's intelligence. It is a surrender of the ego that has developed in human beings. TO SEEK ANDNOT TO SEEK

 If the seeking is ardent and the people are really seeking the truth, they will find it. They will find it, no doubt, because the whole creation is for them. The whole universe is for them. All the deities are for them. All the angels are for them. They are all looking out for those seekers. We have to seek God. We have to seek our fulfillment. We have to relate to that wholesomeness that is God, the Primordial Being, the whole of it. This is what we have to seek. You are created for that. You wanted to seek God. You have not come down this path for money. You are not reading this book for anything else but God. Your seeking is for God. You want to know the truth about God and you want to have God. You do not want to put your ideas onto this, but you want to see how to receive the blessings of God. You should allow this to work out. Allow the light to come in and do not get confused. Do not get upset. You are here to seek God and not to just sit on what you have found so far. A NATURAL PROCESS In our searching, we are asking for the actual experience. In all the scriptures, it has been said that we will be born again. We are looking for a second birth, which is within us. All the religions talk about it. We have to stabilize ourselves to get the experience and it will work out. No effort is required. We breathe, our heart works without our doing anything, therefore everything has to come spontaneously, like the sprouting of a seed. Yet we have not got our fulfillment. People are seeking and it is the awareness that is respon- sible for the seeking. For this, we have to keep our rationality clear. If you are seeking reality, if you are seeking the truth, you have to be very honest about it, extremely honest. You have to know that unless and until you find it, you should not believe anyone. You should not accept anything superficial. People may say anything. I may tell you that you have to have your Realization. That does not have to believe me. It does not mean that at all. mean that you But you should also not deny what I say. It is a living process. It is a growing process, which works it out, but with human beings there is a very big problem. They always identify with imperfections, with ideas. Only in human beings do these things happen. That is why one has to wrong be careful. But there is a way. God has already placed that within you. For your growth, he is testing your genuineness, but if you are so obstinate as to stick onto some misidenti- fied or nonsensical thing, you cannot work it out. Be free from all these things. Open JOURNEYWITHIN

 yourself. You all have to be aware of the whole. You all have to get Self-Realization. By that, God will feel the fulfillment of his creation. And he has to do it. He will do it. But he will have to work very hard. THE TRUE INTEGRATION: THE WHOLESOMENESS If you do not accept the truth, then the truth will still be expressed, no doubt. But for that to happen, the untruth has to be destroyed. So take heed to your wisdom and know what you have to seek. You have to seek your wholesomeness, which we have only partially expressed in our political and our economical and social clubs. All this has to be integrated. All the great religions have substantially helped in our growth. They also have to be integrated in this happening. Just come in the kingdom of God and you will see that all the founders of the great religions are all seated there on the dais. They are all together and you, like fools, are fighting. This is one of the greatest hurdles to be faced by seekers. seeking, first of all your misidentifications must drop out. In your Those who are genuine seekers must open their minds. God loves Know that with all his heart, with all his soul, whether your you you love him or not. He has placed this seeking within you. He has placed this instru- ment within you. He has placed all the things so beautifully that spontaneously Self- Realization works in no time. There are certain things which are very important for Self-Realization. The whole attitude should be one of understanding that it is a gift for you. And there should be no obstinacy about taking that gift. SEEKING THE LIGHT, NOT THE CHAIR If there is a light, you do not falter. You walk straight. Because there was no light, there was a problem. As soon as there is a light, everything becomes all right and you start understanding the whole. You know how the whole thing is and you start walk- ing straight and you know where to sit and what is the chair and what is the person. If total vision is what you are seeking, then you are a seeker and you are a true seeker and you are blessed. You get your own powers and you understand yourself. You get your Self-knowledge. You understand the whole. Why should God not have a sense of giving, as you have? He loves you, no doubt. He wants to give to you because he loves you. If you are wayward and if you are prodigal by nature, why should he continue to give to you? It is a simple question you should ask yourself. Ask for Realization. You will get it. TO SEEK ANDNOT TO SEEK

 I would request you to try to tell your mind that you have done all kinds of things. You have been to all sorts of gurus. You have received all sorts of nonsensi- cal books and you have had all kinds of doubts. Now settle down for a while. Settle down. Tell your mind not to mislead you. You will get it. This is your own. It is your own property. This is your own right to be here. So get it. If any doubts are coming, tell them to wait. A THIRST FOR THE WHOLE AND THE WHOLESOMENESS The creation has reached its maximum growth now. The growth is expressed in hu- man beings. Those human beings are the actors on the stage. The whole nature is working out this new happening. Now only one thing has to happen to you. It is that you have to get connected with the Divine, you have to get connected with the whole, you have to know your own meaning and you have to know your purpose. If this can happen to you, then you are in the new world. You are made for this. You are a human being with a purpose. We must think. All the scientists must ask, once at least, this question, “Why? Why are we made as human beings? From the animal stage, why have we come to this stage? What is the reason?" This question is working in the unconscious of every seeker today. That is why we have so many seekers all over the world, but those seekers are just trying to find out why they are here. I do not blame anyone and I do not feel bad because, after all, you are seekers. You know you are seekers. You must have something to quench your thirst and, with that thirst, until it is quenched, you are not going to be happy. What is that thirst? It is this: you have still not known yourself. It is a very un- conscious thirst. It comes. You do not know what you are seeking. You do not know why you are unhappy. You do not know what you want, but the unconscious is working it out. your glory, what is your greatness, what are your powers. They are all built within you. Through The time has come that you should know what you are and what is all these days, when you grew up in your evolutionary process, all these things were built within you. At this time now when we are here, we do not realize how precarious it is, how vital. The most important time for which we have been waiting, the most important moment in the life of creation is today – when people are seeking. JOURNEYWITHIN

 SEEKERS OF OLD You are to love yourself and you have to adore your seeking and you have to get your fulfillment. This is a very serious matter. There is no guru-shopping going on here. You have to get your Realization. It is so fortunate that the time has come when you are living and that you can have it. Because of that, you took your birth during this time. You are seekers since very ancient times. Only in Kali Yuga, the sun of Sat Yuga, the World of Truth, is the age of enlight- enment going to come. Those saints, who were seeking the reality in the forests, are born today in this world. You can see them. They are saintly. They can see the joke of artificial life so clearly. They know it is absurd, but then they do not know what is real. The time has come and it has to be worked out and it will be worked out. You are seekers. You are saints. What has happened to your saintliness? Why are you so flippant? Why so superficial? Why do you not touch it deeply? Why do you not understand your Self? Why do you not respect your Self? It is such a great thing you are asking for, which is the flowering of your seeking from the amoeba stage to the human stage. For thousands of years you have been seeking and today you are on the threshold. You can now get your Self-Realization. No money is to be given or taken. As a by-product, you get your health. Your material side is also improved. But the real thing that happens to you is that you get Self-knowledge. You get Self-Realization. There is light and that light is within you. You start seeing yourself and your centres and the centres of others because you get connected with the whole. This is what Sahaja Yoga has to offer to you. w you. I respect you and I love you very much because I know I know you from ages. You are the lost children. TO SEEK ANDNOT TO SEEK

 You are born, not only to be human beings, but you have to be superhuman. You have to enjoy yourself. Your life should be enjoyable. It should be blissful. It should not be a curse, morning until evening worried about this, worried about that. God had no intention of creating people who would be all the time worried, quarrelling, fighting. He created people who will live in complete harmony, peace and joy. That is why we are created. That is our destiny. It is not just that I am telling you, but it is a fact. JOURNEYWITHIN

 JOURNEYWWITHIN CHAPTER FOUR СНА TO SEE THE TRUTH 317

 IN EVERY RELIGION TRUTH HAS BEEN DESCRIBED, but people do not see it for themselves. There is blindness. That is why there are these blind alleys where you end up arguing about things. So there must be something that is missing within us because we have not been able to relate truth to our central nervous system. That which is missing within us we should find. In all humility, we should know that there must be something within us. We have been arguing about so many things, we have been talking about so many things, reading so many books, going into all kinds of unusual experiences, from alcohol to drugs, gurus and so on, but still we have not felt anything on our central nervous system. We have not found the truth. Additionally, we have no control over that truth. What is the reason for that? Is it that there is something missing in human awareness? All the true scriptures have said one thing: to know the truth, you are to be born again. It is not only in the Bible, but in all true scriptures. The very ancient book known as Patanjali's Yoga Sutra does not ask you only to stand on your head. That is only a small part of it. What is written in the Patan- jali Sutra is that you have to achieve the truth through your central nervous system through your atmasakshatkar. Atmasakshatkar means the experience of your spirit. This search for the atma or the spirit has also been described by Mohammed. He said you are to become the pir. It has been described by Zoroaster, Lao-Tse and in Zen. Buddha has said it. Mahavira has said it. Every one of them has said it. So many religions have said that you have to be born again. It is not a mental status that is important. It is the desire within you, the pure desire to be one with God, to be one with the beyond. This pure desire exists. The desire that you are used to is not everything. You get fed up. It is a drama and you get bored. You try everything, but you are not happy about it. You see, it is the pure desire to be one with your spirit that you want. You may not be educated. You may be a street urchin. You could be living in a remote place, but still the pure desire may be in you and that works it out. You are not aware of the pure desire, but it is there and it works out.

 REALIZATION IS A LIVING PROCESS Now being born again does not simply mean that you certify yourself, "I am born again." Self-certification does not mean you become that which you say. What is so special about being born again? Why is the human awareness today so ready to be born again? In Sanskrit, the word for a bird is dwijaha. It means "born again." It also means "a brahmin who is born again." But those who today call themselves brahmins are כ not brahmins. They just call themselves brahmins. They are self-certified. Have they come to know the Brahma, the all-pervading power of God? Those who say they are born again should feel the all-pervading power of God around them. If they cannot feel it, they are not born again. So all these self-certifi- cates are a deception, a self-deception and a deception of others. It is just a money- making process. So the truth has to be achieved through your evolutionary process, which is a living process. We must understand it is a living process. It is not achieved just by talking, by mental projections or by taking some courses or giving some money. You cannot get it in that way. It is a living thing. This means the state of our awareness has to become higher than what it is presently. It has to grow. When you find God within yourself, then your priorities change. You do not want to know what is beyond life because you come into the present. You are not worried about the past and the future, but that also you come to know because gradually your vision improves. The main thing that happens to you is that feeling, that universality. You just start feeling in the sense that it becomes a part and parcel of your awareness – just a part and parcel of your awareness. As a human being, you have a special awareness for flowers, a special awareness for cleanliness. Animals do not have that. In the same way, you go to the point where you just become aware of that. You start feeling what is right and what is wrong. In the way the seed becomes the roots, then the bark, the leaves, the flowers and then the fruit, there are different states of growth. In the same way, a living religion must give you a new state and that nucleus of religion is within each of us. Every one of us has it. When we go against that living religion within, we go into imbalances. But even today, people ask, "Why have religion? Why should we have a balance? What is the need?" Is that a logical question? Is it good to desire imbalance? THE TENTH VALENCE: THE DESIRE TO ASCEND So what is religion? We come to that point. All religions are just like flowers on one living tree. However, they have been plucked by people who say, "This is mine." “This is mine." “This is mine." They have made these flowers very ugly. Such flowers are decayed. The whole attention TO SEEKTHE TRUTH

 should be on becoming the spirit. If it is not so, the rest of it is not God's work. God's work is just to awaken your Kundalini, that living and real life-force within each of us. It is a living work because he is a living God. His work is to transform a little flower into a fruit, which you cannot do alone. Just as carbon has four valences, human beings have ten valences. Animals have nine valences and human beings have ten. We have ten because we have to ascend. In the evolutionary process, you have to ascend and you can never be satisfied with yourself unless and until you have achieved that ascent. That is especially true for seekers of truth. Real seekers are unhappy because they are of a different category. They will not be satisfied with anything. They will try everything. They will try to get money to get power. They will try this and that, but they will not be happy because they are a different category. Then they will seek God. They will again seek God. They will go to wrong people and spend money here and there, do this and that. Everything they will try and then they will find out. But still, they have not found out what they are. That is why I say they are of a special category. These seekers will become proph- ets and they will make others prophets. BEYOND THE BARRIERS TO SEEING: LOOKING TO THE ROOTS When is this rebirth going to happen? It has to happen now and the only thing that stops it from happening is the barriers within us. These barriers are there because we have misled ourselves. We have been going on various roads of seeking, whatever suited us. As a result, we have built up certain barriers to the truth. But the true goal is to become a prophet, to become your own master, to become a free person. You have to be a free person. So far, you are not. In their present state, most people cannot overcome their own weaknesses, temptations, infatua- tions, emotional problems and mental worries. This is because they are still standing in the waves of this turmoil. This is a troubled area where you just see the waves all the time and you are frightened of breaking down. But if you somehow or other get out of it and get into the boat of your own being, then you will enjoy. You will become a witness, a sakshi. This is the goal. To understand the scriptures, you have to become a free person. You have to be your own master. For that, you cannot pay. To get your freedom of spirit, you cannot pay because money has no value in the divine field. Nothing can bring it forth but your own ascent. But how do we ascend? Is there anything built within us? What we need to know is the knowledge of the roots. Unfortunately, what we see is the knowledge of the tree. We see it from outside, in the same way we see a leaf from outside, but if we have to treat the leaf, we have to go to the roots. From out- JOURNEYWITHIN

 side, when we see the tree, we are still also outside. If you cut off the leaf, it is dead. Then you put it under the microscope. You may see cells. You can see the nucleus of these cells. You can go on analyzing it and analyzing it as a dead thing. But to treat it, you have to go to the roots. It is this knowledge of roots you must have. These are not new ideas. These are very ancient ideas. In the Bible this knowledge of the roots is described as the Holy Ghost. In many languages it is also described. Now the roots within us, if you can see this, are placed in a certain manner. The psychoanalyst Carl Jung saw human beings from outside and he described them in layers. First he said there is the unconscious that cannot be expressed or manifested. Then there is the unconscious that can be manifested. Above the sub- conscious is the conscious mind. Above that is the ego. He saw the human being in layers, one after another. Although you are in layers, the path of ascent is also laid down. In the same way, within us, God, being the greatest organizer, has not simply made us into layers, as Jung described. We are made in a parallel way. We have a left side and a right side and a central path. There are three paths for our evolutionary process. The central path works out our evolution. The left side gives us the desire and the right side gives us the power of action. These are the basic principles of how we are made. The central path of evolution has brought you today to this level of human awareness. Beyond that is a very short ascent which you have to achieve to become the spirit, but there has to be some living process for this to happen. What is that liv- ing process built within us? It is the reflection of the Holy Ghost, which is the power of God, which is the Primordial Mother, which is your individual Mother also called the Ruh or Paramchaitanya. It is within us. It is in the triangular bone called the sacrum. In Sanskrit this force is called as the Kundalini. This actually exists within us. You can see it with your own eyes in some people when there is an obstruction at the higher centres. At those obstructions the Kundal- ini pulsates. You can also feel that pulsation caused by the obstruction. Through a stethoscope you can also feel the percussion at the top of the head, where it pulsates and then it breaks through. When this happens, the pulsation stops and you start feeling the cool breeze coming out of your fontanel bone area. This is a happening that takes place and by this happening, you not only see the truth, you get connected with the truth. The connection takes place and then you start feeling it on your fingertips. You feel the cool breeze which surrounds you. You actually start feeling it. TO SEEKTHE TRUTH

 THE NEW AWARENESS OF COLLECTIVE CONSCIOUSNESS At this point the rational mind starts saying, "So what? Though we feel the cool breeze, so what?" One should know that when we have eyes we start seeing, when we have ears we start hearing. In the same way, you have got a new awareness. This is the awareness of collective consciousness, by which you become. You actually be- come. You are not just certified, but you actually become. It is very much a question of becoming. You become collectively conscious. On your central nervous system you can feel another person, you can feel yourself, you can feel all the centres within. You can feel all these things on your fingertips. Mohammed made it clear. He said that at the time of resurrection hands your will speak. But who talks about the resurrection? Nobody talks about it today. They talk about the doomsday because they can frighten people with that. They can take advantage of it and make money out of it. God, who has made this universe, feels love. Do you think he will destroy this great creation without giving us the fruit, without letting us know the fruit of his creation. He is the wisest of the wise, the greatest compassionate source of love. How could he allow this universe to be destroyed, especially this Earth, which is his special present? So do not believe in all these ideas of destruction and the last complete devasta- tion. There are still a lot of plans. You are supposed to enjoy the blessings of the Divine for which he has created you. Understand this: the experience of truth has to be felt on the central nervous system. If you do not immediately feel it, it is not because you do not belong. The experience is often very slow in the western countries. You are not in any way less of a seeker. You are a very great seeker, but while coming up to this level, you have developed a lot of problems and that is why the seeking sometimes takes time to express itself as the fruitful gain of Self-Realization. Another problem may be that you may get your Self-Realization, but again the down. But it can be brought back up by you, by understanding how Kundalini goes to work it out. You can do it by cooperating with your true Self, by understanding your Self, that you you have have to work it out with respect to your Self and that to give some time to it. Already thousands upon thousands of people around the world have it. If you know how to handle your roots, how to nourish them, how to look after them, then you flower out, you bear fruits. And by your fruits, people know what it is. Then you become trees, giant trees. You will be like moving trees and when people come under such trees, they also will get Realization. JOURNEYWITHIN

 BEYOND MEDIOCRITY We cannot be mediocre. There is no compromise with your Self. You become so powerful that you do not compromise. You can just, in no time, get out of everything that is no good, but you must, first of all, accept yourself and have faith in yourself. Truth is knowledge. The rest of it is all mythical. What we think we know about things is all mythical because whatever we see from outside is only outside. We appreciate the Mona Lisa. We appreciate this painting and other miracles that human beings have created. Sometimes we think that we have observed a very miraculous task. They are miraculous because they have vibrations. They have di- vine vibrations. They emit vibrations and they appeal to you because in your heart lies that spirit, which is the universal being and which gives that feeling of awe when you see these great miracles human beings have created. Unless and until you become a realized soul, how will you really know? To become a realized soul, you have to have the ascent of the Kundalini and the proper state of that Kundalini so that it remains there. It is on that point where we lack in effort, lack in courage and in patience. You must not be superficial. You must decide that if you get your Realization, you will establish yourself. And for that, you do not have to pay. There is no membership. There is no organization. I have nothing to take from you. You cannot give anything to me. We are like a light. When you are enlightened, what happens to you? You see the light. In that light, you see yourself. All confusion is finished. You know the truth feel so blissful and happy because you know everything. There is no chaos. and you You are so relaxed and the power starts flowing through you all the time. It is never lost and you see in that light whatever is good and whatever is bad. You understand everything so well. When you become the light, what do you do? You give the light to others so that they can also be enlightened. This world is one. All human beings are one. That is the destiny of human beings. Your destiny will work it out. You have a promise that you will be looked after. TO SEEKTHE TRUTH

 You have read one-fifth of JOURNEY WWITHIN the book Journey Within. THE FINAL STEPS TO SELF REALIZATION The entire book is available for purchase at www.divinecoolbreeze.org Buy the book and we will give you the money back for this magazine. Send us your proof of purchase to contact@divinecoolbreeze.org and confirm that you are a subscriber and we will send you a six dollar SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI gift certificate. WORDS CHAPTER ONE: 22 June 1984, London (Southbank Polytechnic) | 9 July 1986, Vienna ("Lebensbilder" TV interview) | March 1992, Hong Kong (Radio interview)|5 July 1985, The Hague, Netherlands | 25 September 1983, Los Angeles (KAZU Radio interview) | 6 February 1985, Bordi, India | 21 March 1997, Delhi |21 June 1992, Cabella Ligure, Italy CHAPTER TWO: 6 May 2001, Cabella Ligure, Italy | 24 July 1979, London | 14 March 2003, Pune, India (TV interview)| 22 April 1982, London | 20 July 1979, Cardiff | 14 July 2001, London (Royal Albert Hall) CHAPTER THREE: 24 July 1979, London| 14 July 2001, London (Royal Albert Hall) CHAPTER FOUR: 22 June 1984, London (Southbank Polytechnic) | March 1992, Hong Kong (Radio interview) | 24 March 1981, Sydney, Australia (University of New South Wales) | 8 July 2001, Cabella Ligure, Italy |9 November 2003, LOs Angeles BACK COVER: 21 March 1977, Bombay | 16 July 1979, London ALL PHOTOGRAPHS EXCEPT PAGE ONE: Shri Mataji, India, 1982 or 1983 (Matthew Fogarty) PAGE ONE PHOTOGRAPH: Shri Mataji in an Indian village, January 1981 WWW.DIVINECOOLBREEZE.ORG SUBSCRIPTIONS: contact@divinecoolbreeze.org COONTENT: editor@divinecoolbreeze.org PRINTED BY King Printing Company Inc. Lowell Massachusetts USA and Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. Pune Maharashtra India

 Please awaken yourself to this great occasion of understanding. You have to read within yourself. Your own book is within yourself. This dynamic force is dying to bubble out of you. We have to change this world and transform it into a beautiful creation. The Creator will not allow his creation to be destroyed. The greatest of greatest, highest of highest achievement is the awareness of God and, with love, that is what it is. JOURNEYWITHIN



----------------------

2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-0.txt 
 JOURNEYWITHIN
THE FINAL STEPS TO SELF REALIZATION
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE 2012 ISSUE 5 VOLUME TWENTY-FIVE NUMBER FIVE
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-1.txt 
 JOURNEYWITHIN
THE FINAL STEPS TO SELF REALIZATION
THE WORDS OF SHRI MATAJI ARE SUBTLE. There is poetry
Each change has been handled with care and scrutiny.
and instruction. There is warning and assurance. There is
The editing has been done with a scalpel, not with a sword.
both humour and wisdom. Above all, there is love.
Each word choice has been weighed. This book is a gentle
movement of Shri Mataji's words from the stage to the
These pages are a generous excerpt from a new book:
Journey Within. The book is composed entirely of the
page. It is a careful editing of Her message from across the
words of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi – from more than fifty
years.
The intention and, we hope, the result of this distillation
sources, over a span of thirty years.
And there is more. In a departure from the usual style of
is inspiration – and pure love. We have tried to present
the best, the clearest, the strongest possible introduction to
this magazine, the words are edited. Sentences are some-
times reconstructed. Phrases are moved. Tenses are regu-
Sahaja Yoga and, in that, an explanation of the meaning of
larized. We jump at times, without indication, from one
life as well – entirely using Her words to us.
We hope that you will find here the beginning of a book
talk to another. But the important words have not been
changed. The message remains.
that offers the essense of Her teachings and is also true to
Shri Mataji once said that verbal language is different
Her voice.
than the written. What is understood clearly in person, can
It is an introduction to Sahaja Yoga for those who are
looking for truth. It is an introduction to Shri Mataji for
be ambiguous when transcribed.
This book is the result of a project approved by Shri
those who never met Her.
It is both a welcome and an invitation.
Mataji in 2003. The methods used in its creation received
Her approval and blessing.
It is an invitation to journey within.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-2.txt 
 IN
Everyone has to search for the truth within.
There is no other way.
I BOW TO ALL THE SEEKERS OF TRUTH.
There are in these modern times, many seekers of truth. They are a special cat-
egory of people. Perhaps we are not aware that in every country a lot of people are
born with this seeking. They are a special category who see beyond, trying to find
something beyond what they can perceive through their senses.
The truth is found through our sense organs.
For example, if we see something as white, we call it white. If we feel it as cold,
we call it cold. If it is hot, we call it hot. This means whatever we perceive through
our sense organs and whatever is communicated to us through our central nervous
system, we accept as the truth. We should accept only that which we feel to be the
truth and not something that is told to us, not something that we have read in books,
not something that we can project from our mind.
There is no denial of any of the scriptures.
There is no denial of anything that we have known so far in this world, but to
begin with, let us start from scratch, as they say, from a clean slate.
Let us see in this book what is the truth –
the truth of your experience.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-3.txt 
 JOURNEYWITHIN
CHAPTER ONE
TO FIND THE WAY
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-4.txt 
 MY FATHER FELT THAT I WOULD DO SOMETHING GREAT IN THIS LIFE.
I don't know if he dreamed it or simply understood it, but all the time he used to
say, “You have to find out the way of giving en masse Realization." By Realization,
יי
he was meaning the need for a deep, spiritual awakening in people.
gave me a good education in different religions and also a good education
about human beings: what are their problems, why do they act the way they do, why
don't they take to God, why are they hypocritical. All kinds of things he told me.
Не
I knew all about it from my very childhood. I was a very aware person, but I did
not know who to talk to because people did not have the same awareness then. You
could not talk to anyone just like that.
My mother was a very strict lady. She taught me so many things. Indeed all of
my sisters and I are expert cooks and in each of our lives we are doing very well.
We do not trouble anyone. All these things have come from our mother, who was
a strict lady and she would not tolerate any nonsense. She would never tell a lie. If
told her, “When this gentleman comes, you tell him that I am not in the house,’
you
she would say, "Don't tell me to tell lies. I'll tell him that you told me to tell the lie."
That is how she was and that is how she treated us. We lived with that, but we did
not mind it because what she did was for our good. We knew that she was doing it
for our good.
Even President Roosevelt once said that an Indian woman is like a magnolia in a
forest. Even one flower in the forest may be hidden. You cannot see it, but you can
smell it. The whole forest is fragrant. You cannot see it anywhere. The fragrance is
only in one flower, but yet you know this magnolia very well. It has the greatest qual-
ity, that of love. Love is the most attractive thing in this world.
My parents were great people, realized souls. My father was a person who knew
why I was on this Earth. Even my mother knew about it. When I was small, I used
father that it was my desire that, like the stars in the sky, many people on
to tell
my
Earth should also shine and spread the light of God.
So there was a special rapport between us and they could understand why I was
busy meditating or finding out about how to give Realization to others.
I was regarded as a very joyful person, at the same time very serious and deep.
When I started my studies as a child, I was not very much interested, although I did
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-5.txt 
 them, but also I used to read about the lives of great people. At a very young age,
I
did not have any particular interest in reading textbooks.
When I was about seven years of age, I happened to go with my father to see
Mahatma Gandhi. He was about seventy miles from us. The first time he met me,
he
much. He said, “Leave this child here.
liked me very
"
I was a little girl, but he understood that there was something about me. Surpris-
ingly, he consulted me on very serious problems.
One day he wanted to make a prayer book, so he asked me, “How should I put
CC
this series of prayers?"
I told him to do it according to the different centres within us. I said, “You do
this one, then this one." He said, "All right, it's a good idea." He changed the order.
It was so smoothly and silently done that it was not made obvious to anyone that
we had our rapport on these things. He never asked me about the spirit, nor did he
ever meditate.
Every year after that I would go back and visit Gandhiji. It was a time of emer-
gency in India and in a small way I contributed.
Gandhiji loved me very much. He used to call me Nepali because I have a broad
face. Everybody used to call me Nepali at that time.
Gandhi was a man born for an emergency, at a time when India wanted to be
politically independent. A political leader need not worry about spirit and religion,
but he considered our country to be a land of yoga. He always based his theories,
philosophies and activities on the fibre of the people. We are a very religious people
and he sought to create an atmosphere of satisfaction.
He used to talk to me as if he was talking to his grandmother. He was a very
sweet man, especially with children and he would try to learn from them. It was
surprising how he understood that children often have more wisdom than do older
people.
Although he was a very kind person to children, he was an extremely strict man,
with himself and with others. He was a big disciplinarian. He would make everyone
get up at four o’clock in the morning, take their baths, with everything ready for
morning prayers at five o'clock. He used to walk very fast and I also learned fast
walking with him.
Gandhi was an extremely loving, nice person and he would listen to me because
I was a child. Supposing I had forced him to eat more, he would have laughed and
accepted it.
I would make some orange juice for him and he would discuss small things with
me. I remember once I told him, “Why do you make everyone get up so early? If you
CC
want to get up, you can, but why do you make everyone else? It's all right for me,
but why do you have to make everyone else?"
TO FINDTHE WAY
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-6.txt 
 He said, "Everyone should be made to get up early, we are passing through a cri-
sis, we have to fight the British and attain our independence. If people are lethargic,
how are we going to succeed? We have to be disciplined."
He said, “You are a little girl. You get up in the morning, why can't they get up?"
I said, "I am little, that's why I get up. They are big, so they can't get up."
Mine was a very free expression of a personality. People accepted it. I was very
loving, compassionate and generous. I was a unique person as a child.
Then I told him that we also needed to have inner discipline and so he knew that
I was a wise person and he used to love me and respect me in a very fatherly manner.
He would discuss things with me and he impressed me. He had a sense of integrity,
was absolutely honest with himself – something I appreciated. He never cheated
himself. This was the greatest thing about him. In all matters, including money, he
was so integrated. What he said, he did.
He criticized himself, but Gandhi did not talk of spiritual Self-Realization. For
him, Realization was not the problem at that time. After independence, we should
have taken to Realization. We had the problems of the partition of India and Paki-
stan and everyone's attention was diverted to this problem and nobody thought of
Realization at that time.
Gandhi was a great soul, no doubt. He was an extremely great human being, but
true Realization is very different. It is another realm altogether. His meditation was
to ponder things and to guide himself, but not the kind of meditation of thoughtless
awareness. That is a different dimension of awareness.
Gandhi's main contribution was to establish balance in people and to make them
more Indian, removing the slavish mentality that had trickled down into us.
My family was a part and parcel of the freedom struggle, my parents were a part
and parcel of it as well. My father burnt all his suits because they were stitched in
England, my mother burnt all her saris. They would spin their own clothes and wear
them. My father sacrificed everything – every paise (less than a penny) that he had –
for the freedom struggle.
So much was snatched away by the English. We had lived in beautiful houses
and then we shifted to huts. The sacrifices were to the maximum and we were very
happy about it and very proud. We had only two changes of clothes. We washed our
clothes and lived like very poor people, sleeping on thin, rough floor mats. I remem-
ber I never had a pillow. I never used shoes for years. I had only one sweater. I had
only one coat throughout my college years. When I was in Lahore, which is terribly
cold – sometimes it can be like London – that coat was worn out and finished.
We never grudged and never grumbled and we never said that our father should
have looked after us or done something different. Even today, when people from that
JOURNEYWITHIN
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-7.txt 
 time see us, they know we are children of such a great man. They have tremendous
for us because of him. My parents dedicated their lives to the cause of the
respect
freedom of India and I also felt it was very important because if we are not free we
cannot do anything on a religious basis.
Because of the resistance to the British occupation of India, my father went to
jail twice, once for about two and a half years. He was the only supporting member
of the family, so we had to leave our house and live in huts and we had all kinds of
problems and hardships.
When I was eighteen years old, I remember one day some people came and told
us, “Your father is being transferred from one jail to another."
כ
My mother was worried because I was a young girl. The police used to torture
me, they used to give me shocks and make my life very miserable. My mother was
crying and she told an old gentleman, "I'm worried about my daughter. I don't want
CC
her to be tortured any more." This man told me to stop and he said that what I was
doing in fighting the English wasn’t proper.
My father took me aside. He said, "Don't listen to this old johnny. Forget him. I
would like all my children to be sacrificed on the altar of freedom. If you are doing
it, I am a proud father and I'll tell your mother to behave herself. I am so proud of
you." The police were after my life.
Such were the times I lived through. I had to give up my college, having abscond-
ed for eight months. I know what the Indian people have gone through.
The British were also after me because I helped many people. I had joined the
independence movement and, in a very serious way, I became a leader among the
young people.
I thought unless and until I take a positive stand, it may not work out for India.
In the end, all these problems work out with divine power, not with human pow
ers. Divine power is there and it works things out in such a smooth manner that
there is no need to use human powers.
It is not gracious to say in detail how the British tortured me, what they did to
me, but they did really torture me. I was a young girl. It is over now, so it is finished.
My parents neglected us in a way because they gave their lives to the country, but
that never deterred us from schoolwork and we came up very well. After studying
science for two years at college, I went into medical school. I was studying in Lahore
Medical College because I wanted to know about medicine. I knew about the com-
plete nervous system, but I did not know the vocabulary attached to it, so I studied
there for two years.
I did not complete my studies because just at that time the 1947 riots broke out
and the college was closed, but I felt I had learned what I needed, so I did not need
to return and I soon married.
TO FINDTHE WAY
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-8.txt 
 During all that time, my pastime and my full-time work was to find out about
human beings. What are the problems they have? How do they avoid reality? How
do they shun it? How do they run away from it? How are they seeking? What do
they have to offer? What will they accept? How do you handle them? It was quite an
intricate set of questions. Every person provided new problems and I had to find it
out. In a way, it was a system which I knew because in order to enter into someone
subtly, to understand the problems of the Kundalini, you go into the journey and
find out about the person.
In this way, I found out the permutations and combinations of their problems. It
is like the Periodic Table of Elements. One has to divide them into three, then into
seven, then into their permutations and combinations. So one can imagine – three
into seven, raised to power of eternity – it was like that. But it doesn't matter. I knew
it would work out.
That is how my life continued. All the time, my inner being was still seeking for
the
and methods of giving en masse Realization.
ways
My father said, "Before you develop this technique, do not talk about religion.
Let no one know that you know anything about it because they will not understand.
First of all, you must give them Realization. If they get their Realization, then they
will know that there is something about it in this human awareness." My father
always used to give an analogy, "Supposing we are born on the tenth storey and
everyone else is on the ground. You must at least make them climb two storeys so
that they will know that there is something above. Otherwise there is no use talking
about it. They have to enter into the medium," my father said. "So that is what you
have to be – very careful that first of all you must give Realization to them."
I was seeking a way of doing this, working it out inside myself through my own
style of meditation. I was working out all the permutations and combinations. When
I met a person, I would see what problems that person had, how they could over-
come them. In that way, I would try to study that person internally.
Somehow or other, I knew I must open the seventh chakra.
I knew I wanted to do something, that is how I saw it. I wanted to find a proper
time when I could discover a method by which an en masse happening could take
place and everyone could achieve it.
In May of 1970, I was sitting near the sea. I decided there and then that it should
happen and so it worked out that the last centre was opened.
saw the Kundalini, which is the primordial force within us, the Holy Ghost
within us, rising like a telescope opening out and then I saw the whole thing open
and a torrential rain of beams started flowing through my head and everywhere.
JOURNEYWITHIN
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-9.txt 
 I felt that I was lost, I was no more. Only the grace was there. I saw it completely
happening to me. In 1970, on the 5th of May, this happened.
If it is a job, you can do it. But God's work is not just a job. The struggle began
from the day I started giving Realization. I began with one lady, then twelve people
achieved Realization.
Over the first two years, only about fourteen people received their Self-Realiza-
tion, then gradually many others followed and it became known as Sahaja Yoga.
We have to understand that life should be enjoyable. Life should be a blessing. It
should not be a misery. We create our own miseries by our false ideas, by our own
conflicts. We have in our mind mental projections. It comes from our mind or from
our obstinacy.
All these things can be cured if you take to Sahaja Yoga because you become a
balanced person, a level-headed, mild person and you become a witness. The whole
thing becomes like a show, like a drama and you become fearless. This is what a hu-
man being has to achieve.
We talk of peace, we talk of the end of war, but all that is not going to work
out. The only thing that is going to work out is the transformation of human beings
because if human beings are transformed, things will work out perfectly. Not only
that, but people will also enjoy the bliss of life. Human beings must ask themselves
one thing: “What have I achieved out of all this?"
Just for a minute stop and think about this.
I was born in India and in a Christian family. If you are an enlightened person,
you see the essence of everything. No matter into what religion you are born, you
should not ignore any other religion. You should try to learn about other religions
and you find that the essence is the same in every religion.
What is there to fight about? By fighting, you belong to no religion, while in
truth, you belong to every religion.
My life, on the whole, has been very collective. I am by nature extremely collec-
tive and I expressed this temperament from my very childhood.
I was very friendly with all the people from the area in which we lived and my
mother was known as Nirmala's mother, father was known as Nirmala's father.
They said, "We have lost our identity because of our daughter."
I never felt lonely. When I am with myself, I am never lonely at all. I enjoy myself
very much.
When I came to London in 1974 because of my husband's work, I had one Sahaja
Yoga program. There were seven hippies who remained after that and so I had to
TO FINDTHE WAY
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-10.txt 
 work with them. For four years I was working with them to give them Realization.
They were difficult.
At that time, I also used to visit India. In India too the work was done. We began
working in the villages first, where we started moving in a very big way.
Gradually people found that this was the way they could transform themselves.
mad. They
Many people were taking drugs or were alcoholics or were in some way
soon felt better and were cured.
Slowly, it was established that this Sahaja Yoga was something very important.
You enjoy because you seek the comfort of your spirit. That gives you joy. You
think you get joy by acquisition, but you do not. Through Kundalini awakening you
get that joy and, in that joy, you do not want anything. You do not ask for anything.
You just enjoy yourself. You are the property of enjoyment. In Sanskrit they say,
"The spirit is satisfied by its own spirit.
JOURNEYWITHIN
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-11.txt 
 JOURNEYWITHIN
CHAPTER TWO
TO SEEK
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-12.txt 
 THERE HAS BEEN, FROM AGES PAST, A SEEKING FOR THE TRUTH.
When people discovered that there was no other way to find the truth, but to
surrender to the Divine, they did not know how to do it.
There have been seekers all over the world, but darkness existed around those
people.
I found, when I was a little girl that there was complete ignorance about how
to find the truth. So many were lost in all kinds of so-called religions and rituals.
Morning until evening, some sort of a ritual they were doing. Whether they were
Hindus, Christians or Muslims, they all believed that by doing all these rituals, they
would achieve something, that they would know the truth and get Self-Realization.
All such seekers went to wrong people and in wrong directions, but they were really
seeking from their heart. As a result, they were misled into such horrible black areas
that they did not know what they were seeking and what they were supposed to see
and what they had to have.
It has been prophesied that when the Kali Yuga, this present age of confusion,
will come, people will find themselves. Then all those people seeking the truth in the
jungles, in the hills and dales, in the Himalayas will become ordinary household-
ers. They will be householders. They will not be sanyasis going about. They will be
householders and they will find the truth.
Every religion has said one thing: “You must know yourself." Islam says it. Bud-
dha said the same. Christians say the same. Hindus say the same. But still people go
on doing all kinds of acrobatics, realizing, "We haven't found the truth."
So it came to me. In my childhood I knew I had to do it, but when I saw the hu-
man beings, how much in darkness they were about themselves, how aggressive and
how sinful they were, how their style was so cruel, it was unbelievable. That was the
time I saw Hitler coming up and our country of India also was in complete bondage.
The first thing was to make our country free. It was very important and that is
why I took a very active role in the movement for the freedom of our nation.
My father and mother did the same. But when we got the freedom, somehow, af-
ter some time, we got lost. People started taking to all kinds of modern things, which
were wrong, which were so-called entertainment.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-13.txt 
 With that, I found that all over the world there was a big seeking force and some
false people took full advantage of it. They went out, made lots of money and, with
their falsehood, they cursed those who were seeking. I do not know what they did to
them. So many seekers were lost in that way.
Despite that, I went to America and I was shocked how things were going on
there, but I could not help because they were so mentally ill-equipped. They could
not understand what they had to have. They did not know that you cannot pay
for
the truth.
Once I met a lady and she told me that she was seeking God. I said, “What do
you think of God? What are you seeking?"
כל
When we say we are seeking, do we know what we are supposed to seek and
do we understand how we are going to feel when our seeking is complete and we
have reached the destination? Everyone has to search for the truth within. There is
way. Without searching for the truth that lies within, one goes on treading
no other
the path of untruth. When you are established in truth, no rules and regulations are
required. Then all your deeds become divine. Therefore, everyone should seek the
truth and this is the time when you can get it.
Let us see now how the seeking comes to be within us and from uwhere it comes.
SEEKING FOOD AND PRESERVATION
Seeking is only possible when something is living. For example, what is the seeking
of a chair? It cannot think. It cannot move. You can put it in the kitchen or you can
put it on the street. You can smash it and throw it away. You can again use that
kind.
wood for some other purpose or make a stool out of it. It has no seeking of any
Only when a thing becomes a living being does it start manifesting its seeking. A
living thing is supposed to seek. It is not dead. So those who say "we are not seek-
ing" are as good as dead. But those who say "we are seeking" are living beings – and
they are living and also kicking.
This desire to seek was created within a little animal, called as the amoeba, by
giving him hunger. Just think of it. It has no brain. It has just a small nucleus, but it
can feel it is hungry. It has to eat something to grow. It also knows it has to repro-
duce. Then it starts seeking. It also knows how to take the food in, but it does not
know how it digests. That part is not his job. Even for us, it is just the same.
So the seeking starts in the little amoeba and the whole evolution is based on that
seeking, gradually improving and improving the ways and means of seeking, while
still the desire is only for food.
There is also another desire or emotion in the amoeba. It is the sense of
preserva-
tion. It knows the dangers that can finish its existence.
TOSEEK
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-14.txt 
 When this amoeba becomes a human being in thousands and thousands of years,
then the seeking is changed. In the beginning, it starts with the seeking of food. That
is the basis. You must have food to begin with. Of course, the methods are improved,
changed, evolved for the seeking of food, but there is also a great understanding of
how to preserve yourself and your clan. Clubbing starts from a very early age. Even
ants understand that.
Ants understand that they all have to club together, unite together, integrate if
they are to protect themselves. This seeking of wholesomeness also develops gradu-
ally in human beings and the expression of that is all our efforts to preserve ourselves
and to be clubbed together. These efforts are expressed in our political and in our
economic enterprises.
Once as a child, I read a story about some birds. A net was cast and so many
doves were caught in the net. They discovered they had been misled and misguided.
They had been lured into the net by some grain. So to get out of the net was im-
possible for them. It was an impossibility. If one tried to get out, they all got more
entangled. So what to do? They all said, "Why don't we all fly out with the net itself
and then with our beaks we'll cut this net and we'll be freed? But first we must get
out from here. We will put our energy together, all of us and fly out." That's what
they did. They spread their wings, all of them working together and they took off.
Off they went and they were freed.
Today that same kind of a trick is needed. One person cannot work it out. It is
impossible. One has to become a whole group to lift the society up higher, so that we
can really get rid of the shackles of our bondage.
SEEKING POWER AND MONEY
It is in the human being that a new seeking starts. It is the seeking to have power
over others. Animals do not seek power. They have it. For example, a tiger is much
more powerful than a poor rabbit. He is born like that. A rabbit does not want to
become a tiger. He does not try like every Dick, Tom and Harry to become a prime
minister. A rabbit would not try to be a tiger. He understands, "I am a rabbit and
I must develop my means of defences and my means of offences by which I exist."
In the same way, the tiger acts. He is aware of his powers and also he is aware of
his limitations. Some animals also have a power of leadership in them. They become
leaders. You must have seen some birds. They have a leader and whenever that lead-
er changes the direction, all of them follow, as if they are like the tail of that leader.
In the same way the leader goes, all of them follow.
This also is expressed in human beings in a very big way. There are some born
leaders who lead a group of people to a destination in which they fulfill the seeking
of that group.
JOURNEYWITHIN
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Now the seeking of the groups could be for money or status. Money, animals do
not understand. This is a creation of human beings only. For them, money becomes
very important because it is their own creation. We had barter systems, but then we
thought it would be better to have some sort of a medium which would convert one
item into another, so we started money.
The focus of man's attention from food goes to power and from power it goes to
money. Sometimes if somebody has a lot of money, then he wants to have power as
well. It is natural. There is nothing wrong with it, as such. Fundamentally, it is natu-
ral for human beings to run after money and then to run after power or vice versa.
Many spiritual seekers have given up everything for the sake of their seeking.
They have seen that the value of these material things will not take them anywhere.
They have seen beyond. Their value system is different. But even if the value
system
of such people is different, they still can be exploited.
This is not a world for you to seek money. You have come on this Earth to seek
God, to seek your spirit, to be one with your Self, to be in that peaceful place which
is the kingdom of God, which is the kingdom of heaven and not to jump into an il-
lusion or maya, which looks very beautiful, but is not. It is agonizing. It is terrifying.
People cannot sleep if they have too much money because they do not know what
to do with it. The accumulation of all these nonsensical things causes us all tension
within.
If you have comfort, it makes you a slave. If you seek comfort, you are in for
enslavement.
You are seeking beyond money. You know that money is not going to give you
joy. You know that very well. But those who have not yet known that, still they are
climbing up the cusp. They have not seen the ditch below. Such people try to come
up and try to give you some sort of a jargon and get a lot of money from you. It is a
very shameful affair.
SEEKING MEANING AND TRUTH
Beyond the search for money starts another seeking. It is the seeking to know why
we are here. What are we doing here? What is the purpose of our life? Why has
God created us? To what purpose? To what end? Or is it all just a joke? Are we just
foolishly being born, getting married, having children and dying like the amoeba?
Have we any other purpose? Many human beings do not go beyond the knowledge
of money or health.
Animals do not take any exercise, but human beings want good health. They
can go to any extent to preserve their health, but for what? You may be a wrestler,
but for what purpose? Just to fight each other? You might be the healthiest person
TOSEEK
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-16.txt 
 living on this Earth, but for what? It is just a waste. What is your use? You may be
the wealthiest man going in the best cars with all the so-called luxuries of life and
material well-being, but for what?
When such a question comes into your mind, a new kind of seeking starts, which
asks the question "Why are you here?" Are you here just to run in this rat race,
morning to evening earning money and earning power and doing all useless activi-
ties, pleasing others, to show off your money or extract some money from others? Is
that the aim of your life?
Now this is the beginning of the fourth inquiry or the fourth dimension in your
awareness. This inquiry is the flowering of the same rudimentary thing called as hun-
ger – the hunger for spirituality, the hunger for God, the hunger for higher things of
life. It starts within us. That is the genuine happening.
CONFUSION FEEDS SEEKING
In this seeking you get confused because, by the time this seeking starts in you, you
are already famished and finished because you are already conditioned by all kinds
of nonsensical things.
Groping in darkness, the seeker gets more confused and searches intensely. That
is what is happening to so many right now.
These times are known to be full of confusion. Only in confusion do we seek
the truth. Unless and until there is confusion, there cannot be that seeking. And this
confusion has reached such a stage.
This age is very difficult, no doubt, but in difficulties only do we become intense
seekers and that is what happened. People are following whatever they are follow-
ing without discretion. They are not reaching any point of discovery. Like being in a
cocoon, they are hitting their heads here and there.
See the world today. It is full of strife. People are fighting for nothing at all. For
land, they are killing human beings. Can land create human beings? They are fighting
in a very collective manner, thinking they are doing a very great service to humanity.
Today the thinking of human beings is not at all deep. It is very superficial and
that is how you find this world full of turmoil. Every day, every minute you can find
they are killing so many human beings. They are torturing on a very large scale.
tortured by all kinds of
In the past, of course, the saints were also tortured –
different, stupid ideas of something being higher and something being lower, some-
thing being good, something being bad. Under such ideas, their enemies combined
together and worked out all kinds of aggression all over the world, as well as in the
families, in the institutions, in the organizations. Thinking that they were very right,
that they were very good, they tried to aggress others.
JOURNEYWITHIN
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-17.txt 
 So many people thought, "It's better to fight back," and they started fighting it
out collectively. That does not work out. This fighting does not work out because
יכ
fighting begets nothing but murders and killing. In this way, many people were killed.
Buddha talked to people of non-resistance and there is a history to it. In one of the
great universities in Bihar, India, when the aggressive people came in, they killed all
the saints in the name of aggression. They all died. Maybe that might have achieved,
on a very subtle level, some sort of punyas or spiritual merits, but in this age known
as Kali Yuga, it is not going to work out.
What is the resistance you can put up against such people? How can you fight
them? It is an impossible situation to convince anybody that they are aggressive and
they are nowhere near the truth because nobody wants to accept such a thing. So
whatever they are trying, all over the world, to convince others of their follies, is
completely failing. And thus, this struggle, this war mongering cannot be cured.
We have to accept that human beings are not at that level to understand what is
with them. They do not want to accept it. To them, aggression is the only way
wrong
they can propound their own goodness.
Why is there such a need for people to become so restless, full of tensions? Any-
where you go, you find confusion. It is terrible. The whole society seems to be boil-
ing with a kind of a fear of destruction.
What is the reason? There are so many religions – organized and disorganized.
There are so many sadhus and saints. There are so many books written about what
you should become. But one who is a seeker of truth should see one point. Why are
there so many problems in this world and how can you help to solve them? Where
is the problem? The problem is inside the human beings.
We have come out of the animal stage to the human stage. We have a human
awareness, no doubt. In that awareness, we start seeing all kinds of things that are
not good, which are destructive, which are disturbing. If it does not disturb you, it
means you are not at all a sensitive person. But you are sensitive as a human being.
If
you just turn on the television set, you will know that there are many pictures
around, but there has to be a television set to catch them. That catching has to be
done by our awareness, but the human awareness, as it is, is not subtle enough to
catch the divine power.
There are many people in this world who are seeking the truth because they can-
not bear the nonsense of the modern world and those people are very sensitive.
So what is the solution? The solution is that they should find the truth. They
should get their Self-Realization and only then will things improve.
If they are seeking the truth, they will be surprised that this world is one, all hu-
man beings are one and that oneness is the destiny of human beings.
TOSEEK
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-18.txt 
 You may be calling yourself British or an Indian or an Australian or all sorts
of things people call themselves, but, in the eyes of God, you are just a human be-
ing. You are only that. You do not have a tail and do not have your head bent
you
down. You have your head upright. Whether you are in Africa or India or England
or America, it is just the same. As long as your head is up like that and you do not
have a tail, you are definitely a human being. And if a human being has evolved
through various experiences of life and realizes that none of those experiences have
really given him fulfillment nor the answer to his question "why are we here?" then
CC
the turning point takes place in his life. He becomes a seeker. It does not happen
before that.
Those who go to a guru and say, "Will you please give a job to my son?" – it
>כ
should be said to such a person, "My child, you are not yet fit. You are not yet ma-
ככ
ture enough to come here and ask."
If
you go to someone to ask for a diamond ring or anyone says, "I give diamond
rings in the name of God," and you are quite satisfied with such a statement, you are
no good as a seeker.
If somebody says, "I will cure" –
all right, a person may cure you, but you are
no good as a seeker.
Why should God cure anyone who is not seeking God? I mean why should I re-
pair a microphone if it is not going to carry my voice?
You have to be genuine. You have to be wise to understand that you are seeking
your fulfillment. You are not seeking money and diamond rings and all these tom-
fooleries that are going on.
Do not deceive yourself. Please try to understand. Self-deception will never be
forgiven by God. The amoeba, does it deceive itself if it sees food? It understands
what it is seeing. But human beings deceive themselves morning until evening.
Understand this: You are going to witness the magic of God.
Is this the destiny of human beings, to be destroyed by each other for land or for
anything else?
Think of the whole world as one, think what is happening all over. Every day
read the newspaper. Every day there is some sort of horrible news about horrible
you
things people are doing to each other for no rhyme or reason.
We have to think, "What is the destiny? Where are we going? What is our situa-
tion? Can we improve it?"
JOURNEYWITHIN
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-19.txt 
 JOURNEYWITHIN
CHAPTER THREE
TO SEEK AND NOT TO SEEK
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-20.txt 
 WE HAVE TWO CATEGORIES OF PEOPLE – the ones who are not seeking at all
and the ones who want to find solutions to the problems.
In
every generation we have people who advocate revolution because they do not
like a particular system or do not like a particular style of life. But now the revolu-
tion has to come from within. We have to evolve from within because the destruction
is also coming from within. We are destroying ourselves more from within than from
without. Because we are so unhappy, so absolutely confused, quite a percentage of
people are schizophrenic. We start seeking the solution and, in that seeking, we make
mistakes. We make mistakes because we do not know what to seek and how to find.
We do not know how to evolve to that state. Logically, we have to reach some con-
clusions, to conclude that it has to be some evolutionary happening. This is logical.
To transform ourselves, there has to be some evolution.
You must have noticed that there are really very few true seekers in this world.
Seekers also must realize that they cannot be happy with anything else but their
spirit. This is the test of a seeker. And a non-seeker can never understand a seeker. It
is very difficult to live with a man or woman who is not a seeker.
If they are not seekers, then they will never be so and you cannot inject seeking
into them. They may become materially well off, but they can never become seek-
ers. This kind of person is very difficult to change, but they will realize one thing,
lead a much better life than they do. You are much more peaceful, blissful,
that
you
dharmic and sane, but still they will not accept your
life.
Even if they change mentally, they cannot have that urge because, to a seeker,
nothing is as important as seeking.
A DEVOTION TO SEEKING
In seeking, the person should have a great devotion. There are untold miseries you
have to go through. Seeking is when, within yourself, you are struggling and outside
you find nothing satisfactory. This is how the seeking has a double edge. In that seek-
ing, when you are trying to get to the truth, it seems it is a very difficult thing, but
you cannot help it because you are not satisfied with what exists around
you.
Nonetheless, you are definitely seeking. Perhaps you do not know what you are
seeking, but one thing is definite – you are not satisfied with whatever you are. You
think there is something beyond, which you have to seek. There is something be-
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-21.txt 
 yond, no doubt, which has been told to you by all the prophets, by all the scriptures,
by all the great incarnations that came on this Earth. It has been promised also that
you will be judged one day. That judgment will first be your own, a judgment of
yourself, as to whether you are seeking the Divine or some sort of a frivolous thing.
We are born as seekers. We might have made mistakes in seeking, but we are
definitely seekers. If you were not a seeker, you would be happy now reading some
other book. But, no, there is something beyond, something beautiful beyond, which
is being promised, which you feel is there. You are aware of the existence of that
beauty. You are aware of it, but so far you have not reached the source. And that is
why you are seeking.
There has never before on this Earth been such an urge to seek. I do not know
if you understand that it is really a different category of people who are seekers and
they will go on seeking until they find the truth, but one has to know what to seek.
It is said you have to become. You have to be. No matter what language you under-
stand, God's language is of love and it is for everyone, for
every person, for every
case. It cannot be for one person or one type of people or for one category, but one
category is there and they are the seekers. A seeker is of a special category, but the
only trouble is they do not know what they are seeking.
As seekers, what are we expecting? This is a very, very precarious and important
time. The last judgment has started. That is how you are all here and you are seek-
ing. A transformation must take place. When that transmutation starts, all these
misidentifications drop away. You enjoy the best of health, the best of your heart.
The best of your mind and your emotions come out.
The best part of it is that this is what one has to achieve. The whole humanity has
to achieve it, but the few who are the seekers have to do it first. They are the founda-
tion. In every evolutionary stage, only a few fish come out, then many others follow.
TRUE SEEKING
Why is it some are seekers and some are not? One may say that if God has created
all the human beings, all of them should have seeking. It is because in their own
freedom they have lost their way. They are seeking something else and they think
they are right. They have that right to think that they are right. Even a stupid fellow,
even a mad person thinks he is right. If you tell him that “You are mad," he will say,
“You are mad." This seeking, though it is put into them, they are not yet capable of
expressing it.
Yet so many are achieving it in the proper way because, for that, one has to sur-
render. It is not a surrender of one's freedom, nor one's intelligence. It is a surrender
of the ego that has developed in human beings.
TO SEEK ANDNOT TO SEEK
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-22.txt 
 If the seeking is ardent and the people are really seeking the truth, they will find
it. They will find it, no doubt, because the whole creation is for them. The whole
universe is for them. All the deities are for them. All the angels are for them. They
are all looking out for those seekers.
We have to seek God. We have to seek our fulfillment. We have to relate to that
wholesomeness that is God, the Primordial Being, the whole of it. This is what we
have to seek. You are created for that.
You wanted to seek God. You have not come down this path for money. You are
not reading this book for anything else but God. Your seeking is for God. You want
to know the truth about God and you want to have God. You do not want to put
your ideas onto this, but you want to see how to receive the blessings of God.
You should allow this to work out. Allow the light to come in and do not get
confused. Do not get upset. You are here to seek God and not to just sit on what you
have found so far.
A NATURAL PROCESS
In our searching, we are asking for the actual experience. In all the scriptures, it has
been said that we will be born again. We are looking for a second birth, which is
within us. All the religions talk about it. We have to stabilize ourselves to get
the
experience and it will work out.
No effort is required. We breathe, our heart works without our doing anything,
therefore everything has to come spontaneously, like the sprouting of a seed. Yet we
have not got our fulfillment. People are seeking and it is the awareness that is respon-
sible for the seeking. For this, we have to keep our rationality clear.
If you are seeking reality, if you are seeking the truth, you have to be very honest
about it, extremely honest. You have to know that unless and until you find it, you
should not believe anyone. You should not accept anything superficial. People may
say anything. I may
tell
you that you have to have your Realization. That does not
have to believe me. It does not mean that at all.
mean that
you
But you should also not deny what I say.
It is a living process. It is a growing process, which works it out, but with human
beings there is a very big problem. They always identify with imperfections, with
ideas. Only in human beings do these things happen. That is why one has to
wrong
be careful.
But there is a way. God has already placed that within you. For your growth, he is
testing your genuineness, but if you are so obstinate as to stick onto some misidenti-
fied or nonsensical thing, you cannot work it out. Be free from all these things. Open
JOURNEYWITHIN
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-23.txt 
 yourself. You all have to be aware of the whole. You all have to get Self-Realization.
By that, God will feel the fulfillment of his creation. And he has to do it. He will do
it. But he will have to work very hard.
THE TRUE INTEGRATION: THE WHOLESOMENESS
If you
do not accept the truth, then the truth will still be expressed, no doubt. But for
that to happen, the untruth has to be destroyed. So take heed to your wisdom and
know what you have to seek.
You have to seek your wholesomeness, which we have only partially expressed
in our political and our economical and social clubs. All this has to be integrated.
All the great religions have substantially helped in our growth. They also have to
be integrated in this happening.
Just come in the kingdom of God and you will see that all the founders of the
great religions are all seated there on the dais. They are all together and you, like
fools, are fighting. This is one of the greatest hurdles to be faced by seekers.
seeking, first of all your misidentifications must drop out.
In
your
Those who are genuine seekers must open their minds.
God loves
Know that
with all his heart, with all his soul, whether
your
you
you
love him or not. He has placed this seeking within you. He has placed this instru-
ment within you. He has placed all the things so beautifully that spontaneously Self-
Realization works in no time.
There are certain things which are very important for Self-Realization. The whole
attitude should be one of understanding that it is a gift for you. And there should be
no obstinacy about taking that gift.
SEEKING THE LIGHT, NOT THE CHAIR
If there is a light, you do not falter. You walk straight. Because there was no light,
there was a problem. As soon as there is a light, everything becomes all right and
you
start understanding the whole. You know how the whole thing is and you start walk-
ing straight and you know where to sit and what is the chair and what is the person.
If total vision is what you are seeking, then you are a seeker and you are a true
seeker and you are blessed. You get your own powers and you understand yourself.
You get your Self-knowledge. You understand the whole.
Why should God not have a sense of giving, as you have? He loves you, no
doubt. He wants to give to you because he loves you. If you are wayward and if you
are prodigal by nature, why should he continue to give to you? It is a simple question
you should ask yourself.
Ask for Realization. You will get it.
TO SEEK ANDNOT TO SEEK
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-24.txt 
 I would request you to try to tell your mind that you have done all kinds of
things. You have been to all sorts of gurus. You have received all sorts of nonsensi-
cal books and you have had all kinds of doubts. Now settle down for a while. Settle
down. Tell your mind not to mislead you. You will get it.
This is your own. It is your own property. This is your own right to be here. So
get it.
If any doubts are coming, tell them to wait.
A THIRST FOR THE WHOLE AND THE WHOLESOMENESS
The creation has reached its maximum growth now. The growth is expressed in hu-
man beings. Those human beings are the actors on the stage. The whole nature is
working out this new happening. Now only one thing has to happen to you. It is
that you have to get connected with the Divine, you have to get connected with the
whole, you have to know your own meaning and you have to know your purpose.
If this can happen to you, then you are in the new world. You are made for this.
You are a human being with a purpose. We must think. All the scientists must ask,
once at least, this question, “Why? Why are we made as human beings? From the
animal stage, why have we come to this stage? What is the reason?"
This question is working in the unconscious of every seeker today. That is why
we have so many seekers all over the world, but those seekers are just trying to find
out why they are here.
I do not blame anyone and I do not feel bad because, after all, you are seekers.
You know you are seekers. You must have something to quench your thirst and,
with that thirst, until it is quenched, you are not going to be happy.
What is that thirst? It is this: you have still not known yourself. It is a very un-
conscious thirst. It comes. You do not know what you are seeking. You do not know
why you are unhappy. You do not know what you want, but the unconscious is
working it out.
your glory,
what is your greatness, what are your powers. They are all built within you. Through
The time has come that you should know what you are and what is
all these days, when you grew up in your evolutionary process, all these things were
built within
you.
At this time now when we are here, we do not realize how precarious it is, how
vital. The most important time for which we have been waiting, the most important
moment in the life of creation is today – when people are seeking.
JOURNEYWITHIN
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-25.txt 
 SEEKERS OF OLD
You are to love yourself and you have to adore your seeking and you have to get
your fulfillment. This is a very serious matter. There is no guru-shopping going on
here. You have to get your Realization. It is so fortunate that the time has come
when
you are living and that you can have it. Because of that, you took your birth
during this time.
You are seekers since very ancient times.
Only in Kali Yuga, the sun of Sat Yuga, the World of Truth, is the age of enlight-
enment going to come. Those saints, who were seeking the reality in the forests, are
born today in this world. You can see them. They are saintly. They can see the joke
of artificial life so clearly. They know it is absurd, but then they do not know what
is real. The time has come and it has to be worked out and it will be worked out.
You are seekers. You are saints. What has happened to your saintliness? Why are
you so flippant? Why so superficial? Why do you not touch it deeply? Why do
you
not understand your Self? Why do you not respect your
Self?
It is such a great thing you are asking for, which is the flowering of your seeking
from the amoeba stage to the human stage. For thousands of years you have been
seeking and today you are on the threshold.
You can now get your Self-Realization. No money is to be given or taken. As a
by-product, you get your health. Your material side is also improved. But the real
thing that happens to you is that you get Self-knowledge. You get Self-Realization.
There is light and that light is within you. You start seeing yourself and your centres
and the centres of others because you get connected with the whole.
This is what Sahaja Yoga has to offer to you.
w you.
I respect you and I love you very much because I know
I know you from ages.
You are the lost children.
TO SEEK ANDNOT TO SEEK
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-26.txt 
 You are born, not only to be human beings, but you have to be superhuman. You
have to enjoy yourself. Your life should be enjoyable. It should be blissful. It should
not be a curse, morning until evening worried about this, worried about that.
God had no intention of creating people who would be all the time worried,
quarrelling, fighting. He created people who will live in complete harmony, peace
and joy.
That is why we are created.
That is our destiny.
It is not just that I am telling you, but it is a fact.
JOURNEYWITHIN
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-27.txt 
 JOURNEYWWITHIN
CHAPTER FOUR
СНА
TO SEE THE TRUTH
317
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-28.txt 
 IN EVERY RELIGION TRUTH HAS BEEN DESCRIBED, but people do not see it
for themselves.
There is blindness. That is why there are these blind alleys where you
end
up
arguing about things. So there must be something that is missing within us because
we have not been able to relate truth to our central nervous system. That which is
missing within us we should find.
In all humility, we should know that there must be something within us. We have
been arguing about so many things, we have been talking about so many things,
reading so many books, going into all kinds of unusual experiences, from alcohol
to drugs, gurus and so on, but still we have not felt anything on our central nervous
system. We have not found the truth.
Additionally, we have no control over that truth. What is the reason for that? Is
it that there is something missing in human awareness? All the true scriptures have
said one thing: to know the truth, you are to be born again. It is not only in the Bible,
but in all true scriptures.
The very ancient book known as Patanjali's Yoga Sutra does not ask you only
to stand on your head. That is only a small part of it. What is written in the Patan-
jali Sutra is that you have to achieve the truth through your central nervous system
through your atmasakshatkar. Atmasakshatkar means the experience of your spirit.
This search for the atma or the spirit has also been described by Mohammed.
He said you are to become the pir. It has been described by Zoroaster, Lao-Tse and
in Zen. Buddha has said it. Mahavira has said it. Every one of them has said it. So
many religions have said that you have to be born again.
It is not a mental status that is important. It is the desire within you, the pure
desire to be one with God, to be one with the beyond. This pure desire exists. The
desire that you are used to is not everything. You get fed up. It is a drama and you
get bored. You try everything, but you are not happy about it. You see, it is the pure
desire to be one with your spirit that you want.
You may not be educated. You may be a street urchin. You could be living in a
remote place, but still the pure desire may be in you and that works it out. You are
not aware of the pure desire, but it is there and it works out.
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-29.txt 
 REALIZATION IS A LIVING PROCESS
Now being born again does not simply mean that you certify yourself, "I am born
again." Self-certification does not mean you become that which you say.
What is so special about being born again?
Why is the human awareness today so ready to be born again?
In Sanskrit, the word for a bird is dwijaha. It means "born again." It also means
"a brahmin who is born again." But those who today call themselves brahmins are
כ
not brahmins. They just call themselves brahmins. They are self-certified. Have they
come to know the Brahma, the all-pervading power of God?
Those who say they are born again should feel the all-pervading power of God
around them. If they cannot feel it, they are not born again. So all these self-certifi-
cates are a deception, a self-deception and a deception of others. It is just a money-
making process.
So the truth has to be achieved through your evolutionary process, which is a
living process. We must understand it is a living process. It is not achieved just by
talking, by mental projections or by taking some courses or giving some money.
You
cannot get it in that way. It is a living thing. This means the state of our awareness
has to become higher than what it is presently. It has to grow.
When you find God within yourself, then your priorities change. You do not
want to know what is beyond life because you come into the present. You are not
worried about the past and the future, but that also you come to know because
gradually your vision improves. The main thing that happens to you is that feeling,
that universality. You just start feeling in the sense that it becomes a part and parcel
of your awareness – just a part and parcel of your awareness. As a human being, you
have a special awareness for flowers, a special awareness for cleanliness. Animals do
not have that. In the same way, you go to the point where you just become aware of
that. You start feeling what is right and what is wrong.
In the way the seed becomes the roots, then the bark, the leaves, the flowers and
then the fruit, there are different states of growth. In the same way, a living religion
must give you a new state and that nucleus of religion is within each of us. Every one
of us has it. When we go against that living religion within, we go into imbalances.
But even today, people ask, "Why have religion? Why should we have a balance?
What is the need?" Is that a logical question? Is it good to desire imbalance?
THE TENTH VALENCE: THE DESIRE TO ASCEND
So what is religion? We come to that point.
All religions are just like flowers on one living tree. However, they have been
plucked by people who say, "This is mine." “This is mine." “This is mine." They
have made these flowers very ugly. Such flowers are decayed. The whole attention
TO SEEKTHE TRUTH
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-30.txt 
 should be on becoming the spirit. If it is not so, the rest of it is not God's work. God's
work is just to awaken your Kundalini, that living and real life-force within each of
us. It is a living work because he is a living God. His work is to transform a little
flower into a fruit, which you cannot do alone.
Just as carbon has four valences, human beings have ten valences. Animals have
nine valences and human beings have ten. We have ten because we have to ascend.
In the evolutionary process, you have to ascend and you can never be satisfied with
yourself unless and until you have achieved that ascent. That is especially true for
seekers of truth.
Real seekers are unhappy because they are of a different category. They will not
be satisfied with anything. They will try everything. They will try to get money to
get power. They will try this and that, but they will not be happy because they are a
different category.
Then they will seek God. They will again seek God. They will go
to wrong people and spend money here and there, do this and that. Everything they
will try and then they will find out. But still, they have not found out what they are.
That is why I say they are of a special category. These seekers will become proph-
ets and they will make others prophets.
BEYOND THE BARRIERS TO SEEING: LOOKING TO THE ROOTS
When is this rebirth going to happen? It has to happen now and the only thing that
stops it from happening is the barriers within us. These barriers are there because we
have misled ourselves. We have been going on various roads of seeking, whatever
suited us. As a result, we have built up certain barriers to the truth.
But the true goal is to become a prophet, to become your own master, to become
a free person. You have to be a free person. So far, you are not. In their
present
state, most people cannot overcome their own weaknesses, temptations, infatua-
tions, emotional problems and mental worries. This is because they are still standing
in the waves of this turmoil. This is a troubled area where you just see the waves
all the time and you are frightened of breaking down. But if you somehow or other
get out of it and get into the boat of your own being, then you will enjoy. You will
become a witness, a sakshi. This is the goal.
To understand the scriptures, you have to become a free person. You have to be
your own master. For that, you cannot pay.
To get your freedom of spirit, you cannot pay because money has no value in the
divine field. Nothing can bring it forth but your own ascent. But how do we ascend?
Is there anything built within us?
What we need to know is the knowledge of the roots. Unfortunately, what we see
is the knowledge of the tree. We see it from outside, in the same way we see a leaf
from outside, but if we have to treat the leaf, we have to go to the roots. From out-
JOURNEYWITHIN
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-31.txt 
 side, when we see the tree, we are still also outside. If you cut off the leaf, it is dead.
Then
you put it under the microscope. You may see cells. You can see the nucleus of
these cells. You can go on analyzing it and analyzing it as a dead thing. But to treat
it, you have to go to the roots. It is this knowledge of roots you must have.
These are not new ideas. These are very ancient ideas. In the Bible this knowledge
of the roots is described as the Holy Ghost. In many languages it is also described.
Now the roots within us, if you can see this, are placed in a certain manner.
The psychoanalyst Carl Jung saw human beings from outside and he described
them in layers. First he said there is the unconscious that cannot be expressed or
manifested. Then there is the unconscious that can be manifested. Above the sub-
conscious is the conscious mind. Above that is the ego. He saw the human being in
layers, one after another.
Although you are in layers, the path of ascent is also laid down. In the same way,
within us, God, being the greatest organizer, has not simply made us into layers, as
Jung described.
We are made in a parallel way. We have a left side and a right side and a central
path. There are three paths for our evolutionary process. The central path works out
our evolution.
The left side gives us the desire and the right side gives us the power of action.
These are the basic principles of how we are made.
The central path of evolution has brought you today to this level of human
awareness. Beyond that is a very short ascent which you have to achieve to become
the spirit, but there has to be some living process for this to happen. What is that liv-
ing process built within us? It is the reflection of the Holy Ghost, which is the power
of God, which is the Primordial Mother, which is your individual Mother also called
the Ruh or Paramchaitanya. It is within us. It is in the triangular bone called the
sacrum. In Sanskrit this force is called as the Kundalini.
This actually exists within us. You can see it with your own eyes in some people
when there is an obstruction at the higher centres. At those obstructions the Kundal-
ini pulsates. You can also feel that pulsation caused by the obstruction. Through a
stethoscope you can also feel the percussion at the top of the head, where it pulsates
and then it breaks through. When this happens, the pulsation stops and you start
feeling the cool breeze coming out of your fontanel bone area.
This is a happening that takes place and by this happening, you not only see the
truth, you get connected with the truth.
The connection takes place and then you start feeling it on your fingertips. You
feel the cool breeze which surrounds you. You actually start feeling it.
TO SEEKTHE TRUTH
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-32.txt 
 THE NEW AWARENESS OF COLLECTIVE CONSCIOUSNESS
At this point the rational mind starts saying, "So what? Though we feel the cool
breeze, so what?" One should know that when we have eyes we start seeing, when
we have ears we start hearing. In the same way, you have got a new awareness. This
is the awareness of collective consciousness, by which you become. You actually be-
come. You are not just certified, but you actually become. It is very much a question
of becoming. You become collectively conscious. On your central nervous system
you can feel another person, you can feel yourself, you can feel all the centres within.
You can feel all these things on your fingertips.
Mohammed made it clear. He said that at the time of resurrection
hands
your
will speak. But who talks about the resurrection? Nobody talks about it today. They
talk about the doomsday because they can frighten people with that. They can take
advantage of it and make money out of it.
God, who has made this universe, feels love. Do you think he will destroy this
great creation without giving us the fruit, without letting us know the fruit of his
creation. He is the wisest of the wise, the greatest compassionate source of love.
How could he allow this universe to be destroyed, especially this Earth, which is his
special present?
So do not believe in all these ideas of destruction and the last complete devasta-
tion. There are still a lot of plans. You are supposed to enjoy the blessings of the
Divine for which he has created you.
Understand this: the experience of truth has to be felt on the central nervous
system. If you do not immediately feel it, it is not because you do not belong. The
experience is often very slow in the western countries. You are not in any way less
of a seeker. You are a very great seeker, but while coming up to this level, you have
developed a lot of problems and that is why the seeking sometimes takes time to
express itself as the fruitful gain of Self-Realization.
Another problem may be that you may get your Self-Realization, but again the
down. But it can be brought back up by you, by understanding how
Kundalini
goes
to work it out. You can do it by cooperating with your true Self, by understanding
your Self, that you
you have
have to work it out with respect to your Self and that
to give some time to it.
Already thousands upon thousands of people around the world have it. If you
know how to handle your roots, how to nourish them, how to look after them, then
you flower out, you bear fruits. And by your fruits, people know what it is. Then
you become trees, giant trees. You will be like moving trees and when people come
under such trees, they also will get Realization.
JOURNEYWITHIN
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-33.txt 
 BEYOND MEDIOCRITY
We cannot be mediocre. There is no compromise with your Self. You become so
powerful that you do not compromise. You can just, in no time, get out of everything
that is no good, but you must, first of all, accept yourself and have faith in yourself.
Truth is knowledge. The rest of it is all mythical.
What we think we know about things is all mythical because whatever we see
from outside is only outside.
We appreciate the Mona Lisa. We appreciate this painting and other miracles
that human beings have created. Sometimes we think that we have observed a very
miraculous task. They are miraculous because they have vibrations. They have di-
vine vibrations. They emit vibrations and they appeal to you because in your heart
lies that spirit, which is the universal being and which gives that feeling of awe when
you see these great miracles human beings have created.
Unless and until you become a realized soul, how will you really know?
To become a realized soul, you have to have the ascent of the Kundalini and the
proper state of that Kundalini so that it remains there. It is on that point where we
lack in effort, lack in courage and in patience. You must not be superficial.
You must decide that if you get your Realization, you will establish yourself. And
for that, you do not have to pay. There is no membership. There is no organization.
I have nothing to take from you. You cannot give anything to me.
We are like a light. When you are enlightened, what happens to you? You see the
light. In that light, you see yourself. All confusion is finished. You know the truth
feel so blissful and happy because you know everything. There is no chaos.
and
you
You are so relaxed and the power starts flowing through you all the time. It is never
lost and you see in that light whatever is good and whatever is bad. You understand
everything so well.
When you become the light, what do you do? You give the light to others so that
they can also be enlightened.
This world is one.
All human beings are one.
That is the destiny of human beings.
Your destiny will work it out.
You have a promise that you will be looked after.
TO SEEKTHE TRUTH
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-34.txt 
 You have read one-fifth of
JOURNEY WWITHIN
the book Journey Within.
THE FINAL STEPS TO SELF REALIZATION
The entire book is available
for purchase at
www.divinecoolbreeze.org
Buy the book and we will give you
the money back for this magazine.
Send us your proof of purchase
to contact@divinecoolbreeze.org
and confirm that you are a subscriber
and we will send you a six dollar
SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI
gift certificate.
WORDS CHAPTER ONE: 22 June 1984, London (Southbank Polytechnic) | 9 July 1986, Vienna ("Lebensbilder" TV interview) | March
1992, Hong Kong (Radio interview)|5 July 1985, The Hague, Netherlands | 25 September 1983, Los Angeles (KAZU Radio interview) | 6
February 1985, Bordi, India | 21 March 1997, Delhi |21 June 1992, Cabella Ligure, Italy CHAPTER TWO: 6 May 2001, Cabella Ligure, Italy
| 24 July 1979, London | 14 March 2003, Pune, India (TV interview)| 22 April 1982, London | 20 July 1979, Cardiff | 14 July 2001, London
(Royal Albert Hall) CHAPTER THREE: 24 July 1979, London| 14 July 2001, London (Royal Albert Hall) CHAPTER FOUR: 22 June 1984,
London (Southbank Polytechnic) | March 1992, Hong Kong (Radio interview) | 24 March 1981, Sydney, Australia (University of New South
Wales) | 8 July 2001, Cabella Ligure, Italy |9 November 2003, LOs Angeles BACK COVER: 21 March 1977, Bombay | 16 July 1979, London
ALL PHOTOGRAPHS EXCEPT PAGE ONE: Shri Mataji, India, 1982 or 1983 (Matthew Fogarty)
PAGE ONE PHOTOGRAPH: Shri Mataji in an Indian village, January 1981
WWW.DIVINECOOLBREEZE.ORG SUBSCRIPTIONS: contact@divinecoolbreeze.org COONTENT: editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
PRINTED BY King Printing Company Inc. Lowell Massachusetts USA and Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. Pune Maharashtra India
 2012_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_V.pdf-page-35.txt 
 Please awaken yourself to this great occasion of understanding.
You have to read within yourself.
Your own book is within yourself.
This dynamic force is dying to bubble out of you.
We have to change this world
and transform it into a beautiful creation.
The Creator will not allow his creation to be destroyed.
The greatest of greatest, highest of highest achievement
is the awareness of God and, with love, that is what it is.
JOURNEYWITHIN
