Yu vadrishti PIs Dec 2012 MAAAAAAAA AAAAAA

 If you start doing God's work, your worries are taken over - then you don't have to worry about anything. (23-04-89)

 INSIDE THIS ISSUE Vaikhari is the powers ...4 Mahalakshmi's Principle ...8 No hierarchy in Sahaja Yoga ...6 Blake's life was another crucifixion ...12 Gagangiri Maharaj ...14 त्वमेव साक्षात का अर्थ ...१६ मानव को प्राप्त स्वतंत्रता का उचित उपयोग आवश्यक ... १८ मंत्र हमारी कुण्डलिनी के शब्द हैं ...२०

 Vaikhari is the powers H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 17th October 1988 4

 ALARATRI - Who is even the destroyer of Kali.When you give joy to someone. The source Lofjoy has to be beyond joy. I am the giver of knowledge. Without the light of"Atma" without the light of the 'Spirit' how can you know anything? Why not get Realisation? Without that what's the use of doing Devi Puja. Without the knowledge of 'Atma', if you do any Puja, what is the use? You won't get Divine Blessings already said Thousands of years back. "Vaikhari" is the powers by which we speak. Any God's name you take, you ask are you this? .. (Vibrations..) Because the 'Shakti' of all those people is the essence of all those. Because I am that Shakti, that's why you get the vibrations. Ask anybody's name, even the saints, rishis, maharishis. 'Hanh' all of that is me. That is why that's the point they are trying to make. Beeja Mantra means say the "Vaikhari". Vaikhari is the power of Speaking. This power of speaking is made into mantras by people who have power of Realisation. Now, so, for them to improve, supposing they want to improve their centre, or they want to improve their left or right. They have to say the Beeja Mantras. If they say the Beeja Mantras: that area gets the 'beeja', then the 'beeja' has to sprout and has to grow. So the first step they have is to say the 'beeja mantra' and they have to say the different mantras of the different chakras. So, one is the 'beeja' and then is the tree. So if you know the 'beeja' first of all, you can implant a 'beeja' into yourself by saying that, and then you start saying all other. So, that's how you make it grow. The word "Sanskrit" has come out of Kundalini's movement, when she makes a sound, all was recorded by the great saints and like that every Chakra has got vowels and consonants according to the number of sub-plexus they have, you can say petals they have and all of them make all the alphabets of Sanskrit language. You all have become 'Vidyavaan' now. Now you try to understand that how this 'vidya' has been penetrating into you slowly. Not with any teachers or anybody sitting with a stick in the hand. The whole 'Vidya' is exposed from within and without. Whatever I say, you can tally it on your Vibrations. So it goes into your hand. You don't accept it because I am saying but it is so, that's why you accept it. Supposing I say, this is water, then what, you will drink the water and see if it quenches your thirst. Then only you are going to believe that this is water, otherwise you are not going to believe. In the same way it is. will you We are 'Swayama - Siddhas'. "Ra" is the energy Radha. The one who sustain the energy is Radha. She is Mahalaxmi that is why She sustains the Kundalini. "Eee" is the Primordial Mother, and "Ra"is the energy that is Kundalini. So the 'Reem' means that you have the energy passing through the thing towards the Primordial Being. So "Reem" that is why the Yogis - because they believe only in connection. Yogis believe in Yoga and so they have to look after the energy and also the Primordial Mother. This is very important because that is how energy should be there - Kundalini as well as Primordial Mother. Fourteen thousands years before they have written all this which is the truth, which you know now. Now when you read this book (Devi Saptashati), you will understand.

 H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Perth, Australia 09-02-1992 No Hierarchy in Sahaja Yoga you see it is this, there's nothing like hierarchy in Sahaja Yoga, as you know. 6. MiL

 '... You are there on your own position. You are there. You are in charge of yourself. So you don't worry. There's no jealousy. There's no fear. There's no kind of a temptation. You just, you're there. You're not bothered. Sometimes I've seen the leaders are worried about their leadership sometime. Now leadership is just hocus-pocus, I must tell you. If somebody says, "Mother, you become the leader." I say, "No. [laughs] I know. I know that joke." So it's a joke. Leadership is a joke, you see, and if you know it's a joke, then only you'll work it out better. Because, you see it is this, there's nothing like hierarchy in Sahaja Yoga, as you know. We are all one, same. We cannot say that hands are better than feet and the feet is better than this. Nothing of the kind. In the same way, everything is very important and everything circulates like the blood cells. So we do not say that this blood cell is good and that blood cell is bad or this blood cell is higher, that blood cell is higher. In the same way, everybody is circulating. So one should not have any fear. Also fear of the leader should not be there. There's no need to fear the leader. If you are on your gravity, you keep to it. He will understand you. As long as leader is on the gravity, he'll be there. As soon as you go away, goes away from the gravity, he'll go away himself. So you stand on your own gravity point and nobody can disturb you. You should have no fear, nothing, nothing to bother in Sahaj Yog. As it is, you are all saints. What is there to bother? The whole Ganas, all the angels, all this all-pervading power is looking after you. Yesterday we saw a kind of a light which was miraculous light following us on both the sides of the car, especially on my was such a lot of light following. Just giving indication that it's all right, this is Ganesha's place and here things are going to work out. So you are placed so well, you have so many powers within yourself and which you can express very well. Fearlessly you can have it within yourself. Anybody who tries to trouble you will be looked after by this all-pervading power. You don't have to do anything side there about it."

 Mahalakshmi's Principle 1986 Mahalakshmi should be considered as the mother of Lakshmi. Lakshmi's mother means, when Lakshmi came amongst human beings, She took also the form of a balanced woman. She stands in balance on a lotus and in both hands She holds two lotuses : a pink and delicate one.

 Today's Puja is very important as it is a Mahalakshmi Puja and Mahalakshmi in Sahaja Yoga is more important than any other Shakti because Mahalakshmi Shakti - which we also call Sushumna Nadi - resides there and She deals with Тоя Parasympathetic nervous system. To make this Mahalakshmi Shakti powerful there have been many changes in human evolution. Mahalakshmi took different avatars and She was very courageous to take birth in this world in a human form and do Her work. It is surprising that no one has yet given us much information about the importance of Mahalakshmi's avatars, or no one has a deep knowledge of Her whole explanation. Now, the Mahalakshmi's principle depends on Lakshmi's principle, because Mahalakshmi should be considered as the mother of Lakshmi. Lakshmi's mother means, when Lakshmi came amongst human beings, She took also the form of a balanced woman. She stands in balance on a lotus and in both hands She holds two lotuses: a pink and delicate one. The meaning of the pink lotus is that a person who is wealthy (Lakshmipati), his nature should be "pinkness" (sweetness, loving), he should not be rude. The second lotus can give protection to the beetle. In spite of its thorns, still it can make its abode in it, he is welcome. Like this, a person who is a Lakshmipati should welcome any type of person, he should behave like a lotus. He should enquire about the well-being of the other persons. 66 99 Moreover, when you look at Her hands, one is like this [giving, left hand] and one is like that [protecting, right hand]. The person who is not giving cannot be a Lakshmipati. There is no joy like the joy of giving. Only the generous person should be recognized as great in this world. The left hand gesture is for giving. As Shri Lakshmi shows by using the left hand, a Lakshmipati should also use his left hand for giving. Using the left hand means that the right hand should not know about it. The left hand means Sahaj, without putting any effort. The desire should be of giving. All things in this world are only important to be given to others, to show our love to others by giving. That's why things are important. Amongst all the Swayambhus, we in Sahaja Yoga, give special respect to that of Mahalakshmi. Only because of Her our Kundalini finds the way up on the path [of Shushumna], She prepares the Nadi for Her to rise. This Nadi of Mahalakshmi. When the right hand is like this [protection gesture] it gives Ashraya [shelter]. It has two meanings. She gives protection [Rakshana] to everyone and shelter [Ashraya]. But on the opposite side, the Lakshmipati (rich man) gets all the trouble and fear from the others. Lakshmi stood up on the lotus without putting pressure, She doesn't show off Her qualities, but the other men show their properties, cars or other futile things, to impress others with their wealth. She is standing lightly on the lotus, not putting the weight on others. She doesn't disturb others like this. The true Lakshmipati will sit

 very quietly with confidence in himself [Shraddha] and leave without disturbing others. He may make some donation but insists that his name is not mentioned. "I leave it at your feet, but please don't write down my name."“But Baba, we have to register the donations for the Trust..." But that man says : "You may put anyone's name, but please, not mine. If there is any legal trouble I will face it." A very polite man, that is a true Lakshmipati. 99 99 99 Her [right] hand is upward, means our attention should be always upward [gesture like crossing the Agnya]. A person who is Lakshmipati is conscious of being very rich but really wonders how to meet Parameshwara [God Almighty]. When he feels like this, then the principle of Mahalakshmi starts awakening in him. In that principle of Mahalakshmi the awakening of the Kundalini takes place and it is to make the Kundalini rise that people sing Ude, Ude Ambe. “Kundalini, please rise". We pray in that way in the temple of Mahalakshmi, because in this form of Mahalakshmi only Kundalini can rise. And then the Kundalini in the form of Mahalakshmi rises through all the Chakras and crosses them up to Sahasrara Chakra where the complete breakthrough takes place. Now, this Mahalakshmi has taken birth so many times amongst us. Let's see. First of all there is a very close relation between the principle of Mahalakshmi and the Guru. In this relationship there is love and purity. Now, if you look from the beginning, all those great Gurus had a daughter or a sister. As one of those relations Mahalakshmi took birth. Like Janaka's daughter, Sita, was the incarnation [Swarupa] of Mahalakshmi, She was the principle [tatwa] of Mahalakshmi. Sita was Mahalakshmi and the daughter of Janaka. Then Nanaka's sister, Nanaki, was also Mahalakshmi. Her relationship was that of a sister. Moreover, Mohammad Sahib's daughter, Fatima, was Mahalakshmi too. Again, Radha. Radha was Mahalakshmi's incarnation [swarup]. Then again Mary was Mahalakshmi and Her relationship was that of Purity. She was so pure that She gave birth to Christ. She gave him birth as a Virgin. And as the incarnation of the Virgin, because of Her purity, She got a pure son like Christ. Also She was Mahalakshmi. And by these Avatars of Mahalakshmi our chakras got fixed. Like the chakra of Rama is on the right heart. [pointing to the Chakras] At this level, She is in the form of Shri Sita. There She is in the form of Radha, there She is in the form of Mary. At this place [Agnya] the three Chakras meet : Mahakali, Mahalakshmi, Mahasaraswati. Then these three Shaktis meet and when those three Shaktis meet, then only one Shakti which is the Adi Shakti takes form. That's why on Sahasrara Chakra, the Adi Shakti resides, but it is said that "Sahasrare Mahamaya" : She is the Adi Shakti, but She is in the form of Mahamaya. Owing to the existence of these three Shaktis the Adi Shakti who is in the form of Mahamaya 10

 [Mahamayaswarup] came in this world in order to open all the Sahasraras. And She is in front of you, you know about it, so there is no need to tell you more. So out of those three, why is it Mahalakshmi who becomes the Adi Shakti [pudhe Adi Shakti avatarit zhali]? Because She [Mahalakshmi] has two Shaktis. In Her, Mahalakshmi, Mahasaraswati, Mahakali, these three Shaktis are incarnated. The principle of Mahalakshmi itself, is our Pure Desire, that is Amba. In fact it is Mahakali Shakti and with this She has the power of elevation [Tar Tiche utthan hou Shakte, ti karu Shakte]. That's why Adi Shakti is important. Though these three Shaktis are important, only the Adi Shakti can do the ultimate work. It happens when the three combine. And for this, though this work is spontaneous, you as well should work hard, otherwise the work cannot be done, it's too difficult. If it could be done by Adi Shakti alone there would have been no need for all the trouble [pasara]. You people should put in big efforts. In this process your cooperation is also needed. Now you are on the stage, not me. Take my powers and use them. But you have to be on the stage. That's why you are [worthy of worship, adorable: pujaniya]. You are special [wishesh ahat]. As the Adi Shakti, I have already done this work since long times. There is nothing special for me. But you have to use it, you have to get it. You have to master it, you have to be impressive. This is the true desire of the Adi Shakti. This is Her pure desire [Shuddha Iccha], that you should all reach this level, accept it with pleasure, progress in it, then I'm satisfied. In this satisfaction I forget all the troubles. How much trouble I had to go through, in those earlier times how much I had to go through, as Sita, Radha or Mary how much trouble I got. All these past stories I forget. Now nothing is left of this, what is happening now only matters. We should remember in this present incarnation that Mahalakshmi's principle took a human form. Manavi swarupat means in human form. But the Goddess, which is Mahakali, doesn't incarnate in human form, but only as a Goddess. It is easy to come in the form of Goddess, but it is a difficult work to incarnate in the human form. To reside amongst the people, struggle with them, to pay attention to all the human limitations [maryadas] is extremely difficult. All this work has been done in human form by these Goddesses, and today is the time we see the result of it. It is my pure desire to have programmes in Ganapatipule and I would like to tell you to continue it for at least three or four years. And you can't imagine how perfect the work is going to be from Ganapati to the Sahasrara. It is so great that you cannot express it in words. It is my pure desire that you take all my powers. If it can work out I don't need anything else. 11

 wwwww Blake's life was William Blake's Birthday Celebration, 28th November 1985, London 12

 ow the compassion and love of Christ can work out miracles, no doubt OW it can work out because he came for us. The whole universe was created for us. It is for us to receive all the blessings of the divine. It is we who are going to become the spirit, as he said, “you are to be born again". 99 But the conditioning of the subtle conditionings of these surroundings and the atmosphere, the history and all that, is so much embedded in us that we don't realize and are not aware that we have to look upward. Blake's life was another crucifixion I feel. When I read him tears fall continuously sometimes. What a son of a great father! Who said Christ was not bothered about his parents? He ran away from the house at the age of twelve years. That means all the boys are now running from their houses at twelve years, taking to drugs? That's the best way we can pay homage to him, by running away from the houses, taking to drugs, because Christ ran away from the house at the age of twelve years! And he said this is my father's business, that's what he writes. What do I care for the parents? That does not mean that you should not respect your parents, but it means that I am at a higher seeking, I have a higher seeking, I have to go in another direction. You have lived in this direction, whatever it is you have balanced your life, but I have to ascend. And this is the message he has tried to put forward before you, very clearly, that is so obvious, so clear-cut. Whenever he is so fight it, whenever he is so compassionate, whenever he is so gentle, whenever he is so modest, the inner line is one, that achieve your ascent, achieve your higher being, become that. He has prepared ground for us here in England. As I told you many times, England is a very important part of the universe. another crucifixion 13

 Gagangiri Maharaj 3. Born in 1906 at Patan in south Maharashtra, this yogi visited Gagangad in 1935 and by 1940 had made it his abode. That is how he got the name Gagangiri. In the early 1970s he sent seekers to Shri Mataji with the comment, "the Adi Shakti is in Bombay, why have you come to me?" He passed from this life on Monday, February 4, 2008. 14

 'll tell you once how I worked on a really great soul called Gagangarh Maharaj. It's an interesting story. This Gagangarh Maharaj used to live on a hilltop and he would never see people. He was a very angry type of a man. He's John the Baptist and all his legs and hands were broken and he travels on a tiger. Very hot-tempered. Went to see him and every Sahaja Yogi was saying, "Why are you going to a guru?" I said, "See his vibrations." So I climbed all the way see him and it was raining heavily and he's supposed to be in charge of rains, he can control the rains, you see. He's a very big, powerful man and the rain would not stop. It was pouring and pouring and pouring. I got completely drenched by the time I reached there, he was very angry, you see, sitting on a block of stones. He was just going on like this, with anger. I was smiling at him and I went and sat in his little cave till he came back. NATIONAL He said, "Mother, why did you not allow me to control the rain? Was that to kill my ego?" I said, "No, not at all. I never did that." He said, "But why didn't you stop the rain? Why didn't you allow me to stop the rain? You are all drenched." So now see how I played the compassion on him. I said, "See you are a sanyasi, isn't it? And you have bought a sari for me. I can't take a sari from a sanyasi, so I had to get drenched otherwise I'll have no excuse." And the whole temper went away, you see, just, he just fell at my feet and started crying and said what love! And I said, "There's another point, that the water was flowing on my body and was completely covering all these beautiful hills and dales and tomorrow we'll have all the greenery lush there for you to enjoy, isn't it? What does it matter for me? Rain or no rain, makes no difference to me, I'm quite all right." 830 And he brought out a beautiful sari for me there. He said, "You knew about the sari." I said, "I knew." He said, "How?" I said, "Love knows everything, doesn't it? Love gives you eyes, ears, everything." (H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, New York, 18/8/84) 15

 16

 महामंत्र T।ॐ त्वमेव साक्षात श्री महालक्ष्मी, महासरस्वती, महाकाली त्रिगुणात्मिका कुण्डलिनी साक्षात श्री आदिशक्ति माताजी श्री निर्मला देव्यै नमो नमः । । |।ॐ त्वमेव साक्षात श्री कल्की साक्षात श्री आदिशक्ति माताजी श्री निर्मला देव्यै नमो नमः । । |ॐ त्वमेव साक्षात श्री कल्की साक्षात श्री सहस्रार स्वामिनी मोक्ष प्रदायिनी माताजी श्री निर्मला देव्यै नमो नमः । । २ं श्रीगणेश मंत्र |।ॐ त्वमेव साक्षात श्री गणेश साक्षात श्री आदिशक्ति माताजी श्री निर्मला देव्यै नमो नमः । । सक्षात का अथ वमेक .... आपकी कुण्डलिनी यदि आपके चक्रों की ख़राबी के कारण कार्यान्वित नहीं हो रही है तो आपको कहना है-आप हैं, आप हैं, 'त्वमेव साक्षात' आप यह न कहे कि आप पूज्य हैं। आप कहें, 'आप गणेश हैं इससे आपके चक्रों की सारी अपवित्रता जाती है, आपके बन्धन और भी ठीक हो जाते हैं। तब आप किसी घुल भी कार्य का श्रेय नहीं लेते तब आपको यह नहीं लगता कि आप कुछ कर रहे है, तब आपका पूरा व्यक्तित्व एक पूर्ण यंत्र में परिवर्तित हो जाता है, तब आप अपने सभी कार्यों को परमात्मा के कार्यों के रूप में देखते हैं इस प्रकार आप ज्योतिर्मय हो जाते हैं । प.पू.श्री माताजी, टर्की, ६.११.१९९४ 17

 मानव को प्राप्त स्वतंत्रता का उचित उपयोग आवश्यक वास्तव में मानव विकास का प्रतीक (Epitome of evolution) है। परमात्मा के बनाये हुए जीवों में वह बहुमूल्य है, परन्तु मानव अपना मूल्य नहीं जानता। प.पू.श्री माताजी, सेंट पीटर्सबर्ग, ३१.७.१९९३ मानव ही एकमात्र वो जीव हैं जिन्हें स्वयं विकसित होने की स्वतंत्रता प्राप्त है। ... ... प.पू.श्री माताजी, फरवरी १९७९ पर अपनी स्वतंत्रता में मानव ने सभी उल्टे-सीधे कार्य किये।....सभी समस्यायें मानव की अपनी मूर्खताओं के ... ... कारण उत्पन्न होती हैं। परमात्मा आपके लिये कोई समस्या खड़ी नहीं करते। प.पू.श्री माताजी, २६.१.१९९५ .... सहजयोग आपकी पूर्ण स्वतंत्रता को स्वीकार ही नहीं उसका गौरव करता है, क्योंकि आपको स्वतंत्रता देना ही सहजयोग का कर्तव्य है। ......लेकिन स्वतंत्रता और स्वच्छन्दता में बहुत बड़ा अन्तर है, इसको समझ लेना चाहिये। स्वतंत्रता मनुष्य की सद्बुद्धि से आती है। बहकावे में न आयें.....अपना कल्याण करें। प.पू.श्री माताजी, बम्बई, २७ .३.१९७४ देखो, परमात्मा की इच्छा अत्यन्त सहज है। उनका प्रेम दिव्य है। ....उन्होंने इस विश्व का सृजन किया और उसके बाद मानव का सृजन किया ताकि वे उसे जीवन की उच्चतम चीज़ आनन्द प्रदान कर सकें। आनन्द जो कि सहज गुण .परन्तु किस प्रकार हम स्वयं परमात्मा विरोधी और आनन्द विरोधी हो गए, क्यों होता है ? आप समझें| है। हमारी चेतना हमारे मस्तिष्क के माध्यम से नीचे की ओर बढ़ती है। और अधोगति की ओर जाते हुए हमें परमात्मा से ले जाती है। परमात्मा को प्राप्त करना हमारा अंतिम लक्ष्य है। परन्तु हम सर्वप्रथम परमात्मा से तादात्म्य की दूर चेतना से थोड़ा दूर जाते हैं, केवल यह समझने के लिये कि स्वतंत्रता का उपयोग उचित होना चाहिये। इस प्रशिक्षण के बिना मानव को स्वतंत्रता देना व्यर्थ है।.......जो चेतना हमारी अपनी थी, मानवीय चेतना, वह हमारी स्वतंत्रता को परखने के लिये, उस पर प्रयोग करने के लिये हमें दी गयी थी, इसके द्वारा आत्मा बन जाते हैं। आखिरकार आपने आत्मा बनना है। परन्तु जब हम अपनी तथाकथित चेतना में उन्नत होने लगते हैं तो मात्र 'आत्मा बनना ही हमारी चिन्ता नहीं रह जाती। मैं कहूँगी कि हम उस वृक्ष की तरह हैं जो खड़े होने और उन्नत होने के लिये अपनी जड़ें पृथ्वी में उतारता है। इसी प्रकार से हमारी जड़ें भी हमारे मस्तिष्क में हैं और फिर हम पत्ते निकलने फूल खिलने और फल बनने तक ऊपर उठते चले जाते हैं। परन्तु इसके विपरीत फल की अवस्था तक पहुँचने से पहले हम बनावटी पत्तों का सृजन और उनका आनन्द लेने लगते हैं। हम बनावट में फँस जाते हैं। एक बार जब हम इस बनावटीपन को अपनाने लगते हैं तो हम वास्तविकता से दूर हटकर नकारात्मक विचारों या परमात्मा विरोधी विचारों की ओर बढ़ने लगते हैं। इन्हीं विचारों के कारण हम एटमबम बनाते है। अत: वास्तव में दो शाखायें हैं जिनमें हम बँट जाते हैं। 18

 १. कुछ लोग बायीं ओर को या नकारात्मक दृष्टिकोण की ओर जाना चाहते हैं। वे स्वयं को नष्ट करते हैं....उन्हें सभी प्रकार के रोग हो जाते हैं। ये अपने शरीर को कष्ट देते हैं।..... २. दूसरा दायाँ पक्ष है। इसमें जाने वाले लोग अन्य लोगों को कष्ट देते हैं। उन्हें नष्ट करते हैं। दोनों ही मार्ग परमात्मा, उनकी दया और उनकी कृपा से दूर हैं। लक्ष्य केवल एक होना चाहिये 'आत्मा', केवल तभी उचित दिशा की ओर बढ़ सकते हैं। परन्तु मानव इस लक्ष्य से आसानी से भटक जाते हैं, क्योंकि ऐसा करने के लिये वे स्वतंत्र हैं। .हमारे पहला अपराध जो हमने किया है वह है परमात्मा को नकारना। हमें परमात्मा का भय नही है। शरीर में होने वाले विभिन्न रोग क्या हैं? ये उन्हीं विनाशकारी शक्तियों के अतिरिक्त कुछ भी नहीं जिनकी रचना हमने स्वयं अपने अन्दर की है। किसी भी बाह्य, किसी ग्रह या किसी भी प्रकार के सांसारिक आक्रमण का कोई भय नहीं है, नहीं ऐसा कोई भय नहीं है। आक्रमण की रचना हमारे अपने अन्दर होती है और इसका ज्ञान हमें होना चाहिये। स्वतंत्रता के नाम पर हमने अपने अन्दर विनाश के सभी जीवाणु एकत्र कर लिये हैं। प.पू.श्री माताजी, इंग्लैण्ड, ३१.३.१९८३ अन्तर्जात रुप से हमारे अन्दर आत्मा का निवास है, जो हमें ज्योतिर्मय करना चाहती है और हमें शान्त अस्तित्व का आशीर्वाद और आनन्द प्रदान करना चाहती है। आपके इस चिराग का सृजन किसी उद्देश्य से किया गया है। इसे ज्योतिर्मय किया जाना है। ..... है।.... सी प्रक्रियाओं के बाद इस बहुमूल्य जीवन का सृजन परमात्मा सृजित यह विश्व बहुत सुन्दर है। बहुत ... ... किया गया। अत्यन्त कठिनाई से यह सृजन हुआ। मत भूलिए कि आपको आत्मा बनना है, इसके बिना आपका जीवन व्यर्थ है क्योंकि आप सृजन की पराकाष्ठा हैं। आप ही उस सृजन के निष्कर्ष हैं। हमारे अन्दर एक सितारा चमक रहा है, और यही हमारी आत्मा है। हमें अपने अन्दर उन्हें (परमात्मा की शक्तियों को) जाग्रत करना होगा, और इस प्रकार से आत्मसाक्षात्कार पाना होगा। .. परिस्थितियों में मानव जैसा है, ये कार्य बहुत जल्दी से कार्यान्वित नहीं होगा। शनै: शनै: होगा इस बात का मुझे विश्वास है। अपने स्तर पर मैंने पूरी कोशिश की। . आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्राप्त कर लेना सर्वोत्तम है। आज यही सबसे अधिक महत्वपूर्ण है। नि:सन्देह आज की .शनै: शनै: मुझे विश्वास है, यह कार्यान्वित होगा। विश्वास रखे इस सांसारिक खींचातानी से परे भी कोई जीवन है, सौन्दर्य और गरिमा से परिपूर्ण शाश्वत जीवन। परन्तु अब भी व्यक्ति को समझना होगा कि परमात्मा के कार्य परमात्मा से ही आशीर्वादित होते हैं। अपने सारे आशीर्वादों और सहायता की कृपावर्षा वे आप पर करेंगे ताकि आप मनचाहे कर्तव्यों को पूर्ण कर सकें। अपने आस पास बाधाओं से लड़ने के लिये आपको स्वयं को अधिक सुदृढ़ महसूस करना होगा और सृजन के इस अंतिम लक्ष्य को कार्यान्वित करना होगा । प.पू.श्री माताजी, इंग्लैण्ड, ३१.३.१९८३ (निर्मला योग १९८३, चैतन्य लहरी-मई -जून, २००७, रुपान्तरित) 19

 क ी बु हवर र জ। ा मंत्र हमारी कृण्डलिनी के शब्द है 20

 संस्कृत भाषा की विशेषता ये है कि एक-एक अक्षर मंत्र है। देवनागरी लिपि में एक-एक जो हम अक्षर अ+क्ष जो क्षर नहीं है (जो नष्ट नहीं होता)। जितना हमने अ, आ, इ, ई जो कुछ है वो सारा ही कुण्डलिनी में घूमने वाला शब्द है। वहाँ शब्द निकलता है। मनन में हमने इन शब्दों को सीखा है तब लिखा है। जब कुण्डलिनी ऐसे घूमती है तो आवाज़ यूँ करती है श..श...श... यहाँ पर। ठीक है न! हर जगह उसके अलग-अलग शब्द हैं जैसे यहाँ (आज्ञा चक्र पर) हूं, क्षं दो शब्द आते हैं। वो जो हम 'ओम' करके लिखते हैं, अ जैसे जो लिखते हैं वो यहाँ आप देख सकते हैं कि यहाँ पर ओम ही रहता है। जब कुण्डलिनी जागृत होती है तो यहाँ जब उस पर लाइट पड़ती है तो ये जो जो भी चक्र है यहाँ पर ओम (ॐ) ऐसा ही लिखा होता है जैसा आप लिखते हैं और जो 'अ, आ, इ, ई' जो भी लिखा है, आप लिखते हैं देवनागरी में, वो भी हमारे अन्दर कुण्डलिनी वहाँ पर आघात करती है, जिस वक्त उसके निनाद होते हैं तब वह निनाद और उसका लिखना भी वहाँ घटित होता है। कितनी बारीक चीज़ है। क्या आपकी संस्कृति है और कहाँ से आयी है, जो सारी मननों से उतरी हुई है, कोई हमने बाहर से सीखी हुई आर्टिफिशियल चीजें नहीं है। ये भाषा हमारे अन्दर उत्पन्न होती है और लिखित होती है। एक-एक अक्षर लिखने में अर्थ होता है। ओम कैसे बना? इस तरह ॐ की रचना होती है, बिल्कुल ॐ ही लिखा है। मैं ऐसे ऊँगली घुमा रही हूँ आपका आज्ञा घूम रहा है। इतनी साइन्टिफिक चीज़ है क्योंकि इसका सम्बन्ध रिएल्टी से है। जब तक आप संस्कृत में श्लोक नहीं कहते, मेरे चक्र चलते ही नहीं आश्चर्य की बात है। पर आप पर अंग्रेज़ी में कहें तो चलते हैं पर सिर्फ आज्ञा चक्र पर ईसा मसीह की जो उन्होंने अपनी लिखी है क्योंकि यहाँ पर ईसा मसीह का स्थान है, उस पर उनका जो हिब्रू भाषा में लिखा हुआ है 'लार्डस प्रेयर' चलता है, पर इंग्लिश में कहें तो चल जाता है। पर यहाँ पर तो क्षमा स्वरूपिणी 'क्षमा' ही शब्द कहना पड़ता है क्योंकि यहाँ 'क्ष' शब्द है, इसलिये 'क्षमा' कहना चाहिये। सब कहने पर भी क्षमा कहना पड़ता है।...... मंत्र की योजना आनी चाहिये। ......ंत्र विद्या का बड़ा भारी शास्त्र है कि कौनसा आपका चक्र पकड़ा हुआ है? गर आपकी लेफ्ट साइड पकड़ी है तो आपको लेफ्ट साइड का मंत्र देना चाहिये और आपकी राइट साइड़ पकड़ी है तो राइट साइड़ का देना चाहिये, बीच की पकड़ी ह्यी है तो बीच का मंत्र देना चाहिये। प.पू.श्री माताजी, दिल्ली, ३.२.१९७८ सारे देवता आपके बड़े भाई हैं। कुण्डलिनी के पथ पर भिन्न रूपों में वे विद्यमान हैं। आपको चाहिये कि उन्हें पहचाने और उन्हें प्राप्त करें।.......देवी-देवता को जाग्रत करने के लिये मंत्रों का उच्चारण पूर्णत: शुद्ध होना चाहिये और पूरे हृदय से किया जाना चाहिये, केवल तभी जाग्रति घटित हो पायेगी .....तेल में यदि पानी हो तो दीपक की बाती किस प्रकार जलेगी? प.पू.श्री माताजी के एक पत्र से, १९.१२.१९८२ चक्र कूप्रभावित होने से तत्सम्बन्धी देवता वहाँ से अपना स्थान त्याग देते हैं। उस चक्र का मंत्र उच्चारण करके श्री माताजी के नाम की शक्ति से उन देवता का आवाहन किया जाता है। उपचार के लिये विपरीत पाश्र्व का हाथ प्रभावित चक्र पर रखें और प्रभावित पाश्र्व का हाथ फोटो के पूज्य 21

 सामने फैलायें। प.पू.श्री माताजी, निर्मला योग, जुलाई- अगस्त १९८३ से आपको समझना चाहिये कि छोटी- छोटी क्रियाओं से एवं मंत्रों के उच्चारण से किस प्रकार हम अपने अन्दर के देवताओं का आवाहन करते हैं, क्योंकि आप जाग्रत हैं। आपका हर शब्द जाग्रत है। अत: आपके मंत्र भी सिद्ध हैं। प.पू.श्री माताजी, ५.५.१९८० .... परन्तु यदि आप परमात्मा की शक्ति से सम्बन्ध बनाये बिना ही मन्त्रोच्चारण किए जा रहे हैं तो आपको उस शक्ति से जोड़ने वाले तार जल सकते हैं तथा आपको गले की समस्यायें हो सकती है। प.पू.श्री माताजी, पेन्सिवेनिया, अमेरिका, १९.०९.१९९२ सहजयोग में आज ऐसे हज़ारों लोग हैं जिन्होंने मंत्र को सिद्ध कर लिया है। इतने मंत्र सिद्ध हैं उनके कि अगर वो अपनी जगह में बैठ कर मंत्र कह दें तो जो काम करना है, करा सकते हैं। सिद्धता के लिये मंत्र पर मेहनत करनी पड़ती है, उस पर बोलना पड़ता है, अपने चक्रों पर ध्यान करना पड़ता है, और उसकी सिद्धता हासिल हो जाती है । प.पू.श्री माताजी, दिल्ली, १६.२.१९८१ सहजयोग में किसी भी चीज़ की अति न करें। अगर आप किसी को बतायें कि आपके लिये ये मंत्र है तो इसे तभी ... ... तक प्रयोग करना चाहिये जब तक आप उस चक्र की बाधा से छुटकारा न पा लें। उसके बाद नहीं। प.पू.श्री माताजी, ४.२.१९८३ मंत्र का स्थायी भाव पवित्रता है। मंत्रोच्चार के समय मंत्र की ओर ही चित्त का होना आवश्यक है। प.पू.श्री माताजी, १८.९.१९८८ जब मैं बोलती हूँ तो मेरा हर शब्द मंत्र है। मैं जब बोलना आरम्भ करती हूँ तो लोग ठीक होने लगते हैं। ... ... प.पू.श्री माताजी की डॉ.तलवार से वार्ता ॐ बीज मंत्र है - ओंकार शब्द है, यह प्रथम शब्द है जब सदाशिव और आदिशक्ति सृष्टि रचना हेतु अलग हुये, ध्वनि को ओंकार रुप में प्रयोग किया गया| ओंकार अर्थात् प्रकाश पूर्ण चैतन्य लहरियाँ..आदिशक्ति माँ ओंकार से श्री गणेश की रचना करती हैं......इनके दायें भाग में सभी तत्वों के अणु हैं और बायें भाग में मनोभाव। इसके मध्य में आपके ... ... इस उत्थान की शक्ति निहित है। प.पू.श्री माताजी, आस्ट्रिया, २६.८.१९९० सारे संसार का कार्य इसी ओंकार की शक्ति से होता है, इसे हम चैतन्य कहते हैं, ब्रह्म चैतन्य कहते हैं। ब्रह्म चैतन्य का साकार स्वरुप ही ओंकार है। इसका मूर्तस्वरूप या विग्रह श्री गणेश हैं।.... यह ओंकार अति पवित्र है और अनन्त का कार्य करने वाली शक्ति है। आत्मा की शक्ति भी ओंकार की ही शक्ति है। प.पू.श्री माताजी, आस्ट्रिया, २५.१२.१९९० 22

 Just think how much your Mother loves - when you think how much your Mother loves you, you are jumping onto Her Kundalini, and at that time when you jump onto Mother's Kundalini, then there is no thought. (83-01-07) Published & Printed by Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. No. 8, Chandragupta Co-op Housing Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune, Maharashtra, India - 411 038. © : 25286537, 25286032 email:sale@nitl.co.in website: www.nitl.co.in (For queries & sending articles contact on above address)

 While doing Namahs... in the Presence of the Divine... you should not budge even from where you are sitting... you should not move... your eyes should not rove about... you should not yawn... so many things... in behaviour. Once you start feeling responsible... you yourself will know how to behave... what to do... what not to do. H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmaladevi, 77/01/26



----------------------

2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Yu vadrishti
PIs
Dec 2012
MAAAAAAAA
AAAAAA
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-1.txt 
 If you start doing God's work, your worries are taken
over - then you don't have to worry about anything.
(23-04-89)
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 INSIDE
THIS ISSUE
Vaikhari is the powers ...4
Mahalakshmi's Principle ...8
No hierarchy in Sahaja Yoga ...6
Blake's life was another crucifixion ...12
Gagangiri Maharaj ...14
त्वमेव साक्षात का अर्थ ...१६
मानव को प्राप्त स्वतंत्रता का उचित उपयोग आवश्यक ... १८
मंत्र हमारी कुण्डलिनी के शब्द हैं ...२०
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Vaikhari
is the powers
H. H. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 17th October 1988
4
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 ALARATRI - Who is even the destroyer of Kali.When you give joy to someone. The source
Lofjoy has to be beyond joy.
I am the giver of knowledge. Without the light of"Atma" without the light of the 'Spirit' how can
you know anything? Why not get Realisation? Without that what's the use of doing Devi Puja.
Without the knowledge of 'Atma', if you do any Puja, what is the use? You won't get Divine
Blessings already said Thousands of years back.
"Vaikhari" is the powers by which we speak.
Any God's name you take, you ask are you this? .. (Vibrations..) Because the 'Shakti' of all
those people is the essence of all those. Because I am that Shakti, that's why you get the
vibrations. Ask anybody's name, even the saints, rishis, maharishis. 'Hanh' all of that is me. That
is why that's the point they are trying to make.
Beeja Mantra means say the "Vaikhari". Vaikhari is the power of Speaking. This power of
speaking is made into mantras by people who have power of Realisation. Now, so, for them to
improve, supposing they want to improve their centre, or they want to improve their left or right.
They have to say the Beeja Mantras. If they say the Beeja Mantras: that area gets the 'beeja', then
the 'beeja' has to sprout and has to grow. So the first step they have is to say the 'beeja mantra' and
they have to say the different mantras of the different chakras. So, one is the 'beeja' and then is the
tree. So if you know the 'beeja' first of all, you can implant a 'beeja' into yourself by saying that,
and then you start saying all other. So, that's how you make it grow. The word "Sanskrit" has
come out of Kundalini's movement, when she makes a sound, all was recorded by the great saints
and like that every Chakra has got vowels and consonants according to the number of sub-plexus
they have, you can say petals they have and all of them make all the alphabets of Sanskrit
language.
You all have become 'Vidyavaan' now. Now you try to understand that how this 'vidya' has been
penetrating into you slowly. Not with any teachers or anybody sitting with a stick in the hand. The
whole 'Vidya' is exposed from within and without. Whatever I say, you can tally it on your
Vibrations. So it goes into your hand. You don't accept it because I am saying but it is so, that's
why you accept it. Supposing I say, this is water, then what, you will drink the water and
see if it quenches your thirst. Then only you are going to believe that this is water, otherwise you
are not going to believe. In the same way it is.
will
you
We are 'Swayama - Siddhas'.
"Ra" is the energy Radha. The one who sustain the energy is Radha. She is Mahalaxmi that is why
She sustains the Kundalini.
"Eee" is the Primordial Mother, and "Ra"is the energy that is Kundalini. So the 'Reem' means that
you have the energy passing through the thing towards the Primordial Being. So "Reem" that is
why the Yogis - because they believe only in connection. Yogis believe in Yoga and so they have
to look after the energy and also the Primordial Mother. This is very important because that is
how energy should be there - Kundalini as well as Primordial Mother. Fourteen thousands years
before they have written all this which is the truth, which you know now. Now when you read this
book (Devi Saptashati), you will understand.
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 H. H. Shri
Mataji
Nirmala
Devi,
Perth, Australia
09-02-1992
No Hierarchy in Sahaja Yoga
you see it is this,
there's nothing like hierarchy in Sahaja Yoga,
as you know.
6.
MiL
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 '... You are there on your own position. You are there. You
are in charge of yourself. So you don't worry. There's no
jealousy. There's no fear. There's no kind of a temptation.
You just, you're there. You're not bothered. Sometimes I've
seen the leaders are worried about their leadership
sometime. Now leadership is just hocus-pocus, I must tell
you. If somebody says, "Mother, you become the leader." I
say, "No. [laughs] I know. I know that joke." So it's a joke.
Leadership is a joke, you see, and if you know it's a joke,
then only you'll work it out better. Because, you see it is
this, there's nothing like hierarchy in Sahaja Yoga, as you
know. We are all one, same. We cannot say that hands are
better than feet and the feet is better than this. Nothing of
the kind. In the same way, everything is very important and
everything circulates like the blood cells. So we do not say
that this blood cell is good and that blood cell is bad or this
blood cell is higher, that blood cell is higher. In the same
way, everybody is circulating. So one should not have any
fear. Also fear of the leader should not be there. There's no
need to fear the leader. If you are on your gravity, you keep
to it. He will understand you. As long as leader is on the
gravity, he'll be there. As soon as you go away, goes away
from the gravity, he'll go away himself.
So you stand on your own gravity point and nobody can
disturb you. You should have no fear, nothing, nothing to
bother in Sahaj Yog. As it is, you are all saints. What is
there to bother? The whole Ganas, all the angels, all this
all-pervading power is looking after you. Yesterday we
saw a kind of a light which was miraculous light following
us on both the sides of the car, especially on my
was such a lot of light following. Just giving indication
that it's all right, this is Ganesha's place and here things are
going to work out. So you are placed so well, you have so
many powers within yourself and which you can express
very well. Fearlessly you can have it within yourself.
Anybody who tries to trouble you will be looked after by
this all-pervading power. You don't have to do anything
side there
about it."
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Mahalakshmi's Principle
1986
Mahalakshmi
should be
considered
as the mother of
Lakshmi.
Lakshmi's mother
means,
when
Lakshmi came
amongst
human beings,
She took
also the form of a
balanced woman.
She stands in
balance on a lotus
and
in both hands
She holds
two lotuses :
a pink and
delicate one.
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Today's Puja is very important as it is a Mahalakshmi Puja and Mahalakshmi in
Sahaja Yoga is more important than any other Shakti because Mahalakshmi
Shakti - which we also call Sushumna Nadi - resides there and She deals with
Тоя
Parasympathetic nervous system. To make this Mahalakshmi Shakti powerful there
have been many changes in human evolution. Mahalakshmi took different avatars
and She was very courageous to take birth in this world in a human form and do Her
work. It is surprising that no one has yet given us much information about the
importance of Mahalakshmi's avatars, or no one has a deep knowledge of Her whole
explanation.
Now, the Mahalakshmi's principle depends on Lakshmi's principle, because
Mahalakshmi should be considered as the mother of Lakshmi. Lakshmi's mother
means, when Lakshmi came amongst human beings, She took also the form of a
balanced woman. She stands in balance on a lotus and in both hands She holds two
lotuses: a pink and delicate one. The meaning of the pink lotus is that a person who is
wealthy (Lakshmipati), his nature should be "pinkness" (sweetness, loving), he
should not be rude. The second lotus can give protection to the beetle. In spite of its
thorns, still it can make its abode in it, he is welcome. Like this, a person who is a
Lakshmipati should welcome any type of person, he should behave like a lotus. He
should enquire about the well-being of the other persons.
66
99
Moreover, when you look at Her hands, one is like this [giving, left hand] and one is
like that [protecting, right hand]. The person who is not giving cannot be a
Lakshmipati. There is no joy like the joy of giving. Only the generous person should
be recognized as great in this world. The left hand gesture is for giving. As Shri
Lakshmi shows by using the left hand, a Lakshmipati should also use his left hand for
giving. Using the left hand means that the right hand should not know about it. The
left hand means Sahaj, without putting any effort. The desire should be of giving. All
things in this world are only important to be given to others, to show our love to others
by giving. That's why things are important. Amongst all the Swayambhus, we in
Sahaja Yoga, give special respect to that of Mahalakshmi. Only because of Her our
Kundalini finds the way up on the path [of Shushumna], She prepares the Nadi for
Her to rise. This Nadi of Mahalakshmi.
When the right hand is like this [protection gesture] it gives Ashraya [shelter]. It has
two meanings. She gives protection [Rakshana] to everyone and shelter [Ashraya].
But on the opposite side, the Lakshmipati (rich man) gets all the trouble and fear from
the others.
Lakshmi stood up on the lotus without putting pressure, She doesn't show off Her
qualities, but the other men show their properties, cars or other futile things, to
impress others with their wealth. She is standing lightly on the lotus, not putting the
weight on others. She doesn't disturb others like this. The true Lakshmipati will sit
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 very quietly with confidence in himself [Shraddha] and leave without disturbing
others. He may make some donation but insists that his name is not mentioned. "I
leave it at your feet, but please don't write down my name."“But Baba, we have to
register the donations for the Trust..." But that man says : "You may put anyone's
name, but please, not mine. If there is any legal trouble I will face it." A very polite
man, that is a true Lakshmipati.
99
99
99
Her [right] hand is upward, means our attention should be always upward [gesture
like crossing the Agnya]. A person who is Lakshmipati is conscious of being very
rich but really wonders how to meet Parameshwara [God Almighty]. When he
feels like this, then the principle of Mahalakshmi starts awakening in him.
In that principle of Mahalakshmi the awakening of the Kundalini takes place and
it is to make the Kundalini rise that people sing Ude, Ude Ambe. “Kundalini,
please rise". We pray in that way in the temple of Mahalakshmi, because in this
form of Mahalakshmi only Kundalini can rise. And then the Kundalini in the form
of Mahalakshmi rises through all the Chakras and crosses them up to Sahasrara
Chakra where the complete breakthrough takes place.
Now, this Mahalakshmi has taken birth so many times amongst us. Let's see. First
of all there is a very close relation between the principle of Mahalakshmi and the
Guru. In this relationship there is love and purity. Now, if you look from the
beginning, all those great Gurus had a daughter or a sister. As one of those
relations Mahalakshmi took birth. Like Janaka's daughter, Sita, was the
incarnation [Swarupa] of Mahalakshmi, She was the principle [tatwa] of
Mahalakshmi. Sita was Mahalakshmi and the daughter of Janaka. Then Nanaka's
sister, Nanaki, was also Mahalakshmi. Her relationship was that of a sister.
Moreover, Mohammad Sahib's daughter, Fatima, was Mahalakshmi too. Again,
Radha. Radha was Mahalakshmi's incarnation [swarup]. Then again Mary was
Mahalakshmi and Her relationship was that of Purity. She was so pure that She
gave birth to Christ. She gave him birth as a Virgin. And as the incarnation of the
Virgin, because of Her purity, She got a pure son like Christ. Also She was
Mahalakshmi.
And by these Avatars of Mahalakshmi our chakras got fixed. Like the chakra of
Rama is on the right heart. [pointing to the Chakras] At this level, She is in the
form of Shri Sita. There She is in the form of Radha, there She is in the form of
Mary. At this place [Agnya] the three Chakras meet : Mahakali, Mahalakshmi,
Mahasaraswati. Then these three Shaktis meet and when those three Shaktis meet,
then only one Shakti which is the Adi Shakti takes form. That's why on Sahasrara
Chakra, the Adi Shakti resides, but it is said that "Sahasrare Mahamaya" : She is
the Adi Shakti, but She is in the form of Mahamaya. Owing to the existence of
these three Shaktis the Adi Shakti who is in the form of Mahamaya
10
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 [Mahamayaswarup] came in this world in order to open all the Sahasraras. And
She is in front of you, you know about it, so there is no need to tell you more.
So out of those three, why is it Mahalakshmi who becomes the Adi Shakti [pudhe
Adi Shakti avatarit zhali]? Because She [Mahalakshmi] has two Shaktis. In Her,
Mahalakshmi, Mahasaraswati, Mahakali, these three Shaktis are incarnated. The
principle of Mahalakshmi itself, is our Pure Desire, that is Amba. In fact it is
Mahakali Shakti and with this She has the power of elevation [Tar Tiche utthan
hou Shakte, ti karu Shakte]. That's why Adi Shakti is important. Though these
three Shaktis are important, only the Adi Shakti can do the ultimate work. It
happens when the three combine. And for this, though this work is spontaneous,
you as well should work hard, otherwise the work cannot be done, it's too difficult.
If it could be done by Adi Shakti alone there would have been no need for all the
trouble [pasara].
You people should put in big efforts. In this process your cooperation is also
needed. Now you are on the stage, not me. Take my powers and use them. But you
have to be on the stage. That's why you are [worthy of worship, adorable:
pujaniya]. You are special [wishesh ahat]. As the Adi Shakti, I have already done
this work since long times. There is nothing special for me. But you have to use it,
you have to get it. You have to master it, you have to be impressive. This is the true
desire of the Adi Shakti. This is Her pure desire [Shuddha Iccha], that you should
all reach this level, accept it with pleasure, progress in it, then I'm satisfied. In this
satisfaction I forget all the troubles. How much trouble I had to go through, in
those earlier times how much I had to go through, as Sita, Radha or Mary how
much trouble I got. All these past stories I forget. Now nothing is left of this, what
is happening now only matters.
We should remember in this present incarnation that Mahalakshmi's principle
took a human form. Manavi swarupat means in human form. But the Goddess,
which is Mahakali, doesn't incarnate in human form, but only as a Goddess. It is
easy to come in the form of Goddess, but it is a difficult work to incarnate in the
human form. To reside amongst the people, struggle with them, to pay attention to
all the human limitations [maryadas] is extremely difficult. All this work has been
done in human form by these Goddesses, and today is the time we see the result of
it.
It is my pure desire to have programmes in Ganapatipule and I would like to tell
you to continue it for at least three or four years. And you can't imagine how
perfect the work is going to be from Ganapati to the Sahasrara. It is so great that
you cannot express it in words. It is my pure desire that you take all my powers. If
it can work out I don't need anything else.
11
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 wwwww
Blake's life was
William Blake's Birthday Celebration, 28th November 1985, London
12
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 ow the compassion and love of Christ can work out miracles, no doubt
OW
it can work out because he came for us. The whole universe was
created for us. It is for us to receive all the blessings of the divine. It is we
who are going to become the spirit, as he said, “you are to be born again".
99
But the conditioning of the subtle conditionings of these surroundings and
the atmosphere, the history and all that, is so much embedded in us that we
don't realize and are not aware that we have to look upward.
Blake's life was another crucifixion I feel. When I read him tears fall
continuously sometimes. What a son of a great father! Who said Christ was
not bothered about his parents? He ran away from the house at the age of
twelve years.
That means all the boys are now running from their houses at twelve years,
taking to drugs? That's the best way we can pay homage to him, by running
away from the houses, taking to drugs, because Christ ran away from the
house at the age of twelve years!
And he said this is my father's business, that's what he writes. What do I care
for the parents? That does not mean that you should not respect your parents,
but it means that I am at a higher seeking, I have a higher seeking, I have to
go in another direction.
You have lived in this direction, whatever it is you have balanced your life,
but I have to ascend. And this is the message he has tried to put forward
before you, very clearly, that is so obvious, so clear-cut.
Whenever he is so fight it, whenever he is so compassionate, whenever he is
so gentle, whenever he is so modest, the inner line is one, that achieve your
ascent, achieve your higher being, become that.
He has prepared ground for us here in England. As I told you many times,
England is a very important part of the universe.
another crucifixion
13
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Gagangiri Maharaj
3.
Born in 1906 at Patan in south Maharashtra, this yogi visited Gagangad in 1935 and by 1940 had
made it his abode. That is how he got the name Gagangiri. In the early 1970s he sent seekers to
Shri Mataji with the comment, "the Adi Shakti is in Bombay, why have you come to me?" He
passed from this life on Monday, February 4, 2008.
14
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 'll tell you once how I worked on a really great soul called Gagangarh
Maharaj. It's an interesting story. This Gagangarh Maharaj used to live on a
hilltop and he would never see people. He was a very angry type of a man. He's
John the Baptist and all his legs and hands were broken and he travels on a tiger.
Very hot-tempered. Went to see him and every Sahaja Yogi was saying, "Why
are you going to a guru?" I said, "See his vibrations."
So I climbed all the way see him and it was raining heavily and he's supposed to
be in charge of rains, he can control the rains, you see. He's a very big, powerful
man and the rain would not stop. It was pouring and pouring and pouring. I got
completely drenched by the time I reached there, he was very angry, you see,
sitting on a block of stones. He was just going on like this, with anger. I was
smiling at him and I went and sat in his little cave till he came back.
NATIONAL
He said, "Mother, why did you not allow me to control the rain? Was that to kill
my ego?"
I said, "No, not at all. I never did that."
He said, "But why didn't you stop the rain? Why didn't you allow me to stop the
rain? You are all drenched."
So now see how I played the compassion on him. I said, "See you are a sanyasi,
isn't it? And you have bought a sari for me. I can't take a sari from a sanyasi, so I
had to get drenched otherwise I'll have no excuse." And the whole temper went
away, you see, just, he just fell at my feet and started crying and said what love!
And I said, "There's another point, that the water was flowing on my body and
was completely covering all these beautiful hills and dales and tomorrow we'll
have all the greenery lush there for you to enjoy, isn't it? What does it matter for
me? Rain or no rain, makes no difference to me, I'm quite all right."
830
And he brought out a beautiful sari for me there. He said, "You knew about the
sari."
I said, "I knew."
He said, "How?"
I said, "Love knows everything, doesn't it? Love gives you eyes, ears,
everything."
(H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, New York, 18/8/84)
15
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 16
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 महामंत्र
T।ॐ त्वमेव साक्षात श्री महालक्ष्मी, महासरस्वती, महाकाली त्रिगुणात्मिका कुण्डलिनी साक्षात
श्री आदिशक्ति माताजी श्री निर्मला देव्यै नमो नमः । ।
|।ॐ त्वमेव साक्षात श्री कल्की साक्षात श्री आदिशक्ति माताजी श्री निर्मला देव्यै नमो नमः । ।
|ॐ त्वमेव साक्षात श्री कल्की साक्षात श्री सहस्रार स्वामिनी मोक्ष प्रदायिनी माताजी श्री निर्मला देव्यै नमो नमः । ।
२ं
श्रीगणेश मंत्र
|।ॐ त्वमेव साक्षात श्री गणेश साक्षात श्री आदिशक्ति माताजी श्री निर्मला देव्यै नमो नमः । ।
सक्षात
का अथ
वमेक
.... आपकी कुण्डलिनी यदि आपके चक्रों की ख़राबी के कारण कार्यान्वित
नहीं हो रही है तो आपको कहना है-आप हैं, आप हैं, 'त्वमेव साक्षात' आप यह न
कहे कि आप पूज्य हैं। आप कहें, 'आप गणेश हैं इससे आपके चक्रों की सारी
अपवित्रता जाती है, आपके बन्धन और भी ठीक हो जाते हैं। तब आप किसी
घुल
भी कार्य का श्रेय नहीं लेते तब आपको यह नहीं लगता कि आप कुछ कर रहे है,
तब आपका पूरा व्यक्तित्व एक पूर्ण यंत्र में परिवर्तित हो जाता है, तब आप अपने
सभी कार्यों को परमात्मा के कार्यों के रूप में देखते हैं इस प्रकार आप ज्योतिर्मय
हो जाते हैं ।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, टर्की, ६.११.१९९४
17
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 मानव को प्राप्त स्वतंत्रता का उचित उपयोग आवश्यक
वास्तव में मानव विकास का प्रतीक (Epitome of evolution) है। परमात्मा के बनाये हुए जीवों में वह बहुमूल्य
है, परन्तु मानव अपना मूल्य नहीं जानता।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, सेंट पीटर्सबर्ग, ३१.७.१९९३
मानव ही एकमात्र वो जीव हैं जिन्हें स्वयं विकसित होने की स्वतंत्रता प्राप्त है।
... ...
प.पू.श्री माताजी, फरवरी १९७९
पर अपनी स्वतंत्रता में मानव ने सभी उल्टे-सीधे कार्य किये।....सभी समस्यायें मानव की अपनी मूर्खताओं के
... ...
कारण उत्पन्न होती हैं। परमात्मा आपके लिये कोई समस्या खड़ी नहीं करते।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, २६.१.१९९५
.... सहजयोग आपकी पूर्ण स्वतंत्रता को स्वीकार ही नहीं उसका गौरव करता है, क्योंकि आपको स्वतंत्रता देना ही
सहजयोग का कर्तव्य है। ......लेकिन स्वतंत्रता और स्वच्छन्दता में बहुत बड़ा अन्तर है, इसको समझ लेना चाहिये।
स्वतंत्रता मनुष्य की सद्बुद्धि से आती है। बहकावे में न आयें.....अपना कल्याण करें।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, बम्बई, २७ .३.१९७४
देखो, परमात्मा की इच्छा अत्यन्त सहज है। उनका प्रेम दिव्य है। ....उन्होंने इस विश्व का सृजन किया और
उसके बाद मानव का सृजन किया ताकि वे उसे जीवन की उच्चतम चीज़ आनन्द प्रदान कर सकें। आनन्द जो कि सहज गुण
.परन्तु किस प्रकार हम स्वयं परमात्मा विरोधी और आनन्द विरोधी हो गए, क्यों होता है ? आप समझें|
है।
हमारी चेतना हमारे मस्तिष्क के माध्यम से नीचे की ओर बढ़ती है। और अधोगति की ओर जाते हुए हमें परमात्मा
से
ले जाती है। परमात्मा को प्राप्त करना हमारा अंतिम लक्ष्य है। परन्तु हम सर्वप्रथम परमात्मा से तादात्म्य की
दूर
चेतना से थोड़ा दूर जाते हैं, केवल यह समझने के लिये कि स्वतंत्रता का उपयोग उचित होना चाहिये। इस प्रशिक्षण के
बिना मानव को स्वतंत्रता देना व्यर्थ है।.......जो चेतना हमारी अपनी थी, मानवीय चेतना, वह हमारी स्वतंत्रता को
परखने के लिये, उस पर प्रयोग करने के लिये हमें दी गयी थी, इसके द्वारा आत्मा बन जाते हैं।
आखिरकार आपने आत्मा बनना है। परन्तु जब हम अपनी तथाकथित चेतना में उन्नत होने लगते हैं तो मात्र 'आत्मा
बनना ही हमारी चिन्ता नहीं रह जाती। मैं कहूँगी कि हम उस वृक्ष की तरह हैं जो खड़े होने और उन्नत होने के लिये अपनी
जड़ें पृथ्वी में उतारता है। इसी प्रकार से हमारी जड़ें भी हमारे मस्तिष्क में हैं और फिर हम पत्ते निकलने फूल खिलने और
फल बनने तक ऊपर उठते चले जाते हैं। परन्तु इसके विपरीत फल की अवस्था तक पहुँचने से पहले हम बनावटी पत्तों
का सृजन और उनका आनन्द लेने लगते हैं। हम बनावट में फँस जाते हैं। एक बार जब हम इस बनावटीपन को अपनाने
लगते हैं तो हम वास्तविकता से दूर हटकर नकारात्मक विचारों या परमात्मा विरोधी विचारों की ओर बढ़ने लगते हैं।
इन्हीं विचारों के कारण हम एटमबम बनाते है।
अत: वास्तव में दो शाखायें हैं जिनमें हम बँट जाते हैं।
18
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-18.txt 
 १. कुछ लोग बायीं ओर को या नकारात्मक दृष्टिकोण की ओर जाना चाहते हैं। वे स्वयं को नष्ट करते हैं....उन्हें
सभी प्रकार के रोग हो जाते हैं। ये अपने शरीर को कष्ट देते हैं।.....
२. दूसरा दायाँ पक्ष है। इसमें जाने वाले लोग अन्य लोगों को कष्ट देते हैं। उन्हें नष्ट करते हैं।
दोनों ही मार्ग परमात्मा, उनकी दया और उनकी कृपा से दूर हैं। लक्ष्य केवल एक होना चाहिये 'आत्मा', केवल तभी
उचित दिशा की ओर बढ़ सकते हैं। परन्तु मानव इस लक्ष्य से आसानी से भटक जाते हैं, क्योंकि ऐसा करने के लिये वे
स्वतंत्र हैं।
.हमारे
पहला अपराध जो हमने किया है वह है परमात्मा को नकारना। हमें परमात्मा का भय नही है।
शरीर में होने वाले विभिन्न रोग क्या हैं? ये उन्हीं विनाशकारी शक्तियों के अतिरिक्त कुछ भी नहीं जिनकी रचना हमने
स्वयं अपने अन्दर की है। किसी भी बाह्य, किसी ग्रह या किसी भी प्रकार के सांसारिक आक्रमण का कोई भय नहीं है, नहीं
ऐसा कोई भय नहीं है। आक्रमण की रचना हमारे अपने अन्दर होती है और इसका ज्ञान हमें होना चाहिये। स्वतंत्रता के नाम
पर हमने अपने अन्दर विनाश के सभी जीवाणु एकत्र कर लिये हैं।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, इंग्लैण्ड,
३१.३.१९८३
अन्तर्जात रुप से हमारे अन्दर आत्मा का निवास है, जो हमें ज्योतिर्मय करना चाहती है और हमें शान्त अस्तित्व
का आशीर्वाद और आनन्द प्रदान करना चाहती है। आपके इस चिराग का सृजन किसी उद्देश्य से किया गया है। इसे
ज्योतिर्मय किया जाना है। .....
है।....
सी प्रक्रियाओं के बाद इस बहुमूल्य जीवन का सृजन
परमात्मा सृजित यह विश्व बहुत सुन्दर है।
बहुत
...
...
किया गया। अत्यन्त कठिनाई से यह सृजन हुआ। मत भूलिए कि आपको आत्मा बनना है, इसके बिना आपका जीवन
व्यर्थ है क्योंकि आप सृजन की पराकाष्ठा हैं। आप ही उस सृजन के निष्कर्ष हैं।
हमारे अन्दर एक सितारा चमक रहा है, और यही हमारी आत्मा है।
हमें अपने अन्दर उन्हें (परमात्मा की शक्तियों को) जाग्रत करना होगा, और इस प्रकार से आत्मसाक्षात्कार पाना
होगा। ..
परिस्थितियों में मानव जैसा है, ये कार्य बहुत जल्दी से कार्यान्वित नहीं होगा। शनै: शनै: होगा इस बात का मुझे विश्वास है।
अपने स्तर पर मैंने पूरी कोशिश की।
. आत्मसाक्षात्कार प्राप्त कर लेना सर्वोत्तम है। आज यही सबसे अधिक महत्वपूर्ण है। नि:सन्देह आज की
.शनै: शनै: मुझे विश्वास है, यह कार्यान्वित होगा।
विश्वास रखे इस
सांसारिक खींचातानी से परे भी कोई जीवन है, सौन्दर्य और गरिमा से परिपूर्ण शाश्वत जीवन।
परन्तु अब भी व्यक्ति को समझना होगा कि परमात्मा के कार्य परमात्मा से ही आशीर्वादित होते हैं। अपने सारे
आशीर्वादों और सहायता की कृपावर्षा वे आप पर करेंगे ताकि आप मनचाहे कर्तव्यों को पूर्ण कर सकें।
अपने आस पास बाधाओं से लड़ने के लिये आपको स्वयं को अधिक सुदृढ़ महसूस करना होगा और सृजन
के इस अंतिम लक्ष्य को कार्यान्वित करना होगा ।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, इंग्लैण्ड, ३१.३.१९८३
(निर्मला योग १९८३, चैतन्य लहरी-मई -जून, २००७, रुपान्तरित)
19
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-19.txt 
 क
ी
बु
हवर
र
জ।
ा
मंत्र हमारी कृण्डलिनी के शब्द है
20
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-20.txt 
 संस्कृत भाषा की विशेषता ये है कि एक-एक अक्षर मंत्र है। देवनागरी लिपि में एक-एक जो
हम अक्षर अ+क्ष जो क्षर नहीं है (जो नष्ट नहीं होता)। जितना हमने अ, आ, इ, ई जो कुछ है वो सारा
ही कुण्डलिनी में घूमने वाला शब्द है। वहाँ शब्द निकलता है। मनन में हमने इन शब्दों को सीखा है तब
लिखा है। जब कुण्डलिनी ऐसे घूमती है तो आवाज़ यूँ करती है श..श...श... यहाँ पर। ठीक है
न! हर जगह उसके अलग-अलग शब्द हैं जैसे यहाँ (आज्ञा चक्र पर) हूं, क्षं दो शब्द आते हैं।
वो जो हम 'ओम' करके लिखते हैं, अ जैसे जो लिखते हैं वो यहाँ आप देख सकते हैं कि यहाँ पर
ओम ही रहता है। जब कुण्डलिनी जागृत होती है तो यहाँ जब उस पर लाइट पड़ती है तो ये जो जो भी
चक्र है यहाँ पर ओम (ॐ) ऐसा ही लिखा होता है जैसा आप लिखते हैं और जो 'अ, आ, इ, ई' जो भी
लिखा है, आप लिखते हैं देवनागरी में, वो भी हमारे अन्दर कुण्डलिनी वहाँ पर आघात करती है,
जिस वक्त उसके निनाद होते हैं तब वह निनाद और उसका लिखना भी वहाँ घटित होता है।
कितनी बारीक चीज़ है। क्या आपकी संस्कृति है और कहाँ से आयी है, जो सारी मननों से उतरी हुई है,
कोई हमने बाहर से सीखी हुई आर्टिफिशियल चीजें नहीं है।
ये भाषा हमारे अन्दर उत्पन्न होती है और लिखित होती है। एक-एक अक्षर लिखने में अर्थ
होता है। ओम कैसे बना? इस तरह ॐ की रचना होती है, बिल्कुल ॐ ही लिखा है। मैं ऐसे ऊँगली घुमा
रही हूँ आपका आज्ञा घूम रहा है। इतनी साइन्टिफिक चीज़ है क्योंकि इसका सम्बन्ध रिएल्टी से है।
जब तक आप संस्कृत में श्लोक नहीं कहते, मेरे चक्र चलते ही नहीं आश्चर्य की बात है। पर आप पर
अंग्रेज़ी में कहें तो चलते हैं पर सिर्फ आज्ञा चक्र पर ईसा मसीह की जो उन्होंने अपनी लिखी है क्योंकि
यहाँ पर ईसा मसीह का स्थान है, उस पर उनका जो हिब्रू भाषा में लिखा हुआ है 'लार्डस प्रेयर'
चलता है, पर इंग्लिश में कहें तो चल जाता है। पर यहाँ पर तो क्षमा स्वरूपिणी 'क्षमा' ही शब्द
कहना पड़ता है क्योंकि यहाँ 'क्ष' शब्द है, इसलिये 'क्षमा' कहना चाहिये। सब कहने पर भी क्षमा
कहना पड़ता है।......
मंत्र की योजना आनी चाहिये। ......ंत्र विद्या का बड़ा भारी शास्त्र है कि कौनसा आपका
चक्र पकड़ा हुआ है? गर आपकी लेफ्ट साइड पकड़ी है तो आपको लेफ्ट साइड का मंत्र देना चाहिये
और आपकी राइट साइड़ पकड़ी है तो राइट साइड़ का देना चाहिये, बीच की पकड़ी ह्यी है तो बीच का
मंत्र देना चाहिये।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, दिल्ली, ३.२.१९७८
सारे देवता आपके बड़े भाई हैं। कुण्डलिनी के पथ पर भिन्न रूपों में वे विद्यमान हैं। आपको
चाहिये कि उन्हें पहचाने और उन्हें प्राप्त करें।.......देवी-देवता को जाग्रत करने के लिये मंत्रों का
उच्चारण पूर्णत: शुद्ध होना चाहिये और पूरे हृदय से किया जाना चाहिये, केवल तभी जाग्रति घटित
हो पायेगी
.....तेल में यदि पानी हो तो दीपक की बाती किस प्रकार जलेगी?
प.पू.श्री माताजी के एक पत्र से, १९.१२.१९८२
चक्र कूप्रभावित होने से तत्सम्बन्धी देवता वहाँ से अपना स्थान त्याग देते हैं। उस चक्र का
मंत्र उच्चारण करके श्री माताजी के नाम की शक्ति से उन देवता का आवाहन किया जाता है।
उपचार के लिये विपरीत पाश्र्व का हाथ प्रभावित चक्र पर रखें और प्रभावित पाश्र्व का हाथ फोटो के
पूज्य
21
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 सामने फैलायें।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, निर्मला योग, जुलाई- अगस्त १९८३ से
आपको समझना चाहिये कि छोटी- छोटी क्रियाओं से एवं मंत्रों के उच्चारण से किस प्रकार हम अपने अन्दर के
देवताओं का आवाहन करते हैं, क्योंकि आप जाग्रत हैं। आपका हर शब्द जाग्रत है। अत: आपके मंत्र भी सिद्ध हैं।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, ५.५.१९८०
.... परन्तु यदि आप परमात्मा की शक्ति से सम्बन्ध बनाये बिना ही मन्त्रोच्चारण किए जा रहे हैं तो आपको उस शक्ति
से जोड़ने वाले तार जल सकते हैं तथा आपको गले की समस्यायें हो सकती है।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, पेन्सिवेनिया, अमेरिका, १९.०९.१९९२
सहजयोग में आज ऐसे हज़ारों लोग हैं जिन्होंने मंत्र को सिद्ध कर लिया है। इतने मंत्र सिद्ध हैं उनके कि अगर वो
अपनी जगह में बैठ कर मंत्र कह दें तो जो काम करना है, करा सकते हैं।
सिद्धता के लिये मंत्र पर मेहनत करनी पड़ती है, उस पर बोलना पड़ता है, अपने चक्रों पर ध्यान करना
पड़ता है, और उसकी सिद्धता हासिल हो जाती है ।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, दिल्ली, १६.२.१९८१
सहजयोग में किसी भी चीज़ की अति न करें। अगर आप किसी को बतायें कि आपके लिये ये मंत्र है तो इसे तभी
... ...
तक प्रयोग करना चाहिये जब तक आप उस चक्र की बाधा से छुटकारा न पा लें। उसके बाद नहीं।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, ४.२.१९८३
मंत्र का स्थायी भाव पवित्रता है। मंत्रोच्चार के समय मंत्र की ओर ही चित्त का होना आवश्यक है।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, १८.९.१९८८
जब मैं बोलती हूँ तो मेरा हर शब्द मंत्र है। मैं जब बोलना आरम्भ करती हूँ तो लोग ठीक होने लगते हैं।
... ...
प.पू.श्री माताजी की डॉ.तलवार से वार्ता
ॐ बीज मंत्र है - ओंकार शब्द है, यह प्रथम शब्द है जब सदाशिव और आदिशक्ति सृष्टि रचना हेतु अलग हुये,
ध्वनि को ओंकार रुप में प्रयोग किया गया| ओंकार अर्थात् प्रकाश पूर्ण चैतन्य लहरियाँ..आदिशक्ति माँ ओंकार से श्री
गणेश की रचना करती हैं......इनके दायें भाग में सभी तत्वों के अणु हैं और बायें भाग में मनोभाव। इसके मध्य में आपके
... ...
इस
उत्थान की शक्ति निहित है।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, आस्ट्रिया, २६.८.१९९०
सारे संसार का कार्य इसी ओंकार की शक्ति से होता है, इसे हम चैतन्य कहते हैं, ब्रह्म चैतन्य कहते हैं। ब्रह्म
चैतन्य का साकार स्वरुप ही ओंकार है। इसका मूर्तस्वरूप या विग्रह श्री गणेश हैं।.... यह ओंकार अति पवित्र है और अनन्त
का कार्य करने वाली शक्ति है। आत्मा की शक्ति भी ओंकार की ही शक्ति है।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, आस्ट्रिया, २५.१२.१९९०
22
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Just think how much your Mother loves - when you think how much
your Mother loves you, you are jumping onto Her Kundalini, and at that
time when you jump onto Mother's Kundalini, then there is no thought.
(83-01-07)
Published & Printed by
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
No. 8, Chandragupta Co-op Housing Society, Paud Road,
Kothrud, Pune, Maharashtra, India - 411 038. © : 25286537, 25286032 email:sale@nitl.co.in
website: www.nitl.co.in (For queries & sending articles contact on above address)
 2012_Yuvadrishti_Mx_IV.pdf-page-23.txt 
 While doing Namahs... in the Presence of the Divine... you should not budge even
from where you are sitting... you should not move... your eyes should not rove
about... you should not yawn... so many things... in behaviour. Once you start feeling
responsible... you yourself will know how to behave... what to do... what not to do.
H.H.Shri Mataji Nirmaladevi, 77/01/26
