The Divine Cool Breeze 2013 issue 1 – volume twenty-six number one 16 00

 107

 Sometimes the words are not sufficient to hold the outpour of your joy. 2 sahaha yoga is not 14 collectivity 16 what is beauty? 18 day of the goddess 26 fear 28 our story 30 incarnations have to come 32 no problem

 Sahaja Yoga is not so simnple as you think because there are lots of temptations. Easter Puja 1998 Sahaja Yoga is Not Sahaja Yoga is not meant for people who are lousy. Mahalakshmi Puja 1985 Sangli Sahaja Yoga is not meant for people who are shallow by nature or not meant for people who are not deep enough to seek. It is for a special category of people who are seekers. They are the only ones who can really become Sahaja Yogis. 10 September 1983 You have to be honest and you have to be intelligent. Sahaja Yoga is not meant for idiots. Frankly, try to understand why are you on this Earth. 9 July 1994 Sahaja Yoga is not meant for people who do not want their salvation. It is meant for people who really want their salvation. 24 July 1992 There are many who are Sahaja Yogis and not at all Sahaja Yogis. Sahaja Yoga is not for hypocrites at all. You cannot be a hypocrite. You have to be what you preach, what you say, what you understand and what we stand for. 5 March 1986

 beNot Sahaja Yoga is not meant for frivolous people, nor for the stupid or idiots. It is meant for people of courage, people of for the lousy dignity and who are honest and truthful and want to know the truth. 8 July 1988 for the idiotic Sahaja Yoga is not meant for rrogant people. If you try to be arrogant, you will drop out. 2 June 1982 for the stupid Sahaja Yoga is not meant for useless people. for the useless Shri Krishna Puja 1992 If there are stupid people, if there are idiotic people, Sahaja Yoga for the shallow is not meant for such people. In the Sanskrit language they are called as mudhahs. Neither is this meant for people who are for the arrogant over-smart and trying to cheat themselves – intelligence has that capacity – and to indulge for the frivolous into things which are not Sahaj. Sahasrara Puja 1987 Do not be enamoured by for the hypocritical nonsensical things. These nonsensical things can only be appreciated by stupid and idiotic people and Sahaja Yoga is not for those not wanting salvation meant for idiots. It is meant for people who are alert and aware and who want the truth. 4 October 1993 3.

 Sahaja Yoga is not some sort of a club where you can just put a label on your head. The job of Sahaja Yoga It is the becoming. It is nothing artificial. What you become within is the point. 26 October 1987 is not to cure, but to Sahaja Yoga is not an individual movement, but a collective movement. You cannot just practise it at home alone. create doctors. You have to please come to the collective. 28 July 1992 Sahaja Yoga is not meant for a few or for 9 May 1985 very few individuals – it is collective – but it is made for the whole of the collective and it has to work out that way. 27 December 1988 We have to be one with the subtleties. Sahaja Yoga is not possible if you want to see it from a gross level. You cannot understand. Shri Durga Puja 1982 Sahaja Yoga is not going to work by advertisement, Sahaja Yoga is not going to benefit by you, nor by My photographs. It is going to work by your but you have to be benefitted. work, by your responsibility, by your shouldering 6 January 1990 Sahaja Yoga. It is your responsibility to spread Sahaja Yoga and to establish it. But first of all, your shoulders should be strong.... Life for us is nothing but Sahaja Yoga and Sahaja Yoga is nothing but enlightening ourselves and others. Shri Virata Puja 1989

 Sahaja Yoga is not like this, you just put some spirit into somebody and the that Sahaja Yoga is not a cult. person feels absolutely elated for a time being It is your evolution. and then is finished, but it is It is your natural thing that is happening to you. something that has to grow. It is a living process. It grows within us. It takes time. Shri Mahakali Puja 1989 It is not a cult where there is nothing like bad and good... Sahaja Yoga is not a craze. It is not like this. It is a power that should give you greater powers instead of making In a cult everybody is good. you frightened personalities. You are not excluded people, There is nothing like a bad thing.... excluded from the rest of them. You are not excluded. But in natural processes, we have discretion You are exclusive, but not excluded. This is discretion. and we know what is good and what is bad. Sahasrara Puja 1984 have seen a sunflower, If Sahaja Yoga is not a thing where you you can just enrol yourself and it knows which way to turns its face. make some money and become wealthy. You have to grow and become the tree yourself. The trees know which way to turn their faces, It is your own. 22 March 1981 which way to move. The roots know where to go, how to go towards the sources of water. 7 April 1982 LO

 Knowledge of Sahaja Yoga is not the way you Sahaja Yoga is not for Me at all. I do not have to do it. It is for you to do it to gain that knowledge understand. It is not the knowledge of chakras. which is in yourself. It is the knowledge of attitudes. It is not the knowledge 26 November 1979 Sahaja Yoga is not only meant for of any system. We do not want to have systems because your ascent, but for the ascent of the whole world. every system creates a bondage, a kind of a slavery. 10 October 1993 We have to develop attitudes within us which are Sahaja Yoga is not meant for attitudes that are tried and tested on experience. the individual. It is not meant for you. It is not meant for any So it is not what you can talk elaborately about. collective Sahaja Yogis. It is meant for the whole world. You have to bring the light of God's love and Chakras and things are important, but it is what compassion everywhere. Navaratri Puja 1988 you express in your personality, in your attitude toward things. 6 September 1986 Many people do not understand that Sahaja Yoga is not for them only. It is for the whole world. You have to give it to others and you have to bring forth what Sahaja Yoga is not just to pass energy through us like you call unity of love. Shri Adi Shakti Puja 2007 all other material things are passing energy.... In Sahaja Yoga, there is not such a hard and fast rule about anything. You have to absorb that flow of the Ganges within you I mean you are absolutely free and assimilate it and transform yourself. people and you have to use all the freedom, absolutely. 27 January 1980 Shri Vishnumaya Puja 1992 Sahaja Yoga is not part time. It is not a side issue. It should be always with you. Kundalini Puja 1992

 Not Sahaja Yoga is not a new thing. In the tradition of spirituality, it is mentioned about fourteen thousand years back by a club Markandeya. 5 September 1984 Coming to Sahaja Yoga is not just for your personal limited personalities and their problems, a cult but it is you on one side who has to grow and, on the other side, everyone has to grow through a craze you. Sahasrara Puja 1994 It is not that it is compulsory · a thought "If you don't meditate you'll go to hell" – nothing of the kind. >כ Sahaja Yoga is not like that. Only in Sahaja Yoga one thing is there: a new thing if you have to grow, then you have to meditate. And that is the best time for individual meditation, for a profession individual meditation. And that is how one has to do it. 31 August 1991 an extreme thing Sahaja Yoga is not any religion outside. It is not an organized religion by human beings. It is an organized religion a thing that is within us, that is spontaneously happening within us and it works out absolutely without any concern to your a mental understanding community, race or to your colour or to the nationality or to the position or whatever may be the relationship you may have with each other. 15 June 1979

 Sahaja Yoga is not just by saying | Sahaja Yoga is not done through brain activities. "I am a Sahaja Yogi," but it is a very deep personality. And that deep personality has to be felt by others as the wise, very wise thing. Many people think that if you just tell yourself, "You have to be like this," it will work out – if כ you Not that how much you talk or have to all the time inform yourself that “Oh, you must shout or give lectures is important, it is the peace, the tranquility, the get rid of a particular problem," it will be all right. capacity to love within you which are important. And that is how Or some people think that if they tell somebody that people can judge whether you are really clearly blessed by “This is wrong with you and you should get well," your Mother or not. Navaratri Puja 2002 it will be all right. It is not so because Sahaja Yoga does If they are married, they are not not work on a mental level. It works on a spiritual happy. If they are divorced, they must be married again – all sorts level, which is a much higher level. 16 January 1983 of things and complications for which I am not prepared. Sahaja Yoga is not for that. Perhaps we do not realize how important it is to be Christmas Puja 2001 Many Sahaja Yogis feel that Sahaja Yoga is for solving problems all which are of a very a Sahaja Yogi. Sahaja Yoga is not only for saying, "Mother, I am full of joy, I'm enjoying myself, I got mundane nature. Sahaja Yoga is purified, everything is fine." But for what? Why for giving you spiritual light. It is not for solving your did you get all these blessings? Why have you been problems. But, as a result, the problems are solved. cleansed? So that this knowledge of the will of God 13 November 1980 should be apparent in you. Not only that, it should be Sahaja Yoga is not meant for such people who want to go into al this surplus [activity] and all these kinds of actions. It is a very simple a part and parcel of you. So we have to raise our level. We have to come up. Sahasrara Puja 1992 thing. 20 October 1980

 You have to transform. It is the transmutation that has to take Some people have a hankering after money. place. Sahaja Yoga is not for sale. 20 July 1981 Some people think they can make money by coming Sahaja Yoga is not for people who to Sahaja Yoga. Some people think they will become want to go to hell. It is very easy. But to deny Sahaja Yoga and to leaders or something, they will have fame or defy it after coming to it and not to accept the verdict of Sahaja something, that they will achieve a kind of a very Yoga and to displease the Deities is the worst thing one can do. Shri Krishna Puja 1981 dominant position and some think that they can befool Me also. At the right time, we will realize that Sahaja Sahaja Yoga is not a thought. It is an experience. It is not a Yoga is not for this. Sahaja Yoga is for making you the thought. Enter nirvichara samadhi otherwise – only you can grow, wisest person, the sanest person, the most generous and you cannot grow. 18 July 1994 the most confident person in the world because you We are so conditioned that we take to things which superficially have to fight. You have to fight the dark ignorance are very appealing. Sahaja Yoga is not like that. It is truth. of Kali Yuga.... As you know, Sahaja Yoga is It is reality. 10 June 1982 not meant for a few or for very few individuals. Sahaja Yoga is not individualistic. It is not for one person to become It is collective. But it is made for the whole of the a saint and sit somewhere. It is not like that. It is not meant collective and it has to work out that way. for one person, for oneself. It is not individualistic. It is a collective happening. 26 December 1988 Shri Adi Shakti Puja 1997

 The understanding of Sahaja Yoga is not mental. Coming to Sahaja Yoga It is not a mental understanding. You cannot is not what we have gained, what we have got. There are understand it through the brain. If you try to people who say, "We've done so much for Sahaj Yoga and what has Sahaja Yoga given us?" understand it through the brain, you get away from it It has given you Self Realization. It has given you the angel status. because you cannot explain how it works out. Shri Hanuman Puja 1989 It is a miraculous thing. It is a mystery. God is a Sahaja Yoga is not done by Adi Shakti. She has created these mystery for man, will remain a mystery to a point, powers in everyone, which work out, but Sahaja Yoga is not. Sahaja Yoga but he can become His power. He can become an works through the innate qualities that are in the Mother Earth and that instrument of His power. So you cannot comprehend are in the seed. So I am here not as Adi Shakti. I am here as the Mother the complete thing through your brains. You cannot [of the Sahaja Yogis], as their Holy Mother. And as the Holy Mother, even comprehend a little bit through your brains. I have guided them. The only thing is when you see it happening, you see it Shri Hanumana Puja 1989 working out. The effects of that experience which are Sahaja Yoga is not in the market. This you must have known because you cannot pay for Sahaja Yoga. It is an insult even to think of money. put on your brain, that gives you faith. 8 September 1980 This is your own right. You are made for it. 7 March 1981 Sahaja Yoga is not just raising the Kundalini, but giving the complete knowledge about Sahaja Yoga and also empowering the person with the power to give others Realization. It was a tremendous task. Shri Krishna Puja 1991

 Sahaja Yoga is not only doing the Not course, but it is for your well- being, for your benevolence. have to go further And you with it and you have to grow. for sale Now do not leave it half way. It is not like just sprouting in the seed, but it has to become the tree, otherwise nobody can be helped. for a few Shri Saraswati Puja 1990 Sahaja Yoga is not a profession for curing because a profession means the individuality of a drop. This is a collective work. Sahaja Yoga is a surrender. It is not a profession. for the individual It is a surrender. Shri Devi Shakti Puja 1995 for making money Sahaja Yoga is not going to be like other religions where people abuse children, do what they like, make money, this, that, all nonsense like a mafia. You are people who are for material well-being chosen and are special people who believe in a good moral life and a for solving mundane problems peaceful life. Shri Adi Shakti Puja 1995 Sahaja Yoga is not only for your for seeing imperfections of others | enjoyment like some drunkards sitting and drinking together. It is to fill up your cups to be given to others, to many others who are there. Easter Puja 1992 11

 Sahaja Yoga is not for sticking on The most important thing is that Sahaja Yoga is to something like somebody who not a cult. You have to be absolutely normal people. had learned certain lessons about Sahaja Yoga in the beginning of it, 5 December 1980 certain mantras they had learned, and still they are sticking onto the same step. No, no, no, no – you have to go ahead. This is just a To do the work of Sahaja Yoga is not to feel that you staircase. Do not get stuck at a point. Guru Puja 1987 are doing it, but it is Shri Ganesha who is doing it. If you do not want to accept Me Shri Ganesha Puja 1995 or if you react, it is not going to help you. Sahaja Yoga is not for Me. It is for you. If you are truthfully, honestly, if you are seekers, then you must know that Sahaja Yoga is not one lecture. “my aim is to rise spiritually." 1 January 1990 It is not two. It can be hundreds. But the happening takes a split of a second. In no way should you be just women who do not know anything of Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja 13 June 1983 Yoga is not only made for men. It is made for you, much for you because you are shakti and I am The first principle of Sahaja Yoga is not to see your Mother. 1 January 1990 Sahaja Yoga is not only for the physical being because you are others’ imperfections. What is the gain? Shri Krishna Puja 1981 not only the physical being... It is not for the mental being. Not It is not for the emotional being. But it is for your spiritual being. But as you are the temple of God, the temple has to be cleansed. 31 July 1984

 This is a serious work, I must say. Sahaja Yoga is not what I Sahaja Yoga is not possible in people who are frivolous, who are cheap, who have no respect That is not Sahaja Yoga. for themselves, who are people who have wavered, who do not care for their Realization and for What you say, what you talk, you must walk. higher life. You see, that is how Sahaja Yoga spreads very slowly. It does not spread so fast. Because I say so, that does not mean 28 February 1983 Some people have an opening by listening to Me you become Sahaja Yogis. introduction lecture free and then the second one is banking. Sahaja Yoga is not like that. No – you have to practise it. All this nonsense is not in Sahaja Yoga. It is reality and reality cannot be purchased. And practising is very easy. 7 December 1991 Sahaja Yoga is not going to work It is very easy to practise Sahaja Yoga out individually. Anybody who thinks that “I am something greater than the others" is a because it is innately within you. gone case. 15 October 1979 If they are interested in material It is joy-giving. You enjoy your virtues. well-being, Sahaja Yoga is not for such people at all. If they do not want to have God, forget them. 3 February 1983 And you are so secure, so confident. Sahaja Yoga is not an extreme thing. 12 February 1992 Shri Devi Puja 1985 13

 Let us see how we miss out in collectivity. There is a very practical down-to-earth understanding. First, we must know that without collectivity we cannot exist. As the body has to be in connection with the brain, in the same way, without collectivity, Sahaja Yoga cannot exist. Once you understand that, then you have to work it out that col- Virata Puja 1991 lectivity is absolutely established, within and without. It is more within Melbourne that you have to establish, than without. Whatever you have within is manifested outside. Now how do we establish it within ourselves? First of all, we have to understand that now we are the relations of each other. Gyaneshwari said, "Techi Soyarik hoti." ("They will be your relatives.") So the first thing is that within ourselves we have to see introspection. With introspection, what are we doing against collectivity in our mind? How is our mind working? I do not know what thing comes first in the human mind about an- other but the first thing is that these are your real relations and person, nobody else is your relation. These children are your children and these men are your brothers and these ladies are your sisters and we are one big family together. We are part and parcel of one body and this hand cannot hit another hand. Thank God it does not think, otherwise, as hu- man beings, they might start thinking against another hand, but they do not because they are connected to one brain activity. So the first thing one has to understand is that do not try to see the defects of another person, but the goodness of another person. That is really going to help you the most. 14

 without collectivity sahaja yoga cannot exist they will be your relatives

 Is to K NOW that Sahaja Yogis have to be with great potential manifesting. If they are, then it triggers very well. Otherwise I cannot work it out. For that, we have to understand that in Sahaja Yoga there is no sacrifice of any kind. You do not have to sacrifice anything. It is all the time blessings throughout. You do not have to do not have to suffer anything also – nothing of the kind. sacrifice anything and you I have told you about how My father was in jail, My mother was in jail and how many times we suffered during the war of independence. We lost everything, all our properties, everything for the war of independence only. But this is the independence, the freedom of an absolute nature, not only for you, but for the whole world, for your children, for everyone. It is a tremendous work. It is a very great achievement. In the history of spirituality, in the his- tory of the world, this is the greatest thing that has happened. It is that people are transformed WC into a new awareness. Perhaps you are not aware of it and we take it for granted, we do not understand the importance of it... You are very safe in Sahaja Yoga. Stay in Sahaja Yoga. Grow in Sahaja Yoga. Enjoy in Sahaja 20 March 1990 Yoga. Everything is there available for you. And you do not have to do anything else except that keep together. It is a collective happening. It is a collective. Sydney

 what is beauty? If you are not in the collective, the Divine is not interested in you at all. You are out of it. Only the collective gets the power. Only the collective is magnetic. A single person who lives away from the collective all the time, there is something wrong with that person. If you cannot be collective, there is something wrong. Such a person should sit down and find out what is wrong... If you want to lead a happy, healthy, good life, then be sensible, have some wisdom about it. And so some people who have been negative are still negative and just thinking on the same lines.... We are not like common people. We are not ordinary people. We are saints. We are to respect each other, to love each other, to understand and enjoy each other. What will the chil- dren say tomorrow...? Let us see how we start diverting our energies to a collective beauty, collective love, col- lective understanding. And if it is not, there is something wrong with you. Take it from Me - something is wrong. So either you are right-sided or left-sided. Find out and just get yourself cleared out. Treat it out yourself and you will understand that there was something wrong with you, nothing wrong with Sahaja Yoga. All such ideas are going to completely blast Sahaja Yoga and finish it off. They are selfish, self-oriented, absolutely out-of-date ideas for Sahaja Yoga... It is like one family. It is like one body. If something hurts here, the whole body knows. You must know how many there are with us. You feel so strong and happy. But first of all, you must develop that rapport. You must develop that love. You must develop that personality.... The right-sided are over-confident. The left-sided are diffident.... The left-sided trouble themselves and the right-sided trouble others. They try to show off.. There is nobody great in Sahaja Yoga. Everybody is just the same. Just like all fingers are the same, every cell is the same, everybody is the same. So nobody is higher and lower. There is no hierarchy in Sahaja Yoga. Everybody must understand that we are all one, part and parcel of one body and we do not have to consider ourself higher or lower.... A Sahaja Yogi has to be very dignified, otherwise why will people come to Sahaja Yoga if we are just like them? We have to be exceptional, isn't it? And that is what I call dignified, loving, affectionate, kind, sweet. That's what is the beauty. 17

 the Goddess Day of Shri Durga Puja Rahuri India February 1982 Tadax is a special day. There is a combination of two things happening... It was a very important day that started at 8:15 in the morning called as Rath Saptami. It is the seventh day and it is said that the sun travels with his seven forces, seven colours in a big chariot. And today they celebrate this day as a day when the sun travels with divine vibrations all over the world and illumines.... The second thing today we do is a very great puja of Ashtami. It is the day when the Goddess killed nine rakshasas together with Her eight hands. So today is a very special day for which a very special attention is needed. It is only at the behest of the bhaktas that the Goddess took Her form and killed all these rakshashas. Also with Her eight hands She killed Mahishasur. That is why She is called as Mahishasur Mardini. She is called as Nav-Chandi, the one who has killed nine chandas. It means nine rakshashas She has killed. So it is a very important day and very vital and very deep. It is very simple to say, “Mother, we have fixed Your puja on such and such date." Nobody thinks what Mother has to work behind these כל things. You cannot fix My puja. It is not proper. It is I who can tell you what time is the best for you to do the puja. It starts at two minutes past twelve. So now we can start it....

 19

 23 That is how it is going 20

 Today is the day of the Goddess, a very important day that you are here. Somehow we are having all the pujas on Mondays. That is why I am wearing this spe- cial type of a sari, which is to be used for Ashta Puja's Vahana. It is a tiger as well as a lion. Imagine – where I am staying there is a photograph of a tiger and a lion, both in that photo. You can go and see for yourself. Normally, you never get these, but that is there, a beautiful photograph enlarged, a tiger and a lion. So in the morning, the Surya was very beautiful. I don't know if you saw the morning sun. At least tomor- row try to see. It is not important how long you sleep here, what food you eat, whether you get it in time and all that. You should get rid of these habits. It is very important. And these regularities and all these mundane type of things, the bounding of timing and all that, you must get out of this space, time – everything. And you should not go on worrying about things because you get so exhausted. Without doing any work, you feel ex- hausted because you are so fixed up, so fixed up that you cannot get out of these habits, you see, while the In- %23 dians are not fixed up like this. They know that Mother knows the best. She will come at the time when the puja has to start. So one should try to understand that if I am the God, then why should you worry? But I have one problem with the Western mind. It is that if they cannot conceive it, they start criticizing in- stead of making yourself subtler and subtler to conceive the beauty of the Divine. If you do not get it, you will start criticizing on any point – anything you can get hold of and you will start criticizing. So that is not the way we can grow. That is why I am telling you beforehand that this puja is very important to work. and, at this puja, you have to request that nine chandas, WO1 K. who are still there, be killed. And this Mahishasur also should be killed. They should be driven out and that is how it is going to work out.

 It is very important.... It is a much deeper significance. Much deeper work has to be done. So many things have to be worked out. It is a very subtle thing. And the more you discuss it, the more you talk about it, you lose. You should keep quiet and absorb. So today is not a day of such a mundane type. It is very important in this small place where we are sitting. We are doing a tremendous job and you people, who have suffered the most on account of these rakshashas, should be absolutely intensive, be careful that these sinners must go out. Something has to be done instead of thinking about yourself and your inconveniences, your troubles and whatever you call them, which are not so important at all. You are saints and you must support all divine work with complete understand- ing. On the contrary, if you are so much worried about your own things – I mean you are a fool, you yourself are a fool, so I would say that even some people will say that this happened, that happened. Perhaps the group is bit too big... I always had a feeling that this group is increasing a bit too much. We did not have any idea of so many people coming in. But then they are sharing, they are settled down, there is some place to sleep. And if you can understand, see that these things are not impor- tant then you go to England and just sleep or you go to Australia and just sleep. I mean you have all the time. Just now you are here to become subtler and subtler.... We have to be one with the subtleties. Sahaja Yoga is not possible if you want to see it from a gross level. You cannot understand. I have already told you that, without Realization, you cannot have Sahaja Yoga. But even after Realization, if you stick on to those old things which belong to the egg you will have no advantage. So try to become subtler and subtler. And do not think about it. You will relax. You will feel better ... that you should have food in the right time – “this at the right time, this should be the food." I mean it is such a stuck-up thing. We cannot be stuck-up with food. We cannot be stuck-up with all these things. You are going to a level where nobody has reached. With this understanding, if and you surrender, it means not to give Me anything, but to get rid of your ego your stuck-up ideas which there have been. It would be a very good thing. When you discuss also among yourselves, nobody should discuss inconvenienc- es.... I live with many more conveniences and comforts than any one of you live, but I can adjust Myself much more. So you should also try to forget about it. Do not talk of your inconveniences. That will make you very gross. The one who becomes subtler and subtler only can achieve something... to be one with the subtleties W.

 Today is Ashtami ... and the morning is Rath Saptami. Getting a puja on Ashtami is a very big thing and at Rahuri, My maternal home, is also there. On this day of Ashtami, we celebrate this day, Rama Devi as Ashta Bhuja Devi, who made great conquests, prominent conquests, being the killing of the big, big, bad rakshasas, destroying them, killing them. She is called as Nav Chandi, also as Chandika, Ashta Bhuja, Durga and many other names are there and She has destroyed all these chan- da, munda and others, all the Nav Chandas. That is why She is called Nav Chandi. She has also destroyed Mahishasura and, after killing Mahishasura, the Gods show- ered praises on Her, but those bhaktas who called Her, they were all very dharmic, sattvik, with very good qualities. Having been very much pleased with their qualities, the Devi took incarnation. So those qualities should be in us. What are our feelings towards the Devi? “Mataji, we have fixed Your puja, just like we have arranged one program, so You please come in many villages. Mataji, we have kept the puja at this time." Keeping will not do and you cannot keep like this. If I am pleased, I will sit for the puja, otherwise not. It depends on Me. You have to invite the Devi first ... oth- erwise the Devi will not sit. The Devi is not in need of the puja. You are in need of the puja. She has to be pleased.... Her children have made a lot of mistakes.... Her children are still making mistakes. They have shraddha, some have shraddha, but they make mistakes. In some, there is no shraddha at all, but are superficial. They will outwardly show they are very good. Seeing all these things, the Devi's mind be- comes saddened and feels why the puja should be given to such people who do not deserve this. 23

 10 It is for the whole universe.

 So you should become sadguni [virtuous]. In sadgunas, the highest quality is. Adi Shan- karacharya was asked which is the greatest quality. He said Devi bhakti, Mother's bhakti. She is Devi. Your Mother is the Devi. Understanding that, do Her bhakti. In that bhakti there should not be any false thing. The first quality, the highest quality, if it is seen in a hu- man being from his heart, all his bad qualities will be destroyed. He will get light and attain moksha. That is why he has always praised the Devi. In the beginning he has described a lot, written lots of books like Vivek Chudamani. Lastly, he said that only by pleasing the Devi one can get everything. Then why do these things? Why to do debates? Why to do discourses and break one's head? Just praise the Devi and you will get whatever you want. His intelligence very few people have. When that intelligence comes into us, then you will get the authority. In the same way, without doing anything, also I am prasanna chitta now and any number of mistakes you make, I will forgive them all. Without doing that, it will not be possible because I have come with a very big heart and will forgive all your mistakes, but cheating on Me you should not do and all the time crying and repeatedly saying that "I have committed mistakes" will also not do. Then it becomes a problem for the Devi. You should ask for forgiveness from the Devi and take a vow today that hereafter we will not repeat the mistakes. Today is Ashtami. It is called as Bhishma Ashtami. Now Bhishma had taken a vow which you all know. That vow was never broken by him under any circumstances, therefore today you have to take a vow. On this Ashtami, you all take a vow that, because of this vow, all the world will be benefitted from it fruits. You should not think how will it happen from this small place. This is a very big centre, so whatever vow you take now, with complete devotion and utmost faith, the fruits of which will be for the whole world. That is how you should think. Today is another day. It is called as Bhishma Ashtami. It is the day when Bhishma, a great saint, took a great vow and that vow he carried out all his life. It was a great vow he took. So today also is the day of the vow he took on an Ashtami day ... so today is another day for you to take a vow. So also we should try to take a vow. And with that vow, you should be able to achieve something which has not been yet achieved. This achievement is not only for these people. It is not only for Maharashtra, it is not only for India, it is not only for the whole world, but for the whole universe. So you are playing a very important, vital role and one should try to improve one's quality of life... Unless and until you have that substantial quality, nothing is going to work out.... You must work it out in such a way that you become substantially dedicated to Sahaja Yoga, not just for your sake, not just for your family or for your country, but for the whole universe. you are the seeds who are going to create that great atmosphere that will bring forth So the great change that we are expecting of Mahayoga. 25

 a stupid worrying fall Fear It should be brought to a proper balance between the understanding of the poor and the rich and the rich and the poor. After some time, you will find that people will not consider or riches as so important, but the richness of the spirit will become very important. That is what is going to be the Sahaj nations, where the richness of the heart, the spirituality, oneness with the Divine will become the greatest boon for everyone. But still we are struggling to be in that state. Many are. And still we go into materialistic tantrums or some sort of a stupid worrying fall. All these must be carefully watched. If can keep this chariot of new progress progressing faster, we are going to create a new world of complete harmony, complete peace, joy and love. But for that, you are the ones who have to do it. I cannot do it. If I could have done it, I would not have asked you to join Sahaja Yoga. It is like the horses and the charioteer. Horses are to be driven. The charioteer does not drive the chariot. In the same way, you must understand your responsibility that this is the greatest work we are doing. It is not only the industry or the labour and the capital I am talking about, but I am talking about the totality of well-being. Of course, all of this is a part and parcel of that, no doubt. But the balance should be with the totality. So we have to think of a total well-being. Once we start thinking of the total well-being, then the first thing that should come to us is are we capable of bringing up that total well- being? Are we? Have we got the total well-being within ourselves or not? Have we? We are still worried if the plane is coming or not. I mean we are so mundane, so little, so small. With one bandhan you can control any plane, any atmosphere and here you are still worried about things which are absolutely under So this totality has to be thought over. What is this totality that Mother is talking about? In this totality, a world has to be created of people, by the people, who have no fear. This fear has to be given up. Behind all this nonsensical nervousness is fear. So for that, what She does is to give ... Her protection. You are beyond fear. You are protected. But if you do not want to believe in yourself and you do not believe into Her protection, then nobody can help you because everything is mythical for you. In every venture that we take up, we should not have any fear because God is with a fact. It is the truth. You just try. But when you try through your ego, you fall into the trap fear. I have seen egotistical people are the most frightened people, and panicked, because they panic others and so they think they can be panicked one day... This fear creeps into our minds and we start getting all kinds of these stupid tantrums out of this mythical fear. The fear is created by our ego. A person who has no ego, he will have no fear because he has not harmed anyone. Why should he have fear? And such a man or such a woman will be looked after by God because God takes over. When you surrender your ego to God, He takes over. But for those who have ego, He says, “All right, go ahead, use your ego, poverty you your control. you. It is of any CC try to protect yourself, cut your throat." That's what it is.

 So when I talk of total benevolence, I am talking about your own total benevolence. So first is the fear, which should go out of your mind completely if you believe in the Almighty God. "You are Almighty God, You are almighty..." It is all lip-service. If you believe that God is almighty and you are connected with God, then why should you have any fear of anything? But when we say, “Don't have fear," another extreme comes up: we do not have fear, we can do what we like, we can perform everything ourselves, we need not tell anyone. You have to tell God whatever you are doing. You have to take permission. You have to inform in His darbar, in His court, that “Sir, we are thinking of doing such and such thing." But you We will say, CC think you are God. You are not. And that is why the other part of non-fear is this kind of an arbitrary behaviour which is very dangerous for Sahaja Yoga, for yourself and for everybody else. Mahalakshmi Puja 1992 Kalve Ganesha has no fear at all. In the same way, you should have no fear, no fear at all – no fear. As long as your Mother is with you, why should you have any fear? Fear of this, fear of that, “I'm frightened, I can't do this, I can't do that." That children never do. They will try everything if you tell them. You should have no fear. I do not know what fear is. In the same way, you should have no fear, no fear of anything. Nothing is going to go wrong with you, but do not do wrong things. If you do wrong things it will repel. It will work out on you. But do not do wrong things. Be straightforward and noth- ing can harm We have had so many experiences of this, how everywhere laid down for you, everybody is looking after you. There are so many Deities who are working out things for have to be, you have to be extremely careful that you do not develop this fear business because fear takes you to the left side and once you go to the left side, you know the problems of the left side. First of all, you go against Ganesha. Ganesha is standing at the base of the left. And you develop cancers, you develop all these things, fear, fear, fear and emotional problems and all these things come. In emotions you should be bubbling with joy. Joy is your emotion. In action you should be thoughtless. And in ascent you should be surrendered. That's all. It is very simple. you. Nothing can harm you. you. But you then 31 December 1985 When you are standing on the truth, what is there to fear? Truth is such a a complete picture of the whole thing. There is nothing to fear. Your Father, He is compassion. He is an ocean of compassion. And He is an ocean of love and an ocean of forgiveness. And He is now within Who is more powerful than Him? It is very easy for many in God." You believe it or not. He is there. light that it gives you you. human beings to say, “Oh, we don't believe 7 October 1981 CC Joy is your emotion. In action you should be thoughtless. And in ascent you should be surrendered. 27

 Our Story SHE IS EVERYWH ERE It happened in the year 1972. One day, 9:30 pm. We finished our meals. All the members of our family were chit-chatting. All of a sudden, my wife began to feel acute pain in the stomach. I inquired and our Poojya Mataji told us that She had gone to Santa Cruz Airport to give a send-off to Shri Srivastava-sahib. While returning, She thought of us and paying a visit to our place, which was on the way. When She came to know that my wife had She said, "O Mother, had You been here at this time, I would have got immediate relief immediately gave Her healing touch on the from You." CC acute pain in the stomach at that time, She stomach and cured her within no time. Hardly a minute might have passed when we heard the jungling noise of our door-bell. I opened the door. It was a surprise of sur- - our Divine Mother Mataji smiling That day we had great pleasure with tremen- dous vibrations in our home for about two hours. This is our significant experience. Really, our Divine Mother Mataji is omnip- prises and entering the front room. We were overjoyed and wondered how our Mataji had come to our place at that particu- otent. She comes to the rescue of Her devotees when remembered. I can say that one must have sincere dedica- tion, complete surrender and obedience at the Holy Feet of Her Holiness Mataji. Anant Jeevan lar time. (My wife had remembered Her just Feb-Apr 1980 a minute ago.) B.G. Pradhan 28

 THE M OVING FINGER The moving finger writes; and, having writ, Moves on: nor all thy Piety nor Wit Shall lure it back to cancel half a Line H.H. Mataji: Bete, can anyone operate between the eyebrows and the third eye? In that case, all the surgeons would be much sought for. (laughter) A young girl of sixteen was fascinated by Ratna: Mataji, is it possible that the Divine these lines so much that she lived on them for Power can be converted into evil as shown in the latest movies, The Omen, The Exorcist? H.H. Mataji: The Divine Power always twenty-six years. If there was a Moving Finger who could control our lives, then what was the need for temples, churches and worship? – a question which haunted her for many, many remains divine. There is no doubt in it. It is you forget a power which can never finish. If your path, I may give you a little jolt, that's all. years. Then one day she heard a saying, "Arise, My love for all of you is always there. awake and stop not until the goal is reached." appealed all right and so she got up at 4 am, called herself a karma yogi and kept on working. But still the problem of life and its meaning were not being solved. Everything the Sahasrara, which is the final destination. appeared existing, but what was her role in life? This was a question, probably an eternal Ratna: In the spiritual path, is it necessary to wear good clothes? H.H. Mataji: Once the Kundalini is awak- ened, she passes through six chakras, touching It All these chakras have Deities to guard them. Once the Mahalakshmi chakra is aroused, you have to respect Her by putting on your best one! Maybe we were not the lucky ones like those and being scrupulously clean. Mahasaraswati born when Shri Ram and Sita, Radha and demands precision and neatness. Krishna, Lord Jesus and Mother Mary came down on Earth to bless the people. Sometimes I thought that maybe we could still get a darshan of Mahavishnu or have a vision of Sakshat Shakti Herself. I kept on The goal was reached. Her Holiness Mataji with Her glances and touches had given Ratna her Self Realization. The Moving Finger moved on and blessed thinking and lo! we were blessed. in the room. And now we under- everyone In 1980, Her Holiness Mataji Nirmala stood that all that had been written for us Devi was in Delhi. She was here to waken the could be scratched down with all H.H. Mat- Kundalini. aji's blessings. With Ratna and her whole family medi- tating and taking salt water treatment in the night, life seems to have developed a new meaning. No hurry, no worries, no taxis, no cars to rush you up to any place of pilgrimage. She was the lucky one to have made it! Yes! Mataji's looks and glances are enough. Even Her photograph vibrates. It is absolutely true. Our beloved and revered Mataji absorbs all our sorrows and this keeps us always smil- ing. Smiling as we always are, others want to know the secret. This young girl, now a mother of grown-up children, went to meet Her Holiness as She happened to be her Mamaji (aunt) by relation- ship. But when she bowed to touch Her Lotus Feet, she realized that, more than a Mami, a "Mother" was needed. The change was all in a few micro-seconds. She asked Her Holiness to bless her daugh- ter, Ratna, who was accompanying her. Ratna, a student, felt completely relaxed in H.H. Mataji's presence. H.H. Mataji: How are you, Bete? Ratna: I am all right, Mataji, but I would like to know about the third eye which Lebsang Rampa wrote about. Then, as there are no secrets in Sahaja Yoga, we tell them, say, “Jai Mataji.' Maha Avatar Mrs. Varma, Delhi September 1980 Oct-Dec 1980

 LEN Incarnations have to EGO

 come Different stages of human evolution took place when all these incarnations came on this Earth. Incarnations have to come. If you reason it out, you will understand why an incarnation is needed to come on this Earth. The unconscious can guide you through symbols which appear in your dreams. There are so many other ways, by certain happenings, the unconscious, the Divine, can guide you – but it is all vague, extremely vague. The unconscious must have a mouth to explain itself. It must have a proper body to be able to communicate what it has to say, otherwise how are you going to have rapport with the unconscious. You cannot have any rapport with the Divine unless and until you know you are the Atman, your Atma. Before that, whatever you may try may create a depth in you, a serenity in you, a character in you, but still you cannot have a direct rapport. You are to be connected. Now, somebody has to do this job. That is why many incarnations came on this Earth. 31

 DIVINE COOL BREEZE volume 26 number 1 BACK COVER: 10 March 1985 “The love which you have should be expanded. And it is very simple. If you are attached to Me, I am a person who is so much spread out all over. It goes into the whole. It goes into the nature. It permeates everywhere. Whatever love you give Me is not like a drop in an ocean, but is this ocean in a drop. And that is what we must understand: how to love Mother." WORDS CONTENTS PAGES: Shri Ganesha Puja 1984 PAGE 31: "Maha Avatar" magazine October-December 1980 OPPOSITE PAGE: 26 November 1979

 There should be no problem for you to understand that it is a special grace because you are special. Maybe I am also special. And special people needed somebody special, so I had to come down here. Let's have it in a mutual admiration way. It will be a good idea. There is no need to feel obliged because I have to do it. I feel loaded with it. And I feel lighter when you get it. Like a mother, I tell you sometimes I have to be stern... I know the job of a mother. You need not be afraid of Me at all. I know everything about you – somehow. www.divinecoolbreeze.org contact@divinecoolbreeze.org editor@divinecoolbreeze.org PHOTOS PAGES 19, 20, 23, 24: Niphad India, 1982 (Matthew Fogarty photo) CONTENTS PAGES: Delhi, 1982 (Matthew Fogarty photo) PAGE 16: Vaiturna India, 1982 (MF) PAGE 28 India, 1982 (MF) PAGE 30 and OPPOSITE: India circa 1982-83 (Matthew Fogarty photo) PRINTED BY King Printing Company Inc. USA Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. India BACK COVER: Axinia Samoilova

 Whatever love you give Me is not like a drop in an ocean but is this ocean in a drop



----------------------

2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
2013 issue 1 – volume twenty-six number one
16
00
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-1.txt 
 107
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-2.txt 
 Sometimes the words are not sufficient
to hold the outpour of your joy.
2 sahaha yoga is not
14 collectivity
16 what is beauty?
18 day of the goddess
26 fear
28 our story
30 incarnations have to come
32 no problem
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Sahaja Yoga is not so simnple as you think
because there are lots of temptations.
Easter Puja 1998
Sahaja Yoga is
Not
Sahaja Yoga is not meant for people who are lousy.
Mahalakshmi Puja 1985 Sangli
Sahaja Yoga is not meant for people who are shallow by nature or not
meant for people who are not deep enough to seek. It is for a special
category of people who are seekers. They are the only ones who can really
become Sahaja Yogis. 10 September 1983
You have to be honest and you have to be intelligent. Sahaja Yoga is not
meant for idiots. Frankly, try to understand why are you on this Earth.
9 July 1994
Sahaja Yoga is not meant for people who do not want their salvation.
It is meant for people who really want their salvation. 24 July 1992
There are many who are Sahaja Yogis and not at all Sahaja Yogis.
Sahaja Yoga is not for hypocrites at all. You cannot be a hypocrite.
You have to be what you preach, what you say, what you understand
and what we stand for. 5 March 1986
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-4.txt 
 beNot
Sahaja Yoga is not meant for
frivolous people, nor for the
stupid or idiots. It is meant for
people of courage, people of
for the lousy
dignity and who are honest
and truthful and want to know
the truth. 8 July 1988
for the idiotic
Sahaja Yoga is not meant for
rrogant people. If you try to be
arrogant, you will drop out.
2 June 1982
for the stupid
Sahaja Yoga is not meant
for useless people.
for the useless
Shri Krishna Puja 1992
If there are stupid people, if there
are idiotic people, Sahaja Yoga
for the shallow
is not meant for such people.
In the Sanskrit language they
are called as mudhahs. Neither
is this meant for people who are
for the arrogant
over-smart and trying to cheat
themselves – intelligence has
that capacity – and to indulge
for the frivolous
into things which are not Sahaj.
Sahasrara Puja 1987
Do not be enamoured by
for the hypocritical
nonsensical things. These
nonsensical things can only be
appreciated by stupid and idiotic
people and Sahaja Yoga is not
for those not wanting salvation
meant for idiots. It is meant for
people who are alert and aware
and who want the truth.
4 October 1993
3.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Sahaja Yoga is not some sort of a club
where you can just put a label on your head.
The job of Sahaja Yoga
It is the becoming. It is nothing artificial.
What you become within is the point.
26 October 1987
is not to cure, but to
Sahaja Yoga is not an individual
movement, but a collective movement.
You cannot just practise it at home alone.
create doctors.
You have to please come to the collective.
28 July 1992
Sahaja Yoga is not meant for a few or for
9 May 1985
very few individuals – it is collective –
but it is made for the whole of the collective
and it has to work out that way.
27 December 1988
We have to be one with the subtleties.
Sahaja Yoga is not possible if you
want to see it from a gross level.
You cannot understand.
Shri Durga Puja 1982
Sahaja Yoga is not going to work by advertisement,
Sahaja Yoga is not going to benefit by you,
nor by My photographs. It is going to work by your
but you have to be benefitted.
work, by your responsibility, by your shouldering
6 January 1990
Sahaja Yoga. It is your responsibility to spread
Sahaja Yoga and to establish it. But first of all, your
shoulders should be strong.... Life for us is nothing
but Sahaja Yoga and Sahaja Yoga is nothing but
enlightening ourselves and others.
Shri Virata Puja 1989
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Sahaja Yoga is not like this,
you just put some spirit into
somebody and the
that
Sahaja Yoga is not a cult.
person feels
absolutely elated for a time being
It is your evolution.
and then is finished, but it is
It is your natural thing that is happening to you.
something that has to grow.
It is a living process.
It grows within us. It takes time.
Shri Mahakali Puja 1989
It is not a cult where there is
nothing like bad and good...
Sahaja Yoga is not a craze.
It is not like this.
It is a power that should give you
greater powers instead of making
In a cult everybody is good.
you frightened personalities.
You are not excluded people,
There is nothing like a bad thing....
excluded from the rest of them.
You are not excluded.
But in natural processes, we have discretion
You are exclusive, but not
excluded. This is discretion.
and we know what is good and what is bad.
Sahasrara Puja 1984
have seen a sunflower,
If
Sahaja Yoga is not a thing where
you
you can just enrol yourself and
it knows which way to turns its face.
make some money and become
wealthy. You have to grow and
become the tree yourself.
The trees know which way to turn their faces,
It is your own. 22 March 1981
which way to move. The roots know where to go,
how to go towards the sources of water.
7 April 1982
LO
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Knowledge of Sahaja Yoga is not the way you
Sahaja Yoga is not for Me at all.
I do not have to do it. It is for
you
to do it to gain that knowledge
understand. It is not the knowledge of chakras.
which is in yourself.
It is the knowledge of attitudes. It is not the knowledge
26 November 1979
Sahaja Yoga is not only meant for
of any system. We do not want to have systems because
your ascent, but for the ascent
of the whole world.
every system creates a bondage, a kind of a slavery.
10 October 1993
We have to develop attitudes within us which are
Sahaja Yoga is not meant for
attitudes that are tried and tested on experience.
the individual. It is not meant
for
you. It is not meant for
any
So it is not what you can talk elaborately about.
collective Sahaja Yogis. It is meant
for the whole world. You have to
bring the light of God's love and
Chakras and things are important, but it is what
compassion everywhere.
Navaratri Puja 1988
you express in your personality, in your attitude
toward things. 6 September 1986
Many people do not understand
that Sahaja Yoga is not for them
only. It is for the whole world.
You have to give it to others and
you have to bring forth what
Sahaja Yoga is not just to pass energy through us like
you call unity of love.
Shri Adi Shakti Puja 2007
all other material things are passing energy....
In Sahaja Yoga, there is not such a
hard and fast rule about anything.
You have to absorb that flow of the Ganges within you
I mean you are absolutely free
and assimilate it and transform yourself.
people and you have to use all the
freedom, absolutely.
27 January 1980
Shri Vishnumaya Puja 1992
Sahaja Yoga is not part time.
It is not a side issue.
It should be always with you.
Kundalini Puja 1992
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Not
Sahaja Yoga is not a new thing.
In the tradition of spirituality,
it is mentioned about fourteen
thousand years back by
a club
Markandeya. 5 September 1984
Coming to Sahaja Yoga is not
just for your personal limited
personalities and their problems,
a cult
but it is you on one side who has
to grow and, on the other side,
everyone has to grow through
a craze
you. Sahasrara Puja 1994
It is not that it is compulsory ·
a thought
"If you don't meditate you'll go
to hell" – nothing of the kind.
>כ
Sahaja Yoga is not like that. Only
in Sahaja Yoga one thing is there:
a new thing
if you have to grow, then you have
to meditate. And that is the best
time for individual meditation, for
a profession
individual meditation. And that is
how one has to do it.
31 August 1991
an extreme thing
Sahaja Yoga is not any religion
outside. It is not an organized
religion by human beings. It is
an organized religion
a thing that is within us, that is
spontaneously happening within
us and it works out absolutely
without any concern to your
a mental understanding
community, race or to your colour
or to the nationality or to the
position or whatever may be the
relationship you may have with
each other. 15 June 1979
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Sahaja Yoga is not just by saying | Sahaja Yoga is not done through brain activities.
"I am a Sahaja Yogi," but it is a
very deep personality. And that
deep personality has to be felt by
others as the wise, very wise thing.
Many people think that if you just tell yourself,
"You have to be like this," it will work out – if
כ
you
Not that how much you talk or
have to all the time inform yourself that “Oh, you must
shout or give lectures is important,
it is the peace, the tranquility, the
get rid of a particular problem," it will be all right.
capacity to love within you which
are important. And that is how
Or some people think that if they tell somebody that
people can judge whether you
are really clearly blessed by
“This is wrong with you and you should get well,"
your Mother or not.
Navaratri Puja 2002
it will be all right. It is not so because Sahaja Yoga does
If they are married, they are not
not work on a mental level. It works on a spiritual
happy. If they are divorced, they
must be married again – all sorts
level, which is a much higher level. 16 January 1983
of things and complications for
which I am not prepared.
Sahaja Yoga is not for that.
Perhaps we do not realize how important it is to be
Christmas Puja 2001
Many Sahaja Yogis feel that
Sahaja Yoga is for solving
problems all which are of a very
a Sahaja Yogi. Sahaja Yoga is not only for saying,
"Mother, I am full of joy, I'm enjoying myself, I got
mundane nature. Sahaja Yoga is
purified, everything is fine." But for what? Why
for giving you spiritual light.
It is not for solving your
did you get all these blessings? Why have you been
problems. But, as a result, the
problems are solved.
cleansed? So that this knowledge of the will of God
13 November 1980
should be apparent in you. Not only that, it should be
Sahaja Yoga is not meant for such
people who want to go into al
this surplus [activity] and all these
kinds of actions. It is a very simple
a part and parcel of you. So we have to raise our level.
We have to come up. Sahasrara Puja 1992
thing.
20 October 1980
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-10.txt 
 You have to transform. It is the
transmutation that has to take
Some people have a hankering after money.
place. Sahaja Yoga is not for sale.
20 July 1981
Some people think they can make money by coming
Sahaja Yoga is not for people who
to Sahaja Yoga. Some people think they will become
want to go to hell. It is very easy.
But to deny Sahaja Yoga and to
leaders or something, they will have fame or
defy it after coming to it and not
to accept the verdict of Sahaja
something, that they will achieve a kind of a very
Yoga and to displease the Deities
is the worst thing one can do.
Shri Krishna Puja 1981
dominant position and some think that they can befool
Me also. At the right time, we will realize that Sahaja
Sahaja Yoga is not a thought.
It is an experience. It is not a
Yoga is not for this. Sahaja Yoga is for making you the
thought. Enter nirvichara samadhi
otherwise
– only you can grow,
wisest person, the sanest person, the most generous and
you cannot grow. 18 July 1994
the most confident person in the world because you
We are so conditioned that we
take to things which superficially
have to fight. You have to fight the dark ignorance
are very appealing. Sahaja Yoga
is not like that. It is truth.
of Kali Yuga.... As you know, Sahaja Yoga is
It is reality. 10 June 1982
not meant for a few or for very few individuals.
Sahaja Yoga is not individualistic.
It is not for one person to become
It is collective. But it is made for the whole of the
a saint and sit somewhere.
It is not like that. It is not meant
collective and it has to work out that way.
for one person, for oneself.
It is not individualistic.
It is a collective happening.
26 December 1988
Shri Adi Shakti Puja 1997
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-11.txt 
 The understanding of Sahaja Yoga is not mental.
Coming to Sahaja Yoga
It is not a mental understanding. You cannot
is not what we have gained,
what we have got. There are
understand it through the brain. If you try to
people who say, "We've done
so much for Sahaj Yoga and
what has Sahaja Yoga given us?"
understand it through the brain, you get away from it
It has given you Self Realization.
It has given you the angel status.
because you cannot explain how it works out.
Shri Hanuman Puja 1989
It is a miraculous thing. It is a mystery. God is a
Sahaja Yoga is not done by
Adi Shakti. She has created these
mystery for man, will remain a mystery to a point,
powers in everyone, which work out,
but Sahaja Yoga is not. Sahaja Yoga
but he can become His power. He can become an
works through the innate qualities
that are in the Mother Earth and that
instrument of His power. So you cannot comprehend
are in the seed. So I am here not as
Adi Shakti. I am here as the Mother
the complete thing through your brains. You cannot
[of the Sahaja Yogis], as their Holy
Mother. And as the Holy Mother,
even comprehend a little bit through your brains.
I have guided them.
The only thing is when you see it happening, you see it
Shri Hanumana Puja 1989
working out. The effects of that experience which are
Sahaja Yoga is not in the market.
This you must have known because
you cannot pay for Sahaja Yoga.
It is an insult even to think of money.
put on your brain, that gives you faith.
8 September 1980
This is your own right.
You are made for it.
7 March 1981
Sahaja Yoga is not just raising the
Kundalini, but giving the complete
knowledge about Sahaja Yoga and
also empowering the person with the
power to give others Realization.
It was a tremendous task.
Shri Krishna Puja 1991
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Sahaja Yoga is not only doing the
Not
course, but it is for your well-
being, for your benevolence.
have to go further
And you
with it and you have to grow.
for sale
Now do not leave it half way.
It is not like just sprouting in the
seed, but it has to become the tree,
otherwise nobody can be helped.
for a few
Shri Saraswati Puja 1990
Sahaja Yoga is not a profession
for curing
because a profession means the
individuality of a drop. This is a
collective work. Sahaja Yoga is a
surrender. It is not a profession.
for the individual
It is a surrender.
Shri Devi Shakti Puja 1995
for making money
Sahaja Yoga is not going to be like
other religions where people abuse
children, do what they like, make
money, this, that, all nonsense like
a mafia. You are people who are
for material well-being
chosen and are special people who
believe in a good moral life and a
for solving mundane problems
peaceful life.
Shri Adi Shakti Puja 1995
Sahaja Yoga is not only for your
for seeing imperfections of others
| enjoyment like some drunkards
sitting and drinking together.
It is to fill up your cups to be
given to others, to many others
who are there. Easter Puja 1992
11
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Sahaja Yoga is not for sticking on
The most important thing is that Sahaja Yoga is
to something like somebody who
not a cult. You have to be absolutely normal people.
had learned certain lessons about
Sahaja Yoga in the beginning of it,
5 December 1980
certain mantras they had learned,
and still they are sticking onto the
same step. No, no, no, no – you
have to go ahead. This is just a
To do the work of Sahaja Yoga is not to feel that you
staircase. Do not get stuck at a
point. Guru Puja 1987
are doing it, but it is Shri Ganesha who is doing it.
If you do not want to accept Me
Shri Ganesha Puja 1995
or if you react, it is not going
to help you. Sahaja Yoga is not
for Me. It is for you. If you are
truthfully, honestly, if you are
seekers, then you must know that
Sahaja Yoga is not one lecture.
“my aim is to rise spiritually."
1 January 1990
It is not two. It can be hundreds.
But the happening takes a split of a second.
In no way should you be just
women who do not know
anything of Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja
13 June 1983
Yoga is not only made for men.
It is made for you, much for you
because you are shakti and I am
The first principle of Sahaja Yoga is not to see
your Mother. 1 January 1990
Sahaja Yoga is not only for the
physical being because you are
others’ imperfections. What is the gain?
Shri Krishna Puja 1981
not only the physical being...
It is not for the mental being.
Not
It is not for the emotional being.
But it is for your spiritual being.
But as you are the temple of God,
the temple has to be cleansed.
31 July 1984
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-14.txt 
 This is a serious work, I must say.
Sahaja Yoga is not what I
Sahaja Yoga is not possible in
people who are frivolous, who
are cheap, who have no respect
That is not Sahaja Yoga.
for themselves, who are people
who have wavered, who do not
care for their Realization and for
What
you say, what you talk, you must walk.
higher life. You see, that is how
Sahaja Yoga spreads very slowly.
It does not spread so fast.
Because I say so, that does not mean
28 February 1983
Some people have an opening
by listening to Me you become Sahaja Yogis.
introduction lecture free and then
the second one is banking.
Sahaja Yoga is not like that.
No – you have to practise it.
All this nonsense is not in Sahaja
Yoga. It is reality and reality
cannot be purchased.
And practising is very easy.
7 December 1991
Sahaja Yoga is not going to work
It is very easy to practise Sahaja Yoga
out individually. Anybody who
thinks that “I am something
greater than the others" is a
because it is innately within you.
gone case. 15 October 1979
If they are interested in material
It is joy-giving. You enjoy your virtues.
well-being, Sahaja Yoga is not for
such people at all. If they do not
want to have God, forget them.
3 February 1983
And
you are so secure, so confident.
Sahaja Yoga is
not an extreme thing.
12 February 1992
Shri Devi Puja 1985
13
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Let us see how we miss out in collectivity.
There is a very practical down-to-earth understanding.
First, we must know that without collectivity we cannot exist. As the
body has to be in connection with the brain, in the same way, without
collectivity, Sahaja Yoga cannot exist.
Once you understand that, then you have to work it out that col-
Virata Puja 1991 lectivity is absolutely established, within and without. It is more within
Melbourne that you have to establish, than without. Whatever you have within is
manifested outside.
Now how do we establish it within ourselves? First of all, we have
to understand that now we are the relations of each other. Gyaneshwari
said, "Techi Soyarik hoti." ("They will be your relatives.")
So the first thing is that within ourselves we have to see introspection.
With introspection, what are we doing against collectivity in our mind?
How is our mind working?
I do not know what thing comes first in the human mind about an-
other
but the first thing is that these are your real relations and
person,
nobody else is your relation. These children are your children and these
men are your brothers and these ladies are your sisters and we are one
big family together. We are part and parcel of one body and this hand
cannot hit another hand. Thank God it does not think, otherwise, as hu-
man beings, they might start thinking against another hand, but they do
not because they are connected to one brain activity.
So the first thing one has to understand is that do not try to see the
defects of another person, but the goodness of another person. That is
really going to help you the most.
14
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-16.txt 
 without
collectivity
sahaja yoga
cannot exist
they will be your relatives
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Is to K
NOW that Sahaja Yogis have to be with great potential manifesting. If they
are, then it triggers very well. Otherwise I cannot work it out.
For that, we have to understand that in Sahaja Yoga there is no sacrifice of any kind. You
do not have to sacrifice anything. It is all the time blessings throughout. You do not have to
do not have to suffer anything also – nothing of the kind.
sacrifice anything and you
I have told you about how My father was in jail, My mother was in jail and how many
times we suffered during the war of independence. We lost everything, all our properties,
everything for the war of independence only. But this is the independence, the freedom of an
absolute nature, not only for you, but for the whole world, for your children, for everyone. It
is a tremendous work. It is a very great achievement. In the history of spirituality, in the his-
tory of the world, this is the greatest thing that has happened. It is that people are transformed
WC
into a new awareness. Perhaps you are not aware of it and we take it for granted, we do not
understand the importance of it...
You are very safe in Sahaja Yoga. Stay in Sahaja Yoga. Grow in Sahaja Yoga. Enjoy in Sahaja
20 March 1990
Yoga. Everything is there available for you. And you do not have to do anything else except that
keep together. It is a collective happening. It is a collective.
Sydney
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-18.txt 
 what is beauty?
If you are not in the collective, the Divine is not interested in you at all. You are out of it.
Only the collective gets the power. Only the collective is magnetic. A single person who lives
away from the collective all the time, there is something wrong with that person. If you cannot
be collective, there is something wrong. Such a person should sit down and find out what is
wrong... If you want to lead a happy, healthy, good life, then be sensible, have some wisdom
about it. And so some people who have been negative are still negative and just thinking on
the same lines....
We are not like common people. We are not ordinary people. We are saints. We are to
respect each other, to love each other, to understand and enjoy each other. What will the chil-
dren say tomorrow...?
Let us see how we start diverting our energies to a collective beauty, collective love, col-
lective understanding. And if it is not, there is something wrong with you. Take it from Me
- something is wrong.
So either you are right-sided or left-sided. Find out and just get yourself cleared out. Treat
it out yourself and you will understand that there was something wrong with you, nothing
wrong with Sahaja Yoga. All such ideas are going to completely blast Sahaja Yoga and finish it
off. They are selfish, self-oriented, absolutely out-of-date ideas for Sahaja Yoga...
It is like one family. It is like one body. If something hurts here, the whole body knows.
You must know how many there are with us. You feel so strong and happy. But first of all, you
must develop that rapport. You must develop that love. You must develop that personality....
The right-sided are over-confident. The left-sided are diffident.... The left-sided trouble
themselves and the right-sided trouble others. They try to show off..
There is nobody great in Sahaja Yoga. Everybody is just the same. Just like all fingers are
the same, every cell is the same, everybody is the same. So nobody is higher and lower. There
is no hierarchy in Sahaja Yoga. Everybody must understand that we are all one, part and parcel
of one body and we do not have to consider ourself higher or lower....
A Sahaja Yogi has to be very dignified, otherwise why will people come to Sahaja Yoga if
we are just like them?
We have to be exceptional, isn't it?
And that is what I call dignified, loving, affectionate, kind, sweet.
That's what is the beauty.
17
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-19.txt 
 the Goddess
Day of
Shri Durga Puja
Rahuri India February 1982
Tadax
is a special day. There is a combination of two things happening...
It was a very important day that started at 8:15 in the morning called as
Rath Saptami. It is the seventh day and it is said that the sun travels with
his seven forces, seven colours in a big chariot. And today they celebrate
this day as a day when the sun travels with divine vibrations all over the
world and illumines....
The second thing today we do is a very great puja of Ashtami. It is
the day when the Goddess killed nine rakshasas together with Her eight
hands. So today is a very special day for which a very special attention
is needed.
It is only at the behest of the bhaktas that the Goddess took Her form
and killed all these rakshashas. Also with Her eight hands She killed
Mahishasur. That is why She is called as Mahishasur Mardini. She is
called as Nav-Chandi, the one who has killed nine chandas. It means
nine rakshashas She has killed. So it is a very important day and
very
vital and very deep.
It is very simple to say, “Mother, we have fixed Your puja on such
and such date." Nobody thinks what Mother has to work behind these
כל
things. You cannot fix My puja. It is not proper. It is I who can tell
you
what time is the best for you to do the puja.
It starts at two minutes past twelve. So now we can start it....
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-20.txt 
 19
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-21.txt 
 23
That is how it is going
20
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Today is the day of the Goddess, a very important
day that you are here. Somehow we are having all the
pujas on Mondays. That is why I am wearing this spe-
cial type of a sari, which is to be used for Ashta Puja's
Vahana. It is a tiger as well as a lion.
Imagine – where I am staying there is a photograph
of a tiger and a lion, both in that photo. You can go and
see for yourself. Normally, you never get these, but that
is there, a beautiful photograph enlarged, a tiger and a
lion.
So in the morning, the Surya was very beautiful. I
don't know if you saw the morning sun. At least tomor-
row try to see. It is not important how long you sleep
here, what food you eat, whether you get it in time and
all that. You should get rid of these habits. It is very
important. And these regularities and all these mundane
type of things, the bounding of timing and all that, you
must get out of this space, time – everything. And
you
should not go on worrying about things because you
get so exhausted. Without doing any work, you feel ex-
hausted because you are so fixed up, so fixed up that
you cannot get out of these habits, you see, while the In-
%23
dians are not fixed up like this. They know that Mother
knows the best. She will come at the time when the puja
has to start. So one should try to understand that if I am
the God, then why should you worry?
But I have one problem with the Western mind. It is
that if they cannot conceive it, they start criticizing in-
stead of making yourself subtler and subtler to conceive
the beauty of the Divine. If you do not get it, you will
start criticizing on any point – anything you can get hold
of and you will start criticizing.
So that is not the way we can grow. That is why I am
telling you beforehand that this puja is very important
to work.
and, at this puja, you have to request that nine chandas,
WO1
K.
who are still there, be killed. And this Mahishasur also
should be killed. They should be driven out and that is
how it is going to work out.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-23.txt 
 It is very important.... It is a much deeper significance. Much deeper work has
to be done. So many things have to be worked out. It is a very subtle thing. And the
more you discuss it, the more you talk about it, you lose. You should keep quiet and
absorb.
So today is not a day of such a mundane type. It is very important in this small
place where we are sitting. We are doing a tremendous job and you people, who have
suffered the most on account of these rakshashas, should be absolutely intensive, be
careful that these sinners must go out. Something has to be done instead of thinking
about yourself and your inconveniences, your troubles and whatever you call them,
which are not so important at all.
You are saints and you must support all divine work with complete understand-
ing. On the contrary, if you are so much worried about your own things – I mean
you are a fool, you yourself are a fool, so I would say that even some people will say
that this happened, that happened. Perhaps the group is bit too big... I always had
a feeling that this group is increasing a bit too much. We did not have any idea of
so many people coming in. But then they are sharing, they are settled down, there is
some place to sleep. And if you can understand, see that these things are not impor-
tant then you go to England and just sleep or you go to Australia and just sleep. I
mean you have all the time. Just now you are here to become subtler and subtler....
We have to be one with the subtleties. Sahaja Yoga is not possible if you want
to see it from a gross level. You cannot understand. I have already told
you that,
without Realization, you cannot have Sahaja Yoga. But even after Realization, if you
stick on to those old things which belong to the egg
you will have no advantage.
So try to become subtler and subtler. And do not think about it. You will relax. You
will feel better ... that you should have food in the right time – “this at the right time,
this should be the food." I mean it is such a stuck-up thing. We cannot be stuck-up
with food. We cannot be stuck-up with all these things.
You are going to a level where nobody has reached. With this understanding, if
and
you surrender, it means not to give Me anything, but to get rid of your ego
your
stuck-up ideas which there have been. It would be a very good thing.
When you discuss also among yourselves, nobody should discuss inconvenienc-
es.... I live with many more conveniences and comforts than any one of you live, but
I can adjust Myself much more. So you should also try to forget about it. Do not
talk of your inconveniences. That will make you very gross. The one who becomes
subtler and subtler only can achieve something...
to be one with the subtleties
W.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-24.txt 
 Today is Ashtami ... and the morning is Rath Saptami. Getting a puja on Ashtami
is a very big thing and at Rahuri, My maternal home, is also there. On this day of
Ashtami, we celebrate this day, Rama Devi as Ashta Bhuja Devi, who made great
conquests, prominent conquests, being the killing of the big, big, bad rakshasas,
destroying them, killing them. She is called as Nav Chandi, also as Chandika, Ashta
Bhuja, Durga and many other names are there and She has destroyed all these chan-
da, munda and others, all the Nav Chandas. That is why She is called Nav Chandi.
She has also destroyed Mahishasura and, after killing Mahishasura, the Gods show-
ered praises on Her, but those bhaktas who called Her, they were all very dharmic,
sattvik, with very good qualities.
Having been very much pleased with their qualities, the Devi took incarnation.
So those qualities should be in us. What are our feelings towards the Devi? “Mataji,
we have fixed Your puja, just like we have arranged one program, so You please
come in many villages. Mataji, we have kept the puja at this time."
Keeping will not do and you cannot keep like this. If I am pleased, I will sit for
the puja, otherwise not. It depends on Me. You have to invite the Devi first ... oth-
erwise the Devi will not sit. The Devi is not in need of the puja. You are in need of
the puja. She has to be pleased.... Her children have made a lot of mistakes.... Her
children are still making mistakes. They have shraddha, some have shraddha, but
they make mistakes. In some, there is no shraddha at all, but are superficial. They
will outwardly show they are very good. Seeing all these things, the Devi's mind be-
comes saddened and feels why the puja should be given to such people who do not
deserve this.
23
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-25.txt 
 10
It is for the whole universe.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-26.txt 
 So you should become sadguni [virtuous]. In sadgunas, the highest quality is. Adi Shan-
karacharya was asked which is the greatest quality. He said Devi bhakti, Mother's bhakti.
She is Devi. Your Mother is the Devi. Understanding that, do Her bhakti. In that bhakti
there should not be any false thing. The first quality, the highest quality, if it is seen in a hu-
man being from his heart, all his bad qualities will be destroyed. He will get light and attain
moksha. That is why he has always praised the Devi. In the beginning he has described a
lot, written lots of books like Vivek Chudamani. Lastly, he said that only by pleasing the
Devi one can get everything. Then why do these things? Why to do debates? Why to do
discourses and break one's head? Just praise the Devi and you will get whatever you want.
His intelligence very few people have.
When that intelligence comes into us, then you will get the authority. In the same way,
without doing anything, also I am prasanna chitta now and any number of mistakes you
make, I will forgive them all. Without doing that, it will not be possible because I have come
with a very big heart and will forgive all your mistakes, but cheating on Me you should not
do and all the time crying and repeatedly saying that "I have committed mistakes" will also
not do. Then it becomes a problem for the Devi. You should ask for forgiveness from the
Devi and take a vow today that hereafter we will not repeat the mistakes.
Today is Ashtami. It is called as Bhishma Ashtami. Now Bhishma had taken a vow
which
you all know. That vow was never broken by him under any circumstances, therefore
today you have to take a vow. On this Ashtami, you all take a vow that, because of this vow,
all the world will be benefitted from it fruits. You should not think how will it happen from
this small place. This is a very big centre, so whatever vow you take now, with complete
devotion and utmost faith, the fruits of which will be for the whole world. That is how you
should think.
Today is another day. It is called as Bhishma Ashtami. It is the day when Bhishma, a
great saint, took a great vow and that vow he carried out all his life. It was a great vow he
took. So today also is the day of the vow he took on an Ashtami day ... so today is another
day for you to take a vow. So also we should try to take a vow. And with that vow, you
should be able to achieve something which has not been yet achieved.
This achievement is not only for these people. It is not only for Maharashtra, it is not
only for India, it is not only for the whole world, but for the whole universe. So you are
playing a very important, vital role and one should try to improve one's quality of life...
Unless and until you have that substantial quality, nothing is going to work out....
You must work it out in such a way that you become substantially dedicated to Sahaja
Yoga, not just for your sake, not just for your family or for your country, but for the whole
universe.
you are the seeds who are going to create that great atmosphere that will bring forth
So
the great change that we are expecting of Mahayoga.
25
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-27.txt 
 a stupid worrying fall
Fear
It should be brought to a proper balance between the understanding of the poor and the rich
and the rich and the poor. After some time, you will find that people will not consider
or riches as so important, but the richness of the spirit will become very important. That is
what is going to be the Sahaj nations, where the richness of the heart, the spirituality, oneness
with the Divine will become the greatest boon for everyone.
But still we are struggling to be in that state. Many are. And still we go into materialistic
tantrums or some sort of a stupid worrying fall. All these must be carefully watched. If
can keep this chariot of new progress progressing faster, we are going to create a new world of
complete harmony, complete peace, joy and love. But for that, you are the ones who have to
do it. I cannot do it. If I could have done it, I would not have asked you to join Sahaja Yoga. It
is like the horses and the charioteer. Horses are to be driven. The charioteer does not drive the
chariot. In the same way, you must understand your responsibility that this is the greatest work
we are doing. It is not only the industry or the labour and the capital I am talking about, but
I am talking about the totality of well-being. Of course, all of this is a part and parcel of that,
no doubt. But the balance should be with the totality.
So we have to think of a total well-being. Once we start thinking of the total well-being,
then the first thing that should come to us is are we capable of bringing up that total well-
being? Are we? Have we got the total well-being within ourselves or not? Have we? We are still
worried if the plane is coming or not. I mean we are so mundane, so little, so small. With one
bandhan you can control any plane, any atmosphere and here you are still worried about things
which are absolutely under
So this totality has to be thought over. What is this totality that Mother is talking about?
In this totality, a world has to be created of people, by the people, who have no fear. This fear
has to be given up. Behind all this nonsensical nervousness is fear. So for that, what She does
is to give ... Her protection. You are beyond fear. You are protected. But if you do not want
to believe in yourself and you do not believe into Her protection, then nobody can help you
because everything is mythical for you.
In every venture that we take up, we should not have any fear because God is with
a fact. It is the truth. You just try. But when you try through your ego, you fall into the trap
fear. I have seen egotistical people are the most frightened people, and panicked, because they
panic others and so they think they can be panicked one day...
This fear creeps into our minds and we start getting all kinds of these stupid tantrums out
of this mythical fear. The fear is created by our ego. A person who has no ego, he will have no
fear because he has not harmed anyone. Why should he have fear? And such a man or such
a woman will be looked after by God because God takes over. When you surrender your ego
to God, He takes over. But for those who have ego, He says, “All right, go ahead, use your ego,
poverty
you
your control.
you. It is
of
any
CC
try to protect yourself, cut your throat." That's what it is.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-28.txt 
 So when I talk of total benevolence, I am talking about your own total benevolence. So first
is the fear, which should go out of your mind completely if you believe in the Almighty God.
"You are Almighty God, You are almighty..." It is all lip-service. If you believe
that God is almighty and you are connected with God, then why should you have any fear of
anything? But when we say, “Don't have fear," another extreme comes up: we do not have fear,
we can do what we like, we can perform everything ourselves, we need not tell anyone. You
have to tell God whatever you are doing. You have to take permission. You have to inform in
His darbar, in His court, that “Sir, we are thinking of doing such and such thing." But you
We will
say,
CC
think
you are God. You are not.
And that is why the other part of non-fear is this kind of an arbitrary behaviour which is
very dangerous for Sahaja Yoga, for yourself and for everybody else.
Mahalakshmi Puja 1992 Kalve
Ganesha has no fear at all. In the same way, you should have no fear, no fear at all – no fear. As
long as your Mother is with you, why should you have any fear? Fear of this, fear of that, “I'm
frightened, I can't do this, I can't do that." That children never do. They will try everything if
you tell them. You should have no fear.
I do not know what fear is. In the same way, you should have no fear, no fear of anything.
Nothing is going to go wrong with you, but do not do wrong things. If you do wrong things it
will repel. It will work out on you. But do not do wrong things. Be straightforward and noth-
ing can harm
We have had so many experiences of this, how everywhere laid down for you, everybody
is looking after you. There are so many Deities who are working out things for
have to be, you have to be extremely careful that you do not develop this fear business because
fear takes you to the left side and once you go to the left side, you know the problems of the
left side. First of all, you go against Ganesha. Ganesha is standing at the base of the left. And
you develop cancers, you develop all these things, fear, fear, fear and emotional problems
and all these things come. In emotions you should be bubbling with joy. Joy is your emotion.
In action you should be thoughtless. And in ascent you should be surrendered. That's all. It is
very simple.
you. Nothing can harm you.
you. But
you
then
31 December 1985
When you are standing on the truth, what is there to fear? Truth is such a
a complete picture of the whole thing.
There is nothing to fear. Your Father, He is compassion. He is an ocean of compassion.
And He is an ocean of love and an ocean of forgiveness. And He is now within Who is
more powerful than Him? It is very easy for many
in God." You believe it or not. He is there.
light that it gives you
you.
human beings to say, “Oh, we don't believe
7 October 1981
CC
Joy is your emotion.
In action you should be thoughtless.
And in ascent you should be surrendered.
27
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-29.txt 
 Our Story
SHE IS EVERYWH ERE
It happened in the year 1972.
One day, 9:30 pm.
We finished our meals. All the members
of our family were chit-chatting. All of a
sudden, my wife began to feel acute pain in
the stomach.
I inquired and our Poojya Mataji told us
that She had gone to Santa Cruz Airport to
give a send-off to Shri Srivastava-sahib. While
returning, She thought of us and paying a visit
to our place, which was on the way.
When She came to know that my wife had
She said, "O Mother, had You been here at
this time, I would have got immediate relief immediately gave Her healing touch on the
from You."
CC
acute pain in the stomach at that time, She
stomach and cured her within no time.
Hardly a minute might have passed when
we heard the jungling noise of our door-bell.
I opened the door. It was a surprise of sur-
- our Divine Mother Mataji smiling
That day we had great pleasure with tremen-
dous vibrations in our home for about two
hours. This is our significant experience.
Really, our Divine Mother Mataji is omnip-
prises
and entering the front room.
We were overjoyed and wondered how our
Mataji had come to our place at that particu-
otent. She comes to the rescue of Her devotees
when remembered.
I can say that one must have sincere dedica-
tion, complete surrender and obedience at the
Holy Feet of Her Holiness Mataji.
Anant Jeevan lar time. (My wife had remembered Her just
Feb-Apr 1980 a minute ago.)
B.G. Pradhan
28
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-30.txt 
 THE M OVING FINGER
The moving finger writes; and, having writ,
Moves on: nor all thy Piety nor Wit
Shall lure it back to cancel half a Line
H.H. Mataji: Bete, can anyone operate
between the eyebrows and the third eye? In
that case, all the surgeons would be much
sought for. (laughter)
A young girl of sixteen was fascinated by Ratna: Mataji, is it possible that the Divine
these lines so much that she lived on them for
Power can be converted into evil as shown in
the latest movies, The Omen, The Exorcist?
H.H. Mataji: The Divine Power always
twenty-six years. If there was a Moving Finger
who could control our lives, then what was
the need for temples, churches and worship? –
a question which haunted her for many, many
remains divine. There is no doubt in it. It is
you forget
a power which can never finish. If
your path, I may give you a little jolt, that's all.
years.
Then one day she heard a saying, "Arise, My love for all of you is always there.
awake and stop not until the goal is reached."
appealed all right and so she got up at 4
am, called herself a karma yogi and kept on
working. But still the problem of life and its
meaning were not being solved. Everything the Sahasrara, which is the final destination.
appeared existing, but what was her role in
life? This was a question, probably an eternal
Ratna: In the spiritual path, is it necessary to
wear good clothes?
H.H. Mataji: Once the Kundalini is awak-
ened, she passes through six chakras, touching
It
All these chakras have Deities to guard them.
Once the Mahalakshmi chakra is aroused, you
have to respect Her by putting on your best
one!
Maybe we were not the lucky ones like those and being scrupulously clean. Mahasaraswati
born when Shri Ram and Sita, Radha and demands precision and neatness.
Krishna, Lord Jesus and Mother Mary came
down on Earth to bless the people.
Sometimes I thought that maybe we could
still get a darshan of Mahavishnu or have a
vision of Sakshat Shakti Herself. I kept on
The goal was reached. Her Holiness Mataji
with Her glances and touches had given Ratna
her Self Realization.
The Moving Finger moved on and blessed
thinking and lo! we were blessed.
in the room. And now we under-
everyone
In 1980, Her Holiness Mataji Nirmala stood that all that had been written for us
Devi was in Delhi. She was here to waken the
could be scratched down with all H.H. Mat-
Kundalini.
aji's blessings.
With Ratna and her whole family medi-
tating and taking salt water treatment in the
night, life seems to have developed a new
meaning.
No hurry, no worries, no taxis, no cars to
rush you up to any place of pilgrimage. She
was the lucky one to have made it!
Yes! Mataji's looks and glances are enough.
Even Her photograph vibrates. It is absolutely
true. Our beloved and revered Mataji absorbs
all our sorrows and this keeps us always smil-
ing. Smiling as we always are, others want to
know the secret.
This
young girl, now a mother of grown-up
children, went to meet Her Holiness as She
happened to be her Mamaji (aunt) by relation-
ship. But when she bowed to touch Her Lotus
Feet, she realized that, more than a Mami, a
"Mother" was needed.
The change was all in a few micro-seconds.
She asked Her Holiness to bless her daugh-
ter, Ratna, who was accompanying her. Ratna,
a student, felt completely relaxed in H.H.
Mataji's presence.
H.H. Mataji: How are you, Bete?
Ratna: I am all right, Mataji, but I would like
to know about the third eye which Lebsang
Rampa wrote about.
Then, as there are no secrets in Sahaja Yoga,
we tell them, say, “Jai Mataji.'
Maha Avatar
Mrs. Varma, Delhi September 1980 Oct-Dec 1980
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-31.txt 
 LEN
Incarnations have to
EGO
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-32.txt 
 come
Different stages of human evolution took place
when all these incarnations came on this Earth.
Incarnations have to come. If you reason it out,
you will understand why an incarnation is needed
to come on this Earth. The unconscious can
guide you through symbols which
appear in your
dreams. There are so many other ways, by certain
happenings, the unconscious, the Divine, can guide
you – but it is all vague, extremely vague.
The unconscious must have a mouth to explain
itself. It must have a proper body to be able to
communicate what it has to say, otherwise how are
you going to have rapport with the unconscious.
You cannot have any rapport with the Divine
unless and until you know you are the Atman, your
Atma. Before that, whatever you may try may create
a depth in you, a serenity in you, a character in you,
but still you cannot have a direct
rapport.
You are to be connected. Now, somebody has to
do this job. That is why many incarnations came on
this Earth.
31
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-33.txt 
 DIVINE COOL BREEZE volume 26 number 1
BACK COVER: 10 March 1985 “The love which you have
should be expanded. And it is very simple. If you are attached
to Me, I am a person who is so much spread out all over.
It goes into the whole. It goes into the nature. It permeates
everywhere. Whatever love you give Me is not like a drop in
an ocean, but is this ocean in a drop. And that is what we must
understand: how to love Mother."
WORDS
CONTENTS PAGES: Shri Ganesha Puja 1984
PAGE 31: "Maha Avatar" magazine October-December 1980
OPPOSITE PAGE: 26 November 1979
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-34.txt 
 There should be no problem for you
to understand that it is a special grace
because you are special.
Maybe I am also special.
And special people needed somebody special,
so I had to come down here.
Let's have it in a mutual admiration way.
It will be a good idea.
There is no need to feel obliged because I have to do it.
I feel loaded with it.
And I feel lighter when you get it.
Like a mother, I tell you sometimes I have to be stern...
I know the job of a mother.
You need not be afraid of Me at all.
I know everything about you – somehow.
www.divinecoolbreeze.org
contact@divinecoolbreeze.org
editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
PHOTOS
PAGES 19, 20, 23, 24: Niphad India, 1982 (Matthew Fogarty photo)
CONTENTS PAGES: Delhi, 1982 (Matthew Fogarty photo)
PAGE 16: Vaiturna India, 1982 (MF)
PAGE 28 India, 1982 (MF)
PAGE 30 and OPPOSITE: India circa 1982-83 (Matthew Fogarty photo)
PRINTED BY
King Printing Company Inc. USA
Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. India
BACK COVER: Axinia Samoilova
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_I.pdf-page-35.txt 
 Whatever love you give Me
is not like a drop in an ocean
but is this ocean in a drop
