Yuva GE Sept.2013

 Now, what 's the meaning of the Sahaj culture - this culture, is something that is, you are groomed, you are brought up, in a very natural manner, that child like, simple innocent behaviour. you develop a culture. A small, like, a 1 September 1996.

 INSIDE THIS ISSUE Prapancha and Sahaja Yoga ..4 आज्ञा चक्र एवं नियंत्रक देवता ...18

 Prapancha and Sahaja Yoga. Dadar, Mumbai, 26th Nov 1984.

 PRAPANCHA Today's subject is 'Prapancha' and 'Sahaja Yoga'. First of all let us See what is the meaning of word 'Prapancha'. 'Prapancha', 'pancha' Means 'five', the five elements through which our evolution took place. But 'pra' word in front of it changes its meaning. It means the light offive elements 'Prapancha'. (Prapancha also means married family life). 'Avghachi sansar sukhacha karin' (I shall make the whole world Joyous) this joy we should get in prapancha. You cannot find god except prapancha. Many people imagine that 'yoga' means to go to Himalayas and sit there to die of freezing cold. It is not yoga. It is 'hatya' (obstinacy/ incapatinare). It is not even obstinacy but little stupidity. This imagination about yoga is absolutely wrong. Specially in Maharashtra all the saints were married. They practiced prapancha. Only Swami Ramadasa did not do Prapancha. But in 'dasabodha' (Marathi scripture by Saint Ramadasa). Prapancha is flowing in every page. Leaving Prapancha , you cannot find god. He said this many times. To find god by leaving Prapancha has been the imagination of people of our country since ancient times. This is the reason why Buddha left Prapancha and went to jungles and got selfrealization there. But even if he would have lived with family, he would have got self realization. For example; if we have to go to Dadar (place in Bombay), we can reach by straight way there. But instead we go to Bhiwandi then Pune and after roaming in four-five places then we reach Dadar. One is straight path and other is zig-zag. The zig-zag way is correct, it is not so. That time there was no easy way so they chose the difficult path. They made the easy path very difficult. So, shall we also make the same difficult path for us? Therefore everyone has described about the easy and straight path 'sahaj'. We should go in sahaj samadhi. All the saints said 'Sahaj Samadhi lago' (go into sahaj meditation). Kabira got married. Guru nanaka was also married. From the time of King Janaka all who have become great realized souls got married.After them many came who did not get married but never criticized the marriage organization. And it is not that what we call as prapancha is wrong. So, first of all we should remove this imagination from our minds that if we have to go through path of yoga then we have to leave prapancha. Instead, if you are in prapancha then you must come to Sahaj Yoga. 6.

 COMPLAINTS OF PRAPANCHA In the beginning when I started Sahaj Yoga in Dadar, everyone used to come with the complaints of prapancha. "My mother in law is not alright, my husband is not alright, my is bad, my children are not alright etc ..all these small complaints of prapancha people used to bring in Sahaj Yoga. It happens only in the beginning. We come to God with the problems of prapancha by getting upset of them and for solving the problems of prapancha. And we ask God, 'Oh ! God my house should be alright, my children should be healthy my married life should flourish, everyone should be happy in my family' that's all. Human inclination is limited and so mundane, and he looks everything from that mundane level. But this mundane level is required. If it is not there then things won't work fine ahead. One cannot come on second step before crossing first step. So prapancha is the first step and very important in sahaj yoga. I cannot give realization to a "sanyasi" ( ascetic). I cannot ! What to do? I tried Many times but it doesn't work out. wife The reason is that we wear the external clothes of ascetic...but are you an ascetic from inside? Asceticism is the feeling inside. You cannot become a saint by wearing just the clothes, that we are saints, I have left the home and family, I have left this, I have left that...by saying all this if people think that they have found out path of Yoga then they are absolutely mistaken !. If you are an Escapist, and you have tendency of escapism then there is no cure for it. Wise person should think that we are in prapancha and if we get anything by running away from it then what is the use? Suppose you are taken in some jungle and you sit there and say, "see I can live without water" then what is the special thing in it? Living in water if you don't need water, you are detached from water, when this state comes then it is true prapancha. Then only it is true prapancha. And we need it today. We need that prapancha. 66 You all might be knowing about King Janaka. Nachiketa thought that this King Janaka who has crown on his head, he has all slaves and servants, there is dance going in front of him. When he comes in our Ashram my guru touches his feet? How is it that he is so great? So his Guru said to him that he should himself go and see. Nachiketa went and stood in front of Janaka and said, 'Please give me self realization, my guru has said that you can give selfrealization, so please give me selfrealization.' King Janaka said, 'look , if you would have asked me whole universe I would have given but I cannot give you realization, reason being that one who doesn't know the subtle aspect of it then what is the use of giving it to such human being? The one who will understand its subtle aspect can only get deeper into it.' So, the tattwa of Prapancha is 'Pr' which means the light. Until unless it is awakened within you all....you will remain in 'Pancha' and cannot enter in 'Prapancha'. When Nachiketa asked the above question to King Janaka. King Janaka asked Nachiketa to be with him. I hope you know rest of the story. So I don't have to repeat it. But at last Nachiketa understood that this man (King Janaka) has no attachments. He is not worried at all. neither he has any sticking with worldly things or what we call as world. He is like an ascetic.

 He will wear crown on his head of king and sleep on the ground, like a real Emperor. He doesn't need any comforts, somewhere he will sleep on soft bed...sometimes lie on the ground....like an Emperor within. He is not worried of anything, he is not caught by anything. PRAPANCHA NEVER GETS EFFECTED BY ANY COMFORT OR ANY SLAVISHNESS The one who is in prapancha never gets effected by any comfort or any slavishness towards material. Even if you ask him to sleep by resting his head on stone, he can sleep. Ask him to eat anything, without taste...he can eat and also he can eat in parties. If you ask him tomorrow that, 'what is to be done now , we have to make an ashram so how to do it?' He will tell you everything perfectly about it. He will give you details of materials to be used and the quality etc...everything. He is not stuck to anything within. This is the matter of tattwa. You all should understand it. Namdeva has written one poetry and same has been added in Gurugrantha Sahib (Holy scripture of Sikh Religion) by Guru Nanaka. It is very beautiful. I would like to certainly describe it to you. It is written in that poetry; 'The Kite is flying above in sky and one child is holding its string. He is laughing, talking and moving to and fro but his attention is on kite'. In another paragraph it says; “ Many women are going on street with pitchers on their head filled with the water from river and they are talking and joking, talking about their home etc but their whole attention is on the pitcher (Cana) that the water should not get spilled'. Same there is one more description about the mother; 'One mother has child on her lap and she is 66 way doing all the work of house and kitchen, she does all the job in the house...sometimes bends down sometimes runs here and there....but her attention is on the child that he should not fall down' Same way is with the saints and yogis. They know how to do all kinds of work. They do all kinds of work but their attention is always on their spirit. These all saints were like you people, living with their family, wife and children. After having all that they have one speciality and you all should understand that speciality by coming in that Tattwa. What is that speciality?...it is Sahaj Yoga! You must also see that after getting that state what beneficial changes come within you. Because in Prapancha you always see profit and loss. What will you gain? What will you loose? But you must understand that God is beyond all this gain and loss. But many don't know the meaning of it. In modern times if you talk about God then people think that 'this lady has never got modern education and she is reciting stories like our grandmothers'. But God is and he will ever exist.

 GOD WORKS OUT THINGS BEING IN PRAPANCHA. But we have to see how God works out things being in Prapancha. First of all, see, is there any problem? Someone said to me, 'Shri mataji my house problems.... I don't have any job'. Such kind of talks, mean talks, gross level talks, 'this is like this, Like that.. etc'. After some times the same fellow comes and says, 'Shri Mataji everything is solved, everything became alright'. So, how all this happens? You must see this. Once it happened, I have one disciple from foreign country. I generally don't call them 'disciples'... I call them 'children'. So both were girls. Both were going in a car in Germany. In Germany there are big highways called 'Autoban' and there are many vehicles moving fast on it. So they wrote to me one letter,' From both the sides there were truck , big buses, very big cars which are double lords were going. Our car was in between...its brakes were not working and the car was vobbling (shaking) So she thought that she is going to die now and she cant escape. If the break was alright then there were some chances, but it was also out of order. So, in that condition she got 'inspiration'. The inspiration of emergency. It worked out. That is; now everything is finished, nothing is left, the time of destruction has come. So, she surrendered and said, 'Shri Mataji now you only do something... whatever you want I am going to close my eyes'. She closed her eyes, it was written in her letter. After some time I saw that the car was properly parked on one side and the break was also working. Now, Shri Mataji did not do anything, you must see this. How does it happen? Means that whatever has happened, it has happened due to some cause. Means Cause and result. Suppose some quarrel has taken place in your house due to your wife, parents or some 'x' person. The result is disturbance in house. The one who has simple thinking will keep on fighting with the result. 'I have to fight with it!!' then some other reason will come out to fight, then third. Now what is the cause? How many think about the cause of quarrel? Those who are with Subtle understanding fight with the cause of the quarrel. Fighting, the other way makes the result to fight back and they get into the cycle of cause and effect and the problem remains unsolved. They cannot go beyond it. Therefore to practice prapancha is very difficult, everyone says like this. What is the cure of it? The cure is that whatever is the cause of it, you have to go beyond the cause. The cause was that the break (of car) was broken, she was fighting with the break. But when she realized that there is something beyond it...Shakti (power) and by going beyond that cause, the cause got terminated. Also the effect got terminated. It is like this. You believe it or not, but it happens like this. It is not blind faith. Many people come to me and say, 'Shri Mataji we remember God so much but we are suffering from Cancer, how is it?... we go to temples, go to siddhavinayaka and stand there for hours. Specially we go there on Tuesdays, but nothing good happened with us, this God never did anything good with us so why should we worship him?' Alright. But the God whom you are calling...is he connected with you? Till you are connected with him, how can something good happen with you? You must have telephone connection with God. You keep worshipping God day and night, but whatever you are praying..is it reaching to God? Whatever stupid things you do and behave in stupid way and then you come and say that God did not give you anything. Why should God give you something? Once you are connected with Government of India then you can ask some favour because you are citizen of India and not of the Kingdom of God. 9.

 FIRST BECOME THE CITIZEN OF KINGDOM OF GOD First become the citizen of Kingdom of God and then you will see that even before thinking about the problem it will be solved by God. Now imagine that by sitting here if you start saying that the queen of England did not do anything for you. Why should she do something for you? So, here is God and why should God do something for you? You have not entered into his Kingdom. Only to dictate on him 'Oh ! Lord'. As if he is in your pocket. Now even people don't know that they should remember God. They have not said remember but they have said to auspicious remembering (Susmaran) of God. 'Su' word is just like 'Pra'. 'Su' means where you have become auspicious by becoming human beings and you are blessed. Otherwise you keep on taking the name of God like Parrot. It influences the young generation. They say, ' What is the mening of this God? Two people came here taking the name of God and took money from our mother, there some people came and tied black thread in the neck and took away money. What does this kind of God means?" Then some people start talking like them and say that there is no God. But first of all we commit the mistake that are we connected to God? You must see this. First establish the connection with God!. Now, Sahaja Yoga means to connect yourself with the Divine. 'Sah' means 'with you' and 'Ja' means 'born with you'. Yoga within you since birth. The right to get Yoga Siddhi is Sahaja Yoga. God has kept within you a Divine Energy called Kundalini. Whether you believe it or not. Because it is difficult for the people with external eyes to believe. Specially the intellectuals and literary people move with mental thoughts. And up to where will their thoughts reach...no one knows. One thinking does not match with the other. This is why there are so many differences. So the power which is beyond these thoughts or mental analysis has been described since ancient times in our country. It is needed to put your attention on that. But these intellectuals have so much ego that they are not ready to pay attention this side. May be it is somewhere concerned with their livelihood. But after coming to Sahaja Yoga you are blessed with well being. After getting connected with God your problems disappear in such a way that you are surprised. 'What did we do?' 'How did God give us so much? How everything got arranged in such beautiful way?' You ask yourself these questions and get amazed. You might have read the last paragraph of Gyaneshwara's Pasaydan. What he has described is the condition of today. It has to work out in this way. 10

 WHATEVER ONE WILL DESIRE WILL BE FULFILLED Whatever one will desire will be fulfilled. But before desiring it you have to awaken your Kundalini. I cannot promise you anything before that. Neither I assure you like ministers and leaders. Whatever the truth is, I am speaking it in my language and in my way. I am not speaking to you in literary or philosophical way. I am teaching you in the same way as a mother teaches her child about household things. You must receive the treasure within that you are tied in Prapancha. You say you. 'Tied' means what? It means that you are giving importance to the stupid and useless things. 'I must get a good Job, why I am not getting it? because unemployment is there , means unemployed are increasing. It will keep on increasing. So, how to go beyond all this stupid thinking? The cure is that you have to awaken the power which is around us. We have that Power in Mooladhara Chakra. You will see that how this Power within you in your Mooladhara works out in this Prapancha. Your attention should be towards that power. And first of all you must know that this power of Kundalini which is in your Mooladhara is due to Shri Ganesha. Now, we should say that this Maharashtra is blessed. Here we have Ashtavinayaks (Eight forms of Shri Ganesha) which are great blessing of God for you. This is the reason that I have been able to establish Sahaja Yoga in Maharashtra. Because the power of Shri Ganesha covers you. I have been helped a lot because of that covering. This Shri Ganesha is sitting in your Mooladhara. Now, if there is some doctor, he will keep the photograph of Shri Ganesha in his house. He will construct temple also. He will go and bow there. But he will never understand the relation of medical science with Shri Ganesha. He wont even accept it. 11

 WITHOUT SHRI GANESHA EVEN MEDICAL SCIENCE IS WORTHLESS. But without Shri Ganesha even medical science is worthless. Because of this Ganesha's Power you can produce children. Imagine that the face of child resembles the face of parents. There are millions of people all over the world but every child resembles his parents or the grandparents or some relative of that family. Who controls this balance and regulation? It is only Shri Ganesha. You all are supposed to accept the child like innocence of your children. That innocence should come within you. There are small children in house. How innocent they are. We speak bad words in front of them. We bring them up in such an environment where everything is inauspicious. No one puts attention on them and we let them do anything. These children are shri ganesha ofyour house and family. You are not even bothered to look after them and to bring them up properly. Now a days even 80 years old women marries in England. I don't understand anything what to say. Please do not bring the filth and dirty things of west here. Let the dirty things of west remain in west. 'ati shahane tyanche bail rikame ( those who are too clever have empty head). So if Shri Ganesha's curse should not fall on us, we have to assure it. Shri Ganesha sits inside us and brings up our children. First giving birth and then upbringing. And that innocent Ganesha (child) gives joy to everyone in family. There is tremendous joy in the family where a child is born. How many waves of joy flow from coming of that child. But the house where children are not born, there is so much feeling of emptiness. You feel as if not to visit that house. Because there is no giggling of the child there. Nojoy at all. There is no sweetness in such house. But now the time has changed. Children are not born in the countries which we call as affluent or rich countries. Their population is decreasing. Our country's population is increasing. People say it is very bad. Your country's population should not increase. What I want to say is that those children who are taking birth also have wisdom. Why should they take birth in those Eastern countries. They will there husband and wife divorce everyday and kill their children. The same will happen to us. Because only here (in India) parents have that dedication and love for their children and have that Sahaj way of living which is not in rich (Western) countries, not at all. that say You might be surprised to know that in London city the parents kill their two children in one week. Everyday I get shocks. And they are not at all effected by it. They are lost in so much ego that they don't understand what crime they are committing. After living there I realized that how nice are the Indian men and women. Here in India the telephones do not work, microphones do not work, trains do not function....I agree but the human beings function perfectly. The subtlest of subtle in them is Ganesha Tattwa. 13

 GANESH TATTWA And the house which does not have good Ganesha Tattwa has everything improper. I blame the spoiling of children on the parents. Nowadays even the mother goes out to work. Men already work. Still it is important to see that how much deep is the time you devote to your children. Now what happens after coming to Sahaja Yoga. Means how Sahaja Yoga is related to your children is very important to see. In Sahaja Yoga your Ganesha's Power gets awakened because of Kundalini. The first thing which comes is wisdom. We call it Vinayaka (Ganesha). He only gives wisdom to everyone. People bring children to me who are very poor in studies. I have seen such children whom the parents bring to me and say that their child is zero in the class. He only does mischiefs and speaks stupid with his teacher. I asked the child, 'Why do you do like this?' He said, 'I don't know anything and teacher keeps on scolding me always.' "Then what should I do?' The same child came first class first in his class. How did it happen? That power starts flowing within you as soon as Ganesha is awakened within you and a new dimension starts in human being. That dimension is called collective consciousness. The things which a person cannot see or feel before now through this new awareness he starts feeling them in Sahaj way. This new dimension or say this new consciousness makes a person truly capable. And through that capability a miracle takes place. The children who are useless and are of no worth, like those who drink wine etc. You know that nowadays a lot of drugs are being consumed. I never saw a thing called marijuana. Now I have come to know that they sell it in schools. This all stupidity is because of no wisdom. When this wisdom gets awakened , all those living in England and America became very good citizens. This is the power of Sahaj Yoga. Children get disciplined. I see that today there is no discipline in children because mother and father fight and quarrel with each other and do not respect their children. They behave very badly with them. The children behave like their parents and do stupid and indiscipline things like their parents behave. After coming to Sahaja Yoga if the parent's kundalini is awakened and also of the children then everyone behaves in proper manner. First the self respect is awakened within. By giving lectures you cannot awaken self respect in them. But by awakening of kundalini in Sahaj Yoga, a person gets self respect. In our country there is a process of respecting the one who is in power. But the true power is of Shri Ganesha. Whoever has his power, you should bow to his feet. Rest all will come today and go tomorrow. They have no importance, they all are useless people. Those who have awakened Ganesha within them, you must bow in front of them only. There is tremendous change in a person when Ganesha's power is awakened. As you see today that the eyes of men is always flittering here and there...and the Agnya Chakra is badly caught. Like fools they keep looking here and there. There is a big number of such men today. It has also started in Maharashtra. When i was small and was studying in schools. I never saw such stupid men at that time. But now these new creatures have come. They always keep rotating their eyes here and there. Always seeing here and there, like the advertisements on the way. You loose much power and energy by that. There is no joy in doing like this. It is joyless pursuit as we can say. They put all their attention on that and keep roving their eyes here and there. Ifthey miss some advertisement by mistake then they think that they have lost something very important. They will rotate their eye again and read the advertisement. It is very necessary for them to see everything. This disease of eyes gets terminated. 14

 'KATAKSHA' 'NIRIKSHANA' (INSPECTION IN EVERY GLANCE The person becomes concentrated at spirit in sahaj yoga. Then you get stable vision. If this state of eye is awakened then we call it 'kataksha nirikshana' (inspection in every glance). Where ever your glance will go you will awaken the kundalini. Whomever you will see will get purified. Such purity will come in eyes....this is alone the task of shri ganesha. You have not recognized your Ganesha. If you would have recognized then you would have been stable in your purity. Whatever is pure , only that you must do. But you did not worship your Ganesha. Doesn't matter. You have children in your house, watch their Ganesha. Make them adorable and get your Kundalini awakened. But the speciality of Sahaja Yoga is that it all happens spontaneous. You have to do nothing for it. By awakening of Kundalini, man gets wisdom and his whole personality becomes special. Now if there are some intellectuals, they would say that Mataji is telling some illusionary story. But you will be surprised to hear that in Ahmadnagar (Loc in Maharashtra) 10000 people left drinking. I don't say that there should be prohibition of liquor..I don't say anything like this. However you are you must come to Sahaja Yoga. You must come and enlighten the lamp of your spirit. After enlightening of that lamp all the faults will be seen clearly. Till that lamp is lightened, you cannot see if something is sticked on your Sari. In the same way you can see everything clearly. Even if it is lightened a little, you will be able to see your weaknesses. You become your own Guru and correct yourself. Make yourself pure. There is no limit of the joy amongst those who are purified. Someone has said, 'Jab mast hue tab kya bole?' (Once we drowned into joy then what is there to speak?). This becomes the condition once we come into the state of bliss. Purity is blissful!, not only blissful but it makes the complete personality fragrant. If such a person is standing anywhere, people will say, 'This gentleman has something special'. Sahaja Yoga is not for the people who don't want to become Special!. Those who have to become , will become special. It is well known that you are going to become extraordinary and special people. You have to earn this blessing! Sahaja Yoga is for all those who are living with family and children and want to become special people. Those who think that they don't want to become special and they are alright as they are and say that they don't want anything from Mataji, then its alright I do Namaskar to them. They can visit but we cant force realization on them. If you want complete freedom, then i have to look after your freedom. If you have to go to hell, so better go there and if you have to come to heaven then you are welcome !! Icannot force you at all. First of all in prapancha (family life) a child is a source of joy. From the beginning of pregnancy, there is joy in the house. After the pains of mother are over the child takes birth in happy surroundings. I have seen nowadays that those who are realized have the children who are realized from birth itself. No matter they are living anywhere. There are many realized souls who have to take birth. I am seeing everyone, they say, "who is the one who will keep our spirit enlightened" saints do not take birth through the people who are not worth it. Such great souls have to take birth and for them such realized yogis are required. Their prapancha will be truly enlightened. And for such enlightened prapancha creation you have to come to Sahaj Yoga and awaken your kundalini. After this we come to second Chakra which is called Swadishthan in which there are lot ofPrapanchas. 66 15

 SWADHISHTHAN IN WHICH THERE ARE LOT OF PRAPANCHAS Swadishthan in which there are lot of Prapanchas. There are many benefits in your Prapancha through it. Swadishthan's first work is to make your Guru principal strong. I have seen in many houses that the father is not respected at all, mother is not respected at all. The small 15 years old children are everything there. I see now-a-days in the market that it is very difficult to get a Sari for an elderly person like me. All Saris are for young girls. For elders and old people they don't make Saris anymore. There used to be money with elders in previous times. Everything used to be good for them. Now no one is concerned about old and elder people. It has become difficult for them to even get one sari for some marriage occasion etc. When this Guru Shakti is awakened within you then this old age which comes is full of radiation. Now if I take some elderly and old person. The father or Grandfather also behave like stupid sometimes. Mother behaves like a stupid fool. She doesn't know how she has to live in front of the other people who come from outside. She always keeps on shouting. All her attention is on the keys of the house or on the quarrels ofcaste system. A konkanastha (a caste in south Maharashtra) should be married to Konkanastha. The country boy should be married to same country's girl. If it is not so then the mother in law quarrels with her daughter in law. This stupidities of elders end after coming to Sahaj Yoga. Instead of it in that old age there is a kind of radiation. That person stands in his pride. You will feel that oh! my God what has happened to my father. You will feel that these are the people from ancient time of Shivaji. And you will get bowed in front of them. So the agitation which is in this youth of today, taking divorce for little problems, fighting with wife, not having good relations with parents, cannot live in house, running away from house. This all is happening today. There is no job, no money and all bad habits inside. From all the direction our youth is moving towards destruction. In fact their background in India is very great. But I tell you that Maharashtra's background is very great. They forget everything and don't study or understand. Now, how much knowledge of music they have in Maharashtra. There is lot of literature of saints in Marathi language. But who reads such books now? 16

 YOUNG GENERATION They purchase dirty books from the street and read. Very superficial things...not going deeper but floating on top. This is the condition of Yuva (young) generation. If it continues then they all will be lost. They will become useless. Ask me !I went to America and there are 65% jobless people. There they are afraid of a disease called aids. All young generation is dying and can't understand how to escape from it. Its reason is 'what's wrong'. 'There might have been Saint Ramadasa, what are we going to do with him, keep this all with you, we are becoming modern now'. This stupid modernity!. Where those modern Americans are going? You go to those countries once what is the condition of those modern people. The writers here keep writing about those countries sitting here. Go there and see what's happening in those modern countries. The elders there keep thinking day and night that how to commit suicide. They have only one thought and that is suicide. This is the only way left with them. You want to become modern like them who will vanish in thin air one day. Then I bow to you, you may go out of Sahaja Yoga. But, you have to be firm on your shakti and you have to become special. Then you have to stop a little from your fast journey. Think in silence that 'am I also running with all these western people who are in rat race?' You must think peacefully about the heritage of India. During partition of property if they get even one cloth less then they go to court to fight the case. But it is great heritage of our country where no one is putting attention, it is going to finish now. How much we have taken benefit from it. The elders get this knowledge after coming to Sahaja Yoga. Because they know that how much higher they have gone from their state before realization. In my childhood my father said to me, 'first of all this young generation should be awakened'. The sages sitting on 10th floor (state of realization) cannot understand the state of the person who is on the first step. These common people sing bhajans but do not know the feelings which are connected with the songs. When they will reach to first stage then they will realize that there are further steps ahead. So, beyond this human awareness there is greater awareness called 'Ritambhara Shakti' you get it in Sahaj. After achieving it you will be able to have vision of your life. What are we, how great we are and is it good to play with your life? How much treasure you have, how much have you kept your self respect? You don't know anything about yourself. Try to understand this and get realization in Sahaja Yoga. What is the condition of young generation today. All of them can come to Sahaja Yoga. It is very easy to give realization to younger generation. They commit mistakes in their innocence. It is all innocence. One boy smokes cigarette then I should also do it. If someone is wearing good clothes then I should also wear. All innocence, but sometimes this innocence can be destructive. What is lacking today in our country. Someone will say that it is food. But I don't see any such problem. I feel that we eat too much and give to others. Whenever I come here, I do namaskar and say, 'please finish it, I don't want anymore food.' Every person there says that there is no problem or scarcity of food in India because they request you to eat a lot that they feel not to eat at all. So what is deficient in our country? People are very smart in discussions and arguments. If they are standing here, they can give great lectures than even mine. We are very smart in everything else. A little oversmart. We have everything, Gold, silver...what is not there? Think and find out where we are lacking? 17

 ु ु कि आज्ञा चक्र एवं नियंत्रक देवता

 छठा चक्र अगन्य चक्र कहलाता है। इसे आज्ञा चक्र भी कहते हैं और इसकी केवल दो पंखुड़ियाँ होती हैं।... करती हैं। यह केन्द्र पियुष (पिट्यूटरी) तथा शंकुरूप (पीनियल) ग्रन्थियों के लिये कार्य करता है जो कि अहं एवं प्रति अहं नामक दोनो संस्थाओं का प्रतिनिधित्व करता है। .इस केन्द्र को वहाँ स्थित किया गया है जहाँ मस्तिष्क में दोनों दृकतंत्रिकायें एक दूसरे को पार आज्ञा चक्र का महत्वपूर्ण क्षेत्र सिर के पिछले भाग का वह स्थल है जो माथे के ठीक पीछे स्थित है। ये उस क्षेत्र में स्थित है जो गर्दन के आधार से आठ उंगलियों की ऊँचाई पर स्थित है। यह महागणेश का क्षेत्र है। श्री गणेश ने महागणेश के रूप में अवतार लिया और वही अवतार जीजस क्राइस्ट का है। श्री क्राइस्ट का स्थान कपाल के केन्द्र भाग में है और उसके चारों ओर एकादश का साम्राज्य है। जीजस क्राइस्ट इस साम्राज्य के स्वामी हैं। इस चक्र का अतिसूक्ष्म द्वार है। इसलिये श्री क्राइस्ट ने कहा, 'मैं द्वार हूँ। इस अति सूक्ष्म द्वार को पार करना आसान करने के लिये श्री क्राइस्ट ने इस पृथ्वी पर अवतार लिया और स्वयं यह द्वार प्रथम पार किया। अपने अहंभाव के कारण लोगों ने श्री क्राइस्ट को सूली पर चढ़ाया क्योंकि कोई मनुष्य परमेश्वर का अवतार बन कर आ सकता है ये उनकी बुद्धि को मान्य नहीं था। उन्होंने अपने बौद्धिक अहंकार के कारण सत्य को ठुकराया। प.पू.श्री माताजी, २७.९.१९७९ यदि आज्ञा चक्र नहीं खुला तो कुण्डलिनी का उत्थान नहीं हो सकता क्योंकि जिस मनुष्य का है उसका मूलाधार चक्र भी पकड़ जाता है। किसी मनुष्य का आज्ञा चक्र बहुत ही ज़्यादा आज्ञा चक्र पकड़ता पकड़ा होगा तो उसकी कुण्डलिनी शक्ति जाग्रत नहीं होगी। आज्ञा चक्र के खराब होने का मुख्य कारण आँखें हैं। किसी भी स्त्री की तरफ बुरी दृष्टि से देखना महापाप है। .......गलत नज़र रखने से मनुष्य किसी पशू के समान बर्ताव करता है। क्योंकि रात दिन उसके अन्दर गर्दे विचारों का चक्र चलता रहता है। ....... श्री क्राइस्ट ने बहुत ज़ोर से कहा था कि आप व्यभिचार मत कीजिये, परन्तु मैं आपसे कहती हूँ कि आपकी नज़र भी व्यभिचारी नहीं होनी चाहिये । .... अगर नज़र अपवित्र होगी तो आपको आँखों की तकलीफ भी हो जाएगी। ... अपनी आँखे इधर-उधर घुमाने के कारण ये खराब होती हैं। आज्ञा चक्र खराब होने का दूसरा कारण है मनुष्य की 'कार्य पद्धति' समझ लीजिये आप बहुत काम करते हैं, अति कर्मी हैं, अच्छे काम करते हैं, कोई भी बुरा काम नहीं करते परन्तु ऐसी अतिकार्यशीलता की वज़ह से चाहे वह अति पढ़ना हो, अति सिलाई हो या अति विचारशीलता, आपका आज्ञा चक्र प्रभावित होता है, इसका कारण है कि जिस समय आप अति कार्य करते हैं उस समय परमात्मा को भूल जाते हैं, उस समय आपमें ईश्वर प्रणिधान स्थित नहीं होता। अनाधिकृत गुरु के सामने झुकने अथवा उनके चरणों में अपना माथा टेकने से भी आज्ञा चक्र 19

 खराब हो जाता है। श्री क्राइस्ट ने अपना माथा चाहे जिस आदमी या स्थान के सामने झुकाने को मना किया है । ऐसा करने से हमने जो कुछ पाया है वह सब नष्ट हो जाता है। केवल परमेश्वरी अवतार के सामने अपना माथा टेकना चाहिये। प.पू.श्री माताजी, २७.९.१९७९ आज्ञा चक्र अति सूक्ष्म केन्द्र है, अपने बंधनों तथा अहं से प्राप्त विचारों के कारण लोगों की आज्ञा इतनी अवरोधित हो गयी है कि इसमें से कुण्डलिनी का पार होना असम्भव था। ईसा चूँकि चैतन्य का ही रूप थे अत: पुनर्जन्म का खेल रचा गया। हमें समझना चाहिये कि ईसा की मृत्यु के कारण ही हमें हमारा पुनर्जन्म प्राप्त हुआ है और भूतकाल की मृत्यु हो गयी है, हमारे पश्चाताप और बंधन समाप्त हो गए। हमारे सभी विचारों और बन्धनों में से अहं कि 'मैं यह कार्य कर रहा हूँ' सबसे बुरा है, इसका समाप्त होना आवश्यक है। .....जब तक आप स्वयं को कर्ता समझते रहेंगे आप आनन्द के सागर में छलांग नहीं लगा सकते। प.पू.श्री माताजी, इटली, १९.४.१९९२ जब हम अहं को बढ़ावा देने लगते हैं तो दाईं ओर की समस्यायें आरम्भ हो जाती हैं, तब प्रतिक्रिया के रूप में इसका प्रभाव बाईं ओर पर पड़ता है। वास्तव में बाईं ओर का स्थान हमारे सिर में दाईं तरफ है तो हमारा अहं दाईं आज्ञा में आ जाता है। श्री महावीर बाईं ओर के रुद्र हैं। अहंवश होकर लोग पापमय अनुचित कार्य करते हैं जो श्री गणेश के विरूद्ध हैं । प.पू.श्री माताजी, दिल्ली, १६.३.१९९७ ...... बाईं आज्ञा ( पीछे की ओर) की यदि समस्या होतो इसका कुप्रभाव आँखो पर पड़ता है, हमारी आँखो का आकार बढ़ सकता है तथा दूर दृष्टि कम हो सकती है। मानसिक रोगियों को बाईं आज्ञा की समस्या बहुत अधिक होती है। तो बाईं आज्ञा की पकड़ यह सुझाती है कि व्यक्ति को किसी प्रकार की भूत -बाधा है। व्यक्ति को गुरुओं और पुस्तकों के विषय में बहुत सावधान रहना चाहिये क्योंकि इनके कारण बाईं आज्ञा तथा स्वाधिष्ठान की समस्या हो सकती है। बाईं आज्ञा चक्र यदि प्रकाशित हो जाए तो व्यक्ति अपनी लौकिक आँखो से चैतन्य देखने लगता है। यह बाईं आज्ञा अत्यन्त अन्तर्भदी है। सामने का दायां आज्ञा चक्र भी बहुत महत्वपूर्ण है। हम यदि क्षमा नहीं करते तो यह खराब हो जाता ..बहुत अधिक सोचने पर हमारे चेतन मस्तिष्क पर आक्रमण कर देता है। .... अब एक नया रोग आ गया है जिसमें व्यक्ति रेंगने वाला व्यक्ति सा हो है। यदि बहुत अधिक सोचते हैं तो भी यह समस्यायें खड़ी करता है । जाता है, लोग अपने हाथ-पाँव नहीं चला सकते, इनका केवल मस्तिष्क चलता है, ये चल भी नहीं सकते केवल रेंग सकते हैं। ..बहत अधिक सोचना, अत्याधिक भविष्यवादी दृष्टिकोण व्यक्ति की आज्ञा को खराब कर देता है। प.पू.श्री माताजी 20

 ......दो रस्सियाँ (अहं-प्रतिअहं) आज्ञा चक्र को इतना संकीर्ण कर देती है कि इसके अन्दर से कुछ भी नहीं गुज़र सकता। ....आप यदि अहंवादी हैं तो आप आज्ञा मार्ग को बहुत ही संकीर्ण कर देते हैं। ......आप यदि प्रतिअहंवादी, डरे हये, किसी से दबे हुये व्यक्ति हैं तब भी यह चक्र बहुत अधिक विकृत हो जाता है। ऐसी स्थिति में इसे संतुलित करने के लिये हमें बायें को उठाकर दाईं ओर डालना होता है या दाईं को उठाकर बाईं ओर डालना होता है, आवश्यकतानुसार ..... संतुलन स्थापित होने पर यह आज्ञा चक्र बेहतर हो जाता है क्योंकि अब इसमें ऐंठन कम हो जाती है। केवल तभी उठती हुई कुण्डलिनी इस चक्र को पार कर पाती है। अपने अहंकार को नीचे लाना होगा आपको परमात्मा के उच्चतम अस्तित्व को भगवान तथा विश्व का उच्चतम शासक मानना होगा। जब ईसा मसीह आपके अन्दर जाग्रत होते हैं तो वे आपके कर्मों को सोख लेते हैं और आपके अहं और प्रति अहं को संतुलित करके आपके कर्मों, पापों और बन्धनों से आपको मुक्त कर देते हैं। प.पू.श्री माताजी, दिल्ली, ३.२.१९८३ आपके अन्त:स्थित ईसा मसीह आपको शिक्षा देंगे कि किस प्रकार आपको अन्य लोगों से व्यवहार करना है, किस प्रकार उनका विश्वास जीतना है और अपने हृदय से प्रवाहित होने वाले प्रेम एवं शान्ति आपने किस प्रकार उन्हें देनी है। प.पू.श्री माताजी, टर्की, १९.४.१९९८ श्री क्राइस्ट ने बहुत ही सरल तरीके से आप में कौन-कौन सी शक्तियाँ हैं व कौनसे आयुध हैं इसके बारे में कहा है - इन आयुधों में सर्वप्रथम क्षमा करना है। जो तत्व श्री गणेश में परोक्ष रूप में है, वही तत्व मनुष्य में क्षमा के रुप में कार्यान्वित है। वस्तुत: क्षमा बहुत बड़ा शस्त्र है क्योंकि उसी से मनुष्य अहंकार से बचता है। हमें किसी ने दु:ख दिया, परेशान किया या हमारा अपमान किया तो अपना मन बार -बार यही बात सोचता रहता है और उद्विग्न रहता है ......इससे मुक्ति पाने के लिये हम सहजयोग में ऐसे मनुष्य को क्षमा करने के लिये कहते हैं। दूसरों को क्षमा करना, ये एक बहुत बड़ा आयुध श्री क्राइस्ट के कारण हमें प्राप्त हुआ है जिससे आप दूसरों के कारण होने वाली परेशानियों से छुटकारा पा सकते हैं। आपके कभी सिर में दर्द हो तो आप कोई दवाई न लेकर श्री क्राइस्ट की प्रार्थना करिये कि 'इस दुनिया में जिस किसी ने मुझे कष्ट दिया है, परेशान किया है, उन सबको माफ कीजिये।' तो आपका सिर दर्द तुरन्त समाप्त हो जाएगा। आज्ञा चक्र स्वच्छ रखने के लिये मनुष्य को हमेशा अच्छे पवित्र धर्म ग्रन्थ पढ़ने चाहिये, अपवित्र . किसी अपवित्र व गन्दे मनुष्य को देखने से भी आज्ञा चक्र खराब हो साहित्य बिल्कुल नहीं पढ़ना चाहिये। 21

 सकता है। प.पू.श्री माताजी, बम्बई, २७.९.१९७९ येशु प्रार्थना (लॉर्डस् प्रेयर) आज्ञा चक्रका मंत्र है। आज्ञा चक्रके दो पहलू हैं 'हं और 'क्षम'। 'हं' का अर्थ है 'ैं हूँ और 'क्षम्' का अर्थ मैं क्षमा करता हूँ। आज्ञा चक्रयदि पकड़ रहा है और आप महसूस करते हैंकि आपके अन्दर अहं है तो आपको कहना चाहिए 'मैं क्षमा करता हूँ।' हमारे अन्दर यदि प्रतिअहं है तो कहना चाहिये, 'मैं हूँ - मैं हूँ। प.पू.श्री माताजी, ३०.९.१९८१ हमें गुस्से को रोकना चाहिये और उसकी जगह 'क्षमा-क्षमा-क्षमा' ऐसे तीन बार कहने से आज्ञा चक्र ठीक हो जाता है। प.पू.श्री माताजी, पुणे, १४.१.२००४ आज्ञा चक्र पर उत्थान की अवस्था अत्यन्त कठिन है, क्योंकि यदि आप कुण्डलिनी को आज्ञा से ऊपर धकेलने की कोशिश करते हैं तो आप प्रयत्न का उपयोग कर रहे हैं और ऐसा करते ही आप अपनी आज्ञा में रुकावट खड़ी कर देते हैं। अवरोधित आज्ञा को यदि आप उसी हाल में छोड़ दे तो कुण्डलिनी स्वयं इस पर कार्य करेगी तथा आपकी आज्ञा का अवरोध समाप्त हो जायेगा। भक्ति भाव से यदि पूर्ण हृदय से गा रहे हैं या मेरा नाम ले रहे हैं तो स्वत: ही आज्ञा चक्र खुल जायेगा । प.पू.श्री माताजी, इटली, २.११.१९९१ आज्ञा चक्र की पकड़ को छुडवाने के लिये हम कुंकुम लगाते हैं। उससे अहंकार व आपकी अनेक विपत्तियाँ दूर होती हैं। जब आपके आज्ञा चक्र पर कुंकुम लगाया जाता है तब आपका आज्ञा चक्र खुलता है। प.पू.श्री माताजी, २९.७.१९७९ आज्ञा चक्र के नियंत्रक देवता श्री जीजस क्राइस्ट की विशिष्ट भूमिका ईसा 'श्री गणेश' की अवतरित शक्ति हैं। जो श्री गणेश मूलाधार चक्र पर स्थित रहकर आपकी कुण्डलिनी शक्ति की लज्जा का रक्षण करते हैं, वही श्री गणेश आज्ञा चक्र पर (क्राइस्ट रुप में अवतरित होकर) उस कुण्डलिनी शक्ति का द्वार खोलते हैं । प.पू.श्री माताजी, बम्बई, २७.९.१९७९ ईसा मसीह का पुनर्जन्म सहजयोग के लिये अत्यन्त प्रतीकात्मक है। .... परमात्मा ने उनके क्रूसारोपण की योजना आज्ञा चक्र को खोलने के लिये बनायी थी। ईसा मसीह मृत्यु से ऊपर उठे, इसी प्रकार हमें भी मूर्खतापूर्ण विचारों, नकारात्मक आदर्शों पर काबू पाना चाहिए । प.पू. श्री माताजी, टर्की, १९.४.१९९८ मृत्यु से ईसा मसीह का पुनर्जीवित होना इस बात का प्रतीक है कि मानव का अध्यात्मविहीन जीवन मृत्युसम है। श्री माताजी, इटली, ११.४.१९९३ प.पू. 22

 Do it with your heart, because what is happening is that it's all mental. Do it with your heart. You, what you are saying is saying to Me: I'm sitting before you - fortunate people! Do it with heart, then only it will be - open your heart, and do it with your heart. Come along! Without feeling guilty, that's very important. 1 September 1985. Published & Printed by Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. No. 8, Chandragupta Co-op Housing Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune, Maharashtra, India - 411 038. © : 25286537, 25286032 email:sale@nitl.co.in website: www.nitl.co.in (For queries & sending articles contact on above address)

 Rakshabandhan - "Raksha" means protection and “bandhan" means the bondage- the bondage of protection. 26/08/80 Happy Rakshabandban aRshabanapan



----------------------

2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Yuva GE
Sept.2013
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Now, what 's the meaning of the Sahaj culture - this culture, is
something that is, you are groomed, you are brought up, in a
very natural manner, that
child like, simple innocent behaviour.
you develop a culture. A small, like, a
1 September 1996.
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-2.txt 
 INSIDE
THIS ISSUE
Prapancha and Sahaja Yoga ..4
आज्ञा चक्र एवं नियंत्रक देवता ...18
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Prapancha and
Sahaja Yoga.
Dadar, Mumbai, 26th Nov 1984.
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-5.txt 
 PRAPANCHA
Today's subject is 'Prapancha' and 'Sahaja Yoga'. First of all let us See what is the meaning
of word 'Prapancha'. 'Prapancha', 'pancha' Means 'five', the five elements through which our
evolution took place. But 'pra' word in front of it changes its meaning. It
means the light offive elements 'Prapancha'. (Prapancha also means married family life).
'Avghachi sansar sukhacha karin' (I shall make the whole world Joyous) this joy we
should get in prapancha. You cannot find god except prapancha. Many people imagine that
'yoga' means to go to Himalayas and sit there to die of freezing cold. It is not yoga. It is 'hatya'
(obstinacy/ incapatinare). It is not even obstinacy but little stupidity. This imagination about
yoga is absolutely wrong. Specially in Maharashtra all the saints were married. They practiced
prapancha. Only Swami Ramadasa did not do Prapancha. But in 'dasabodha' (Marathi
scripture by Saint Ramadasa). Prapancha is flowing in every page. Leaving Prapancha , you
cannot find god. He said this many times. To find god by leaving Prapancha has been the
imagination of people of our country since ancient times.
This is the reason why Buddha left Prapancha and went to jungles and got selfrealization
there. But even if he would have lived with family, he would have got self realization. For
example; if we have to go to Dadar (place in Bombay), we can reach by straight way there.
But instead we go to Bhiwandi then Pune and after roaming in four-five places then we reach
Dadar. One is straight path and other is zig-zag. The zig-zag way is correct, it is not so. That
time there was no easy way so they chose the difficult path. They made the easy path very
difficult. So, shall we also make the same difficult path for us? Therefore everyone has
described about the easy and straight path 'sahaj'. We should go in sahaj samadhi. All the saints
said 'Sahaj Samadhi lago' (go into sahaj meditation). Kabira got married.
Guru nanaka was also married. From the time of King Janaka all who have become great
realized souls got married.After them many came who did not get married but never criticized
the marriage organization. And it is not that what we call as prapancha is wrong.
So, first of all we should remove this imagination from our minds that if we have to go
through path of yoga then we have to leave prapancha. Instead, if you are in prapancha then
you must come to Sahaj Yoga.
6.
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-6.txt 
 COMPLAINTS OF PRAPANCHA
In the beginning when I started Sahaj Yoga in Dadar, everyone used to come with the
complaints of prapancha. "My mother in law is not alright, my husband is not alright, my
is bad, my children are not alright etc ..all these small complaints of prapancha people
used to bring in Sahaj Yoga. It happens only in the beginning. We come to God with the
problems of prapancha by getting upset of them and for solving the problems of prapancha.
And we ask God, 'Oh ! God my house should be alright, my children should be healthy my
married life should flourish, everyone should be happy in my family' that's
all. Human inclination is limited and so mundane, and he looks everything from that mundane
level. But this mundane level is required. If it is not there then things won't work fine ahead.
One cannot come on second step before crossing first step. So prapancha is the first step and
very important in sahaj yoga. I cannot give realization to a "sanyasi" ( ascetic). I cannot ! What
to do? I tried Many times but it doesn't work out.
wife
The reason is that we wear the external clothes of ascetic...but are you an ascetic from
inside? Asceticism is the feeling inside. You cannot become a saint by wearing just the clothes,
that we are saints, I have left the home and family, I have left this, I have left that...by saying all
this if people think that they have found out path of Yoga then they are absolutely mistaken !. If
you are an Escapist, and you have tendency of escapism then there is no cure for
it.
Wise person should think that we are in prapancha and if we get anything by running away
from it then what is the use? Suppose you are taken in some jungle and you sit there and say,
"see I can live without water" then what is the special thing in it? Living in water
if you don't need water, you are detached from water, when this state comes then it is true
prapancha. Then only it is true prapancha. And we need it today. We need that prapancha.
66
You all might be knowing about King Janaka. Nachiketa thought that this King Janaka
who has crown on his head, he has all slaves and servants, there is dance going in front of him.
When he comes in our Ashram my guru touches his feet? How is it that he is so great? So his
Guru said to him that he should himself go and see. Nachiketa went and stood in front of Janaka
and said, 'Please give me self realization, my guru has said that you can give selfrealization, so
please give me selfrealization.'
King Janaka said, 'look , if you would have asked me whole universe I would have given
but I cannot give you realization, reason being that one who doesn't know the subtle aspect of it
then what is the use of giving it to such human being? The one who will understand its subtle
aspect can only get deeper into it.' So, the tattwa of Prapancha is 'Pr' which means the light.
Until unless it is awakened within you all....you will remain in 'Pancha' and cannot enter in
'Prapancha'.
When Nachiketa asked the above question to King Janaka. King Janaka asked Nachiketa
to be with him. I hope you know rest of the story. So I don't have to repeat it. But at last
Nachiketa understood that this man (King Janaka) has no attachments. He is not worried at all.
neither he has any sticking with worldly things or what we call as world. He is like an ascetic.
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-7.txt 
 He will wear crown on his head of king and sleep on the ground, like a real Emperor. He doesn't
need any comforts, somewhere he will sleep on soft bed...sometimes lie on the ground....like
an Emperor within. He is not worried of anything, he is not caught by anything.
PRAPANCHA NEVER GETS EFFECTED
BY ANY COMFORT OR ANY SLAVISHNESS
The one who is in prapancha never gets effected by any comfort or any slavishness
towards material. Even if you ask him to sleep by resting his head on stone, he can sleep. Ask
him to eat anything, without taste...he can eat and also he can eat in parties. If you ask him
tomorrow that, 'what is to be done now , we have to make an ashram so how to do it?' He will
tell you everything perfectly about it. He will give you details of materials to be used and the
quality etc...everything. He is not stuck to anything within. This is the matter of tattwa. You all
should understand it.
Namdeva has written one poetry and same has been added in Gurugrantha Sahib (Holy
scripture of Sikh Religion) by Guru Nanaka. It is very beautiful. I would like to certainly
describe it to you. It is written in that poetry; 'The Kite is flying above in
sky and one child is holding its string. He is laughing, talking and moving to and fro but his
attention is on kite'.
In another paragraph it says; “ Many women are going on street with pitchers on their
head filled with the water from river and they are talking and joking, talking about their home
etc but their whole attention is on the pitcher (Cana) that the water should not get spilled'. Same
there is one more description about the mother; 'One mother has child on her lap and she is
66
way
doing all the work of house and kitchen, she does all the job in the house...sometimes bends
down sometimes runs here and there....but her attention is on the child that he should not fall
down' Same way is with the saints and yogis. They know how to do all kinds of work. They do
all kinds of work but their attention is always on their spirit. These all saints were like you
people, living with their family, wife and children. After having all that they have one
speciality and you all should understand that speciality by coming in that Tattwa.
What is that speciality?...it is Sahaj Yoga! You must also see that after getting that state
what beneficial changes come within you. Because in Prapancha you always see profit and
loss. What will you gain? What will you loose?
But you must understand that God is beyond all this gain and loss. But many don't know
the meaning of it. In modern times if you talk about God then people think that 'this lady has
never got modern education and she is reciting stories like our grandmothers'. But God is and
he will ever exist.
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-8.txt 
 GOD WORKS OUT THINGS BEING IN PRAPANCHA.
But we have to see how God works out things being in Prapancha. First of all, see, is there
any problem? Someone said to me, 'Shri mataji my house problems.... I don't have any job'.
Such kind of talks, mean talks, gross level talks, 'this is like this,
Like that.. etc'. After some times the same fellow comes and says, 'Shri Mataji everything is
solved, everything became alright'. So, how all this happens? You must see this. Once it
happened, I have one disciple from foreign country. I generally don't call them 'disciples'... I
call them 'children'. So both were girls. Both were going in a car in Germany.
In Germany there are big highways called 'Autoban' and there are many vehicles moving
fast on it. So they wrote to me one letter,' From both the sides there were truck , big buses,
very
big cars which are double lords were going. Our car was in between...its brakes were not
working and the car was vobbling (shaking) So she thought that she is going to die now and she
cant escape. If the break was alright then there were some chances, but it was also out of order.
So, in that condition she got 'inspiration'. The inspiration of emergency. It worked out. That is;
now everything is finished, nothing is left, the time of destruction has come. So, she
surrendered and said, 'Shri Mataji now you only do something... whatever you want I am going
to close my eyes'. She closed her eyes, it was written in her letter. After some time I saw that the
car was properly parked on one side and the break was also working. Now, Shri Mataji did not
do anything, you must see this. How does it happen? Means that whatever has happened, it has
happened due to some cause. Means Cause and result. Suppose some quarrel has taken place in
your house due to your wife, parents or some 'x' person. The result is disturbance in house. The
one who has simple thinking will keep on fighting with the result. 'I have to fight with it!!' then
some other reason will come out to fight, then third. Now what is the cause? How many think
about the cause of quarrel? Those who are with Subtle understanding fight with the cause of the
quarrel. Fighting, the other way makes the result to fight back and they get into the cycle of cause
and effect and the problem remains unsolved.
They cannot go beyond it. Therefore to practice prapancha is very difficult, everyone says
like this. What is the cure of it? The cure is that whatever is the cause of it, you have to go
beyond the cause. The cause was that the break (of car) was broken, she was fighting
with the break. But when she realized that there is something beyond it...Shakti (power) and
by going beyond that cause, the cause got terminated. Also the effect got terminated. It is like
this. You believe it or not, but it happens like this. It is not blind faith. Many people come to me
and say, 'Shri Mataji we remember God so much but we are suffering from Cancer, how is it?...
we go to temples, go to siddhavinayaka and stand there for hours. Specially we go there on
Tuesdays, but nothing good happened with us, this God never did anything good with us so
why should we worship him?' Alright. But the God whom you are calling...is he connected
with you? Till you are connected with him, how can something good happen with you? You
must have telephone connection with God. You keep worshipping God day and night, but
whatever you are praying..is it reaching to God? Whatever stupid things you do and behave in
stupid way and then you come and say that God did not give you anything. Why should God
give you something? Once you are connected with Government of India then you can ask some
favour because you are citizen of India and not of the Kingdom of God.
9.
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-9.txt 
 FIRST BECOME THE CITIZEN OF KINGDOM OF GOD
First become the citizen of Kingdom of God and then you will see that even before
thinking about the problem it will be solved by God.
Now imagine that by sitting here if you start saying that the queen of England did not do
anything for you. Why should she do something for you? So, here is God and why should God
do something for you? You have not entered into his Kingdom. Only to dictate on him 'Oh !
Lord'. As if he is in your pocket. Now even people don't know that they should remember God.
They have not said remember but they have said to auspicious remembering (Susmaran)
of God. 'Su' word is just like 'Pra'. 'Su' means where you have become auspicious by becoming
human beings and you are blessed. Otherwise you keep on taking the name of God like Parrot.
It influences the young generation. They say, ' What is the mening of this God? Two people
came here taking the name of God and took money from our mother, there some people came
and tied black thread in the neck and took away money. What does this kind of God means?"
Then some people start talking like them and say that there is no God. But first of all we
commit the mistake that are we connected to God? You must see this. First establish the
connection with God!.
Now, Sahaja Yoga means to connect yourself with the Divine. 'Sah' means 'with you' and
'Ja' means 'born with you'. Yoga within you since birth. The right to get Yoga Siddhi is Sahaja
Yoga. God has kept within you a Divine Energy called Kundalini. Whether you believe it or
not. Because it is difficult for the people with external eyes to believe. Specially the
intellectuals and literary people move with mental thoughts. And up to where will their
thoughts reach...no one knows. One thinking does not match with the other. This is why there
are so many differences.
So the power which is beyond these thoughts or mental analysis has been described since
ancient times in our country. It is needed to put your attention on that. But these intellectuals
have so much ego that they are not ready to pay attention this side. May be it is somewhere
concerned with their livelihood. But after coming to Sahaja Yoga you are blessed with well
being. After getting connected with God your problems disappear in such a way that you are
surprised. 'What did we do?' 'How did God give us so much? How everything got arranged in
such beautiful way?' You ask yourself these questions and get amazed.
You might have read the last paragraph of Gyaneshwara's Pasaydan. What he has
described is the condition of today. It has to work out in this way.
10
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-10.txt 
 WHATEVER ONE WILL DESIRE
WILL BE FULFILLED
Whatever one will desire will be fulfilled. But before desiring it you have to awaken your
Kundalini. I cannot promise you anything before that. Neither I assure you like ministers and
leaders. Whatever the truth is, I am speaking it in my language and in my way. I am not
speaking to you in literary or philosophical way. I am teaching you in the same way as a mother
teaches her child about household things. You must receive the treasure within
that you are tied in Prapancha.
You say
you.
'Tied' means what? It means that you are giving importance to the stupid and useless
things. 'I must get a good Job, why I am not getting it? because unemployment is there , means
unemployed are increasing. It will keep on increasing.
So, how to go beyond all this stupid thinking? The cure is that you have to awaken the
power which is around us. We have that Power in Mooladhara Chakra. You will see that how
this Power within you in your Mooladhara works out in this Prapancha. Your attention should
be towards that power.
And first of all you must know that this power of Kundalini which is in your Mooladhara is
due to Shri Ganesha. Now, we should say that this Maharashtra is blessed. Here we have
Ashtavinayaks (Eight forms of Shri Ganesha) which are great blessing of God for you. This is
the reason that I have been able to establish Sahaja Yoga in Maharashtra. Because the power of
Shri Ganesha covers you. I have been helped a lot because of that covering. This Shri Ganesha
is sitting in your Mooladhara. Now, if there is some doctor, he will keep the photograph of Shri
Ganesha in his house. He will construct temple also. He will go and bow there. But he will
never understand the relation of medical science with Shri Ganesha. He wont even accept it.
11
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-12.txt 
 WITHOUT SHRI GANESHA
EVEN MEDICAL SCIENCE IS WORTHLESS.
But without Shri Ganesha even medical science is worthless. Because of this Ganesha's
Power you can produce children. Imagine that the face of child resembles the face of parents.
There are millions of people all over the world but every child resembles his parents or the
grandparents or some relative of that family. Who controls this balance and regulation? It is
only Shri Ganesha.
You all are supposed to accept the child like innocence of your children. That innocence
should come within you. There are small children in house. How innocent they are. We speak
bad words in front of them. We bring them up in such an environment where everything is
inauspicious. No one puts attention on them and we let them do anything. These children are
shri ganesha ofyour house and family. You are not even bothered to look after them and to bring
them up properly.
Now a days even 80 years old women marries in England. I don't understand anything
what to say. Please do not bring the filth and dirty things of west here. Let the dirty things of
west remain in west. 'ati shahane tyanche bail rikame ( those who are too clever have empty
head). So if Shri Ganesha's curse should not fall on us, we have to assure it. Shri Ganesha sits
inside us and brings up our children. First giving birth and then upbringing. And that innocent
Ganesha (child) gives joy to everyone in family. There is tremendous joy in the family where a
child is born. How many waves of joy flow from coming of that child.
But the house where children are not born, there is so much feeling of emptiness. You feel
as if not to visit that house. Because there is no giggling of the child there. Nojoy at all. There is
no sweetness in such house. But now the time has changed. Children are not born in the
countries which we call as affluent or rich countries. Their population is decreasing.
Our country's population is increasing. People say it is very bad. Your country's
population should not increase. What I want to say is that those children who are taking birth
also have wisdom. Why should they take birth in those Eastern countries. They will
there husband and wife divorce everyday and kill their children. The same will happen to us.
Because only here (in India) parents have that dedication and love for their children and have
that Sahaj way of living which is not in rich (Western) countries, not at all.
that
say
You might be surprised to know that in London city the parents kill their two children in
one week. Everyday I get shocks. And they are not at all effected by it. They are lost in so much
ego that they don't understand what crime they are committing. After living there I realized that
how nice are the Indian men and women. Here in India the telephones do not work,
microphones do not work, trains do not function....I agree but the human beings function
perfectly. The subtlest of subtle in them is Ganesha Tattwa.
13
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-13.txt 
 GANESH TATTWA
And the house which does not have good Ganesha Tattwa has everything improper. I
blame the spoiling of children on the parents. Nowadays even the mother goes out to work.
Men already work. Still it is important to see that how much deep is the time you devote to your
children. Now what happens after coming to Sahaja Yoga. Means how Sahaja Yoga is related
to your children is very important to see. In Sahaja Yoga your Ganesha's Power gets awakened
because of Kundalini.
The first thing which comes is wisdom. We call it Vinayaka (Ganesha). He only gives
wisdom to everyone. People bring children to me who are very poor in studies. I have seen
such children whom the parents bring to me and say that their child is zero in the class. He only
does mischiefs and speaks stupid with his teacher. I asked the child, 'Why do you do like this?'
He said, 'I don't know anything and teacher keeps on scolding me always.' "Then what should I
do?' The same child came first class first in his class. How did it happen? That power starts
flowing within you as soon as Ganesha is awakened within you and a new dimension starts in
human being. That dimension is called collective consciousness. The things which a person
cannot see or feel before now through this new awareness he starts feeling them in Sahaj way.
This new dimension or say this new consciousness makes a person truly capable. And through
that capability a miracle takes place. The children who are useless and are of no worth, like
those who drink wine etc. You know that nowadays a lot of drugs are being consumed. I never
saw a thing called marijuana.
Now I have come to know that they sell it in schools. This all stupidity is because of no
wisdom. When this wisdom gets awakened , all those living in England and America became very
good citizens. This is the power of Sahaj Yoga. Children get disciplined. I see that today there is no
discipline in children because mother and father fight and quarrel with each other and do not
respect their children. They behave very badly with them. The children behave like their parents
and do stupid and indiscipline things like their parents behave. After coming to Sahaja Yoga if the
parent's kundalini is awakened and also of the children then everyone behaves in proper manner.
First the self respect is awakened within. By giving lectures you cannot awaken self respect in
them. But by awakening of kundalini in Sahaj Yoga, a person gets self respect. In our country
there is a process of respecting the one who is in power. But the true power is of Shri Ganesha.
Whoever has his power, you should bow to his feet. Rest all will come today and go tomorrow.
They have no importance, they all are useless people. Those who have awakened Ganesha within
them, you must bow in front of them only. There is tremendous change in a person when
Ganesha's power is awakened. As you see today that the eyes of men is always flittering here and
there...and the Agnya Chakra is badly caught. Like fools they keep looking here and there. There
is a big number of such men today. It has also started in Maharashtra. When i was small and was
studying in schools. I never saw such stupid men at that time. But now these new creatures have
come. They always keep rotating their eyes here and there. Always seeing here and there, like the
advertisements on the way. You loose much power and energy by that. There is no joy in doing
like this. It is joyless pursuit as we can say. They put all their attention on that and keep roving their
eyes here and there. Ifthey miss some advertisement by mistake then they think that they have lost
something very important. They will rotate their eye again and read the advertisement. It is very
necessary for them to see everything. This disease of eyes gets terminated.
14
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-14.txt 
 'KATAKSHA'
'NIRIKSHANA' (INSPECTION IN EVERY GLANCE
The person becomes concentrated at spirit in sahaj yoga. Then you get stable vision. If this
state of eye is awakened then we call it 'kataksha nirikshana' (inspection in every glance). Where
ever your glance will go you will awaken the kundalini. Whomever you will see will get purified.
Such purity will come in eyes....this is alone the task of shri ganesha. You have not
recognized your Ganesha. If you would have recognized then you would have been stable in
your purity. Whatever is pure , only that you must do. But you did not worship your Ganesha.
Doesn't matter. You have children in your house, watch their Ganesha. Make them adorable
and get your Kundalini awakened. But the speciality of Sahaja Yoga is that it all happens
spontaneous. You have to do nothing for it. By awakening of Kundalini, man gets wisdom and
his whole personality becomes special. Now if there are some intellectuals, they would say that
Mataji is telling some illusionary story. But you will be surprised to hear that in Ahmadnagar
(Loc in Maharashtra) 10000 people left drinking. I don't say that there should be prohibition of
liquor..I don't say anything like this.
However you are you must come to Sahaja Yoga. You must come and enlighten the lamp
of your spirit. After enlightening of that lamp all the faults will be seen clearly. Till that lamp is
lightened, you cannot see if something is sticked on your Sari. In the same way you can see
everything clearly. Even if it is lightened a little, you will be able to see your weaknesses. You
become your own Guru and correct yourself. Make yourself pure. There is no limit of the joy
amongst those who are purified. Someone has said, 'Jab mast hue tab kya bole?' (Once we
drowned into joy then what is there to speak?). This becomes the condition once we come into
the state of bliss. Purity is blissful!, not only blissful but it makes the complete personality
fragrant. If such a person is standing anywhere, people will say, 'This gentleman has something
special'. Sahaja Yoga is not for the people who don't want to become Special!. Those who have
to become , will become special. It is well known that you are going to become extraordinary
and special people. You have to earn this blessing! Sahaja Yoga is for all those who are living
with family and children and want to become special people. Those who think that they don't
want to become special and they are alright as they are and say that they don't want anything
from Mataji, then its alright I do Namaskar to them. They can visit but we cant force realization
on them. If you want complete freedom, then i have to look after your freedom. If you have to
go to hell, so better go there and if you have to come to heaven then you are welcome !! Icannot
force you at all. First of all in prapancha (family life) a child is a source of joy. From the
beginning of pregnancy, there is joy in the house. After the pains of mother are over the child
takes birth in happy surroundings. I have seen nowadays that those who are realized have the
children who are realized from birth itself. No matter they are living anywhere. There are many
realized souls who have to take birth. I am seeing everyone, they say, "who is the one who will
keep our spirit enlightened" saints do not take birth through the people who are not worth it.
Such great souls have to take birth and for them such realized yogis are required. Their
prapancha will be truly enlightened. And for such enlightened prapancha creation you have to
come to Sahaj Yoga and awaken your kundalini. After this we come to second Chakra which is
called Swadishthan in which there are lot ofPrapanchas.
66
15
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-15.txt 
 SWADHISHTHAN IN WHICH
THERE ARE LOT OF PRAPANCHAS
Swadishthan in which there are lot of Prapanchas. There are many benefits in your
Prapancha through it. Swadishthan's first work is to make your Guru principal strong.
I have seen in many houses that the father is not respected at all, mother is not respected at
all. The small 15 years old children are everything there.
I see now-a-days in the market that it is very difficult to get a Sari for an elderly person like
me. All Saris are for young girls. For elders and old people they don't make Saris anymore.
There used to be money with elders in previous times. Everything used to be good for them.
Now no one is concerned about old and elder people. It has become difficult for them to even
get one sari for some marriage occasion etc.
When this Guru Shakti is awakened within you then this old age which comes is full of
radiation. Now if I take some elderly and old person. The father or Grandfather also behave
like stupid sometimes. Mother behaves like a stupid fool. She doesn't know how she has to live
in front of the other people who come from outside. She always keeps on shouting. All her
attention is on the keys of the house or on the quarrels ofcaste system.
A konkanastha (a caste in south Maharashtra) should be married to Konkanastha. The
country boy should be married to same country's girl. If it is not so then the mother in law
quarrels with her daughter in law. This stupidities of elders end after coming to Sahaj Yoga.
Instead of it in that old age there is a kind of radiation. That person stands in his pride. You will
feel that oh! my God what has happened to my father. You will feel that these are the people
from ancient time of Shivaji. And you will get bowed in front of them. So the agitation which
is in this youth of today, taking divorce for little problems, fighting with wife, not having good
relations with parents, cannot live in house, running away from house.
This all is happening today. There is no job, no money and all bad habits inside. From all
the direction our youth is moving towards destruction. In fact their background in India is very
great.
But I tell you that Maharashtra's background is very great. They forget everything and
don't study or understand. Now, how much knowledge of music they have in Maharashtra.
There is lot of literature of saints in Marathi language. But who reads such books now?
16
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-16.txt 
 YOUNG
GENERATION
They purchase dirty books from the street and read. Very superficial things...not going
deeper but floating on top. This is the condition of Yuva (young) generation. If it continues then
they all will be lost. They will become useless. Ask me !I went to America and there are 65%
jobless people. There they are afraid of a disease called aids. All young generation is dying and
can't understand how to escape from it. Its reason is 'what's wrong'. 'There might have been
Saint Ramadasa, what are we going to do with him, keep this all with you, we are becoming
modern now'. This stupid modernity!. Where those modern Americans are going? You go to
those countries once what is the condition of those modern people. The writers here keep
writing about those countries sitting here. Go there and see what's happening in those modern
countries. The elders there keep thinking day and night that how to commit suicide. They have
only one thought and that is suicide. This is the only way left with them.
You want to become modern like them who will vanish in thin air one day. Then I bow to
you, you may go out of Sahaja Yoga. But, you have to be firm on your shakti and you have to
become special. Then you have to stop a little from your fast journey. Think in silence that 'am I
also running with all these western people who are in rat race?' You must think peacefully about
the heritage of India. During partition of property if they get even one cloth less then they go to
court to fight the case. But it is great heritage of our country where no one is putting attention, it
is going to finish now. How much we have taken benefit from it. The elders get this knowledge
after coming to Sahaja Yoga. Because they know that how much higher they have gone from
their state before realization. In my childhood my father said to me, 'first of all this young
generation should be awakened'. The sages sitting on 10th floor (state of realization) cannot
understand the state of the person who is on the first step. These common people sing bhajans but
do not know the feelings which are connected with the songs. When they will reach to first stage
then they will realize that there are further steps ahead. So, beyond this human awareness there is
greater awareness called 'Ritambhara Shakti' you get it in Sahaj. After achieving it you will be able
to have vision of your life. What are we, how great we are and is it good to play with your life? How
much treasure you have, how much have you kept your self respect? You don't know anything
about yourself. Try to understand this and get realization in Sahaja Yoga. What is the condition of
young generation today. All of them can come to Sahaja Yoga. It is very easy to give realization to
younger generation. They commit mistakes in their innocence. It is all innocence.
One boy smokes cigarette then I should also do it. If someone is wearing good clothes then
I should also wear. All innocence, but sometimes this innocence can be destructive. What is
lacking today in our country. Someone will say that it is food. But I don't see any such problem.
I feel that we eat too much and give to others. Whenever I come here, I do namaskar and say,
'please finish it, I don't want anymore food.' Every person there says that there is no problem or
scarcity of food in India because they request you to eat a lot that they feel not to eat at all. So
what is deficient in our country? People are very smart in discussions and arguments. If they are
standing here, they can give great lectures than even mine. We are very smart in everything
else. A little oversmart. We have everything, Gold, silver...what is not there? Think and find
out where we are lacking?
17
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-17.txt 
 ु
ु
कि
आज्ञा चक्र एवं नियंत्रक देवता
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-18.txt 
 छठा चक्र अगन्य चक्र कहलाता है। इसे आज्ञा चक्र भी कहते हैं और इसकी केवल दो पंखुड़ियाँ
होती हैं।...
करती हैं। यह केन्द्र पियुष (पिट्यूटरी) तथा शंकुरूप (पीनियल) ग्रन्थियों के लिये कार्य करता है जो कि अहं
एवं प्रति अहं नामक दोनो संस्थाओं का प्रतिनिधित्व करता है।
.इस केन्द्र को वहाँ स्थित किया गया है जहाँ मस्तिष्क में दोनों दृकतंत्रिकायें एक दूसरे को पार
आज्ञा चक्र का महत्वपूर्ण क्षेत्र सिर के पिछले भाग का वह स्थल है जो माथे के ठीक पीछे स्थित
है। ये उस क्षेत्र में स्थित है जो गर्दन के आधार से आठ उंगलियों की ऊँचाई पर स्थित है। यह महागणेश का क्षेत्र
है। श्री गणेश ने महागणेश के रूप में अवतार लिया और वही अवतार जीजस क्राइस्ट का है। श्री क्राइस्ट का
स्थान कपाल के केन्द्र भाग में है और उसके चारों ओर एकादश का साम्राज्य है। जीजस क्राइस्ट इस साम्राज्य
के स्वामी हैं।
इस चक्र का अतिसूक्ष्म द्वार है। इसलिये श्री क्राइस्ट ने कहा, 'मैं द्वार हूँ। इस अति सूक्ष्म द्वार को पार
करना आसान करने के लिये श्री क्राइस्ट ने इस पृथ्वी पर अवतार लिया और स्वयं यह द्वार प्रथम पार किया। अपने
अहंभाव के कारण लोगों ने श्री क्राइस्ट को सूली पर चढ़ाया क्योंकि कोई मनुष्य परमेश्वर का अवतार बन कर आ
सकता है ये उनकी बुद्धि को मान्य नहीं था। उन्होंने अपने बौद्धिक अहंकार के कारण सत्य को ठुकराया।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, २७.९.१९७९
यदि आज्ञा चक्र नहीं खुला तो कुण्डलिनी का उत्थान नहीं हो सकता क्योंकि जिस मनुष्य का
है
उसका मूलाधार चक्र भी पकड़ जाता है। किसी मनुष्य का आज्ञा चक्र बहुत ही ज़्यादा
आज्ञा चक्र पकड़ता
पकड़ा होगा तो उसकी कुण्डलिनी शक्ति जाग्रत नहीं होगी।
आज्ञा चक्र के खराब होने का मुख्य कारण आँखें हैं।
किसी भी स्त्री की तरफ बुरी दृष्टि से देखना महापाप है। .......गलत नज़र रखने से मनुष्य किसी
पशू के समान बर्ताव करता है। क्योंकि रात दिन उसके अन्दर गर्दे विचारों का चक्र चलता रहता है। ....... श्री
क्राइस्ट ने बहुत ज़ोर से कहा था कि आप व्यभिचार मत कीजिये, परन्तु मैं आपसे कहती हूँ कि आपकी नज़र
भी व्यभिचारी नहीं होनी चाहिये । .... अगर नज़र अपवित्र होगी तो आपको आँखों की तकलीफ भी हो
जाएगी। ...
अपनी आँखे इधर-उधर घुमाने के कारण ये खराब होती हैं।
आज्ञा चक्र खराब होने का दूसरा कारण है मनुष्य की 'कार्य पद्धति' समझ लीजिये आप बहुत काम करते
हैं, अति कर्मी हैं, अच्छे काम करते हैं, कोई भी बुरा काम नहीं करते परन्तु ऐसी अतिकार्यशीलता की वज़ह से
चाहे वह अति पढ़ना हो, अति सिलाई हो या अति विचारशीलता, आपका आज्ञा चक्र प्रभावित होता है,
इसका कारण है कि जिस समय आप अति कार्य करते हैं उस समय परमात्मा को भूल जाते हैं, उस समय
आपमें ईश्वर प्रणिधान स्थित नहीं होता।
अनाधिकृत गुरु के सामने झुकने अथवा उनके चरणों में अपना माथा टेकने से भी आज्ञा चक्र
19
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-19.txt 
 खराब हो जाता है। श्री क्राइस्ट ने अपना माथा चाहे जिस आदमी या स्थान के सामने झुकाने को मना किया है ।
ऐसा करने से हमने जो कुछ पाया है वह सब नष्ट हो जाता है। केवल परमेश्वरी अवतार के सामने अपना माथा
टेकना चाहिये।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, २७.९.१९७९
आज्ञा चक्र अति सूक्ष्म केन्द्र है, अपने बंधनों तथा अहं से प्राप्त विचारों के कारण लोगों की आज्ञा
इतनी अवरोधित हो गयी है कि इसमें से कुण्डलिनी का पार होना असम्भव था। ईसा चूँकि चैतन्य का ही रूप थे
अत: पुनर्जन्म का खेल रचा गया। हमें समझना चाहिये कि ईसा की मृत्यु के कारण ही हमें हमारा पुनर्जन्म प्राप्त
हुआ है और भूतकाल की मृत्यु हो गयी है, हमारे पश्चाताप और बंधन समाप्त हो गए।
हमारे सभी विचारों और बन्धनों में से अहं कि 'मैं यह कार्य कर रहा हूँ' सबसे बुरा है, इसका समाप्त होना
आवश्यक है।
.....जब तक आप स्वयं को कर्ता समझते रहेंगे आप आनन्द के सागर में छलांग नहीं लगा सकते।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, इटली, १९.४.१९९२
जब हम अहं को बढ़ावा देने लगते हैं तो दाईं ओर की समस्यायें आरम्भ हो जाती हैं, तब प्रतिक्रिया
के रूप में इसका प्रभाव बाईं ओर पर पड़ता है। वास्तव में बाईं ओर का स्थान हमारे सिर में दाईं तरफ है तो हमारा
अहं दाईं आज्ञा में आ जाता है। श्री महावीर बाईं ओर के रुद्र हैं। अहंवश होकर लोग पापमय अनुचित कार्य करते
हैं जो श्री गणेश के विरूद्ध हैं ।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, दिल्ली, १६.३.१९९७
...... बाईं आज्ञा ( पीछे की ओर) की यदि समस्या होतो इसका कुप्रभाव आँखो पर पड़ता है, हमारी आँखो
का आकार बढ़ सकता है तथा दूर दृष्टि कम हो सकती है। मानसिक रोगियों को बाईं आज्ञा की समस्या बहुत
अधिक होती है। तो बाईं आज्ञा की पकड़ यह सुझाती है कि व्यक्ति को किसी प्रकार की भूत -बाधा है।
व्यक्ति को गुरुओं और पुस्तकों के विषय में बहुत सावधान रहना चाहिये क्योंकि इनके कारण बाईं
आज्ञा तथा स्वाधिष्ठान की समस्या हो सकती है।
बाईं आज्ञा चक्र यदि प्रकाशित हो जाए तो व्यक्ति अपनी लौकिक आँखो से चैतन्य देखने लगता है।
यह बाईं आज्ञा अत्यन्त अन्तर्भदी है।
सामने का दायां आज्ञा चक्र भी बहुत महत्वपूर्ण है। हम यदि क्षमा नहीं करते तो यह खराब हो जाता
..बहुत अधिक सोचने पर हमारे चेतन
मस्तिष्क पर आक्रमण कर देता है। .... अब एक नया रोग आ गया है जिसमें व्यक्ति रेंगने वाला व्यक्ति सा हो
है। यदि बहुत अधिक सोचते हैं तो भी यह समस्यायें खड़ी करता है ।
जाता है, लोग अपने हाथ-पाँव नहीं चला सकते, इनका केवल मस्तिष्क चलता है, ये चल भी नहीं सकते केवल रेंग
सकते हैं।
..बहत अधिक सोचना, अत्याधिक भविष्यवादी दृष्टिकोण व्यक्ति की आज्ञा को खराब कर देता है।
प.पू.श्री माताजी
20
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-20.txt 
 ......दो रस्सियाँ (अहं-प्रतिअहं) आज्ञा चक्र को इतना संकीर्ण कर देती है कि इसके अन्दर से कुछ भी नहीं
गुज़र सकता। ....आप यदि अहंवादी हैं तो आप आज्ञा मार्ग को बहुत ही संकीर्ण कर देते हैं। ......आप यदि
प्रतिअहंवादी, डरे हये, किसी से दबे हुये व्यक्ति हैं तब भी यह चक्र बहुत अधिक विकृत हो जाता है। ऐसी स्थिति
में इसे संतुलित करने के लिये हमें बायें को उठाकर दाईं ओर डालना होता है या दाईं को उठाकर बाईं ओर डालना
होता है, आवश्यकतानुसार .....
संतुलन स्थापित होने पर यह आज्ञा चक्र बेहतर हो जाता है क्योंकि अब इसमें ऐंठन कम हो जाती है।
केवल तभी उठती हुई कुण्डलिनी इस चक्र को पार कर पाती है।
अपने अहंकार को नीचे लाना होगा आपको परमात्मा के उच्चतम अस्तित्व को भगवान तथा विश्व
का उच्चतम शासक मानना होगा।
जब ईसा मसीह आपके अन्दर जाग्रत होते हैं तो वे आपके कर्मों को सोख लेते हैं और आपके अहं
और प्रति अहं को संतुलित करके आपके कर्मों, पापों और बन्धनों से आपको मुक्त कर देते हैं।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, दिल्ली, ३.२.१९८३
आपके अन्त:स्थित ईसा मसीह आपको शिक्षा देंगे कि किस प्रकार आपको अन्य लोगों से व्यवहार
करना है, किस प्रकार उनका विश्वास जीतना है और अपने हृदय से प्रवाहित होने वाले प्रेम एवं शान्ति आपने
किस प्रकार उन्हें देनी है।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, टर्की, १९.४.१९९८
श्री क्राइस्ट ने बहुत ही सरल तरीके से आप में कौन-कौन सी शक्तियाँ हैं व कौनसे आयुध हैं इसके
बारे में कहा है -
इन आयुधों में सर्वप्रथम क्षमा करना है। जो तत्व श्री गणेश में परोक्ष रूप में है, वही तत्व मनुष्य में क्षमा के
रुप में कार्यान्वित है। वस्तुत: क्षमा बहुत बड़ा शस्त्र है क्योंकि उसी से मनुष्य अहंकार से बचता है।
हमें किसी ने दु:ख दिया, परेशान किया या हमारा अपमान किया तो अपना मन बार -बार यही बात
सोचता रहता है और उद्विग्न रहता है ......इससे मुक्ति पाने के लिये हम सहजयोग में ऐसे मनुष्य को क्षमा करने के
लिये कहते हैं। दूसरों को क्षमा करना, ये एक बहुत बड़ा आयुध श्री क्राइस्ट के कारण हमें प्राप्त हुआ है जिससे
आप दूसरों के कारण होने वाली परेशानियों से छुटकारा पा सकते हैं।
आपके कभी सिर में दर्द हो तो आप कोई दवाई न लेकर श्री क्राइस्ट की प्रार्थना करिये कि 'इस दुनिया
में जिस किसी ने मुझे कष्ट दिया है, परेशान किया है, उन सबको माफ कीजिये।' तो आपका सिर दर्द तुरन्त समाप्त
हो जाएगा।
आज्ञा चक्र स्वच्छ रखने के लिये मनुष्य को हमेशा अच्छे पवित्र धर्म ग्रन्थ पढ़ने चाहिये, अपवित्र
. किसी अपवित्र व गन्दे मनुष्य को देखने से भी आज्ञा चक्र खराब हो
साहित्य बिल्कुल नहीं पढ़ना चाहिये।
21
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-21.txt 
 सकता है।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, बम्बई, २७.९.१९७९
येशु प्रार्थना (लॉर्डस् प्रेयर) आज्ञा चक्रका मंत्र है। आज्ञा चक्रके दो पहलू हैं 'हं और 'क्षम'। 'हं' का अर्थ है 'ैं
हूँ और 'क्षम्' का अर्थ मैं क्षमा करता हूँ। आज्ञा चक्रयदि पकड़ रहा है और आप महसूस करते हैंकि आपके अन्दर अहं है तो
आपको कहना चाहिए 'मैं क्षमा करता हूँ।' हमारे अन्दर यदि प्रतिअहं है तो कहना चाहिये, 'मैं हूँ - मैं हूँ।
प.पू.श्री माताजी,
३०.९.१९८१
हमें गुस्से को रोकना चाहिये और उसकी जगह 'क्षमा-क्षमा-क्षमा' ऐसे तीन बार कहने से आज्ञा चक्र
ठीक हो जाता है।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, पुणे, १४.१.२००४
आज्ञा चक्र पर उत्थान की अवस्था अत्यन्त कठिन है, क्योंकि यदि आप कुण्डलिनी को आज्ञा से
ऊपर धकेलने की कोशिश करते हैं तो आप प्रयत्न का उपयोग कर रहे हैं और ऐसा करते ही आप अपनी आज्ञा में
रुकावट खड़ी कर देते हैं। अवरोधित आज्ञा को यदि आप उसी हाल में छोड़ दे तो कुण्डलिनी स्वयं इस पर कार्य
करेगी तथा आपकी आज्ञा का अवरोध समाप्त हो जायेगा। भक्ति भाव से यदि पूर्ण हृदय से गा रहे हैं या मेरा नाम
ले रहे हैं तो स्वत: ही आज्ञा चक्र खुल जायेगा ।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, इटली, २.११.१९९१
आज्ञा चक्र की पकड़ को छुडवाने के लिये हम कुंकुम लगाते हैं। उससे अहंकार व आपकी अनेक
विपत्तियाँ दूर होती हैं। जब आपके आज्ञा चक्र पर कुंकुम लगाया जाता है तब आपका आज्ञा चक्र खुलता है।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, २९.७.१९७९
आज्ञा चक्र के नियंत्रक देवता श्री जीजस क्राइस्ट की विशिष्ट भूमिका
ईसा 'श्री गणेश' की अवतरित शक्ति हैं।
जो श्री गणेश मूलाधार चक्र पर स्थित रहकर आपकी कुण्डलिनी शक्ति की लज्जा का रक्षण करते हैं,
वही श्री गणेश आज्ञा चक्र पर (क्राइस्ट रुप में अवतरित होकर) उस कुण्डलिनी शक्ति का द्वार खोलते हैं ।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, बम्बई, २७.९.१९७९
ईसा मसीह का पुनर्जन्म सहजयोग के लिये अत्यन्त प्रतीकात्मक है। .... परमात्मा ने उनके क्रूसारोपण
की योजना आज्ञा चक्र को खोलने के लिये बनायी थी। ईसा मसीह मृत्यु से ऊपर उठे, इसी प्रकार हमें भी
मूर्खतापूर्ण विचारों, नकारात्मक आदर्शों पर काबू पाना चाहिए ।
प.पू. श्री माताजी, टर्की, १९.४.१९९८
मृत्यु से ईसा मसीह का पुनर्जीवित होना इस बात का प्रतीक है कि मानव का अध्यात्मविहीन जीवन
मृत्युसम है।
श्री माताजी, इटली, ११.४.१९९३
प.पू.
22
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Do it with your heart, because what is happening is that it's all
mental. Do it with your heart. You, what you are saying is saying to
Me: I'm sitting before you - fortunate people! Do it with heart,
then only it will be - open your heart, and do it with your heart.
Come along! Without feeling guilty, that's very important.
1 September 1985.
Published & Printed by
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
No. 8, Chandragupta Co-op Housing Society, Paud Road,
Kothrud, Pune, Maharashtra, India - 411 038. © : 25286537, 25286032 email:sale@nitl.co.in
website: www.nitl.co.in (For queries & sending articles contact on above address)
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_III.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Rakshabandhan -
"Raksha" means protection
and “bandhan" means
the bondage- the bondage of
protection.
26/08/80
Happy Rakshabandban
aRshabanapan
