The Divine Cool Breeze volume twenty-six number three 2013-issue 3

 canaloharie all It is such a great pleasure to see you assembled here, which is such a far-fetched place, away from the madding crowd. It is such a beautiful place, which has vibrations. I selected this place suddenly from a very thick newspaper, an American newspaper. The vibrations were just shooting out and I said, "What is this, coming from where?" There was a little advertisement and I said, "This is the place where we have to go. י<ל This place has so many vibrations, even in the advertisement. the divine cool breeze

 CAN YOU IMAGINE ME THINKING ABOUT A PLACE LIKE THIS? a far-fetched place away from the madding crowd So you can imagine how the guidance comes. It comes from vibrations and that is how I was here and this place was selected by the Divine Force. And it happened only in one day – such a miraculous thing to happen in one day. It was taking so much time for them even to get this and suddenly I told them, “Better get it." It all worked out and we are now here in the most beautiful atmosphere.

 canajoharie shri adi shakti puja 1999 18EA The red Indians were driven out and they came here to hide themselves. They were hiding themselves in this place so that they should not be crushed and de- stroyed forever. That era is over now, that era of domination, of entering into some- body else's land and occupying it and considering it to be a great revelry. All that is over now. The human understanding has gone much beyond and they understand that this is sinful, this is wrong, whatever we have done was wrong. But those people are no more. And the children and the grandchildren of those children, of these people who were the children of God ... they do not like all that – have no right to take somebody's land like that and occupy it as your because you own. Of course, the land does not belong to anyone, but still, wherever you are born, that is your land and that land has to be kept with those who are born here, who own it.

 But this kind of aggression has been going on for ages. Now the time has shri krishna puja 2001 come to finish this. Once and for all give up this kind of adventure, to enter into somebody's land or somebody's house and occupy it. But there is another kind of aggression I see now. It is that they enter into the minds of the people now through their talk, through all kinds of their aggressive attitude and the mind itself becomes a slave. The present times are like that, I think, where people have no freedom to think what is right, what is wrong and also to take to right things. They have to accept whatever is happening around, whatever is immoral, whatever is destruc- tive. One has to accept because still, I think, we do not have a sufficient number of Sahaja Yogis who can oppose all these adventures of modern times.... The first, first duty of every Sahaja Yogi now is to save others, to talk about Sahaja Yoga, to work out Sahaja Yoga in different places.... The con- cern has to now go from yourself to others. You got your Realization all right. You corrected yourself. You are absolutely perfecting yourself. All this is there, but now what is to be done? For what is this light enlightened here? It is for others. So now Sahaja Yogis have to live for others and not for themselves. They will have all the energy, they will have all the support and they will have all the blessings. So we have to live for others. And how do we live for others is very simple. It is to have concern, concern about everything. You should have concern about the Mother Earth, concern about your neigh- bours, concern about the people who are suffering all over the world. If you read the newspaper, you will be amazed how things are happening, how people are suffering. We have to understand fundamentally that unless and until transforma- tion takes place, we cannot change this world. And you all can transform others, so it is your duty. It is your job to transform other people and to tell them what is divine love. live for others

 Love is the only way now we can work it out. It is something like a big, big oil which should go into this darkness of aggression and which will clarify many places, many hearts, many people. It is an ocean, we should say, an ocean of greatness. This divine love is so great and so powerful, at the same time so very gentle that you can see the nature, how the trees grow. Every leaf gets the sunshine. Every tree has its own position. We have to learn so much from the nature because nature is abound- ing with that love. Nature has no aggressiveness. It is just under the complete control of the divine love. love is the only way love With this understanding, you should also know that when you are getting to Sahaja Yogis what should be your attitude, how you should move, how you should express your love. This is quite possible now. It is not difficult. You should not be afraid, not feel shy, talk to them, how you should understand them, how you should but in a sweet manner you can talk to them. You can communicate with them. You can tell them because this was the time this was to happen. That is the reason Adi Shakti had to come. Without Her it would not have been possible. All other incarnations were there, but firstly, they were only on one chakra... They had to establish themselves with other people, with the people around. They did try and they worked it out, but it did not really work in the real sense of the word. So Adi Shakti had to come, who has all of them with Her. They are all with us, all the time wanting to help you to do everything that you want to achieve.... These holy vibrations are with you for every kind of good work you want to do. And kind of Sahaj work you want to do, these vibrations will definitely be there to guide you, to help you, to support you and to love you. You will be amazed how people, once they start working for Sahaja Yoga, how they are blessed from every angle. So you have to decide in your own mind that all your dreams have to come true. So the only thing that you have to do is to know only that your purpose of life is to spread Sahaja Yoga... 4

 It is a very unique time where there is light everywhere. The nature is absolutely You can see how nature acts, how it is trying to help you and support you with you. and how it wants to work out everything for you. It is to be just understood and felt that you are something very special and that you have all the help, every one of you. It is not one person, two persons. It is not ten persons. It is the whole lot, as if the whole ocean is there to help you, help you to swim over to save so many. You have not seen such an ocean where there is so much depth and all the waves try to save you, to make you float in the realm of joy. All this has happened to you because there is a purpose. It is not just because you have done poorva punyas and all that. Many people say because of a previous life we have got it. That is true. The cause may be that, but the result is that now you are capable of giving Realization to people and this is what you have to do. All the way you have come here in this wilderness. From this wilderness only, you will rise and you will bless all the people of the world. Especially America should be blessed again and again because it is the Virat. It is Shri Krishna's land because people will always try to follow, to copy you. Things will improve if you get ... the blessings of the various lotuses you have within yourself, no doubt. But what about you doing something about it? And this is what is very important... When you meditate, you think about yourself, how much you have grown, what have you done, what have you given to others. Whatever you have got, unless and until distribute it, it won't increase. That is the fundamental law and that works. you I have seen people who are realized souls, who are very good, who know everything about Sahaja Yoga, but are not yet that much confident or that much deep. All this is only possible if you yourself get into creating new Sahaja Yogis and more Sahaja Yogis – not for popularity, but for their good and for the good of the whole.... Try to experiment with it. Once you experiment, you will find out that only with the attention that you put to these things, it will work out. I am sure it will work out.... it will work out On a subtler level we have worked, but now we have to work it on the surface. At the subtler level we are there. We have achieved and we can achieve much more. But we should come out of it and think what can we do on the surface, so that people see what Sahaja Yoga is and what it can do for people. is your personal behavior, your collective behavior, your national behavior, all are going to change the atmosphere which is supposed to be superficial, so that that also becomes subtler.

 I have been saying this in many places, but at this puja I think it is important to say that if you are really facing the Adi Shakti, then you must know your powers are boundless. You have to just assert those powers. It is not a stationary power. There is a movement in it and there is a right type of a movement. It knows where to enter, how to work it out. Now look at this place. Can you imagine Me thinking about a place like this? But I just had in mind, of course, I must say, that we should have some place here because the American Sahaja Yogis did not have any place to meet – that's all. And see how I got it. But the desire to do all this should be there within your subtler level and then it works. It works. It is like a magic, I tell you. Now you have faith in your- self and decide about it. I am so very happy that it has been achieved with such ease – unbelievable, with such ease. Absolutely, nothing great was done. The way we got this was so simple. Just like another Sahaja Yogi, the person who was to sell to us came down so excited and he just sold it to us, finished. We did not have to do anything to convince him or to talk to him or reduce the price – nothing. And he sold it out to us. In the same way, whatever on a subtler level you desire, it becomes a terrific force which moves by itself, which knows where to go, how to enter into which area and it gets the thing done. It is something we all should experience and work it out with full confidence. It is the love that we have, the concern we have. This is the power that has given us Self Realization and this is the power that has given us this enrich- ment of achievements. this force will come in I am sure all of you who are here will realize how it was done – I mean so quickly. This is one of the things that should just tell you what we are capable of doing, what we are capable of achieving. And when you think of so many people who are lost in the maya of ignorance, we should really feel from inside that concern and that hankering, "How can I help these people?" And you will be amazed, once you like that, how this Divine Power, this Force, will come in. Forget about petty things think וי and petty problems. They are nothing. You have such a powerful thing behind you. It is true that all this universe was created, everything was created and then you were created and all that is done. But the greatest thing this Power has done is to cre- ate Sahaja Yogis. This is the greatest thing. Those who have knowledge, those who have the pure knowledge and those who have the divine love in their heart, what a tremendous personality it is. Just think of that and you will get all the opportunities to express that love.

 opportunities to exoress that love

 an immortal portal shri adi shakti puja 2000 Throughout the world, there are doors immortal and gateways to the spirit, opening and closing every day, by the grace of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi – Ganapatipule, Cabella, Nagpur, Pratishthan, Belapur, to name a few, and one I recently returned from: Canajoharie, New York, USA. We are a family, for we know who Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi is and that our Mother is working out everything. The camaraderie, work level, dedication, commitment, sheer determination demonstrated throughout this time by our brothers and sisters was incredible. I am privileged to have been a small part and to have been able to take time out of “our lives" to pay homage, to get: muddy, cold, wet, full of sawdust and share the gift of divine collectivity with our brothers and sisters with whom we have shared so much, so many times before. This was a journey of lifetimes, all in a few short weeks in the summer of 2000, visiting a new Immortal Portal. A part of me was left there and a larger part of there I take with me. Jeff Lyons 16 the pot that washes itself

 shri krishna puja 2001 It was a blessing for Sahaja Yoga all over the world and especially in America when Shri Mataji graced us with Her presence at Canajoharie. Nirmal Mukhi There's something about the beauty and intensity of vibrations of Canajoharie that makes it unlike any experience. That, combined with being surrounded by my brothers and sisters and having Mother on the land, made it a time that I will always carry in my heart. Grace Buetti (age 15) It really felt like playing in Mother's garden – with eight hundred to a thousand of your siblings. All I really remember from the puja itself was how beautiful Shri Mataji looked, how the vibrations flow so strongly doing Her puja and how clear and joyful and playful I felt afterwards. Mark Mays Krishna Puja 2001, in Satya Yuga, was one memorable event and really was a live preview of our Mother's vision of what is to come in the future. Sujata Gulati (De Sousa) mother's garden

 all the time they worshipped 10

 spiritual people In America I was surprised to see that there were so many red Indians, who are called as Indian Americans. They were all oppressed – oppressed so much that they had to run away to different places. And then I went to this place, Canajoharie. I found the vibrations were so good. That means they were very innocent, simple people. Americans at that time who went there tried to completely finish them. So they went and hid in places like Canajoharie. But Canajoharie had such tremendous vibrations that I said, "Look at this. So many years have passed, still the people who CC lived there or walked about and were absolutely enjoying this place were red Indians," the ones לל who were Indians – we call them American Indians. But they are so simple and innocent and they were also, I think, spiritual people because they used to worship the Mother. Mother, all the time they worshipped.

 canajoharie shri adi shakti puja 2000 I have already told you about the Adi Shakti, how She had to work out so many things in this world, first to create and then to create human beings through the evolutionary process, after that to comfort, then to counsel. So many people came on this Earth just to do the counselling. They told what was wrong, what was right, what we should do, what we should not do, what is self-respect and what is the duty of a human being as the superior-most creature. of them came on this Earth. One after another, in every country, they So many came and their counselling formed religions. Of course, you see the mess of the re- ligions and that is how their life was wasted. They formed religions after religions, by which only human beings were divided, divided to such an extent they hate each other.... Despite that, the human brain in its freedom did all kinds of wrong things and created a country – or we can say the whole world - full of lots of problems arising out of religion. How can it be that religion makes you hate somebody? Religion is there to understand love, imbibe love and compassion. So the third thing one had to do is the Adi Shakti's job. That is the one Kundal- ini within us and, by Her awakening, we got pure knowledge, absolute knowledge - pure knowledge that it cannot be challenged, absolutely. Whatever you know after Realization is absolute. If you know that, then what you have to understand is that everything has to be united. You cannot have fights and you cannot hate anyone. If that thing starts happening, all the problems of the world will be fin- ished. So the first thing, redemption – that is the quality of the Adi Shakti – was to redeem people of their all-wrong ideas about others... religion is to imbibe love

 There are six enemies we have got and unless and until we can conquer those six enemies we cannot be a religious person. That is what it is said. But actually, all reli- gions are based only on prospering those six enemies that we have within ourselves. When you see this clearly, you start seeking. You start seeking – seeking a message, the truth and the revelation of truth. Absolute truth can only come through your evolution, through your reformation, that you become a person who knows the truth. For that, Adi Shakti's ascent is important within you, which is your Kundalini. And when this thing takes place, automatically you drop all those six enemies that you have. You become a beautiful human being. Like a lotus, when it is in early germinating state, it looks like all other small animals or small, very, very small dirty things that are in the pond. And then when she starts coming out, coming out of that horrible water, it becomes such a beautiful flower, rises up and opens out. In the same way, a Sahaja Yogi, though he lives along with all these horrible things that are going on, but flowers like a lotus. It does not have all these insects, all this dirt and filth of that water in which it lives. It sucks only the pure water and ... the others remain there as it is. So what is left within you is nothing but purity, beauty and fragrance, just like a lotus. Then there is no more the problem of getting attacked by all of these small, small creatures in the water and all the dirty things that are in the water. And this state that you have achieved now, I am very happy to see so many people in America have achieved it.... The second thing that happens to you, you become absolutely collective. This has to happen, but I find still people have not understood the meaning of collectivity... I have seen, even among Sahaja Yogis sometimes, some people who are working for who are educated, sometimes look down upon people who are not so money, well off. Or maybe the housewives, who are working in the house, looking after the children, building up the families, are not treated with respect as some secretary.... When money is important, then the Lakshmi principle is not respected.... Very wrong things can happen. You can work, you can be educated, but you should be able to look after your family and look after their comfort and look after their unity... The women who work very hard in the household with love, look after the chil- dren, look after the family are in no way less than these people who are working in the office. So such women must be respected by their husbands, by the males of the family. Not only that, but all the Sahaja Yogis must respect such women who are doing such a difficult task. I have been a housewife and I know what it is to run the house, to look after the children, to look after the complete organization and look- ing after the expenditure of the money if that is limited. This ego has to go... 13

 In one of My lectures, I talked to you about the emotional intelligence. That is what we should try to imbibe – emotional intelligence. That means the intelligence that is based on emotions. Unless and until we become emotionally intelligent, our society cannot improve. In an emotional intelligence, you care and you enjoy car- ing. You do everything for others with a great emotional understanding, not for one child, not for one son, but for everyone you have to be emotionally intelligent. Some children are born like this, but some are to be made like that, that they should be emotionally intelligent because if the mother and father are money-ori- ented, very selfish, they won't allow their child to give anything to others. So such a child will grow into a very funny type of a person and he will never do anything for anybody, not even for his own country.... what are you making out of your life This emotional intelligence has to be brought in our lives, in our pattern that we have. Are we emotionally intelligent or we are just intelligent or emotional...? If you are just intelligent, you can become a very dry person. You may just have few friends - maybe you may not have – and you will always try to preserve yourself away from the collectivity. And if you are emotional, you will be attached only to one person, attached to one child ... for no rhyme and reason. Why are you attached to one per- son? Why do you bother about one person only...? So according to ethics, emotional intelligence is the highest quality by which you give to others. You care for others, for everyone and you become very, very collec- tive.... I am just a woman, I am just a mother, but what I have is really the emotional intelligence, an ocean of it, and from that I know about everything. I understand about everything and all this work has been done because of that quality in My head. I am not attached to one person or to one style. Whatever you say, I can under- stand because I am at a level where I can understand everything that you are doing. To achieve that, you try to develop emotional intelligence.... The joy of life is only in the emotional intelligence. If you do not have that, it becomes very dry. Life becomes very unbearable, horrible and even the family gets broken up if there is no emotional intelligence in the family... I thought that for this special puja I should say something about the family. In our ashrams or in our programs or wherever we are, we should remember this point, that are we having that emotional intelligence when we are trying to talk about Sa- haja Yoga. Why do I need to be every place to tell them what is the meaning? You can tell them. If you have that emotional intelligence, everybody will listen to you... 14

 You are Sahaja Yogis. You have to send waves of emotional intelligence. You have to send love all over the world. You have to show how you can with love win over. It is also possible if you are not so attached. If you are attached to your country only, now it is a bigger issue. Then you will try to exploit other countries, take ad- vantage of them, try to run them down. But if you are emotionally attached to your country, then you will bring a good name to your country by doing real good work. I do not know why people do not know how to discriminate. Why are they so selfish trying to bring them up, trying to do all the good things for themselves? There is a very great chance for all of you to get this within you, your reach, because you are all Sahaja Yogis. You have become like lotuses and the lotus has the fragrance which spreads all over. And days together it stays in the water, in that dirty water and it spreads the fragrance. With that fragrance also you can do lots of things. The bees come there. They sleep in that beautiful house of a lotus and in the night it closes down very carefully, all kinds of things come for the flower, to take the little of the beauty of that flower. We can say because you can extract also the essence of that which has a fragrance, you can also get some honey out of that, whatever is possible. Everybody comes to that flower. That does not mean that flower in any way is weak, but that is its quality. That is its strength. That is its understanding. That is what you are. You are all made into lotuses. You are not made into some sort of creeps or some sort of stupid donkeys - no. You are the people who are to give the fragrance of your love, fragrance of your compassion to others. And you should feel happy about it. That does not mean that you give up this, give up that noth- ing of the kind. But it means that whatever you have, whatever is your possibility, capability, you must try to do for others, give it to them and the more you do it, this collectivity, that is what is very important.... The whole family of Sahaja Yoga also is your family, so for everyone you must have compassion and love. I know some people grow very fast, but some do not because they lack this balance between emotion and intelligence. This balance has to be completely established... In our general attitude also, we should try to see are we really following, are we really doing what is to be done. What are we doing for morality? That is a very important point in Sahaja Yoga – how you dress, how you walk, how you talk. Ev- erything is very important. And all other things that you have, you should try how to create and all these things of different, different chakras should try to concen- you trate on them and see for yourself what are you doing. What are you making out of your life? You are Sahaja Yogis. You are special people. You are not ordinary. I want to tell you that you should have self-esteem. Try to understand what is your quality – what are your qualities.

 nature 16

 vibrations canajoharie

 canajoharie shri krishna puja 2001 You have to fight the negative forces. You have to fight the wrongdoers. All this [Shri Krishna] explains in a very beautiful manner, that we have within us three kinds of powers, which we also know, and by the middle one that we have we rise above all these material, physical, mental, emotional, all these problems facing us into a new realm of spirituality. And that is what He wanted to save from the cruel people, from the aggressive, who were also misleading others. It is a very good understanding, if you have, that who is your relation? Who is your brother? Who is your sister? Those who are evolved souls are your relations. They are your own and for them, if you have to fight the people who are aggressive, you better do it. You have to do it. That is the way of dharma. So we have three paths, as you know, in Sahaja Yoga. The one is of bhakti. Bhak- ti is where you sing the praise of God, have devotion. You do all kinds of rituals, everything and accepted by many, many people and by many so-called religions, that we must have you are very close to God. This is one which is being you think that complete dedication for God.... The second one was the karma, that you do your work. You go on doing your work with a detached mind. I mean it is not possible, but that is what they say, we are doing our karmas, good karmas. We do all kinds of good things, go to various places for our cleansing, meet many great people of spirituality, go to all various places and pray, visit all auspicious places which are being described. All kinds of rituals we do for that. That is the karma yoga.... The third one is the discretion, which He calls as the gyanmarga. It is the central path by which you evolve. You evolve into ... a new state of your mind, a new state of your being, by which you become absolutely above every nonsense. Also you are endowed with power to fight whatever is bad, whatever is corrupting, whatever is killing this world. At that stage, you are equipped with a divine power that you can finish off anything that is negative around you. This is to be understood, that that is a state. That is not just talking. That is not just believing that “I am that," but it is >כ a state. If you come up to that state where you are beyond all these things and you have all the knowledge, pure knowledge, the subtle knowledge of being – this is the gyanmarg.... Ours is a gyanmarg. That is the knowledge, the path of knowledge, in which have to know all the knowledge. Unless and until you have the whole knowledge, you you are not yet a gyani, a person who knows. In this way, He has established that our evolutionary process has to come beyond all other human awareness. Other hu- man awareness is of no value for a spiritual personality...

 ours is a gyanmarg 6. ду We are born as human beings and we know so many things already. People know so many things, but they do not know the actual. This knowledge does not come through your reading or through your intellectual pursuit or for your emotional movement – no. It is shashvat. That means it is all the time there. It exists. It will ex- ist. And it is just to be understood, just to be known to yourself what it is. It cannot change. It cannot be remolded. It is what it is and that is what you know now. No- body would doubt that. Because those who haven't got this state, they may doubt, they may call you crazy, they may think anything. But with the open eyes, whatever you say is the truth. In the same way, with the open heart and an open brain, when you know that that is the real truth, that is what is to be known.... Shri Krishna’s specialty was that He always supported people who were realized souls, who were on the right path, who are doing righteous things. He would never support anybody who may be well-off, who may be a great thing... The discrimination is the gift of Shri Krishna. Apart from anything else, He gives us the gift of discrimination. That is His style, to teach you how to discriminate and then you will become experts on discrimination, on vibrations. On vibrations, you can get everything so clearly, so beautifully. Others may not agree with you – that is a different point – but you know what is right and what is wrong. And that is what Shri Krishna's gift is.... Sahaja Yogis first have the power of satisfaction, tremendous satisfaction. Imag- ine in this place you are all enjoying so much. You are living here, so happy. It shows what? You are so satisfied. Otherwise nobody would like... But to live with others, this collectivity also is the blessing of Shri Krishna. He teaches you to be collective, the fun of collectivity, the enjoyment of collectivity. A person who is secluded, who keeps himself off like a drunkard is not the one who worships Shri Krishna. The one who is one with Shri Krishna enjoys everyone who is there. Especially if they are all realized souls, that person enjoys their company very much. That is something so easily understood in your lives if you see how you live happily, morally, absolutely perfect, in no way you do anything immoral, steal anything or have bad feelings for other people. It is something surprising that has happened to you that you are all living so happily in one place together with such joy. His collectivity is to be under- stood because I always say that Shri Krishna is the Deity of America.

 America is the Vishuddhi of the whole world, so it is very important that the people who are in charge here should know all the powers of the Vishuddhi, plus how to preserve it and how to expand it to the whole world. With these two hands, which also are from Vishuddhi chakra ... you have to spread Sahaja Yoga. You have to go to different worlds, different countries. Even to small villages you have to spread Sahaja Yoga. Only in the hands first you see the cool breeze.

 shri krishna's specialty he always supported people who were realized souls SO who were on the right path who are doing righteous things That means you feel the universal power of the Divine in your hand. So this is the col- lective universal love that comes to your hand and teaches you. So it is such an impor- tant chakra. In the same way, America is very important and, as citizens of America, you should try to maintain the religion, the dharma here and to create a great understanding for world problems. And try to give love to all the people from whatever country they may be coming. May God Bless you all.

 24

 imagine in this place You are all enjoying so much. You are living here, so happy. It shows what? You are so satisfied. It is something surprising that has happened to you that you are all living so happily in one place together with such joy. 23

 canajoharie shri kubera puja 2002 Today we are going to worship Shri Krishna as a very great personality. And you know why He came on this Earth – to es- tablish the new form of – not Virat, not Virata – but a form by which this country became so prosperous. And by His advent only, He created a beautiful mentality among the people how to develop this country with dharma. And you had very great leaders who followed Him and who worshipped Him in a way and created a new world of this America. But unfortunately, as the time passed on, this form vanished from the minds of the people. The reason was Krishna was rep- resented here by a very, very wrong type of people who had no idea about Shri Krishna, that He was a great master of wealth, that He knew how to use the wealth and how to create the wealth with dharma, not with adharma. They all forgot about it completely and gradually started using maneuvering pow- ers, all kinds of adharmic things – cheating, grabbing money, spending their money in absolutely useless things. He is Kubera. He does not need any money, of course. He achieves money. And not only that, He is, He lived in money. They said that He created a golden house for Himself, abso- lutely made with gold in Dwaraka, but it submerged in the water, in the sea.... He was the one who was for satya first – truth. He was for truth and He worked out everything on the principle of truth. Whatever was not truth, He tried to finish it off. Whatever was destructive, He tried to remove that. And He established Himself through truth only. He is the one who represents the truth, absolute truth, and how the truth can pre- vail in everything... By worshipping Kubera, what we are doing? We are going to establish the truth of money, what lies behind the money, what is the point of having money. This country had money. As had a result, so many good people came here to work and you so many complementary things. You had lots of people who have complemented because I think in certain things Americans were a little less. Not in intelligence, but in brilliance I think they were little bit lacking. 24

 So they got very brilliant people from abroad and also they were very focused people, so they worked it out very well. Also they respected people who came with brains. So this is what happens when you forget that truth is the main point. If you do not have the truth, no use having money. Because what you did was to go around with this thing, that thing, I mean all kinds of things, to just get money.... What is the use of such money, which is so temporary, which is so useless? But that is human nature, to run after maya. And this is the quality of money, that it gives you maya – maya like this, that they get a little money somehow, with that little money, they buy something. Then they think money is very important. You can buy lots of things. You can buy cars. You can buy airplanes, this, that. So there is where maya plays on you and you start running after that mad money... Sahaja Yoga is one thing which gives you a complete vision of the destruction that can follow this maya business. It is something, such a insight that you do not have to do anything with it... Even if you understand the value of money, even if you understand that money can bring lots of things to you, despite that, you do not look at it. You just turn your face. That is the sign of a real Sahaja Yogi. To him, it does not matter, temperamentally. It is not that he does something for that or tells his mind – nothing. Temperamentally, he does not care for money just because he is above it. The one who is above money is a real Sahaja Yogi. The one who is engulfed in the nonsense and the maya of money is not a Sahaja Yogi. Sahaja Yogis have to fix their mind to their spirit. Enjoy the powers of your spirit, your own. That enjoyment, once you get it, you do not fall to your greed. This is something very, very simple, but sometimes you do not do it... A Sahaja Yogi has his own spirit to enjoy, more than anything else. He does not want to possess anything. It is a headache to possess things.... So what I have to tell you is this: should not worry about your financial you situations at all. Do not go on calculating. Do not see how much money you have in the bank, what you have to do with your money, where you should invest. I have seen people going mad planning the whole thing. There is no need to do that once you are a Sahaja Yogi. It all works automatically. The greed is within you, just like any other disease. As you have diseases, greed is also there. As your diseases can get cured with Sahaja Yoga, your diseases, as much as your greed is, it vanishes. You do not know what greed is. The only way to counter-balance is to become extremely generous. If you are ex- tremely generous, greed will run away. That may be another way of doing it.... You have to be generous, just generous, not with yourself, but with others. As much as possible, be generous. Generosity is very love-giving, one of the expressions of your love.... 26

 To be generous is the best way to live in this world. After all, it is a headache to have too many things. Better to get rid of them, but out of love. If you do that, you will know how much they will be appreciative of you. Another thing is, to get rid of greed, you should try to do some sort of a collective social work. Supposing you go to some place where lots of poor people are there, I tell you your greed will just drop out.... In Sahaja Yoga, we do not say.. that you give up your clothes, you give up your family, you stay in a forest or in a hut or anything – nothing of the kind. Do not give up anything. You have to give up from your heart. Just it should happen in your personality. You do not have to give up. And if you have that well built-in spiritual- ity, you will not even think of grabbing someone. On the contrary, you would like to give up everything.... You give up from within. If you are not attached to it, you have given up. That much should be there and if you all enjoy your generosity and charity, there is nothing like it. I have known people who are very rich and all that, but they lack generosity. That is another quality of Kubera... the world will improve The third solution for this kind of a nonsensical greed is your self-respect. Why should you steal, why should you have anything that is stolen or why should you have anything that belongs to another person? If you have that self-respect within you, you won't touch anything that is not yours.... Greed is never satisfied. I have seen people who were very rich once upon a time become very, very poor. So to them, life has become hell. They cannot live without their great pomp and show, but they do not understand that it was false. They just go on feeling extremely downtrodden when they lose their money. Then there are people who want to have money. They will do anything but get money.... Power is the same as that. If you have your own powers, you do not hanker after these powers. But they want to have power because they want to have money and - can you imagine? Where are human beings, at what they get power with money level, at what level of evolution they are? They are going around and around the circle of this money. This is Nabhi chakra which has to improve, which gives you satisfaction. If your Nabhi chakra is satisfied, you have achieved the state of Kubera. That is very important, to see that your Nabhi should be satisfied. There are so many other kinds of things we have, but I think now the worst is this greed. And this, if it is managed somehow or other, brought to its own level, then I think the world will improve very much.

 a most beautiful atmosphere 28

 canajoharie advice to brides 2001 It is the woman who makes the marriage happy or unhappy. She should know how to handle the situation and to understand because it is a question of love. If you have love in your heart, you can win over anybody. So first you must think of showing, expressing in a very gentle manner your husband and for his family and try to control yourself in a way that they do not get upset with you and he does not get upset with Sometimes you may not like some things. At that moment you should keep quiet and later on you can correct it, but the best thing is how you love your husband, how you look after him, how you suggest This is not understood sometimes. Sometimes the brides think that once you are married, "We can demand this, we can demand that." There should be no demand at all, no demand of any kind, but the only thing is, if you develop the love, it will look after you and give all that is necessary that you want to have. You do not have to open your mouth and ask, "Give me this, I want this." No, there is no need at all. It is the love that you have shown or given that will be valued the most and will be granting whatever is your need and whatever is necessary. But you should never open your mouth. That is the secret. Never ask for anything and it may be that he may also complain that “You are not saying anything to me." It is all right. Whatever is proper is all right. You see, you have to build up this self-respect of your husband. You have to respect his self-reliance. It is all you have to do ... because you are the supporting personality. But actually you are his energy. You are the one who is going to completely fulfill his life with your love and with your attention. If you have decided on that, you won't see small, small things. You won't bother about small things, what sort of a dress he is wearing, what sort of a thing he does because he comes from a different family, different background and he has his own style of doing things. So you should not try to criticize him on that point.... There is nothing to be expected that it should be in a very perfect way So he should be left to himself in the way that he wants to express. If you find anything love for your you. that you love him very much. that think. you very wrong, then when he is quiet, then tell him very quietly, make him understand. This in no way makes you subservient to your husband. On the contrary, he will become subservient to you. He will try to always keep you happy and keep you pleased because this is a Sahaj match. This is not an ordinary marriage. Sahaj marriage means two realized souls are married to each other. Those who have achieved their spirit are married, so whatever may be the case with others, with you it should be the maximum amount of enjoyment, love, peace and blessings... Maybe something is different from yours.... It does not matter. It is not important. It is superficial. But if anything has to be done to keep them pleased, better do it because in return they will always look after your pleasures, your happiness, your joy. 30

 In case they fail and they cannot adjust themselves to a proper married life, then also we allow divorce.... But first is the duty of a wife, I personally think, to see that you make a beautiful home, a beautiful house, family and beautiful children... A woman thinks she works very hard in the house and that she should have more rest, she should be more sort of going outside and all that. The husband also thinks he works hard. So the point is never think about yourself. Think about the other, how much he works, how much he is putting his effort, how much time he gets. If you think like that, from your heart, then will understand his difficulties and there won't be any problem. But if he also starts thinking very you about himself, it is wrong.... So it has to be very mutually understood and you have to prove that Sahaj marriages are excel- lent. They give the greatest joy and the greatest happiness and greatest morality. On this point, please be careful. If you try to be immoral after marriage, it is going to be impossible for Me to get you married because you get a bad reputation and it is Try to make it a beautiful marriage, so that others also enjoy. If they are happily married couples, then everybody enjoys their company. Otherwise there is somebody complaining, this, that. Then no one likes to talk to such people. So keep all these things away from your family life and just give joy, which you are capable of. I am looking forward to your married life and to a very, very happy life that you are going to have. WC difficult.... very May God bless you. the divine cool breeze LI THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE PHOTOGRAPHS All photos taken at Canajoharie COVER and PAGE 25: Shri Kubera Puja 2002 (Anjan Upadhya photo) PAGE 2: Shri Krishna Puja 2001 (Sergiy Shatokhin photo) PAGE 7: Shri Adi Shakti Puja 2011 (Omar Davis photo) PAGES 8-9 and 16-17: Canajohari, Guru Puja 2009 (Omar Davis photo) PAGES 10-11: the sky over Canajoharie, Guru Puja 2010 (Omar Davis photo) PAGES 20-21: Asees Ahluwalia and swimmers (Yuri Mishin photo) PAGES 22-23: Shri Adi Shakti Puja 2000 (Guruguha Vijalapur photo) PAGES 28-29: Melanie, Mandar and Janak Pandit, Shri Krishna Puja 2012 (OD) PAGES 32-33: Canajorharie pond, 2011 (Omar Davis photo) BACK COVER: Canajoharie, Guru Puja 2008 (Omar Davis photo) volume twenty-six number three www.divinecoolbreeze.org contact@divinecoolbreeze.org editor@divinecoolbreeze.org WORDS PAGE 1: Shri Adi Shakti Puja 1999 PAGE 11: Shri Ganesha Puja 1999 PAGE 23: Shri Krishna Puja 2001 PAGE 33 BOTTOM and BACK COVER: Shri Adi Shakti Puja 1999 PRINTED BY King Printing Company Inc. Lowell Massachusetts USA and Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. Pune Maharashtra India www.divinecoolbreeze.org

 a far-fetched place I just had in mind that we should have some place here because the American Sahaja Yogis did not have any place to meet.

 away from the madding crowd canajoharie

 nature every leaf gets the sunshine every tree has its own position we have to learn so much from nature because nature is abounding with love



----------------------

2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
volume twenty-six number three
2013-issue 3
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-1.txt 
 canaloharie
all
It is such a great pleasure to see you
assembled here, which is such a far-fetched
place, away from the madding crowd. It is
such a beautiful place, which has vibrations.
I selected this place suddenly from a very
thick newspaper, an American newspaper.
The vibrations were just shooting out and
I said, "What is this, coming from where?"
There was a little advertisement and I said,
"This is the place where we have to go.
י<ל
This place has so many vibrations, even in
the advertisement.
the divine cool breeze
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-2.txt 
 CAN YOU IMAGINE ME THINKING ABOUT A PLACE LIKE THIS?
a far-fetched place
away from the madding crowd
So you can imagine
how the guidance comes.
It comes from vibrations
and that is how I was
here and this place was
selected by the Divine
Force. And it happened
only in one day – such
a miraculous thing to
happen in one day.
It was taking so much
time for them even to get
this and suddenly I told
them, “Better get it."
It all worked out and we
are now here in the most
beautiful atmosphere.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-3.txt 
 canajoharie shri adi shakti puja 1999
18EA
The red Indians were driven out and they came here to hide themselves. They
were hiding themselves in this place so that they should not be crushed and de-
stroyed forever. That era is over now, that era of domination, of entering into some-
body else's land and occupying it and considering it to be a great revelry. All that is
over now. The human understanding has gone much beyond and they understand
that this is sinful, this is wrong, whatever we have done was wrong.
But those people are no more. And the children and the grandchildren of those
children, of these people who were the children of God ... they do not like all that –
have no right to take somebody's land like that and occupy it as your
because
you
own. Of course, the land does not belong to anyone, but still, wherever you are
born, that is your land and that land has to be kept with those who are born here,
who own it.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-4.txt 
 But this kind of aggression has been going on for ages. Now the time has
shri krishna puja 2001
come to finish this. Once and for all give up this kind of adventure, to enter
into somebody's land or somebody's house and occupy it.
But there is another kind of aggression I see now. It is that they enter
into the minds of the people now through their talk, through all kinds of
their aggressive attitude and the mind itself becomes a slave. The present
times are like that, I think, where people have no freedom to think what is
right, what is wrong and also to take to right things. They have to accept
whatever is happening around, whatever is immoral, whatever is destruc-
tive. One has to accept because still, I think, we do not have a sufficient
number of Sahaja Yogis who can oppose all these adventures of modern
times....
The first, first duty of every Sahaja Yogi now is to save others, to talk
about Sahaja Yoga, to work out Sahaja Yoga in different places.... The con-
cern has to now go from yourself to others. You got your Realization all
right. You corrected yourself. You are absolutely perfecting yourself. All
this is there, but now what is to be done? For what is this light enlightened
here? It is for others.
So now Sahaja Yogis have to live for others and not for themselves.
They will have all the energy, they will have all the support and they will
have all the blessings. So we have to live for others. And how do we live for
others is very simple. It is to have concern, concern about everything. You
should have concern about the Mother Earth, concern about your neigh-
bours, concern about the people who are suffering all over the world. If you
read the newspaper, you will be amazed how things are happening, how
people are suffering.
We have to understand fundamentally that unless and until transforma-
tion takes place, we cannot change this world. And you all can transform
others, so it is your duty. It is your job to transform other people and to tell
them what is divine love.
live for others
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Love is the only way now we can work it out. It is something like a big, big oil
which should go into this darkness of aggression and which will clarify many places,
many hearts, many people. It is an ocean, we should say, an ocean of greatness. This
divine love is so great and so powerful, at the same time so very gentle that you can
see the nature, how the trees grow. Every leaf gets the sunshine. Every tree has its
own position. We have to learn so much from the nature because nature is abound-
ing with that love. Nature has no aggressiveness. It is just under the complete control
of the divine love.
love is the only way
love
With this understanding, you should also know that when you are getting to
Sahaja Yogis what should be your attitude, how you should move, how you should
express your love.
This is quite possible now. It is not difficult. You should not be afraid, not feel shy,
talk to them, how you should understand them, how
you should
but in a sweet manner you can talk to them. You can communicate with them. You
can tell them because this was the time this was to happen. That is the reason Adi
Shakti had to come. Without Her it would not have been possible.
All other incarnations were there, but firstly, they were only on one chakra...
They had to establish themselves with other people, with the people around. They
did try and they worked it out, but it did not really work in the real sense of the
word.
So Adi Shakti had to come, who has all of them with Her. They are all with us,
all the time wanting to help you to do everything that you want to achieve.... These
holy vibrations are with you for every kind of good work you want to do. And
kind of Sahaj work you want to do, these vibrations will definitely be there to guide
you, to help you, to support you and to love you. You will be amazed how people,
once they start working for Sahaja Yoga, how they are blessed from every angle.
So you have to decide in your own mind that all your dreams have to come true.
So the only thing that you have to do is to know only that your purpose of life is to
spread Sahaja Yoga...
4
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-6.txt 
 It is a very unique time where there is light everywhere. The nature is absolutely
You can see how nature acts, how it is trying to help you and support you
with
you.
and how it wants to work out everything for you. It is to be just understood and felt
that you are something very special and that you have all the help, every one of you.
It is not one person, two persons. It is not ten persons. It is the whole lot, as if the
whole ocean is there to help you, help you to swim over to save so many. You have
not seen such an ocean where there is so much depth and all the waves try to save
you, to make you float in the realm of joy.
All this has happened to you because there is a purpose. It is not just because you
have done poorva punyas and all that. Many people say because of a previous life
we have got it. That is true. The cause may be that, but the result is that now you are
capable of giving Realization to people and this is what you have to do.
All the way you have come here in this wilderness. From this wilderness only, you
will rise and you will bless all the people of the world. Especially America should
be blessed again and again because it is the Virat. It is Shri Krishna's land because
people will always try to follow, to copy you. Things will improve if you get ... the
blessings of the various lotuses you have within yourself, no doubt. But what about
you doing something about it? And this is what is very important...
When you meditate, you think about yourself, how much you have grown, what
have you done, what have you given to others. Whatever you have got, unless and
until
distribute it, it won't increase. That is the fundamental law and that works.
you
I have seen people who are realized souls, who are very good, who know everything
about Sahaja Yoga, but are not yet that much confident or that much deep. All this
is only possible if you yourself get into creating new Sahaja Yogis and more Sahaja
Yogis – not for popularity, but for their good and for the good of the whole....
Try to experiment with it. Once you experiment, you will find out that only with
the attention that you put to these things, it will work out. I am sure it will work
out....
it will work out
On a subtler level we have worked, but now we have to work it on the surface.
At the subtler level we are there. We have achieved and we can achieve much more.
But we should come out of it and think what can we do on the surface, so that
people see what Sahaja Yoga is and what it can do for people.
is your personal behavior, your collective behavior, your national behavior, all
are going to change the atmosphere which is supposed to be superficial, so that that
also becomes subtler.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-7.txt 
 I have been saying this in many places, but at this puja I think it is important to
say that if you are really facing the Adi Shakti, then you must know your powers are
boundless. You have to just assert those powers. It is not a stationary power.
There
is a movement in it and there is a right type of a movement. It knows where to enter,
how to work it out.
Now look at this place. Can you imagine Me thinking about a place like this?
But I just had in mind, of course, I must say, that we should have some place here
because the American Sahaja Yogis did not have any place to meet – that's all. And
see how I got it. But the desire to do all this should be there within your subtler level
and then it works. It works. It is like a magic, I tell you. Now you have faith in your-
self and decide about it.
I am so very happy that it has been achieved with such ease – unbelievable, with
such ease. Absolutely, nothing great was done. The way we got this was so simple.
Just like another Sahaja Yogi, the person who was to sell to us came down so excited
and he just sold it to us, finished. We did not have to do anything to convince him or
to talk to him or reduce the price – nothing. And he sold it out to us.
In the same way, whatever on a subtler level you desire, it becomes a terrific force
which moves by itself, which knows where to go, how to enter into which area and
it gets the thing done. It is something we all should experience and work it out with
full confidence. It is the love that we have, the concern we have. This is the power
that has given us Self Realization and this is the power that has given us this enrich-
ment of achievements.
this force will come in
I am sure all of you who are here will realize how it was done – I mean so quickly.
This is one of the things that should just tell you what we are capable of doing, what
we are capable of achieving. And when you think of so many people who are lost
in the maya of ignorance, we should really feel from inside that concern and that
hankering, "How can I help these people?" And you will be amazed, once you
like that, how this Divine Power, this Force, will come in. Forget about petty things
think
וי
and
petty problems. They are nothing. You have such a powerful thing behind
you.
It is true that all this universe was created, everything was created and then you
were created and all that is done. But the greatest thing this Power has done is to cre-
ate Sahaja Yogis. This is the greatest thing. Those who have knowledge, those who
have the pure knowledge and those who have the divine love in their heart, what a
tremendous personality it is. Just think of that and you will get all the opportunities
to express that love.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-8.txt 
 opportunities to exoress that love
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-9.txt 
 an immortal portal
shri adi shakti puja 2000
Throughout the world, there are doors immortal
and gateways to the spirit, opening and closing
every day, by the grace of Shri Mataji Nirmala
Devi – Ganapatipule, Cabella, Nagpur, Pratishthan,
Belapur, to name a few, and one I recently returned
from: Canajoharie, New York, USA.
We are a family, for we know who Shri Mataji
Nirmala Devi is and that our Mother is working
out everything. The camaraderie, work level,
dedication, commitment, sheer determination
demonstrated throughout this time by our brothers
and sisters was incredible. I am privileged to have
been a small part and to have been able to take
time out of “our lives" to pay homage, to get:
muddy, cold, wet, full of sawdust and share the gift
of divine collectivity with our brothers and sisters
with whom we have shared so much, so many times
before.
This was a journey of lifetimes, all in a few
short weeks in the summer of 2000, visiting a new
Immortal Portal.
A part of me was left there and a larger part of
there I take with me. Jeff Lyons
16
the pot that washes itself
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-10.txt 
 shri krishna puja 2001
It was a blessing for Sahaja Yoga all over the world
and especially in America when Shri Mataji graced us
with Her presence at Canajoharie. Nirmal Mukhi
There's something about the beauty and intensity of
vibrations of Canajoharie that makes it unlike any
experience. That, combined with being surrounded
by my brothers and sisters and having Mother on the
land, made it a time that I will always carry in my
heart. Grace Buetti (age 15)
It really felt like playing in Mother's garden – with
eight hundred to a thousand of your siblings. All I
really remember from the puja itself was how beautiful
Shri Mataji looked, how the vibrations flow so strongly
doing Her puja and how clear and joyful and playful I
felt afterwards. Mark Mays
Krishna Puja 2001, in Satya Yuga, was one memorable
event and really was a live preview of our Mother's
vision of what is to come in the future.
Sujata Gulati (De Sousa)
mother's garden
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-11.txt 
 all the time they worshipped
10
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-12.txt 
 spiritual people
In America I was surprised to see that there were so many red Indians, who are called as Indian
Americans. They were all oppressed – oppressed so much that they had to run away to different
places. And then I went to this place, Canajoharie. I found the vibrations were so good. That
means they were very innocent, simple people. Americans at that time who went there tried to
completely finish them. So they went and hid in places like Canajoharie. But Canajoharie had such
tremendous vibrations that I said, "Look at this. So many years have passed, still the people who
CC
lived there or walked about and were absolutely enjoying this place were red Indians," the ones
לל
who were Indians – we call them American Indians. But they are so simple and innocent and they
were also, I think, spiritual people because they used to worship the Mother. Mother, all the time
they worshipped.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-13.txt 
 canajoharie shri adi shakti puja 2000
I have already told you about the Adi Shakti, how She had to work out so many
things in this world, first to create and then to create human beings through the
evolutionary process, after that to comfort, then to counsel. So many people came
on this Earth just to do the counselling. They told what was wrong, what was
right, what we should do, what we should not do, what is self-respect and what is
the duty of a human being as the superior-most creature.
of them came on this Earth. One after another, in every country, they
So
many
came and their counselling formed religions. Of course, you see the mess of the re-
ligions and that is how their life was wasted. They formed religions after religions,
by which only human beings were divided, divided to such an extent they hate each
other.... Despite that, the human brain in its freedom did all kinds of wrong things
and created a country – or we can say the whole world - full of lots of problems
arising out of religion.
How can it be that religion makes you hate somebody? Religion is there to
understand love, imbibe love and compassion.
So the third thing one had to do is the Adi Shakti's job. That is the one Kundal-
ini within us and, by Her awakening, we got pure knowledge, absolute knowledge
- pure knowledge that it cannot be challenged, absolutely. Whatever you know
after Realization is absolute. If you know that, then what you have to understand
is that everything has to be united. You cannot have fights and you cannot hate
anyone. If that thing starts happening, all the problems of the world will be fin-
ished. So the first thing, redemption – that is the quality of the Adi Shakti – was to
redeem people of their all-wrong ideas about others...
religion is to imbibe love
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-14.txt 
 There are six enemies we have got and unless and until we can conquer those six
enemies we cannot be a religious person. That is what it is said. But actually, all reli-
gions are based only on prospering those six enemies that we have within ourselves.
When you see this clearly, you start seeking. You start seeking – seeking a message,
the truth and the revelation of truth. Absolute truth can only come through your
evolution, through your reformation, that you become a person who knows the
truth. For that, Adi Shakti's ascent is important within you, which is your Kundalini.
And when this thing takes place, automatically you drop all those six enemies that
you have. You become a beautiful human being. Like a lotus, when it is in early
germinating state, it looks like all other small animals or small, very, very small dirty
things that are in the pond. And then when she starts coming out, coming out of that
horrible water, it becomes such a beautiful flower, rises up and opens out.
In the same way, a Sahaja Yogi, though he lives along with all these horrible
things that are going on, but flowers like a lotus. It does not have all these insects,
all this dirt and filth of that water in which it lives. It sucks only the pure water and
... the others remain there as it is. So what is left within you is nothing but purity,
beauty and fragrance, just like a lotus. Then there is no more the problem of getting
attacked by all of these small, small creatures in the water and all the dirty things
that are in the water. And this state that you have achieved now, I am very happy to
see so many people in America have achieved it....
The second thing that happens to you, you become absolutely collective. This has
to happen, but I find still people have not understood the meaning of collectivity...
I have seen, even among Sahaja Yogis sometimes, some people who are working
for
who are educated, sometimes look down upon people who are not so
money,
well off. Or maybe the housewives, who are working in the house, looking after the
children, building up the families, are not treated with respect as some secretary....
When money is important, then the Lakshmi principle is not respected.... Very wrong
things can happen. You can work, you can be educated, but you should be able to
look after your family and look after their comfort and look after their unity...
The women who work very hard in the household with love, look after the chil-
dren, look after the family are in no way less than these people who are working in
the office. So such women must be respected by their husbands, by the males of the
family. Not only that, but all the Sahaja Yogis must respect such women who are
doing such a difficult task. I have been a housewife and I know what it is to run the
house, to look after the children, to look after the complete organization and look-
ing after the expenditure of the money if that is limited. This ego has to go...
13
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-15.txt 
 In one of My lectures, I talked to you about the emotional intelligence. That is
what we should try to imbibe – emotional intelligence. That means the intelligence
that is based on emotions. Unless and until we become emotionally intelligent, our
society cannot improve. In an emotional intelligence, you care and you enjoy car-
ing. You do everything for others with a great emotional understanding, not for one
child, not for one son, but for everyone you have to be emotionally intelligent.
Some children are born like this, but some are to be made like that, that they
should be emotionally intelligent because if the mother and father are money-ori-
ented, very selfish, they won't allow their child to give anything to others. So such a
child will grow into a very funny type of a person and he will never do anything for
anybody, not even for his own country....
what are you making out of your life
This emotional intelligence has to be brought in our lives, in our pattern that we
have. Are we emotionally intelligent or we are just intelligent or emotional...? If
you
are just intelligent, you can become a very dry person. You may just have few friends
- maybe you may not have – and you will always try to preserve yourself away from
the collectivity. And if you are emotional, you will be attached only to one person,
attached to one child ... for no rhyme and reason. Why are you attached to one per-
son? Why do you bother about one person only...?
So according to ethics, emotional intelligence is the highest quality by which
you
give to others. You care for others, for everyone and you become very, very collec-
tive.... I am just a woman, I am just a mother, but what I have is really the emotional
intelligence, an ocean of it, and from that I know about everything. I understand
about everything and all this work has been done because of that quality in My
head. I am not attached to one person or to one style. Whatever you say, I can under-
stand because I am at a level where I can understand everything that you are doing.
To achieve that, you try to develop emotional intelligence.... The joy of life is only in
the emotional intelligence. If you do not have that, it becomes very dry. Life becomes
very unbearable, horrible and even the family gets broken up if there is no emotional
intelligence in the family...
I thought that for this special puja I should say something about the family. In
our ashrams or in our programs or wherever we are, we should remember this point,
that are we having that emotional intelligence when we are trying to talk about Sa-
haja Yoga. Why do I need to be every place to tell them what is the meaning? You
can tell them. If you have that emotional intelligence, everybody will listen to you...
14
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-16.txt 
 You are Sahaja Yogis. You have to send waves of emotional intelligence. You
have to send love all over the world. You have to show how you can with love win
over. It is also possible if you are not so attached. If you are attached to your country
only, now it is a bigger issue. Then you will try to exploit other countries, take ad-
vantage of them, try to run them down. But if you are emotionally attached to your
country, then you will bring a good name to your country by doing real good work.
I do not know why people do not know how to discriminate. Why are they so selfish
trying to bring them up, trying to do all the good things for themselves?
There is a very great chance for all of you to get this within you, your reach,
because you are all Sahaja Yogis. You have become like lotuses and the lotus has
the fragrance which spreads all over. And days together it stays in the water, in that
dirty water and it spreads the fragrance. With that fragrance also you can do lots of
things. The bees come there. They sleep in that beautiful house of a lotus and in the
night it closes down very carefully, all kinds of things come for the flower, to take the
little of the beauty of that flower. We can say because you can extract also the essence
of that which has a fragrance, you can also get some honey out of that, whatever
is possible. Everybody comes to that flower. That does not mean that flower in any
way is weak, but that is its quality. That is its strength. That is its understanding.
That is what you are. You are all made into lotuses. You are not made into some sort
of creeps or some sort of stupid donkeys - no. You are the people who are to give
the fragrance of your love, fragrance of your compassion to others. And you should
feel happy about it. That does not mean that you give up this, give up
that
noth-
ing of the kind. But it means that whatever you have, whatever is your possibility,
capability, you must try to do for others, give it to them and the more you do it, this
collectivity, that is what is very important....
The whole family of Sahaja Yoga also is your family, so for everyone you must
have compassion and love. I know some people grow very fast, but some do not
because they lack this balance between emotion and intelligence. This balance has to
be completely established...
In our general attitude also, we should try to see are we really following, are
we really doing what is to be done. What are we doing for morality? That is a very
important point in Sahaja Yoga – how you dress, how you walk, how you talk. Ev-
erything is very important. And all other things that you have, you should try how
to create and all these things of different, different chakras
should try to concen-
you
trate on them and see for yourself what are you doing.
What are you making out of your life? You are Sahaja Yogis. You are special
people. You are not ordinary. I want to tell you that you should have self-esteem. Try
to understand what is your quality – what are your qualities.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-17.txt 
 nature
16
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-18.txt 
 vibrations
canajoharie
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-19.txt 
 canajoharie shri krishna puja 2001
You have to fight the negative forces. You have to fight the wrongdoers. All this [Shri
Krishna] explains in a very beautiful manner, that we have within us three kinds of
powers, which we also know, and by the middle one that we have we rise above all
these material, physical, mental, emotional, all these problems facing us into a new
realm of spirituality. And that is what He wanted to save from the cruel people, from
the aggressive, who were also misleading others.
It is a very good understanding, if you have, that who is your relation? Who is
your brother? Who is your sister? Those who are evolved souls are your relations.
They are your own and for them, if you have to fight the people who are aggressive,
you better do it. You have to do it. That is the way of dharma.
So we have three paths, as you know, in Sahaja Yoga. The one is of bhakti. Bhak-
ti is where you sing the praise of God, have devotion. You do all kinds of rituals,
everything and
accepted by many, many people and by many so-called religions, that we must have
you are very close to God. This is one which is being
you think that
complete dedication for God....
The second one was the karma, that you do your work. You go on doing your
work with a detached mind. I mean it is not possible, but that is what they say, we
are doing our karmas, good karmas. We do all kinds of good things, go to various
places for our cleansing, meet many great people of spirituality, go to all various
places and pray, visit all auspicious places which are being described. All kinds of
rituals we do for that. That is the karma yoga....
The third one is the discretion, which He calls as the gyanmarga. It is the central
path by which you evolve. You evolve into ... a new state of your mind, a new state
of
your being, by which you become absolutely above every nonsense. Also you are
endowed with power to fight whatever is bad, whatever is corrupting, whatever is
killing this world. At that stage, you are equipped with a divine power that you can
finish off anything that is negative around you. This is to be understood, that that is
a state. That is not just talking. That is not just believing that “I am that," but it is
>כ
a state. If you come up to that state where you are beyond all these things and you
have all the knowledge, pure knowledge, the subtle knowledge of being – this is the
gyanmarg....
Ours is a gyanmarg. That is the knowledge, the path of knowledge, in which
have to know all the knowledge. Unless and until you have the whole knowledge,
you
you are not yet a gyani, a person who knows. In this way, He has established that
our evolutionary process has to come beyond all other human awareness. Other hu-
man awareness is of no value for a spiritual personality...
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-20.txt 
 ours is a gyanmarg
6.
ду
We are born as human beings and we know so many things already. People know
so many things, but they do not know the actual. This knowledge does not come
through your reading or through your intellectual pursuit or for your emotional
movement – no. It is shashvat. That means it is all the time there. It exists. It will ex-
ist. And it is just to be understood, just to be known to yourself what it is. It cannot
change. It cannot be remolded. It is what it is and that is what you know now. No-
body would doubt that. Because those who haven't got this state, they may doubt,
they may call you crazy, they may think anything. But with the open eyes, whatever
you say is the truth. In the same way, with the open heart and an open brain, when
you know that that is the real truth, that is what is to be known....
Shri Krishna’s specialty was that He always supported people who were realized
souls, who were on the right path, who are doing righteous things. He would never
support anybody who may be well-off, who may be a great thing...
The discrimination is the gift of Shri Krishna. Apart from anything else, He gives
us the gift of discrimination. That is His style, to teach you how to discriminate and
then
you will become experts on discrimination, on vibrations. On vibrations, you
can get everything so clearly, so beautifully. Others may not agree with you – that is
a different point – but you know what is right and what is wrong. And that is what
Shri Krishna's gift is....
Sahaja Yogis first have the power of satisfaction, tremendous satisfaction. Imag-
ine in this place you are all enjoying so much. You are living here, so happy. It shows
what? You are so satisfied. Otherwise nobody would like... But to live with others,
this collectivity also is the blessing of Shri Krishna. He teaches you to be collective,
the fun of collectivity, the enjoyment of collectivity. A person who is secluded, who
keeps himself off like a drunkard is not the one who worships Shri Krishna. The one
who is one with Shri Krishna enjoys everyone who is there. Especially if they are all
realized souls, that person enjoys their company very much. That is something so
easily understood in your lives if you see how you live happily, morally, absolutely
perfect, in no way you do anything immoral, steal anything or have bad feelings for
other people. It is something surprising that has happened to you that you are all
living so happily in one place together with such joy. His collectivity is to be under-
stood because I always say that Shri Krishna is the Deity of America.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-21.txt 
 America is the Vishuddhi of the whole world, so it is very important that the people
who are in charge here should know all the powers of the Vishuddhi, plus how to preserve
it and how to expand it to the whole world. With these two hands, which also are from
Vishuddhi chakra ... you have to spread Sahaja Yoga. You have to go to different worlds,
different countries. Even to small villages you have to spread Sahaja Yoga. Only in the
hands first you see the cool breeze.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-22.txt 
 shri krishna's specialty
he always supported people
who were realized souls
SO
who were on the right path
who are doing righteous things
That means you feel the universal power of the Divine in your hand. So this is the col-
lective universal love that comes to your hand and teaches you. So it is such an impor-
tant chakra. In the same way, America is very important and, as citizens of America, you
should try to maintain the religion, the dharma here and to create a great understanding
for world problems. And try to give love to all the people from whatever country they may
be coming. May God Bless you
all.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-23.txt 
 24
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-24.txt 
 imagine in this place
You are all enjoying so much.
You are living here, so happy.
It shows what?
You are so satisfied.
It is something surprising
that has happened to you
that you are all living
so happily
in one place together
with such joy.
23
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-25.txt 
 canajoharie shri kubera puja 2002
Today we are going to worship Shri Krishna as a very great
personality. And you know why He came on this Earth – to es-
tablish the new form of – not Virat, not Virata – but a form by
which this country became so prosperous. And by His advent
only, He created a beautiful mentality among the people how
to develop this country with dharma. And you had very great
leaders who followed Him and who worshipped Him in a way
and created a new world of this America.
But unfortunately, as the time passed on, this form vanished
from the minds of the people. The reason was Krishna was rep-
resented here by a very, very wrong type of people who had no
idea about Shri Krishna, that He was a great master of wealth,
that He knew how to use the wealth and how to create the
wealth with dharma, not with adharma. They all forgot about
it completely and gradually started using maneuvering pow-
ers, all kinds of adharmic things – cheating, grabbing money,
spending their money in absolutely useless things.
He is Kubera. He does not need any money, of course. He
achieves money. And not only that, He is, He lived in money.
They said that He created a golden house for Himself, abso-
lutely made with gold in Dwaraka, but it submerged in the
water, in the sea.... He was the one who was for satya first –
truth. He was for truth and He worked out everything on the
principle of truth. Whatever was not truth, He tried to finish
it off. Whatever was destructive, He tried to remove that. And
He established Himself through truth only. He is the one who
represents the truth, absolute truth, and how the truth can pre-
vail in everything...
By worshipping Kubera, what we are doing? We are going
to establish the truth of money, what lies behind the money,
what is the point of having money. This country had money. As
had
a result, so many good people came here to work and
you
so many complementary things. You had lots of people who
have complemented because I think in certain things Americans
were a little less. Not in intelligence, but in brilliance I think
they were little bit lacking.
24
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-27.txt 
 So they got very brilliant people from abroad and also they were very focused
people, so they worked it out very well. Also they respected people who came with
brains. So this is what happens when you forget that truth is the main point. If
you
do not have the truth, no use having money. Because what you did was to go around
with this thing, that thing, I mean all kinds of things, to just get money....
What is the use of such money, which is so temporary, which is so useless? But
that is human nature, to run after maya. And this is the quality of money, that it
gives you maya – maya like this, that they get a little money somehow, with that little
money, they buy something. Then they think money is very important. You can buy
lots of things. You can buy cars. You can buy airplanes, this, that. So there is where
maya plays on you and you start running after that mad money...
Sahaja Yoga is one thing which gives you a complete vision of the destruction
that can follow this maya business. It is something, such a insight that you do not
have to do anything with it... Even if you understand the value of money, even if
you understand that money can bring lots of things to you, despite that, you do not
look at it. You just turn your face. That is the sign of a real Sahaja Yogi. To him, it
does not matter, temperamentally. It is not that he does something for that or tells
his mind – nothing. Temperamentally, he does not care for money just because he is
above it. The one who is above money is a real Sahaja Yogi. The one who is engulfed
in the nonsense and the maya of money is not a Sahaja Yogi.
Sahaja Yogis have to fix their mind to their spirit. Enjoy the powers of your spirit,
your own. That enjoyment, once you get it, you do not fall to your greed. This is
something very, very simple, but sometimes you do not do it...
A Sahaja Yogi has his own spirit to enjoy, more than anything else. He does not
want to possess anything. It is a headache to possess things....
So what I have to tell you is this:
should not worry about your financial
you
situations at all. Do not go on calculating. Do not see how much money you
have
in the bank, what you have to do with your money, where you should invest. I have
seen people going mad planning the whole thing. There is no need to do that once
you are a Sahaja Yogi. It all works automatically. The greed is within you, just like
any other disease. As you have diseases, greed is also there. As your diseases can get
cured with Sahaja Yoga, your diseases, as much as your greed is, it vanishes. You do
not know what greed is.
The only way to counter-balance is to become extremely generous. If you are ex-
tremely generous, greed will run away. That may be another way of doing it.... You
have to be generous, just generous, not with yourself, but with others. As much as
possible, be generous. Generosity is very love-giving, one of the expressions of
your
love....
26
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-28.txt 
 To be generous is the best way to live in this world. After all, it is a headache to
have too many things. Better to get rid of them, but out of love. If you do that, you
will know how much they will be appreciative of you.
Another thing is, to get rid of greed, you should try to do some sort of a collective
social work. Supposing you go to some place where lots of poor people are there, I
tell you your greed will just drop out....
In Sahaja Yoga, we do not say.. that you give up your clothes, you give up your
family, you stay in a forest or in a hut or anything – nothing of the kind. Do not give
up anything. You have to give up from your heart. Just it should happen in your
personality. You do not have to give up. And if you have that well built-in spiritual-
ity, you will not even think of grabbing someone. On the contrary, you would like
to give up everything.... You give up from within. If you are not attached to it, you
have given up. That much should be there and if you all enjoy your generosity and
charity, there is nothing like it. I have known people who are very rich and all that,
but they lack generosity. That is another quality of Kubera...
the world will improve
The third solution for this kind of a nonsensical greed is your self-respect. Why
should you steal, why should you have anything that is stolen or why should you
have anything that belongs to another person? If you have that self-respect within
you, you won't touch anything that is not yours....
Greed is never satisfied. I have seen people who were very rich once upon a time
become very, very poor. So to them, life has become hell. They cannot live without
their great pomp and show, but they do not understand that it was false. They just
go on feeling extremely downtrodden when they lose their money. Then there are
people who want to have money. They will do anything but get money....
Power is the same as that. If you have your own powers, you do not hanker after
these powers. But they want to have power because they want to have money and
- can you imagine? Where are human beings, at what
they get power with money
level, at what level of evolution they are? They are going around and around the
circle of this money. This is Nabhi chakra which has to improve, which gives you
satisfaction. If your Nabhi chakra is satisfied, you have achieved the state of Kubera.
That is very important, to see that your Nabhi should be satisfied.
There are so many other kinds of things we have, but I think now the worst is
this greed. And this, if it is managed somehow or other, brought to its own level,
then I think the world will improve very much.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-29.txt 
 a most beautiful atmosphere
28
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-31.txt 
 canajoharie advice to brides 2001
It is the woman who makes the marriage happy or unhappy. She should know how to handle
the situation and to understand because it is a question of love. If you have love in your heart,
you can win over anybody.
So first you must think of showing, expressing in a very gentle manner your
husband and for his family and try to control yourself in a way that they do not get upset with
you and he does not get upset with
Sometimes you may not like some things. At that moment you should keep quiet and later
on you can correct it, but the best thing is how you love your husband, how you look after him,
how you suggest
This is not understood sometimes. Sometimes the brides think that once you are married,
"We can demand this, we can demand that." There should be no demand at all, no demand of
any kind, but the only thing is, if you develop the love, it will look after you and give all that
is necessary that you want to have.
You do not have to open your mouth and ask, "Give me this, I want this." No, there is no
need at all. It is the love that you have shown or given that will be valued the most and will be
granting whatever is your need and whatever is necessary.
But you should never open your mouth. That is the secret. Never ask for anything and
it may be that he may also complain that “You are not saying anything to me." It is all right.
Whatever is proper is all right.
You see, you have to build up this self-respect of your husband. You have to respect his
self-reliance. It is all you have to do ... because you are the supporting personality. But actually
you are his energy. You are the one who is going to completely fulfill his life with your love and
with your attention.
If you have decided on that, you won't see small, small things. You won't bother about
small things, what sort of a dress he is wearing, what sort of a thing he does because he comes
from a different family, different background and he has his own style of doing things. So you
should not try to criticize him on that point.... There is nothing to be expected that it should
be in a very perfect way
So he should be left to himself in the way that he wants to express. If you find anything
love for
your
you.
that
you love him very much.
that
think.
you
very wrong, then when he is quiet, then tell him very quietly, make him understand. This in no
way makes you subservient to your husband. On the contrary, he will become subservient to
you. He will try to always keep you happy and keep you pleased because this is a Sahaj match.
This is not an ordinary marriage.
Sahaj marriage means two realized souls are married to each other. Those who have achieved
their spirit are married, so whatever may be the case with others, with you it should be the
maximum amount of enjoyment, love, peace and blessings...
Maybe something is different from yours.... It does not matter. It is not important. It is
superficial. But if anything has to be done to keep them pleased, better do it because in return
they will always look after your pleasures, your happiness, your joy.
30
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-32.txt 
 In case they fail and they cannot adjust themselves to a proper married life, then also we allow
divorce.... But first is the duty of a wife, I personally think, to see that you make a beautiful
home, a beautiful house, family and beautiful children...
A woman thinks she works very hard in the house and that she should have more rest, she
should be more sort of going outside and all that. The husband also thinks he works hard. So
the point is never think about yourself. Think about the other, how much he works, how much
he is putting his effort, how much time he gets. If you think like that, from your heart, then
will understand his difficulties and there won't be any problem. But if he also starts thinking
very
you
about himself, it is wrong....
So it has to be very mutually understood and you have to prove that Sahaj marriages are excel-
lent. They give the greatest joy and the greatest happiness and greatest morality.
On this point, please be careful. If you try to be immoral after marriage, it is going to be
impossible for Me to get you married because you get a bad reputation and it is
Try to make it a beautiful marriage, so that others also enjoy. If they are happily married couples,
then everybody enjoys their company. Otherwise there is somebody complaining, this, that.
Then no one likes to talk to such people.
So keep all these things away from your family life and just give joy, which you are capable of.
I am looking forward to your married life and to a very, very happy life that you are going to
have.
WC
difficult....
very
May God bless
you.
the divine cool breeze
LI
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
PHOTOGRAPHS
All photos taken at Canajoharie
COVER and PAGE 25: Shri Kubera Puja 2002 (Anjan Upadhya photo)
PAGE 2: Shri Krishna Puja 2001 (Sergiy Shatokhin photo)
PAGE 7: Shri Adi Shakti Puja 2011 (Omar Davis photo)
PAGES 8-9 and 16-17: Canajohari, Guru Puja 2009 (Omar Davis photo)
PAGES 10-11: the sky over Canajoharie, Guru Puja 2010 (Omar Davis photo)
PAGES 20-21: Asees Ahluwalia and swimmers (Yuri Mishin photo)
PAGES 22-23: Shri Adi Shakti Puja 2000 (Guruguha Vijalapur photo)
PAGES 28-29: Melanie, Mandar and Janak Pandit, Shri Krishna Puja 2012 (OD)
PAGES 32-33: Canajorharie pond, 2011 (Omar Davis photo)
BACK COVER: Canajoharie, Guru Puja 2008 (Omar Davis photo)
volume twenty-six number three
www.divinecoolbreeze.org
contact@divinecoolbreeze.org
editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
WORDS
PAGE 1: Shri Adi Shakti Puja 1999
PAGE 11: Shri Ganesha Puja 1999
PAGE 23: Shri Krishna Puja 2001
PAGE 33 BOTTOM and BACK COVER:
Shri Adi Shakti Puja 1999
PRINTED BY
King Printing Company Inc. Lowell Massachusetts USA and
Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. Pune Maharashtra India
www.divinecoolbreeze.org
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-33.txt 
 a far-fetched place
I just had in mind that we should have some place here because the American Sahaja Yogis did not have any place to meet.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-34.txt 
 away
from the
madding
crowd
canajoharie
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_III.pdf-page-35.txt 
 nature
every leaf gets the sunshine
every tree has its own position
we have to learn so much from nature
because nature is abounding with love
