The Divine Cool Breeze 2013 issue 2 – volume twenty-six number two HNe

 EGO র

 There are many who are not here, who have got their Realization all over the world. I remember all of them. And all of you should remember them. 2 One Guru Mantra 4 A Spiritual Life 18 A Serene Person 20 Your Essence 22 Be Steady 26 I Respect Your Freedom 30 The Life Eternal

 THERE IS ONE GUR U MANTRA TO REMEMBER: we are Sahaja Yogis. Just remember this. We are Sahaja Yogis. And once you know you are Sahaja Yogis, this projection will start. What happened to William Blake, if you see, he started projecting his imagination and he reached the point of knowledge. So anything that you see, anything you do or others are doing, try to relate it with Sahaja Yoga – and project. Then you will also reach the ocean of love. have that, then what? Who can disturb you? Who Once you can trouble you? Who can make anything that is difficult for you because you are sitting in the ocean? The fellow is sitting outside somewhere. How can he come into the ocean and trouble you? So this is what is to remember: you are a Sahaja Yogi. Take a bandhan morning and evening. It is so simple. Even to say ... seems stupid to Me, but I have to say because people forget. You forget that you are realized souls. Use your vibratory awareness for at least protecting yourself because there is negativity sitting next door. So be very careful about this, to remember that "I am a Sahaja Yogi." Once you say that, you will know how you have to behave, 400 what is the protocol. You will know what is the discipline you have to follow. You will know how to love others, everything. This is the essence. How many have been Sahaja Yogis before? Poor things, all these gurus suffered so much. You are not to suffer, not to go any kind of a misery any more – no more. But do not forget you are Sahaja Yogis, that is why. That will give you complete confidence in yourself and you will be absolutely secured. Try to establish the state that you are Sahaja Yogis. Thus you become gurus of yourself and of others. 30

 EINE

 you lead a life that We are celebrating the resurrection of Christ. With it, we have to also cel- Easter Puja ebrate the resurrection of human beings, of Sahaja Yogis, who have been res- urrected as realized souls. With that, we have to understand that we enter into 22 April 1984 London a new awareness. There was no need for Christ to enter into any new awareness. He had to come down again to show to this world that you are the eternal life, that you lead a life that is spiritual, which never perishes. You have to rise into that new realm, which is the realm of God Almighty, what you call the Kingdom of God. And He said it very clearly to Nicodemus, that "You are to be born again." And when he asked, "Am I to enter back into my mother's womb to be born again?" He said it so clearly. It is so clear. Those who do not want to see can remain blind, but He said it very, very clearly that "No, that is whatever is born of the flesh is the flesh, but whatever is born of the spirit is the spirit." 4.

 I mean nothing could be more clear than that, that it has to be born of the spirit. Of course, human beings have a special capacity to twist everything around. For them, spirit could be a book, could be some words, could be an organization, a church or some sort of a thing like that which they have made. But whatever is man-made is not the spirit. This is the clear statement of Christ, which people wanted to avoid and start their own organizations, their own ideas. They created a very mythical thing in His name and now the time has come for it to be blasted. It has been going on and on for thousands of years. It captured so many innocent people and people are into it. But when you are resurrected, when become realized souls, one has to understand that now your movement is you inward, you are moving towards your roots and not outside. So whatever was the endeavour before Realization has to be changed. The direction has to be changed and that point mostly we miss. is spiritual which never perishes

 Entertainment for the spirit This is the thing today I am trying to explain to you: so far, to a human mind, enter- tainment was important – entertaining to the mind, not to the spirit. Entertainment to the spirit is absolutely opposite to the entertainment to the mind. Like somebody the other day telephoned to Me and said, "Mother, there is no excitement in Sahaja Yoga." The excitement is too much. We are going against that. We are going towards peace, not towards excitement and these kind of electric shocks that we require every time... All human enterprises have been like that. They are to excite your body because if it is the dead you are dealing with, then you have to excite it. But something that is living, that is eternal, you have to enjoy it and not to excite it. So the direction has to be a juxtaposition and that is where many Sahaja Yogis fail to understand. How do we do it is the point. How do we make our attention move inward in- stead of going outward? If you start from the time you are born again, it is much easier because it is into a new venture you go. In that is the peace peace of your spirit, the joy of your spirit, which is permanent. You do not need any excitement from it. It is permanent. It is eternal. Realization is effortless So the first thing that comes to our mind is that whatever we do before Realization, we have not to do. The first and foremost thing is Realization comes to you effort- lessly. So the effort which is built in your body all the time, the energy of effort - "I must do this, I must do that, I have to do this, I have to do that" – that creates ten- sion. So what do we do? We do not try to compete with others. We do not try to fix certain timing, dates, watches. We do not also put our attention into any endeavour which puts us into effort, but we relax that attitude of effort. It is called as, in San- skrit, prayatna shaithilya. For a Western mind, it is very difficult to grasp the subject, so try to understand. That does not mean lethargy, so one should never confuse with the dead, the energy of the living. Now we are trying to transform our energies towards the energy of the spirit, so you have to allow the spirit to take over. Your effort of your mind should be reduced and the energy of the spirit should work through you. Now how do you do it? First is detachment. Detachment – start with the thought. Let us see the thought. It is called as vichara shaithilya, relaxation of the thought. Now a thought is coming into your mind, some thought, “Today is Mother's puja, let's go, we have to hurry up, you see, must get this." You didn't get the flowers. get the flowers. You must get this and you must Now you go to the Third World and get that.

 Second is "No, detach yourself. Witness. Leave it to the Spirit. Watch. You will get it." Many of you have noticed this. But still this mind, which is quite silly, tries to impress upon you that you have to use the old junky instrument of this mind and it asserts that “better use" and when you start using that, ego comes in, you get at- tached to it and what you lose is your progress and thus the joy is minimized. The spirit works out auspiciousness How do you detach yourself..? I tried something as human beings do, in the begin- ning, just to see how it works out, because I had to experiment. For example, when I had to attend any puja or anything, I used to ask them, "What is the auspicious time?" So they would tell Me, "This is the auspicious time." And then another would telephone to say, "This is the auspicious time." So I said, "How can there be two auspicious times?" You see, it is a big problem with human beings. So they said, “There are five Panchangas in India." That means five books to consult the auspicious time. That is what human beings have done. I said, "Then why consult? It's better not to have five auspicious times, isn't it?" The auspicious time has to be beyond time. But it is bound in time the way hu- man beings have made it.... You calculate. You have a watch. You see, to overcome all these hurdles, human beings also make certain devices. So you consult, "Now what is the auspicious time here...?" Then it is a big headache because there are five ךיי books to be consulted, watch could be wrong, this could be wrong, that could be so. But if you are the spirit, then the spirit works out auspiciousness. It is the spirit that works out the auspiciousness. And imagine, when you think like that, how much tension goes out. First of all, you have to be a slave of the watch. Another, you have to be the slave of the books. Then you have to be the slave of the market, of the room, of the place which you have to hire. But supposing, if you allow the spirit to work it out, then everything will work out and you will reach the point where it is the most auspicious. So how do you accept it? Just by accepting. the spirit works out auspiciousness

 a mantra is that power of the word that expresses spirit Allow it to work out If you give up your satta, your own domain, you get into the domain of your spirit. You give up your domain – that is your ego's domain or maybe your super-ego's do- main – you give up that and try to see things, how it works out. Now what is the testing point of it? How do you test it? It works out. That is the point of testing. It works out. Allow it to work out. Do not put your attention. Attention has the second part of it – it is the tension. And do not try to say, "Why not today? It should have hap- pened today. We expected it to happen. Why not at this moment?" That is your ego. >>ך "Thy will be done." So the thought that starts moving in our mind all the time, which creates tensions, is not the thought of the spirit. So what you should say is "Not this thought. Not this thought. Yan neti neti wachaneyh nigamh awochuh. Not this thought, not this thought, not this thought." And see how you relax.... Just go on refusing to accept any thought. So you go into nirvichara. In that state you the spirit. feel The weapon of forgiveness Christ has done the greatest work on this, but we do not understand because His life was like a micro-thing - three years. So we have to open it out a little bit and see what He did. He has given us the greatest weapon of forgiveness. When you forgive a person, what do you do? You accept the situation, to begin with, and secondly you 6. forgive what you think has been done wrong to you. But because nothing can be done wrong to your spirit, you just forgive because you are the spirit. And when forgive, you have found that you tension goes away. your So even to your thoughts you say, “All right, forgive this thought, forgive this thought" because thought is also not to be punished.... Not forget, but forgive be- will even forget that you are the spirit. “Forgive all the thoughts that cause then you are coming to me." Just go on saying this. It is a mantra. What is a mantra? It is that power of the word that expresses spirit. 00

 So this is a very important thing Christ has given us: the weapon of forgiveness. Everybody has that weapon. Everyone can use that weapon. You do not have to in effort for it. You do not have to pay for it. It is just you have to say, "I put any forgive." You will be amazed. Your nerves will soothe down. This tension, this pres- sure of these modern things will be reduced if you go on saying, "I forgive, I forgive CC them.' The central path This opposite movement that you have to move, first of all, should start at this point, today, from forgiving others. Now what happens when you forgive someone? That means you do not react. The power to react to somebody's injuries, insults is finished. And when that power is finished, you become a powerful person because nobody can now overpower you because nobody can kill you, nobody can hurt nobody can do anything to you. you, But it is not, again I will say, shamelessness. You see, people can think that it is shamelessness. So if somebody says to you something harsh and something that is wrong, you do not accept it... In Sahaja Yoga one has to understand that it is just the central path. It is just the balancing thing which is important. It is not an extreme of anything. Like when we go to say that you must forgive everyone, it is not going to that extreme where you have done some wrong and somebody says to you, you don't take that part of it. It does not mean that. Again discretion is the engine of your movement.... It is a very thin road on which you have to walk. One side is the huge big Rock of Gibraltar of your ego. On the other side is the superego. In between is a small discretion path going on which you have to see both sides. Whether you are hitting yourself with the Rock of Gibraltar or falling into the valley of superego, you should see that you are using your discretion. So the other thing one has to remember is that whatever you were doing before road on Realization is to go to extremes.... But in Sahaja Yoga it is a very slippery which we are walking and there you have to see that it is not your ego and it is not your superego. So discretion has to be used very much and the balance in this move- ment.... In Sahaja Yoga, as soon as you leave your discretion, you fall this side or that side. Those people who are high quality Sahaja Yogis, take to discretion first, how far to go. Now for that, Mother does not have to say because you are the spirit. You yourself – you are the spirit. First of all, assume your position as the spirit and then move with it, that you say discreetly how far to go, how far not to go.

 Enjoying the waves You have to become thoughtless by becoming a forgiving person. Most of the thoughts will drop out once you become forgiving. But you cannot forgive some people, like you cannot forgive God, you cannot forgive Mother. Certain things you you walk properly, you can go ahead. This is the thing which brings you vichara shaithilya or cannot do, so the maryadas must be seen. Now, in these boundaries, if you can say the mind becomes relaxed. have to have vishaya shaithilya. That means your sense organs always Then you react to things because you are human beings. You are born like that. So whatever happens, you react. For example, you see a beautiful flower, you react to it, some sort of a thought rises with it. Now you must practise to see something without al- lowing any thought to rise. Then you start sucking through your spirit the beauty, the glory, the fragrance of a flower. Every flower is a poetry, but when you start thinking about it then it becomes a dead thing. But you just try to enjoy. Now you are the people who are on this Earth to enjoy yourself, not to worry about anything, just to enjoy. But if you are still used to "I must do this thing special, I am some special Sahaja Yogi, I am a very highly evolved Sahaja Yogi," then you are finished. Say we are all going in a boat, enjoy the boat and also the waves. But somebody says, "I'm a very special one, I'll try to jump down," then you are back again into the same position. So one has to have an attitude of looking at things. Try to develop this habit of looking at things without thinking about it. Try to develop your mind on those lines, that you do not react. Now that excitement business or all this sensationalization, that is today's craze. It comes from the same, that your sense organs require a kind of sensation because they react. We must have our sense organs which do not react because they must only react to the spirit. So we have to develop a new type of sense organs or a new quality of sense organs, which do not react to outside excitement. The source and central point want Sahaja Yoga to be excitement, how can you do it? I mean it is just Now if you the opposite of it.... For example, your eyes – they see something, then they react. Your ears – they hear something, they react. Somebody wants to talk – see the reac- tion. There are expectations. But because the spirit is active itself, it acts itself. You have seen vibrations do not speak, they act. It has the power to act. You need not react. If you can reduce the power of reaction, you rise much higher. This is a thing which one has to know when now we are celebrating His resurrection because it is tapah. It is the penance of Christ. Christ came on this Earth for penance. You know 10

 in the Gayatri mantra there are seven things they have said it and at the point of Christ it is tapah. It is the penance. So you have to have so-called penance to achieve the joy. The penance is to pull back your sense organs inside yourself. As Krishna has said, you have to pull back all your limbs of sense organs like a tortoise does. So the excitement that you require for your sense organs is no more needed because your sense organs now are themselves the source of excitement, in the sense that they neutralize all the excitements. You go to that point from where it starts. A river starts with a very small little drop and then it expands, expands, expands, expands. You go to the source, abso- lutely to the central point. There you will find hardly even a drop falling out. Another good example would be that a wheel has the central point and the wheel moves all the time, but the central point has to be fixed... With the wheel, if that central point also moves, then the cart cannot move. The cart will also start rolling down. So the central point has to be fixed, otherwise the wheel cannot move. So you go to that central point and the movement is on the central point, where there is no movement in a way because there is only ascent. There is no revolution. It does not revolve any more. There is just ascent on the central point. Generosity and pleasure I hope you try to understand that all the movements come out of ignorance. All the outer movements come because we are not yet on the central point. But that achieve- ment is not difficult because you have jumped onto it, but you again come out onto the periphery, onto the wheel. So how to keep there and to ascend in that line...? Every time you jump out, now how do you go back to the central point? It is by detachment, by tapah, by penance. Penance is to deny. It does not mean asceticism of outside, but asceticism of within. First of all, we must learn to give to others. That also sometimes people find dif- ficult, I have seen.... Try to give to others – detachment. So one way is to have forgiveness, then the second is generosity. If you work for Sahaja Yoga, say, "I haven't done anything so far." Not to react to it, what work you have done. “Oh, it's pleasure. I did it. It's my pleasure. I did it just out of pleasure." Don't count it. “I brought four flowers, she brought two flowers. I must be paid for כ one and a half flower." All these calculations are on the periphery, outside, when כ you were not realized souls. Now you just do not count anything else but your blessings. So you generous.

 Children and generosity I have seen now people have different attachments, subtler ones, like attached to their own children.... Once the children are born to Sahaja Yogis, then the whole world becomes their children. You will spoil them. You will spoil yourself. You are just their trustees, but to you it becomes a very big thing that you have produced a child.... To create a child is not something great, but that you have a child in charge of you, which has to work for God. You are just in charge. But to identify that "this your head com- child is great, he's a very big realized soul" and all that will blast pletely because it is a subtler blasting. It is like a hydrogen bomb. Ordinary bombs can destroy a part of it, but these subtler bombs are even worse. And that will spoil the child, that will also spoil you very much in your ascent. So what you have to do is to see that if you have a child, you are just in charge, as you are in charge of all the children of Sahaja Yogis, not of your own. Be gener- ous... The person who is a generous person, for him the whole world is his family. So expand yourself... What we understand is that our relationships and our identifications have to be dropped completely. We are universal beings now. So your child is a source of joy. Every child should be the source of joy to you. Every child should be. Bachelors that way are better or the ones who are not yet married, they can enjoy everybody's child nicely. But when you are not a mother and a father, if you are enjoying, what is so creditable? When you become the parents and then you enjoy other children as much as you enjoy your child, then your generosity has started. The wheels of the chariot The generosity of loving others, the generosity through compassion – compassion does not mean that you should pity someone, but compassion means the sharing of personality, the sharing of love personality. And that is where we miss the point, that compassion means somebody has to be helped. Sahaja Yoga compassion is not that. Sahaja Yoga compassion is sharing. First is the forgiveness.... Second is – you can call it the compassion or the detach- ment leading to compassion... Thirdly is the compassion. These are the wheels of your chariot which moves you. These are the wheels you should remember. Now, if you go further with it, with the detachment – supposing it works out in you – even you become compassionate. Even if that comes, still what is the judging point? How do you know that you are all right? How do you measure? How do you find out that you are all right? What do you call to take the bearing of the ship? How do you know? You must have peace. You should be a peaceful person. 12

 Agitation should be outside, but you should be an absolutely peaceful person. If you are not a peaceful person, then be sure that you are not yet there where you should have been. Now you can say that Christ also got very angry. "He took a whip in His hand and beat the people, so we can also do the same." You are not Christ. You are not an incarnation. You must know you are a realized soul, so you do not have to take a whip in your hand and hit others. You cannot. This is the mistake that the disciples of Muhammed-sahib have done, that they never thought that He was an incarna- tion. All the incarnations have killed. Krishna has killed. Rama has killed. The Devi has killed. But you are not the Devi. You are not Shri Krishna, so you do not have to kill anyone. You do not have to show temper. So if you still have a temper, then know that your progress is very slow. You have to be a peaceful person. Imagine Sahaja Yogis having a jihad, what do you say to that – going with swords in the hand and a spear in the hand and hitting others? Peacefulness and aggression This point I want to make very clear because when I am there, of course, I am going to tell you, everyone. But when I am not there, I do not want you to take in your hands the swords and things and fight.... So you are not to take any weapon into your hand or even anger does not behove a Sahaja Yogi at any point, unless and until I tell you to be angry. So this is the crite- ria, that you have to be a peaceful person, not an aggressive person... If you are argumentative, then know that you are not yet there where you have to be. A peaceful person goes to a point and then argues it out. If you are argumenta- tive, then your progress is not all right. So a person has to be absolutely peaceful and this peace is the most effective thing. We are seeking the peace of the universe. You cannot achieve it through any one of these bombs. You can only achieve it through the spirit, which is the source of all the peace. So I would request all of you to give up tempers, angers. Peace is the greatest powerful thing on this Earth.... The one who does not react to anything else is the most powerful. So one has to understand that peace is the criteria to know that you are absolutely at that point where you have to be. But peace by no chance means cowardliness... The difference between a peaceful person and a cowardly person is that a cow- ardly person acts to the negative forces and a peaceful person creates positive forces, constructive forces, generates it. So you are not to be cowardly, but you have to be peaceful and a peaceful person is like a magnet, so soothing it is.

 Soothing like ghee We are moving towards the soothing qualities of the spirit. We have to soothe others and not to excite.... We call it like the ghee. When the body is charred and is abso- lutely burning, then you put some sort of a ghee on it so it becomes smooth like a lubricant. Such a personality is a lubricant. It does not go into friction, but reduces frictions. It is a lubricating temperament. So you should judge yourself, "Am I a lubricant personality?" For example, you see two people are fighting. And one goes as a peacemaker and one goes to excite it more – you see, he joins them. Now the one who is the peace- maker is the blessed one, is the one who is the one moving towards God because he is the peacemaker. "Blessed are those who are the peacemakers." All these things, if you see, are what I am telling today. It is the same, but in a different language, that's all, as what Christ said. To understand Christ, you have to open Him out more because He said it in very simple words which have very deep meanings and only a Sahaja Yogi can understand Him. So you have to make peace. Love is radiant The love that you enjoy is not what is bestowed upon you, but what bestow you you have seen so far. They will write,“I love you." And the second sentence will be "I want upon others. The idea of love is also funny. It is just the opposite of what to divorce you." And the modern fashion is like that. "I love you, I want to divorce כ you because I love you too much because I want to spare you." It is very modern, very sophisticated. So the love that hurts others, love that tortures others, the love that expects is not love. Love that just flows, just forgives, is just compassion, is the most enjoyable thing, radiant just like the sunshine. Christ even forgave those who crucified Him ... because He knew that God will not forgive. Even God will not forgive those, so He tried to forgive them. But we, those who call themselves Christians, those who are supposed to be Christians, are just the opposite of Christ, just the opposite in every way.... So you come to a point where you understand that you become the love. And when it is pure love relationships, then there is no lust and greed or anything, but just love and the purity of it. You do not want to do it because you want to have any lust out of that person. It is just the opposite.... So what you emit out of your love to others is a sense of security, an ocean of security you can call it. Everyone feels secured, secured with you. And that security will be felt by everyone. Trust – trust others. You must trust. That is very important. Trust for everything. I have seen some people are very serious on money. Some are very serious about 14

 possessions. Some are this. I know they are sometimes weak people. They could be weak about money, weak about possessions, could be even insulting to things that should not be so, but do not lose your temper. Just have forgiveness for them and let them feel secured, absolutely secured... Trust others because in Sahaja Yoga you must know we are all growing, we are all transforming. So we must grow. We must grow and, for growth, security is the most important thing. If there is no security for a tree, it will never grow. So everybody should feel secured in the company of Sahaja Yogis.... Growth must take place and for that you must trust. Somebody might make mistakes. All right, it doesn't matter. Somebody may be dishonest. It doesn't matter, but give them security.... As long as that person is honest to God it is sufficient. Our honesty is of a different level.... They are growing. They are coming to the light and the more light they see, the better they become. This trust has to be there, trusting in God that He will give him the right path. Collectivity and self-discipline This understanding about your growth is within yourself, which you can see, and the highest of all is the collectivity – not the fraternity of bhoots, but collectivity. Again discretion has to be used, how far you are collective. If a person thinks he is a very great person and he can correct everyone and he can punish everyone and do as he likes, then he is not collective. But sometimes you have to also understand that even with bhootish people, I have to stoop down to conquer them, to bring them up. Do not become like them. Try to elevate them rather than to go down to their level. And if you can manage that, then you have achieved what you wanted to do through your collectivity. And a person has to be collective. If he is not collective, then one must know that there is something definitely wrong with that person.... What you have to do is to have a kind of self-directed discipline – self-directed, not on others, self-directed. “Do I meditate in the morning? I don't. So what's wrong with me? I'm supposed to be a Sahaja Yogi." Nobody has to tell you. You yourself should do this to yourself. You are fond of food? "All right, doesn't matter, I'll fast for two days." No fast- ing is allowed in Sahaja Yoga, but fasting for detachment is all right. Not for God's sake, for your sake you do it. "I like a particular type of cake. All right, I'll not have it. I'll not have it for one year." But no, if people have to give up, then they will give up something like rhubarb. So one should not be cunning about it. You should not be cunning with yourself. So what you have to do is to see where does this mind go. What is the attraction...?

 So a tapah is to be established within yourself, self-discipline. Now those who talk too much should stop talking.... If our tongue talks too much, then we had bet- ter keep quiet. If we do not talk, we better talk. We should teach ourselves how to talk. Now and talk to the sea. Go and talk to some tree. Go and talk to someone go like that. Or best is to talk to Me, to My photograph. So that is how you achieve a kind of a control over your tongue, to talk sweetly. Some people have to go through penance for that. For them, to talk sweetly is like taking rhubarb again. They just cannot talk sweetly, just can't – sarcasm. You see in that sarcasm, they have a special pleasure. Try to say something sweetly. You can be humourous without being sarcastic. Humour is the best way. What is the need to be sarcastic? There is no need at all. It is a sign of cowardliness, sarcasm. It is a sign that you want to hurt others, but you are not straightforward. So try to avoid sarcastic talking. If you are sarcastic, better tell your tongue to behave itself. So a little disciplining towards yourself, punishment what you call or the tapah, the penance, has to work out. Let the dynamism work out People have so many ways of seeing things. Some men want to see women all the time. Some women want to see men all the time or clothes or anything. Now the dif- ference is that when you see something, it reacts. The difference between My looking at anything is that that reacts. When I look at you, your Kundalini reacts. When I look at this, it gets vibrated. Every eye, every glance makes the thing react. And ni- reekshana means, “I know what it is, I know what it is." Just looking at a person I know what it is. Looking at a thing, I know what it is – nireekshana. And the whole thing is in the memory.... Everything I see gets vibrated and also I note what is there and is all ready there to be used at a proper time. But what do I do? What do I do? I do nothing. I do noth- ing. I do not think. I do not plan. Everything that you do, I don't do. So when you have that kind of a temperament, you will be amazed the amount of dynamism that will work it out. You do not have to create a dynamo. It is inside you. Let it work it out.... You become the truth. So in every chakra, concentrate and use the chakra to detach yourself from the particular quality of that chakra. Like now for example, the Nabhi Chakra does the digestion. Now you do not worry what you should eat to digest. Just detach yourself from there. With vibrations, if you just see and eat whatever is there, you will digest and then you become the truth. Truth that is love – that is God. May God bless you all. 16

 a serene person They said, "You see, what happened is that our husbands told us, 'If you really want to see a lady who is absolutely, immaculately feminine and very auspicious and very כל כ serene, then it is Mrs. Srivastava. So they came to see Me. Imagine them. The idea of serenity does not exist now for women in the world, but these ladies came to see Me. "Who is this serene lady who has come...?" Very respectfully, they said, "How did you develop this serenity?" I said, "I didn't develop. It was just existing. I didn't do anything to look serene or in any way work it out. There is no beauty parlour for that, but it is something innate in Me. What did think it was – you serenity?" She said, "No, no, all the men praised about that 'she is a person who is, even you in these horrible days, extremely serene." 19

 Once you are awakened in your essences, your We have to understand one thing: that the essence is within us. For example, innocence is absolutely pure. Within us it is abso- lutely pure. In its own form it is absolutely pure. But when it is reflected through our medium, it gets spoiled. The way you are, the way you express gets spoiled. If you are a cunning person, the innocence cannot be manifested. Your innocence, whatever God has placed within you, is com- pletely darkened because you cannot reflect it back. There is no manifestation of it. Why it happens? If you are pure, if you are all right, the inno- cence is all right. Then why is it not manifested through you? Why this cunningness can stop that innocence or any other es- know exist on different sences that are within you, which you chakras. We must think about it, why it happens, that even af- ter Realization we cannot properly manifest our innocence, our form. primordial powers which are within us in absolute purest Why? What happens within us?

 you will be amazed to see the truth lie somewhere else and we are just fighting among ourselves. SS The trouble is with our attention. When you became human beings, you were given full freedom to put your attention onto anything you wanted. Say if you want, you can put your attention on to any subject. Say I receive a telephone call. So I put My attention to it. Now I can go on identifying with it, thinking about it. All My attention will be enveloped and I will not pay attention to anything else that is happening. The attention is so mobile it has no base, as if the whole thing, like a jelly, goes and gets attached to a thing... you waste your attention on foolish, nonsensical things, what is go- ing to happen? So this is how we put our attention onto absolutely useless If things, sometimes gone to very depraved things also. We may put our atten- tion to anything that we think requires our attention. But do you have your self-esteem? If we have, then where should be your attention? It should be on yourself. Where is your Self now? It is God Almighty. It is a part of that great primordial being. Your attention should be on that. After Realization, your attention should be in your heart, on your spirit, which is the part of God Almighty. If your attention is on your spirit, you will be amazed, how your attention will act. You see like a jelly which attached to a point. It may little bit get disturbed. Again it will get settled down. Again it will get a little bit disturbed. It will settle down. It will not hang onto any point and will not bother you. So to put all your essences properly, first of all, put your attention to your heart and to your spirit because that is your absolute point which have you discovered. 23 June 1980 London 21

 BE STE ADY I Seeker: Respected Mataji, please give me the knowledge and show me more clearly the are the dos and don'ts for Sahaja Yoga? What way... Don'ts and dos – first and foremost things are that a Sahaja Yogi cannot smoke or drink. One absolutely, one hundred percent sure, because if you drink or smoke after some time either you will lose your vibrations or you will start vomiting. You cannot smoke. If you smoke, your Vishuddhi will be caught. If you caught and whenever you will place your hand towards the photograph all the Nabhi chakra will be burning absolutely. So Many people have done it without any difficulty. They do not have any difficulty. They just give up. So this is one of the most important things that you have to gradually give up. Just take My name. You can work it out. We have people here, they will tell you they were alcoholic, they were taking drugs and they were doing all kinds of things. They have given up all that and now they are absolutely normal people. First thing is that don't drink and don't smoke. will find you drink your Nabhi chakra will be "What is this happening?" And will you will give up. you say, Secondly, do not fast. When Mother is there you are not to fast. Only fast on Naraka Chaturdashi – that's all.... If you do not feel like eating, eat something else, but don't leave your stomach empty. You can have some fruit juice or milk or whatever you like. These are certain things about the food and the stomach – Nabhi chakra.... 22

 You can be fully realized if you come together 22 March 1977 Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan Delhi Keep your eyes steady and mostly on the Mother Earth. You see, you have heard about Lakshmana. He never saw the face of Sitaji – never, never saw Her face. He only saw Her feet. How can that be? He was always living with Her. He had never seen Her face. He had just seen Her feet. So you can imagine what should be the position and for fourteen years he had to lead a complete brahmacharya's life. She was like his mother. He knew She was Adi Shakti, but he just saw Her Feet. That should be our case.... We should lead a sanctified married life. Now suppos- ing somebody is married, then he should not run away with other women and the other women should not run away with other men. And lead a sanctified life, create a nest of family, a proper family house. Try to adopt, compromise, adjust, make your wife realize or make your husband realize and bring peace in the family because there are many great souls who want to take birth – many of them.... So you must try to get a family life, a proper family, a proper relationship. Do service to your parents, to your mothers. Do not find faults with your parents and try to be kind to them. Also be kind to the wife's parents and try to be good in the family. Try to bring more peace if they are difficult. I mean, it's all right. Do not spoil the children also. Correct them. Make them loving. Make a nice society.

 Every one of you should be the carrier of the love of your Mother, everywhere. If you are Sahaja Yogis and if you change and transform in your behaviour, naturally Sahaja Yoga will have its own reputation and everybody will start taking to Sahaja Yoga... You cannot earn any money from Sahaja Yoga. Do not have Sahaja Yogis for business partnerships. No, they are Sahaja Yogis. Do not use Sahaja Yoga for making money.... You have to be generous people. You have to be absolutely honest.... Be satisfied in your heart.... You have to lead a chaste life and you have to also see chaste things.... Your priorities will change. Your friends will change gradually. You will not like dirty jokes, nothing. You will just change and you will run away from them. I have seen these foreigners. Now they are telling Me that they just cannot stand all these things now. Once upon a time, whatever they could tolerate and enjoy ... they just cannot stand it and bear it because now you have become saintly. You have to be decent people.... Do not dabble into all these rumours and frivolous things. Do not waste your precious life. You are Sahaja Yogis. Not a single moment is to be wasted on nonsensical things. Every moment should be spent in having dignity for yourself, for others, for loving others... Do not be misers at all. Miserly people are against Sahaja Yoga and if miserly people come, I give them trouble. If you are miserly, you get lots of trouble. So you do not get miserly I'm telling you. And do not be too talkative and troublesome. I can stop your talking. And if you do not talk at all, that is also not good. That means do not go to the extremes of anything. These are certain things which you have to know. Women should not dress up like men and men should not behave like women. All these nonsenses you should not do. You should be yourself.... No need to wear funny dresses go around and have your hair up to this much or try to show off. You see, all these are mythical things. Be normal, natural people and lead a normal, natural, decent life and it's not so important. and Food is not so important. Whatever you get, you get, you eat. And do not talk too much of comfort and do not also sleep on the thorns – no, no, no. But do not be absolutely a waster. Be in the centre. It is a very simple thing for Sahaja Yogis. And you see with your vibrations if you have to take a decision. “Should I take this house or not?" Take the vibrations. Anything you see, "What should I do? Should I have? Who should I have as a prime minister?" Now, see for yourself whom do you want to have as prime minister. See four people you put in – see the vibrations. Who has the best...? In a democracy CC 24

 anybody can be brought in, but the one who is a good one is a Sahaja Yogi. He should be the prime minister and you should ask. If the more people ask for it, he may be. So decide everything with vibrations, for yourself, for collectiveness or anything. And the most important is that you give it to others. Sahaja Yoga does not work in your houses, families or in small little groups, but it works ... when all of you are here – because I am here. It is a collective work. All of you are cells of one body and the more cells that are awakened, the more the body is active. So you have to come together, to be together. Love each other. Mix up with others. Do not form groups – no. You should talk to each other very freely, whatever is your language, nationality or whatever it is. And you should mix up with others. It is not proper. It is a sense of insecurity that is expressed if you have a group.... should be no grouping done – no need. Be open. All of us are born of one Mother. We should not feel insecure... Together is all right. We are all brothers and sisters. There friendly and kind and do not analyze others and criticize others. Better to Be very criticize yourself than to analyze others.... We should watch ourselves and not others. Why somebody is behaving like that, you just don't worry. How are you behaving yourself? Are you all right? Are your vibrations all right? And that is how – with love, patience, understanding -I am sure one day we all will feel the oneness, all of us, and we should help each other. If some- body is sick we should help.... You should not sort of identify with yourself. You should identify yourself with the eternal life that is within you and you are going to enjoy it very much. So do not feel insecure. Do not have too many desires for something and prised... If it works out, well and good – if it doesn't work out, well and good – because we are there after all. And if the car gets punctured, all right, we are there after all. Even if the car is not there, we are there. We are not lost. you will be sur- So do not think of the future, do not think of the past, but think of the present and enjoy. That is the message of Sahaja Yoga and perhaps I have covered most of the points for people. And never try to criticize anyone – never, never, never. And be firm and know that you have just now crossed, so many of you just crossed. So be steady.... What is going to happen, let us see. Let us see. Be with that. you Suddenly, do not be bumptious about it and otherwise you will be rippled back again, you see. So gradually grope the whole thing. When you have got the mastery over it, then grip it. But if you are bumptious, anybody can push you down.... There are many like that. So be careful. You see, everybody is trying to push you down. In this world, there are satanic forces and you are very special chosen people. That is why vibrations. There are so many people ... but how many have felt it? You are the you have got very few who have felt it. So be careful about it and meet together in this same number. All of you can be realized fully if you come together and sit together. They say when Mataji is here, they are here... Those eight or ten people who have been attending it regularly are the best and they are also busy cleaning you.

 I respect your Free At this time you had to have Realization. your That was decided by the divine collectivity, you can call it. All the Gods, God- desses, all of Them decided to put this work on somebody whom they thought to be very capable. So They said, "We all will be with You, entirely with You, all Our powers will be with You, but You take up this job now in this Kali Yuga to transform human beings." In a way, human beings are more difficult than animals because they have their own freedom and they have been given this freedom to achieve their final freedom. In their freedom, the way they behave is something very surprising, how they go completely out of control and try to do things which are so destructive. Of course, in Kali Yuga, it was predicted in India, but I think they could not pre- dict what would happen in America or what would happen in the western coun- tries where people have freedom just to destroy themselves and they are finding new methods of destroying themselves. This tendency cannot be curbed, cannot be stopped by Adi Shakti or by God Almighty because you have been given the freedom to ruin yourselves, spoil your- selves and to go to hell. That cannot be controlled by any divine power. The divine power also respects your freedom.

 dom So the divine collectivity thought, “Are We going to completely ruin the cre- ation of Adi Shakti? Are We going to completely destroy whatever She has cre- ated and then recreate something better?" This was the discussion going on. And most of Them were so fed up with the human beings, especially with the western freedom, that They said, "These people want help. And why should We give them the Heavens? It's not proper. CC כי So the first thing Adi Shakti did was to create a seeking in them. She created it, this desire to seek. And so these people, belonging to this culture which was so destructive, started seeking. And when the seeking started, also, as usual in the market, there were many others who came forward to demand answers to their seeking. They had to go to various cults and things and false people and all that because they had no way to know. But if they had read some books of enlightened people like Kabir, like Nanak, even the Gnostics, their scriptures, anything like that, they would have understood what is the truth and where to find it and how to find it. It is a big struggle I find between the people who are seekers and those who are not at all seekers. They do not want to know and they can never be seekers. I can assure you that some of them will never think of seeking. Shri Adi Shakti Puja 1994 27

 God has freedom given you The other day in Rome, one journalist came and he felt. He said, "I've never expected this, I'm fantastically good" and all that and "the vibrations I'm feeling, cool breeze I'm feeling." And then he never appeared on the scene. And he said that "I'm enjoying my Self Realization." It is very selfish, I think, just to enjoy for yourself. Imagine the light enjoying its own light and giving no light to others. Why to give enlightenment to any such a selfish personality? He will lose all his vibrations, I can assure you, and then he will come back to Me after one year and say, “Mother, I've got a headache here and my foot is like this and I met with an accident.... God has no interest in such wasters. Do you repair the lights which are never going to give light? God is the source of all the common sense and He is not going to do something to waste CC His energy on people who have no value for their own lives. So I tell you again that you are important, a very important creation of God, as a human being. And in His compassion and love, He has decided to give you this emancipation so that you enter into the kingdom of God and reside with His bliss. You are the most important among all the evolved things and the grace is absolutely openly flowing. You do not have to confess anything. You do not have to feel guilty. You do not have to worry what you have done before. You do not have to pay or jump or do any mental or physical exercise. It works out. But the transition from working it out and developing into its full scale is a dangerous place – like a bird which halfway comes out of the egg and still is sticking on to everything that is dirty in the egg. Here, one has go to fearlessly, completely thrash out all that is misidentifica- tion and spread the wings into this new freedom with complete confidence and understanding that Creator is the Almighty and that you are in His domain and that He loves you. your God has given you freedom to decide. If you want to go to heaven, you can go. If you want to go to hell, you can. A man says that he does not believe in human freedom because we are not free to be born when we want and to die when we want and to have accidents when we want. А таn I am talking of that freedom only. I believe in it and you can have it also.... I will give you an example. There was a lady. This Algerian was told she was going to die in one week's time. The doctors said. Everybody said. And she is not only living, but she is doing very well now. She is with her children and everything. Our president of India came to the London airport and they told that he was going to die. They had prepared for his funeral and everything in India. And I met him at the airport. You know that in ten minutes he got cured and he went there. He walked on. Everybody started seeing whether he was coming or his ghost was walking down. It was like that. And he is still there – still there. All right, then about accidents ... so many accidents – one and a thousand and one. But I will tell you one where the bus fell down with the Chhaya-pandit coming to see Me, about eighty feet, double rumbling. And it stood on its four wheels and the driver ran away with fear, but somebody knew how to drive and the key was in there. They started the thing and they came out, and not one person was hurt. Actually, even ifa Sahaja Yogi wants to die, he cannot die. He will be looked after by angels. It is a fact. Tell him that. You see, all this could be stories to him, but all is a fact and for yourself. If I say so, why not have it? It's all free. He is honest because, at this point... what he says is true because he is not free. But I'm talking of something that has to happen to you. you see 2 May 1982 Lille France

 If you want to go to hell, I will give you a chariot.. If you want to go to heaven, I will give you an airplane. I leave it to your freedom because I have always believed in the freedom of My children because I think they are not that low type, that I should put freedom on them as a sort of a bar that they should not use their freedom. You are absolutely free. If you want to go to hell, I will give you a chariot to go direct. But if you want to go to heaven, I will give you a vimana, an airplane to go there. So it is for you people to become dynamic and to have confidence within you... Freedom is different and abandonment is different. These are two things one must under- stand. Say there is a kite in the hand. Then it is in your hand. But if allow the kite to fly wherever it likes, it is abandonment. So the freedom is that in which you can manage to maneuvre it, to man it, to take it the way you like. That is the freedom. Then you are free. But if ... baselessly you are roaming about, then this is abandonment for which there is always a punishment.... You see they just want to play games. It leads them nowhere. So this is not free- dom. This is tomfoolery. It is making a fool of yourself. It is only your identification. Freedom means freedom to ego, not to wisdom. you Guru Puja 1979 29

 I met Her Holiness Mataji in April 1974. Before actually meeting Her, I attended She Life Eternal one session of meditation in November 1973. I got Her to photograph and practised at home, as I was told in the session. And lo! I got what I was longing for from the photograph itself. The next year when I meditated in the presence of the Divine Mother. I was overwhelmed with joy. Inner peace came to me. Her Holiness Mataji told me that I was realized. It was really very kind of Her Holiness Mataji to have given Realization to an ordinary person like me. We are all very grateful to the Divine Mother MATAJI SRI NIRMALA DEVI NAMO NAMAH for giving us the sacred knowledge of Sahaja Yoga, making Kundalini awakening Sahaja Yoga gives you a chance to be fully your meaning. and raising as easy as child's Take full advantage of it. play. Ancient seekers had to go to the Himalayas and jungles Establish your attention in the Absolute to learn this technique. and achieve the Eternal Life in the Kingdom of God. In these days of pseudo-gurus, it is really very kind of the This lies more in the capacities and subtleties of subtler people. Divine Mother to have come Later on the gross may follow. amongst us. Her presence is a The early Sahaja Yogis are the foundation of this empire of God. great blessing to mankind. R.D. Kulkarni Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi

 The Joy of Life Until the other day, I was wandering aimlessly me and put me onto the path of God Realiza- Our Story In 1980 a small as a beggar in the streets of life. Thanks to Shri Mataji, I am hoping to ended after I become one of Shri Mataji's spir- tion. My long search for God and a true Guru journal was published become a king of kings in the near future. So long as your desires are not fulfilled and spiritual kingdom of God. I truly became a they overwhelm you in endless succession, Brahmin, the devotee traveller on the path to itual sons. I was reborn a second time, in the by The Life Eternal Trust. The fifty-six supreme Brahma. Without the grace of the Guru, God Real- you are in essence a beggar. True joy and manent happiness are possible only when all your desires are fulfilled. There is one desire ization is impossible. The Guru only can fulfillment in which all desires are fulfilled. sow the seed of Divinity in you. Unless That is the desire for God. When the Divine nurture the seed into a tree by total devotion the lives of Sahaja Grace falls into the kamandal of your heart, all and sadhana, you cannot reap the fruits of well as ads pages included Shri per- the Mataji's words and testimonials about you Yogis, as desires are fulfilled, your sorrows of ages the Divine. Only as you advance in sadhana, from manufacturers are wiped out and you experience the eternal can you experience the great bliss and beauty spring and joy of life. Only that person is a king who is himself Mataji. Hence, please do not judge Mataji bearings. Weekly full and in his fullness gives to others. Only a with your limited intellect, your ego your meetings were of cables and ball of Divinity within you and the greatness of and God-realized soul is the king of kings because limited spiritual experience. It will be almost listed in Bombay, he is in possession of infinite wealth and can like the seven blind men trying to find out Delhi, Pune, distribute that wealth to others. He is estab- about the elephant. Mataji has opened the doorway to the king- love and compassion for others. Only in that dom of God, which overflows with the trea- state of divine love can you truly give to others. sures of eternal love, bliss, beauty and holiness. Rahuri, Dhulia lished in universal consciousness and is full of and Switzerland. "The Life Eternal" My greatest fortune in life has been that I came into contact with Mataji Nirmala Devi of the Divine Kingdom by being true disciples who awakened the sleeping Divinity within of Mataji. Let us all take of these eternal treasures part is a chapter in Gopal, New Delhi Our Story. This is the Era of Enlightenment. One can see and feel the bubbling of new idioms in our creative world of art, music and all that is beautiful and joy-giving. Integration is the key note of this new regeneration of universal tones. These tones are ripples of the harmonic, dynamic undercurrent music of the Universal Divine Love. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi 31

 In My lifetime what is most important is the raising of the Kundalini. So I am not worried about other things. That is My job, you see. DIVINE COOL BREEZE volume 26 number 2 WORDS CONTENTS PAGES: Diwali Puja 2002 Los Angeles PAGE 2: Guru Puja 1993 Cabella Italy PAGE 19: Diwali Puja 1999 Delphi Greece THIS PAGE: 21 September 1981 New York BACK COVER: 18 June 1983 Paris France PHOTOS COVER, CONTENTS PAGES and PAGE 3: Mahakali Puja, Lonavala India, 19 December 1982 (Matthew Fogarty photographer) PAGE 17: Vaiturna India circa 1982 (Matthew Fogarty) PAGES 18 and 29: date and place unknown PAGES 22-23: India, January 1982 (Matthew Fogarty) PAGE 32: Daglio Italy 2007 (Calin Chiriou) BACK COVER: Vancouver Canada www.divinecoolbreeze.org contact@divinecoolbreeze.org editor@divinecoolbreeze.org PRINTED BY King Printing Company Inc. Lowell Massachusetts USA and Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. Pune Maharashtra India

 I want to talk about the Promised Land the land where there is the rule of God Almighty, where your Father is sitting with both His hands to receive you with love and give you all His powers for which you should not say, “I'm not ready." The only thing I cannot do is to create that earnest desire in you.



----------------------

2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
2013 issue 2 – volume twenty-six number two
HNe
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 EGO
র
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 There are many who are not here,
who have got their Realization all over the world.
I remember all of them.
And all of you should remember them.
2 One Guru Mantra
4 A Spiritual Life
18 A Serene Person
20 Your Essence
22 Be Steady
26 I Respect Your Freedom
30 The Life Eternal
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 THERE IS ONE GUR
U MANTRA TO REMEMBER:
we are Sahaja Yogis. Just remember this. We are Sahaja Yogis. And
once you know you are Sahaja Yogis, this projection will start.
What happened to William Blake, if you see, he started
projecting his imagination and he reached the point of knowledge.
So anything that you see, anything you do or others are doing,
try to relate it with Sahaja Yoga – and project. Then you will also
reach the ocean of love.
have that, then what? Who can disturb you? Who
Once
you
can trouble you? Who can make anything that is difficult for you
because you are sitting in the ocean? The fellow is sitting outside
somewhere. How can he come into the ocean and trouble you?
So this is what is to remember: you are a Sahaja Yogi. Take
a bandhan morning and evening. It is so simple. Even to say ...
seems stupid to Me, but I have to say because people forget. You
forget that you are realized souls. Use your vibratory awareness for
at least protecting yourself because there is negativity sitting next
door.
So be very careful about this, to remember that "I am a Sahaja
Yogi." Once you say that, you will know how you have to behave,
400
what is the protocol. You will know what is the discipline you have
to follow. You will know how to love others, everything. This is
the essence.
How many have been Sahaja Yogis before? Poor things, all
these gurus suffered so much. You are not to suffer, not to go
any kind of a misery any more – no more. But do not forget you are
Sahaja Yogis, that is why. That will give you complete confidence
in yourself and you will be absolutely secured. Try to establish the
state that you are Sahaja Yogis. Thus
you become gurus of yourself
and of others.
30
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 EINE
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 you lead
a life that
We are celebrating the resurrection of Christ. With it, we have to also cel-
Easter Puja ebrate the resurrection of human beings, of Sahaja Yogis, who have been res-
urrected as realized souls. With that, we have to understand that we enter into
22 April 1984
London a new awareness.
There was no need for Christ to enter into any new awareness. He had to
come down again to show to this world that you are the eternal life, that
you
lead a life that is spiritual, which never perishes.
You have to rise into that new realm, which is the realm of God Almighty,
what you call the Kingdom of God. And He said it very clearly to Nicodemus,
that "You are to be born again."
And when he asked, "Am I to enter back into my mother's womb to be
born again?" He said it so clearly. It is so clear. Those who do not want to see
can remain blind, but He said it very, very clearly that "No, that is whatever
is born of the flesh is the flesh, but whatever is born of the spirit is the spirit."
4.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 I mean nothing could be more clear than that, that it has to be born of the
spirit. Of course, human beings have a special capacity to twist everything
around. For them, spirit could be a book, could be some words, could be
an organization, a church or some sort of a thing like that which they have
made. But whatever is man-made is not the spirit. This is the clear statement
of Christ, which people wanted to avoid and start their own organizations,
their own ideas. They created a very mythical thing in His name and now the
time has come for it to be blasted.
It has been going on and on for thousands of years. It captured so many
innocent people and people are into it. But when you are resurrected, when
become realized souls, one has to understand that now your movement is
you
inward, you are moving towards your roots and not outside.
So whatever was the endeavour before Realization has to be changed. The
direction has to be changed and that point mostly we miss.
is spiritual
which never perishes
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Entertainment for the spirit
This is the thing today I am trying to explain to you: so far, to a human mind, enter-
tainment was important – entertaining to the mind, not to the spirit. Entertainment
to the spirit is absolutely opposite to the entertainment to the mind.
Like somebody the other day telephoned to Me and said, "Mother, there is no
excitement in Sahaja Yoga." The excitement is too much. We are going against
that. We are going towards peace, not towards excitement and these kind of electric
shocks that we require every time...
All human enterprises have been like that. They are to excite your body because
if it is the dead you are dealing with, then you have to excite it. But something that
is living, that is eternal, you have to enjoy it and not to excite it. So the direction has
to be a juxtaposition and that is where many Sahaja Yogis fail to understand.
How do we do it is the point. How do we make our attention move inward in-
stead of going outward? If you start from the time you are born again, it is much
easier because it is into a new venture you go. In that is the peace
peace of your
spirit, the joy of your spirit, which is permanent. You do not need any excitement
from it. It is permanent. It is eternal.
Realization is effortless
So the first thing that comes to our mind is that whatever we do before Realization,
we have not to do. The first and foremost thing is Realization comes to you effort-
lessly. So the effort which is built in your body all the time, the energy of effort - "I
must do this, I must do that, I have to do this, I have to do that" – that creates ten-
sion.
So what do we do? We do not try to compete with others. We do not try to fix
certain timing, dates, watches. We do not also put our attention into any endeavour
which puts us into effort, but we relax that attitude of effort. It is called as, in San-
skrit, prayatna shaithilya.
For a Western mind, it is very difficult to grasp the subject, so try to understand.
That does not mean lethargy, so one should never confuse with the dead, the energy
of the living. Now we are trying to transform our energies towards the energy of the
spirit, so you have to allow the spirit to take over. Your effort of your mind should
be reduced and the energy of the spirit should work through you.
Now how do you do it? First is detachment. Detachment – start with the thought.
Let us see the thought. It is called as vichara shaithilya, relaxation of the thought.
Now a thought is coming into your mind, some thought, “Today is Mother's puja,
let's go, we have to hurry up, you see, must get this." You didn't get the flowers.
get the flowers. You must get this and you must
Now you go to the Third World and
get that.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Second is "No, detach yourself. Witness. Leave it to the Spirit. Watch. You will
get it."
Many of you have noticed this. But still this mind, which is quite silly, tries to
impress upon you that you have to use the old junky instrument of this mind and
it asserts that “better use" and when you start using that, ego comes in, you get at-
tached to it and what you lose is your progress and thus the joy is minimized.
The spirit works out auspiciousness
How do you detach yourself..? I tried something as human beings do, in the begin-
ning, just to see how it works out, because I had to experiment. For example, when
I had to attend any puja or anything, I used to ask them, "What is the auspicious
time?" So they would tell Me, "This is the auspicious time." And then another
would telephone to say, "This is the auspicious time." So I said, "How can there be
two auspicious times?" You see, it is a big problem with human beings.
So they said, “There are five Panchangas in India." That means five books to
consult the auspicious time. That is what human beings have done. I said, "Then
why consult? It's better not to have five auspicious times, isn't it?"
The auspicious time has to be beyond time. But it is bound in time the way hu-
man beings have made it.... You calculate. You have a watch. You see, to overcome
all these hurdles, human beings also make certain devices. So you consult, "Now
what is the auspicious time here...?" Then it is a big headache because there are five
ךיי
books to be consulted, watch could be wrong, this could be wrong, that could be so.
But if you are the spirit, then the spirit works out auspiciousness. It is the spirit
that works out the auspiciousness. And imagine, when you think like that, how
much tension goes out. First of all, you have to be a slave of the watch. Another, you
have to be the slave of the books. Then you have to be the slave of the market, of
the room, of the place which you have to hire. But supposing, if you allow the spirit
to work it out, then everything will work out and you will reach the point where it
is the most auspicious.
So how do you accept it? Just by accepting.
the spirit works out auspiciousness
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 a mantra is that power of the word
that expresses spirit
Allow it to work out
If you give up your satta, your own domain, you get into the domain of
your spirit.
You give up your domain – that is your ego's domain or maybe your super-ego's do-
main – you give up that and try to see things, how it works out.
Now what is the testing point of it? How do you test it? It works out. That is the
point of testing. It works out.
Allow it to work out. Do not put your attention. Attention has the second part
of it – it is the tension. And do not try to say, "Why not today? It should have hap-
pened today. We expected it to happen. Why not at this moment?" That is your ego.
>>ך
"Thy will be done." So the thought that starts moving in our mind all the time,
which creates tensions, is not the thought of the spirit. So what
you should
say is
"Not this thought. Not this thought. Yan neti neti wachaneyh nigamh awochuh. Not
this thought, not this thought, not this thought." And see how you relax.... Just go
on refusing to accept any thought. So you go into nirvichara. In that state you
the spirit.
feel
The weapon of forgiveness
Christ has done the greatest work on this, but we do not understand because His
life was like a micro-thing - three years. So we have to open it out a little bit and see
what He did. He has given us the greatest weapon of forgiveness. When you forgive
a person, what do you do? You accept the situation, to begin with, and secondly you
6.
forgive what you think has been done wrong to you. But because nothing can be
done wrong to your spirit, you just forgive because you are the spirit. And when
forgive, you have found that
you
tension goes away.
your
So even to your thoughts you say, “All right, forgive this thought, forgive this
thought" because thought is also not to be punished.... Not forget, but forgive be-
will even forget that
you are the spirit. “Forgive all the thoughts that
cause then
you
are coming to me." Just go on saying this. It is a mantra. What is a mantra? It is that
power of the word that expresses spirit.
00
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 So this is a very important thing Christ has given us: the weapon of forgiveness.
Everybody has that weapon. Everyone can use that weapon. You do not have to
in effort for it. You do not have to pay for it. It is just you have to say, "I
put
any
forgive." You will be amazed. Your nerves will soothe down. This tension, this pres-
sure of these modern things will be reduced if you go on saying, "I forgive, I forgive
CC
them.'
The central path
This opposite movement that you have to move, first of all, should start at this
point, today, from forgiving others. Now what happens when you forgive someone?
That means you do not react. The power to react to somebody's injuries, insults is
finished. And when that power is finished, you become a powerful person because
nobody can now overpower you because nobody can kill you, nobody can hurt
nobody can do anything to you.
you,
But it is not, again I will say, shamelessness. You see, people can think that it is
shamelessness. So if somebody says to you something harsh and something that is
wrong, you do not accept it...
In Sahaja Yoga one has to understand that it is just the central path. It is just the
balancing thing which is important. It is not an extreme of anything. Like when we
go to say that you must forgive everyone, it is not going to that extreme where you
have done some wrong and somebody says to you, you don't take that part of it. It
does not mean that. Again discretion is the engine of your movement....
It is a very thin road on which you have to walk. One side is the huge big Rock
of Gibraltar of your ego. On the other side is the superego. In between is a small
discretion path going on which you have to see both sides. Whether you are hitting
yourself with the Rock of Gibraltar or falling into the valley of superego, you should
see that you are using your discretion.
So the other thing one has to remember is that whatever you were doing before
road on
Realization is to go to extremes.... But in Sahaja Yoga it is a very slippery
which we are walking and there you have to see that it is not your ego and it is not
your superego. So discretion has to be used very much and the balance in this move-
ment.... In Sahaja Yoga, as soon as you leave your discretion, you fall this side or
that side.
Those people who are high quality Sahaja Yogis, take to discretion first, how far
to go. Now for that, Mother does not have to say because you are the spirit. You
yourself – you are the spirit.
First of all, assume your position as the spirit and then move with it, that you say
discreetly how far to go, how far not to go.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Enjoying the waves
You have to become thoughtless by becoming a forgiving person. Most of the
thoughts will drop out once you become forgiving. But you cannot forgive some
people, like you cannot forgive God, you cannot forgive Mother. Certain things you
you walk
properly, you can go ahead. This is the thing which brings you vichara shaithilya or
cannot do, so the maryadas must be seen. Now, in these boundaries, if
you can say the mind becomes relaxed.
have to have vishaya shaithilya. That means your sense organs always
Then
you
react to things because you are human beings. You are born like that. So whatever
happens, you react. For example, you see a beautiful flower, you react to it, some
sort of a thought rises with it. Now you must practise to see something without al-
lowing any thought to rise. Then you start sucking through your spirit the beauty,
the glory, the fragrance of a flower. Every flower is a poetry, but when you start
thinking about it then it becomes a dead thing. But you just try to enjoy.
Now you are the people who are on this Earth to enjoy yourself, not to worry
about anything, just to enjoy. But if you are still used to "I must do this thing special,
I am some special Sahaja Yogi, I am a very highly evolved Sahaja Yogi," then you
are finished.
Say we are all going in a boat, enjoy the boat and also the waves. But somebody
says, "I'm a very special one, I'll try to jump down," then you are back again into
the same position. So one has to have an attitude of looking at things. Try to develop
this habit of looking at things without thinking about it. Try to develop your mind
on those lines, that you do not react.
Now that excitement business or all this sensationalization, that is today's craze.
It comes from the same, that your sense organs require a kind of sensation because
they react. We must have our sense organs which do not react because they must
only react to the spirit. So we have to develop a new type of sense organs or a new
quality of sense organs, which do not react to outside excitement.
The source and central point
want Sahaja Yoga to be excitement, how can you do it? I mean it is just
Now if
you
the opposite of it.... For example, your eyes – they see something, then they react.
Your ears – they hear something, they react. Somebody wants to talk – see the reac-
tion. There are expectations. But because the spirit is active itself, it acts itself. You
have seen vibrations do not speak, they act. It has the power to act. You need not
react.
If
you can reduce the power of reaction, you rise much higher. This is a thing
which one has to know when now we are celebrating His resurrection because it is
tapah. It is the penance of Christ. Christ came on this Earth for penance. You know
10
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 in the Gayatri mantra there are seven things they have said it and at the point of
Christ it is tapah. It is the penance. So you have to have so-called penance to achieve
the joy.
The penance is to pull back your sense organs inside yourself. As Krishna has
said, you have to pull back all your limbs of sense organs like a tortoise does. So the
excitement that you require for your sense organs is no more needed because your
sense organs now are themselves the source of excitement, in the sense that they
neutralize all the excitements.
You go to that point from where it starts. A river starts with a very small little
drop and then it expands, expands, expands, expands. You go to the source, abso-
lutely to the central point. There you will find hardly even a drop falling out.
Another good example would be that a wheel has the central point and the wheel
moves all the time, but the central point has to be fixed... With the wheel, if that
central point also moves, then the cart cannot move. The cart will also start rolling
down.
So the central point has to be fixed, otherwise the wheel cannot move. So you
go to that central point and the movement is on the central point, where there is no
movement in a way because there is only ascent. There is no revolution. It does not
revolve any more. There is just ascent on the central point.
Generosity and pleasure
I hope you try to understand that all the movements come out of ignorance. All the
outer movements come because we are not yet on the central point. But that achieve-
ment is not difficult because you have jumped onto it, but you again come out onto
the periphery, onto the wheel. So how to keep there and to ascend in that line...?
Every time you jump out, now how do you go back to the central point? It is by
detachment, by tapah, by penance. Penance is to deny. It does not mean asceticism
of outside, but asceticism of within.
First of all, we must learn to give to others. That also sometimes people find dif-
ficult, I have seen.... Try to give to others – detachment.
So one way is to have forgiveness, then the second is generosity. If you work for
Sahaja Yoga, say, "I haven't done anything so far." Not to react to it, what work you
have done. “Oh, it's pleasure. I did it. It's my pleasure. I did it just out of pleasure."
Don't count it. “I brought four flowers, she brought two flowers. I must be paid for
כ
one and a half flower." All these calculations are on the periphery, outside, when
כ
you
were not realized souls. Now you just do not count anything else but your blessings.
So you
generous.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Children and generosity
I have seen now people have different attachments, subtler ones, like attached to
their own children.... Once the children are born to Sahaja Yogis, then the whole
world becomes their children. You will spoil them. You will spoil yourself. You are
just their trustees, but to you it becomes a very big thing that you have produced a
child....
To create a child is not something great, but that you have a child in charge of
you, which has to work for God. You are just in charge. But to identify that "this
your head com-
child is great, he's a very big realized soul" and all that will blast
pletely because it is a subtler blasting. It is like a hydrogen bomb. Ordinary bombs
can destroy a part of it, but these subtler bombs are even worse. And that will spoil
the child, that will also spoil you very much in your ascent.
So what you have to do is to see that if you have a child, you are just in charge,
as you are in charge of all the children of Sahaja Yogis, not of your own. Be gener-
ous... The person who is a generous person, for him the whole world is his family.
So expand yourself...
What we understand is that our relationships and our identifications have to be
dropped completely. We are universal beings now. So your child is a source of joy.
Every child should be the source of joy to you. Every child should be. Bachelors
that
way are better or the ones who are not yet married, they can enjoy everybody's
child nicely. But when you are not a mother and a father, if you are enjoying, what
is so creditable? When you become the parents and then you enjoy other children as
much as you enjoy your child, then your generosity has started.
The wheels of the chariot
The generosity of loving others, the generosity through compassion – compassion
does not mean that you should pity someone, but compassion means the sharing of
personality, the sharing of love personality. And that is where we miss the point, that
compassion means somebody has to be helped. Sahaja Yoga compassion is not that.
Sahaja Yoga compassion is sharing.
First is the forgiveness.... Second is – you can call it the compassion or the detach-
ment leading to compassion... Thirdly is the compassion. These are the wheels of
your chariot which moves you. These are the wheels you should remember.
Now, if you go further with it, with the detachment – supposing it works out in
you – even you become compassionate. Even if that comes, still what is the judging
point? How do you know that you are all right? How do you measure? How do you
find out that you are all right? What do you call to take the bearing of the ship? How
do you know? You must have peace. You should be a peaceful person.
12
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Agitation should be outside, but you should be an absolutely peaceful person.
If you are not a peaceful person, then be sure that you are not yet there where you
should have been.
Now you can say that Christ also got very angry. "He took a whip in His hand
and beat the people, so we can also do the same." You are not Christ. You are not
an incarnation. You must know you are a realized soul, so you do not have to take a
whip in your hand and hit others. You cannot. This is the mistake that the disciples
of Muhammed-sahib have done, that they never thought that He was an incarna-
tion. All the incarnations have killed. Krishna has killed. Rama has killed. The Devi
has killed. But you are not the Devi. You are not Shri Krishna, so you do not have to
kill anyone. You do not have to show temper.
So if you still have a temper, then know that your progress is very slow. You have
to be a peaceful person. Imagine Sahaja Yogis having a jihad, what do you say to
that – going with swords in the hand and a spear in the hand and hitting others?
Peacefulness and aggression
This point I want to make very clear because when I am there, of course, I am going
to tell you, everyone. But when I am not there, I do not want you to take in your
hands the swords and things and fight....
So you are not to take any weapon into your hand or even anger does not behove
a Sahaja Yogi at any point, unless and until I tell you to be angry. So this is the crite-
ria, that you have to be a peaceful person, not an aggressive person...
If you are argumentative, then know that you are not yet there where you have to
be. A peaceful person goes to a point and then argues it out. If you are argumenta-
tive, then your progress is not all right.
So a person has to be absolutely peaceful and this peace is the most effective
thing. We are seeking the peace of the universe. You cannot achieve it through any
one of these bombs. You can only achieve it through the spirit, which is the source
of all the peace. So I would request all of you to give up tempers, angers. Peace is the
greatest powerful thing on this Earth....
The one who does not react to anything else is the most powerful. So one has to
understand that peace is the criteria to know that you are absolutely at that point
where you have to be. But peace by no chance means cowardliness...
The difference between a peaceful person and a cowardly person is that a cow-
ardly person acts to the negative forces and a peaceful person creates positive forces,
constructive forces, generates it. So you are not to be cowardly, but you have to be
peaceful and a peaceful person is like a magnet, so soothing it is.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Soothing like ghee
We are moving towards the soothing qualities of the spirit. We have to soothe others
and not to excite.... We call it like the ghee. When the body is charred and is abso-
lutely burning, then you put some sort of a ghee on it so it becomes smooth like a
lubricant. Such a personality is a lubricant. It does not go into friction, but reduces
frictions. It is a lubricating temperament. So you should judge yourself, "Am I a
lubricant personality?"
For example, you see two people are fighting. And one goes as a peacemaker and
one goes to excite it more – you see, he joins them. Now the one who is the peace-
maker is the blessed one, is the one who is the one moving towards God because he
is the peacemaker. "Blessed are those who are the peacemakers."
All these things, if you see, are what I am telling today. It is the same, but in a
different language, that's all, as what Christ said. To understand Christ, you have to
open Him out more because He said it in very simple words which have very deep
meanings and only a Sahaja Yogi can understand Him. So you have to make peace.
Love is radiant
The love that you enjoy is not what is bestowed upon you, but what
bestow
you
you have
seen so far. They will write,“I love you." And the second sentence will be "I want
upon others. The idea of love is also funny. It is just the opposite of what
to divorce you." And the modern fashion is like that. "I love you, I want to divorce
כ
you because I love you too much because I want to spare you." It is very modern,
very sophisticated.
So the love that hurts others, love that tortures others, the love that expects is
not love. Love that just flows, just forgives, is just compassion, is the most enjoyable
thing, radiant just like the sunshine. Christ even forgave those who crucified Him ...
because He knew that God will not forgive. Even God will not forgive those, so He
tried to forgive them. But we, those who call themselves Christians, those who are
supposed to be Christians, are just the opposite of Christ, just the opposite in every
way....
So
you come to a point where you understand that you become the love. And
when it is pure love relationships, then there is no lust and greed or anything, but
just love and the purity of it. You do not want to do it because you want to have any
lust out of that person. It is just the opposite....
So what you emit out of your love to others is a sense of security, an ocean of
security you can call it. Everyone feels secured, secured with you. And that security
will be felt by everyone.
Trust – trust others. You must trust. That is very important. Trust for everything.
I have seen some people are very serious on money. Some are very serious about
14
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 possessions. Some are this. I know they are sometimes weak people. They could be
weak about money, weak about possessions, could be even insulting to things that
should not be so, but do not lose your temper. Just have forgiveness for them and
let them feel secured, absolutely secured... Trust others because in Sahaja Yoga you
must know we are all growing, we are all transforming.
So we must grow. We must grow and, for growth, security is the most important
thing. If there is no security for a tree, it will never grow. So everybody should feel
secured in the company of Sahaja Yogis.... Growth must take place and for that you
must trust.
Somebody might make mistakes. All right, it doesn't matter. Somebody may be
dishonest. It doesn't matter, but give them security.... As long as that person is honest
to God it is sufficient. Our honesty is of a different level.... They are growing. They
are coming to the light and the more light they see, the better they become. This trust
has to be there, trusting in God that He will give him the right path.
Collectivity and self-discipline
This understanding about your growth is within yourself, which you can see, and the
highest of all is the collectivity – not the fraternity of bhoots, but collectivity. Again
discretion has to be used, how far you are collective. If a person thinks he is a very
great person and he can correct everyone and he can punish everyone and do as he
likes, then he is not collective. But sometimes you have to also understand that even
with bhootish people, I have to stoop down to conquer them, to bring them up. Do
not become like them. Try to elevate them rather than to go down to their level. And
if you can manage that, then you have achieved what you wanted to do through
your collectivity. And a person has to be collective. If he is not collective, then one
must know that there is something definitely wrong with that person....
What you have to do is to have a kind of self-directed discipline – self-directed,
not on others, self-directed.
“Do I meditate in the morning? I don't. So what's wrong with me? I'm supposed
to be a Sahaja Yogi." Nobody has to tell you. You yourself should do this to yourself.
You are fond of food? "All right, doesn't matter, I'll fast for two days." No fast-
ing is allowed in Sahaja Yoga, but fasting for detachment is all right. Not for God's
sake, for your sake you do it. "I like a particular type of cake. All right, I'll not have
it. I'll not have it for one year." But no, if people have to give up, then they will give
up something like rhubarb. So one should not be cunning about it. You should not
be cunning with yourself. So what you have to do is to see where does this mind
go.
What is the attraction...?
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 So a tapah is to be established within yourself, self-discipline. Now those who
talk too much should stop talking.... If our tongue talks too much, then we had bet-
ter keep quiet. If we do not talk, we better talk. We should teach ourselves how to
talk. Now
and talk to the sea. Go and talk to some tree. Go and talk to someone
go
like that. Or best is to talk to Me, to My photograph. So that is how you achieve a
kind of a control over your tongue, to talk sweetly. Some people have to go through
penance for that. For them, to talk sweetly is like taking rhubarb again. They just
cannot talk sweetly, just can't – sarcasm. You see in that sarcasm, they have a special
pleasure.
Try to say something sweetly. You can be humourous without being sarcastic.
Humour is the best way. What is the need to be sarcastic? There is no need at all. It
is a sign of cowardliness, sarcasm. It is a sign that you want to hurt others, but
you
are not straightforward. So try to avoid sarcastic talking. If you are sarcastic, better
tell your tongue to behave itself. So a little disciplining towards yourself, punishment
what you call or the tapah, the penance, has to work out.
Let the dynamism work out
People have so many ways of seeing things. Some men want to see women all the
time. Some women want to see men all the time or clothes or anything. Now the dif-
ference is that when you see something, it reacts. The difference between My looking
at anything is that that reacts. When I look at you, your Kundalini reacts. When I
look at this, it gets vibrated. Every eye, every glance makes the thing react. And ni-
reekshana means, “I know what it is, I know what it is." Just looking at a person I
know what it is. Looking at a thing, I know what it is – nireekshana. And the whole
thing is in the memory....
Everything I see gets vibrated and also I note what is there and is all ready there
to be used at a proper time. But what do I do? What do I do? I do nothing. I do noth-
ing. I do not think. I do not plan. Everything that you do, I don't do.
So when you have that kind of a temperament, you will be amazed the amount
of dynamism that will work it out. You do not have to create a dynamo. It is inside
you. Let it work it out.... You become the truth.
So in every chakra, concentrate and use the chakra to detach yourself from the
particular quality of that chakra. Like now for example, the Nabhi Chakra does the
digestion. Now you do not worry what you should eat to digest. Just detach yourself
from there. With vibrations, if you just see and eat whatever is there, you will digest
and then you become the truth.
Truth that is love – that is God.
May God bless you all.
16
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 a serene person
They said, "You see, what happened is that
our husbands told us, 'If you really want to
see a lady who is absolutely, immaculately
feminine and very auspicious and very
כל כ
serene, then it is Mrs. Srivastava.
So they came to see Me. Imagine them.
The idea of serenity does not exist now for
women in the world, but these ladies came
to see Me. "Who is this serene lady who has
come...?" Very respectfully, they said, "How
did
you develop this serenity?"
I said, "I didn't develop. It was just
existing. I didn't do anything to look serene
or in
any way work it out. There is no
beauty parlour for that, but it is something
innate in Me. What did think it was –
you
serenity?"
She said, "No, no, all the men praised
about
that 'she is a person who is, even
you
in these horrible days, extremely serene."
19
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Once you are awakened in your essences,
your
We have to understand one thing: that the essence is within us.
For example, innocence is absolutely pure. Within us it is abso-
lutely pure. In its own form it is absolutely pure. But when it is
reflected through our medium, it gets spoiled. The way you are,
the way you express gets spoiled.
If you are a cunning person, the innocence cannot be manifested.
Your innocence, whatever God has placed within you, is com-
pletely darkened because you cannot reflect it back. There is no
manifestation of it.
Why it happens? If you are pure, if you are all right, the inno-
cence is all right. Then why is it not manifested through you?
Why this cunningness can stop that innocence or any other es-
know exist on different
sences that are within you, which
you
chakras. We must think about it, why it happens, that even af-
ter Realization we cannot properly manifest our innocence, our
form.
primordial powers which are within us in absolute
purest
Why? What happens within us?
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 you will be amazed to see the truth lie somewhere else and we are just fighting among ourselves.
SS
The trouble is with our attention. When you became human beings, you
were given full freedom to put your attention onto anything you wanted.
Say if you want, you can put your attention on to any subject. Say I receive a
telephone call. So I put My attention to it. Now I can go on identifying with
it, thinking about it. All My attention will be enveloped and I will not pay
attention to anything else that is happening. The attention is so mobile it has
no base, as if the whole thing, like a jelly, goes and gets attached to a thing...
you waste your attention on foolish, nonsensical things, what is go-
ing to happen? So this is how we put our attention onto absolutely useless
If
things, sometimes gone to very depraved things also. We may put our atten-
tion to anything that we think requires our attention. But do you have your
self-esteem? If we have, then where should be your attention? It should be on
yourself. Where is your Self now? It is God Almighty. It is a part of that great
primordial being. Your attention should be on that.
After Realization, your attention should be in your heart, on your spirit,
which is the part of God Almighty. If your attention is on your spirit, you
will
be amazed, how your attention will act. You see like a jelly which attached to
a point. It may little bit get disturbed. Again it will get settled down. Again
it will get a little bit disturbed. It will settle down. It will not hang onto any
point and will not bother you.
So to put all your essences properly, first of all, put your attention to your
heart and to your spirit because that is your absolute point which
have
you
discovered.
23 June 1980 London
21
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 BE STE ADY
I
Seeker: Respected Mataji, please give me the knowledge and show me more clearly the
are the dos and don'ts for Sahaja Yoga?
What
way...
Don'ts and dos – first and foremost things are that a Sahaja Yogi cannot smoke or
drink. One absolutely, one hundred percent sure, because if you drink or smoke
after some time either you will lose your vibrations or you will start vomiting. You cannot
smoke. If you smoke, your Vishuddhi will be caught. If you
caught and whenever you will place your hand towards the photograph all the Nabhi chakra
will be burning absolutely. So
Many people have done it without any difficulty. They do not have any difficulty. They just
give up.
So this is one of the most important things that you have to gradually give up. Just take My
name. You can work it out. We have people here, they will tell you they were alcoholic, they
were taking drugs and they were doing all kinds of things. They have given up all that and now
they are absolutely normal people. First thing is that don't drink and don't smoke.
will find
you
drink your Nabhi chakra will be
"What is this happening?" And
will
you will give up.
you
say,
Secondly, do not fast. When Mother is there you are not to fast. Only fast on Naraka
Chaturdashi – that's all.... If you do not feel like eating, eat something else, but don't leave your
stomach empty. You can have some fruit juice or milk or whatever you like. These are certain
things about the food and the stomach – Nabhi chakra....
22
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-24.txt 
 You can be fully realized if you come together
22 March 1977 Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan Delhi
Keep your eyes steady and mostly on the Mother Earth. You see, you have heard
about Lakshmana. He never saw the face of Sitaji – never, never saw Her face. He only
saw Her feet. How can that be? He was always living with Her. He had never seen
Her face. He had just seen Her feet. So you can imagine what should be the position
and for fourteen years he had to lead a complete brahmacharya's life. She was like his
mother. He knew She was Adi Shakti, but he just saw Her Feet.
That should be our case.... We should lead a sanctified married life. Now
suppos-
ing somebody is married, then he should not run away with other women and the
other women should not run away with other men. And lead a sanctified life, create
a nest of family, a proper family house. Try to adopt, compromise, adjust, make your
wife realize or make your husband realize and bring peace in the family because there
are many great souls who want to take birth – many of them.... So you must try to get
a family life, a proper family, a proper relationship.
Do service to your parents, to your mothers. Do not find faults with your parents
and try to be kind to them. Also be kind to the wife's parents and try to be good in the
family. Try to bring more peace if they are difficult. I mean, it's all right.
Do not spoil the children also. Correct them. Make them loving. Make a nice
society.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Every one of you should be the carrier of the love of your Mother, everywhere. If you
are Sahaja Yogis and if you change and transform in your behaviour, naturally Sahaja Yoga will
have its own reputation and everybody will start taking to Sahaja Yoga...
You cannot earn any money from Sahaja Yoga. Do not have Sahaja Yogis for business
partnerships. No, they are Sahaja Yogis. Do not use Sahaja Yoga for making money....
You have to be generous people.
You have to be absolutely honest....
Be satisfied in your heart....
You have to lead a chaste life and you have to also see chaste things....
Your priorities will change. Your friends will change gradually. You will not like dirty jokes,
nothing. You will just change and you will run away from them. I have seen these foreigners.
Now they are telling Me that they just cannot stand all these things now. Once upon a time,
whatever they could tolerate and enjoy ... they just cannot stand it and bear it because now you
have become saintly. You have to be decent people....
Do not dabble into all these rumours and frivolous things. Do not waste your precious
life. You are Sahaja Yogis. Not a single moment is to be wasted on nonsensical things. Every
moment should be spent in having dignity for yourself, for others, for loving others...
Do not be misers at all. Miserly people are against Sahaja Yoga and if miserly people
come, I give them trouble. If you are miserly, you get lots of trouble. So you do not get miserly
I'm telling you.
And do not be too talkative and troublesome. I can stop your talking. And if you do not
talk at all, that is also not good.
That means do not go to the extremes of anything. These are certain things which
you
have to know.
Women should not dress up like men and men should not behave like women. All
these nonsenses you should not do. You should be yourself.... No need to wear funny dresses
go around and have your hair up to this much or try to show off. You see, all these are
mythical things. Be normal, natural people and lead a normal, natural, decent life and it's not
so important.
and
Food is not so important. Whatever you get, you get, you eat.
And do not talk too much of comfort and do not also sleep on the thorns – no, no, no.
But do not be absolutely a waster. Be in the centre. It is a very simple thing for Sahaja Yogis.
And you see with your vibrations if you have to take a decision. “Should I take this
house or not?" Take the vibrations. Anything you see, "What should I do? Should I have? Who
should I have as a prime minister?" Now, see for yourself whom do you want to have as prime
minister. See four people you put in – see the vibrations. Who has the best...? In a democracy
CC
24
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-26.txt 
 anybody can be brought in, but the one who is a good one is a Sahaja Yogi. He should be the
prime minister and you should ask. If the more people ask for it, he may be.
So decide everything with vibrations, for yourself, for collectiveness or anything. And the
most important is that you give it to others.
Sahaja Yoga does not work in your houses, families or in small little groups, but it
works ... when all of you are here – because I am here. It is a collective work. All of you are cells
of one body and the more cells that are awakened, the more the body is active.
So you have to come together, to be together. Love each other. Mix up with others. Do
not form groups – no. You should talk to each other very freely, whatever is your language,
nationality or whatever it is. And you should mix up with others.
It is not proper. It is a sense of insecurity that is expressed if you have a group....
should be no grouping done – no need. Be open. All of us are born of one Mother. We should
not feel insecure... Together is all right. We are all brothers and sisters.
There
friendly and kind and do not analyze others and criticize others. Better to
Be
very
criticize yourself than to analyze others.... We should watch ourselves and not others. Why
somebody is behaving like that, you just don't worry. How are you behaving yourself? Are you
all right? Are your vibrations all right? And that is how – with love, patience, understanding -I
am sure one day we all will feel the oneness, all of us, and we should help each other. If some-
body is sick we should help....
You should not sort of identify with yourself. You should identify yourself with the
eternal life that is within you and you are going to enjoy it very much.
So do not feel insecure. Do not have too many desires for something and
prised... If it works out, well and good – if it doesn't work out, well and good – because we are
there after all. And if the car gets punctured, all right, we are there after all. Even if the car is
not there, we are there. We are not lost.
you will be sur-
So do not think of the future, do not think of the past, but think of the present and
enjoy.
That is the message of Sahaja Yoga and perhaps I have covered most of the points for
people. And never try to criticize anyone – never, never, never. And be firm and know that you
have just now crossed, so many of you just crossed.
So be steady.... What is going to happen, let us see. Let us see. Be with that.
you
Suddenly, do not be bumptious about it and otherwise you will be rippled back again,
you see. So gradually grope the whole thing. When you have got the mastery over it, then grip
it. But if you are bumptious, anybody can push you down.... There are many like that. So be
careful. You see, everybody is trying to push you down.
In this world, there are satanic forces and you are very special chosen people. That is why
vibrations. There are so many people ... but how many have felt it? You are the
you have
got
very few who have felt it.
So be careful about it and meet together in this same number. All of you can be realized
fully if you come together and sit together. They say when Mataji is here, they are here...
Those eight or ten people who have been attending it regularly are the best and they are
also busy cleaning you.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-27.txt 
 I respect your
Free
At this time you had to have
Realization.
your
That was decided by the divine collectivity, you can call it. All the Gods, God-
desses, all of Them decided to put this work on somebody whom they thought
to be very capable. So They said, "We all will be with You, entirely with You, all
Our powers will be with You, but You take up this job now in this Kali Yuga to
transform human beings."
In a way, human beings are more difficult than animals because they have
their own freedom and they have been given this freedom to achieve their final
freedom. In their freedom, the way they behave is something very surprising, how
they go completely out of control and try to do things which are so destructive.
Of course, in Kali Yuga, it was predicted in India, but I think they could not pre-
dict what would happen in America or what would happen in the western coun-
tries where people have freedom just to destroy themselves and they are finding
new methods of destroying themselves.
This tendency cannot be curbed, cannot be stopped by Adi Shakti or by God
Almighty because you have been given the freedom to ruin yourselves, spoil your-
selves and to go to hell. That cannot be controlled by any divine power. The
divine power also respects your
freedom.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-28.txt 
 dom
So the divine collectivity thought, “Are We going to completely ruin the cre-
ation of Adi Shakti? Are We going to completely destroy whatever She has cre-
ated and then recreate something better?" This was the discussion going on. And
most of Them were so fed up with the human beings, especially with the western
freedom, that They said, "These people want help. And why should We give them
the Heavens? It's not proper.
CC
כי
So the first thing Adi Shakti did was to create a seeking in them. She created
it, this desire to seek. And so these people, belonging to this culture which was so
destructive, started seeking. And when the seeking started, also, as usual in the
market, there were many others who came forward to demand answers to their
seeking. They had to go to various cults and things and false people and all that
because they had no way to know. But if they had read some books of enlightened
people like Kabir, like Nanak, even the Gnostics, their scriptures, anything like
that, they would have understood what is the truth and where to find it and how
to find it.
It is a big struggle I find between the people who are seekers and those who are
not at all seekers. They do not want to know and they can never be seekers. I can
assure you that some of them will never think of seeking.
Shri Adi Shakti Puja 1994
27
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-29.txt 
 God has
freedom
given you
The other day in Rome, one journalist came and he felt. He said, "I've never expected this,
I'm fantastically good" and all that and "the vibrations I'm feeling, cool breeze I'm feeling."
And then he never appeared on the scene. And he said that "I'm enjoying my Self Realization."
It is very selfish, I think, just to enjoy for yourself. Imagine the light enjoying its own light
and giving no light to others. Why to give enlightenment to any such a selfish personality? He
will lose all his vibrations, I can assure you, and then he will come back to Me after one year and
say, “Mother, I've got a headache here and my foot is like this and I met with an accident....
God has no interest in such wasters. Do you repair the lights which are never going to give
light? God is the source of all the common sense and He is not going to do something to waste
CC
His energy on people who have no value for their own lives.
So I tell you again that you are important, a very important creation of God, as a human
being. And in His compassion and love, He has decided to give you this emancipation so that
you enter into the kingdom of God and reside with His bliss. You are the most important
among all the evolved things and the grace is absolutely openly flowing. You do not have to
confess anything. You do not have to feel guilty. You do not have to worry what you have done
before. You do not have to pay or jump or do any mental or physical exercise. It works out.
But the transition from working it out and developing into its full scale is a dangerous
place – like a bird which halfway comes out of the egg and still is sticking on to everything that
is dirty in the egg. Here, one has go to fearlessly, completely thrash out all that is misidentifica-
tion and spread the wings into this new freedom with complete confidence and understanding
that
Creator is the Almighty and that you are in His domain and that He loves
you.
your
God has given you freedom to decide. If you want to go to heaven, you can go. If you want
to go to hell, you can.
A man says that he does not believe in human freedom because we are not free to be born when we
want and to die when we want and to have accidents when we want.
А таn
I am talking of that freedom only. I believe in it and you can have it also.... I will give you an
example. There was a lady. This Algerian was told she was going to die in one week's time. The
doctors said. Everybody said. And she is not only living, but she is doing very well now. She is
with her children and everything.
Our president of India came to the London airport and they told that he was going to die.
They had prepared for his funeral and everything in India. And I met him at the airport. You
know that in ten minutes he got cured and he went there. He walked on. Everybody started
seeing whether he was coming or his ghost was walking down. It was like that. And he is still
there – still there.
All right, then about accidents ... so many accidents – one and a thousand and one. But
I will tell you one where the bus fell down with the Chhaya-pandit coming to see Me, about
eighty feet, double rumbling. And it stood on its four wheels and the driver ran away with fear,
but somebody knew how to drive and the key was in there. They started the thing and they
came out, and not one person was hurt.
Actually, even ifa Sahaja Yogi wants to die, he cannot die. He will be looked after by angels.
It is a fact. Tell him that. You see, all this could be stories to him, but all is a fact and
for yourself. If I say so, why not have it? It's all free.
He is honest because, at this point... what he says is true because he is not free. But I'm
talking of something that has to happen to you.
you see
2 May 1982 Lille France
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-30.txt 
 If you want to go to hell, I will give you a chariot..
If you want to go to heaven, I will give you an airplane.
I leave it to your freedom because I have always believed in the freedom of My children
because I think they are not that low type, that I should put freedom on them as a sort of a bar
that they should not use their freedom.
You are absolutely free. If you want to go to hell, I will give you a chariot to go direct. But
if you want to go to heaven, I will give you a vimana, an airplane to go there. So it is for you
people to become dynamic and to have confidence within you...
Freedom is different and abandonment is different. These are two things one must under-
stand. Say there is a kite in the hand. Then it is in your hand. But if allow the kite to
fly wherever it likes, it is abandonment. So the freedom is that in which you can manage to
maneuvre it, to man it, to take it the way you like. That is the freedom. Then you are free. But
if ... baselessly you are roaming about, then this is abandonment for which there is always a
punishment.... You see they just want to play games. It leads them nowhere. So this is not free-
dom. This is tomfoolery. It is making a fool of yourself. It is only your identification. Freedom
means freedom to ego, not to wisdom.
you
Guru Puja 1979
29
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-31.txt 
 I met Her Holiness Mataji in
April 1974. Before actually
meeting Her, I attended
She Life Eternal
one session of meditation in
November 1973. I got Her
to
photograph and practised at
home, as I was told in the
session. And lo! I
got what
I was longing for from the
photograph itself. The next
year when I meditated in the
presence of the Divine Mother.
I was overwhelmed with joy.
Inner peace came to me.
Her Holiness Mataji told
me that I was realized.
It was really very kind of Her
Holiness Mataji to have given
Realization to an ordinary
person like me. We are all
very
grateful to the Divine Mother
MATAJI SRI NIRMALA DEVI NAMO NAMAH
for giving us the sacred
knowledge of Sahaja Yoga,
making Kundalini awakening
Sahaja Yoga gives you a chance to be fully your meaning.
and raising as easy as child's
Take full advantage of it.
play. Ancient seekers had to go
to the Himalayas and jungles
Establish your attention in the Absolute
to learn this technique.
and achieve the Eternal Life in the Kingdom of God.
In these days of pseudo-gurus,
it is really very kind of the
This lies more in the capacities and subtleties of subtler people.
Divine Mother to have come
Later on the gross may follow.
amongst us. Her presence is a
The early Sahaja Yogis are the foundation of this empire of God.
great blessing to mankind.
R.D. Kulkarni
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-32.txt 
 The Joy of Life
Until the other day, I was wandering aimlessly me and put me onto the path of God Realiza- Our Story
In 1980 a small
as a beggar in the streets of life.
Thanks to Shri Mataji, I am hoping to ended after I become one of Shri Mataji's spir-
tion. My long search for God and a true Guru
journal was published
become a king of kings in the near future.
So long as your desires are not fulfilled and spiritual kingdom of God. I truly became a
they overwhelm you in endless succession, Brahmin, the devotee traveller on the path to
itual sons. I was reborn a second time, in the
by The Life Eternal
Trust. The fifty-six
supreme Brahma.
Without the grace of the Guru, God Real-
you are in essence a beggar. True joy and
manent happiness are possible only when all
your desires are fulfilled. There is one desire ization is impossible. The Guru only can
fulfillment in which all desires are fulfilled. sow the seed of Divinity in you. Unless
That is the desire for God. When the Divine nurture the seed into a tree by total devotion the lives of Sahaja
Grace falls into the kamandal of your heart, all and sadhana, you cannot reap the fruits of well as ads
pages included Shri
per- the
Mataji's words and
testimonials about
you
Yogis, as
desires are fulfilled, your sorrows of ages the Divine. Only as you advance in sadhana,
from manufacturers
are wiped out and you experience the eternal can you experience the great bliss and beauty
spring and joy of life.
Only that person is a king who is himself Mataji. Hence, please do not judge Mataji bearings. Weekly
full and in his fullness gives to others. Only a with your limited intellect, your ego your meetings were
of cables and ball
of Divinity within you and the greatness of
and
God-realized soul is the king of kings because limited spiritual experience. It will be almost
listed in Bombay,
he is in possession of infinite wealth and can like the seven blind men trying to find out
Delhi, Pune,
distribute that wealth to others. He is estab- about the elephant.
Mataji has opened the doorway to the king-
love and compassion for others. Only in that dom of God, which overflows with the trea-
state of divine love can you truly give to others. sures of eternal love, bliss, beauty and holiness.
Rahuri, Dhulia
lished in universal consciousness and is full of
and Switzerland.
"The Life Eternal"
My greatest fortune in life has been that I
came into contact with Mataji Nirmala Devi of the Divine Kingdom by being true disciples
who awakened the sleeping Divinity within of Mataji.
Let us all take
of these eternal treasures
part
is a chapter in
Gopal, New Delhi
Our Story.
This is the Era of Enlightenment.
One can see and feel the bubbling of new idioms in our creative world
of art, music and all that is beautiful and joy-giving.
Integration is the key note of this new regeneration of universal tones.
These tones are ripples of the harmonic, dynamic undercurrent
music of the Universal Divine Love.
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
31
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-34.txt 
 In My lifetime what is most important
is the raising of the Kundalini.
So I am not worried about other things.
That is My job, you see.
DIVINE COOL BREEZE volume 26 number 2
WORDS
CONTENTS PAGES: Diwali Puja 2002 Los Angeles
PAGE 2: Guru Puja 1993 Cabella Italy
PAGE 19: Diwali Puja 1999 Delphi Greece
THIS PAGE: 21 September 1981 New York
BACK COVER: 18 June 1983 Paris France
PHOTOS
COVER, CONTENTS PAGES and PAGE 3:
Mahakali Puja, Lonavala India, 19 December 1982
(Matthew Fogarty photographer)
PAGE 17: Vaiturna India circa 1982 (Matthew Fogarty)
PAGES 18 and 29: date and place unknown
PAGES 22-23: India, January 1982 (Matthew Fogarty)
PAGE 32: Daglio Italy 2007 (Calin Chiriou)
BACK COVER: Vancouver Canada
www.divinecoolbreeze.org
contact@divinecoolbreeze.org
editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
PRINTED BY
King Printing Company Inc.
Lowell Massachusetts USA and
Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd.
Pune Maharashtra India
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_II.pdf-page-35.txt 
 I want to talk about the Promised Land
the land where there is the rule of God Almighty,
where your Father is sitting with both His hands to receive you with love
and give you all His powers for which you should not say, “I'm not ready."
The only thing I cannot do is to create that earnest desire in
you.
