Yuva Gie Jun.2013

 INSIDE THIS ISSUE Questions by doctors to Shri Mataji ...4 विशुद्धि चक्र एवं गुण ...18

 Questions By Doctors To Shri Mataji 1 January 2000 Sinusitis Shri Mataji : So the ... which is very tough becomes loose, and the heat is absorbed. Doctor : Shri Mataji, would the onions as well, they need to be hot? Shri Mataji :[Yes, very hot.] As far as you can bear it. As far as you can bear it. It's a very simple thing. Usually, if you have sinus, don't travel. Doctor : [Shri Mataji, we made a list of questions to ask You, because sometimes some yogis ask us questions and we're not absolutely sure about them.] Shri Mataji : About diseases? Doctor : /Yes, Shri Mataji, about them.] Shri Mataji : Chemotherapy I'm against. There's no need. Is a wrong thing, chemotherapy. You see, they produce heat. You lose your hair. Such a lot of heat; and other complications will come with heat, that is. But Sahaja Yoga is a very simple method. You do use heat, in the sense, you use camphor and also this candles. But candles should be big, thick and should give light. But you don't put it inside the body. Doctor: So in general, for cancer, say, surgery or radiotherapy would be better than chemotherapy? Shri Mataji : Chemotherapy is absolutely dangerous. It goes from one to another – see, it is left- sided problem, so chemotherapy gives you heat. With the heat, for the time being, the left side

 improves. That's all. [But in reality it's something else.] But you can give heat from outside. Camphor is very heating. So camphor, you can have a havan, you can have camphor, you can have three-candle treatment. But then what they do, they take such a small little candle, you know – that's not the way. You must have a thick candle. Use a thick candle with a thick light, so the heat is given from outside. Even you can use ajwain. Now what is this? Doctor : Shri Mataji, this is radiotherapy, x-ray treatment. [Sometimes if there is cancer they treat it with x-ray, which is called radiotherapy.] Shri Mataji : [Nothing should go inside.] Maybe x-ray might help, but x-ray also penetrates inside the body. [It's useless.] Doctor : [Shri Mataji, this is regarding the various scans like CT scan, MRI scan. These are x-ray type scans. For example, if there is a problem or a disease in an organ, they scan it to see where the problem is. Shri Mataji, You've said about ultrasound that the pregnant women shouldn't do ultrasound scans, because the realised baby or foetus can be harmed by them.] Shri Mataji : /There is no harm in that because it's] outside. Ultrasound, you don't put it inside, do you? Doctor : No, it's just outside, but the sound waves go inside. Shri Mataji : Doesn't matter. That doesn't matter so much. But there's no need. Ultrasound is all right, but ultrasound doesn't have the heat. What you need is the heat. [It doesn't have heating. Okay, what's this epidural?] Doctor : Epidural, Shri Mataji ... [Hindi] Shri Mataji, when ladies are in labour, when they're having a baby, going through labour pains, then an epidural is inserted in your spine. A small plastic catheter - a pipe, a tiny tube – and then you put some drugs into it to numb your nerves, to ... Local anaesthetic. Shri Mataji :I mean, there were, I'll tell you three, four cases. One was a doctor also. And she came to Me, and she had a funny complication that her spine had contracted and there was a big, you can say, not a crack, but they said the protrusion on the inside. And she got a fright, she came to Me. So I gave her a bandhan, and I put My hand there. I told her, "You'll have a painless delivery." If such women, if they meditate, they'll have painless delivery. Four, five people had painless delivery, four, five, when they came to Me. She was very good-painless delivery. For example, this, My grand-daughter: she is, you know, tiny-winy, you know, and this child was about eight pounds, [and she's so small]. She had a painless delivery. So you can do that. If she meditates, you don't have to do all these nonsensical things; because you might spoil the spinal cord with that. It's very delicate ..., spinal cord. 6.

 OCP Doctor : Shri Mataji, that's the contraceptive pill, and for contraception and hormone replacement therapy. These are hormones which ladies take when their own hormones' levels start to down. go Like oestrogens, that they take after the menopause. The hormone replacement therapy is hormones that ladies take after menopause. Once their periods stop, once they reach... Shri Mataji : But what is their use? Doctor : It's to prevent osteoporosis, Shri Mataji. [Shri Mataji, after menopause, after the periods have stopped, the bones of women get weak. So doctors say that if they continue to take this hormone replacement therapy, then the bones will remain strong. The calcium in the bones is reduced after menopause, that's why they say this is good.] Мепораuse Shri Mataji : [There is no need to have menopause.] You see, I think Sahaja yogis won't have menopause; they won't have. Menopause comes out of imbalance within you. That's why it comes. If you are in balance you won't have a menopause. I never had. I mean, I know so many people who never had. Doctor : Menopausal problems, yes. They won't have any problems with the menopause, Shri Mataji? No problems? Shri Mataji : No problems. You can take calcium, soluble calcium you can take, during menopause. [That's the time to take it.] Doctor: [What about the contraceptive pill, Shri Mataji?] Shri Mataji : [That's not a good thing.] It's not very good. [There is no need to take this pill.] Doctor :[Shri Mataji, should women do any kind of contraception or not?] Shri Mataji :[They should do], but must be external. I'm against taking inside. Doctor : /Shri Mataji, this is about allergies. When people have eczema, is it a hot liver or a cold liver?] Shri Mataji : You see, all allergies are due to bad liver. All allergies are. Skin is looked after by the liver. That's the basic thing. Now when, you see, a child is born, if the mother is eating food or something which is bad for the liver, or when the child is born mostly they get jaundice, I've seen, at a young age. Because of the hospital perhaps, maybe, they catch. So such a person gets allergies. So you must treat the liver. By treating the liver, perfected it. Anand, you see, had some allergies – My grandson. So I told him, "Anand, put some ice on it." Finished- he has no allergies left. 99

 Hot Liver Doctor: So it's a hot liver, not lethargic liver? Shri Mataji : It's a hot liver. [It explodes.] Doctor : How do we know which one is cold and which one is lethargic? On vibrations. On vibrations you will know. See, there are symptoms connected with Shri Mataji : liver. Cold must be an enlarged liver, and hot is contracted. So for liver, best is to look after the one which is heated up, because it creates all the problems. If it is enlarged, also you can reduce it by eating something like chana... chana and all these things. Chana is, you see, all such things which can contract. But not which can enlarge it: like rice can enlarge, then carbohydrates, you see. Also what you have is milk ... Milk gives you heat. There's so many things like that which we take, can enlarge the ...(liver). For example... It is, we can say that people who eat too much of sugar: that can enlarge, because you give sugar for hot. Sugar we give for hot liver, as a treatment. But if somebody is eating too much of sugar, then it will enlarge; sugarcane juice too much. I mean, [if anything goes in imbalance, then it's not right.] And sweets that are like you find with Bengalis, they have an enlarged liver. Why? Because they eat sweets which are not fried but, you see, are made out of this protein thing with a lot of juices. [Like they have this chom chom and this and that.] These Bengali sweets if you eat, then you have an enlarged liver. Liver Enlarged Doctor : [So, Shri Mataji, when the liver is enlarged, is it lethargic? I mean, when we eat too many sweets?] Shri Mataji : [Yes, it's possible. It shouldn't be enlarged], it is out of function then. One is overly functioning, hot one, and this is out of function. I mean that also, imagine. [They'll get a big belly.] Doctor: [Shri Mataji, what are the symptoms ofalethargic liver?] Shri Mataji : [The person] will be lethargic by temperament. He doesn't think much. [He has problems walking.] He cannot walk properly, has a very big [belly]. [Can have gases.] Just the opposite of the liver when it is hot. [He doesn't have allergies.] For a person whose liver is enlarged, he never gets allergies, but he's lethargic by temperament. He sleeps a lot; it's left-sided. Rheumatoid Arthritis Doctor : /Shri Mataji, this is about auto-immune diseases: for example, like in rheumatoid arthritis, in which your own antibodies harm you, for example, in thejoints.] Shri Mataji : [I know arthritis. In arthritis, again heat with ajwain, and] it's also left-sided.

 Doctor :[Shri Mataji, we use hot ajwain?] Shri Mataji : [Yes, heat with hot ajwain. You can also use other heating things.] You can use candle treatment, or also you can correct your left side by putting the left hand towards the photograph and put the light, and right hand on the Mother Earth. This comes from the Mother Earth. /You can also do it by using the mantra for the Mother Earth.] Doctor:[Shri Mataji, why is it that your own antibodies harm you?] Shri Mataji : [No, no, what happens is you have low level of calcium, and with that your bones become like that.] There are two types of arthritis. [In one there is too much calcium, and in the other there is a deficiency of calcium.] There are two types of arthritis. [One is the one], we call it that – I don't know what disease, which pains a lot. Gout. Doctor: Gout? Osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis. Shri Mataji : Yes, one pains. There's a terrible pain all the time, on legs and on knees and all that. And another one you get crippled. So these are due to the low calcium, deficiency- the pain. Painful is due to calcium deficiency; and the other one that you have, which is due to too much of calcium. Doctor :[The one that cripples?] Shri Mataji : /Yes, the one that pains. In medical science there is no differentiation. You don't have the same treatment for all.] For example, for a person, say, who has pain, you should take phosphorus. Phosphorus – in My book I've written about phosphorus. Phosphorus gives you heat, [and with that heat] it improves. They can take phosphorus, if you have pain. Phosphorus will cure it. And the other one when you have, it is due to over-calcium. Doctor : Shri Mataji, in what form should we take phosphorus? In what form? In food, or phosphorus ... [In tablets or in fish or food?] Shri Mataji : In the blood. [It is in the genes. Phosphorus ...] I've written. Have you read that now, doctor? Doctor :I think so, Shri Mataji, yes. It's in Your book. Shri Mataji : Nobody has talked about it so far. But I've said it, that if there is phosphorus in your genes, then, and if you are a dry person, then it explodes and you get the heat. Doctor : What can you take, Mother, to give phosphorus? Shri Mataji : Phosphorus. Itself, phosphorus, you should. There are... Doctor: You can buy it? Shri Mataji : Yes, you can buy it. Phosphorus also in, we can say, in certain salts there is phosphorus. They also take seaweed; that has phosphorus. [But it gets cured just by meditating.] There was one lady who was so badly off, she could not even sit on the ground. Then I told her, you do your right- 9.

 side this thing, treatment. She's all right, she's walking, but if she sits on the ground I don't know. The another one is difficult. Autistic Children Doctor : [Shri Mataji, this is about autism, about autistic children.] Shri Mataji : [It's a badha. You have to do treatment for the badha]: lemons, this thing- chillies and all that. [It's caused by a badha.] They're normal otherwise, they're really normal, but they go into sort of epileptic. [Epileptic, they have a badha.] Doctor:[This is about ME, yuppie flu, Shri Mataji.] Shri Mataji : Yuppie disease – this is right-sided. You see, this is very common these days, because those who work very hard, also very proud of their work, and they want to behave like bureaucrats, and all that – that causes yuppie diseases. Mostly to bureaucrats; if not to bureaucrats, then also you can say, business. Top people of business, they get it. We have cured yuppies disease, we have cured. So what you have to do is to give them all the left side treatment – no, I mean, the right side for treatment, it will bring in left side in. Yes, also you must sit in the water with your right foot, put right hand towards the photograph, all right – without the light, and right foot. Also you can put ice here and the ice here. [Same as liver treatment.] Actually it's a liver problem. Doctor : [Shri Mataji, this is about phosphate, but You've already answered it. What about people with high levelof phosphate?] Shri Mataji : Anger. It explodes. Doctor: High levels of phosphate can lead to a very angry personality. Shri Mataji : And this is not the end of it. Ifyou're angry person, you get heart. Doctor:/ShriMataji, for women who can't have children, should they have in-vitro fertilisation or not?] Shri Mataji : [No, I mean] try Sahaja Yoga. [It can happen with Sahaja Yoga.] Inability to have children Doctor: The inability to have children ... Many Sahaja yoginis find difficulty to have babies. Shri Mataji : It's all right side. Mostly it is right-sided. But for example, ... , her mother had cancer and she was shocked, [so her] shock, that's left-sided. It can be too much of left side, or too much of right side. ... Right side also: overly educated, all the time working very hard – right side. Mostly right side. Also left side possible: for example you are possessed, something like that. Throughout Sahaja Yoga you must understand whether right-sided or left-sided. And we have very simple things to correct both the sides. 10

 Doctor :[Shri Mataji, what is the treatment for fibroids in the uterus?] Shri Mataji : [For that, son, there is a thing] – for anything of uterus, mostly it is a left-sided problem. Any growth in the body is left-sided problem. So what they do is to get a [vessel], they put charcoal in that, not too much – [in modern this thing, it's easy] – and put some, again ajwain. And you keep it inside the, say, if you have a WC or if you have a bidet, and sit on that. [Burn it.] Doctor : Burn it. Burn it. Jai Shri Mataji. Can I ask? [Shri Mataji, ... , who is our singer, when he sings very high, he gets pain in his head here and if he does this, down, he gets pain here.] Shri Mataji : /[He's caught a cold, son.] But another thing I'll tell you: sometimes you feel pressure in the brain, isn't it? And I've experimented Myself on that, so ... Now the, you must sneeze and your cold must go out; the cold has gone up to the head. This theory doesn't exist for you people, but this cold if it goes to the brain you become absolutely... [What do you call 'bhan bhan'?] Doctor : It's like blocked, the whole head is blocked, you know, like whole encased in something that's pressure. Shri Mataji : And you can't hear, you feel so disgusted, that's the thing. For that you must take out, you know, your cold. For that, you see, one thing I found out in Ayurveda is called "Shinkhani". Tell her to bring the Shinkhani – Alga, tell her. It's a small little bottle, costs you two rupees or three rupees. Should smell it: with that smelling, sneezing. You get a terrible sneezing, and you clear out. Very common in England. If you, as many people don't wear hats, they don't cover themselves, they catch cold. [And it goes to the head.] It's in the head. And outside you – lungs are all right, everything all right. The head is ...Very common, I've seen here that. Doctor : Will this clear back Agnya, Mother? Will it clear back Agnya heaviness? Shri Mataji : Back Agnya is again the same candle treatment, but also with this also you get back Agnya. Doctor : And this will clear it? Yes. Shri Mataji : There are two types of again, cold: one is from the liver, and one from real cold. So the one which is with the liver, you know that you have to treat with ice and all that. Because have you cold, you think "Why should we treat with ice?" but you have to. Doctor : But it's a fluid or powder? (It's a powder.) Shinkhani, powder– makes you sneeze. Shri Mataji is saying, he's got a head-cold. Asthma Shri Mataji : Asthma. Asthma is again due to liver. Also it is – supposing the husband is very dominating and he also has a bad liver; because he's dominating he's a bad liver, so it is added to that. 11

 Such a person gets a very bad asthma. Doctor :The woman. From the husband. Shri Mataji : Hot-tempered. Doctor: And, Shri Mataji, asthma in children–[is it due to the father?] Shri Mataji : [It's the same. Fix their liver.] Doctor :[Child's liver?] Shri Mataji :/Yes. Give sugar to the child. You know the treatment of liver: sugar,] vibrated water, all that. He'll be all right. It's very simple, it's very simple. Doctor : [Shri Mataji, You told us that eczema is due to the liver. Shri Mataji, what is the reason for the peritoneum drying out, and what are its symptoms?] Shri Mataji: [That's also liver, son.] Liver is the giver of heat. So if the –ofcourse, not the other one, but the one which is overactive. [It's due to that one.] Doctor : [Shri Mataji, what are its symptoms?] Shri Mataji : [In that] you just put ice, ice there. Put ice here, ice there, and it's very good. And cold- water bath which you can give. Doctor : For hot liver, drink vibrated water, and cold-water bath. [Shri Mataji, this is about fungal infections, especially women tend to get these.] Ajwain Treatment Shri Mataji: [Again] that is for this ajwain treatment. Doctor: Vaginal thrush- ajwain. Shri Mataji : Put it on the fire, some sort of a utensils or vessel, and put some charcoal in it, and then on that, ajwain, and put it in the WC. So it will come up, and you sit on WC. Doctor : In front of the WC? (No, no-over it. Over the bidet.) Shri Mataji :Then put it on bidet or on that. Hemorrhoids or piles Doctor : [Shri Mataji, what about hemorrhoids or piles?] Shri Mataji : Piles? I don't know, but [for piles] I'm making a medicine for them. It's made from aloe vera, you call it? From that. But, you see, piles – you'll be amazed, ... had very bad piles after the 12

 child's birth. So I was there, she told Me, and they were all worried because she was bleeding very much. And next time I went there, they said it's disappeared. Faith- faith is the solution. There's another, this ... from America. She had a funny disease where all kinds of things used to grow over her intestine, and this and that. [It was a strange disease.] So once it happened, she had removed all ofthem-I mean, they operated on and took out all of that. When she came to Cabella she had this problem, and she arranged with the doctor that "I'll see you'", this and that. She stayed in Cabella, and then she went to the doctor where the appointment was – it's all not there: you know, finished. Faith – faith is very important. It's all the divine play. These are all external, but divine play is very great. If the divine play takes place, you know- so many people who were dead came to life, in Sahaja Yoga. Here also, that ..., was dead and gone, and they told Me that she's finished. I went there – you see, that you may not be able to do, possibly you should – because the spirit is hanging around. If you can manage to locate the spirit, to bring it back and put it in the heart, it's all right. But I don't know if you people can manage that part. But the [faith comes.] Faith. Faith you have to have. she Onion Treatment for Hamsa. Hot onions [So what is this tics?] Doctor : [Shri Mataji, ... , who is my son, who is going to be ten years old, for a few months he does something like this with his eyes. This is called tics. Sometimes he does this, sometimes that and sometimes with his mouth. So what should we do for this?] Shri Mataji : [It's caused by the Hamsa Chakra.] Doctor : Hamsa Chakra, Shri Mataji? Onion treatment for Hamsa. Hot onions. Shri Mataji : [Hot onions.] Pregnant Ladies Doctor : [Shri Mataji, this is a question regarding pregnant ladies: should they go to public meetings or not?] Shri Mataji: [Ofcourse.]They need not work on people. Doctor :[Shri Mataji, if there is a doctor who is pregnant, should she work in a hospital or not?] Shri Mataji : [Yes.] They can work, no problem; but they should not, you see, sort of bend. [If they all meditate, then it's all right.] Every day in the night if you meditate and morning time before going, five minutes, nothing can happen to you, and you'll have a realised soul. 13

 [No camphor in pregnancy.] Camphor, ajwain – no. They're all heat-giving. They should not eat anything heat-giving, you see, like papaya – it's heat-giving. [Even fruits have their own tendencies.] Doctor : [Shri Mataji, is an ice pack all right in pregnancy?] Shri Mataji : /[Yes, a little bit is all right.] If she's thinking too much, it's better to put it here (on the ego) than on the ... Doctor : [Shri Mataji, should we opt for home delivery or hospital?] 14

 Shri Mataji : You see, [if the hospital is good, then have it in the hospital. And if you have someone knowledgeable in the house, you can have it in the house. But the hospital should be good. I mean, in the hospital] if the nurses are very harsh or not clean, [that can harm. It's better in the house, but there should be someone knowledgeable in the house.] If it's a Sahaja yogi, another doctor Sahaja yogi can help in the house and work it out. It'd be better, [because hospitals are not good.] If there's a good hospital – [I mean, in England they are good.] They're all right. Working environment? Doctor: [Shri Mataji, during pregnancy... / Shri Mataji : You get holidays, don't you? Doctor: Yes. Shri Mataji : You should take holiday. It's a good idea. And also you must walk. Walking is very important, because first you are active, then suddenly you'd be too inactive. So you should walk. Walking is good. Doctor : [Shri Mataji, this is a question that doctors, has asked regarding MS and these types of diseases.] Shri Mataji :[What is MS?] Multiple Sclerosis Doctor : Multiple sclerosis, Shri Mataji. [There is a deficiency in the fat around the nerves in MS.] Shri Mataji : [So what happens?] Doctor : [Can get paralysis, can also get problems with eyesight.] Multiple sclerosis, Shri Mataji. Shri Mataji : Multiple sclerosis. [It's muscular?] Doctor :[Shri Mataji, it affects the nerves. The fat around the nerves is finished.] Shri Mataji : I've cured, I know. I've cured multiple sclerosis. /The hands and legs become like this. They stumble.] Doctor : [Yes, Shri Mataji, they get weak.] 15

 When the Mooladhara gets a Badha Shri Mataji : One thing I've seen, very surprising: if one of the two, husband and wife, any one is possessed, the husband gets it if the wife is possessed; or if the husband is possessed the wife gets it. It's My observation. [When the Mooladhara gets a badha.] Doctor: [Shri Mataji, left or right Mooladhar?] Shri Mataji : [See, it's left, son.] You know, because if the husband is possessed, he's not all right, he's left-sided, so the wife gets it, not the husband. Very common. Whenever I ask them, how is your wife, or how is your husband ... It acts on Mooladhara, no doubt. /Its treatment is] you should treat the wife, or the husband, whosoever is that thing, [and they should do it too if they have the possession.] You can use chillies. This for possession, I mean. There are many diseases you get out of possession, many diseases, which doctors are not sort of aware of it. So many diseases you get. Itself is a disease, you see: to be possessed is a disease. But sometimes what they have, they get a bulge here out, the skin bulges out like that – then there's a possession. It's one of the signs. [All around the Agnya] you get bulges like that – one of the symptoms. In possession as you, if it is very extreme case, then you can make it out that it's possession, you see: that they start shaking before My photograph and shouting, screaming, all that. That's a possession. Also, person who has possession, you see, is, he's dull otherwise, but otherwise aggressive. For doing any work or anything he's dull, but can be aggressive. They are mostly overly aggressive on sexual this thing, mostly, and also they are wayward. They are fond of many women and this and that. On this I can give a big lecture. They had roving eyes – even slight possession can do that – very fond of women, and can create problems. But it's the Mooladhara. The problem is Mooladhar. You'd be amazed, Mooladhara is such a great thing that it supports your nervous system, also supports your muscular system. But they have been cured. Multiple sclerosis has been cured in Sahaja Yoga. So you must do worship of Ganesha. Also you can use [the smoke from ajwain]: like how you use it for cold, you can use it for that. These days it's very common for human beings to be like that, you see, wayward and all that, because the whole atmosphere is like that. It's a– they're talking about it all the time. You can call multiple – that's why it's called multiple sclerosis! But the trouble is, the one who is possessed doesn't suffer: whosoever is married to a possessed person gets it. It's a Mooladhar. AIDS is Mooladhar. [Mooladhara has countless problems.] So Mooladhara must be kept very much safe and honoured. The marriage is a sanctity, and one should live with that sanctity. But you know, even women have so many diseases. If they go round with other women and all that, they can catch. [All these other diseases that people know about], they all come from these bad women. [The diseases caused by Mooladhara], all of them come from bad women. So the whole culture is so bad that we're in for trouble. For example, the men want to have always a younger woman, so one is discarded, second discarded, like that it goes on. All right. 16

 Mooladhara is the most important chakra in our being. It supports us throughout. And in this one I feel sorry that the women suffer. [Multiple sclerosis comes to women from men, and to men from women, if they go to prostitutes.] And this roving eyes also: that's gives you Agnya. People mesmerise with that. They think it's a power. Very dangerous. And it's going on, I mean, in the society, specially in the so-called elegant and educated society. They like parties, to go ... and flirt. Very dangerous for the eyes. And you know these viruses, this so-called, they're nothing but bhoots, and they enter into you by so and so many sources. The whole attention has gone to something else. Instead of having self-respect shamelessness. I have seen My great-grandson, so small as that, he has such a sense of shame that if they remove the diaper he'd say, "Put the towel on me." [What a sense of shame.] And there were some girls swimming in the competition. He said, "Put towels, towels on them." "Lajja rupene samsthita" – the mantra is this - “Ya Devi sarva bhuteshu lajja rupene samsthita." Shamelessness is not the way. But some people are shameful, but they're secretive. They get all this, but their wives suffer the .... One has to be a Sahaja yogi, I tell you, to lead a proper healthy life. And avoid hospitals and doctors as far as possible, because they don't understand some things. They go to extremes of everything. So you must tell people to control their temper. See, if you get temper, then you can take a pillow, hit it hard, take out. Do something. But for temper is, I think best is to take the right-sided thing, best. To be patient. See, this is a, liver is a horrible thing. [That's why it's called liver], because you live with the liver. Shri Mataji : [Look, "Eka hi akshar prem ka, pade to pandit hoye."]- "One word of love, one who can read that becomes the scholar." My great-grandson, this grandson, great-grandson of Mine, he had that emotion, you see. So anybody would come, he'll try to give them something to eat, something of their interest. All the time he's thinking how to make friendship. That is the thing here. Then your love starts growing. So nice to be friendly. But what to do? Human beings are human beings. With meditation your loving power grows, your compassion grows. 17

 विशुद्धि चक्र एवं गुण ४० म

 पाँचवाँ चक्र विशुद्धि चक्र के नाम से जाना जाता है। मनुष्य की गर्दन में इसकी रचना है, इसमें सोलह पंखुड़ियाँ होती है जो कान, नाक, गला जिव्हा तथा दाँतो आदि की देखभाल करती है । दूसरों से सम्पर्क स्थापित करने का दायित्व भी इसी चक्र का है क्योंकि अपनी आँखें, नाक, कान, वाणी तथा हाथों के द्वारा हम दूसरों से सम्पर्क करते हैं। शारीरिक स्तर पर यह चक्र ग्रीवा केन्द्र के लिये कार्य करता है। सहजयोग मनुष्य में शुरू से ही श्री कृष्ण शक्ति स्थित है। जिस समय जीव से मनुष्य की उत्क्रान्ति हयी उस समय उनकी गर्दन ऊँची उठ गयी। ये कार्य मनुष्य की गर्दन में स्थित विशुद्धि चक्र के कारण हुआ।...... यह चक्र जिस जगह आपके गर्दन में स्थित है, उस जगह से आपकी आपकी गर्दन ऊँची उठी है । यह कार्य विशुद्धि चक्र की श्रीकृष्ण शक्ति जाग्रत होने से हो सका । इससे आपकी उत्क्रान्ति में परिपूर्णता आयी, यह कहा जाएगा। | श्रीकृष्ण शक्ति के दो अंग हैं, एक विशुद्धि के दायें और बायीं ओर और एक बीचोबीच में। इसमें जो शक्ति बीच में है वह विराट की ओर ले जाती है। बायीं ओर की शक्ति के मन को कोई गलती या झूठे काम करने के बाद बनने वाली भावनाओं से १ .. मनुष्य खराब होती है। जिस समय मनुष्य को लगता है कि मैंने बहुत पाप किया है और गलती की है तब उसका विशुद्धि चक्र | बायीं तरफ खराब हो जाता है। मनुष्य की यही पाप या गलती की धारणा उससे उसे दूर भगाने के लिये नशीली वस्तुओं के पास ले जाती है। सिगरेट या बीड़ी पीना, सुरति (तम्बाकू) खाना श्रीकृष्ण शक्ति के विरोध में है । विशुद्धि चक्र के बायें में श्री विष्णुमाया की शक्ति स्थित है। ये शक्ति बहन की है, श्रीकृष्ण की बहन की। श्रीकृष्ण की जो बहन मरते समय आकाश में उड़ गयी और जिसने आकाशवाणी की वही ये विष्णुमाया शक्ति हैं। जिस व्यक्ति की बहन बीमार होगी उसके विशुद्धि चक्र पर बाईं ओर बोझ महसूस होगा। अगर किसी मनुष्य की नज़र अपनी बहन के प्रति या अन्य महिलाओं के प्रति ठीक या पवित्र नहीं होती तो यह चक्र तुरन्त खराब हो जाता है। अपवित्रता के बर्ताव से विशुदि चक्र के बाईं तरफ तकलीफ होती है। ......ये आँखे इधर-उधर घुमाना भी श्री कृष्ण शक्ति के विरोध में है कमज़ोर होती है। .......इन आँखों में घुमाने से आँखों की बीमारी फैलती है, नज़र २ . ... दायीं ओर श्रीकृष्ण और श्री राधा की शक्ति से बना है (श्री रुक्मिणी- विठल) इस शक्ति के विरोध में जब मनुष्य जाता है तब कहता है मैं बहुत बड़ा आदमी हूँ .....मैं ही सब कुछ हूँ ....ऐसी वृत्ति में उस मनुष्य में कंस रूपी अहंकार बढ़ता है ...... उसे लगता है कि किसी भी प्रकार मुझे सभी लोगों पर अपना अधिकार जमाना चाहिये ......उसे दायीं तरफ की विशुद्धि चक्र की पकड़ होती है। प.पू.श्री माताजी, मुंबई, २५.९.१९७९ 19

 अब जिनकी आदत बहत ज्यादा चिल्लाने की, चीखने की, दूसरों को अपने शब्दों में रखने की ..... और अपने शब्दों से दूसरों को दुःख देने की, आदत होती है, उसकी राइट विशुद्धि पकड़ी जाती है और उससे अनेक रोग उसे हो जाते हैं। ... .राइट साइड पकड़ने से स्पान्डिलायटिस होता है ....दुनिया भर की दूसरी बीमारी हो सकती है जैसे लकवा और दिल का दौरा, हाथ उसका जकड़ जाता है। .....इससे जुकाम-सर्दी होती है, इतना ही नहीं जिसे हम कहते है अस्थमा, उसका प्रादुर्भाव हो सकता है। जो आदमी अपने को बड़ा विद्वान समझते हैं उनकी तो ये हालत हो सकती है कि वे इतने अति विद्वान हो जाते हैं कि उनकी अपनी ही बुद्धि वही आपको चलाने लगती है, आपके खिलाफ चलती है। ....... इससे आदमी तो वो कोई भी काम करते हैं हठात्, पर लेकिन आप अगर कहें अब आप पैर हटाइये तो नहीं हो सकता क्योंकि हठात, उनकी खुद की बुद्धि ही परास्त हो गयी है। प.पू.श्री माताजी, १६.३.१९८४ विशुद्धि चक्र खराब होने से मेंदू के दोनों ओर संवेदना ले जाने वाली नाड़ियाँ खराब होती है (इनकी संवेदन क्षमता कम हो जाती है) प.पू.श्री माताजी, २५.९.१९७९ जैसे-जैसे विशुद्धि चक्र जाग्रत होता है वैसे-वैसे संवेदन क्षमता में वृद्धि होती है। विशुद्धि चक्र जाग्रत करने के कुछ मंत्र हैं - अपने अंगूठे की बगल वाली उंगलियाँ दोनों कान में डालकर गर्दन पीछे करके और नज़र आकाश की ओर रखकर ज़ोर से व आदर से सोलह बार 'अल्लाह हो अकबर' मंत्र कहने से विशुद्धि चक्र साफ होता है। तब आपको जानना होगा अकबर माने विराट पुरुष परमेश्वर है। प.पू.श्री माताजी, २५.९.१९७९ आप सब अपनी बाईं विशुद्धि पर नियंत्रण कर मृद्ल वाणी द्वारा मंजुल शब्दों का प्रयोग करें, आपकी भाषा प्रत्येक व्यक्ति के लिये मृद् होनी अनिवार्य है। यह मधुरता आपकी बाईं विशुद्धि को शुद्ध कर देगी। मृदुल प्रक्रिया से संबोधन ही अपनी अपराध भावना को सुधारने का सर्वश्रेष्ठ मार्ग है। प.पू.श्री माताजी, राहुरी, २१.१२.१९८०, निर्मला योग, १९८५ .....व्यक्ति गिल्टी महसूस करता है, इसलिये सहजयोग में इसका जब लेफ्ट विशुद्धि खराब हो जाती है, मंत्र है I am not guilty और हिन्दी में कहते हैं 'माँ हमने कोई गलती नहीं की जो तुम माफ न करो।' ... जिसका विशुद्धि चक्र ठीक होगा उसका मुखड़ा ठीक होगा, सुंदर होगा, उसकी आँखे तेजस्वी होगी, नाक- नक्श तेजस्वी होंगे । प.पू.श्री माताजी, दिल्ली, १६.२.१९८१ ३. ... मध्य विशुद्धि चक्र के बीचो बीच जो शक्ति है वह विराट की शक्ति है। इस शक्ति से मनुष्य परमेश्वर की 20

 खोज में रहता है।.....अपने 'स्व' को पहचानिये। अपने 'स्व' को पहचानने से ही मनुष्य अपनी सुबुद्धि पाता है। जब तक दुर्बुद्धि है उसकी विशुद्धि जाग्रत नहीं होती। प.पू.श्री माताजी, मुम्बई, २५.७.१९७९ जो बीच में श्रीकृष्ण हैं उनके लिये सारी सृष्टि एक लीला है, उनके लिये यह लीला है, और जब सहजयोग में पार हो जाते हैं तब उनके लिये भी सारी सृष्टि जो दिखायी देती है, वो एक साक्षी है, उसकी ओर वे साक्षी के स्वरूप से देखते हैं। वो जो कुछ भी पहले उनको हरेक चीज़ से लगाव था, वो छूट करके वो देखता है, अरे! यह सब तो एक नाटक था। प.पू.श्री माताजी, दिल्ली, १६.३.१९८४ अन्तर्जात गुण १. सामूहिक चेतना-सामूहिकता- संतुलन - जब मनुष्य अपने विशुद्धि चक्र में जाग्रत होता है तब उसे सुबुद्धि आती है व संतुलन आता है। आपकी सामूहिक चेतना जाग्रत होती है, आप अपने तरफ अंतर्मुख होकर देख सकते हैं व आपकी दृष्टि परम् की ओर मुड़ती है। ......आप औरों की भावनायें, संवेदना वे सब अपने आप में जान सकते हैं। प.पू.श्री माताजी, २५.७.१९७९ सामूहिकता मतलब हमेशा आपको उस परमेश्वरी शक्ति के साथ सामूहिक चेतना में जुड़े रहना, विशुद्धि चक्र की जाग्रति के बाद यह अवस्था मिलती है। प.पू.श्री माताजी, निर्मला योग १९८४ सामूहिक होना गहनता प्राप्त करने का एकमात्र उपाय है। जो व्यक्ति सामूहिकता के साथ कार्य करता है और सामूहिकता में रहता है, उसमें नयी प्रकार की शक्तियाँ जाग्रत हो जाती हैं। प.पू.श्री माताजी, गुरुपूजा, कबैला, १९९७ श्रीकृष्ण की सुमत्ता, २. माधुर्य-मिठास-नम्रता आनी चाहिये । उनकी मधुरता, उनकी मोहकता, वो हमारे जीवन में प.पू.श्री माताजी, १६.३.१९८४ आवाज़ में मिठास होनी चाहिये, उसमें माधुर्य होना चाहिये, उसमें एक मोहित करने की शक्ति होनी चाहिये, जिससे मनुष्यों को लगे कि जो बोल रहे हैं, इसमें खिंचाव है। प.पू.श्री माताजी, दिल्ली, ७.५.१९८३ आपको विनम्र होना है, यही आपकी सज्जा है और यही गुण। 21

 स्वयं को कभी विशेष न समझें और न ही श्रेष्ठ माने। स्वयं को यदि आप श्रेष्ठ मानते हैं तो आप पूर्ण के अंग- प्रत्यंग नहीं रहते .... ..सबसे महत्वपूर्ण चीज़ जो है वो है विनम्रता । प.पू.श्री माताजी, कबैला, ७.५.२००० ३. व्यवहार कुशलता - व्यवहार में पूरे हृदय से दोस्ती करो, कोई कार्य हो तो पूरे हदय से करो। उपरी -उपरी नहीं, अन्दरूनी रखो। एक छोटा सा फूल भी यदि कोई शुद्ध हृदय से दे तो उसका बहुत असर हो सकता है। जो भी आपको कहना है हृदय से हो। गहराई में जब आप विशुद्धि को प्राप्त करेंगे तब आपका जनहित, जन सम्बन्ध और विश्व बंधुत्व है, उससे पहले नहीं। प.पू.श्री माताजी, दिल्ली, २८.२.१९९१ ......तो हमारे विशुद्धि चक्र में बसे हुए श्रीकृष्ण जो हैं इनको आपको जाग्रत करना पड़ेगा। जब तक ये जाग्रत नहीं होंगे तब तक आपको विशुद्धि चक्र की तकलीफ रहेगी। प.पू.श्री माताजी, दिल्ली, १६.३.१९८४ ४. साक्षी अवस्था - हमारे लिये यह समझना अत्यन्त महत्वपूर्ण है कि हमारी विशुद्धि साफ होनी चाहिये । सर्वप्रथम हमारा हृदय सुंदर और स्वच्छ होना चाहिये जहाँ से श्री कृष्ण के मधुर संगीत की सुगंध आती हो । अपनी विशुद्धि को सुधारें। विराट को देखते हुए अपनी त्रुटियों का पता लगाओ और इन्हें सुधारो क्योंकि आपके अतिरिक्त कोई अन्य इन्हें नहीं सुधार सकता। देखो कि तुम्हें पूर्ण ज्ञान है। एक अच्छी विशुद्धि के बिना आप यह ज्ञान नहीं पा सकते क्योंकि विशुद्धि पर आकर आप साक्षी बनते हैं। यदि आपने साक्षी अवस्था प्राप्त कर ली है तो आप अपनी त्रुटियों, समस्याओं तथा वातावरण की कमियों को जान सकेंगे। श्रीकृष्ण की पूजा करते समय हमें यह जानना है कि अंत में वे बुद्धि तत्व बन जाते हैं। पेट की चर्बी सूक्ष्म रूप में बुद्धि को पहुँचती है तथा श्री नारायण बुद्धि में प्रवेश कर 'विराट' रूप हो जाते हैं और अकबर बन जाते हैं और जब वे अकबर बन जाते हैं तभी पदार्थ के अन्दर बुद्धि (ज्ञान) बन जाते हैं। यही कारण है कि श्री कृष्ण को पूजने वाले लोग अहंकार रहित बुद्धिमान बन जाते हैं। उनकी बुद्धि विकसित होती है परन्तु यह अहं ग्रासित नहीं होती। बिना अहं की बुद्धि जिसे मैं शुद्ध बुद्धि कहती हैूँ, प्रकट होने लगती है। प.पू.श्री माताजी, १४.८.१९८९, चैतन्य लहरी जुलाई-अगस्त, २००८ एक बार सहस्रार खुल जाने के बाद आपको वापिस अपनी विशुद्धि चक्र पर आना पड़ता है, अर्थात् अप सामूहिकता के स्तर पर। विशुद्धि चक्र यदि ज्योतिर्मय नहीं हो तो आप चैतन्य लहरी महसूस नहीं कर सकते। प.पू.श्री माताजी 22

 To understand sahajayoga we should know where are we today in this kaliyuga. What are we found today? It should really make you feel quite disturbed to see the way things are going on in every country, every where. What's the problem? What is the, such a need for people to become so restless full of tensions. 20/03/1998 Published & Printed by Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. No. 8, Chandragupta Co-op Housing Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune, Maharashtra, India - 411 038. © : 25286537, 25286032 email:sale@nitl.co.in website: www.nitl.co.in (For queries & sending articles contact on above address)

 Humble person means the person who doesn't have ego. So to burn offego festival called Holi. and to burn offour conditioning we had this 25.10.1987



----------------------

2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 Yuva Gie
Jun.2013
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 INSIDE
THIS ISSUE
Questions by doctors to Shri Mataji ...4
विशुद्धि चक्र एवं गुण ...18
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Questions By Doctors
To
Shri Mataji
1 January 2000
Sinusitis
Shri Mataji : So the ... which is very tough becomes loose, and the heat is absorbed.
Doctor : Shri Mataji, would the onions as well, they need to be hot?
Shri Mataji :[Yes, very hot.] As far as you can bear it. As far as you can bear it. It's a very simple
thing. Usually, if you have sinus, don't travel.
Doctor : [Shri Mataji, we made a list of questions to ask You, because sometimes some yogis ask us
questions and we're not absolutely sure about them.]
Shri Mataji : About diseases?
Doctor : /Yes, Shri Mataji, about them.]
Shri Mataji : Chemotherapy I'm against. There's no need. Is a wrong thing, chemotherapy. You see,
they produce heat. You lose your hair. Such a lot of heat; and other complications will come with
heat, that is. But Sahaja Yoga is a very simple method. You do use heat, in the sense, you use camphor
and also this candles. But candles should be big, thick and should give light. But you don't put it
inside the body.
Doctor: So in general, for cancer, say, surgery or radiotherapy would be better than chemotherapy?
Shri Mataji : Chemotherapy is absolutely dangerous. It goes from one to another – see, it is left-
sided problem, so chemotherapy gives you heat. With the heat, for the time being, the left side
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 improves. That's all. [But in reality it's something else.] But you can give heat from outside.
Camphor is very heating. So camphor, you can have a havan, you can have camphor, you can have
three-candle treatment. But then what they do, they take such a small little candle, you know – that's
not the way. You must have a thick candle. Use a thick candle with a thick light, so the heat is given
from outside. Even you can use ajwain. Now what is this?
Doctor : Shri Mataji, this is radiotherapy, x-ray treatment. [Sometimes if there is cancer they treat it
with x-ray, which is called radiotherapy.]
Shri Mataji : [Nothing should go inside.] Maybe x-ray might help, but x-ray also penetrates inside
the body. [It's useless.]
Doctor : [Shri Mataji, this is regarding the various scans like CT scan, MRI scan. These are x-ray
type scans. For example, if there is a problem or a disease in an organ, they scan it to see where the
problem is. Shri Mataji, You've said about ultrasound that the pregnant women shouldn't do
ultrasound scans, because the realised baby or foetus can be harmed by them.]
Shri Mataji : /There is no harm in that because it's] outside. Ultrasound, you don't put it inside, do
you?
Doctor : No, it's just outside, but the sound waves go inside.
Shri Mataji : Doesn't matter. That doesn't matter so much. But there's no need. Ultrasound is all
right, but ultrasound doesn't have the heat. What you need is the heat. [It doesn't have heating.
Okay, what's this epidural?]
Doctor : Epidural, Shri Mataji ... [Hindi] Shri Mataji, when ladies are in labour, when they're having
a baby, going through labour pains, then an epidural is inserted in your spine. A small plastic catheter
- a pipe, a tiny tube – and then you put some drugs into it to numb your nerves, to ... Local
anaesthetic.
Shri Mataji :I mean, there were, I'll tell you three, four cases. One was a doctor also. And she came
to Me, and she had a funny complication that her spine had contracted and there was a big, you can
say, not a crack, but they said the protrusion on the inside. And she got a fright, she came to Me. So I
gave her a bandhan, and I put My hand there. I told her, "You'll have a painless delivery." If such
women, if they meditate, they'll have painless delivery. Four, five people had painless delivery, four,
five, when they came to Me. She was very good-painless delivery.
For example, this, My grand-daughter: she is, you know, tiny-winy, you know, and this child
was about eight pounds, [and she's so small]. She had a painless delivery. So you can do that. If she
meditates, you don't have to do all these nonsensical things; because you might spoil the spinal cord
with that. It's very delicate ..., spinal cord.
6.
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 OCP
Doctor : Shri Mataji, that's the contraceptive pill, and for contraception and hormone replacement
therapy. These are hormones which ladies take when their own hormones' levels start to
down.
go
Like oestrogens, that they take after the menopause. The hormone replacement therapy is hormones
that ladies take after menopause. Once their periods stop, once they reach...
Shri Mataji : But what is their use?
Doctor : It's to prevent osteoporosis, Shri Mataji. [Shri Mataji, after menopause, after the periods
have stopped, the bones of women get weak. So doctors say that if they continue to take this hormone
replacement therapy, then the bones will remain strong. The calcium in the bones is reduced after
menopause, that's why they say this is good.]
Мепораuse
Shri Mataji : [There is no need to have menopause.] You see, I think Sahaja yogis won't have
menopause; they won't have. Menopause comes out of imbalance within you. That's why it comes. If
you are in balance you won't have a menopause. I never had. I mean, I know so many people who
never had.
Doctor : Menopausal problems, yes. They won't have any problems with the menopause, Shri
Mataji? No problems?
Shri Mataji : No problems. You can take calcium, soluble calcium you can take, during menopause.
[That's the time to take it.]
Doctor: [What about the contraceptive pill, Shri Mataji?]
Shri Mataji : [That's not a good thing.] It's not very good. [There is no need to take this pill.]
Doctor :[Shri Mataji, should women do any kind of contraception or not?]
Shri Mataji :[They should do], but must be external. I'm against taking inside.
Doctor : /Shri Mataji, this is about allergies. When people have eczema, is it a hot liver or a cold
liver?]
Shri Mataji : You see, all allergies are due to bad liver. All allergies are. Skin is looked after by the
liver. That's the basic thing. Now when, you see, a child is born, if the mother is eating food or
something which is bad for the liver, or when the child is born mostly they get jaundice, I've seen, at a
young age. Because of the hospital perhaps, maybe, they catch. So such a person gets allergies. So
you must treat the liver. By treating the liver, perfected it. Anand, you see, had some allergies – My
grandson. So I told him, "Anand, put some ice on it." Finished- he has no allergies left.
99
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Hot Liver
Doctor: So it's a hot liver, not lethargic liver?
Shri Mataji : It's a hot liver. [It explodes.]
Doctor : How do we know which one is cold and which one is lethargic?
On vibrations. On vibrations you will know. See, there are symptoms connected with
Shri Mataji :
liver. Cold must be an enlarged liver, and hot is contracted. So for liver, best is to look after the one
which is heated up, because it creates all the problems. If it is enlarged, also you can reduce it by
eating something like chana... chana and all these things. Chana is, you see, all such things which
can contract. But not which can enlarge it: like rice can enlarge, then carbohydrates, you see. Also
what you have is milk ... Milk gives you heat. There's so many things like that which we take, can
enlarge the ...(liver). For example... It is, we can say that people who eat too much of sugar: that can
enlarge, because you give sugar for hot. Sugar we give for hot liver, as a treatment. But if somebody
is eating too much of sugar, then it will enlarge; sugarcane juice too much. I mean, [if anything goes
in imbalance, then it's not right.] And sweets that are like you find with Bengalis, they have an
enlarged liver. Why? Because they eat sweets which are not fried but, you see, are made out of this
protein thing with a lot of juices. [Like they have this chom chom and this and that.] These Bengali
sweets if you eat, then you have an enlarged liver.
Liver Enlarged
Doctor : [So, Shri Mataji, when the liver is enlarged, is it lethargic? I mean, when we eat too many
sweets?]
Shri Mataji : [Yes, it's possible. It shouldn't be enlarged], it is out of function then. One is overly
functioning, hot one, and this is out of function. I mean that also, imagine. [They'll get a big belly.]
Doctor: [Shri Mataji, what are the symptoms ofalethargic liver?]
Shri Mataji : [The person] will be lethargic by temperament. He doesn't think much. [He has
problems walking.] He cannot walk properly, has a very big [belly]. [Can have gases.] Just the
opposite of the liver when it is hot. [He doesn't have allergies.] For a person whose liver is enlarged,
he never gets allergies, but he's lethargic by temperament. He sleeps a lot; it's left-sided.
Rheumatoid Arthritis
Doctor : /Shri Mataji, this is about auto-immune diseases: for example, like in rheumatoid arthritis,
in which your own antibodies harm you, for example, in thejoints.]
Shri Mataji : [I know arthritis. In arthritis, again heat with ajwain, and] it's also left-sided.
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Doctor :[Shri Mataji, we use hot ajwain?]
Shri Mataji : [Yes, heat with hot ajwain. You can also use other heating things.] You can use candle
treatment, or also you can correct your left side by putting the left hand towards the photograph and
put the light, and right hand on the Mother Earth. This comes from the Mother Earth. /You can also do
it by using the mantra for the Mother Earth.]
Doctor:[Shri Mataji, why is it that your own antibodies harm you?]
Shri Mataji : [No, no, what happens is you have low level of calcium, and with that your bones
become like that.] There are two types of arthritis. [In one there is too much calcium, and in the other
there is a deficiency of calcium.] There are two types of arthritis. [One is the one], we call it that – I
don't know what disease, which pains a lot. Gout.
Doctor: Gout? Osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis.
Shri Mataji : Yes, one pains. There's a terrible pain all the time, on legs and on knees and all that. And
another one you get crippled. So these are due to the low calcium, deficiency- the pain. Painful is due
to calcium deficiency; and the other one that you have, which is due to too much of calcium.
Doctor :[The one that cripples?]
Shri Mataji : /Yes, the one that pains. In medical science there is no differentiation. You don't have
the same treatment for all.] For example, for a person, say, who has pain, you should take
phosphorus. Phosphorus – in My book I've written about phosphorus. Phosphorus gives you heat,
[and with that heat] it improves. They can take phosphorus, if you have pain. Phosphorus will cure it.
And the other one when you have, it is due to over-calcium.
Doctor : Shri Mataji, in what form should we take phosphorus? In what form? In food, or
phosphorus ... [In tablets or in fish or food?]
Shri Mataji : In the blood. [It is in the genes. Phosphorus ...] I've written. Have you read that now,
doctor?
Doctor :I think so, Shri Mataji, yes. It's in Your book.
Shri Mataji : Nobody has talked about it so far. But I've said it, that if there is phosphorus in your
genes, then, and if you are a dry person, then it explodes and you get the heat.
Doctor : What can you take, Mother, to give phosphorus?
Shri Mataji : Phosphorus. Itself, phosphorus, you should. There are...
Doctor: You can buy it?
Shri Mataji : Yes, you can buy it. Phosphorus also in, we can say, in certain salts there is phosphorus.
They also take seaweed; that has phosphorus. [But it gets cured just by meditating.] There was one
lady who was so badly off, she could not even sit on the ground. Then I told her, you do your right-
9.
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 side this thing, treatment. She's all right, she's walking, but if she sits on the ground I don't know. The
another one is difficult.
Autistic Children
Doctor : [Shri Mataji, this is about autism, about autistic children.]
Shri Mataji : [It's a badha. You have to do treatment for the badha]: lemons, this thing- chillies and
all that. [It's caused by a badha.] They're normal otherwise, they're really normal, but they go into
sort of epileptic. [Epileptic, they have a badha.]
Doctor:[This is about ME, yuppie flu, Shri Mataji.]
Shri Mataji : Yuppie disease – this is right-sided. You see, this is very common these days, because
those who work very hard, also very proud of their work, and they want to behave like bureaucrats,
and all that – that causes yuppie diseases. Mostly to bureaucrats; if not to bureaucrats, then also you
can say, business. Top people of business, they get it. We have cured yuppies disease, we have cured.
So what you have to do is to give them all the left side treatment – no, I mean, the right side for
treatment, it will bring in left side in. Yes, also you must sit in the water with your right foot, put right
hand towards the photograph, all right – without the light, and right foot. Also you can put ice here
and the ice here. [Same as liver treatment.] Actually it's a liver problem.
Doctor : [Shri Mataji, this is about phosphate, but You've already answered it. What about people
with high levelof phosphate?]
Shri Mataji : Anger. It explodes.
Doctor: High levels of phosphate can lead to a very angry personality.
Shri Mataji : And this is not the end of it. Ifyou're angry person, you get heart.
Doctor:/ShriMataji, for women who can't have children, should they have in-vitro fertilisation or not?]
Shri Mataji : [No, I mean] try Sahaja Yoga. [It can happen with Sahaja Yoga.]
Inability to have children
Doctor: The inability to have children ... Many Sahaja yoginis find difficulty to have babies.
Shri Mataji : It's all right side. Mostly it is right-sided. But for example, ... , her mother had cancer
and she was shocked, [so her] shock, that's left-sided. It can be too much of left side, or too much of
right side. ... Right side also: overly educated, all the time working very hard – right side. Mostly
right side. Also left side possible: for example you are possessed, something like that. Throughout
Sahaja Yoga you must understand whether right-sided or left-sided. And we have very simple things
to correct both the sides.
10
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Doctor :[Shri Mataji, what is the treatment for fibroids in the uterus?]
Shri Mataji : [For that, son, there is a thing] – for anything of uterus, mostly it is a left-sided
problem. Any growth in the body is left-sided problem. So what they do is to get a [vessel], they put
charcoal in that, not too much – [in modern this thing, it's easy] – and put some, again ajwain. And
you keep it inside the, say, if you have a WC or if you have a bidet, and sit on that. [Burn it.]
Doctor : Burn it. Burn it.
Jai Shri Mataji. Can I ask? [Shri Mataji, ... , who is our singer, when he sings very high, he gets pain in
his head here and if he does this, down, he gets pain here.]
Shri Mataji : /[He's caught a cold, son.] But another thing I'll tell you: sometimes you feel pressure in
the brain, isn't it? And I've experimented Myself on that, so ... Now the, you must sneeze and your
cold must go out; the cold has gone up to the head. This theory doesn't exist for you people, but this
cold if it goes to the brain you become absolutely... [What do you call 'bhan bhan'?]
Doctor : It's like blocked, the whole head is blocked, you know, like whole encased in something
that's pressure.
Shri Mataji : And you can't hear, you feel so disgusted, that's the thing. For that you must take out,
you know, your cold. For that, you see, one thing I found out in Ayurveda is called "Shinkhani". Tell
her to bring the Shinkhani – Alga, tell her. It's a small little bottle, costs you two rupees or three
rupees. Should smell it: with that smelling, sneezing. You get a terrible sneezing, and you clear out.
Very common in England. If you, as many people don't wear hats, they don't cover themselves, they
catch cold. [And it goes to the head.] It's in the head. And outside you – lungs are all right, everything
all right. The head is ...Very common, I've seen here that.
Doctor : Will this clear back Agnya, Mother? Will it clear back Agnya heaviness?
Shri Mataji : Back Agnya is again the same candle treatment, but also with this also you get back
Agnya.
Doctor : And this will clear it? Yes.
Shri Mataji : There are two types of again, cold: one is from the liver, and one from real cold. So the
one which is with the liver, you know that you have to treat with ice and all that. Because
have
you
cold, you think "Why should we treat with ice?" but you have to.
Doctor : But it's a fluid or powder? (It's a powder.) Shinkhani, powder– makes you sneeze.
Shri Mataji is saying, he's got a head-cold.
Asthma
Shri Mataji : Asthma. Asthma is again due to liver. Also it is – supposing the husband is very
dominating and he also has a bad liver; because he's dominating he's a bad liver, so it is added to that.
11
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Such a person gets a very bad asthma.
Doctor :The woman. From the husband.
Shri Mataji : Hot-tempered.
Doctor: And, Shri Mataji, asthma in children–[is it due to the father?]
Shri Mataji : [It's the same. Fix their liver.]
Doctor :[Child's liver?]
Shri Mataji :/Yes. Give sugar to the child. You know the treatment of liver: sugar,] vibrated water,
all that. He'll be all right. It's very simple, it's very simple.
Doctor : [Shri Mataji, You told us that eczema is due to the liver. Shri Mataji, what is the reason for
the peritoneum drying out, and what are its symptoms?]
Shri Mataji: [That's also liver, son.] Liver is the giver of heat. So if the –ofcourse, not the other one,
but the one which is overactive. [It's due to that one.]
Doctor : [Shri Mataji, what are its symptoms?]
Shri Mataji : [In that] you just put ice, ice there. Put ice here, ice there, and it's very good. And cold-
water bath which you can give.
Doctor : For hot liver, drink vibrated water, and cold-water bath. [Shri Mataji, this is about fungal
infections, especially women tend to get these.]
Ajwain Treatment
Shri Mataji: [Again] that is for this ajwain treatment.
Doctor: Vaginal thrush- ajwain.
Shri Mataji : Put it on the fire, some sort of a utensils or vessel, and put some charcoal in it, and then
on that, ajwain, and put it in the WC. So it will come up, and you sit on WC.
Doctor : In front of the WC? (No, no-over it. Over the bidet.)
Shri Mataji :Then put it on bidet or on that.
Hemorrhoids or piles
Doctor : [Shri Mataji, what about hemorrhoids or piles?]
Shri Mataji : Piles? I don't know, but [for piles] I'm making a medicine for them. It's made from aloe
vera, you call it? From that. But, you see, piles – you'll be amazed, ... had very bad piles after the
12
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 child's birth. So I was there, she told Me, and they were all worried because she was bleeding very
much. And next time I went there, they said it's disappeared. Faith- faith is the solution.
There's another, this ... from America. She had a funny disease where all kinds of things used to
grow over her intestine, and this and that. [It was a strange disease.] So once it happened, she had
removed all ofthem-I mean, they operated on and took out all of that. When she came to Cabella she
had this problem, and she arranged with the doctor that "I'll see you'", this and that. She stayed in
Cabella, and then she went to the doctor where the appointment was – it's all not there: you know,
finished. Faith – faith is very important.
It's all the divine play. These are all external, but divine play is very great. If the divine play takes
place, you know- so many people who were dead came to life, in Sahaja Yoga. Here also, that ...,
was dead and gone, and they told Me that she's finished. I went there – you see, that you may not be
able to do, possibly you should – because the spirit is hanging around. If you can manage to locate the
spirit, to bring it back and put it in the heart, it's all right. But I don't know if you people can manage
that part. But the [faith comes.] Faith. Faith you have to have.
she
Onion Treatment for Hamsa. Hot onions
[So what is this tics?]
Doctor : [Shri Mataji, ... , who is my son, who is going to be ten years old, for a few months he does
something like this with his eyes. This is called tics. Sometimes he does this, sometimes that and
sometimes with his mouth. So what should we do for this?]
Shri Mataji : [It's caused by the Hamsa Chakra.]
Doctor : Hamsa Chakra, Shri Mataji?
Onion treatment for Hamsa. Hot onions.
Shri Mataji : [Hot onions.]
Pregnant Ladies
Doctor : [Shri Mataji, this is a question regarding pregnant ladies: should they go to public meetings
or not?]
Shri Mataji: [Ofcourse.]They need not work on people.
Doctor :[Shri Mataji, if there is a doctor who is pregnant, should she work in a hospital or not?]
Shri Mataji : [Yes.] They can work, no problem; but they should not, you see, sort of bend. [If they
all meditate, then it's all right.] Every day in the night if you meditate and morning time before going,
five minutes, nothing can happen to you, and you'll have a realised soul.
13
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 [No camphor in pregnancy.] Camphor, ajwain – no. They're all heat-giving. They should not eat
anything heat-giving, you see, like papaya – it's heat-giving. [Even fruits have their own tendencies.]
Doctor : [Shri Mataji, is an ice pack all right in pregnancy?]
Shri Mataji : /[Yes, a little bit is all right.] If she's thinking too much, it's better to put it here (on the
ego) than on the ...
Doctor : [Shri Mataji, should we opt for home delivery or hospital?]
14
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Shri Mataji : You see, [if the hospital is good, then have it in the
hospital. And if you have someone knowledgeable in the house, you
can have it in the house. But the hospital should be good. I mean, in
the hospital] if the nurses are very harsh or not clean, [that can harm.
It's better in the house, but there should be someone knowledgeable
in the house.] If it's a Sahaja yogi, another doctor Sahaja yogi can
help in the house and work it out. It'd be better, [because hospitals
are not good.] If there's a good hospital – [I mean, in England they
are good.] They're all right.
Working environment?
Doctor: [Shri Mataji, during pregnancy... /
Shri Mataji : You get holidays, don't you?
Doctor: Yes.
Shri Mataji : You should take holiday. It's a good idea. And also you
must walk. Walking is very important, because first you are active,
then suddenly you'd be too inactive. So you should walk. Walking is
good.
Doctor : [Shri Mataji, this is a question that doctors, has asked
regarding MS and these types of diseases.]
Shri Mataji :[What is MS?]
Multiple Sclerosis
Doctor : Multiple sclerosis, Shri Mataji. [There is a deficiency in
the fat around the nerves in MS.]
Shri Mataji : [So what happens?]
Doctor : [Can get paralysis, can also get problems with eyesight.]
Multiple sclerosis, Shri Mataji.
Shri Mataji : Multiple sclerosis. [It's muscular?]
Doctor :[Shri Mataji, it affects the nerves. The fat around the nerves is finished.]
Shri Mataji : I've cured, I know. I've cured multiple sclerosis. /The hands and legs become like this.
They stumble.]
Doctor : [Yes, Shri Mataji, they get weak.]
15
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 When the Mooladhara gets a Badha
Shri Mataji : One thing I've seen, very surprising: if one of the two, husband and wife, any one is
possessed, the husband gets it if the wife is possessed; or if the husband is possessed the wife gets it.
It's My observation. [When the Mooladhara gets a badha.]
Doctor: [Shri Mataji, left or right Mooladhar?]
Shri Mataji : [See, it's left, son.] You know, because if the husband is possessed, he's not all right,
he's left-sided, so the wife gets it, not the husband. Very common. Whenever I ask them, how is your
wife, or how is your husband ... It acts on Mooladhara, no doubt. /Its treatment is] you should treat
the wife, or the husband, whosoever is that thing, [and they should do it too if they have the
possession.] You can use chillies. This for possession, I mean.
There are many diseases you get out of possession, many diseases, which doctors are not sort of
aware of it. So many diseases you get. Itself is a disease, you see: to be possessed is a disease. But
sometimes what they have, they get a bulge here out, the skin bulges out like that – then there's a
possession. It's one of the signs. [All around the Agnya] you get bulges like that – one of the
symptoms. In possession as you, if it is very extreme case, then you can make it out that it's
possession, you see: that they start shaking before My photograph and shouting, screaming, all that.
That's a possession. Also, person who has possession, you see, is, he's dull otherwise, but otherwise
aggressive. For doing any work or anything he's dull, but can be aggressive. They are mostly overly
aggressive on sexual this thing, mostly, and also they are wayward. They are fond of many women
and this and that. On this I can give a big lecture. They had roving eyes – even slight possession can
do that – very fond of women, and can create problems.
But it's the Mooladhara. The problem is Mooladhar. You'd be amazed, Mooladhara is such a
great thing that it supports your nervous system, also supports your muscular system. But they have
been cured. Multiple sclerosis has been cured in Sahaja Yoga. So you must do worship of Ganesha.
Also you can use [the smoke from ajwain]: like how you use it for cold, you can use it for that. These
days it's very common for human beings to be like that, you see, wayward and all that, because the
whole atmosphere is like that. It's a– they're talking about it all the time. You can call multiple – that's
why it's called multiple sclerosis! But the trouble is, the one who is possessed doesn't suffer:
whosoever is married to a possessed person gets it. It's a Mooladhar. AIDS is Mooladhar.
[Mooladhara has countless problems.]
So Mooladhara must be kept very much safe and honoured. The marriage is a sanctity, and one
should live with that sanctity. But you know, even women have so many diseases. If they go round
with other women and all that, they can catch. [All these other diseases that people know about], they
all come from these bad women. [The diseases caused by Mooladhara], all of them come from bad
women. So the whole culture is so bad that we're in for trouble. For example, the men want to have
always a younger woman, so one is discarded, second discarded, like that it goes on. All right.
16
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Mooladhara is the most important chakra in our being. It supports us throughout. And in this one
I feel sorry that the women suffer. [Multiple sclerosis comes to women from men, and to men from
women, if they go to prostitutes.]
And this roving eyes also: that's gives you Agnya. People mesmerise with that. They think it's a
power. Very dangerous. And it's going on, I mean, in the society, specially in the so-called elegant and
educated society. They like parties, to go ... and flirt. Very dangerous for the eyes. And you know
these viruses, this so-called, they're nothing but bhoots, and they enter into you by so and so many
sources. The whole attention has gone to something else. Instead of having self-respect
shamelessness.
I have seen My great-grandson, so small as that, he has such a sense of shame that if they remove
the diaper he'd say, "Put the towel on me." [What a sense of shame.] And there were some girls
swimming in the competition. He said, "Put towels, towels on them."
"Lajja rupene samsthita" – the mantra is this - “Ya Devi sarva bhuteshu lajja rupene samsthita."
Shamelessness is not the way. But some people are shameful, but they're secretive. They get all this,
but their wives suffer the ....
One has to be a Sahaja yogi, I tell you, to lead a proper healthy life. And avoid hospitals and
doctors as far as possible, because they don't understand some things. They go to extremes of
everything. So you must tell people to control their temper. See, if you get temper, then you can take
a pillow, hit it hard, take out. Do something. But for temper is, I think best is to take the right-sided
thing, best. To be patient. See, this is a, liver is a horrible thing. [That's why it's called liver], because
you live with the liver.
Shri Mataji : [Look, "Eka hi akshar prem ka, pade to pandit hoye."]- "One word of love, one who
can read that becomes the scholar."
My great-grandson, this grandson, great-grandson of Mine, he had that emotion, you see. So
anybody would come, he'll try to give them something to eat, something of their interest. All the time
he's thinking how to make friendship. That is the thing here. Then your love starts growing. So nice to
be friendly. But what to do? Human beings are human beings. With meditation your loving power
grows, your compassion grows.
17
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 विशुद्धि चक्र एवं गुण
४०
म
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 पाँचवाँ चक्र विशुद्धि चक्र के नाम से जाना जाता है। मनुष्य की गर्दन में इसकी रचना है, इसमें सोलह
पंखुड़ियाँ होती है जो कान, नाक, गला जिव्हा तथा दाँतो आदि की देखभाल करती है । दूसरों से सम्पर्क स्थापित करने
का दायित्व भी इसी चक्र का है क्योंकि अपनी आँखें, नाक, कान, वाणी तथा हाथों के द्वारा हम दूसरों से सम्पर्क करते
हैं। शारीरिक स्तर पर यह चक्र ग्रीवा केन्द्र के लिये कार्य करता है।
सहजयोग
मनुष्य में शुरू से ही श्री कृष्ण शक्ति स्थित है। जिस समय जीव से मनुष्य की उत्क्रान्ति हयी उस समय उनकी
गर्दन ऊँची उठ गयी। ये कार्य मनुष्य की गर्दन में स्थित विशुद्धि चक्र के कारण हुआ।...... यह चक्र जिस जगह आपके
गर्दन में स्थित है, उस जगह से आपकी आपकी गर्दन ऊँची उठी है । यह कार्य विशुद्धि चक्र की श्रीकृष्ण शक्ति जाग्रत होने
से हो सका । इससे आपकी उत्क्रान्ति में परिपूर्णता आयी, यह कहा जाएगा।
|
श्रीकृष्ण शक्ति के दो अंग हैं, एक विशुद्धि के दायें और बायीं ओर और एक बीचोबीच में। इसमें जो शक्ति
बीच में है वह विराट की ओर ले जाती है।
बायीं ओर की शक्ति
के मन को कोई गलती या झूठे काम करने के बाद बनने वाली भावनाओं से
१ ..
मनुष्य
खराब होती है। जिस समय मनुष्य को लगता है कि मैंने बहुत पाप किया है और गलती की है तब उसका विशुद्धि चक्र
|
बायीं तरफ खराब हो जाता है। मनुष्य की यही पाप या गलती की धारणा उससे उसे दूर भगाने के लिये नशीली वस्तुओं
के पास ले जाती है।
सिगरेट या बीड़ी पीना, सुरति (तम्बाकू) खाना श्रीकृष्ण शक्ति के विरोध में है ।
विशुद्धि चक्र के बायें में श्री विष्णुमाया की शक्ति स्थित है। ये शक्ति बहन की है, श्रीकृष्ण की बहन की।
श्रीकृष्ण की जो बहन मरते समय आकाश में उड़ गयी और जिसने आकाशवाणी की वही ये विष्णुमाया शक्ति हैं। जिस
व्यक्ति की बहन बीमार होगी उसके विशुद्धि चक्र पर बाईं ओर बोझ महसूस होगा।
अगर किसी मनुष्य की नज़र अपनी बहन के प्रति या अन्य महिलाओं के प्रति ठीक या पवित्र नहीं होती तो
यह चक्र तुरन्त खराब हो जाता है। अपवित्रता के बर्ताव से विशुदि चक्र के बाईं तरफ तकलीफ होती है। ......ये आँखे
इधर-उधर घुमाना भी श्री कृष्ण शक्ति के विरोध में है
कमज़ोर होती है।
.......इन आँखों में घुमाने से आँखों की बीमारी फैलती है, नज़र
२ . ... दायीं ओर श्रीकृष्ण और श्री राधा की शक्ति से बना है (श्री रुक्मिणी- विठल) इस शक्ति के विरोध में जब
मनुष्य जाता है तब कहता है मैं बहुत बड़ा आदमी हूँ .....मैं ही सब कुछ हूँ ....ऐसी वृत्ति में उस मनुष्य में कंस रूपी
अहंकार बढ़ता है ...... उसे लगता है कि किसी भी प्रकार मुझे सभी लोगों पर अपना अधिकार जमाना चाहिये
......उसे
दायीं तरफ की विशुद्धि चक्र की पकड़ होती है।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, मुंबई, २५.९.१९७९
19
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 अब जिनकी आदत बहत ज्यादा चिल्लाने की, चीखने की, दूसरों को अपने शब्दों में रखने की ..... और
अपने शब्दों से दूसरों को दुःख देने की, आदत होती है, उसकी राइट विशुद्धि पकड़ी जाती है और उससे अनेक रोग उसे
हो जाते हैं। ...
.राइट साइड पकड़ने से स्पान्डिलायटिस होता है ....दुनिया भर की दूसरी बीमारी हो सकती है जैसे
लकवा और दिल का दौरा, हाथ उसका जकड़ जाता है। .....इससे जुकाम-सर्दी होती है, इतना ही नहीं जिसे हम कहते
है अस्थमा, उसका प्रादुर्भाव हो सकता है।
जो आदमी अपने को बड़ा विद्वान समझते हैं उनकी तो ये हालत हो सकती है कि वे इतने अति विद्वान हो
जाते हैं कि उनकी अपनी ही बुद्धि वही आपको चलाने लगती है, आपके खिलाफ चलती है। ....... इससे आदमी
तो वो कोई भी काम करते हैं हठात्, पर लेकिन आप अगर कहें अब आप पैर हटाइये तो नहीं हो सकता क्योंकि
हठात,
उनकी खुद की बुद्धि ही परास्त हो गयी है।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, १६.३.१९८४
विशुद्धि चक्र खराब होने से मेंदू के दोनों ओर संवेदना ले जाने वाली नाड़ियाँ खराब होती है (इनकी संवेदन
क्षमता कम हो जाती है)
प.पू.श्री माताजी, २५.९.१९७९
जैसे-जैसे विशुद्धि चक्र जाग्रत होता है वैसे-वैसे संवेदन क्षमता में वृद्धि होती है।
विशुद्धि चक्र जाग्रत करने के कुछ मंत्र हैं - अपने अंगूठे की बगल वाली उंगलियाँ दोनों कान में डालकर
गर्दन पीछे करके और नज़र आकाश की ओर रखकर ज़ोर से व आदर से सोलह बार 'अल्लाह हो अकबर' मंत्र कहने से
विशुद्धि चक्र साफ होता है। तब आपको जानना होगा अकबर माने विराट पुरुष परमेश्वर है।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, २५.९.१९७९
आप सब अपनी बाईं विशुद्धि पर नियंत्रण कर मृद्ल वाणी द्वारा मंजुल शब्दों का प्रयोग करें, आपकी भाषा
प्रत्येक व्यक्ति के लिये मृद् होनी अनिवार्य है। यह मधुरता आपकी बाईं विशुद्धि को
शुद्ध कर देगी। मृदुल प्रक्रिया से
संबोधन ही अपनी अपराध भावना को सुधारने का सर्वश्रेष्ठ मार्ग है।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, राहुरी, २१.१२.१९८०, निर्मला योग, १९८५
.....व्यक्ति गिल्टी महसूस करता है, इसलिये सहजयोग में इसका
जब लेफ्ट विशुद्धि खराब हो जाती है,
मंत्र है I am not guilty और हिन्दी में कहते हैं 'माँ हमने कोई गलती नहीं की जो तुम माफ न करो।'
... जिसका विशुद्धि चक्र ठीक होगा उसका मुखड़ा ठीक होगा, सुंदर होगा, उसकी आँखे तेजस्वी होगी, नाक-
नक्श तेजस्वी होंगे ।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, दिल्ली, १६.२.१९८१
३. ... मध्य विशुद्धि चक्र के बीचो बीच जो शक्ति है वह विराट की शक्ति है। इस शक्ति से मनुष्य परमेश्वर की
20
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 खोज में रहता है।.....अपने 'स्व' को पहचानिये। अपने 'स्व' को पहचानने से ही मनुष्य अपनी सुबुद्धि पाता है। जब
तक दुर्बुद्धि है उसकी विशुद्धि जाग्रत नहीं होती।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, मुम्बई, २५.७.१९७९
जो बीच में श्रीकृष्ण हैं उनके लिये सारी सृष्टि एक लीला है, उनके लिये यह लीला है, और जब सहजयोग में
पार हो जाते हैं तब उनके लिये भी सारी सृष्टि जो दिखायी देती है, वो एक साक्षी है, उसकी ओर वे साक्षी के स्वरूप से देखते हैं।
वो जो कुछ भी पहले उनको हरेक चीज़ से लगाव था, वो छूट करके वो देखता है, अरे! यह सब तो एक नाटक था।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, दिल्ली, १६.३.१९८४
अन्तर्जात गुण
१. सामूहिक चेतना-सामूहिकता- संतुलन -
जब मनुष्य अपने विशुद्धि चक्र में जाग्रत होता है तब उसे सुबुद्धि
आती है व संतुलन आता है।
आपकी सामूहिक चेतना जाग्रत होती है, आप अपने तरफ अंतर्मुख होकर देख सकते हैं व आपकी दृष्टि परम्
की ओर मुड़ती है। ......आप औरों की भावनायें, संवेदना वे सब अपने आप में जान सकते हैं।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, २५.७.१९७९
सामूहिकता मतलब हमेशा आपको उस परमेश्वरी शक्ति के साथ सामूहिक चेतना में जुड़े रहना,
विशुद्धि चक्र की जाग्रति के बाद यह अवस्था मिलती है।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, निर्मला योग १९८४
सामूहिक होना गहनता प्राप्त करने का एकमात्र उपाय है।
जो व्यक्ति सामूहिकता के साथ कार्य करता है और सामूहिकता में रहता है, उसमें नयी प्रकार की शक्तियाँ
जाग्रत हो जाती हैं।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, गुरुपूजा, कबैला, १९९७
श्रीकृष्ण की सुमत्ता,
२. माधुर्य-मिठास-नम्रता
आनी चाहिये ।
उनकी
मधुरता, उनकी मोहकता, वो हमारे जीवन में
प.पू.श्री माताजी, १६.३.१९८४
आवाज़ में मिठास होनी चाहिये, उसमें माधुर्य होना चाहिये, उसमें एक मोहित करने की शक्ति होनी चाहिये,
जिससे मनुष्यों को लगे कि जो बोल रहे हैं, इसमें खिंचाव है।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, दिल्ली, ७.५.१९८३
आपको विनम्र होना है, यही आपकी सज्जा है और यही गुण।
21
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 स्वयं को कभी विशेष न समझें और न ही श्रेष्ठ माने। स्वयं को यदि आप श्रेष्ठ मानते हैं तो आप पूर्ण के अंग-
प्रत्यंग नहीं रहते ....
..सबसे महत्वपूर्ण चीज़ जो है वो है विनम्रता ।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, कबैला, ७.५.२०००
३. व्यवहार कुशलता - व्यवहार में पूरे हृदय से दोस्ती करो, कोई कार्य हो तो पूरे हदय से करो। उपरी -उपरी नहीं,
अन्दरूनी रखो। एक छोटा सा फूल भी यदि कोई शुद्ध हृदय से दे तो उसका बहुत असर हो सकता है।
जो भी
आपको कहना है हृदय से हो।
गहराई में जब आप विशुद्धि को प्राप्त करेंगे तब आपका जनहित, जन सम्बन्ध और विश्व बंधुत्व है, उससे
पहले नहीं।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, दिल्ली, २८.२.१९९१
......तो हमारे विशुद्धि चक्र में बसे हुए श्रीकृष्ण जो हैं इनको आपको जाग्रत करना पड़ेगा। जब तक ये जाग्रत नहीं
होंगे तब तक आपको विशुद्धि चक्र की तकलीफ रहेगी।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, दिल्ली, १६.३.१९८४
४. साक्षी अवस्था - हमारे लिये यह समझना अत्यन्त महत्वपूर्ण है कि हमारी विशुद्धि साफ होनी चाहिये ।
सर्वप्रथम हमारा हृदय सुंदर और स्वच्छ होना चाहिये जहाँ से श्री कृष्ण के मधुर संगीत की सुगंध आती हो । अपनी
विशुद्धि को सुधारें। विराट को देखते हुए अपनी त्रुटियों का पता लगाओ और इन्हें सुधारो क्योंकि आपके अतिरिक्त कोई
अन्य इन्हें नहीं सुधार सकता। देखो कि तुम्हें पूर्ण ज्ञान है। एक अच्छी विशुद्धि के बिना आप यह ज्ञान नहीं पा सकते
क्योंकि विशुद्धि पर आकर आप साक्षी बनते हैं। यदि आपने साक्षी अवस्था प्राप्त कर ली है तो आप अपनी त्रुटियों,
समस्याओं तथा वातावरण की कमियों को जान सकेंगे।
श्रीकृष्ण की पूजा करते समय हमें यह जानना है कि अंत में वे बुद्धि तत्व बन जाते हैं। पेट की चर्बी सूक्ष्म रूप में
बुद्धि को पहुँचती है तथा श्री नारायण बुद्धि में प्रवेश कर 'विराट' रूप हो जाते हैं और अकबर बन जाते हैं और जब वे
अकबर बन जाते हैं तभी पदार्थ के अन्दर बुद्धि (ज्ञान) बन जाते हैं। यही कारण है कि श्री कृष्ण को पूजने वाले लोग
अहंकार रहित बुद्धिमान बन जाते हैं। उनकी बुद्धि विकसित होती है परन्तु यह अहं ग्रासित नहीं होती। बिना अहं की बुद्धि
जिसे मैं शुद्ध बुद्धि कहती हैूँ, प्रकट होने लगती है।
प.पू.श्री माताजी, १४.८.१९८९, चैतन्य लहरी जुलाई-अगस्त, २००८
एक बार सहस्रार खुल जाने के बाद आपको वापिस अपनी विशुद्धि चक्र पर आना पड़ता है, अर्थात् अप
सामूहिकता के स्तर पर। विशुद्धि चक्र यदि ज्योतिर्मय नहीं हो तो आप चैतन्य लहरी महसूस नहीं कर सकते।
प.पू.श्री माताजी
22
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 To understand sahajayoga we should know where are we
today in this kaliyuga. What are we found today? It should
really make you feel quite disturbed to see the way things are
going on in every country, every where. What's the problem?
What is the, such a need for people to become so restless full
of tensions.
20/03/1998
Published & Printed by
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
No. 8, Chandragupta Co-op Housing Society, Paud Road,
Kothrud, Pune, Maharashtra, India - 411 038. © : 25286537, 25286032 email:sale@nitl.co.in
website: www.nitl.co.in (For queries & sending articles contact on above address)
 2013_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 Humble person means the person who doesn't have ego. So
to burn offego
festival called Holi.
and to burn offour conditioning we had this
25.10.1987
