The Divine Cool Breeze Yoga omelyear in Sahaja 1997 2013 issue 4 – volume twenty-six number four

 19 16 MARCH DELHI SHRI SHIVA PUJA 21 MARCH DELHI BIRTHDAY PUJA 6 APRIL DELHI MEDICAL CONFERENCE TALK 4 MAY CABELLA SAHASRARA PUJA 25 MAY CABELLA SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA 8 JUNE NEW JERSEY SHRI KRISHNA PUJA 10 JUNE NEW YORK PUBLIC PROGRAM 16 JUNE LOS ANGELES PUBLIC PROGRAM 18 JUNE BERKELEY PUBLIC PROGRAM 20 JUNE VANCOUVER PUBLIC PROGRAM 23 JUNE TORONTO PUBLIC PROGRAM 20 JULY CABELLA GURU PUJA 6 & 7 AUGUST MOSCOW PUBLIC PROGRAMS

 97 8 AUGUST MOSCOW PUJA 11 AUGUST ST. PETERSBURG PUBLIC PROGRAM 13 AUGUST TAGLIATTI PUBLIC PROGRAM 15 AUGUST KIEV PUBLIC PROGRAM 23 AUGUST CABELLA SHRI KRISHNA PUJA 24 AUGUST CABELLA MARRIAGES 7 SEPTEMBER CABELLA SHRI GANESHA PUJA 5 OCTOBER CABELLA NAVARATRI PUJA 2 NOVEMBER LISBON DIWALI PUJA 3 NOVEMBER LISBON PUBLIC PROGRAM 4 DECEMBER DELHI PUBLIC PROGRAM 25 DECEMBER GANAPATIPULE CHRISTMAS PUJA 31 DECEMBER KALWE SHAKTI PUJA

 LISTEN TO ME It has been a very, very joyful evening for all of us and we can thank all the people who have brought all kinds of entertainment for all of us... It is a very remarkable thing that we come from different countries and different cultures, speaking different languages and how we understand the language of heart, language of love, which is divine love. So tomorrow will be the great puja of Kundalini.. I think I will be able to say something new tomorrow for all of you to enjoy. I cannot entertain as you all can entertain. But somehow I have seen that whatever I am saying you all listen to Me so intensely there must be some entertainment there.

 1007 ONE YEAR language of gena HEART language of LOVE

 16 MARCH DELHI INDIA SHIVARATRI PUJA Deceiving yourself is not going to help. The best thing is to face yourself and understand wrong you have been doing. If you correct yourself and become that, I am sure a torch what all the problems – political, economic and all stupid problems we have – will be fin- ON the ished.. All these problems only are created by human beings. They are not created by the Divine Force, but the Divine Force tries to neutralize them. If there are many Sahaja path Yogis who are practising Sahaja Yoga in the real sense of the word, if that could be done, if that could be achieved, then I think we can do a lot, a lot for the betterment of human- ity. And that is why we have got Realization. It is not only for yourself, it is not only for your family, it is not only for your city or country, but for the whole world Sahaja Yoga is going to work out. Now if you have to do competition, you must only do competition in your ascent and in nothing else. But people are so superficial that they think by showing off or by becom- ing something – a big Johnny – they will achieve something of a very great level. It is not so. It has to be a very humble attitude towards yourself also, so that understand you that whatever you are doing is for the betterment of global problems. Absolutely we can solve because you are the channels of the Divine. If I could do it alone, I would have done it. But I can't, so that is why I had to gather you all and to tell you that you become all the channels. But in the meanwhile, you enjoy. You enjoy life. Every second becomes a joy, which is also the gift of Shiva. Shiva is the one who creates this great admiration and great appreciation of every moment, everything that is there. And that is the state we have to achieve, by not condemning yourself or not by pampering your ego, but by seeing what you are. That is the main thing one has to see: what problem you have and what is troubling you is yourself only. If you could just come to that point of understanding, I am sure, I am very, very sure that you will be such an asset to help to make this world look at itself and change because superficially you cannot change such deep-rooted problems. And you are being so blessed by Kundalini that you can really become a great torch. I should say, a torch on the path of truth, love and joy. every second becomes a JOY

 ONE WORLD we can say now that it is not in different nations we have to think, but we have to think that we are belonging to ONE WORLD OF DIVINITY. And there you are absolutely protected.

 21 MARCH DELHI INDIA BIRTHDAY PUJA You have not come here in Sahaja Yoga to emancipate Me. You have come here to believers evolve yourself and, because of that, you have to face yourself and see for yourself what is within you which is very strong, which is troublesome, which is dragging you down, of synthesis which is killing. Sahaja Yoga is nothing but an ocean of joy.. What you enjoy in that is collectivity – sangat. That collectivity you should enjoy only by getting rid of your non- sensical boundaries that you have built and then you see the joy. All the time you will be floating in joy. There is a sense which people have which you may not have before Realization. Some of the people –I was amazed how deep they are - how they took to Sahaja Yoga. They are supposed to be very great men, supposed to be people of very great principles, but very hot-tempered, intolerant about people and they take to Sahaja Yoga just like this because inside there is a big depth, so that everything is absorbed without any problem. Everybody can achieve, but one has to be careful as to the two wheels of our mind. One is the ego, another is the conditioning... You are only still small children and, like small children, you must have a very clean heart to accept, to absorb the beauty of the peace that is within you – and also the beauty of purity. Without purity you cannot enjoy anything. So in Sahaja Yoga, although we have so many people, I must say the purity of these few saints, who lived earlier, we have to yet achieve... We have to now understand that Sahaja Yoga is to be consolidated through synthesis. We are believers of synthesis. Any divisive thing that comes into your mind you should I make to you, that you please introspect. just throw it away. This is a request on this day Unless and until you introspect, you cannot even respect yourself. You cannot even love yourself. If you love yourself, you will introspect and find out what is wrong. It is important. See, even I feel all this, standing like a witness to you, a silent witness. When I see big, big mountains, I think they are like great saints who are watching, and they are trying to record what is happening in this world because they also understand. They also know. I have to again and again tell you that today is the day to see your own self, your own chakras, your own defects. That will give you permanently the joy that is promised. You will get thoughtless awareness. Also you will get doubtless awareness. But never get into the trap of your conditioning and of your ego. This is what I have to tell you today, on this day where you are celebrating, that you celebrate your own birthday. Celebrate it. See for yourself what you have achieved and what you are going to achieve. It is time for you to celebrate, than to celebrate My birth- day. I will be very happy to celebrate your birthday than to celebrate Mine.

 Honour and Celebration in Delhi 1 Shri Mataji watched as a beautiful chariot, pulled by very young children dressed in white, crossed the Inside the chariot was a large birthday cake. On Easter Sunday, Shri Mataji and Sir C.P. celebrated their golden wedding anniversary with a music program at the New Temple in Delhi. Shri Mataji spoke briefly about resurrecting people through Sahaja Yoga, includ- ing Muslims, and particularly Sufis. On Sunday April 6th, the Indian Medical Association sted a special forum, "The Art of Healing and Sahaja Yoga," at which Shri Mataji presented a talk about the DELHI – In 1997 Delhi was blessed with two pujas in the space of one week. Yogis from all over the world stayed at the Nizamuddin Scout Camp in those familiar dome-shaped brick huts. Between the Shivaratri and Birthday Pujas, yogis were able to adventure out beyond Delhi. One group trav- stage. elled to Hardwar and Rishikesh to bathe in the River up Ganges. This is the place where many holy saints and Deities have been, including Shri Sita and Shri Rama. At the Birthday Puja, there were two musical evenings. The second of these included a performance by Debu Chaudhuri. Shri Mataji stayed until 3:30 in the morning. At the Birthday Puja itself, the pendal was a sight to behold, completely bedecked with the most colourful balloons, streamers and flowers. Shri Mataji wore a pink sari and looked exquisitely beautiful and radiant. She spoke in Hindi and then in English. She spoke about the dangers of ego and the need for introspection. A letter from the grandson of Alfred Nobel was read aloud, in which Shri Mataji was praised and wished a happy birthday. CC Swadisthan chakra. On the evening of that same day, Shri Mataji was the guest of honour at the Unity International Foundation where it was announced that She would receive a Unity Award for International Understanding later in the year. A spokesman for the foundation explained that the award is normally reserved for heads of state. On Monday April 7th, Shri Mataji and Sir CP again celebrated fifty years of marriage, this time with a dinner at the Taj Palace with family, friends and well-wishers. In 1997, I took Jalil, a Moroccan Sahaja Yogi, to meet Shri Mataji at the time of the Birthday Puja in Delhi. When we arrived at Her house in Noida, we were It was 1997 and it was the first occasion that I went to India for Birthday Puja in Delhi. When I arrived in the middle of hundreds of people at the airport, a young man came to me and said, "Jai Shri Mataji!" It was a complete week of celebrations for the seventy- fifth birthday of our Holy Mother. Among all these activities, there was a special recognition of Shri Mataji by the Medical Society of India. They mentioned the miraculous cure of my son, who at long distance, had been cured in Mexico. immediately invited in and were treated very hospitably, being offered sweets and tea. After that, we were allowed to enter Shri Mataji's room and we namaskared at Her CC Feet. Shri Mataji wanted to know details of events in Morocco and we told our experience with a man called Moham- med. We had had our first workshop in a hotel room in Marrakesh and, after about twenty minutes, there was such a deep atmosphere of silence. Mohammed opened and looked at Shri Mataji's photo. At that time our Holy Mother had tears in Her eyes and was full compassion for this young man, who was suffering of amyloidosis, a mortal and incurable disease. When the ceremony was over, the Divine Mother came out just where I was standing and I told Her that I was going back to Mexico that night. Shri Mataji stopped in front of me and said, "Thank you for coming to India. May God bless you." I wanted to kiss Her Lotus Feet and thank Her for all his eyes "I have had a good communication and I can feel Her,' he said. He then said that the silence told him the truth. Later we asked him why this was and he explained that his father had been a Sufi and told him that if he ever found something that gave him absolute silence, then, at that moment, he would meet God. Shri Mataji liked this story very much. “You have to prepare Morocco for My coming," She said. She has given to me, but we were standing in a narrow corridor surrounded by a crowd of doctors and I only could bend my head to say from my Mother" as She went out. Franz Mekyna heart "Thank You, Graciela Vázquez-Diaz

 4 MAY CABELLA ITALY SAHASRARA PUJA You are powerful. You have powers. Not only that, but you have been specially bestowed with those powers. But if you do not want use them, then what are you? If the lamp is not the realm enlightened, what is this lamp for – just for decoration? So this has to be used. And this of god has to be used without feeling that awareness within you that you are something great, better than others, something selected or also they say that we are chosen... Whatever you do, you should see from the results what works out. Results should be such that you should see how it works out. That is the intelligence. I think that is the superior intelligence by which you know how to say things, what things to say and how to work it out. This divine love gives you a complete control over yourself and you know everything, how to behave, how to talk to people, how to manage them... When you become the ocean, then you are not bothered what shore you go to, where you travel. You are not bothered. You are only with the ocean, moving up and down. That is how it is a living ocean of love and that is what we have to develop – without dominating others, without showing off. It should be that the whole thing should be contained within ourself. It should be all within yourself and that is the most enjoyable thing... This is something that if you have it within yourself, you are fully filled within your Self. So what is most important? What is so much needed? Nothing. You are com- pletely filled with yourself, contented with yourself and then you want to share. This is of dealing with the Sahasrara and I am sure the day will come when this the ideal way whole world's Sahasrara has to be opened out. This is what we have to do and we are not going to disappear into some exclusive places that are just for meditation. You can go there, but not for escaping the world. That is not the idea. The idea is for meditation for your growth. It would be a nice place to go to. It is very important to understand: how valuable you are, how remarkably important you are, born at this time. You got your Realization for what? To emancipate this world, to transform human beings, to take the whole of this world into the realm of God. That is what you are here for. when you become the ocean YOU ARE NOT BOTHERED

 291

 25 MAY CABELLA ITALY SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA Today we are going to do the puja of Adi Shakti. It is a difficult subject, to talk about Adi she is the Shakti, because it is not easy to understand that Adi Shakti is the power of Sadashiva. Sadashiva is God Almighty. She is His breath, as some people call it. Some say She is the breath desire and some say that She is the entire power of Sadashiva and Sadashiva cannot do anything without Her powers.. As the children of Adi Shakti, we have to go all out . Everywhere, on every corner we have to shout and we have to tell loudly what is the time in which we are living.. You are children of the Adi Shakti. You are here and your Mother is here. It is a very, very fortu- nate thing for Me that you are here. I am very proud of you, but again and again I have to tell you that the work has to be with a faster speed. We have to move with a faster speed and get more people to Sahaja Yoga. It is rather difficult for Me to say something forcefully. That is not My nature. I cannot get into tempers and I cannot get angry and I cannot forcefully say something to you. But if you fail, then the only thing will be that you have failed Me completely. It means that – nothing less than that... So on the whole we have done well I must say, but it is not the final. We have to work faster with more enthusiasm and joyfully. You do not know what joy you get when you give Realization to somebody. It is the most joyful moment when you give Realization to others. Now just try it. Once you try once, you will enjoy it, then you will want more and more and more.. The want disappears into this desire, that “My God, this man is going, should I call him and give him Realization?" On the street you will feel, "Come here, come here, I want to give you something" And you will make him sit down and you will give Realization. This will be your style. Like mad, you will say, "Oh no, no, look at this, this gentleman is without any Realization, let us give!" You will have to go to churches. You will have to go to universities. You will have to go to all such congregations where they have no idea about what they can achieve and then tell them without any fear, without any malice. You can talk to them and you should tell them, "Now we are here to help for your good. We have not come for our good, but for your good. Now listen to us." And I am sure, very sure, that the Kundalini within you will be very happy. She is not happy with people who are not using her fully. So She will be very happy to help you and do the needful for the emancipation of the whole world. without fear without malice GIVE REALIZATION

 CABELLA – We are all anxiously awaiting Shri Mataji's arrival at the entertainment evening and the very special experience of this moment. All our little hearts are so excited and the sight of our On many occasions we would go into Shri CABELLA – Mataji's rooms and lift big boxes with gifts and open them. Then She would talk about all kinds of things. Sometimes She would offer us tea and vibrate the sugar and it was always in that loving, motherly way. The first time She actually called me by name, I was very proud somehow because that was my recognition of being Her child. It was at the end of that year that we had a meeting Mother fulfills the little hearts so much that the little hearts become bigger to fit it all in. And sometimes the love is so tremendous that the hearts get so full of love and it overflows and manifests in tears. It must be love tears that come because it feels like we have been a little lost again and the sight of our Mother reassures us that She is always with us. with an accountant who did not speak any English and I was there to translate. That was a very beautiful moment because I was there next to Shri Mataji, next to Her chair, just like Shri Ganesha is sitting. And I was completely empty and there to serve Shri Mataji. Sidsel Mugford Marco Arciglio

 7 JUNE NEW JERSEY USA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS Dancing, art, every kind of creativity will definitely bring forth the spiritual aspect of music that elevates Americans' life. They have to come to this, otherwise it is not going to be appreciated, it won't be an appeal, people won't like such music. They will try some tricks otherwise. You know that in this country we have all kinds of people, all kinds of music and some- times extremely stupid, but somehow they are gaining the idea that popularity now does not remain with all kinds of strange and stupid things. They have taken, I am sure, by their own urge to search the reality, a new type of a style, new type of a singing, in which there is a different tune, I feel. It is coming up, suggesting that there is something higher that we have to enjoy. The idea of enjoyment is changing. Sometimes people feel that this country is not so ancient, it has no traditions, also that the people are from different cultures and so they are all mixed up, confused. But in that SO confusion only, you are going to find the truth. And that is why everywhere in America you go, you find that there are people who are working out some sort of a search of their own. Maybe it is not correct, it is not all right. Like the music now – you see, you had such serene, deep music, also some very collective music, all types of music that you could think of - Indian music, Spanish music, also Russian music. All these have combined on the stage here. That is suggestive that one day the whole world will have a sense of music. That is a different thing than what music is because music can be anything. To have the sense of music that not only entertains, but elevates you, takes you to higher realms of your existence – that is music. You know how much I love music. It is not because I am fond of music, but through music vibrations can be spread much faster... It is a very funny mixture here I find in America. One side is this creativity, which is some- times quite mad. On the other side you find people extremely busy, who have no time to even sing something or read something – extremely, extremely busy making money. Only money is the criteria. But the money situation seems to be very bad here to Me, for the future, because of the stupid ideas about economics... Unless and until you have the light of your spirit, you cannot grow very further because, in the dimensions of the human mind, you cannot conceive the heights which you can reach. in that confusion only YOU FIND THE TRUTH

 WHAT T IF... What if Sahaja Yoga and the teachings of Shri Mataji could transform people After a vibrant program at the University of California Berkeley What if Sahaja Yoga and the teachings of Shri Mataji could activate the campus and after Shri Mataji received primordial energy of the Kundalini and the serpent coiled three and a half seekers onto the stage, we eventually times at the base of the spine, which rises up through the spinal cord and made our way back to the car, where an Indian gentlemen stood eagerly What if the violence and death and destruction that happens every day in waiting to engage Shri Mataji in lively debate about Vedantic philosophy. What if people could live happier, healthier lives, more productive lives We had started the day early in Los Angeles and now here we were in What if there was a religion without dogma, without theology, without Berkeley debating the ancient Vedas at priestcraft, without tithing, a religion without religious wars, a religion with- midnight in a car park. Shri Mataji, who is always patient, displayed What if there was a religion without hate, without fear and without guilt? tremendous compassion in guiding this What if there was a practice that offered only the cosmic bliss of divine aspirant before we made our way back through Self Realization? flows out through the crown of the head and could transform people's lives? our cities became a thing of the past? simply by practising Sahaja Yoga and the teachings of Shri Mataji? out religious fundamentalism? love and asked nothing in return? What if human beings have evolved from lower forms of life and that we are still evolving, but rather than evolving our physical bodies, we are evolv- to where we were staying. Geoffrey Godfrey ing into a higher state of consciousness, an evolution of our brain and central In 1997, when Our Divine Mother visited Berkeley, we were blessed to What if the survival of our species, homo sapiens, and the survival of be at the public program held at the our very beautiful ecosystems and the survival of life as we know it on Planet university. I had a strong desire to offer Her a very fragrant variety of rose that What if the thousands of generations of biological Darwinism required grew on our small patio. I went to for biological evolution and the human consciousness of evolution could take the stage, bowed and sat at Her Lotus Feet and offered the humble little rose. Then – I still wonder why – I simply burst into tears. Mother instantly took What if the simple act of Sahaja Yoga could create a profound harmoniz- my right hand into Hers. “Why? What ing effect on society and that individuals could create effortlessly greater hap- happened, My child?" She asked. I was overwhelmed. I somehow gasped an answer. “Mother, I could have never imagined that I would get to see You this close." “Believe in yourself," Mother Would you be open to the great possibilities that may be bestowed upon said with a smile, radiating love. She had my hand still in Hers. Then, The answer to all these questions is that it can happen and is happening. many other seekers got to the stage to Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi and Her teaching of Sahaj Yoga is enjoy Her loving vibrations, while I was getting immersed in the most It is a gift of cosmic consciousness that comes from the power of Self blissful experience of my life. This Claes Nobel, 18 June 1997, Berkeley USA divine gift of Shri Mataji has a very nervous system? Earth depended on this evolution of human consciousness? place over the course of a lifetime? Or what if the evolution of human consciousness could take place in an afternoon? piness, peace and quality of life? What if there was a great spiritual teacher before you? Would you listen? Would you hear? you? тапу a gift to all of you and all of humanity. Realization. special place in my heart. Ivana Banerjee

 8 JUNE NEW JERSEY USA SHRI KRISHNA PUJA Although this is the land of Shri Krishna, people ask Me why the people are not spiritual. OU dre How is it they get entangled into different types of seekings which are not leading to truth? Why is it the people in America are not so alert as to recognize what is the truth and what they have to find...?“Why freedom?" one may there ask... Today we see a country that is America in a complete chaos. So this freedom, without any wisdom at all growing, starts creating a terrible ego. When auspiciousness is given up, then Shri Ganesha sleeps and Christ, who is the incarnation of Shri Ganesha, also does not bother. So the rule of Christ is finished. So what rules is the ego – this ego which thinks it is free... The mind starts working with ego. Ego takes over like a computer and it starts suggesting and methods by which how much money you can earn. So when you start earn- ways ing money, then again the same Ego Mister tells you how to destroy yourself with this money... It takes you to all kinds of wrong places... This is the curse of money on human beings, which is to be understood: freedom with- out wisdom is the most dangerous thing to use. It is better not to be free if you have no wisdom because God knows what you will do if you have freedom and no wisdom... But this Paramchaitanya, when it takes over, it is love. It is absolute love - love which thinks, understands, coordinates, cooperates, works and is extremely sensitive. It works. I am sometimes so surprised the way it works, without fail, without making any mistakes. You do not have to even tell because you are there. But to believe that we are there also is a difficult task. With all the experiences, you should believe that you are there, but that is also quite a difficult task. So when we say they are established Sahaja Yogis, then what we mean is this: they are completely one, under the complete charge of Paramachaitanya. That is what we have to be. If you want to save this country, you have to be that – no argument, no explanation, noth- ing, no fighting, no strikes, nothing. No placards are needed. You are the ones who will advertise Sahaja Yoga. Every one of you should understand that your life is very impor- tant at this juncture. And you have to become that special person who reflects reality through the divine love. the most dangerous thing FREEDOM WITHOUT WISDOM

 NEW YORK – Although the trip to North America in 1997 was initially scheduled for about twelve days, Shri Mataji ended up staying forty days and nights and, throughout all this time, She seemed to be working out all sorts of issues. It seemed to be a testing time, with much essential yet subtle work being undertaken personally by Shri Mataji, so much so that we missed travelling back across the Atlantic to the July 3rd public program at the Royal Albert Hall in London. Geoffrey Godfrey NEW YORK- On June 10th they filed into the magnificent gothic cathedral, a huge cavernous place. It was a classic and grand picture of New York, representing its variety, its drama and its potential. Many already had a sense of reverence and awe for the transformation they were to experience. By the end of the program, the hall, which holds twenty-five hundred people, was full. 17741 777

 20 JULY CABELLA ITALY GURU PUJA In Sahaja Yoga, a guru has to be a binding force. There are two types of people, I have it is you seen, who go on breaking relations. It is very easy for them. They go on complaining. But there are others who have a power to bind people together in such a sweet manner that the people are brought closer together. Not that they have to forgive, it automatically works out. It just works out like that and people go on joining such a man. For a guru, it is important that he should not have any false ideas about himself. He might be from a poor family, might be from the rich family. Whatever it is, he should not be conscious of that... Your personality has to be something that people should say, "This is the real guru we have met!" For that, you know very well, you do not have to give up your family, do not have to give up anything. But ego, if it is still there, I don't know what to say, but you must get rid of it completely and collectively also... On this day of Guru Puja, I have to say now that one has to work very hard – very hard. The most important thing is how much you have dedicated your life, your time to Sahaja Yoga. Then only you will achieve that state of guru. Look at Me. I am a housewife and I have My family's responsibilities and problems. But despite that, I am all the time think- ing about Sahaja Yogis, Sahaja Yoga and all that is this emancipation of human beings in the whole world – not only here or there - in the whole world. So that should be your widened vision, not for only your school, college or university, your this or that, but a very wider vision one should have and that you have to develop through your working into every type of circumstance, every type of problem you have. Once you develop that kind of a personality, then you will be amazed how you can help so many people. I know there are so many Sahaja Yogis here who are worthy of praise and really I love them very much and they also love Me very much, but one should always see that, as you are now going to be the gurus, you have to be careful not to think that you are a guru. You should never think you are a guru already. Once you start think- ing, again Mr. Ego, the guru, comes up. So once you decide that "I am nothing, I am nothing, I am just a little ripple in the heart of my Mother" – if such a humble feeling you get – then all your problems can be solved and things will work out because your attention and your behaviour are going to impress other people, nothing else. Whatever you may try, it is you who is going to get Sahaja Yoga further. JUST A RIPPLE in the heart of mother my

 23 AUGUST CABELLA ITALY SHRI KRISHNA PUJA This is to be understood very clearly: the sahaja dharma is that you are just free – com- laugh at yourself plete freedom from lust, greed and all nonsense. You are above it. You are above. This sahaj dharma is above the dharma established by Shri Krishna or by Shri Rama because have reached that stage. It is in complete freedom you have to be dharmic. What- you ever is not good for you, you should not do. I do not have to tell you that you do not do this or you do not do that. Whatever I say may not be acceptable, but immediately your vibrations will tell you. | This is sahaj dharma. In the sahaj dharma you get rid of all kinds of ... lust, anger, attrac- tions, then greed. Greed - that is very important, greed and attractions... The free mind is that which has attention completely enlightened by the spirit. But the problem is we are still rising out of this human bondage to a higher life of Realization. And when we are going to that level, we have to realize that we have to give up all these shackles, all these horrible things within us. Like a bird, when it is born out of the egg, it shakes out all the parts of the egg. Your brothers, your sisters, your father, your mother, your husband, everybody – they try to put you down. Now, if they are drinking, they will say, "Come along, you better have something to drink, you are not social, you are useless, you are not up-to-date. What is this nonsense?" That is how a fashion starts and this collective action of fashion did not come from Shri Krishna and not in Sahaj... You are all grown-up children of Mine and I want you to know all the beauties that are within you, that you have to enjoy. First of all, learn to laugh at yourself. That is the best way to enjoy yourself and not to spend much time at the mirror. That is another way... The attention should be on your own qualities, on your own personality and then you will be amazed how your personality is giving you joy, giving you alladha, giving you so much of patience with others. To Me, the whole thing looks like sometimes a joke because nothing is so serious. It is not a Rama's type that you have to be serious. I don't have to kill anybody. I don't use any weapons in this lifetime... You must try to see the beauty as Sahaja Yogis. You should be sensitive to see how you have been helped, how you have been guided, how you have been blessed. This is sahaj dharma. SEE THE BEAUTY this is sahaj dharma

 7 SEPTEMBER CABELLA ITALY SHRI GANESHA PUJA Today we are going to worship Shri Ganesha. It is all said about Him that He is the first bound Deity who was created on this Earth by Adi Shakti. As about His creation, you know the story and also you know how an elephant's head was attached to Him. by dharma Today I am going to tell something more subtle about Him, Kundalini and the Mother Earth. He was made out of the Mother Earth with the vibrations of His Mother. Now the significance of Mother Earth we have never understood. Now look at the Mother Earth, She is the one who produces all kinds of beautiful flowers of different fragrance, of dif- ferent nature, colour, heights. The trees are different. Trees, when they grow up, they grow in such a manner that every leaf of that tree gets the sun. Look at the collective sense which is given to us by this Mother Earth. We have never realized that this Mother Earth, which is giving us everything that we want, how the sun helps the Mother Earth, cooperates, coordinates with Her. To go further with it, you have seen a picture where a Kundalini is coming out of the Mother Earth and half of it is seen. So what does this Kundalini do for us? Or what does this Mother Earth do for us? The Kundalini leaves the Mother Earth as a reflection and what does She do within us to build us up in which way? So it is the Primordial Power which is coming out of the Mother Earth. Mother Earth itself acts like a mother. She looks after you. She gives you whatever you want. And another miracle thing is that the highest tree is a coconut tree and a coconut will never fall on any creature or any human being. That means all think- ing, all understanding, all consciousness, all awareness is coming from the Mother Earth. But we never understand it. As it is, we take it for granted. Now what does She do for us, for us human beings? She is the Primordial Power. What She does is to build in us ... "restrictions" or "primordial taboos" or "primordial dharmas." For example, you see the steel is here. It has its own dharma. It cannot behave like wood. Wood has its own dharma. It cannot behave like silver. They all have their dharma and they are bound in that dharma. Everything that is in the nature has its own dharma. If you see the tiger, if you see the lion, if you see a mongoose or you see a snake, they all have their dharma, their style, their everything. It is very surprising how they are bound by it. THE MOTHER EARTH she looks after you OOKS

 NEC

 5 OCTOBER CABELLA ITALY NAVARATRI PUJA It is important that Sahaja Yogis have to do introspection. Introspection is inward- looking. Inward-looking: "Why am I thinking? What am I thinking? What is the need to +. settle think?" You will become Nirvichara. Do not allow mind to befool This mind your you. down with is like a monkey. I tell you, it is really like a monkey. And when it starts working, it makes you jump from this end to that end, that end to that end. And if you reach some conclu- yourself sions, so-called, and if it is not achieved, then you are the most miserable person. I have seen people .. only thinking about something which is absurd. And you can see out of this thinking what comes out on a global level also. What is the need to go to the moon? So many people are starved, are dying out. What is the need to go to Mars? What are they going to get from there? Because they formed a habit. First they came to India, then went to China, then went to this, then went to that. They cannot sit down.. Settling down is very important. Settle down with yourself. You have to rise in spiritual life and if your movement is downward, who can help you? This is a very interesting time, as I told you. It is the time of judgement. And at this time we have to be careful that we are our own judges. Nobody has to tell you that you are catching this one and catching that one. You yourself can feel it, what chakras you are catching.. You have all these qualities already awakened in you. They are in you. You use them... With the Kundalini awakening, all these beautiful qualities you have will come. And then your generosity, your beautiful being, which is enlightened by the spirit, will the world that Sahaja Yoga is the truth. It should not be a mental satisfaction within you, prove to that I have got the Realization, I am this. Not mental – it is a state. It is a state and that state to achieve, you have to really meditate and find time for meditation every night, every morning. The more you will meditate, the better it will be. No excuses are to be given or to be convincing to yourself. Everything is unimportant. Your ascent is very important if you really want to save this world in this Kali Yuga. I think today I have made it very clear to you what qualities already are instilled within you. They are there. They are not dharmas, but qualities. They are just within you. The only thing is you have turned your attention to something opposite, otherwise all these qualities are already instilled within you. They are already there and nothing can destroy them, except for you yourself. If you have destroyed them, nobody can help. YOUR ASCENT is very important

 2 NOVEMBER LISBON PORTUGAL DIWALI PUJA There are ten valencies human beings have got. But apart from that, there are many dharmas anamdS dharmas which are surrounding us like angels. The first dharma is your love for humanity. It is the first dharma. like angEIS But if you say from that end when you start, it starts with Shri Dharma. It is the dharma of the woman – how she should live, how she should get married, how she should look after her children, what should be her behaviour, all is Shri Dharma. And then is Patni Dharma. It is the wife, the wife's dharma. What should be her dharma? In her dharma she looks nice. If she gives up her dharma, then she is a prostitute. So then is Pathi Dharma – how should be a husband, how should he behave towards his family, how should he pay attention towards his wife, about the whole, entire family – the whole, you can say. Parivara they call it, the whole, all the relations and everything. That is his dharma. But beyond that is the dharma of Satya Dharma – how much he sticks to truth. Then the dharma for creativity. In creativity, as you know very well these days, with money people are standing on their heads or I don't know how, what they are doing because the amount of nonsense they are producing all over the world in the name of modernism is no way Khala Dharma – no way. Then we have also what you call politics, Rajkaran Dharma. In this, also dharma is there. Now taking bribes, I mean the kind of things that are going on – corruption, all kinds of things that are going on, competition and fighting and all that. They are falling from their Dharma of Rajkaran. Education – same thing. We call it as Shikhshada. All such things are dharmas. There is a kind of a principle which we have to keep, otherwise you can topple down from the lotus and that is what happens. Now we have also Rashtra Dharma. The Rashtra Dharma is that of your country. You must – theirs is a dharma of your rashtra. When you have to fight for your country, you should. But you should not be aggressive on other countries, not try to dominate other countries, nor you should bring a bad name to your country. It is very important Sahaja Yogis have all these intact, absolutely, because you are stand- ing on the lotuses already. standing on lotuses DHARMÁS INTACT

 LISBON – The puja began early in the evening and the Goddess Shri Mahalakshmi sakshat Shri Mataji, whose face was shining like the moon, spoke about the significance of Diwali, the qualities of Shri Lakshmi, the different At the Lisbon airport after Diwali Puja in 1997, about thirty yogis were in the airport and one by one Shri Mataji was accepting a flower from each of them. I began to feel we were putting pressure on Mother, who was staying there and having to accept all our flowers, so I held back. When Mother had accepted all the flowers from nearly all the other yogis, it was my turn. When I gave Mother the flower, I began to cry. She asked me why I was crying. "I always cry, Mother" was what came out. I don't actually cry so much, but that is what I said. "You know I can never leave you. I am always with you," Shri Mataji replied, knowing really what I felt. of dharma associated with types the Nabhi chakra and the dangers resulting from going against the Lakshmi tattwa. After the puja, before Shri Mataji was about to leave, She asked a Romanian yogi to sing a song. He began with a Marathi bhajan in a fast pace. Immediately everyone Barbara Bain got up to dance and then there was no stopping the dancing, joy and ecstasy for When it was time to take the food to Mother we were sitting and chatting with Her. Mother asked me where I was from and told me I looked typically as if I had come from India. I told Her that although I was from South Africa my father had been very strict that we should be like Indians. She spoke to me in Hindi and asked me how I had made the dish. She told me not to put too many the next hour or more. Shri Mataji was very happy at the end of the puja and told us the next day that the vibrations were just tremendous and that all the yogis enjoyed them very much. The proof of that we saw in the public program on the following day in Lisbon where about seven hundred people came. The moment Shri Mataji entered the hall, most people achieved their Realization. All the Portuguese people had a constant smile on their faces after the program. Amit Gupta chil- ies in it. She said my food was lovely. At one point She closed Her eyes and it was as if She took some weapon and Her form was so fierce. After some minutes She seemed to come back. "What happened?" I asked Her. "Oh I just went to help somebody," She laughed and said. CC Devibehn Kadam

 the world has to change YOU ARE THE CATALYST 4 DECEMBER DELHI INDIA PUBLIC PROGRAM Whatever may be taught through religion and however they might frighten you that you are you to hell and this will happen, that will happen, whatever it is, people are not will you go afraid of it. And what do they want? They want that whatever they have to do, they will SEEKENS do it. They are not afraid. The fear has gone. Fear of God has gone. Fear of sin has gone. All this is finished. And that is why it is important to understand that we have to become transformed into a new personality. This personality becomes the ocean of peace and with this peace you can spread peace. And when you are peaceful, you see the reality of your life, the beauty of your life. understand also that others are also as beautiful as you are.. We think the Then you others are there and we are different. We are all one, tied together in one thread. Even the Mother Earth is a part and parcel of that. All the stars and all these heavenly bodies all are part and parcel of that. And we are one of that... The world has to change.. You are the catalyst. Through you it will change – not by talk- ing about it or by threatening people or telling them stories. All kinds of things are going on in this world. It is the transformation which is very important and that is so easy to get because you are seekers. You are seekers of truth. You know it is very easy to get and to be experienced. In that, when you experience that peace within yourself, people see. They are impressed and you can spread peace. Peace is only possible if there is genuine divine love within you flowing, otherwise a talk of peace is all useless. I have known people who have got a peace award. I don't know why they got it. They have no peace within. You must have the peace within and that peace is only possible when you are transformed and transformed into a new being, a new personality, about which all the prophecies are there. All the scriptures have talked about it. All the incarnations and all the saints have talked about it. That transformation is at hand. If you want to have that transformation, it is not at all difficult, but you must know you are capable of getting that transformation very easily and retaining it.

 25 DECEMBER GANAPATIPULE INDIA CHRISTMAS PUJA Christ – what was His power? His power was of love and not of anger because He is the christianity through the heart one who has crossed the most difficult centre of Agnya. Those people who have ego never realize they have ego. With their ego, they do all kinds of nonsensical things... You have to be loving, affectionate, kind and disciplined. I must say this because, when you are loving, you go out of bounds sometimes because you have no discipline of Sahaja Yoga. Loving does not mean that you become like Romeo and Juliet. It doesn't mean that. You must have your balance through your discipline. If you have no disci- pline, you can never be a good Sahaja Yogi. From the life of Christ, we have to learn these things that, unless and until we have these things, we cannot become good Sahaja Yogis.. There is a big transformation taking place. In that transformation also your rising is taking place. There is a big evolution going on and those who will not evolve properly will be left behind. As it is said, this is the last judgment and you will be judged. You will be left behind. You cannot adhere to people who are rising higher. With your weight you will fall down... I would love all My children to be extremely loving and collective, not to denounce any- body for no rhyme and reason.. Put your hands to your heart and say, "Mother, we will love. We will spread Your divine love, encompass the whole world, give Realization to all the people. We will not shout. We will not be angry. We will not do all kinds of rituals, but just surrender, surrender our ego to You." Surrender it. Surrender your ego. All your problems can be solved because, as long as there is ego, this Divine Power does not take over. You may do anything. You are not connected. Your connection is missing. Christ is missing. He is no more there. To establish Him, first of all you must show how you love. But that does not mean that you love your wife, love your children and love your house. You have to love everyone. Try to make everyone happy... One has to learn Christianity through the heart – no other way out. They should learn through the heart – the Heart of Your Mother. work it out KNOW WHAT YOU ARE

 New York progam 10 June 1997 GANAPATIPULE – As we approached Ganapatipule, a sense of anticipation grew amongst us and a light, joyful excitement filled the air. We arrived after dark. As our buses pulled into the camp, people began to spot friends, acquaintances, husbands, wives and children. Great reunions were just moments away. It was particularly beautiful to see parents and their children who had been attending the school in Talnoo, near Dharamsala. Now the family of the India tour had expanded to include thousands of people. The power of those numbers was evident in the vibrations. Steve Wollenberger

 31 DECEMBER KALWE INDIA SHAKTI PUJA The shakti – She is the woman. Man cannot do without the woman. She is the power shakti Snakti behind him. But how you treat your shakti is very important. How you look after your wife is very important. is the I was telling them, in the West marriages are broken, families are broken, the children are on the road and there is no discipline at all, no discipline of any kind. You cannot power what sort of children they will be tomorrow. They could be devils. They could be say anything because parents have no interest in their children and parents have no interest in themselves. So first of all, the family has to be all right. You must know that you have married. So many people got married now in Sahaja Yoga, so I have to tell them at the very outset you must decide that you will see the good points of your partner. And you must prom- ise and take a challenge that we are going to make a very happy married life. It is very easy to find faults with others because your eyes are outward. If you could somehow turn them inside, you will be surprised that you have many more defects than they have. It is the responsibility of the women to look after the society. If something has gone with your society, it is because of the women who do not understand what is wrong their job, what is their duty. And their attention has gone so low that they try to compare themselves with the cheap women, with the cheap actresses and also women without ideals in their life. You, being Sahaja Yogis, you have to understand that you are any not like these horrible women. You are a special type. And you must not take to all the stupid things that these women are doing for money. It amounts to prostitution, I think, the way things people are doing for money. So be satisfied. And if you are satisfied, you will really enjoy yourself. You will enjoy your family life. The woman who is not satisfied always finds faults with others, always is demanding something. She can never make a good wife and can never make a good society. And this society which she will make will destroy the next society. you will enjoy yourself BE SATISFIED

 KALWE – It was the last day of the India tor. It was difficult to believe. It seemed like we Of course, the men must respect women and respect the great qualities in them. Their satisfaction, their patience, had only just arrived and yet as if we had been together for ages. One last major event remained: puja to Shri Mataji, scheduled for late that morning. Shri Mataji arrived in a car which drove up the centre aisle right up to the stage, between the men and the ladies. She radiated divinity as always and it was an honour to again be in Her presence. Shri Mataji spoke briefly in Hindi, in Marathi and in English. The puja was a Shakti Puja and a central theme in the English part of the talk was the respect for the wife, who represents the shakti of the family. The puja was very brief. Afterwards, Shri Mataji requested that we all be silent and suck the vibrations. The pendal became absolutely silent and, with deep desire, we tried to absorb the deep love which Shri Mataji was pouring forth. It was a profound moment. And as we their understanding, everything must be respected. And they should not make fun of their wives all the time. I have seen, if that is done, then women stoop down to the same level. That is no friendship. In friendship you must have respect. It is all right, you can do this with your friends, but not with wife. And this is what I cannot understand, your how men use their intelligence in such a stupid manner. Because she is the mother of your children, if you make fun of her, children will also make fun of her. Of course, she has to respect you because she receives her authority from you, but also you must maintain her authority. You must keep her in proper shape.. | was told that this year, on-coming here, there will be Sahaja Yogis who will go astray. They will do dirty things, sang our last aarti on the tour there at Shri Mataji's feet, somehow the whole experience of our month in India seemed to complete itself. It is a privilege to be a of this divine family. Steve Wollenberger bad things and, I should say, things which are not pure and they will destroy Sahaja Yoga. If they are predicted like that, part you can imagine, at this age of Mine, I will have to fight it. all can fight it by understanding that it is not your But you life. This is not a Sahaja life and you have to live in a Sahaja manner. You must bring a good name to Sahaja Yoga – not artifi- cially, but really. People should say that if they have met any saints, they are in Sahaja Yoga. If you are not loving, then it is not going to work out.

 Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, who was born of the royal dynasty of the Shalivahans, propounded all of the knowledge about Kundalini and en-masse awakening of the Kundalini, and also the en-masse actualization of Self Realization. By this method of spontaneous awakening, thousands and thousands of people have been connected to the All-Pervading Primordial Force of Life (Paramachaitanya). She not only worked out the awakening and the union with this Primordial Force, but She gave the complete knowledge of our subtle system.. People's lives have been changed. They have become really transformed and have become very loving, compassionate and peaceful people. They are free from greed and lust which is unsocial behaviour... This power is based in you. It is an actualization of an experience that you feel. A cool breeze flows out of your fingertips and out of the top of your head and this is described in most of the scriptures.... It is a living process of evolution so you do not have to pay for awakening or for your spiritual ascent. This unique method is not against science. What western civilization or western consumer- ism has done has given us blind progress, but with Sahaja Yoga you can achieve progress of the real kind because there is light. self realization LIVES HAVỆ CHANGED

 the joy that you get HOW IT SPREADS So many Sahaja Yogis are there who just jumped into Sahaja Yoga. That is also some- thing very remarkable, but sometimes those who jump very fast, do not go very deep. It is a very funny thing about human beings I can't understand, that sometimes they take time to take to Sahaja Yoga and, once they take to Sahaja Yoga, they go very deep. And sometimes they take no time. They just jump into it and then afterwards you just don't understand why they are still at the same point, same height. They are still not going deep into it. So it all has something to do I think with all the education one must have had or maybe the way they are brought up or maybe their childhood or maybe some psychological problem or could be some sort of egoistical treatment they have developed or some sort of a complication within. But that does not matter. Ultimately, everybody comes up and becomes a very good source of Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja Yoga is now on your shoulders. You have to look after it. You have to spread it.. The confidence comes when you give Realization to others. Apart from that, the joy you get by giving Realization is the greatest. As if like a mother, when she gives birth to a child, how happy she feels. In the same way, you also feel that you have been that able to give Realization to others. And that is how Sahaja Yoga spreads a lot. ADDITIONAL WORDS FROM SHRI MATAJI LISTEN TO ME and ABOVE: 24 May 1997 WORLD MAP: 6 September 1997 OPPOSITE PAGE: an exceerpt frpm speech written by Shri Mataji for presentation at the Russian Folk Medicine Conference held in September 1997. NEWS REPORTS in this issue are from the pages of The Divine Cool Breeze magazines published in 1997 and 1998 and from the book Eternally Inspiring Recollections Volume Six. ALL PHOTOGRAPHS are from 1997, taken at the event described in the accompanying text (unless otherwise noted). The cover photo is from the Shri Adi Shakti Puja. The Diwali Puja photo features sitarist Mr. Sheolikar of Nirmal Sangeet Sarita with Babamama. There are sure to be errors and omissions in this short record of the events of 1997. It is not comprehensive, nor complete. The message of Shri Mataji's travels can be found in the scope, range and love She gave every day in 1997 – and every day since. THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE www.divinecoolbreeze.org SUBSCRIPTIONS: contact@divinecoolbreeze.org CONTENT: editor@divinecoolbreeze.org PRINTED BY King Printing Co. Inc. Lowell Massachusetts USA & Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. Pune Maharashtra India

 bring a good name to SAHAJA YOĞA people should say if they have met any saints THEY ARE IN SAHAJA YOGA



----------------------

2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
Yoga
omelyear in Sahaja
1997
2013 issue 4 – volume twenty-six number four
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-1.txt 
 19
16 MARCH DELHI SHRI SHIVA PUJA
21 MARCH DELHI BIRTHDAY PUJA
6 APRIL DELHI
MEDICAL CONFERENCE TALK
4 MAY CABELLA SAHASRARA PUJA
25 MAY CABELLA SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA
8 JUNE NEW JERSEY SHRI KRISHNA PUJA
10 JUNE NEW YORK PUBLIC PROGRAM
16 JUNE LOS ANGELES PUBLIC PROGRAM
18 JUNE BERKELEY PUBLIC PROGRAM
20 JUNE VANCOUVER PUBLIC PROGRAM
23 JUNE TORONTO PUBLIC PROGRAM
20 JULY CABELLA GURU PUJA
6 & 7 AUGUST MOSCOW PUBLIC PROGRAMS
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-2.txt 
 97
8 AUGUST MOSCOW PUJA
11 AUGUST ST. PETERSBURG PUBLIC PROGRAM
13 AUGUST TAGLIATTI PUBLIC PROGRAM
15 AUGUST KIEV PUBLIC PROGRAM
23 AUGUST CABELLA SHRI KRISHNA PUJA
24 AUGUST CABELLA MARRIAGES
7 SEPTEMBER CABELLA SHRI GANESHA PUJA
5 OCTOBER CABELLA NAVARATRI PUJA
2 NOVEMBER LISBON DIWALI PUJA
3 NOVEMBER LISBON PUBLIC PROGRAM
4 DECEMBER DELHI PUBLIC PROGRAM
25 DECEMBER GANAPATIPULE CHRISTMAS PUJA
31 DECEMBER KALWE SHAKTI PUJA
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-3.txt 
 LISTEN TO ME
It has been a very, very joyful evening for all of us
and we can thank all the people who have brought
all kinds of entertainment for all of us... It is a very
remarkable thing that we come from different
countries and different cultures, speaking different
languages and how we understand the language of
heart, language of love, which is divine love.
So tomorrow will be the great puja of Kundalini..
I think I will be able to say something new tomorrow
for all of you to enjoy. I cannot entertain as you all can
entertain. But somehow I have seen that whatever I
am saying you all listen to Me so intensely there must
be some entertainment there.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-4.txt 
 1007
ONE YEAR
language of
gena
HEART
language of
LOVE
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-5.txt 
 16 MARCH DELHI INDIA SHIVARATRI PUJA
Deceiving yourself is not going to help. The best thing is to face yourself and understand
wrong you have been doing. If you correct yourself and become that, I am sure
a torch
what
all the problems – political, economic and all stupid problems we have – will be fin-
ON
the ished.. All these problems only are created by human beings. They are not created by
the Divine Force, but the Divine Force tries to neutralize them. If there are many Sahaja
path
Yogis who are practising Sahaja Yoga in the real sense of the word, if that could be done,
if that could be achieved, then I think we can do a lot, a lot for the betterment of human-
ity. And that is why we have got Realization. It is not only for yourself, it is not only for
your family, it is not only for your city or country, but for the whole world Sahaja Yoga is
going to work out.
Now if you have to do competition, you must only do competition in your ascent and in
nothing else. But people are so superficial that they think by showing off or by becom-
ing something – a big Johnny – they will achieve something of a very great level. It is not
so. It has to be a very humble attitude towards yourself also, so
that
understand
you
that whatever you are doing is for the betterment of global problems. Absolutely we
can solve because you are the channels of the Divine. If I could do it alone, I would have
done it. But I can't, so that is why I had to gather you all and to tell you that you
become
all the channels. But in the meanwhile, you enjoy. You enjoy life. Every second becomes
a joy, which is also the gift of Shiva. Shiva is the one who creates this great admiration
and great appreciation of every moment, everything that is there. And that is the state
we have to achieve, by not condemning yourself or not by pampering your ego, but by
seeing what you are.
That is the main thing one has to see: what problem you have and what is troubling you
is yourself only. If you could just come to that point of understanding, I am sure, I am
very, very sure that you will be such an asset to help to make this world look at itself and
change because superficially you cannot change such deep-rooted problems. And
you
are being so blessed by Kundalini that you can really become a great torch. I should say,
a torch on the path of truth, love and joy.
every second becomes a
JOY
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-6.txt 
 ONE WORLD
we can say now that
it is not in different nations
we have to think, but we have to
think that we are belonging to
ONE WORLD OF DIVINITY.
And there you are absolutely protected.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-7.txt 
 21 MARCH DELHI INDIA BIRTHDAY PUJA
You have not come here in Sahaja Yoga to emancipate Me. You have come here to
believers
evolve yourself and, because of that, you have to face yourself and see for yourself what
is within you which is very strong, which is troublesome, which is dragging you down,
of synthesis
which is killing. Sahaja Yoga is nothing but an ocean of joy.. What you enjoy in that is
collectivity – sangat. That collectivity you should enjoy only by getting rid of your non-
sensical boundaries that you have built and then you see the joy. All the time you will be
floating in joy.
There is a sense which people have which you may not have before Realization. Some of
the people –I was amazed how deep they are - how they took to Sahaja Yoga. They are
supposed to be very great men, supposed to be people of very great principles, but
very hot-tempered, intolerant about people and they take to Sahaja Yoga just like this
because inside there is a big depth, so that everything is absorbed without any problem.
Everybody can achieve, but one has to be careful as to the two wheels of our mind. One
is the ego, another is the conditioning...
You are only still small children and, like small children, you must have a very clean heart
to accept, to absorb the beauty of the peace that is within you – and also the beauty of
purity. Without purity you cannot enjoy anything. So in Sahaja Yoga, although we have
so many people, I must say the purity of these few saints, who lived earlier, we have to
yet achieve...
We have to now understand that Sahaja Yoga is to be consolidated through synthesis.
We are believers of synthesis. Any divisive thing that comes into your
mind
you should
I make to you, that you please introspect.
just throw it away. This is a request on this day
Unless and until you introspect, you cannot even respect yourself. You cannot even love
yourself. If you love yourself, you will introspect and find out what is wrong.
It is important. See, even I feel all this, standing like a witness to you, a silent witness.
When I see big, big mountains, I think they are like great saints who are watching, and
they are trying to record what is happening in this world because they also understand.
They also know. I have to again and again tell you that today is the day to see your own
self, your own chakras, your own defects. That will give you permanently the joy that is
promised. You will get thoughtless awareness. Also you will get doubtless awareness. But
never get into the trap of your conditioning and of your ego.
This is what I have to tell you today, on this day where you are celebrating, that
you
celebrate your own birthday. Celebrate it. See for yourself what you have achieved and
what
you are going to achieve. It is time for you to celebrate, than to celebrate My birth-
day. I will be very happy to celebrate your birthday than to celebrate Mine.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Honour and Celebration in Delhi
1
Shri Mataji watched as a beautiful chariot, pulled by
very young children dressed in white, crossed the
Inside the chariot was a large birthday cake.
On Easter Sunday, Shri Mataji and Sir C.P. celebrated
their golden wedding anniversary with a music program
at the New Temple in Delhi. Shri Mataji spoke briefly
about resurrecting people through Sahaja Yoga, includ-
ing Muslims, and particularly Sufis.
On Sunday April 6th, the Indian Medical Association
sted a special forum, "The Art of Healing and Sahaja
Yoga," at which Shri Mataji presented a talk about the
DELHI – In 1997 Delhi was blessed with two pujas
in the space of one week. Yogis from all over the world
stayed at the Nizamuddin Scout Camp in those familiar
dome-shaped brick huts.
Between the Shivaratri and Birthday Pujas, yogis were
able to adventure out beyond Delhi. One group trav-
stage.
elled
to Hardwar and Rishikesh to bathe in the River
up
Ganges. This is the place where many holy saints and
Deities have been, including Shri Sita and Shri Rama.
At the Birthday Puja, there were two musical evenings.
The second of these included a performance by Debu
Chaudhuri. Shri Mataji stayed until 3:30 in the morning.
At the Birthday Puja itself, the pendal was a sight to
behold, completely bedecked with the most colourful
balloons, streamers and flowers. Shri Mataji wore a pink
sari and looked exquisitely beautiful and radiant. She
spoke in Hindi and then in English. She spoke about the
dangers of ego and the need for introspection.
A letter from the grandson of Alfred Nobel was read
aloud, in which Shri Mataji was praised and wished a
happy birthday.
CC
Swadisthan chakra.
On the evening of that same day, Shri Mataji was the
guest of honour at the Unity International Foundation
where it was announced that She would receive a Unity
Award for International Understanding later in the year.
A spokesman for the foundation explained that the award
is normally reserved for heads of state.
On Monday April 7th, Shri Mataji and Sir CP again
celebrated fifty years of marriage, this time with a dinner
at the Taj Palace with family, friends and well-wishers.
In 1997, I took Jalil, a Moroccan Sahaja Yogi, to meet
Shri Mataji at the time of the Birthday Puja in Delhi.
When we arrived at Her house in Noida, we were
It was 1997 and it was the first occasion that I went to
India for Birthday Puja in Delhi. When I arrived in the
middle of hundreds of people at the airport, a young man
came to me and said, "Jai Shri Mataji!"
It was a complete week of celebrations for the seventy-
fifth birthday of our Holy Mother. Among all these
activities, there was a special recognition of Shri Mataji
by the Medical Society of India. They mentioned the
miraculous cure of my son, who at long distance, had
been cured in Mexico.
immediately invited in and were treated very hospitably,
being offered sweets and tea. After that, we were allowed
to enter Shri Mataji's room and we namaskared at Her
CC
Feet.
Shri Mataji wanted to know details of events in Morocco
and we told our experience with a man called Moham-
med. We had had our first workshop in a hotel room in
Marrakesh and, after about twenty minutes, there was
such a deep atmosphere of silence. Mohammed opened
and looked at Shri Mataji's photo.
At that time our Holy Mother had tears in Her eyes
and was full compassion for this young man, who was
suffering of amyloidosis, a mortal and incurable disease.
When the ceremony was over, the Divine Mother came
out just where I was standing and I told Her that I was
going back to Mexico that night.
Shri Mataji stopped in front of me and said, "Thank
you for coming to India. May God bless you."
I wanted to kiss Her Lotus Feet and thank Her for all
his
eyes
"I have had a good communication and I can feel Her,'
he said. He then said that the silence told him the truth.
Later we asked him why this was and he explained that
his father had been a Sufi and told him that if he ever
found something that gave him absolute silence, then, at
that moment, he would meet God.
Shri Mataji liked this story very much. “You have to
prepare Morocco for My coming," She said.
She has given to me, but we were standing in a narrow
corridor surrounded by a crowd of doctors and I only
could bend my head to say from my
Mother" as She went out.
Franz Mekyna
heart "Thank You,
Graciela Vázquez-Diaz
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-9.txt 
 4 MAY CABELLA ITALY SAHASRARA PUJA
You are powerful. You have powers. Not only that, but you have been specially bestowed
with those powers. But if you do not want use them, then what are you? If the lamp is not
the realm
enlightened, what is this lamp for – just for decoration? So this has to be used. And this
of god
has to be used without feeling that awareness within you that you are something great,
better than others, something selected or also they say that we are chosen...
Whatever
you do, you should see from the results what works out. Results should be
such that you should see how it works out. That is the intelligence. I think that is the
superior intelligence by which you know how to say things, what things to say and how
to work it out. This divine love gives you a complete control over yourself and you know
everything, how to behave, how to talk to people, how to manage them...
When you become the ocean, then you are not bothered what shore you go to, where
you travel. You are not bothered. You are only with the ocean, moving up and down.
That is how it is a living ocean of love and that is what we have to develop – without
dominating others, without showing off. It should be that the whole thing should be
contained within ourself. It should be all within yourself and that is the most enjoyable
thing... This is something that if you have it within yourself, you are fully filled within
your Self. So what is most important? What is so much needed? Nothing. You are com-
pletely filled with yourself, contented with yourself and then you want to share. This is
of dealing with the Sahasrara and I am sure the day will come when this
the ideal
way
whole world's Sahasrara has to be opened out. This is what we have to do and we are
not going to disappear into some exclusive places that are just for meditation. You can
go there, but not for escaping the world. That is not the idea. The idea is for meditation
for your growth. It would be a nice place to go to.
It is very important to understand: how valuable you are, how remarkably important you
are, born at this time. You got your Realization for what? To emancipate this world, to
transform human beings, to take the whole of this world into the realm of God. That is
what you are here for.
when you become the ocean
YOU ARE NOT BOTHERED
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-10.txt 
 291
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-11.txt 
 25 MAY CABELLA ITALY SHRI ADI SHAKTI PUJA
Today we are going to do the puja of Adi Shakti. It is a difficult subject, to talk about Adi
she is the
Shakti, because it is not easy to understand that Adi Shakti is the power of Sadashiva.
Sadashiva is God Almighty. She is His breath, as some people call it. Some say She is the
breath
desire and some say that She is the entire power of Sadashiva and Sadashiva cannot do
anything without Her powers..
As the children of Adi Shakti, we have to go all out . Everywhere, on every corner we
have to shout and we have to tell loudly what is the time in which we are living.. You are
children of the Adi Shakti. You are here and your Mother is here. It is a very, very fortu-
nate thing for Me that you are here. I am very proud of you, but again and again I have
to tell you that the work has to be with a faster speed. We have to move with a faster
speed and get more people to Sahaja Yoga. It is rather difficult for Me to say something
forcefully. That is not My nature. I cannot get into tempers and I cannot get angry
and I
cannot forcefully say something to you. But if you fail, then the only thing will be that
you
have failed Me completely. It means that – nothing less than that...
So on the whole we have done well I must say, but it is not the final. We have to work
faster with more enthusiasm and joyfully. You do not know what joy you get
when
you
give Realization to somebody. It is the most joyful moment when you give Realization to
others. Now just try it. Once you try once, you will enjoy it, then you will want more and
more and more.. The want disappears into this desire, that “My God, this man is going,
should I call him and give him Realization?" On the street you will feel, "Come here, come
here, I want to give you something" And you will make him sit down and you will give
Realization. This will be your style. Like mad, you will say, "Oh no, no, look at this, this
gentleman is without any Realization, let us give!" You will have to go to churches. You
will have to go to universities. You will have to go to all such congregations where they
have no idea about what they can achieve and then tell them without any fear, without
any malice. You can talk to them and you should tell them, "Now we are here to help for
your good. We have not come for our good, but for your good. Now listen to us." And
I am sure, very sure, that the Kundalini within you will be very happy. She is not happy
with people who are not using her fully. So She will be very happy to help you and do
the needful for the emancipation of the whole world.
without fear without malice
GIVE REALIZATION
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-12.txt 
 CABELLA – We are all anxiously awaiting Shri Mataji's
arrival at the entertainment evening and the very special
experience of this moment.
All our little hearts are so excited and the sight of our
On many occasions we would go into Shri
CABELLA –
Mataji's rooms and lift big boxes with gifts and
open
them. Then She would talk about all kinds of things.
Sometimes She would offer us tea and vibrate the sugar
and it was always in that loving, motherly way. The first
time She actually called me by name, I was very proud
somehow because that was my recognition of being Her
child. It was at the end of that year that we had a meeting
Mother fulfills the little hearts so much that the little
hearts become bigger to fit it all in. And sometimes the
love is so tremendous that the hearts get so full of love
and it overflows and manifests in tears.
It must be love tears that come because it feels like we
have been a little lost again and the sight of our Mother
reassures us that She is always with us.
with an accountant who did not speak any English and I
was there to translate. That was a very beautiful moment
because I was there next to Shri Mataji, next to Her chair,
just like Shri Ganesha is sitting. And I was completely
empty and there to serve Shri Mataji.
Sidsel Mugford
Marco Arciglio
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-13.txt 
 7 JUNE NEW JERSEY USA TALK TO SAHAJA YOGIS
Dancing, art, every kind of creativity will definitely bring forth the spiritual aspect of
music that
elevates
Americans' life. They have to come to this, otherwise it is not going to be appreciated,
it won't be an appeal, people won't like such music. They will try some tricks otherwise.
You know that in this country we have all kinds of people, all kinds of music and some-
times extremely stupid, but somehow they are gaining the idea that popularity now
does not remain with all kinds of strange and stupid things. They have taken, I am sure,
by their own urge to search the reality, a new type of a style, new type of a singing, in
which there is a different tune, I feel. It is coming up, suggesting that there is something
higher that we have to enjoy. The idea of enjoyment is changing.
Sometimes people feel that this country is not so ancient, it has no traditions, also that
the people are from different cultures and so they are all mixed up, confused. But in that
SO
confusion only, you are going to find the truth. And that is why everywhere in America
you go, you find that there are people who are working out some sort of a search of
their own. Maybe it is not correct, it is not all right. Like the music now – you see, you
had such serene, deep music, also some very collective music, all types of music that you
could think of - Indian music, Spanish music, also Russian music. All these have combined
on the stage here. That is suggestive that one day the whole world will have a sense of
music. That is a different thing than what music is because music can be anything. To have
the sense of music that not only entertains, but elevates you, takes you to higher realms
of your existence – that is music.
You know how much I love music. It is not because I am fond of music, but through music
vibrations can be spread much faster...
It is a very funny mixture here I find in America. One side is this creativity, which is some-
times quite mad. On the other side you find people extremely busy, who have no time
to even sing something or read something – extremely, extremely busy making money.
Only money is the criteria. But the money situation seems to be very bad here to Me, for
the future, because of the stupid ideas about economics...
Unless and until you have the light of your spirit, you cannot grow very
further because,
in the dimensions of the human mind, you cannot conceive the heights which you can
reach.
in that confusion only
YOU FIND THE TRUTH
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-14.txt 
 WHAT
T IF...
What if Sahaja Yoga and the teachings of Shri Mataji could transform people After a vibrant program at the
University of California Berkeley
What if Sahaja Yoga and the teachings of Shri Mataji could activate the campus and after Shri Mataji received
primordial energy of the Kundalini and the serpent coiled three and a half seekers onto the stage, we eventually
times at the base of the spine, which rises up through the spinal cord and made our way back to the car, where
an Indian gentlemen stood eagerly
What if the violence and death and destruction that happens every day in waiting to engage Shri Mataji in lively
debate about Vedantic philosophy.
What if people could live happier, healthier lives, more productive lives We had started the day early in Los
Angeles and now here we were in
What if there was a religion without dogma, without theology, without Berkeley debating the ancient Vedas at
priestcraft, without tithing, a religion without religious wars, a religion with- midnight in a car park. Shri Mataji,
who is always patient, displayed
What if there was a religion without hate, without fear and without guilt? tremendous compassion in guiding this
What if there was a practice that offered only the cosmic bliss of divine aspirant before we made our way back
through Self Realization?
flows out through the crown of the head and could transform people's lives?
our cities became a thing of the past?
simply by practising Sahaja Yoga and the teachings of Shri Mataji?
out religious fundamentalism?
love and asked nothing in return?
What if human beings have evolved from lower forms of life and that we
are still evolving, but rather than evolving our physical bodies, we are evolv-
to where we were staying.
Geoffrey Godfrey
ing into a higher state of consciousness, an evolution of our brain and central In 1997, when Our Divine Mother
visited Berkeley, we were blessed to
What if the survival of our species, homo sapiens, and the survival of be at the public program held at the
our very beautiful ecosystems and the survival of life as we know it on Planet university. I had a strong desire to offer
Her a very fragrant variety of rose that
What if the thousands of generations of biological Darwinism required grew on our small patio. I went to
for biological evolution and the human consciousness of evolution could take the stage, bowed and sat at Her Lotus
Feet and offered the humble little rose.
Then – I still wonder why – I simply
burst into tears. Mother instantly took
What if the simple act of Sahaja Yoga could create a profound harmoniz- my right hand into Hers. “Why? What
ing effect on society and that individuals could create effortlessly greater hap- happened, My child?" She asked.
I was overwhelmed. I somehow gasped
an answer. “Mother, I could have never
imagined that I would get to see You
this close." “Believe in yourself," Mother
Would you be open to the great possibilities that may be bestowed upon said with a smile, radiating love. She
had my hand still in Hers. Then,
The answer to all these questions is that it can happen and is happening. many other seekers got to the stage to
Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi and Her teaching of Sahaj Yoga is enjoy Her loving vibrations, while
I was getting immersed in the most
It is a gift of cosmic consciousness that comes from the power of Self blissful experience of my life. This
Claes Nobel, 18 June 1997, Berkeley USA divine gift of Shri Mataji has a very
nervous system?
Earth depended on this evolution of human consciousness?
place over the course of a lifetime?
Or what if the evolution of human consciousness could take place in an
afternoon?
piness, peace and quality of life?
What if there was a great spiritual teacher before you?
Would
you listen?
Would
you hear?
you?
тапу
a gift to all of you and all of humanity.
Realization.
special place in my heart.
Ivana Banerjee
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-15.txt 
 8 JUNE NEW JERSEY USA SHRI KRISHNA PUJA
Although this is the land of Shri Krishna, people ask Me why the people are not spiritual.
OU dre How is it they get entangled into different types of seekings which are not leading to
truth? Why is it the people in America are not so alert as to recognize what is the truth
and what they have to find...?“Why freedom?" one may
there
ask...
Today we see a country that is America in a complete chaos. So this freedom, without
any wisdom at all growing, starts creating a terrible ego. When auspiciousness is given
up, then Shri Ganesha sleeps and Christ, who is the incarnation of Shri Ganesha, also
does not bother. So the rule of Christ is finished. So what rules is the ego – this ego which
thinks it is free...
The mind starts working with ego. Ego takes over like a computer and it starts suggesting
and methods by which how much money you can earn. So when you start earn-
ways
ing money, then again the same Ego Mister tells you how to destroy yourself with this
money... It takes you to all kinds of wrong places...
This is the curse of money on human beings, which is to be understood: freedom with-
out wisdom is the most dangerous thing to use. It is better not to be free if you have no
wisdom because God knows what you will do if you have freedom and no wisdom...
But this Paramchaitanya, when it takes over, it is love. It is absolute love - love which
thinks, understands, coordinates, cooperates, works and is extremely sensitive. It works.
I am sometimes so surprised the way it works, without fail, without making any mistakes.
You do not have to even tell because you are there.
But to believe that we are there also is a difficult task. With all the experiences, you
should believe that you are there, but that is also quite a difficult task. So when we say
they are established Sahaja Yogis, then what we mean is this: they are completely one,
under the complete charge of Paramachaitanya. That is what we have to be.
If you want to save this country, you have to be that – no argument, no explanation, noth-
ing, no fighting, no strikes, nothing. No placards are needed. You are the ones who will
advertise Sahaja Yoga. Every one of you should understand that your life is very impor-
tant at this juncture. And you have to become that special person who reflects reality
through the divine love.
the most dangerous thing
FREEDOM WITHOUT WISDOM
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-16.txt 
 NEW YORK – Although the trip to North America in 1997
was initially scheduled for about twelve days, Shri Mataji ended
up staying forty days and nights and, throughout all this time,
She seemed to be working out all sorts of issues. It seemed to
be a testing time, with much essential yet subtle work being
undertaken personally by Shri Mataji, so much so that we
missed travelling back across the Atlantic to the July 3rd public
program at the Royal Albert Hall in London. Geoffrey Godfrey
NEW YORK- On June 10th they filed into the
magnificent gothic cathedral, a huge cavernous
place. It was a classic and grand picture of
New York, representing its variety, its drama
and its potential. Many already had a sense of
reverence and awe for the transformation they
were to experience. By the end of the program,
the hall, which holds twenty-five hundred
people, was full.
17741
777
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-17.txt 
 20 JULY CABELLA ITALY GURU PUJA
In Sahaja Yoga, a guru has to be a binding force. There are two types of people, I have
it is you
seen, who go on breaking relations. It is very easy for them. They go on complaining. But
there are others who have a power to bind people together in such a sweet manner that
the people are brought closer together. Not that they have to forgive, it automatically
works out. It just works out like that and people go on joining such a man.
For a guru, it is important that he should not have any false ideas about himself. He might
be from a poor family, might be from the rich family. Whatever it is, he should not be
conscious of that... Your personality has to be something that people should
say, "This
is the real
guru we have met!" For that, you know very well, you do not have to give up
your family, do not have to give up anything. But ego, if it is still there, I don't know what
to say, but you must get rid of it completely and collectively also...
On this day of Guru Puja, I have to say now that one has to work very hard – very hard.
The most important thing is how much you have dedicated your life, your time to Sahaja
Yoga. Then only you will achieve that state of guru. Look at Me. I am a housewife and I
have My family's responsibilities and problems. But despite that, I am all the time think-
ing about Sahaja Yogis, Sahaja Yoga and all that is this emancipation of human beings in
the whole world – not only here or there - in the whole world.
So that should be your widened vision, not for only your school, college or university,
your this or that, but a very wider vision one should have and that you have to develop
through your working into every type of circumstance, every type of problem you have.
Once you develop that kind of a personality, then you will be amazed how you can help
so many people. I know there are so many Sahaja Yogis here who are worthy of praise
and really I love them very much and they also love Me very much, but one should
always see that, as you are now going to be the gurus, you have to be careful not to think
that you are a guru. You should never think you are a guru already. Once you
start think-
ing, again Mr. Ego, the guru, comes up.
So once you decide that "I am nothing, I am nothing, I am just a little ripple in the heart
of my Mother" – if such a humble feeling you get – then all your problems can be solved
and things will work out because your attention and your behaviour are going to impress
other people, nothing else. Whatever you may try, it is you who is going to get Sahaja
Yoga further.
JUST A RIPPLE
in the heart of
mother
my
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-19.txt 
 23 AUGUST CABELLA ITALY SHRI KRISHNA PUJA
This is to be understood very clearly: the sahaja dharma is that you are just free – com-
laugh at
yourself
plete freedom from lust, greed and all nonsense. You are above it. You are above. This
sahaj dharma is above the dharma established by Shri Krishna or by Shri Rama because
have reached that stage. It is in complete freedom you have to be dharmic. What-
you
ever is not good for you, you should not do. I do not have to tell you that you do not do
this or you do not do that. Whatever I say may not be acceptable, but immediately your
vibrations will tell you.
|
This is sahaj dharma. In the sahaj dharma you get rid of all kinds of ... lust, anger, attrac-
tions, then greed. Greed - that is very important, greed and attractions...
The free mind is that which has attention completely enlightened by the spirit. But the
problem is we are still rising out of this human bondage to a higher life of Realization.
And when we are going to that level, we have to realize that we have to give up all these
shackles, all these horrible things within us. Like a bird, when it is born out of the egg, it
shakes out all the parts of the egg. Your brothers, your sisters, your father, your mother,
your husband, everybody – they try to put you down. Now, if they are drinking, they
will say, "Come along, you better have something to drink, you are not social, you are
useless, you are not up-to-date. What is this nonsense?" That is how a fashion starts and
this collective action of fashion did not come from Shri Krishna and not in Sahaj...
You are all grown-up children of Mine and I want you to know all the beauties that are
within you, that
you have to enjoy. First of all, learn to laugh at yourself. That is the best
way to enjoy yourself and not to spend much time at the mirror. That is another
way...
The attention should be on your own qualities, on your own personality and then you
will be amazed how your personality is giving you joy, giving you alladha, giving you
so much of patience with others. To Me, the whole thing looks like sometimes a joke
because nothing is so serious. It is not a Rama's type that you have to be serious. I don't
have to kill anybody. I don't use any weapons in this lifetime...
You must try to see the beauty as Sahaja Yogis. You should be sensitive to see how you
have been helped, how you have been guided, how you have been blessed. This is sahaj
dharma.
SEE THE BEAUTY
this is sahaj dharma
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-21.txt 
 7 SEPTEMBER CABELLA ITALY SHRI GANESHA PUJA
Today we are going to worship Shri Ganesha. It is all said about Him that He is the first
bound
Deity who was created on this Earth by Adi Shakti. As about His creation, you know the
story and also you know how an elephant's head was attached to Him.
by dharma
Today I am going to tell something more subtle about Him, Kundalini and the Mother
Earth. He was made out of the Mother Earth with the vibrations of His Mother. Now the
significance of Mother Earth we have never understood. Now look at the Mother Earth,
She is the one who produces all kinds of beautiful flowers of different fragrance, of dif-
ferent nature, colour, heights. The trees are different. Trees, when they grow up, they
grow in such a manner that every leaf of that tree gets the sun. Look at the collective
sense which is given to us by this Mother Earth. We have never realized that this Mother
Earth, which is giving us everything that we want, how the sun helps the Mother Earth,
cooperates, coordinates with Her. To go further with it, you have seen a picture where
a Kundalini is coming out of the Mother Earth and half of it is seen. So what does this
Kundalini do for us? Or what does this Mother Earth do for us?
The Kundalini leaves the Mother Earth as a reflection and what does She do within us
to build us up in which way? So it is the Primordial Power which is coming out of the
Mother Earth. Mother Earth itself acts like a mother. She looks after you. She gives you
whatever you want. And another miracle thing is that the highest tree is a coconut tree
and a coconut will never fall on any creature or any human being. That means all think-
ing, all understanding, all consciousness, all awareness is coming from the Mother Earth.
But we never understand it. As it is, we take it for granted.
Now what does She do for us, for us human beings? She is the Primordial Power. What
She does is to build in us ... "restrictions" or "primordial taboos" or "primordial dharmas."
For example, you see the steel is here. It has its own dharma. It cannot behave like wood.
Wood has its own dharma. It cannot behave like silver. They all have their dharma and
they are bound in that dharma. Everything that is in the nature has its own dharma. If you
see the tiger, if you see the lion, if you see a mongoose or you see a snake, they all have
their dharma, their style, their everything. It is very surprising how they are bound by it.
THE MOTHER EARTH
she looks after you
OOKS
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-22.txt 
 NEC
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-23.txt 
 5 OCTOBER CABELLA ITALY NAVARATRI PUJA
It is important that Sahaja Yogis have to do introspection. Introspection is inward-
looking. Inward-looking: "Why am I thinking? What am I thinking? What is the need to
+.
settle
think?" You will become Nirvichara. Do not allow
mind to befool
This mind
your
you.
down with
is like a monkey. I tell you, it is really like a monkey. And when it starts working, it makes
you jump from this end to that end, that end to that end. And if you reach some conclu-
yourself
sions, so-called, and if it is not achieved, then you are the most miserable person. I have
seen people .. only thinking about something which is absurd. And you can see out of
this thinking what comes out on a global level also. What is the need to go to the moon?
So many people are starved, are dying out. What is the need to go to Mars? What are
they going to get from there? Because they formed a habit. First they came to India,
then went to China, then went to this, then went to that. They cannot sit down.. Settling
down is very important. Settle down with yourself.
You have to rise in spiritual life and if your movement is downward, who can help you?
This is a very interesting time, as I told you. It is the time of judgement. And at this time
we have to be careful that we are our own judges. Nobody has to tell you
that
you are
catching this one and catching that one. You yourself can feel it, what chakras you are
catching.. You have all these qualities already awakened in you. They are in you.
You use
them...
With the Kundalini awakening, all these beautiful qualities you have will come. And then
your generosity, your beautiful being, which is enlightened by the spirit, will
the world that Sahaja Yoga is the truth. It should not be a mental satisfaction within you,
prove to
that I have got the Realization, I am this. Not mental – it is a state. It is a state and that state
to achieve, you have to really meditate and find time for meditation every night, every
morning. The more you will meditate, the better it will be. No excuses are to be given or
to be convincing to yourself. Everything is unimportant. Your ascent is very important if
you really want to save this world in this Kali Yuga.
I think today I have made it very clear to you what qualities already are instilled within
you. They are there. They are not dharmas, but qualities. They are just within you. The
only thing is you have turned your attention to something opposite, otherwise all these
qualities are already instilled within you. They are already there and nothing can destroy
them, except for you yourself. If you have destroyed them, nobody can help.
YOUR ASCENT
is very important
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-25.txt 
 2 NOVEMBER LISBON PORTUGAL DIWALI PUJA
There are ten valencies human beings have got. But apart from that, there are many
dharmas
anamdS dharmas which are surrounding us like angels.
The first dharma is your love for humanity. It is the first dharma.
like angEIS But if you say from that end when you start, it starts with Shri Dharma. It is the dharma
of the woman – how she should live, how she should get married, how she should look
after her children, what should be her behaviour, all is Shri Dharma.
And then is Patni Dharma. It is the wife, the wife's dharma. What should be her dharma?
In her dharma she looks nice. If she gives up her dharma, then she is a prostitute.
So then is Pathi Dharma – how should be a husband, how should he behave towards his
family, how should he pay attention towards his wife, about the whole, entire family – the
whole, you can say. Parivara they call it, the whole, all the relations and everything. That
is his dharma.
But beyond that is the dharma of Satya Dharma – how much he sticks to truth.
Then the dharma for creativity. In creativity, as you know very well these days, with
money people are standing on their heads or I don't know how, what they are doing
because the amount of nonsense they are producing all over the world in the name of
modernism is no way Khala Dharma – no way.
Then we have also what you call politics, Rajkaran Dharma. In this, also dharma is there.
Now taking bribes, I mean the kind of things that are going on – corruption, all kinds of
things that are going on, competition and fighting and all that. They are falling from their
Dharma of Rajkaran.
Education – same thing. We call it as Shikhshada. All such things are dharmas. There is
a kind of a principle which we have to keep, otherwise you can topple down from the
lotus and that is what happens.
Now we have also Rashtra Dharma. The Rashtra Dharma is that of your country. You
must – theirs is a dharma of your rashtra. When you have to fight for your country, you
should. But you should not be aggressive on other countries, not try to dominate other
countries, nor you should bring a bad name to your country.
It is very important Sahaja Yogis have all these intact, absolutely, because you are stand-
ing on the lotuses already.
standing on lotuses
DHARMÁS INTACT
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-26.txt 
 LISBON – The puja began early in the
evening and the Goddess Shri Mahalakshmi
sakshat Shri Mataji, whose face was shining
like the moon, spoke about the significance
of Diwali, the qualities of Shri Lakshmi, the
different
At the Lisbon airport after Diwali Puja in 1997, about thirty yogis
were in the airport and one by one Shri Mataji was accepting a
flower from each of them. I began to feel we were putting pressure
on Mother, who was staying there and having to accept all our
flowers, so I held back. When Mother had accepted all the flowers
from nearly all the other yogis, it was my turn.
When I gave Mother the flower, I began to cry. She asked me
why I was crying.
"I always cry, Mother" was what came out. I don't actually cry so
much, but that is what I said.
"You know I can never leave you. I am always with you," Shri
Mataji replied, knowing really what I felt.
of dharma associated with
types
the Nabhi chakra and the dangers resulting
from going against the Lakshmi tattwa.
After the puja, before Shri Mataji was
about to leave, She asked a Romanian yogi
to sing a song. He began with a Marathi
bhajan in a fast pace. Immediately everyone
Barbara Bain
got up to dance and then there was no
stopping the dancing, joy and ecstasy for
When it was time to take the food to Mother we were sitting and
chatting with Her. Mother asked me where I was from and told
me I looked typically as if I had come from India. I told Her that
although I was from South Africa my father had been very strict
that we should be like Indians. She spoke to me in Hindi and asked
me how I had made the dish. She told me not to put too many
the next hour or more.
Shri Mataji was very happy at the end of
the puja and told us the next day that the
vibrations were just tremendous and that all
the yogis enjoyed them very much.
The proof of that we saw in the public
program on the following day in Lisbon
where about seven hundred people came.
The moment Shri Mataji entered the hall,
most people achieved their Realization. All
the Portuguese people had a constant smile
on their faces after the program. Amit Gupta
chil-
ies in it. She said my food was lovely.
At one point She closed Her eyes and it was as if She took some
weapon and Her form was so fierce. After some minutes She
seemed to come back.
"What happened?" I asked Her.
"Oh I just went to help somebody," She laughed and said.
CC
Devibehn Kadam
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-27.txt 
 the world has to change
YOU ARE THE CATALYST
4 DECEMBER DELHI INDIA PUBLIC PROGRAM
Whatever may be taught through religion and however they might frighten you that
you are
you
to hell and this will happen, that will happen, whatever it is, people are not
will
you
go
afraid of it. And what do they want? They want that whatever they have to do, they will
SEEKENS do it. They are not afraid. The fear has gone. Fear of God has gone. Fear of sin has
gone.
All this is finished. And that is why it is important to understand that we have to become
transformed into a new personality. This personality becomes the ocean of peace and
with this peace you can spread peace. And when you are peaceful, you see the reality of
your life, the beauty of your life.
understand also that others are also as beautiful as you are.. We think the
Then
you
others are there and we are different. We are all one, tied together in one thread. Even
the Mother Earth is a part and parcel of that. All the stars and all these heavenly bodies
all are part and parcel of that. And we are one of that...
The world has to change.. You are the catalyst. Through you it will change – not by talk-
ing about it or by threatening people or telling them stories. All kinds of things are going
on in this world. It is the transformation which is very important and that is so easy to get
because you are seekers. You are seekers of truth. You know it is very easy to get and to
be experienced. In that, when you experience that peace within yourself, people see.
They are impressed and you can spread peace.
Peace is only possible if there is genuine divine love within you flowing, otherwise a talk
of peace is all useless. I have known people who have got a peace award. I don't know
why they got it. They have no peace within. You must have the peace within and that
peace is only possible when you are transformed and transformed into a new being, a
new personality, about which all the prophecies are there. All the scriptures have talked
about it. All the incarnations and all the saints have talked about it. That transformation
is at hand. If you want to have that transformation, it is not at all difficult, but you must
know you are capable of getting that transformation very easily and retaining it.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-29.txt 
 25 DECEMBER GANAPATIPULE INDIA CHRISTMAS PUJA
Christ – what was His power? His power was of love and not of anger because He is the
christianity
through
the heart
one who has crossed the most difficult centre of Agnya.
Those people who have ego never realize they have ego. With their ego, they do all
kinds of nonsensical things...
You have to be loving, affectionate, kind and disciplined. I must say this because, when
you are loving, you go out of bounds sometimes because you have no discipline of
Sahaja Yoga. Loving does not mean that you become like Romeo and Juliet. It doesn't
mean that. You must have your balance through your discipline. If you have no disci-
pline, you can never be a good Sahaja Yogi. From the life of Christ, we have to learn
these things that, unless and until we have these things, we cannot become good Sahaja
Yogis..
There is a big transformation taking place. In that transformation also your rising is taking
place. There is a big evolution going on and those who will not evolve properly will be
left behind. As it is said, this is the last judgment and you will be judged. You will be left
behind. You cannot adhere to people who are rising higher. With your weight you will
fall down...
I would love all My children to be extremely loving and collective, not to denounce any-
body for no rhyme and reason..
Put your
hands to your heart and say, "Mother, we will love. We will spread Your divine
love, encompass the whole world, give Realization to all the people. We will not shout.
We will not be angry. We will not do all kinds of rituals, but just surrender, surrender our
ego to You." Surrender it. Surrender your ego. All your problems can be solved because,
as long as there is ego, this Divine Power does not take over. You may do anything. You
are not connected. Your connection is missing. Christ is missing. He is no more there. To
establish Him, first of all you must show how you love. But that does not mean that you
love your wife, love your children and love your house. You have to love everyone. Try
to make everyone happy...
One has to learn Christianity through the heart – no other way out. They should learn
through the heart – the Heart of Your Mother.
work it out
KNOW WHAT YOU ARE
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-30.txt 
 New York progam
10 June 1997
GANAPATIPULE – As we approached Ganapatipule, a sense of anticipation
grew amongst us and a light, joyful excitement filled the air. We arrived
after dark. As our buses pulled into the camp, people began to spot friends,
acquaintances, husbands, wives and children. Great reunions were just
moments away. It was particularly beautiful to see parents and their children
who had been attending the school in Talnoo, near Dharamsala. Now the
family of the India tour had expanded to include thousands of people. The
power of those numbers was evident in the vibrations. Steve Wollenberger
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-31.txt 
 31 DECEMBER KALWE INDIA SHAKTI PUJA
The shakti – She is the woman. Man cannot do without the woman. She is the power
shakti
Snakti behind him. But how you treat your shakti is very important. How you look after your
wife is very important.
is the
I was telling them, in the West marriages are broken, families are broken, the children
are on the road and there is no discipline at all, no discipline of any kind. You cannot
power
what sort of children they will be tomorrow. They could be devils. They could be
say
anything because parents have no interest in their children and parents have no interest
in themselves.
So first of all, the family has to be all right. You must know that you have married. So
many people got married now in Sahaja Yoga, so I have to tell them at the very outset
you must decide that you will see the good points of your partner. And you must prom-
ise and take a challenge that we are going to make a very happy married life.
It is very easy to find faults with others because your eyes are outward. If you could
somehow turn them inside, you will be surprised that you have many more defects than
they have.
It is the responsibility of the women to look after the society. If something has
gone
with
your society, it is because of the women who do not understand what is
wrong
their job, what is their duty. And their attention has gone so low that they try to compare
themselves with the cheap women, with the cheap actresses and also women without
ideals in their life. You, being Sahaja Yogis, you have to understand that you are
any
not like these horrible women. You are a special type. And you must not take to all the
stupid things that these women are doing for money. It amounts to prostitution, I think,
the way things people are doing for money.
So be satisfied. And if you are satisfied, you will really enjoy yourself. You will enjoy
your family life. The woman who is not satisfied always finds faults with others, always
is demanding something. She can never make a good wife and can never make a good
society. And this society which she will make will destroy the next society.
you will enjoy yourself
BE SATISFIED
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-32.txt 
 KALWE – It was the last day of the India tor.
It was difficult to believe. It seemed like we
Of course, the men must respect women and respect the
great qualities in them. Their satisfaction, their patience,
had only just arrived and yet as if we had been
together for ages.
One last major event remained: puja to Shri
Mataji, scheduled for late that morning.
Shri Mataji arrived in a car which drove up
the centre aisle right up to the stage, between
the men and the ladies. She radiated divinity as
always and it was an honour to again be in Her
presence. Shri Mataji spoke briefly in Hindi, in
Marathi and in English. The puja was a Shakti
Puja and a central theme in the English part
of the talk was the respect for the wife, who
represents the shakti of the family.
The puja was very brief. Afterwards, Shri
Mataji requested that we all be silent and suck
the vibrations. The pendal became absolutely
silent and, with deep desire, we tried to absorb
the deep love which Shri Mataji was pouring
forth. It was a profound moment. And as we
their understanding, everything must be respected. And
they should not make fun of their wives all the time. I have
seen, if that is done, then women stoop down to the same
level. That is no friendship. In friendship you must have
respect. It is all right, you can do this with your friends, but
not with wife. And this is what I cannot understand,
your
how men use their intelligence in such a stupid manner.
Because she is the mother of your children, if you make
fun of her, children will also make fun of her. Of course, she
has to respect you because she receives her authority from
you, but also you must maintain her authority. You must
keep her in proper shape..
| was told that this year, on-coming here, there will be
Sahaja Yogis who will go astray. They will do dirty things,
sang our last aarti on the tour there at Shri
Mataji's feet, somehow the whole experience of
our month in India seemed to complete itself.
It is a privilege to be a of this divine
family. Steve Wollenberger
bad things and, I should say, things which are not pure and
they will destroy Sahaja Yoga. If they are predicted like that,
part
you can imagine, at this age of Mine, I will have to fight it.
all can fight it by understanding that it is not your
But
you
life. This is not a Sahaja life and you have to live in a Sahaja
manner.
You must bring a good name to Sahaja Yoga – not artifi-
cially, but really. People should say that if they have met any
saints, they are in Sahaja Yoga.
If you are not loving, then it is not going to work out.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-33.txt 
 Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, who was born of the royal dynasty of the Shalivahans, propounded
all of the knowledge about Kundalini and en-masse awakening of the Kundalini, and also
the en-masse actualization of Self Realization. By this method of spontaneous awakening,
thousands and thousands of people have been connected to the All-Pervading Primordial
Force of Life (Paramachaitanya). She not only worked out the awakening and the union with
this Primordial Force, but She gave the complete knowledge of our subtle system.. People's
lives have been changed. They have become really transformed and have become very
loving, compassionate and peaceful people. They are free from greed and lust which is
unsocial behaviour...
This power is based in you. It is an actualization of an experience that you feel. A cool breeze
flows out of your fingertips and out of the top of your head and this is described in most of
the scriptures.... It is a living process of evolution so you do not have to pay for awakening
or for your spiritual ascent.
This unique method is not against science. What western civilization or western consumer-
ism has done has given us blind progress, but with Sahaja Yoga you can achieve progress of
the real kind because there is light.
self realization
LIVES HAVỆ CHANGED
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-34.txt 
 the joy that you get
HOW IT SPREADS
So many Sahaja Yogis are there who just jumped into Sahaja Yoga. That is also some-
thing very remarkable, but sometimes those who jump very fast, do not go very deep.
It is a very funny thing about human beings I can't understand, that sometimes they take
time to take to Sahaja Yoga and, once they take to Sahaja Yoga, they go very deep. And
sometimes they take no time. They just jump into it and then afterwards you just don't
understand why they are still at the same point, same height. They are still not going
deep into it.
So it all has something to do I think with all the education one must have had or maybe
the way they are brought up or maybe their childhood or maybe some psychological
problem or could be some sort of egoistical treatment they have developed or some
sort of a complication within. But that does not matter. Ultimately, everybody comes up
and becomes a very good source of Sahaja Yoga.
Sahaja Yoga is now on your shoulders. You have to look after it. You have to spread it..
The confidence comes when you give Realization to others. Apart from that, the joy
you get by giving Realization is the greatest. As if like a mother, when she gives
birth to a child, how happy she feels. In the same way, you also feel that you have been
that
able to give Realization to others. And that is how Sahaja Yoga spreads a lot.
ADDITIONAL WORDS FROM SHRI MATAJI
LISTEN TO ME and ABOVE: 24 May 1997 WORLD MAP: 6 September 1997 OPPOSITE PAGE:
an exceerpt frpm speech written by Shri Mataji for presentation at the Russian Folk Medicine Conference
held in September 1997.
NEWS REPORTS in this issue are from the pages of The Divine Cool Breeze magazines published in 1997
and 1998 and from the book Eternally Inspiring Recollections Volume Six.
ALL PHOTOGRAPHS are from 1997, taken at the event described in the accompanying text (unless
otherwise noted). The cover photo is from the Shri Adi Shakti Puja. The Diwali Puja photo features sitarist
Mr. Sheolikar of Nirmal Sangeet Sarita with Babamama.
There are sure to be errors and omissions in this short record of the events of 1997. It is not comprehensive, nor
complete. The message of Shri Mataji's travels can be found in the scope, range and love She gave every day in
1997 – and every day since.
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE www.divinecoolbreeze.org
SUBSCRIPTIONS: contact@divinecoolbreeze.org CONTENT: editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
PRINTED BY King Printing Co. Inc. Lowell Massachusetts USA & Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. Pune Maharashtra India
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_IV.pdf-page-35.txt 
 bring a good name to
SAHAJA YOĞA
people should say
if they have met any saints
THEY ARE IN SAHAJA YOGA
